THE SPANISH FRIAR OR , The Double Discovery . Acted at the Duke's Theatre . 

Vt melius possis fallere , sum togam . — 
Ma.  



— Alterna revisens 
Lusit , & in solido rursus fortuna locavit . 
Vir.  



Written by john Dryden , Servant to His MAJESTY . 

LONDON , Printed for Richard Tonson and jacob Tonson , at Grays-inn-gate , in Grays-inn-lane , and at the Iudge's-head , in Chancery-lane , 1681.  

TO The Right Honourable JOHN LORD HAUGHTON . 

MY LORD , 

WHEN I first designed this Play I found or thought I found somewhat so moving in the serious part of it , and so pleasant in the Comic , as might deserve a more than ordinary Care in both : Accordingly I used the best of my endeavour , in the management of two Plots , so very different from each other , that it was not perhaps the Talent of every Writer , to have made them of a piece . Neither have I attempted other Plays of the same nature , in my opinion , with the same judgement ; though with like success . And though many Poets may suspect themselves for the fondness and partiality of Parents to their youngest Children , yet I hope I may stand exempted from this Rule , because I know myself too well to be ever satisfied with my own Conceptions , which have seldom reached to those Ideas that I had within me : and consequently , I presume I may have liberty to judge when I write more or lesle pardonably , as an ordinary Markes-man may know certainly when he shoots lesle wide at what he aims . Besides , the Care and Pains I have bestowed on this beyond my other Tragi-comedies may reasonably make the World conclude , that either I can do nothing tolerably , or that this Poem is not much amiss . Few good Pictures have been finished at one sitting ; neither can a true just Play , which is to bear the Test of Ages , be produced at a heat , or by the force of fancy , without the maturity of judgement . For my own part , I have both so just a Diffidence of myself , and so great a Reverence for my Audience , that I dare venture nothing without a strict Examination ; and am as much ashamed to put a loose indigested Play upon the Public , as I should be to offer brass money in a Payment : For though it should be taken , ( as it is too often on the Stage , ) yet it will be found in the second telling : And a judicious Reader will discover in his Closet that trashy stuff , whose glittering deceived him in the action . I have often heard the Stationer sighing in his shop , and wishing for those hands to take off his melancholy bargain which clapped its Performance on the Stage . In a Playhouse every thing contributes to impose upon the judgement ; the Lights , the Scenes , the Habits , and , above all , the Grace of Action , which is commonly the best where there is the most need of it , surprise the Audience , and cast a mist upon their Understandings ; not unlike the cunning of a juggler , who is always staring us in the face , and overwhelming us with gibberish , only that he may gain the opportunity of making the cleaner conveyance of his Trick . But these false Beauties of the Stage are no more lasting than a Rainbow ; when the Actor ceases to shine upon them , when he guilds them no longer with his reflection , they vanish in a twinkling . I have sometimes wondered , in the reading , what was become of those glaring Colours which amazed me in Bussy Damboy upon the Theatre : but when I had taken up what I supposed , a fallen Star , I found I had been cozened with a jelly : nothing but a cold dull mass , which glittered no longer than it was shooting : A dwarfish thought dressed up in gigantic words , repetition in abundance , looseness of expression , and gross Hyperboles ; the Sense of one line expanded prodigiously into ten : and , to sum up all , uncorrect English , and a hideous mingle of false Poetry and true Nonsense ; or , at best , a scantling of wit which lay gasping for life , and groaning beneath a Heap of Rubbish . A famous modern Poet used to sacrifice every year a Statius to Virgil's Manes : and I have Indignation enough to burn a D'amboys annually to the memory of Johnson . But now , My Lord , I am sensible , perhaps too late , that I have gone too far : for I remember some Verses of my own Maximin and Almanzor which cry , Vengeance upon me for their Extravagance , and which I wish heartily in the same fire with Statius and Chapman : All I can say for those passages , which are I hope not many , is , that I knew they were bad enough to please , even when I written them : But I repent of them amongst my Sins : and if any of their fellows intrude by chance into my present writings , I draw a stroke over all those Dalilahs of the Theatre ; and am resolved I will settle myself no reputation by the applause of fools . 't is not that I am mortified to all ambition , but I scorn as much to take it from half-witted judges , as I should to raise an Estate by cheating of Bubbles . Neither do I discommend the lofty style in Tragedy which is naturally pompous and magnificent : but nothing is truly sublime that is not just and proper . If the Ancients had judged by the same measures which a common Reader takes , they had concluded Statius to have written higher than Virgil : for , Quae superimposito moles geminata Colosso , 

carries a more thundering kind of sound than , Tityre tu patulae recubans sub tegmine fagi : 

Yet Virgil had all the Majesty of a lawful Prince ; and Statius only the blustering of a Tyrant . But when men affect a Virtue which they cannot reach , they fall into a Vice , which bears the nearest resemblance to it . Thus an injudicious Poet who aims at Loftiness runs easily into the swelling puffie style , because it looks like Greatness . I remember , when I was a Boy , I thought inimitable Spencer a mean Poet in comparison of Sylvester's Dubartas : and was rapt into an ecstasy when I read these lines : Now , when the winter 's keener breath began 
To Crystallise the Baltic Ocean ; 
To glaze the Lakes , to bridle up the Floods , 
And periwig with Snow the bald pate Woods : 


I am much deceived if this be not abominable fustian , that is , thoughts and words ill sorted , and without the least relation to each other : yet I dare not answer for an Audience , that they would not clap it on the Stage : so little value there is to be given to the common cry , that nothing but Madness can please Madmen , and a Poet must be of a piece with the Spectators , to gain a reputation with them . But , as in a room , contrived for State , the height of the roof should bear a proportion to the Area ; so , in the Heightnings of Poetry , the strength and vehemence of Figures should be suited to the Occasion , the Subject , and the persons . All beyond this is monstrous ; 't is out of nature , 't is an excrescence , and not a living part of Poetry . I had not said thus much , if some young Gallants , who pretend to Criticism , had not told me that this Tragi-comedy wanted the dignity of style : but as a man who is charged ▪ with a Crime of which he thinks himself innocent , is apt to be too eager in his own defence , so perhaps I have vindicated my Play with more partiality than I ought , or than such a trifle can deserve . Yet , whatever beauties it may want , 't is free at least from the grossness of those faults I mentioned : What Credit it has gained upon the Stage , I value no farther than in reference to my Profit , and the satisfaction I had in seeing it represented with all the justness and gracefulness of Action . But as 't is my Interest to please my Audience , so 't is my Ambition to be read ; that I am sure is the more lasting and the nobler Design : for the propriety of thoughts and words , which are the hidden beauties of a Play , are but confusedly judged in the vehemence of Action : All things are there beheld , as in a hasty motion , where the objects only glide before the Eye and disappear . The most discerning Critic can judge no more of these silent graces in the Action , than he who rides Post through an unknown Country can distinguish the situation of places , and the nature of the soil . The purity of phrase , the clearness of conception and expression , the boldness maintained to Majesty , the significancie and sound of words , not strained into bombast , but justly elevated , in short , those very words and thoughts which cannot be changed but for the worse , must of necessity escape our transient view upon the Theatre : and yet without all these a Play may take . For if either the Story move us , or the Actor help the lameness of it with his performance , or now and then a glittering beam of wit or passion strike through the obscurity of the Poem , any of these are sufficient to effect a present liking , but not to fix a lasting admiration ; for nothing but Truth can long continue ; and Time is the surest judge of Truth . I am not vain enough to think I have left no faults in this , which that touchstone will not discover ; neither indeed is it possible to avoid them in a Play of this nature . There are evidently two Actions in it : But it will be clear to any judicious man , that with half the pains I could have raised a Play from either of them : for this time I satisfied my own humour , which was to tack two Plays together ; and to break a rule for the pleasure of variety . The truth is , the Audience are grown weary of continued melancholy Scenes : and I dare venture to prophesy , that few Tragedies except those in Verse shall succeed in this Age , if they are not lightened with a course of mirth . For the Feast is too dull and solemn without the Fiddles . But how difficult a task this is , will soon be tried : for a several Genius is required to either way ; and without both of 'em , a man , in my opinion , is but half a Poet for the Stage . Neither is it so trivial an undertaking , to make a Tragedy end happily ; for 't is more difficult to save than 't is to kill . The Dagger and the Cup of Poison are always in a readiness ; but to bring the Action to the last extremity , and then by probable means to recover all , will require the Art and judgement of a Writer ; and cost him many a pang in the performance . 

And now , My Lord , I must confess that what I have written looks more like a Preface than a Dedication ; and truly it was thus far my design , that I might entertain you with somewhat in my own Art which might be more worthy of a noble mind , than the stale exploded Trick of fulsome Panegyrics . 't is difficult to write justly on any thing , but almost impossible in Praise . I shall therefore wave so nice a subject ; and only tell you , that in recommending a Protestant Play to a Protestant Patron , as I do myself an Honour , so I do your Noble Family a right , who have been always eminent in the support and favour of our Religion and Liberties . And if the promises of your Youth , your Education at home , and your Experience abroad , deceive me not , the Principles you have embraced are such as will no way degenerate from your Ancestors , but refresh their memory in the minds of all true Englishmen , and renew their lustre in your Person ; which , My Lord , is not more the wish than it is the constant expectation of 

your Lordship's Most obedient , faithful Servant , john Dryden . 

PROLOGUE . 

NOW Luck for us , and a kind hearty Pit ; 
For he who pleases , never fails of Wit : 
Honour is yours : 
And you , like Kings , at City Treats bestow it ; 
The Writer knelt , and is bid rise a Poet : 
But you are fickle Sovereign's , to our Sorrow , 
You dubb to day , and hang a man to morrow ; 
You cry the same Sense up , and down again , 
Just like brass money once a year in Spain : 
Take you i' th' mood , what ever base metal come , 
You coin as fast as Groats at Bromingam : 
Though 't is no more like Sense in ancient Plays , 
Than Rome's Religion like St. Peter's days . 
In short , so swift your judgements turn and wind , 
You cast our fleetest Wits a mile behind . 
'T were well your judgements but in Plays did range , 
But even your Follies and Debauches change 
With such a Whirl , the Poets of your age 
Are tired , and cannot score 'em on the Stage , 
Unless each Vice in shorthand they indite , 
Even as notched Prentices whole Sermons write . 
The heavy Hollanders no Vices know 
But what they used a hundred years ago , 
Like honest Plants , where they were stuck , they grow ; 
They cheat , but still from cheating Sires they come ; 
They drink , but they were christened first in Mum. 
Their patrimonial Sloth the Spaniards keep , 
And Philip first taught Philip how to sleep . 
The French and we still change , but here 's the Curse , 
They change for better , and we change for worse ; 
They take up our old trade of Conquering , 
And we are taking theirs , to dance and sing : 
Our Fathers did for change to France repair , 
And they for change will try our English Air. 
As Children , when they throw one Toy away , 
Straight a more foolish Gugaw comes in play : 
So we , grown penitent , on serious thinking , 
Leave Whoring , and devoutly fall to Drinking . 
Scouring the Watch grows out of fashion wit 
Now we set up for Tilting in the Pit ▪ 
Where 't is agreed by Bullies , chicken-hearted , 
To fright the Ladies first , and then be parted . 
A fair Attempt has twice or thrice been made , 
To hire Night-murth'rers , and make Death a Trade . 
When murder 's out , what Vice can we advance ? 
Unless the new found Poisoning Trick of France : 
And when their Art of Ratsbane we have got , 
By way of thanks , we 'll send 'em over our Plot ▪ 
Dramatis Personae . 

Leonora , Queen of Arragon , Mistress Barry . 
Teresa , Woman to Leonora , Mistress Crofts . 
Elvira , Wife to Gomez , Mistress Betterton . 
Torrismond , Mr. Betterton . 
Bertran , Mr. Williams . 
Alphonso , Mr. Wilisheir . 
Lorenzo , his Son , Mr. Smith . 
Raymond , Mr. Gillow . 
Pedro , Mr. Vnderhill . 
Gomez , Mr. Nokes . 
Dominic , the Spanish Friar , Mr. Lee.  
THE SPANISH FRIAR : OR , THE Double Discovery . 

ACT I  

Alphonso , Pedro meet , with Soldiers on each side , Drum's , etc.  Alph.   Stand : give the Word . 


Pedro.   The Queen of Arragon . 


Alph.   Pedro ? — how goes the night ? 


Pedr.   She wears apace . 


Alph.   then welcome daylight : We shall have warm work on 't : 
The Moor will ' gage 
His utmost Forces on this next Assault , 
To win a Queen and Kingdom . 


Pedro ,  Pox of 'is Lyon-way of wooing though : 
Is the Queen stirring yet ? 


Alph.   She has not been a-bed : but in her Chapel 
All night devoutly watched : and bribed the Saints 
With Vows for her Deliverance . 


● Pedro ,  OH , Alphonso , 
I fear they come too late ! her Father's crimes 
Sat heavy on her ; and weigh down her prayers : 
A Crown usurped ; a lawful King deposed ; 
In bondage held ; debarred the common light ; 
His Children murdered , and his Friends destroyed : 
What can we le●s expect then what we feel , 
And what we fear will follow ? 


Alph.   Heaven avert it ! 


Pedro ,  then Heaven must not be Heaven : Judge the event 
By what has passed : th' Usurper joyed not long 
His ill-got Crown ! 't is true , he died in peace : 
Unriddle that ye Powers : But left his Daughter , 
Our present Queen , engaged , upon his deathbed , 
To marry with young Bertran , whose cursed Father 
Had helped to make him great . 
Hence , you well know , this fatal War arose ; 
Because the Moor , Abdalla , with whose Troops 
th' Usurper gained the Kingdom , was refused ; 
And , as an Infidel , his Love despised . 


Alph.   Well ; we are Soldiers , Ped●o : and , like Lawyers , 
Pled for our Pay.  


Pedro ,  A good Cause would do well though : 
It gives my Sword and Edge : You see this Bertran 
Has now three times been beaten by the Moors : 
What hope we have , is in young Torrismond , 
Your brother's Son.  


Alph.   he 's a successful Warrior , 
And has the Soldier's hearts : Upon the skirts 
Of Arragon , our squandered Troops he rallies : 
Our Watchmen , from the Tow'rs , with longing Eyes 
Expect his swift Arrival . 


Pedro ,  It must be swift , or it will come too late . 


Alph.   no more : — Duke Bertran . 


[ Enter Bertran ▪ attended . Bertr .  Relieve the Ce●t'ryss that have watched all night . 
To Ped. Now , Colonel , have you disposed your men , 
That you stand idle her● ? 


Pedro ,  Mine are drawn off , 
To take a short repose . 


Bertr .  Short let it be ▪ 
For , from the Moorish Camp , this hour and more , 
There has been heard a distant humming noise , 
Like Bees disturbed , and arming in their hives . 
What Courage in our Soldiers ? Speak ! What hope ? 


Pedro ,  As much as when Physicians shake their heads , 
And bid their dying Patient think of Heaven . 
Our Walls are thinly manned : our best Men slain : 
The rest , an heartless number , spent with Watching , 
And harassed out with Duty . 


Bertran ,  Good-night all then . 


Pedro ,  Nay , for my part , 't is but a single life 
I have to lose : I 'll plant my Colours down 
In the mid-breach , and by 'em fix my foot : 
Say a short Soldiers Prayer , to spare the trouble 
Of my few Friends above : and then expect 
The next fair Bullet . 


Alph.   Never was known a night of such distraction : 
Noise so confused and dreadful : Justling Crowds , 
That run , and know not whither : Torches gliding , 
Like Meteors , by each other in the streets . 


Pedro ,  I met a reverend , fat , old , gouty Friar ; 
With a Paunch swollen so high , his double Chin 
Might rest upon 't : A true Son of the Church ; 
Fresh coloured , and well thriven on his Trade , 
Come puffing with his greasy baldpate Choir , 
And fumbling over his Beads , in such an Agony , 
He told 'em false for fear : About his Neck 
There hung a Wench ; the Label of his Function ; 
Whom he shaken off , i'faith , methought , unkindly . 
It seems the holy Stallion durst not score 
Another Sin before he left the world . 


[ Enter a Captain . Capt.   To Arms , My Lord , to Arms. 
From the Moors Camp the noise grows louder still : 
Rattling of Armour , Trumpets , Drum's , and Ataballes ; 
And sometimes Peals of Shouts that rend the Heavens' , 
Like Victory : then Groans again , and Howl , 
Like those of vanquished men : But every Echo 
Goes fainter off ; and dies in distant Sounds . 


Bertran ,  Some false Attaque : expect on tother side : 
One to the Gunners on St. Iago's Tower ; Bid 'em , for shame , 
Levelly their Cannon lower : On my Soul , 
They be all corrupted with the Gold of Barbary 
To carry over , and not hurt the Moor.  


[ Enter 2. Captain . 2.  Capt.   My Lord , here 's fresh Intelligence arrived : 
Our Army , led by Valiant Torrismond , 
Is now in hot Engagement with the Moors ; 
't is said , within their Trenches . 


Bertr .  I think all Fortune is reserved for him . 
He might have sent us word though ; 
And then we could have favoured his Attempt 
With Sallies from the Town . — 


Alph.   It could not be : 
We were so close blocked up that none could peep 
Upon the Walls and live : But yet 't is time : — 


Bertr .  no , 't is too late ; I will not hazard it : 
On pain of Death , let no man dare to sally . 


Pedr.   ( aside ) O Envy , Envy , how it works within him ! 
How now ! What means this Show ? 


Alph.   't is a Procession : 
The Queen is going to the great Cathedral 
To pray for our Success against the Moors . 


Pedro ,  Very good : She usurps the Throne ; keeps the old king in Prison ; and , at the same time , is praying for a Blessing : O Religion and Roguery , how they go together ! 



A Procession of Priests and Choristers in white , with Tapers , followed by the Queen and Ladies , goes over the Stage : the Choristers singing . Look down , ye blessed above , look down , 
Behold our weeping Matron's Tears , 
Behold our tender Virgin's Fears , 
And with success our Army's crown . 
Look down , ye blessed above , look down : 
Oh! save us , save us , and our State restore ; 
For Pity , Pity , Pity , we implore ; 
For Pity , Pity , Pity , we implore . 
The Procession goes off ; and shout within . then enter Lorenzo , who knelt to Alphonso . Bertr .  to Alph.  A joyful Cry : and see your Son Lorenzo : 
Good news kind Heaven ! 


Alph.   to Lorenzo , OH , welcome , welcome ! Is the General safe ? 
How near our Army ? When shall we be succoured ? 
Or , Are we succoured ? Are the Moors removed ? 
Answer these Questions first ; and then , a Thousand more : 
Answer 'em all together . 


Lorenzo ,  Yes , when I have a thousand Tongues , I will ▪ 
The general 's well : His Army too is safe 
As Victory can make 'em : The Moors King 
Is safe enough , I warrant him , for one . 
At dawn of day our General cle●t his Pate ▪ 
Spite of his woollen Nightcap : A ●light wound : 
Perhaps he may recover . 


Alphonso ,  thou revivest me . 


Pedro ,  By my computation now , the Victory was gained before the Procession was made for it ; and yet it will go hard ▪ but the Priests will make a Miracle on 't . 



Lorenzo ,  Yes , Faith ; we came like bold intruding Guests ; 
And took 'em unprepared to give us welcome : 
Their Scouts we killed ; then found their Body sleeping : 
And as they lay confused , we stumbled over 'em ; 
And took what Joint came next ; Arms , Heads , or Legs ; 
Somewhat undecently : But when men want light 
They make but bungling work . 


Bertr .  I 'll to the Queen , 
And bear the News . 


Pedro ,  that 's young Lorenzo's duty . 


Bertr .  I 'll spare his trouble . — 
This Torrismond begins to grow too fast ; 
He must be mine , or ruined . 
Aside . 

Lorenzo ,  Pedro , a word : — 


( whisper . ) [ Exit Bertran ▪ Alph.   How swift he shot away ! I find it stung him , 
In spite of his dissembling . 
To Lorenzo , How many of the Enemy are slain ? 


Lorenzo ,  Troth , Sir , we were in haste ; and could not stay 
To score the men we killed : But there they lie . 
Best send our Women out to take the tale ; 
there 's Circumcision in abundance for ' 'em . 


[ Turns to Pedro again . Alph.   How far did you pursue ' 'em ? 


Lorenzo ,  Some few miles . — 
To Pedro , Good store of Harlots , say you , and dog-cheap ? 


Pedro ,  They must be had ; and speedily : 
I have kept a tedious Fast.  


( Whisper again . ) Alph.   When will he make his Entry ? He deserves 
Such Triumphs as were given by Ancient Rome : 
ha , Boy , What sayest thou ? 


Lorenzo ,  As you say , Sir , That Rome was very ancient — 
To Pedro , I leave the choice to you ; Fair , Black , Tall , Low : 
Let her but have a Nose : — and you may tell her 
I 'm rich in Jewels , Rings , and bobbing Pearls 
Plucked from Moor's ears . — 


Alph.   Lorenzo ? 


Lorenzo ,  Somewhat busy 
About Affairs relating to the public . — 
— A seasonable Girl , just in the nick now : — 


[ to Pedro  [ Trumpets within . Pedro ,  I hear the general 's Trumpets : Stand , and mark 
How he will be received ; I fear , but coldly : 
There hung a Cloud , methought , on Bertran's brow . 


Lorenzo ,  then look to see a Storm on Torrismond's : 
Looks fright not men : The General has seen Moores , 
With as bad Faces ; no dispraise to Bertrans . 


Pedro ,  'T was rumoured in the Camp , he love's the Queen . 


Lorenzo ,  He drinks her Health devoutly . 


Alph.   That may breed bad blood betwixt him and Bertran . 


Pedro ,  Yes , in private : 
But Bertran has been taught the Arts of Court , 
To gild a Face with Smiles ; and leer a man to ruin . 
OH here they come . — 
Enter Torrismond and Officers on one side : Bertran attended on the other : they embrace ; Bertran bowing low . Just as I prophesied . — 


Lorenzo ,  Death and Hell , he laughs at him : — in 's Face too . 


Pedro ,  OH , you mistake him : 'T was an humble Grin ; 
The fawning Joy of Courtiers and of Dogs . 


Lorenzo ,  ( Aside ) Here are nothing but Lies to be expected : 
I 'll even go lose myself in some blind Alley ; and try if any courteous 
Damsel will think me worth the finding . 
[ Exit Lorenzo . 

Alph.   Now he begins to open . 


Bertran ,  Your Country rescued , and your Queen relieved ! 
A glorious Conquest ; Noble Torrismond ! 
The People rend the Skies with loud Applause ; 
And Heaven can hear no other Name but yours . 
The thronging Crowds press on you as you pass ; 
And , with their eager Joy , make Triumph slow . 


Torr.   My Lord , I have no taste 
Of popular Applause ; the noisy Praise 
Of giddy Crowds , as changeable as Winds ; 
Still vehement , and still without a cause : 
Servants to Chance ; and blowing in the tide 
Of swollen Success ; but , veering with its ebb , 
It leaves the channel dry . 


Bertran ,  So young a Stoic ! 


Torr.   You wrong me , if you think I 'll ●ell one drop 
Within these Veins for Pageants : But let Honour 
Call for my Blood ; and sluice it into streams ; 
Turn Fortune lose again to my pursuit ; 
And let me hunt her through embattelled Foes , 
In dusty Plains , amid the Cannons roar , 
There will I be the first . 


Bert.   I 'll try him farther — 
( aside . ) Suppose th' assembled States of Arragon 
Decree a Statue to you thus inscribed , 
To Torrismond , who freed his native land  


Alph.   to Pedro , Mark how he sounds and fathoms him , to find 
The shallows of his Soul ! 


Bertr .  The just Applause 
Of Godlike Senates , is the Stamp of Virtue , 
Which makes it pass unquestioned through the World : 
These Honours you deserve ; nor shall my suffrage 
Be last to fix 'em on you : If refused , 
You brand us all with black Ingratitude ; 
For times to come shall say , Our Spain , like Rome , 
Neglects her Champions , after Noble Acts , 
And let's their Laurels wither on their heads . 


Torrismond ,  A Statue , for a Battle blindly fought ▪ 
Where Darkness and Surprise made Conquest cheap ! 
Where Virtue borrowed but the Arms of Chance , 
And struck a random blow ! 'T was Fortune's work ; 
And Fortune take the praise . 


Bertr .  Yet Happiness 
Is the first Fame : Virtue without Success 
Is a fair Picture shown by an ill light : 
But lucky men are Favourites of Heaven : 
And whom should Kings esteem above Heaven's Darlings ? 
The Praises of a young and beauteous Queen 
Shall crown your glorious Acts.  


Pedro   to Alphonso , There sprung the Mine . 


Torr.   The Queen ! That were a happiness too great ! 
Named you the Queen , My Lord ? 


Bertr .  Yes : You have seen her , and you must confess 
A Praise , a Smile , a Look from her is worth 
The shouts of thousand Amphitheatres : 
She , she shall praise you ; for I can oblige her : 
To morrow will deliver all her Charms 
Into my Arms ; and make her mine for ever . 
Why stand you mute ? 


Torr.   Alas ! I cannot speak . 


Bertr .  Not speak , My Lord ! How were your thoughts employed ? 


Torr.   Not can I think ; or I am lost in thought . 


Bertr .  Thought of the Queen , perhaps ? 


Torr.   Why , if it were , 
Heaven may be thought on , though too high to climb . 


Bertr .  OH , now I find where your Ambition drives : 
You ought not think of her . 


Torr.   So I say too ; 
I ought not : Madmen ought not to be mad : 
But who can help his frenzy ? 


Bertr .  Fond young Man ! 
The Wings of your Ambition must be clipped ▪ 
Your shamefaced Virtue shunned the People's Praise , 
And Senate's Honours : But 't is well we know 
What price you hold yourself at : you have fought 
With some Success , and that has sealed your Pardon . 


Torr.   Pardon from thee ! OH , give me patience Heaven ! 
Thrice vanquished Bertran ; if thou dar'st , look out 
Upon yo● slaughtered Host , that Field of blood : 
There seal my Pardon , where thy Fame was lost . 


Ped.   he 's ruined , past redemption ! 


Alph.   to Torr.  Learn respect 
To the first Prince o' th' blood . 


Bert.   OH , let him rave ! 
I 'll not contend with Madmen . 


Torr.   I have done : 
I know 't was Madness to declare this Truth : 
And yet 't were Baseness to deny my Love. 
't is true , my hopes are vanishing as clouds ; 
Lighter than children's bubbles blown by winds : 
My merit 's but the rash results of chance : 
My birth unequal : all the stars against me : 
Power , promise , choice ; the living and the dead : 
Mankind my foes ; and only love to friend : 
But such a love , kept at such awful distance , 
As , what it loudly dares to tell , a Rival 
Shall fear to whisper there : Queens ●ay be loved , 
And so may Gods ; else , why are Altars raised ? 
Why shines the Sun , but that he may be viewed ? 
But , Oh! when he 's too bright , if then we gaze , 
't is but to weep ; and close our eyes in darkness . 
[ Exit Torrismond . 

Bert.   't is well : the Goddess shall be told , she shall , 
Of her new Worshipper . 
[ Exit Bertran . 

Pedro ,  So , here 's fine work ! 
He has supplied his only foe with arms 
For his destruction . Old Penelope's tale 
Inverted : h' has unravelled all by day 
That he has done by night . — What , Planet-struck ! 


Alph.   I wish I were ; to be past sense of this ! 


Ped.   Would I had but a Lease of li●e so long 
As till my Flesh and Blood re●elled this way 
Against our Sovereign Lady : mad for a Queen ? 
With a Globe in one hand , and a Sceptre in tother ? 
A very pretty Moppe● ! 


Alph.   then to declare his Madness to his Rival ! 
His Father absent on an Embassy : 
Himself a Stranger almost ; wholly friendless ! 
A Torrent , rolling down a Precipice , 
Is easier to be stopped , then is his Ruin.  


Ped.   't is fruitless to complain : haste to the Court : 
Improve your interest there , for Pardon from the Queen . 


Alph.   Weak remedies ; 
But all must be attempted . 
[ Exit Alphonso . 

Enter Lorenzo . Lor.   Well , I am the most unlucky Rogue ! I have been ranging over half the Town ; but have sprung no Game . Our Women are worse Infidels than the Moors : I told 'em I was one of their Knight-errants , that delivered them from ravishment : and I think in my conscience that 's their Quarrel to me . 



Pedro ,  Is this a time for fooling ? Your Cousin is run honourably mad in love with her Majesty : He is split upon a Rock ; and you , who are in chase of Harlots , are sinking in the main Ocean . I think the devil 's in the Family . 

[ Exit Pedro.  

[ Lorenzo solus . Lor.   My Cousin ruined , says he ! hum ! not that I wish my Kinsman's ruin ; that wered Unchristian : but if the general 's ruined , I am Heir ; there 's comfort for a Christian. Money I have , I thank the honest Moor's fort ; but I want a Mistress . I am willing to be lewd ; but the Tempter is wanting on his part . 



Enter Elvira veiled . Elvira ▪   Stranger ! Cavalier — will you not hear me ? you Moore-killer , you Matador . — 



Lor.   Meaning me , Madam ? 



Elvira ,  Face about , Man ; you a Soldier , and afraid of the Enemy ! 



Lor.   I must confess , I did not expect to have been charged first : I see Souls will not be lost for want of diligence in this Devil's reign : — Aside — To her . Now ; Madam Cynthia behind a cloud ; your will and pleasure with me ? 



Elvira ,  You have the appearance of a Cavalier ; and if you are as deserving as you seem , perhaps you may not repent of your Adventure . If a Lady like you well enough to hold discourse with you at first sight ; you are Gentleman enough , I hope , to help her out with an Apology : and to lay the blame on Stars , or Destiny ; or what you please , to excuse the Frailty of a Woman . 



Lorenzo ,  OH , I love an easy Woman : there 's such a do to crack a thick shelled Mistress : we break our Teeth ; and find no Kernel . 't is generous in you , to take pity on a Stranger ; and not to suffer him to fall into ill hands at his first arrival . 



Elvira ,  You may have a better opinion of me than I deserve ; you have not seen me yet ; and therefore I am confident you are heart-whole . 



Lorenzo ,  Not absolutely slain , I must confess ; but I am drawing on apace : you have a dangerous Tongue in your head , I can tell you that ; and if your Eyes prove of as kill metal , there 's but one way with me : Let me see you , for the safeguard of my Honour : 't is but decent the Cannon should be drawn down upon me , before I yield . 



Elvira ,  What a terrible Similitude have you made , Colonel ? to show that you are inclining to the Wars : I could answer you with another in my Profession : Suppose you were in want of Money ; would you not be glad to take a Sum upon content in a sealed bag , without peeping ? — but however ; I will not stand with you for a sample . 



[ Lists up her Veil . Lorenzo ,  What Eyes were there ! how keen their Glances ! you do well to keep 'em veiled : they are too sharp to be trusted out o' th' Scabbard . 



Elvira ,  Perhaps now you may accuse my forwardness ; but this day of Jubilee is the only time of freedom I have had : and there is nothing so extravagant as a Prisoner , when he gets lose a little , and is immediately to return into his Fetters . 



Lorenzo ,  To confess freely to you , Madam , I was never in love with lesle than your whole Sex before : but now I have seen you , I am in the direct road of languishing and sighing : and , if Love goes on as it begins , for aught I know , by to morrow morning you may hear of me in Rhyme and Sonnet . I tell you truly , I do not like these Symptoms in myself : perhaps I may go shufflingly at first ; for I was never before walked in Trammels ; yet I shall drudge and moil at Constancy , till I have worn off the hitching in my pace . 



Elvira ,  O , Sir , there are Arts to reclaim the wildest Men , as there are to make Spaniels fetch and carry : chide 'em often , and feed 'em seldom : now I know your temper , you may thank yourself if you are kept to hard meat : — you , are in for years if you make love to me . 



Lorenzo ,  I hate a formal obligation with an Anno Domini at end on 't ; there may be an evil meaning in the word Years , called Matrimony . 



Elvira ,  I can easily rid you of that Fear : I wish I could rid myself as easily of the bondage . 



Lorenzo ,  then you are married ? 



Elvira ,  If a Covetous , and a Jealous , and an Old man be a husband . 



Lor.   Three as good qualities for my purpose as I could wish : now love be praised . 



[ Enter Elvira's Duenna , and whispers to her . Elvira ,  ( Aside . ) If I get not home before my Husband , I shall be ruined ▪ [ — to him . I dare not stay to tell you where — farewell — could I once more — 

[ Exit Elvira . 

Lorenzo ,  This is unconcionable dealing ; to be made a Slave , and not know whose livery I wear : — Who have we yonder ? ( Enter Gomez ▪ ) By that shambling in his walk , it should be my rich old Banquer , Gomez , whom I knew at Barcelona : As I live 't is he — 

To Gomez , What , Old Mammon here ? 



Gom.   How ! Young Beelzebub ! 



Lorenzo ,  What Devil has set his Claws in thy Haunches , and brought thee hither to Saragossa ? Sure he meant a farther Journey with thee . 



Gom.   I always remove before the Enemy : When the Moors are ready to besiege one Town , I shift quarters to the next : I keep as far from the Infidels as I can . 



Lor.   that 's but a hair's breadth at farthest . 



Gom.   Well , you have got a ●amous Victory ; all true Subjects are overjoyed at it : there are Bonfires decreed : and the times had not been hard , my Billet should have burned too . 



Lor.   I dare say for thee , thou hast such a respect for a single Billet , thou wouldst almost have thrown on thyself to save it : thou art for saving every thing but thy Soul.  



Gom.   Well , well , you 'll not believe me generous till I carry you to the Tavern , and crack half a Pint with you at my own charges . 



Lor.   no ; I 'll keep thee from hanging thyself for such an extravagance : and , instead of it , thou shalt do me a mere verbal courtesy : I have just now seen a most incomparable young Lady . 



Gom.   Whereabouts did you see this most incomparable young Lady ? my mind misgives me plaguily . — 

( Aside . ) 

Lor.   Here , man ; just before this Corner-house : Pray Heaven it prove no Bawdy-house . 



Gom.   ( Aside . ) Pray heaven he does not make it one . 



Lor.   What dost thou mutter to thyself ? Hast thou any thing to say against the Honesty of that house ? 



Gom.   Not I , Colonel , the Walls are very honest Stone , and the Timber very honest Wood , for aught I know . But for the Woman , I cannot say , till I know her better : describe her person ; and , if she live in this quarter , I may give you tidings of her . 



Lor.   she 's of a middle Stature , dark coloured Hair , the most bewitching Leer with her Eyes , the most roguish Cast ; her Cheeks are dimpled when she Smiles ; and her Smiles would tempt an Hermit . 



Gom.   ( Aside . ) I am dead , I am buried , I am damned . — Go on — Colonel — have you no other Marks of her ? 



Lor.   thou hast all her Marks ; but that she has an Husband ; a jealous , covetous , old Hunks : speak ; canst thou tell me News of her ? 



Gom.   Yes ; this News , Colonel ; that you have seen your last of her . 



Lor.   If thou helpest me not to the knowledge of her , thou art a circumcised jew.  



Gom.   Circumcise me no more than I circumcise you , Colonel Hernando : once more you have seen your last of her . 



Lor.   ( Aside . ) I am glad he knows me only by that Name of Hernando , by which I went at Barcelona : now he can tell no tales of me to my Father . 

To him . Come , thou wert ever good-natured , when thou couldst get by 't : — Look here , Rogue , 't is of the right damning colour : — thou art not Proof against Gold , sure ! — do not I know thee for a covetous , — 



Gomez ,  Jealous ▪ old Hunks : those were the Marks of your Mistress' Husband , as I remember , Colonel . 



Lor.   O , the Devil ! What a Rogue in understanding was I , not to find him out sooner ! 

( Aside . ) 

Gom.   Do , do , Look sillily , good Colonel : 't is a decent Melancholy after an absolute Defeat . 



Lor.   Faith , not for that , dear Gomez ; — but , 



Gom.   But — no Pumping , My dear Colonel . 



Lor.   hang Pumping ; I was — thinking a little upon a point of Gratitude : we two have been long Acquaintance ; I know thy Merits , and can make some Interest : go to ; thou wert born to Authority : I 'll make thee Alcaide Mayor of Sarragossa . 



Gom.   Satisfy yourself ; you shall not make me what you think , Colonel . 



Lor.   Faith but I will ; thou hast the Face of a Magistrate already . 



Gom.   And you would provide me with a Magistrate's Head to my Magistrate's Face ; I thank you Colonel . 



Lor.   Come , thou art so suspicious upon an idle Story — that Woman I saw , I mean that little , crooked , ugly Woman ; for tother was a Lie ; — is no more thy Wife : — As I 'll go home with thee , and satisfy thee immediately , My dear Friend . 



Gom.   I shall not put you to that trouble : no not so much as a single Visit : not so much as an Embassy by a civil , old Woman : nor a Serenade of Twinckledum , Twinckledum , under my windows : Nay , I will advice you out of my tenderness to your Person , that you walk not near you Corner-house by night ; for to my certain knowledge , there are Blunderbusses planted in every loophole , that go off constantly of their own accord , at the squeaking of a Fiddle , and the thrumming of a Ghittar . 



Lor.   Art thou so obstinate ? then I denounce open War against thee : I 'll demolish thy Citadel by force : or , at least , I 'll bring my whole Regiment upon thee : my thousand red Locusts that shall devour thee in Free quarter . — Farewell wrought Nightcap . 

[ Exit Lorenzo . 

Gom.   Farewell Buff ! Freequarter for a Regiment of red coat Locusts ? I hope to see 'em all in the Red-sea first ! — But o , this jezabel of mine ! I 'll get a Physician that shall prescribe her an ounce of Camphire every morning for her Breakfast , to abate Incontinency : she shall never peep abroad , no , not to Church for Confession ; and for never going , ●●e shall be condemned for a Heretic : she shall have Str●peses by Troy weight ; and Sustenance by drachms and scruples : Nay , I 'll have a Fasting Almanac printed on purpose for her use ; in which , 

no Carnival nor Christmas shall appear ; 
But Lents and Ember-weeks shall fill the year . 
[ Exit Gomez . 

ACT II  

SCENE , The Queen's Antichamber . 

Alphonso , Pedro.  Alph.   When saw you my Lorenzo ? 


Ped.   I had a glimpse of him ; but he shot by me 
Like a young Hound upon a burning scent : 
he 's gone a Harlot-hunting . 


Alph.   His foreign breeding might have taught him better ▪ 


Ped.   't is that has taught him this ▪ 
What learn our Youth abroad ; but to re●ine 
The homely Vices of their native Land ? 
Give me an honest homespun country Clown 
Of our own growth ; his dulness is but plain ; 
But there 's embroidered : they are sent out Fools , 
And come back Fops . 


Alph.   You know what reasons urged me ; 
But now I have accomplished my Designs , 
I should be glad he knew 'em : — his wild Riots 
Disturb my soul ; but they would sit more close , 
Did not the threatened down-fall of our house , 
In Torrismond , overwhelm my private Ills.  


Enter Bertran attended ; and whispering with a Courtier , aside . Bertr .  I would not have her think he dared to love her ; 
If he presume to own it , she 's so proud 
He tempts his certain ruin . 


Alph.   to Ped.  Mark how disdainfully he throws his Eyes on us . 
Our old imprisoned King wore no such Looks . 


Ped.   OH , would the General shake off his Do●age to th'usurping Queen , 
And reinthrone Good ▪ Venerable Sancho , 
I 'll undertake , should Bertran sound his Trumpets , 
And Torrismond but whistle through his Fingers , 
He draws his Army off . 


Alph.   I told him so : 
But had an Answer louder than a Storm . 


Ped.   Now Plague and Pox on his Smock-loyalty ! 
I hate to see a brave bold Fellow sotted , 
Made sour and senseless ; turned to Whey by Love : 
A drivelling Hero ; fit for a Romance . 
OH , here he comes ; what will their greeting be ! 


Enter Torrismond attended . Bertran and he meet and justle . Bertr .  Make way , My Lords , and let the Pageant pass . 


Torr.   I make my way where ever I see my Foe : 
But you , My Lord , are good at a Retreat : 
I have no Moors behind me . 


Bertr .  Death and Hell ! 
Dare to speak thus when you come out again ? 


Torr.   Dare to provoke me thus , insulting man ? 


[ Enter Teresa ▪ Ter.   My Lords , You are too loud so near the Queen : 
You , Torrismond , have much offended her : 
't is her Command you instantly appear , 
To answer your demeanour to the Prince . 


Exit Teresa ; Bertran with his company follow her . Torr.   OH Pedro , OH Alphonso , pity me ! 
A Grove of Pikes 
Whose polished Steel from far severely shines , 
Are not so dreadful as this beauteous Queen . 


Alph.   Call up your Courage timely to your aid : 
And , like a Lion pressed upon the Toils , 
Leap on your Hunters : Speak your Actions boldly ; 
There is a time when modest Virtue is 
Allowed to praise itself . 


Ped.   Heart , you were hot enough ; too hot , but now ; 
Your Fury then boiled upward to a Foam : 
But since this Message came , you sink and settle ; 
As if cold water had been poured upon you . 


Torr.   Alas , thou knowest not what it is to love ! 
When we behold an Angel , not to fear , 
Is to be impudent : — no I 'm resolved , 
Like a led Victim , to my Death I 'll go ; 
And , dying , bless the hand that gave the blow . 


[ Exeunt . The SCENE draws ; and shows the Queen sitting in state , Bertran standing next her : then Teresa , etc.  

She rises , and comes to the Front.  Qu.   Leonora to Bert.  I blame not you , My Lord , my Father's will , 
Your own Deserts , and all my People's Voice , 
Have placed you in the view of Sovereign Power . 
But I would learn the cause , why Torrismond , 
Within my Palace Walls , within my Hearing ▪ 
Almost within my Sight , affronts a Prince 
Who shortly shall command him . 


Bertr .  He thinks you owe him more than you can pay ; 
And looks , as he were Lord of human kind . 


Enter Torrismond , Alphonso , Pedro. Torrismond bows low : then looks earnestly on the Queen , and keeps at distance . Teresa ,  Madam , The General . — 


Qu.   Let me view him well . 
My Father sent him early to the Frontiers ; 
I have not often seen him ; if I did , 
He passed unmarked by my unheeding Eyes ▪ 
But where 's the Fierceness , the Disdainful Pride ; 
The Haughty Port ▪ the Fiery Arrogance ? 
By all these Marks , this is not sure the man  


Bertr .  Yet this is he who filled your Court with Tumult , 
Whose Fierce Demeanour , and whose Insolence 
The Patience of a God could not support . 


Qu.   Name his Offence , My Lord , and he shall have 
Immediate punishment . 


Bertr .  't is of so high a nature , should I speak it ▪ 
That my Presumption then would equal his . 


Qu.   Some one among you speak . 


Ped.   ( Aside . ) Now my Tongue itches . 


Qu.   All dumb ! on your Allegiance ▪ Torrismond , 
By all your hopes , I do command you , speak . 


Torr.   ( kneeling . ) OH seek not to convince me of a Crime 
Which I can never repent , nor can you pardon . 
Or , if you needs will know it , think , o think , 
That he , who thus commanded dares to speak , 
Unless commanded , would have died in silence . 
But you adjured me , Madam , by my hopes ! 
Hope's I have none ; for I am all Despair : 
Friends I have none ; for Friendship follows Favour ▪ 
Desert ●'ve none ; for what I did , was Duty : 
O , that it were ! that it were Duty all ! 


Qu.   Why do you pause ? proceed . 


Torr.   As one condemned to leap a Precipice , 
Who sees before his Eyes the Depth below , 
Stops short , and looks about , for some kind Shrub 
To break his dreadful Fall — ●o ay ; — 
But whither am I going ? if to Death , 
He looks so lovely sweet in Beauty's Pomp ▪ 
He draws me to his Dart. — I dare no more . 


Bertr .  he 's mad beyond the Cure of Hellebore . 
Whips , Darkness , Dungeons , for this Insolence . — 


Torr.   Mad as I am , yet I know when to bear . — 


Qu.   you 're both too bold . You , Torrismond , withdraw : 
I 'll teach you all what 's owing to your Queen . 
For you , My Lord , — 
The Priest to morrow was to ●oin our hands ; 
I 'll try if I can live a day without you . 
So , both of you departed ; and live in Peace . 


Alph.   Who knows whic● way she points ! 
Doubling and turning , like an hunted Hare . 
find out the Meaning of her mind who can . 


Pedr.   Who ever ●ound a Woman's ! backward and forward , The whole Sex in every word . In my Conscience when she was getting , her Mother was thinking of a Riddle . 



[ Exeunt all , but the Queen and Teresa . Queen ,  Hast , my Teresa , hast ; and call him back . 


Teresa ,  Whom , Madam ? 


( Queen , )  Him.  


( Ter. )  Prince Bertran ? 


( Qu. )  Torrismond . 
There is no other Herald  


Ter.   ( Aside . ) A rising Sun ; 
Or I am much deceived . 
[ Exit Teresa . 

Queen ,  A change so swift , what heart did ever feel ! 
It rushed upon me , like a mighty Stream , 
And bore me in a moment far from Shore . 
i  loved away myself : in one short hour 
Already am I gone an Age of Passion . 
Was it his Youth , his Valour , or Success ? 
These might perhaps be found in other men . 
'T was that respect ; that awful homage paid me ; 
That fearful Love which trembled in his Eyes ; 
and , with a silent Earthquake , shaken his Soul. 
But , when he spoke , what tender words he said ! 
So softly , that , like flakes of feathered Snow , 
They melted as they fell . — 


Enter Teresa , with Torrismond . Ter.   He waits your pleasure . 


Qu.   't is well ; retire — O heaven 's , that I must speak 
So distant from my heart — 
( aside ▪ ) To Torr.  How now ! What Boldness brings you back again ? 


Torr.   I heard 't was your Command . 


Qu.   A fond mistake , 
To credit so unlikely a Command . 
And you return full of the same Presumption 
T' affront me with your Love ? 


Torr.   If 't is Presumption for a Wretch condemned 
To throw himself beneath his Judge's feet : 
A Boldness , more than this , I never knew ▪ 
Or , if I did , 't was only to your Foes . 


Qu.   You would insinuate your past Services ; 
And those , I grant , were great : but you confess 
A Fault committed since , that cancels all . 


Torr.   And who could dare to disavow his Crime , 
When that , for which he is accused and seized , 
He bears about him still ! my Eyes con●ess it . 
My every action speaks my heart aloud . 
But , o , the Madness of my high attempt 
Speaks louder yet ! and all together cry , 
I love and I despair . 


Qu.   Have you not heard , 
My Father , with his dying voice , bequeathed 
My Crown and me to Bertran ? And dare you , 
A private man , presume to love a Queen ? 


Torr.   That , that 's the Wound ! I see you set so high , 
As no Desert , or Services , can reach . 
Good Heavens' , why gave you me a Monarch's Soul , 
And crusted it with base Plebeian Clay ! 
Why gave you me Desire's of such extent , 
And such a Span●●to● grasp ' 'em ? Sure my lot 
By some over hasty Angel was misplaced 
In fate 's Eternal Volume ! — But I rave , 
And , like a giddy Bird , in dead of night , 
Fly round the Fire that scorches me to death . 


Qu.   Yet , Torrismond ,   not so ill deserved , 
But I may give you Counsel for your Cure.  


Torr.   I cannot , nay , I wish not to be cured . 


Qu.   ( aside . ) Nor I , Heaven knows ! 


Torr.   There is a Pleasure sure 
In being Mad , which none but Madmen know ! 
Let me indulge it ▪ let me gaze for ever ! 
And , since you are too great to be beloved , 
Be greater , greater yet ; and be adored . 


Qu.   These are the words which I must only hear 
From Bertran's mouth ; they should displease from you ; 
I say they should : but women are so vain , 
To like the Love , though they despise the Lover . 
Yet , that I may not send you from my sight 
In absolute despair — I pity you . 


Torr.   am I then pitied ! I have lived enough ! 
Death , take me in● this moment of my Joy ; 
But when my Soul is plunged in long oblivion , 
Spare this one Thought : let me remember Pity ; 
And so deceived , think all my life was blessed . 


Qu.   What if I add a little to my Alms ? 
If that would help , I could cast in a Tear 
To your Misfortunes . — 


Torr.   A Tear ! You have o'erbid all my past Sufferings , 
And all my future too ! 


Qu.   Were I no Queen — 
Or you of Royal Blood — 


Torr.   What have I lost by my Fore-father's fault ? 
Why was not I the Twenty'th by descent 
From a long restive race of droning Kings ? 
Love ! What a poor omnipotence hast thou 
When Gold and Titles buy thee ? 


Queen ▪   ( sighs . ) O , my torture ! — 


Torr.   Might I presume , but , o , I dare not hope 
That Sigh was added to your Alms for me ! 


Qu.   I give you leave to guests ; and not forbid you ▪ 
To make the best construction for your love . 
Be secret and discreet ; these Fairy favours 
Are lost when not concealed ; — provoke not Bertran . — 
Retire : I must no more but this , — Hope , Torrismond . 
[ Exit Queen . 

Torr.   She bids me hope ; o Heavens' ; she pity's me ! 
And pity still foreruns approaching love ; 
As Lightning does the Thunder ! Tune your Harps 
ye Angels to that sound ; and thou , my Heart , 
Make room to entertain thy flowing Joy. 
Hence all my Grie●ss , and every anxious Care : 
One word , and one kind Gl●nce , can cure despair . 
[ Exit Torrismond ▪ 

SCENE , A Chamber . 

A Table and Wine set out . Enter Lorenzo . Lor.   This may hit ▪ 't is more than barely possible : for Friars have free admittance into every house . This jacobin , whom I have sent to , is her Confessor ; and who can suspect a man of such Reverence for a Pimp ? I 'll try for once : I 'll bribe him high : for commonly none love Money better than they who have made a Vow of Poverty . 



Enter Servant ▪ Seru.   there 's a huge fat religious Gentleman coming up , Sir , he says he 's but a Friar , but he 's big enough to be a Pope ; his Gillss are as rosy as a Turkeycock ; his great Belly walks in state before him like an Harbinger ; and his gouty Legs come limping after it : Never was such a Tun of Devotion seen . 



Lor.   Bring him in , and vani●● ▪ 



[ Exit Seru●nt . Enter Father Dominic . Lor.   Welcome , Father . 



Dom.   Peace be here : I thought I had been sent for to a dying man ; to have fitted him for another world . 



Lor.   no , Faith , Father , I was never for taking such long journeys . Repose yourself , I beseech you , Sir , if those spindle Legs of yours will carry you to the next Chair . 



Dom.   I am old , I am infirm , I must confess , with Fasting . 



Lor.   't is a sign by your wan Complexion , and your thin Jouls , Father . Come — to our better Acquaintance : — here 's a Sovereign Remedy for Old Age and Sorrow . 



[ Drinks . Dom.   The Looks of it are indeed alluring : I 'll do you reason . 



Lor.   Is it to your Palate , Father ? 



[ Drinks . Dom.   Second thoughts , they say , are best : I 'll consider of it once again . 

[ Drinks . It has a most delicious Flavour with it . 

Gad forgive me , I have forgotten to drink your health , Son , I am not used to be so unmannerly . 



[ Drinks again . Lor.   no , I 'll be sworn by what I see of you , you are not : — To the bottom . — I warrant him a true Churchman . — Now , Father , to our business , 't is agreeable to your Calling ; I intent to do an act of Charity . 



Dom.   And I love to hear of Charity ; 't is a comfortable subject . 



Lor.   Being in the late Battle , in great hazard of my Life , I recommended my person to good St. Dominic . 



Dom.   You could not have pitched upon a better : he 's a sure Card : I never knew him fail his Votaries . 



Lor.   Troth I even made bold to strike up a bargain with him , that if I scaped with Life and Plunder , I would present some Brother of his Order with part of the Booty taken from the Infidels , to be employed in charitable uses . 



Dom.   There you hit him : St. Dominic love's Charity exceedingly : that Argument never fails with him . 



Lor.   The Spoils were mighty ; and I scorn to wrong him of a Farthing . To make short my Story ; I enquired among the jacobins for an Almoner , and the general Fame has pointed out your Reverence as the Worthiest man : — here are Fifty good Pieces in this Purse . 



Dom.   How , Fifty Pieces ? 't is too much , too much in Conscience . 



Lor.   Here ; take 'em Father . 



Dom.   no , in troth , I dare not : do not tempt me to break my Vow of Poverty . 



Lor.   If you are modest , I must force you : for I am strongest . 



Dom.   Nay , if you compel me , there 's no contending ; but will you set your strength against a decrepit , poor , old man ? [ Takes the Purse . As I said , 't is too great a Bounty ; but St. Dominic shall own you another Escape : I 'll put him in mind of you . 



Lor.   If you please , Father , we will no● trouble him till the next Battle . But you may do me a greater kindness , by conveying my Prayers to a Female Saint . 



Dom.   A Female Saint ! good now , good now , how your Devotions jump with mine ! I always loved the Female Saints . 



Lor.   I mean a Female , ●mortal , ●married●woman-saint : Look upon the Superscription of this Note ; you know Don Gomez his Wife . 



[ Gives him a Letter . Dom.   Who , Donna Elvira ? I think I have some reason : I am her Ghostly Father . 



Lor.   I have some business of Importance with her , which I have communicated in this Paper ; but her Husband is so horribly given to be jealous . — 



Dom.   Ho , jealous ? he 's the very Quintessence of Jealousy : he keeps no Male Creature in his house : and from abroad he lettest no man come near her . 



Lor.   Excepting you , Father . 



Dom.   Me , I grant you : I am her Director and her Guide in spiritual Affairs . But he has his humours with me too : for tother day , he called me False Apostle . 



Lor.   Did he so ? that reflects upon you all : on my word , Father , that touches your Copyhold . If you would do a meritorious Action , you might revenge the Church's Quarrel . — My Letter , Father — 



Dom.   Well , so far as a Letter , I will take upon me : for what can I refuse to a man so charitably given ? 



Lor.   If you bring an Answer back , that Purse in your hand has a twin-brother , as like him as ever he can look : there are Fifty Pieces lie dormant in it , for more Charities . 



Dom.   That must not be : not a Farthing more upon my Priesthood . — But what may be the purport and meaning of this Letter ; that I confess a little trouble's me . 



Lor.   no harm , I warrant you . 



Dom.   Well , you are a charitable man ; and I 'll take your word : my comfort is , I know not the Contents ; and so far I am blameless . But an Answer you shall have : though not for the sake of your Fifty Pieces more : I have sworn not to take them : they shall not be altogether Fifty : — your Mistress , — forgive me that I should call her your Mistress , I meant Elvira , life's but at next door ; I 'll visit her immediately : but not a word more of the Nine and forty Pieces . — 



Lor.   Nay , I 'll wait on you down Stairs . — Fifty Pounds for the postage of a Letter ! to send by the Church is certainly the dearest road in Christendom . 



[ Exeunt . SCENE , A Chamber . 

Gomez , Elvira . Gom.   Henceforth I banish Flesh and Wine : I 'll have none stirring within these walls these twelve months . 



Elvira ,  I care not ; the sooner I am starved the sooner I am rid of Wedlock . I shall learn the knack to fast a days ; you have used me to fasting nights already . 



Gom.   How the Gipsy answers me ! O , 't is a most notorious Hilding ! 



Elvira ,  ( crying . ) But was ever poor innocent Creature so hardly dealt with , for a little harmless Chat ? 



Gom.   O , the Impudence of this wicked Sex ! Lascivious Dialogues are innocent with you ! 



Elvi.   Was it such a Crime to inquire how the Battle passed ? 



Gom.   But that was not the business , Gentlewoman ; you were not ask News of a Battle past ; you were engaging for a Skirmish that was to come . 



Elvi.   An honest Woman would be glad to hear , that her Honour was safe , and her Enemies were slain . 



Gom.   in her tone . And to ask if he were wounded in your defence ; and , in case he were , to offer yourself to be his Chirurgeon : — then , you did not describe your Husband to him , for a covetous , jealous , rich old Hunks . 



Elvi.   no , I need not : he describes himself sufficiently : but , in what Dream did I do this ? 



Gom.   You walked in your Sleep , with your Eyes broad open , at noon of day ; and dreamt you were talking to the foresaid purpose with one Colonel Hernando . — 



Elvi.   Who , Dear Husband , who ? 



Gom.   What the Devil have I said ? You would have farther Information , would you ? 



Elvi.   no , but , my dear little old man , tell me now ; that I may avoid him for your sake . 



Gom.   Get you up into your Chamber , Cockatrice ; and the●e immure yourself : be confined , I say , during our Royal Pleasure : But , first , down on your marrowbones , upon you● Allegiance ; and make an Acknowledgement of your Offences ; for I will have ample Satisfaction . 



[ Pulls her down . Elvi.   I have done you no Injury , and therefore I 'll make you no Submission : But I 'll complain to my Ghostly Father . 



Gom.   Aye ; there 's your Remedy : When you receive condign Punishment , you run with open Mouth to your Confessor ; that parcel of holy Guts and Garbage ; he must chucle you and moan you : but I 'll rid my hands of his Ghostly Authority [ Enter Dominic . ] one day , and make him know he 's the Son of a — ( sees him . ) So ; — no sooner conjure , but the devil 's in the Circle . — 



Dom.   Son of a what , Don Gomez ? 



Gom.   Why , A Son of a Church , I hope there 's no harm in that , Father . 



Dom.   I will lay up your words for you till time shall serve : and to morrow I enjoin you to Fast for Penance . 



Gom.   ( Aside . ) there 's no harm in that ; she shall fast too : Fasting saves Money . 



Dom.   to Elvira , What was the reason that I found you upon your Knees , in that unseemly posture ? 



Gom.   ( Aside . ) OH horrible ! to find a woman upon her Knees , he says , is an unseemly posture ; there 's a Priest for you . 



Elvi.   to Dom.  I wish , Father , you would give me an opportunity of entertaining you in private : I have somewhat upon my Spirits that presses me exceedingly . 



Dom.   ( Aside . ) This goes well : Gomez , stand you at distance , — farther yet , — stand out of ear-shot — I have somewhat to say to your Wife in private . 



Gomez ,  ( Aside . ) Was ever man thus Priestridden ? would the Steeple of his Church were in his Belly : I am sure there 's room for it . 



Elvi.   I am ashamed to acknowledge my Infirmities ; but you have been always an indulgent Father ; and therefore I will venture , to — and yet I dare not . — 



Dom.   Nay , if you are bashful ; — if you keep your wound from the knowledge of your Surgeon ; — 



Elvi.   You know my Husband is a man in years ; but he 's my Husband ; and therefore I shall be silent : but his Humours are more intolerable than his Age : he 's grown so froward , so covetous , and so jealous , that he has turned my heart quite from him ; and , if I durst confess it , has forced me to cast my Affections on another man  



Dom.   Good : — hold , hold ; I meant abominable : — pray Heaven this be my Colonel . 



[ Aside . Elvi.   I have seen this man , Father ; and have encouraged his Addresses : he 's a young Gentleman , a Soldier , of a most winning Carriage ; and what his Courtship may produce at last I know not ; but I am afraid of my own frailty . 



Dom.   ( aside . ) 't is he for certain : — she has saved the Credit of my Function , by speaking first ; now must I take Gravity upon me . 



Gom.   ( aside . ) This Whispering bodes me no good for certain ; but he has me so plaguily under the lash , that I dare not interrupt him . 



Dom.   Daughter , Daughter , do you remember your matrimonial Vow ? 



Elvi.   Yes , to my sorrow Father , I do remember it : a miserable woman it has made me : but you know , Father , a Marriage-vow is but a thing of course , which all women take when they would get a Husband . 



Dom.   A Vow is a very solemn thing : and 't is good to keep it : — but , notwithstanding , it may be broken , upon some occasions . — Have you striven with all your might against this frailty ? 



Elvi.   Yes , I have striven ; but I found it was against the stream . Love , you know , Father , is a great Vow-maker ; but he 's a greater Vow-breaker . 



Dom.   't is your Duty to strive always : but , notwithstanding , when we have done our utmost , it extenuates the Sin.  



Gom.   I can hold no longer . — Now , Gentlewoman , you are confessing your Enormities ; I know it by that hypocritical , down cast Look : enjoin her to sit bare upon a Bed of Nettles , Father ; you can do no lesle in Conscience . 



Dom.   Hold your peace ; are you growing malapert ? will you force me to make use of my Authority ? your wife 's a well-disposed and a virtuous Lady ; I say it , In verbo Sacerdotis . 



Elvi.   I know not what to do , Father ; I find myself in a most desperate Condition ; and so is the Colonel for Love of me . 



Dom.   The Colonel , say you ! I wish it be not the same young Gentleman I know : 't is a gallant young man , I must con●ess , worthy of any Lady's love in Christendom : in a lawful way I mean ; of such a charming behaviour , so bewitching to a Woman's eye ; and furthermore , so charitably given ; by all good tokens , this must be my Colonel Hernando . 



Elvi.   Aye , and my● Colonel too , Father : I am overjoyed ; and are you then acquainted with him ? 



Dom.   Acquainted with him ! why , he haunts me up and down : and , I am afraid , it is for love of you : for he pressed a Letter upon me , within this hour , to deliver to you : I confess , I received it , lest he should send it by some other ; but with full resolution never to put it into your hands . 



Elvi.   O , dear Father , let me have it , or I shall die . 



Gom.   ( Whispering still . ) A Pox of your close Committee ! I 'll listen I 'm resolved : 



( steals nearer . ) Dom.   Nay , If you are obstinately bend to see it , — use your discretion ; but for my part , I wash my hands on 't . — what make you listening there ? get farther off ; I preach not to thee , thou wicked Eavesdropper . 



Elvi.   I 'll kneel down , Father , as if I were taking Absolution , if you 'll but please to stand before me . 



Dom.   At your peril be it then . I have told you the ill Consequences ; & liberavi animam meam . — Your Reputation is in danger , to say nothing of your Soul. Notwithstanding , when the Spiritual means have been applied , and fails : in that case , the Carnal may be used . — You are a tender Child , you are ; and must not be put into Despair : your Heart is as soft and melting as your Hand . 



He strokes her face ; takes her by the hand ; and gives the Letter . Gom.   Hold , hold , Father ; you go beyond your Commission : Palming is always held foul play amongst Gamesters . 



Dom.   Thus , good Intentions are misconstrued by wicked men : you will never be warned till you are excommunicate . 



Gom.   ( Aside . ) Ah , Devil on him ; there 's his hold ! If there were no more in Excommunication then the Church's Censure , a Wise man would lick his Conscience whole with a wet finger : but , if I am excommunicate , I am outlawed ; and then there 's no calling in my Money . 



Elvira ,  ( rising , ) I have read the Note , Father , and will send him an Answer immediately ; for I know his Lodgings by his Letter . 



Dom.   I understand it not , for my part ; but I wish your Intentions be honest . Remember , that Adultery , though it be a silent Sin , yet it is a crying Sin also . Nevertheless , If you believe absolutely he will die , unless you pity him : to save a man's Life is a point of Charity ; and actions of Charity do alleviate , as I may say , and take off from the Mortality of the Sin. Farewell , Daughter . — Gomez , cherish your virtuous Wife ; and thereupon I give you my Benediction : 



( going . ) Gom.   Stay ; I 'll conduct you to the door , — that I may be sure you steal nothing by the way . — Friars wear not their long Sleeves for nothing . — O , 't is a judas Iscariot . 



[ Exit , after the Friar . Elvi.   This Friar is a comfortable man ! He will understand nothing of the Business ; and yet does it all . 

Pray Wives and Virgins , at your time of need , 
For a True Guide , of my Good Father's breed . 
[ Exit Elvira . 

The End of the Second Act.  

ACT III  

SCENE , The Street . 

Lorenzo , in Friar's habit , meeting Dominic . Lor.   Father Dominic , Father Dominic ; Why in such hast man ? 



Dom.   It should seem a brother of ou● Order . 



Lor.   no , Faith , I am only your brother in Iniquity : my holiness , like yours , is mere outside . 



Dom.   What! my noble Colonel in Metamorphosis ! On what occasion are you transformed ? 



Lor.   Love ; Almighty Love ; that which turned jupiter into a Town-bull , has transformed me into a Friar : I have had a Letter from Elvira , in answer to that I sent by you . 



Dom.   You see I have delivered my Message faithfully : I am a Friar of Honour where I am engaged . 



Lor.   OH , I understand your Hint : the other Fifty pieces are ready to be condemned to Charity . 



Dom.   But this Habit ▪ Son , this Habit ! 



Lor.   't is a Habit that in all Ages has been friendly to Fornication : You have begun the Design in this Clothing , and I 'll try to accomplish it . The Husband is absent ; that evil Counsellor is removed ; and the Sovereign is graciously disposed to hear my grievances . 



Dom.   Go to ; go to ; I find good Counsel is but thrown away upon you : fare you well , fare you well , Son ! ah — 



Lor.   How ! Will you turn Recreant at the last cast ? You must along to countenance my undertaking ; We are at the door man  



Dom.   Well , I have tho●ght on 't ; and I will not go . 



Lor.   You may stay , Father ▪ but no Fifty , pounds without it : that was only promised in the Bond : but the Condition of this Obligation is such , That if the above named Father , Father Dominic , do not well and faithfully , perform — 



Dom.   Now I better think on 't , I will bear you company ; for the Reverence of my Presence may be a curb to your E●orbitancieses . 



Lor.   Led up your Myrmidon , and enter . 



[ Exeunt . Enter Elvira , in her Chamber . Elvi.   he 'll come , that 's certain : young Appetites are sharp ; and seldom need twice bidding to such a banquet : — well ; if I prove frail , as I hope I shall not , till I have compassed my Design ; never Woman had such a Husband to provoke her , such a Lover to allure her , or such a Confessor to absolve her . Of what am I afraid then ? not my Conscience , that 's safe enough ; my Ghostly Father has given it a Dose of Church Opium , to lull it : well , for soothing Sin ▪ I 'll say that for him , he 's a Chaplain for any Court in Christendom . 

Enter Lorenzo and Dominic . OH , Father Dominic , what News ? How ▪ a Companion with you ! What Game have you in hand , that you hunt in Couples ? 



Lor.   ( lifting up his hood . ) I 'll show you that immediately . 



Elvi.   OH , my Love ! 



Lor.   My Life ! 



Elvi.   My Soul ! 



( They embrace . ) Dom.   I am taken on the sudden with a grievous swimming in my Head , and such a mist before my Eyes , that I can neither hear nor see . 



Elvi.   Stay , and I 'll fetch you some comfortable Water . 



Dom.   no , no ; nothing but the open Air will do me good . I 'll take a turn in your Garden : but remember that I trust you both , and do not wrong my good opinion of you . 

[ Exit Dominic . 

Elvi.   This is certainly the dust of Gold which you have thrown in the good man's eyes , that on the sudden he cannot see : for my mind misgives me , this Sickness of his is but Apocryphal ! 



Lor.   't is no Qualm of Conscience I 'll be sworn : you see , Madam , 't is Interest governs all the World : he preaches against Sin ; why ? because he gets by 't : he holds his tongue ; why ▪ because so much more is bidden for his silence . 



Elvi.   And so much for the Friar . 



Lor.   O , those Eyes of yours reproach me justly : that I neglect the subject which brought me hither . 



Elvi.   Do you consider the hazard I have run to see you here ? if you do , methinks it should inform you , that I love not at a common rate . 



Lor.   Nay , if you talk of considering ; let us consider why we are alone . Do you think the Friar left us together to tell Beads ? Love is a kind of penurious God , very niggardly of his opportunities , he must be watched like a hardhearted Treasurer , for he bolts out on the sudden , and , if you take him not in the nick , he vanishes in a twinkling . 



Elvi.   Why do you make such haste to have done loving me ? You Men are all like Watches , wound up for striking twelve immediately ; but , after you are satisfied , the very next that follows is the solitary sound of single one . 



Lor.   How , Madam ! Do you invite me to a Feast , and then preach Abstinence ? 



Elvi.   no , I invite you to a Feast where the Dishes are served up in order : you are for making a hasty meal , and for chopping up your entertainment , like an hungry Clown : trust my management , good Colonel ; and call not for your Dessert too soon : believe me , that which comes last , as it is the sweetest , so it cloies the soon . 



Lor.   I perceive , Madam , by your holding me at this distance , that there is somewhat you expect from me : what am I to undertake or suffer ever I can be happy ? 



Elvi.   I must first be satisfied that you love me . 



Lor.   By all that 's Holy : By these dear Eyes . 



Elvi.   Spare your Oaths and Protestations ; I know you Gallants of the time have a mint at your tongues end to coin them . 



Lor.   You know you cannot marry me : but , By heavens , if you were in a condition — 



Elvi.   then you would not be so prodigal of your Promises , but have the Fear of Matrimony before your eyes : in few words , if you love me , as you profess , deliver me from this Bondage , take me out of Egypt , and I 'll wander with you as far as Earth , and Seas , and Love can carry us . 



Lor.   I never was out at a mad Frolic , though this is the maddest I ever undertaken ; have with you , Lady mine ; I take you at your word ; and , if you are for a merry Jaunt , I 'll try for once who can foot it farthest : there are Hedges in Summer , and Barns in Winter to be found : I , with my Knapsack , and you , with your Bottle at your back : we 'll leave Honour to Madmen , and riches to Knaves ; and travel till we come to the Ridge of the World , and then drop together into the next . 



Elvi.   Give me your Hand , and strike a Bargain . 



[ He takes her Hand , and kisses it . Lor.   In sign and token whereof the Parties interchangeably , and so forth — when should I be weary of Sealing upon this Soft - wax ? 



Elvi.   OH , Heavens ! I hear my Husband's voice . 



Enter Gomez . Gom.   Where are you ▪ Gentlewoman ? there 's something in the wind I 'm sure , because your Woman would have run up Stairs before me : but I have secured her below with a Gag in her Chaps — now , in the Devil's name , what makes this Friar here again ? I do not like these frequent Conjunctions of the Flesh and Spirit ; they are boding . 



Elvi.   Go hence , good Father ; my Husband you see is in an ill humour ; and I would not have you witness of his folly . 



[ Lorenzo going . Gomez ,  ( running to the door , ) By your Reverence's favour , hold a little , I must examine you something better before you go : Hi-day ! who have we here ? Father Dominic is shrunk in the wetting two yards and a half about the Belly : what are become of those two Timber-loggs that he used to wear for Legs , that stood strutting like the two black Posts before a door ? I am afraid some bad body has been setting him over a Fire in a great Cauldron , and boiled him down half the quantity for a Receipt : this is no Father Dominic , no huge , overgrown ▪ Abbey-lubber ; this is but a diminutive sucking Friar : as sure as a Gun now , Father Dominic has been spawning this young , slender Anti-christ . 



Elvi.   ( aside , ) He will be found ; there 's no prevention . 



Gomez ,  Why does he not speak ? What! Is the Friar possessed with a dumb Devil ? If he be , I shall make bold to conjure him . 



Elvi.   he 's but a Novice in his Order , and is enjoined Silence for a Penance . 



Gomez ,  A Novice , quoth a ; You would make a Novice of me too , if you could : but , What was his business here ? Answer me that , Gentlewoman , answer me that . 



Elvi.   What should it be , but to give me some Spiritual Instructions ? 



Gom.   Very good ; and you are like to edify much from a dumb Preacher ; this will not pass ; I must examine the Contents of him a little closer ; OH thou Confessor ! confess who thou art , or thou art no Friar of this World : He comes to Lorenzo , who struggles with him ; his habit fly's open , and discovers a Sword : Gomez starts back . As I live , this is a manifest member of the Church militant . 



Lor.   ( Aside . ) I am discovered ; now Impudence be my Refuge — Yes , Faith 't is I , honest Gomez ; thou seest I use thee like a Friend ; this is a familiar Visit.  



Gom.   What! Colonel Hernando turned a Friar ! who could have suspected you for so much Godliness ? 



Lor.   Even as thou seest , I make bold here . 



Gom.   A very frank manner of proceeding ; but I do not wonder at your Visit , after so friendly an Invitation as I made you ; marry , I hope you will excuse the Blunderbusses for not being in readiness to salute you ; but let me know your hour , and all shall be mended another time . 



Lor.   hang it ; I hate such ripping up of old unkindness ; was upon the Frolic this evening , and came to visit thee in Masquerade . 



Gom.   Very likely ; and not finding me at home , you were forced to toy away an hour with my Wife , or so . 



Lor.   Right : thou speakest my very Soul.  



Gom.   Why , am not I a Friend then , to help you out ? you would have been fumbling half an hour for this Excuse — - but , as I remember , you promised to storm my Citadel , and bring your Regiment of red Locusts upon me for Free quarter : I find , Colonel , by your Habit , there are Black Locusts in the World as well as Red.  



Elvi.   ( Aside . ) When comes my share of the reckoning to be called for ? 



Lor.   Give me thy Hand ; thou art the honestest , kind man ; I was resolved I would not out of thy house till I had seen thee . 



Gom.   no ▪ in my Conscience , if I had stayed abroad till midnight . But , Colonel , you and I shall talk in another tone hereafter ; I mean , in cold friendship , at a Bar , before a Judge , by the way of Plaintiff and Defendant : your Excuses want some grains to make 'em currant : hum and ha will not do the business — there 's a modest Lady of your acquaintance , she has so much Grade to make none at all , but silently to confess the Power of Dame Nature working in her Body to Youthful Appetite . 



Elvi.   How he got in I know not , unless it were by virtue of his Habit.  



Gom.   Ai , ai , the Virtues of that Habit are known abundantly . 



Elvi.   I could not hinder his entrance , for he took me unprovided . 



Gom.   To resist him . 



Elvi.   I 'm sure he has not been here above a quarter of an hour . 



Gom.   And a quarter of that time would have served the turn : OH thou epitome of thy virtuous Sex ! Madam Messalina the Second retire to thy Apartment : I have an Assignation there to make with thee . 



Elvi.   I am all Obedience — 

[ Exit Elvira . 

Lor.   I find , Gomez , you are not the man I thought you : we may meet before we come to the Bar , we may , and our Differences may be decided by other Weapons then by Lawyer's tongues ; in the mean time , no ill treatment of your Wife , as you hope to die a natural death , and go to Hell in your Bed : Bilbo is the word , remember that , and tremble — 

[ he 's going out . 

Enter Dominic . Dom.   Where is this naughty Couple ? where are you , in the name of Goodness ? my mind misgave me ; and I durst trust you no longer with yourselves ; here will be fine work , I 'm afraid , at your next Confession . 



Lor.   ( Aside . ) The Devil is punctual , I see , he has paid me the shame he owed me ; and now the Friar is coming in for his part too . 



Dom.   ( Seeing Gom. ) Bless my Eyes ! what do I see ? 



Gom.   Why ; you see a Cuckold of this honest Gentleman's making : I thank him for his pains . 



Dom.   I confess I am astonished ! 



Gom.   What , at a Cuckoldom of your own contrivance ! your Head-piece and his Limbs have done my business . — Nay , do not look so strangely , remember your own words , Here will be fine work at your next Confession : What naughty Couple were they whom you durst not trust together any longer ? when the hypocritical Rogue had trusted 'em a full quarter of an hour ; and , by the way , horns will sprout in lesle time than Mushrooms . 



Dom.   Beware how you accuse one of my Order upon light suspicions : the naughty Couple that I meant , were your Wife and you , whom I left together with great Animosities on both sides : now , that was the occasion , mark me Gomez , that I thought it convenient to return again , and not to trust your enraged Spirits too long together : you might have broken out into Revile and matrimonial Warfare , which are Sins ; and new Sins make work for new Confessions . 



Lor.   ( Aside . ) Well said , I saith , Friar ; thou art come off thyself , but poor I am left in Limbo . 



Gom.   Angle in some other Ford , good Father , you shall catch no Gudgeons here : look upon the Prisoner at the Bar Friar , and inform the Court what you know concerning him ; he is arraigned here by the name of Colonel Hernando . 



Dom.   What Colonel do you mean , Gomez ? I see no man , but a Reverend Brother of our Order , whose Profession I honour , but whose person I know not , as I hope for Paradise . 



Gom.   no , you are not acquainted with him , the more 's the pity ; you do not know him , under this Disguise , for the greatest Cuckold-maker in all Spain . 



Dom.   OH Impudence ! OH Rogue ! OH Vilain ! Nay , if he be such a man , my Righteous Spirit rises at him ! Does he put on Holy Garments for a cover-shame of Lewdness ? 



Gom.   Yes , and he 's in the right on 't , Father ; when a swingeing Sin is to be committed , nothing will cover it so close as a Fryar's Hood : for there the Devil plays at Bopeep , puts out his Horns to do a mischief , and then shrinks 'em back for safety , like a Snail into her shell . 



Lor.   ( Aside . ) it 's best marching off while I can retreat with Honour ; there 's no trusting this Fryar's Conscience ; he has renounced me already more heartily than ever he did the Devil , and is in a fair way to prosecute me for putting on these Holy Robes : this is the old Church-trick , the Clergy is ever at the bottom of the Plot , but they are wise enough to slip their own Necks out of the Choler , and leave the Laity to be fairly hanged for it — 

[ Exit Lorenzo . 

Gom.   follow your Leader , Friar ; your Colonel is trooped off , but he had not gone so easily , if I durst have trusted you in the house behind me ; gather up your gouty Legs , I say , and rid my house of that huge Body of divinity . 



Dom.   I expect some judgement should fall upon you for your want of Reverence to your Spiritual Director : Slander , Covetousness , and Jealousy , will weigh thee down . 



Gom.   Put Pride , Hypocrisy , and Gluttony , into your Scale , Father , and you shall weigh against me : nay , and Sins come to be divided once , the Clergy puts in for nine parts , and scarce leaves the Laity a tithe . 



Dom.   How darest thou reproach the Tribe of Levi ? 



Gom.   Mary , because you make us Laymen of the Tribe of Issachar : you make Asses of us , to bear your burdens : when we are young , you put Paniers upon us , with your Church discipline ; and , when we are grown up , you load us with a Wife : after that , you procure for other men , and then you load our Wives too ; a fine phrase you have amongst you to draw us into Marriage , you call it Settling of a man ; just as when a fellow has got a sound Knock upon the head , they say he 's settled : Marriage is a Settling blow indeed . They say every thing in the World is good for something , as a Toad , to suck up the Venom of the Earth ; but I never knew what a Friar was good for till your Pimping showed me . 



Dom.   thou shalt answer for this , thou Slanderer , thy Offences be upon thy head . 



Gom.   I believe there are some Offences there of your planting . [ Exit Dominic . Lord , Lord , that men should have sense enough to set Snares in their Warrens to catch Polecats , and Foxes , and yet — 

Want wit a Priest-trap at their door to lay , 
For holy Vermin that in houses prey . 
[ Exit Gomez . 

SCENE , A Bedchamber . 

Queen , Teresa . Ter.   You are not what you were since yesterday : 
Your food forsakes you and your needful rest : 
You pine , you languish , love to be alone ; 
Think much , speak little ; and , in speaking , sigh . 
When you see Torrismond , you are unquiet ; 
But when you see him not , you are in pain . 


Queen ,  OH , let 'em never love , who never tried ! 
They brought a Paper to me to be signed ; 
Thinking on him , I quite forgot my name ; 
And written , for Leonora , Torrismond . 
I went to bed , and to myself I thought , 
That I would think on Torrismond no more : 
then shut my Eyes ; but could not shut out him . 
I turned ; and tried each corner of my Bed , 
To find if Sleep were there , but Sleep was lost . 
Fev'rish , for want of Rest , I rise , and walked ; 
And , by the Moonshine , to the Windows went ; 
There , thinking to exclude him from my thoughts , 
I cast my eyes upon the neighbouring fields ▪ 
And , ever I was aware , sighed to myself , 
There fought my Torrismond . 


Ter.   What hinders you to take the Man you love ? 
The People will be glad , the Soldier shout ; 
And Bertran , though repining , will be awed . 


Qu.   I fear to try new Love , 
As boys to venture on the unknown Ice , 
That crackles underneath 'em , while they slide . 
O , how shall I describe this growing ill ! 
Betwixt my Doubt and Love , methinks , I stand 
Altering , like one that waits an Ague fit ; 
And yet , would this were all ! 


Ter.   What fear you more ? 


Qu.   I am ashamed to say , 't is but a fancy . 
At break of day , when Dreams , they say , are true , 
A drowsy slumber , rather than a sleep , 
Seized on my Senses , with long Watching worn . 
Methought I stood on a wide River's Bank , 
Which I must needs o'erpass , but knew not how : 
When , on a sudden Torrismond appeared , 
Gave me his hand , and led me lightly over ; 
Leaping and bounding on the Billows heads , 
Till safely we had reached the farther shore . 


Ter.   This Dream portends some ill which you shall scape ▪ 
Would you see fairer Visions ? Take this night 
Your Torrismond within your Arms to sleep : 
And , to that end , invent some apt pretence ▪ 
To break with Bertran : 't would be better yet , 
Could you provoke him to give you th' occasion , 
And then to throw him off . 


Enter Bertran at a distance . Qu.   My Stars have sent him : 
For , see , he comes : how gloomily he looks ! 
If he , as I suspect , have sound my Love , 
His Jealousy will furnish him with Fury , 
And me with means to part . 


Bertr .  ( Aside . ) Shall I upbraid her ? Shall I call her false ? 
If she be false , 't is what she most desires . 
My Genius whispers me , Be cautious , Bertran ! 
thou walkest as on a narrow Mountain's neck , 
A dreadful height , with scanty room to tread . 


Qu.   What Business have you at the Court , my Lord ? 


Bert.   What Business , Madam ? 


Qu.   Yes , my Lord , What Business ? 
't is somewhat sure of weighty consequence 
That brings you here so often , and unsent for . 


Bert.   ( Aside . ) 't is what I feared , her words are cold enough 
To frieze a man to death . — May I presume 
To speak , and to complain ? 


Qu.   They who complain to Princes think 'em tame : 
What Bull dare bellow , or , what Sheep dares bleat , 
Within the Lion's den ? 


Bert.   Yet men are suffered to put Heaven in mind 
Of promised Blessings , for they then are Debts . 


Qu.   My Lord , Heaven knows its own time when to give ; 
But you , it seems , charge me with Breach of Faith.  


Bert.   I hope I need not , Madam : 
But as when men in Sickness lingering lie , 
They count the tedious hours by months and years ; 
So every day deferred to Dying Lovers 
Is a whole Age of pain . 


Qu.   What if I never consent to make you mine ? 
My Father's Promise ties me not to time ; 
And Bonds , without a Date , they say , are void . 


Bert.   Far be it from me to believe you bound : 
Love is the freest motion of our minds : 
OH , could you see into my secret Soul , 
There you might read your own Dominion doubled , 
Both as a Queen and Mistress : if you leave me , 
Know I can die , but dare not be displeased . 


Qu.   Sure you affect Stupidity , my Lord , 
Or give me cause to think that when you lost 
Three Battles to the Moors , you coldly stood 
As unconcerned as now . 


Bert.   I did my best ; 
Fate was not in my power . 


Qu.   And with the like tame Gravity you saw 
A raw young Warrior take your baffled work 
And end it at a blow . 


Bert.   I humbly take my leave ; but they who blast 
Your good opinion of me , may have cause 
To know I am no Coward . 
[ He is going . 

Qu.   Bertran , stay ; 
( Aside . ) This may produce some dismal consequence 
To him whom dearer than my Life I love . 
To him . Have I not managed my contrivance well , 
To try your Love , and make you doubt of mine ? 


Bert.   then was it but a Trial ? 
Methinks I start as from some dreadful Dream ; 
And often ask myself , if yet I wake . 
( Aside . ) This turns too quick to be without Design ; 
I 'll sound the bottom of 't ever I believe . 


Qu.   I find your Love ; and would reward it too , 
But anxious Fears solicit my weak breast : 
I fear my People's Faith : 
That hot mouthed Beast that bears against the Curb , 
Hard to be broken even by lawful Kings ; 
But harder by Usurpers : 
Judge then , my Lord , with all these Cares oppressed , 
If I can think of Love.  


Bert.   Believe me , Madam , 
These Jealousies , how ever large they spread , 
Have but one Root , the old , imprisoned King ; 
Whose Lenity first pleased the gaping Crowd : 
But when long tried , and found supinely good , 
Like Aesop's Log , they leapt upon his Back : 
Your Father knew 'em well ; and when he mounted , 
He reined 'em strongly and he spurred them hard ; 
And , but he durst not do it all at once , 
He had not left alive this patient Saint , 
This Anvil of Affronts , but sent him hence , 
To hold a peaceful Branch of Palm above , 
And hymn it in the Quire.  


Qu.   You have hit upon the very String , which touched , 
Echoes the Sound and Jars within my Soul ; 
There lies my Grief . 


Bert.   So long as there 's a Head , 
Thither will all the mounting Spirits fly ; 
Lordship that but off ; and then — 


Qu.   My Virtue shrinks from such an horrid Act.  


Bert.   This 't is to have a Virtue out of season . 
Mercy is good ; a very good dull Virtue ; 
But Kings mistake its timeing ; and are mild , 
When manly Courage bids 'em be severe : 
Better be cruel once then anxious ever : 
Remove this threatening Danger from your Crown ; 
And then securely take the man you love . 


Qu.   ( walking aside . ) Ha! let me think of that : the Man I love ? 
't is true , this Murder is the only means 
That can secure my Throne to Torrismond . 
Nay more , this Execution done by Bertran , 
Makes him the Object of the People's Hate . 


Bert.   ( Aside . ) The more she thinks , 't will work the stronger in her . 


Qu.   ( Aside . ) How eloquent is Mischief to persuade ! 
Few are so wicked as to take delight 
In Crimes unprofitable ▪ nor do I : 
If then I break divine and human Laws , 
no Bribe but Love could gain so bad a Cause . 


Bert.   You answer nothing ! 


Qu.   't is of deep Concernment , 
And I a Woman ignorant and weak : 
I leave it all to you , think what you do , 
You do for him I love . 


Bert.   ( Aside . ) For him she love's ? 
She named not me ; that may be Torrismond , 
Whom she has thrice in private seen this day : 
then I am fairly caught in my own Snare . 
I 'll think again — Madam , it shall be done ; 
And mine be all the blame . 
[ Exit Bertr . 

Qu.   OH , that it were ! I would not do this Crime , 
And yet ▪ like Heaven , permit it to be done . 
〈…〉 ●ood grossly cheat us with Freewill : 
〈…〉 ●hat , but what Heaven first decreed ? 
Our Actions then are neither good nor ill , 
Since from eternal Causes they proceed : 
Our Passions , Fear and Anger , Love and Hate , 
Mere senseless Engines that are moved by Fate ; 
Like Ships on stormy Seas , without a Guide , 
Tossed by the Winds , and driven by the Tide . 


Enter Torrismond . Tor.   am I not rudely bold , and press too often 
Into your presence , Madam ? If I am — 


Qu.   no more ; lest I should chide you for your stay : 
Where have you been ? and , How could you suppose 
That I could live these two long hours without you ? 


Tor.   OH , words to charm an Angel from his orb ! 
Welcome , as kindly Showers to long parched Earth ! 
But I have been in such a dismal place 
Where Joy never enters , which the Sun never cheers : 
bound in with Darkness , overspread with Damps : 
Where I have seen ( if I could say , I saw ) 
The good old King majestic in his Bonds , 
And ' midst his Griefs most venerably great : 
By a dim winking Lamp , which feebly broke 
The gloomy Vapours , he lay stretched along 
Upon the unwholesome Earth ; his Eyes fixed upward : 
And ever and anon a silent Tear 
Stolen down and trickled from his hoary Beard . 


Qu.   OH Heaven , what have I done ! my gentle Love , 
Here end thy sad discourse , and , for my sake , 
Cast off these fearful melancholy thoughts . 


Tor.   My Heart is withered at that piteous Sight , 
As early Blossoms are with Eastern blasts : 
He sent for me , and , while I raised his Head , 
He threw his aged Arms about my Neck ; 
And , seeing that I wept , he pressed me close : 
So , leaning Cheek to Cheek and Eyes to Eyes , 
We mingled Tears in a dumb Scene of Sorrow . 


Qu.   Forbear : you know not how you wound my Soul.  


Tor.   Can you have Grief , and not have Pity too ? 
He told me , when my Father did return , 
He had a wondrous Secret to disclose : 
He kissed me , blessed me , nay , he called me Son ; 
He praised my Courage , prayed for my Success : 
He was so true a Father of his Country , 
To thank me for defending even his Foes , 
Because they were his Subjects . 


Qu.   If they be ; then what am I ? 


Tor.   The Sovereign of my Soul , my Earthly Heaven . 


Qu.   And not your Queen ? 


Tor.   You are so beautiful , 
So wondrous fair , you justify Rebellion : 
As if that faultless Face could make no Sin , 
But Heaven , with looking on it , must forgive . 


Qu.   The King must die , he must , my Torrismond ; 
Though Pity softly pled within my Soul , 
Yet he must die , that I may make you great , 
And give a Crown in dowry with my Love.  


Tor.   Perish that Crown — on any Head but yours ; — 
OH , recollect your Thoughts ! 
Shake not his Hour glass , when his hasty Sand 
Is ebbing to the last : 
A little longer , yet a little longer , 
And Nature drops him down , without your Sin , 
Like mellow Fruit , without a Winter Storm . 


Qu.   Let me but do this one Injustice more : 
His Doom is past ; and , for your sake , he dies . 


Tor.   Would you , for me , have done so ill an Act , 
And will not do a good one ? 
Now , By your Joys on Earth , your Hopes in Heaven , 
OH spare this Great , this Good , this Aged King ; 
And spare your Soul the Crime ! 


Qu.   The crime 's not mine ; 
'T was first proposed , and must be done , by Bertran , 
Fed with false hopes to gain my Crown and Me : 
I , to enhance his Ruin , gave no leave ; 
But barely bade him think , and then resolve . 


Tor.   In not forbidding , you command the Crime ; 
Think , timely think , on the last dreadful day ; 
How will you tremble there to stand exposed , 
And foremost in the rank of guilty Ghosts 
That must be doomed for Murder ; think on Murder : 
That Troop is placed apart from common Crimes ; 
The damned themselves start wide , and eat that Band , 
As far more black and more forlorn than they . 


Qu.   't is terrible , it shakes , it staggers me ; 
I knew this Truth , but I repelled that Thought ; 
Sure there is none but fears a future state ; 
And , when the most obdurate swear they do not , 
Their trembling Hearts belly their boasting Tongues . 
Enter Teresa . send speedily to Bertran ; charge him strictly 
Not to proceed , but wait my farther Pleasure . 


Ter.   Madam , he sends to tell you , 't is performed . 
[ Exit Teresa . 

Tor.   Ten thousand Plagues consume him , Furies drag him , 
Fiend's tear him ; Blasted be the Arm that struck , 
The Tongue that ordered ; — Only She be spared 
That hindered not the Deed. OH , where was then 
The Power that guards the Sacred Lives of Kings ? 
Why slept the Lightning and the Thunderbolts , 
Or bend their idle rage on Fields and Trees , 
When Vengeance called 'em here ? 


Qu.   Sleep that Thought too , 
't is done , and since 't is done , 't is past recall : 
And since 't is past recall , must be forgotten . 


Tor.   OH , never , never , shall it be forgotten ; 
High Heaven will not forget it , after Ages 
Shall with a fearful Curse remember ours ; 
And Blood shall never leave the Nation more ! 


Qu.   His Body shall be Royally interred , 
And the last Funeral Pomps adorn his Hearse ; 
I will myself ( as I have Cause too just ) 
Be the chief Mourner at his Obsequys : 
And yearly fix on the revolving day 
The solemn marks of Mourning , to atone 
And expiate my Offences . 


Tor.   Nothing can , 
But Bloody Vengeance on that Traitor's Head , 
Which , dear departed Spirit , here I vow . 


Qu.   Here end our Sorrows , and begin our Joys : 
Love calls , my Torrismond ; though Hate has raged 
And ruled the day , yet Love will rule the night . 
The spiteful Stars have shed their Venom down , 
And now the peaceful Planets take their turn . 
This Deed of Bertran's has removed all Fears , 
And given me just occasion to refuse him . 
What hinders now , but that the holy Priest 
In secret join our mutual Vows ? and then 
This night , this happy night , is yours and mine . 


Tor.   Be still my Sorrows ; and , be loud my Joys . 
Fly to the utmost Circles of the Sea 
thou furious Tempest that hast tossed my mind , 
And leave no thought , but Leonora , there . — 
what 's this I feel aboding in my Soul ? 
As if this day were fatal ; be it so ; 
Fate shall but have the Leave of my love : 
My Joys are gloomy , but withal are great ; 
The Lion , though he see the Toils are set , 
Yet , pinched with raging Hunger , scowrs away , 
Hunt's in the Face of Danger all the day ; 
At night , with sullen pleasure , grumbles over his Prey . 


[ Exeunt ambo . The End of the Third Act.  

ACT IU.  

SCENE , Before Gomez his Door . 

Enter Lorenzo , Dominic , and two Soldiers at a distance . Dom.   I 'll not wag an ace farther : The whole World shall not bribe me to it ; for my Conscience will digest these gross Enormities no longer . 



Lor.   How , thy Conscience not digest ' 'em ! there 's never a Friar in Spain can show a Conscience that comes near it for Digestion : it digested Pimping when I sent thee with my Letter : and it digested Perjury when thou sworest thou didst not know me : I 'm sure it has digested me Fifty pound of as hard Gold as is in all Barbary : Prithee , why shouldst thou discourage Fornication , when thou knowest thou lovest a sweet young Girl ? 



Dom.   Away , away ; I do not love 'em ; — phau ; no , — spits . I do not love a pretty Girl ; — you are so waggish ; — spits again . 



Lor.   Why , thy mouth waters at the very mention of them . 



Dom.   You take a mighty pleasure in Defamation , Colonel ; but I wonder what you find in running restless up and down , breaking your Brains , emptying your Purse , and wearing out your Body with hunting after unlawful Game . 



Lor.   Why there 's the Satisfaction on 't . 



Dom.   This Incontinency may proceed to Adultery , and Adultery to Murder , and Murder to Hanging ; and there 's the Satisfaction on 't . 



Lor.   I 'll not hang along , Friar ; I 'm resolved to peach thee before thy Superiors for what thou hast done already . 



Dom.   ay them resolved to forswear it if you do : Let me advice you better , Colonel , then to accuse a Churchman to a Churchman : in the common Cause we are all of a piece ; we hang together . 



Lor.   ( Aside . ) If you don 't , it were no matter if you did . 



Dom.   Nay , if you talk of Peaching , I 'll peach first , and see whose Oath will be believed ; I 'll trounce you for offering to corrupt my Honesty , and bribe my Conscience : you shall be summoned by an host of Paratours ; you shall be sentenced in the Spiritual Court ; you shall be excommunicated ; you shall be outlawed ; — and — 



Here Lorenzo takes a Purse , and plays with it , and , at last , le 's the Purse fall chinking on the ground ; which the Friar eyes . In another tone . I say a man might do this now , if he were maliciously disposed , and had a mind to bring matters to extremity ; but , considering that you are my Friend , a Person of Honour , and a worthy good charitable Man , I would rather die a thousand deaths then disoblige you . 

Lorenzo takes up the Purse , and pours it into the Fryar's sleeve . Nay , Good Sir ; nay , Dear Colonel ; OH Lord , Sir , what are you doing now ! I profess this must not be : without this I would have served you to the uttermost ; pray command me : a jealous , foul-mouthed Rogue this Gomez is : I saw how he used you , and you marked how he used me too : OH he 's a bitter man ; but we 'll join our Forces ; ah , shall we , Colonel ? we 'll be revenged on him with a witness . 

Lor.   But how shall I send her word to be ready at the door , ( for I must reveal it in Confession to you , ) that I mean to carry her away this evening , by the help of these two Soldiers ? I Know Gomez suspects you , and you will hardly gain admittance . 



Dom.   Let me alone ; I fear him not ; I am armed with the Authority of my clothing ; yonder I see him keeping Sentry at his door : have you never seen a Citizen , in a cold morning , clapping his sides , and walking forward and backward a mighty pace before his Shop ? but I 'll gain the Pass in spite of his suspicion ; stand you aside , and do but mark how I accost him . 



Lor.   If he meet with a repulse , we must throw off the Foxe's skin , and put on the Lion's , come , Gentlemen , you 'll stand by me . Soldier , Do not doubt us , Colonel . 

They retire all three to a corner of the Stage , Dominic goes to the door where Gomez stands . 

Dom.   Good even Gomez , how does your Wife ? 



Gom.   Just as you would have her , thinking no nothing , but her dear Colonel , and conspiring Cuckoldom against me . 



Dom.   I dare say you wrong her , she is employing her thoughts how to cure you of your jealousy . 



Gom.   Yes , by Certainty . 



Dom.   By your leave , Gomez ; I have some Spiritual Advice to impart to her on that Subject . 



Gom.   You may spare your Instructions if you please , Father , She has no farther need of them . 



Dom.   How , no need of them ! Do you speak in Riddles ? 



Gom.   Since you will have me speak plainer ; she has profited so well already by your Counsel , that she can say her Lesson without your teaching : Do you understand me now ? 



Dom.   I must not neglect my duty , for all that ; once again , Gomez , by your leave . 



Gom.   she 's a little indisposed at present , and it will not be convenient to disturb her . 

Dominic offers to go by him , but tother stands before him . 

Dom.   Indisposed , say you ? OH , it is upon those occasions that a Confessor is most necessary ; I think it was my good Angel that sent me hither so opportunely . 



Gom.   Aye , whose good Angels sent you hither , that you best know , Father . 



Dom.   A word or two of Devotion will do her no harm I 'm sure . 



Gom.   A little Sleep will do her more good I 'm sure : You know she disburdened her Conscience but this morning to you . 



Dom.   But , if she be ill this afternoon , she may have new occasion to confess . 



Gom.   Indeed , as you order matters with the Colonel , she may have occasion of confessing herself every hour . 



Dom.   Pray , how long has she been sick ? 



Gom.   Lord , you will force a man to speak ; why ever since your last Defeat . 



Dom.   This can be but some light Indisposition , it will not last , and I may see her . 



Gom.   How , not last ! I say , It will last , and it shall last ; she shall be sick these seven or eight days , and perhaps longer , as I see occasion : what ; I know the mind of her Sickness a little better than you do . 



Dom.   I find then , I must bring a Doctor . 



Gom.   And he 'll bring an Apothecary with a chargeable long bill of Ana's : those of my Family have the Grace to die cheaper : in a word , Sir Dominic , we understand one another's business here ; I am resolved to stand like the Swiss of my own Family , to defend the entrance ; you may mumble over your Pater Nosters if you please , and try if you can make my doors fly open , and batter down my walls with Bell , Book , and Candle ; but I am not of opinion that you are holy enough to commit Miracles . 



Dom.   Men of my Orders are not to be treated after this manner . 



●om .  I would treat the Pope and all his Cardinals in the same manner , if they offered to see my Wife without my leave . 



Dom.   I excommunicate thee from the Church , if thou dost not open , there 's Promulgation coming out . 



Gom.   And I excommunicate you from my Wife , if you go to that ; there 's Promulgation for Promulgation , and Bull for Bull ; and so I leave you to recreate yourself with the end of an old Song — and Sorrow came to the old Friar . 

[ Exit Gomez . 

Lorenzo comes to him . Lor.   I will not ask you your Success ; for I overheard part of it , and saw the Conclusion ; I find we are now put upon our last Trump ; the Fox is earthed , but I shall send my two Terriers in after him . 



Soldier ,  I warrant you , Colonel , we 'll unkennel him . 



Lor.   And make what haste you can to bring out the Lady : what say you , Father , Burglary is but a venial Sin among Soldiers . 



Dom.   I shall absolve them , because he is an enemy of the Church — there is a Proverb , I confess , which says , That Deadmen tell no Tales ; but let your Soldiers apply it at their own Perils . 



Lor.   What , take away a man's Wife , and kill him too ! the Wickedness of this old Villain startles me , and gives me a twinge for my own Sin ; though it come far short of his : hark you Soldiers , be sure you use as little Violence to him as is possible . 



Dom.   Hold a little , I have thought better how to secure him , with lesle danger to us . 



Lor.   OH Miracle , the Friar is grown conscientious ! 



Dom.   The old King you know is just murdered , and the persons that did it are unknown ; let the Soldiers seize him for one of the Assassinates , and let me alone to accuse him afterwards . 



Lor.   I cry thee mercy with all my heart , for suspecting a Friar of the least good-nature ; what , would you accuse him wrongfully ? 



Dom.   I must confess , 't is wrongful quoad hoc , as to the Fact itself ; but 't is rightful quoad hunc , as to this Heretical Rogue , whom we must dispatch : he has railed against the Church , which is a fouler Crime than the murder of a Thousand Kings ; Omne majus continet in se minus : He that is an Enemy to the Church , is an Enemy unto Heaven ; and he that is an Enemy to Heaven , would have killed the King , if he had been in the Circumstances of doing it : so it is not wrongful to accuse him . 



Lor.   I never knew a Churchman , if he were personally offended , but he would bring in Heaven by hook or crook into his Quarrel . Soldiers , Do as you were first ordered . 

[ Exeunt Soldiers . 

Dom.   What was 't you ordered ' 'em ? Are you sure it 's safe , and not scandalous ? 



Lor.   Somewhat near your●own Design , but not altogether so mischievous ; the People are infinitely discontented , as they have reason ; and Mutinies there are , or will be , against the Queen ; now I am content to put him thus far into the Plot , that he should be secured as a Traitor ; but he shall only be Prisoner at the Soldier's quarters ; and when I am out of reach , he shall be released . 



Dom.   And what will become of me then ? for when he is free he will infallibly accuse me . 



Lor.   Why then , Father , you must have recourse to your infallible Church-remedies , Lie impudently , and Swear devoutly , and , as you told me but now , let him try whose Oath will be first believed : Retire ; I hear 'em coming . 



[ They withdraw . ] Enter the Soldiers with Gomez struggling on their backs . Gom.   Help , good Christians , help Neighbours ; my House is broken open by force ; and I am ravished , and am like to be assassinated ; what do you mean Villains ? will you carry me away like a Pedlar's Pack upon your backs ? will you murder a man in plain daylight ? 



First Soldier ,  no : But we 'll secure you for a Traitor ; and for being in a Plot against the State.  



Gom.   Who , I in a Plot ! OH Lord ! OH Lord ! I never durst be in a Plot : why , how can you in Conscience suspect a rich Citizen of so much wit as to make a Plotter ? there are none but poor Rogues , and those that can't live without it , that are in Plots . 



Second S●uldier ,  Away with him , away with him . 



Gom.   OH , my Gold ! my Wife ! my Wife ! my Gold ! As I hope to be saved now , I know no more of the Plot than they that made it . 



[ They carry him off , and exeunt . Lor.   Thus far have we sailed with a merry gale , and now we have the Cape of good Hope in sight ; the Trade wind is our own if we can but double it . 

[ He looks out . ( Aside . ) Ah , my Father and Pedro stand at the corner of the Street with company , there 's no stirring till they are passed ! 



Enter Elvira with a Casket . Elvi.   am I come at last into your Arms ? 



Lor.   Fear nothing ; the adventure 's ended ; and the Knight may carry off the Lady safely . 



Elvi.   I 'm so overjoyed , I can scarce believe I am at liberty ; but stand panting , like a Bird that has often beaten her Wings in vain against her Cage , and at last dares hardly venture out though she sees it open . 



Dom.   Loose no time , but make haste while the way is free for you ; and thereupon I give you my Benediction . 



Lor.   't is not so free as you suppose ; for there 's an old Gentleman of my acquaintance that blocks up the passage at the corner of the street . 



Dom.   What have you gotten there under your Arm , Daughter ? somewhat I hope that will bear your Charges in your Pilgrimage . 



Lor.   The Friar has an Hawk's eye to Gold and Jewels . 



Elvi.   here 's that will make you dance without a Fiddle , and provide better Entertainment for us then Hedges in Summer , and Barns in Winter ; here 's the very Heart and Soul , and Life Blood of Gomez ; Pawns in abundance , old Gold of Widows , and new Gold of Prodigals , and Pearls and Diamonds of Court Ladies , till the next Bribe helps their Husbands to redeem ' 'em . 



Dom.   They are the Spoils of the Wicked , and the Church endows you with ' 'em . 



Lor.   And , Faith , we 'll drink the Church's Health out of them . But all this while I stand on Thorns ; prithee , Dear , look out , and see if the coast be free for our Escape ; for I dare not peep for fear of being known . 

 Elvira goes to look , and Gomez comes running in upon her : she shrieks out . 

Gom.   Thanks to my Stars , I have recovered my own Territories — What do I see ! I 'm ruined ! I 'm undone ! I 'm betrayed ! 



Dom.   ( Aside . ) What a hopeful Enterprise is here spoiled ? 



Gom.   OH , Colonel , are you there ? and you , Friar ? nay , than I find how the World goes . 



Lor.   Cheer up man ; thou art out of jeopardy ; I heard thee crying out just now ; and came running in full speed with the Wings of an Eagle and the Feet of a Tiger to thy rescue . 



Gom.   Aye , you are always at hand to do me a Courtesy with your Eagles' Feet , and your Tyger's Wings : and , What were you here for , Friar ? 



Dom.   To interpose my Spiritual Authority in your behalf . 



Gom.   And why did you shriek out , Gentlewoman ? 



Elvi.   'T was for Joy at your Return . 



Gom.   And that Casket under your Arm , for what end and purpose ? 



Elvi.   Only to preserve it from the Thiefs . 



Gom.   And you came running out of doors — 



Elvi.   Only to meet you , sweet Husband . 



Gom.   A fine Evidence summed up among you ; thank you heartily ; you are all my Friends : the Colonel was walking by accidentally , and , hearing my voice , came in to save me ; the Friar , who was hobbling the same way too , accidentally again , and not knowing of the Colonel , I warrant you , he comes in to pray for me ; and my faithful Wife runs out of doors to meet me with all my Jewels under her Arm , and shrieks out for Joy at my return : but if my Father-in-law had not met your Soldiers , Colonel , and delivered me in the nick , I should neither have found a Friend nor a Friar here , and might have shrieked out for joy myself for the loss of my Jewels and my Wife . 



Dom.   Art thou an Infidel ? wilt thou not believe us ? 



Gom.   Such Churchmen as you would make any man an Infidel : Get you into your Kennel , Gentlewoman ; I s●all thank you within-doors for your safe custody of my Jewels and your own . [ He thrusts his Wife off the Stage . Exit Elvira . As for you , Colonel Huff-cap , we shall try before a Civil Magistrate who 's the greater Plotter of us two , I against the State , or you against the Petticoat . 



Lor.   Nay , if you will complain , you shall for some thing . 

[ Beats him . 

Gom.   Murder ! murder ! I give up the Ghost ! I am destroyed ! help ! murder ! murder ! 



Dom.   Away , Colonel , let us ●ly for our Lives ; the neighbours are coming out with Forks and ●ire-shovelss and Spits and other domestic Weapons ; the Militia of a whole Alley is raised against us . 



Lor.   This is but the Interest of my Debt , Master Usurer , the Principal shall be paid you at our next meeting . 



Dom.   Ah , if your Soldiers had but dispatched him , his Tongue had been laid a sleep , Colonel ; but this comes of not following good counsel ; ah — 



[ Exeunt Lor. and Friar severally . Gom.   I 'll be revenged of him if I dare ; but he 's such a terrible Fellow that my mind misgives me ; I shall tremble when I have him before the Judge : all my Misfortunes come together : I have been robbed , and cuckolded , and ravished , and beaten in one quarter of an hour ; my poor Limbs smart , and my poor Head aches : aye , do , do , smart Limb , ache Head , and sprout Horns ; but I 'll be hanged before I 'll pity you : you must needs be married , must ye ? there 's for that , ( beats his own Head ) and to a fine , young , modish Lady , must ye ? there 's for that too ; and , at threescore , you old , doting Cuckold , take that remembrance — a fine time of day for a man to be bound Apprentice , when he is past using of his Trade ; to set up an equipage of Noise , when he has most need of Quiet ; instead of her being under Covert-baron , to be under Covert-feme myself ; to have my Body disabled , and my Head fortified ; and , lastly , to be crowded into a narrow Box with a shrill Treble ▪ 

That with one Blast through the whole House does bound , 
And first taught Speaking-trumpets how to sound . 
[ Exit Gomez . 

SCENE , The Court.  

Enter Raymond , Alphonso , Pedro.  ●aym .  Are these , are these , ye Powers , the promised Joys , 
With which I flattered my long tedious absence , 
To find , at my return , my Master murdered ? 
OH , that I could but weep to vent my Passion ! 
But this dry Sorrow burns up all my Tears . 


Alph.   Mourn inward , Brother ; 't is observed at Cour● 
Who weeps , and who wears black ; and your Return 
Will fix all Eyes on every Act of yours , 
To see how you resent King Sancho's Death . 


Raym.   What generous man can live with that Constraint 
Upon his Soul , to bear , much lesle to flatter 
A Court like this ! can I soothe Tyranny ? 
Seem pleased to see my Royal Master murdered , 
His Crown usurped , a Distaff in the Throne , 
A Council made of such as dare not speak , 
And could not if they durst ; whence honest men 
Banish themselves for shame of being there : 
A Government that , knowing not true wisdom , 
Is scorned abroad , and lives on Tricks at home ? 


Alph.   Virtue must be thrown off , 't is a corpse garment ▪ 
Too heavy for the sunshine of a Court.  


Raym.   Well then , I will dissemble for an end 
So great , so pious , as a just Revenge : 
you 'll join with me . 


Alphon.   no honest man but must . 


Pedro ,  What Title has this Queen but Lawless Force ? 
And Force must pull her down . 


Alphon.   Truth is , I pity Leonora's case ; 
Forced , for her Safety , to commit a Crime 
Which most her Soul abhors . 


Raym.   All she has done , or ever can do , of good , 
This one black Deed has damned . 


Pedro ,  you 'll hardly gain your Son to our Design . 


Raym.   Your reason for 't . 


Pedro ,  I want time to unriddle it : 
Put on your t'other Face ; the Queen approaches . 


Enter the Queen , Bertran , and Attendants . Raym.   And that accursed Bertran 
Stalks close behind her , like a Witche's Fiend , 
Pressing to be employed ; stand , and observe them . 


Queen ,  to Bertran : Buried in private , and so suddenly ! 
It crosses my Design , which was t' allow 
The Rites of Funeral fitting his Degree , 
With all the Pomp of mourning . 


Bert.   It was not safe : 
Objects of pity , when the cause is new , 
Would work too fiercely on the giddy Crowd : 
Had Caesar's body never been exposed , 
Brutus had gained his Cause . 


Queen ,  then , was he loved ? 


Bertran ,  OH , never man so much , for Saintlike goodness . 


Pedro ,  ( Aside . ) Had bad men feared him but as good men loved him , 
He had not yet been sainted . 


Queen ,  I wonder how the People bear his Death , 


Bertr .  Some discontent there are ; some idle murmurs . 


Pedro ,  How , Idle Murmurs ! Let me plainly speak : 
The doors are all shut up ; the wealthier sort , 
With Arms across , and Hats upon their Eyes , 
Walk to and from before their silent Shops : 
Whole droves of Lender's crowd the Bankers doors , 
To call in Money ; those who have none , mark 
Where Money goes ; for when they rise 't is Plunder : 
The Rabble gather round the Man of News , 
And listen with their Mouths ; 
Some tell ; some hear , some judge of News , some make it ; 
And he who lies most loud , is most believed . 


Queen ,  This may be dangerous . 


Raym.   ( Aside . ) Pray Heaven it may . 


Bertr .  If one of you must fall ; 
Self-preservation is the first of Laws : 
And if , when Subjects are oppressed by Kings , 
They justify Rebellion by that Law , 
As well may Monarches turn the edge of right 
To cut for them , when self-defence requires it . 


Queen ,  You place such Arbitrary Power in Kings , 
That I much fear , if I should make you one , 
you 'll make yourself a Tyrant ; let these know 
By what Authority you did this Act.  


Bertran ,  You much surprise me to demand that Question : 
But , since Truth must be told , 'T was by your own . 


Queen ,  Produce it ; or , By Heaven , your Head shall answer 
The Forfeit of your Tongue . 


Raym.   ( Aside . ) Brave mischief towards . 


Bertran ,  You bade me . 


Queen ,  When , and where ? 


Bertr .  no , I confess , you bade me not in words ; 
The Dial spoke not , but it made shrewd signs , 
And pointed full upon the stroke of Murder : 
Yet this you said , 
You were a woman ignorant and weak , 
So left it to my care . 


Queen ,  What if I said , 
I was a woman ignorant and weak , 
Were you to take th' advantage of my Sex , 
And play the Devil to tempt me ? You contrived , 
You urged , you driven me headlong to your toils ; 
And if , much tired , and frighted more , I paused ; 
Were you to make my Doubts your own Commission ? 


Bertr .  This 't is to serve a Prince too faithfully ; 
Who , free from Laws himself , will have that done , 
Which , not performed , brings us to sure Disgrace ; 
And , if performed , to Ruin.  


Queen ,  This 't is to counsel things that are unjust : 
First , to debauch a King to break his Laws , 
( Which are his safety , ) and then seek Protection 
From him you have endangered ; but , Just Heaven , 
When Sins are judged , will damn the tempting Devil 
more deep than those he tempted . 


Bert.   If Princes not protect th●ir Ministers , 
What man will dare to serve them ? 


Queen ,  None will dare 
To serve them ill , when they are left to Laws ; 
But when a Counsellor , to save himself , 
Would lay Miscarriages upon his Prince , 
Exposing him to public Rage and Hate ; 
OH , 't is an Act as infamously base , 
As should a common Soldier sculk behind , 
And thrust his General in the Front of War : 
It shows he only served himself before , 
And had no sense of Honour , Country , King ; 
But centred on himself ; and used his Master 
As Guardians do their Wards , with shows of care , 
But with intent to sell the public Safety , 
And pocket up his Prince . 


Pedro ,  ( Aside . ) Well said , i'faith ; 
This Speech is e●en too good for an Usurper . 


Bertr .  I see for whom I must be sacrificed ; 
And , had I not been sotted with my zeal , 
I might have found it sooner . 


Queen ,  From my sight ! 
The Prince who bears an Insolence like this 
Is such an Image of the Powers above , 
As is the Statue of the Thundering God , 
Whose Bolts the Boys may play with . 


Bertran ,  Unrevenged 
I will not fall , nor single . 
[ Exit Bertran cum suis.  

Queen to Raymond , who kisses her hand . Qu.   Welcome , welcome : 
I saw you not before ▪ one Honest Lord 
Is hid with ease among a Crowd of Courtiers : 
How can I be too grateful to the Father 
Of such a Son as Torrismond ? 


Raym.   His Actions were but Duty . 


Queen ,  Yet , My Lord , 
All have not paid that Debt like noble Torrismond ; 
You hear how Bertran brands me with a Crime , 
Of which , your Son can witness , I am free ; 
I sent to stop the Murder , but too late ; 
For Crimes are swift , but Penitence is slow ; 
The bloody Bertran , diligent in ill , 
Flew to prevent the soft returns of Pity . 


Raym.   OH cursed Haste of making sure a Sin ! 
Can you forgive the Traitor ? 


Queen ,  Never , never : 
't is written here in Characters so deep 
That seven years hence , ( till then should I not meet him , ) 
And in the Temple then , I 'll drag him thence , 
Even from the Holy Altar to the Block . 


Raym.   ( Aside . ) she 's fired , as I would wish her ; aid me Justice , 
As all my ends are thine , to gain this Point ; 
And ruin both at once : — It wounds indeed , 
[ To her . To bear Affronts too great to be forgiven , 
And not have Power to punish ; yet one way 
There is to ruin Bertran . 


Queen ,  OH , there 's none ; 
Except an Host from Heaven can make such haste 
To save my Crown as he will do to seize it : 
You saw he came surrounded with his Friends , 
And knew besides our Army was removed 
To quarters too remote for sudden use . 


Raym.   Yet you may give Commission 
To some Bold man whose Loyalty you trust , 
And let him raise the Train-bands of the City . 


Queen ,  Gross feeders , Lion talkers , Lamblike fighters . 


Raym.   You do not know the Virtues of your City , 
What pushing force they have ; some popular Chief , 
more noisy than the rest , but cries Halloo , 
And in a trice the bellowing Herd come out ; 
The Gates are barred , the Ways are barricadoed , 
And One and All 's the Word ; true Cocks of th' Game , 
That never ask for what , or whom , they fight ; 
But turn 'em out , and show 'em but a Foe , 
Cry Liberty , and that 's a Cause of Quarrel . 


Queen ,  There may be Danger , in that boisterous Rout : 
Who knows when Fires are kindled for my Foes , 
But some new Blast of wind may turn those Flames 
Against my Palace Walls . 


Raym.   But still their Chief 
Must be some one whose Loyalty you trust . 


Queen ,  And who more proper for that Trust than you , 
Whose Interests , though unknown to you , are mine ? 
Alphonso , Pedro , haste to raise the Rabble , 
He shall appear to head ' 'em . 


Raymon ,  ( Aside to Alphonso and Pedro , ) First seize Bertran , 
And then insinuate to them that I bring 
Their lawful Prince to place upon the Throne . 


Alphon.   Our lawful Prince . 


Raym.   Fear not ; I can produce him . 


Pedro   to Alph.  Now we want your Son Lorenzo : what a mighty Faction 
Would he make for us of the City Wives , 
With , o , dear Husband , my sweet honey Husband , 
Won't you be for the Colonel ? if you love me , 
Be for the Colonel ; o he 's the finest man ! 
[ Exeunt Alphonso , Pedro.  

Raym.   ( Aside . ) So , now we have a Plot behind the Plot ; 
She thinks she 's in the depth of my Design , 
And that it 's all for her , but time shall show , 
She only life's to help me ruin others , 
And last , to fall herself . 


Queen ,  Now to you Raymond : Can you guests no reason 
Why I repose such Confidence in you ? 
You needs must think 
there 's some more powerful Cause then Loyalty : 
Will you not speak to save a Lady's Blush ? 
Must I inform you 't is for Torrismond , 
That all this Grace is shown ? 


Raym.   ( Aside . ) By all the Powers , worse , worse , than what I feared . 


Queen ,  And yet , what need I blush at such a Choice ? 
I love a man , whom I am proud to love , 
And am well pleased my Inclination gives 
What Gratitude would force ; o , pardon me ; 
I never was covetous of Wealth before : 
Yet think so vast a Treasure as your Son , 
Too great for any private man's possession ; 
And him too rich a Jewel to be set 
In vulgar metal , or for vulgar use . 


Raym.   Arm me with Patience Heaven . 


Queen ,  How , Patience , Raymond ! 
What exercise of Patience have you here ? 
What find you in my Crown to be contemned ? 
Or in my Person loathed ? Have I , a Queen , 
Past by my Fellow-rulers of the World , 
Whose vying Crowns lay glittering in my way , 
As if the World were paved with Diadems ? 
Have I refused their Blood , to mix with yours , 
And raise new Kings from so obscure a race , 
Fate scarce knew where to find them when I called ? 
Have I heaped on my Person , Crown and State , 
To load the Scale , and weighed myself with Earth , 
For you to spurn the Balance ? 


Raym.   Bate the last ; and 't is what I would say ; 
Can I , can any Loyal Subject see 
With Patience such a stoop from Sovereignty , 
An Ocean poured upon a narrow Brook ? 
My Zeal for you must lay the Father by , 
And pled my country 's 'Cause against my Son. 
What though his Heart be great , his Actions gallant ; 
He wants a Crown to poise against a Crown , 
Birth to match Birth , and Power to balance Power . 


Queen ,  All these I have , and these I can bestow ; 
But he brings Worth and Virtue to my Bed ; 
And Virtue is the Wealth which Tyrants want : 
I stand in need of one whose Glories may 
Redeem my Crimes , alley me to his Fame , 
Dispel the Factions of my Foes on Earth , 
Disarm the Justice of the Powers above . 


Raym.   The People never will endure this choice . 


Queen ,  If I endure it what imports it you ? 
Go raise the Ministers of my Revenge , 
Guide with your Breath this whirling Tempest round , 
And see its Fury fall where I design ; 
At last a time for just Revenge is given ; 
Revenge the darling attribute of Heaven : 
But man , unlike his Maker , bears too long ; 
Still more exposed , the more he pardon's Wrong ; 
Great in forgiving , and in suffering brave ; 
To be a Saint he makes himself a Slave . 
[ Exit Queen . 

Raymond ,  ( solus , ) Marriage with Torrismond ! it must not be ; 
By Heaven , it must not be ; or , if it be ; 
Law , Justice , Honour bid farewell to Earth ; 
For Heaven leaves all to Tyrants . 
Enter Torrismond , who knelt to him . 

Tor.   OH , ever welcome , Sir , 
But doubly now ! you come in such a time , 
As if propitious Fortune took a care 
To swell my Tide of Joys to their full height , 
And leave me nothing farther to desire . 


Raym.   I hope I come in time , if not to make , 
At least , to save your Fortune and your Honour : 
Take heed you steer your Vessel right , my Son , 
This Calm of Heaven , this Mermayd's melody , 
Into an unseen whirl-pool draws you fast , 
And in a moment sinks you . 


Tor.   Fortune cannot : 
And Fate can scarce ; i  made the Port already , 
And laugh securely at the lazy storm 
That wanted wings to reach me in the deep . 
Your pardon , Sir ; my duty calls me hence ; 
I go to find my Queen , my earthly Goddess , 
To whom I owe my Hopes , my Life , my Love.  


Raym.   You owe her more perhaps than you imagine ; 
Stay , I command you stay , and hear me first , 
This hour 's the very Crisis of your Fate , 
Your Good or Ill , your Infamy or Fame ; 
And all the colour of your Life depends 
On this important Now.  


Tor.   I see no danger ; 
The City , Army , Court espouse my Cause ; 
And , more than all , the Queen with public favour 
Indulges my Pretensions to her Love.  


Raym.   Nay , if possessing her can make you happy , 
't is granted , nothing hinders your Design . 


Tor.   If she can make me blessed ? she only can : 
Empire , and Wealth , and all she brings beside , 
Are but the Train and Trappingss of her Love : 
The sweetest , kindest , truest of her Sex , 
In whose Possession years roll round on years , 
And Joys in Circles meet new Joys again : 
Kisses , Embraces , Languishing and Death , 
Still from each other , to each other move 
To crown the various seasons of our Love : 
And doubt you if such Love can make me happy ? 


Raym.   Yes , for I think you love your Honour more . 


Tor.   And what can shock my Honour in a Queen ? 


Raym.   A Tyrant , an Usurper ? 


Tor.   Grant the be . 
When from the Conqueror we hold our Lives , 
We yield ourselves his Subjects from that hour : 
For mutual Benefits make mutual Ties . 


Raym.   Why , can you think I owe a Thief my Life , 
Because he took it not by lawless Force ? 
What if he did not all the Ill he could ? 
am I obliged , by that , t' assist his Rapines , 
And to maintain his Murders ? 


Tor.   Not to maintain , but bear 'em unrevenged ; 
Kings Titles commonly begin by Force , 
Which Time wears off and mellows into Right : 
So Power , which in one Age is Tyranny , 
Is ripened in the next to true Succession : 
she 's in Possession . 


Raym.   So Diseases are : 
Should not a lingering Fevor be removed ; 
Because it long has raged within my Blood ? 
Do I rebel when I would thrust it out ? 
What , shall I think the World was made for One , 
And Men are born for Kings , as Beasts for Men ; 
Not for Protection , but to be devoured ? 
Mark those who dote on Arbitrary Power , 
And you shall find 'em either hot-brained Youth , 
Or needy Bankrupts , servile in their greatness , 
And Slaves to some , to lord it over the rest . 
OH baseness , to support a Tyrant Throne , 
And crush your Free-born-brethrens of the World ! 
Nay , to become a part of Usurpation ; 
To espouse the Tyrant's Person and her Crimes , 
And , on a Tyrant , get a Race of Tyrants 
To be your Country's Curse in after Ages . 


Tor.   I see no Crime in her whom I adore , 
Or if I do , her Beauty makes it none : 
Look on me as a man abandoned over 
To an eternal Lethargy of Love ; 
To Pull , and pinch , and wound me , cannot cure , 
And but disturb the Quiet of my Death . 


Raym.   OH , Virtue ! Virtue ! what art thou become ? 
That men should leave thee for that Toy a Woman 
Made from the dross and refuse of a Man ; 
Heaven took him sleeping when he made her too ; 
Had man been waking he had never consented . 
Now Son suppose 
Some brave Conspiracy were ready formed 
To punish Tyrants and redeem the Land , 
Could you so far belly your Country's Hope , 
As not to head the Party ? 


Tor.   How could my Hand rebel against my Heart ? 


Raym.   How could your Heart rebel against your Reason ? 


Tor.   no Honour bids me fight against myself ; 
The Royal Family is all extinct , 
And she who reigns bestows her Crown on me ▪ 
So must I be ungrateful to the Living , 
To be but vainly pious to the Dead ; 
While you defraud your Offspring of their Fate . 


Raym.   Mark who defraud their Offspring , you or I ? 
For know there yet survives the lawful Heir 
Of Sancho's blood , whom when I shall produce , 
I rest assured to see you pale with Fear 
And Trembling at his Name . 


Tor.   He must be more than Man who makes me tremble : 
I dare him to the Field with all the odds 
Of Justice on his side , against my Tyrant : 
Produce your lawful Prince , and you shall see 
How brave a Rebel Love has made your Son.  


Raym.   Read that : 't is with the Royal Signet signed , 
And given me by the King when time should serve 
To be perused by you . 
Torrismond reads . I the King.  My youngest and alone surviving Son 
Reported dead to escape rebellious rage 
Till happier times shall call his Courage forth ▪ 
To break my Fetters or revenge my Fate 
I will that Raymond educate as his , 
And call him Torrismond — 
If I am he , that Son , that Torrismond , 
The World contains not so forlorn a Wretch ! 
Let never man believe he can be happy ! 
For when I thought my Fortune most secure , 
One fatal moment tears me from my Joys : 
And when two Hearts were joined by mutual Love , 
The Sword of Justice cuts upon the Knot , 
And severs 'em for ever . 


Raym.   True ; it must . 


Tor.   OH cruel man , to tell me that it must ! 
If you have any Pity in your Breast , 
Redeem me from this Labyrinth of Fate , 
And plunge me in my first Obscurity : 
The Secret is alone between us two ; 
And though you would not hide me from myself , 
OH , yet be kind , conceal me from the World , 
And be my Father still . 


Raym.   Your Lot's too glorious , and the Proof's too plain , 
Now , in the name of Honour , Sir , I beg you 
( Since I must use Authority no more ) 
On these old Knees I beg you , ever I die , 
That I may see your Father's Death revenged . 


Tor.   Why , 't is the only business of my Life ; 
My Orders issued to recall the Army , 
And Bertran's Death resolved . 


Raym.   And not the Queen's ; o she 's the chief Offender ! 
Shall Justice turn her Edge within your Hand ? 
no , if she scape , you are yourself the Tyrant , 
And Murderer of your Father . 


Tor.   Cruel Fates , 
To what have you referved me ! 


Raym.   Why that Sigh ? 


Tor.   Since you must know , but break , o break my Heart , 
Before I tell my Fatal Story out , 
th' usurper of my Throne , my House's Ruin , 
The Murderer of my Father , is my Wife ! 


Raym.   OH , Horror ! Horror ! after this Alliance ▪ 
Let Tigers match with Hinds , and Wolf's with Sheep , 
And every Creature couple with his Foe . 
How vainly Man designs when Heaven opposes ! 
I bred you up to Arms , raised you to Power , 
Permitted you to fight for this Usurper , 
Indeed to save a Crown , not here's , but yours , 
All to make sure the Vengeance of this Day , 
Which even this Day has ruined — one more question 
Let me but ask , and I have done for ever : 
Do you yet love the Cause of all your Woes , 
Or , is she grown ( as sure she ought to be ) 
more odious to your sight than Toads and Adders ? 


Tor.   OH , there 's the utmost Malice of my Fate , 
That I am bound to hate , and born to love ! 


Raym.   no more : — Farewell my much lamented King.  
( Aside , ) I dare not trust him with himself so far 
To own him to the People as their King , 
Before their Rage has finished my Designs 
On Bertran and the Queen , but in Despite 
Even of himself I 'll save him . 
[ Exit Raymond . 

Tor.   't is but a moment since I have been King , 
And weary on 't already ; I 'm a Lover , 
am loved , possess ; yet all these make me wretched ; 
And Heaven has given me Blessings for a Curse . 
With what a load of Vengeance am I pressed , 
Yet never , never , can I hope for Re●t ; 
For when my heavy Burden I remove , 
The weight falls down , and crushes her I love . 
[ Exit Torrismond . 

The End of the Fourth Act.  

ACT v.  

SCENE , A Bedchamber . 

Enter Torrismond . Tor.   Love , Justice , Nature , Pity and Revenge 
Have kindled up a Wildfire in my Breast , 
And I am all a Civil-war within ! 
Enter Queen and Teresa at ● distance . My Leonora there ! 
Mine ? Is she mine ? My Father's Murderer mine ? 
Oh! that I could with Honour love her more , 
Or hate her lesle with Reason ! See , she weeps ; 
Thinks me unkind , or false , and knows not why 
I thus estrange my Person from her Bed : 
Shall I not tell her ? no : 't will break her Heart : 
she 'll know too soon her own and my Misfortunes . 
[ Exit . 

Queen ,  he 's gone , and I am lost ; Didst thou not see 
His sullen Eyes ? how gloomily they glanced : 
He looked not like the Torrismond I loved . 


Ter.   Can you not guests from whence this Change proceeds ? 


Queen ,  no : there 's the Grief , Teresa : O , Teresa ! 
fain would I tell thee what I feel within , 
But Shame and Modesty have tied my Tongue ! 
Yet , I will tell , that thou mayest weep with me . 
How dear , how sweet his first Embraces were ! 
With what a Zeal he joined his Lips to mine ! 
And sucked my Breath at every word I spoke , 
As if he drew his Inspiration thence : 
While both our Souls came upward to our Mouths , 
As neighbouring Monarches at their Borders meet : 
I thought : O no ; 't is false : I could not think ; 
'T was neither Life nor Death , but both in one . 


Ter.   then sure his Transports were not lesle than yours . 


Qu.   more , more ! for by the high-hung Tapers light 
I could discern his Cheeks were glowing red , 
His very Eyeballs trembled with his Love , 
And sparkled through their Casements humid Fires : 
He sighed and kissed , breathed short , and would have spoken , 
But was too fierce to throw away the time ; 
All he could say was Love , and Leonora . 


Ter.   How then can you suspect him lost so soon ? 


Qu.   Last night he flew not with a Bridegroom's haste , 
Which eagerly prevents the pointed hour ; 
I told the Clocks , and watched the wasting Light , 
And listened to each softly treading step , 
In hope 't was he : but still it was not he . 
At last he came , but with such altered Looks , 
So wild , so ghastly , as if some Ghost had met him ; 
All pale , and speechless , he surveyed me round ; 
then , with a Groan , he threw himself a-bed , 
But far from me , as far as he could move , 
And sighed , and tossed , and turned , but still from me . 


Ter.   What , all the night ? 


Queen ,  Even all the live-long-night . 
At last : ( for , blushing , I must tell thee all , ) 
I pressed his Hand , and laid me by his Side , 
He pulled it back , as if he touched a Serpent . 
With that I burst into a flood of Tears , 
And asked him how I had offended him ? 
He answered nothing , but with Sighs and Groans , 
So restless past the night : and at the Dawn 
Leapt from the Bed , and vanished . 


Ter.   Sighs and Groans , 
Paleness and Trembling , all are signs of Love ; 
He only fears to make you share his Sorrows . 


Queen ,  I wish 't were so : but Love still doubts the worst ; 
My heavy Heart , the Prophetess of Woes , 
Foreboads some ill at hand : To soothe my sadness 
Sing me the Song which poor Olympia made 
When false Bire●o left her . — 


A SONG 

I  

Farewell ungrateful Traitor , 
Farewell my perjured Swain , 
Let never injured Creature 
Believe a Man again . 
The Pleasure of Possessing 
Surpasses all Expressing , 
But 't is too short a Blessing , 
And Love too long a Pain . 
II  

't is easy to deceive us 
In pity of your Pain , 
But when we love you leave us 
To rail at you in vain . 
Before we have descried it 
There is no Bliss beside it , 
But she that once has tried it 
Will never love again . 
III  

The Passion you pretended 
Was only to obtain , 
But when the Charm is ended 
The Charmer you disdain . 
Your Love by ours we measure 
Till we have lost our Treasure , 
But Dying is a Pleasure , 
When Living is a Pain . 


Re-enter Torrismond . Tor.   Still she is here , and still I cannot speak ; 
But wander like some discontend Ghost 
That oft appears , but is forbid to talk . 


[ Going again . Queen ,  OH , Torrismond , if you resolve my Death , 
You need no more but to go hence again ; 
Will you not speak ? 


Tor.   I cannot . 


Qu.   Speak ! o , speak ! 
Your Anger would be kinder than your Silence . 


Tor.   Oh!  


Queen ,  Do not sigh , or tell me why you sigh ? 


Tor.   Why do I live , ye Powers ? 


Qu.   Why do I live , to hear you speak that word ? 
Some black-mouthed Villain has defamed my Virtue . 


Tor.   No! No! Pray let me go . 


Queen ,  ( kneeling ) You shall not go : 
By all the Pleasures of our Nuptial-bed , 
It ever I was loved , though now I 'm not , 
By these true Tears , which from my wounded Heart 
Bleed at my Eyes . — 


Tor.   Rise . 


Queen ,  I will never rise , 
I cannot choose a better place to die . 


Tor.   Oh! I would speak , but cannot . 


Queen ,  ( rising ) Gild keeps you silent then ; you love me not : 
What have I done ? ye Powers , what have I done ? 
To see my Youth , my Beauty , and my Love 
no sooner gained , but slighted and betrayed : 
And like a Rose just gathered from the Stalk , 
But only smelled , and cheaply thrown aside 
To wither on the ground . 


Tere.   For Heaven's sake , Madam , moderate your Passion . 


Queen ,  Why namest thou Heaven ? there is no Heaven for me , 
Despair , Death , Hell , have seized my tortured Soul : 
When I had raised his grovelling Fate from ground , 
To Power and Love , to Empire and to Me ; 
When each Embrace was dearer than the first ; 
then , then to be contemned ; then , then thrown off ; 
It calls me old , and withered , and deformed , 
And loathsome : Oh! what Woman can bear Loathsome ? 
The Turtle fly's not from his billing Mate , 
He bills the closer : but ungrateful Man , 
Base , barbarous Man , the more we raise our Love , 
The more we palls , and cool , and kill his ardour . 
Racks , Poison , Daggers , rid me but of Life ; 
And any Death is welcome . 


Tor.   Be witness all ye Powers that know my Heart , 
I would have kept the fatal Secret hid , 
But she has conquered , to her Ruin conquered : 
Here , take this Paper , read our Destinies ; 
Yet do not ; but in kindness to yourself , 
Be ignorantly safe . 


Qu.   No! give it me , 
Even though it be the Sentence of my Death . 


Tor.   then see how much unhappy Love had made us . 
OH Leonora ! Oh! 
We two were born when sullen Planets reigned ; 
When each the others Influence opposed , 
And drew the Stars to Factions at our Birth . 
Oh! better , better had it been for us 
That we had never seen , or never loved . 


Queen ,  There is no Faith in Heaven , if Heaven says so , 
You dare not give it . 


Tor.   As unwillingly , 
As I would reach out Opium to a Friend 
Who lay in Torture , and desired to die . 
[ Gives the Paper . But now you have it , spare my sight the pain 
Of seeing what a world of Tears it cost you : 
Go silently enjoy your part of Grief , 
And share the sad Inheritance with me . 


Queen ,  I have a thirsty Fevor in my Soul , 
Give me but present Ease , and let me die . 
Exit Qu. and Teres . 

Enter Lorenzo . Lor.   Arm , arm , my Lord , the City Bands are up , 
Drums beating , Colours flying , Shouts confused ; 
All clustering in a heap , like swarming Hives , 
And rising in a moment . 


Tor.   With design to punish Bertran , and revenge the King , 
'T was ordered so . 


Lor.   then you 're betrayed , my Lord 
't is true , they block the Castle kept by Bertran , 
But now they cry , Down with the Palace , Fire it , 
Pull out th' usurping Queen . 


Tor.   The Queen , Lorenzo ! durst they name the Queen ? 


Lor.   If railing and reproaching be to name her . 


Tor.   OH Sacrilege ! Say quickly who commands 
This vile blaspheming Rout ? 


Lor.   I 'm loath to tell you , 
But both our Fathers thrust 'em headlong on , 
And bear down all before ' 'em . 


Tor.   Death and Hell ! 
Somewhat must be resolved , and speedily , 
How sayst thou , my Lorenzo ? dar'st thou be 
A Friend , and once forget thou art a Son , 
To help me save the Queen ? 


Lor.   ( Aside . ) Let me consider ; 
Bear Arms against my Father ? he begat me ; 
that 's true ; but for whose sake did he beget me ? 
For his own sure enough : for me he knew not . 
Oh! but says Conscience : Fly in Nature's Face ? 
But how if Nature fly in my Face first ? 
then Nature's the Aggressor : Let her look to 't — 
— He gave me Life , and he may take it back : — 
no , that 's Boys play , say I — 
't is Policy for Son and Father to take different sides : 
For then , Lands and Tenements commit no Treason . 
( To Tor. ) Sir , upon mature consideration , I have found my Father 
To be little better than a Rebel , and therefore I 'll do 
My best to secure him for your sake ; in hope you may 
Secure him hereafter for my sake . 


Tor.   Put on thy utmost speed to head the Troops 
Which every moment I expect t' arrive : 
Proclaim me , as I am , the lawful King : 
I need not caution thee for Raymond's Life , 
Though I no more must call him Father now . 


Lor.   ( Aside . ) How ! not call him Father ? 
I see Preferment altars a man strangely , 
This may serve me for a Use of Instruction , 
To cast off my Father when I am great . 
Methought too he called himself the lawful King ; 
Intimating sweetly that he knows what 's what 
With our Sovereign Lady : Well , if I rout my 
Father , as I hope in Heaven I shall , I am in a fair 
Way to be a Prince of the Blood : Farewell General ; 
I 'll bring up those that shall try what mettle there is in Orange-tawny . 
[ Exit . ] 

Tor.   ( at the door . ) Hast there , command the Guards be all drawn up 
Before the Palace gate . — By Heaven , I 'll face 
This Tempest , and deserve the Name of King. 
OH , Leonora , beauteous in thy Crimes , 
Never were Hell and Heaven so matched before ! 
Look upward , Fair , but as thou look'st on me ; 
then all the Blessed will beg that thou may'st live , 
And even my Father's Ghost his Death forgive . 
[ Exit Tor.  

SCENE The Palace-yard . 

Drums and Trumpets within . Enter Raymond , Alphonso , Pedro , and their Party . Raym.   Now , valiant Citizens , the time is come 
To show your Courage and your Loyalty : 
You have a Prince of Sancho's Royal Blood , 
The Darling of the Heavens and Joy of Earth ; 
When he 's produced , as soon he shall , among you ; 
Speak , what will you adventure to re-seat him 
Upon his Father's Throne ? 


Omn.   Our Lives and Fortunes . 


Raym.   What then remains to perfect our Success , 
But over the Tyrant's Guards to force our way ? 


Omn.   Led on , Led on . 


Drums and Trumpets on the other Side . Enter Torrismond and his Party : as they are going to fight , he speaks . Tor.   to his , Hold , hold your Arms.  


Raym.   to his , Retire . 


Alph.   What means this Pause ? 


Ped.   Peace : Nature works within them . 
[ Tor & Ray. go apart . 

Tor.   How comes it , good old Man , that we two meet 
On these harsh terms ! thou very reverend Rebel ? 
thou venerable Traitor , in whose Face 
And hoary Hairs Treason is sanctified ; 
And sin 's black die seems blanched by Age to Virtue . 


Raym.   What Treason is it to redeem my King. 
And to reform the State ? 


Tor.   that 's a stale Cheat , 
The primitive Rebel , Lucifer , first used it , 
And was the first Reformer of the Skies . 


Raym.   What if I see my Prince mistake a Poison , 
Call it a Cordial ? am I then a Traitor , 
Because I hold his Hand or break the Glass ? 


Tor.   How dar'st thou serve thy King against his Will ? 


Raym.   Because 't is then the only time to serve him . 


Tor.   I take the blame of all upon myself , 
Discharge thy weight on me . 


Raym.   OH , never , never ! 
Why , 't is to leave a Ship tossed in a Tempest 
Without the Pilot's Care.  


Tor.   I 'll punish thee , 
By Heaven , I will , as I would punish Rebels , 
thou stubborn loyal Man  


Raym.   First let me see 
Her punished who misleads you from your Fame , 
then burn me , hack me , hue me into pieces , 
And I shall die well pleased . 


Tor.   Proclaim my Title , 
To save the effusion of my Subjects Blood , and thou shalt still 
Be as my Foster-father near my Breast , 
And n●xt my Leonora . 


Raym.   That word stabs me . 
You shall be still plain Torrismond with me , 
th' Abetter , Partner , ( if you like that name , ) 
The Husband of a Tyrant , but no King ; 
Till you deserve that Title by your Justice . 


Tor.   then , farewell Pity , I will be obeyed . 
( To the people . ) Hear , you mistaken Men , whose Loyalty 
Runs headlong into Treason : See your Prince , 
In me behold your murdered Sancho's Son ; 
Dismiss your Arms ; and I forgive your Crimes . 


Raym.   Believe him not ; he raves ; his words are loose 
As 〈◊〉 of Sand , and scattering , wide from sense . 
〈…〉 not me , his narural Father ; 
〈…〉 th● usurping Queen , 
〈…〉 his Airy hopes , 
〈…〉 his Head , 
And turns his Brains to Frenzy . 


Tor.   Hear me yet , I am — 


Raym.   Fall on , fall on , and hear him not : 
But spare his Person for his Father's sake . 


Ped.   Let me come , if he be mad , I have that shall cure him . 
there 's no Surgeon in all Arragon has so much 
Dexterity as I have at breathing of the Temple-vein . 


Tor.   My Right for me . 


Raym.   Our Liberty for us . 


Omn.   Liberty , Liberty , — 
[ As they are ready to fight . Enter Lorenzo and his Party . 

Lor.   On forfeit of your Lives lay down your Arms.  


Alph.   How , Rebel , art thou there ? 


Lor.   Take your Rebel back again Father mine . 
The beaten Party are Rebels to the Conquerors . 
I have been at hard-head with your butting Citizens ; 
I have routed your Herd ; I have dispersed them ; 
And now they are retreated quietly , 
From their extraordinary Vocation of Fight in 
The Streets , to their ordinary Vocation of Cozening 
In their Shops . 


Tor.   to Raym.  You see 't is vain contending with the Truth , 
Acknowledge what I am . 


Raym.   You are my King : would you would be your own ; 
But by a fatal fondness you betray 
Your Fame and Glory to th' Usurper's Bed : 
Enjoy the Fruits of Blood and Parricide , 
Take your own Crown from Leonora's Gift , 
And hug your Father's Murderer in your Arms.  


Enter Queen and Teresa : Women . Alph.   no more : behold the Queen . 


Raym.   Behold the Basilisk of Torrismond , 
That kills him with her eyes , I will speak on , 
My Life is of no further use to me : 
I would have chaffered it before for Vengeance : 
Now let it go for Failing . 


Tor.   ( Aside . ) My Heart sinks in me while I hear him speak , 
And every slackened fiber drops its hold , 
Like Nature letting down the Springs of Life : 
So much the Name of Father awes me still . 
send off the Crowd : 
For you , now I have conquered , I can hear with honour your Demands . 


Lor.   to Alph.  Now , Sir , who proves the Traitor ? My Conscience 
Is true to me , it always whispers right when 
I have my Regiment to back it . 


[ Exeunt omnes praeter Tor. Ray. Leon.  Tor.   OH Leonora ! what can Love do more ? 
I have opposed your ill Fate to the utmost : 
Combated Heaven and Earth to keep you mine : 
And yet at last that Tyrant , Justice ! O — 


Queen ,  't is past , 't is past : and Love is ours no more : 
Yet I complain not of the Powers above ; 
They made m' a Miser's feast of Happiness , 
And could not furnish out an●ther meal . 
Now , by yon Stars , by Heaven , and Earth , and Men ; 
By all my Foes at once ; I swear , my Torrismond , 
That to have had you mine for one short day 
Has cancelled half my mighty sum of Woes : 
Say but you hate me not . 


Tor.   I cannot hate you . 


Raym.   Can you not ? say that once more ; 
That all the Saints may witness it against you . 


Queen ,  Cruel Raymond ! 
Can he not punish me but he must hate ? 
O! 't is not Justice , but a brutal Rage , 
Which hate's th' Offender's person with his Crimes : 
I have enough to overwhelm one Woman , 
To lose a Crown and Lover in a day : 
Let Pity lend a Tear when Rigour strikes . 


Raym.   then , than you should have thought of Tears and Pity , 
When Virtue , Majesty , and hoary Age 
Pleaded for Sancho's Life . 


Qu.   My future days shall be one whole Contrition ; 
A Chapel will I build with large Endowment , 
Where every day an hundred aged men 
Shall all hold up their withered hands to Heaven , 
To pardon Sancho's Death . 


Tor.   See , Raymond , see : she makes a large amends : 
Sancho is dead : no punishment of her 
Can raise his cold stiff limbs from the dark Grave ; 
Nor can his blessed Soul look down from Heaven ; 
Or break th' eternal Sabbath of his Rest , 
To see with Joy her Miseries on Earth . 


Raym.   Heaven may forgive a Crime to Penitence , 
For Heaven can judge if Penitence be true ; 
But man , who knows not Hearts , should make Examples ; 
Which like a Warning-piece must be shot off , 
To fright the rest from Crimes . 


Queen ,  Had I but known that Sancho was his Father , 
I would have poured a Deluge of my Blood 
To save one Drop of his . 


Tor.   Mark that , Inexorable Raymond mark ! 
'T was fatal Ignorance that caused his Death . 


Raym.   What if she did not know he was your Father : 
She knew he was a Man , the Best of men , 
Heaven's Image double stamped , as Man and King.  


Qu.   He was , he was , even more than you can say , 
But yet — 


Raym.   But yet you barbarously murdered him . 


Queen ,  He will not hear me out ! 


Tor.   Was ever Criminal forbid to pled ? 
Curb your ill mannered Zeal . 


Raym.   Sing to him Siren ; 
For I shall stop my Ears : now mince the Sin , 
And mollify Damnation with a Phrase : 
Say you consented not to Sancho's Death , 
But barely not forbade it . 


Qu.   Hard hearted Man , I yield my guilty cause , 
But all my Gild was caused by too much Love. 
Had I for Jealousy of Empire sought 
Good Sancho's Death , Sancho had died before . 
'T was always in my Power to take his Life : 
But Interest never could my Conscience blind 
Till Love had cast a mist before my Eyes ; 
And made me think his Death the only means 
Which could secure my Throne to Torrismond . 


Tor.   Never was fatal Mischief meant so kind , 
For all she gave , has taken all away . 
Malicious Powers ! is this to be restored ? 
't is to be worse deposed than Sancho was . 


Raym.   Heaven has restored you , you depose yourself : 
Oh! when young Kings begin with scorn of Justice , 
They make an Omen to their after Reign , 
And blot their Annals in the foremost page . 


Tor.   no more ; lest you be made the first Example , 
To show how I can punish . 


Raym.   Once again : 
Let her be made your Father's Sacrifice , 
And after make me here's . 


Tor.   Condemn a Wife ! 
That were to atone for Parricide with Murder ! 


Raym.   then let her be divorced ! we 'll be content 
With that poor scanty Justice : Let her part . 


Tor.   Divorce ! that 's worse than Death , 't is Death of Love.  


Queen ,  The Soul and Body part not with such Pain 
As I from you : but yet 't is just , my Lord : 
I am th' Accursed of Heaven , the Hate of Earth , 
Your Subject's Detestation , and your Ruin : 
And therefore fix this doom upon myself . 


Tor.   Heaven ! Can you wish it ? to be mine no more ! 


Queen ,  Yes , I can wish it as the dearest Proof 
And last that I can make you of my Love. 
To leave you blessed I would be more accursed 
Than Death can make me ; for Death ends our Woes , 
And the kind Grave shuts up the mournful Scene : 
But I would live without you ; to be wretched long : 
And hoard up every moment of my life , 
To lengthen out the Payment of my Tears , 
Till even fierce Raymond , at the last , shall say , 
Now let her die , for she has grieved enough . 


Tor.   Hear this , hear this thou Tribune of the People : 
thou zealous , public Bloodhound hear , and melt . 


Raym.   ( Aside . ) I could cry now , my Eyes grow womanish , 
But yet my Heart holds out . 


Queen ,  Some solitary Cloister will I choose , 
And there with holy Virgins live immured : 
Course my Attire , and short shall be my Sleep , 
broke by the melancholy midnight Bell : 
Now , Raymond , now be satisfied at last . 
Fasting and Tears , and Penitence and Prayer 
Shall do dead Sancho Justice every hour . 


Raym.   ( Aside . ) By your leave , Manhood ! 


[ Wipes his Eyes . Tor.   He weeps , now he 's vanquished . 


Raym.   No! 't is a salt rheum that scalds my Eyes . 


Qu.   If he were vanquished , I am still unconquered , 
I 'll leave you in the height of all my Love , 
Even when my Heart is beating out its way , 
And struggles to you most . 
Farewell , a last Farewell ! My dear , dear Lord 
Remember me ; speak , Raymond , will you let him ? 
Shall he remember Leonora's Love , 
And shed a parting Tear to her Misfortunes ? 


Raym.   ( Almost crying . ) Yes , yes , he shall , pray go . 


Tor.   Now , By my Soul , she shall not go : why , Raymond , 
Her every Tear is worth a Father's Life ; 
Come to my Arms , come , my fair Penitent , 
Let us not think what future Ills may fall , 
But drink deep Draughts of Love , and lose'em all . 
[ Exit Tor. with the Queen . 

Raym.   no matter yet , he has my Hook within him , 
Now let him friskings and flownce and run and roll , 
And think to break his hold . He toils in vain : 
This Love , the Bait he gorged so greedily , 
Will make him sick , and then I have him sure . 


Enter Alphonso , and Pedro  Alph.   Brother , there 's News from Bertran ; he desire's 
Admittance to the King , and cries aloud , 
This day shall end our Fears of Civil War : 
For his safe Conduct he entreats your Presence , 
And begs you would be speedy . 


Raym.   Though I loathe 
The Traitor's sight , I 'll go : Attend us here . 
[ Exit Ray.  

Enter Gomez , Elvira , Dominic , with Officers , to make the Stage as full as possible . Pedro.   Why , how now Gomez : what mak'st thou here with a whole Brotherhood of City Bailiffs ? why , thou lookest like Adam in Paradise , with his guard of Beasts about him . 



Gom.   Aye , and a man had need of them , Don Pedro : for here are the two old Seducers , a Wife and Priest , that 's Eve and the Serpent , at my Elbow . 



Dom.   Take notice how uncharitably he talks of Church men . 



Gom.   Indeed you are a charitable Belswagger : my Wife cried out Fire , Fire ; and you brought out your Church-buckets , and called for Engines to play against it . 



Alph.   I am sorry you are come hither to accuse your Wife , her Education has been virtuous , her Nature mild and easy . 



Gom.   Yes ! she 's easy with a Vengeance , there 's a certain Colonel has found her so . 



Alph.   She came a spotless Virgin to your Bed.  



Gom.   And she 's a spotless Virgin still for me — she 's never the worse for my wearing , I 'll take my Oath on 't : I have lived with her with all the Innocence of a Man of Threescore ; like a peaceable Bedfellow as I am — 



Elvi.   Indeed , Sir , I have no reason to complain of him for disturbing of my Sleep . 



Dom.   A fine Commendation you have given yourself ; the Church did not marry you for that . 



Pedro ,  Come , come , your Grievances , your Grievances . 



Dom.   Why , Noble Sir , I 'll tell you . 



Gom.   Peace Friar ! and let me speak first . I am the Plaintiff . Sure you think you are in the Pulpit where you preach by hours . 



Dom.   And you edify by minutes . 



Gom.   Where you make Doctrines for the People , and Uses and Applications for yourselves . 



Pedro ,  Gomez , give way to the old Gentleman in black . 



Gom.   No! the tother old Gentleman in black shall take me if I do ! I will speak first ! nay , I will , Friar ! for all your Verbum Sacerdotis , I 'll speak truth in few words , and then you may come afterwards , and lie by the clock as you use to do . For , let me tell you , Gentlemen , he shall lie and forswear himself with any Friar in all Spain : that 's a bold word now — 



Dom.   Let him alone : let him alone : I shall fetch him back with a Circum-bendibus I warrant him . 



Alph.   Well , What have you to say against your Wife , Gomez ? 



Gom.   Why , I say , in the first place , that I and all men are married for our Sins , and that our Wives are a Judgement ; that a Bachelor cobbler is a happier man than a Prince in Wedlock ; that we are all visited with a Household Plague , and , Lord have mercy upon us should be written on all our doors . 



Dom.   Now he reviles Marriage which is one of the seven blessed Sacraments . 



Gom.   't is liker one of the seven deadly Sins : but make your best on 't , I care not : 't is but binding a man Neck and Heels for all that ! But as for my Wife , that Crocodile of Nilus , she has wickedly and traitorously conspired the Cuckoldom of me her anointed Sovereign Lord : and , with the help of the aforesaid Friar , whom Heaven confound , and , with the Limbs of one Colonel Hernando , Cuckold-maker of this City , devilishly contrived to steal herself away , and under her Arm feloniously to bear one Casket of Diamonds , Pearls , and other Jewels , to the Value of 30000 Pistols . Guilty , or Not guilty ; how sayest thou Culprit ? 



Dom.   False and scandalous ! Give me the Book . I 'll take my corporal Oath pointblank against every particular of this Charge . 



Elvi.   And so will 1  



Dom.   As I was walking in the Streets , telling my Beads , and praying to myself , according to my usual custom , I heard a foul Outcry before Gomez his Portal ; and his Wife , my Penitent , making doleful Lamentations : Thereupon , making what haste my Limbs would suffer me , that are crippled with often kneeling , I saw him Spurning and Fisting her most unmercifully ; whereupon , using Christian Arguments with him to desist , he fell violently upon me , without respect to my Sacerdotal Orders , pushed me from him , and turned me about with a Finger and a Thumb , just as a Man would set up a Top. Mercy , quoth I Dam , quoth he . And still continued Labouring me , till a good minded Colonel came by , whom , as Heaven shall save me , I had never seen before . 



Gom.   OH Lord ! OH Lord ! 



Dom.   Aye , and , OH Lady ! OH Lady too ! I redouble my Oath , I had never seen him . Well , this Noble Colonel , like a true Gentleman , was for taking the weaker part you may be sure — whereupon this Gomez flew upon him like a Dragon , got him down , the Devil being strong in him , and gave him Bastinado on Bastinado , and Bu●●et upon Buffet , which the poor , meek Colonel , being prostrate , suffered with a most Christian Patience . 



Gom.   Who ? he meek ? I 'm sure I quake at the very thought of him ; why , he 's as fierce as Rhodomont , he made Assault and Battery upon my Person , beaten me into all the colours of the Rainbow . And every word this abominable Priest has uttered is as false as the Alcoran . But if you want a thorough paced Liar that will swear through thick and thin , commend me to a Friar . 

Enter Lorenzo , who comes behind the Company , and stands at his father 's back unseen , over against Gomez . 

Lor.   ( Aside . ) How now ! what 's here to do ? my cause a trying , as I live , and that before my own Father : now Fourscore take him for an old bawdy Magistrate , that stands like the Picture of Madam Justice , with a pair of Scales in his Hand , to weigh Lechery by Ounces . 



Alph.   Well — but all this while , who is this Colonel Hernando ? 



Gom.   he 's the First-begotten of Beelzebub , with a Face as terrible as Demogorgon . 

Lorenzo peeps up over Alph. head , and stairs at Gomez . No! I lie , I lie : 

he 's a very proper , handsome fellow ! well proportioned , and clean shaped , with a Face like a Cherubin . 



Ped.   What , backward and forward Gomez ? dost thou hunt counter ? 



Alph.   Had this Colonel any former Design upon your Wife ? for , if that be proved , you shall have Justice . 



Gom.   ( Aside . ) Now I dare speak ; let him look as dreadfully as he william I say , Sir , and I will prove it , that he had a lewd Design upon her Body , and attempted to corrupt her Honesty . 

[ Lor. lists up his Fist clenched at him . I confess my Wife was as willing — as himself ; and , I believe , 't was she corrupted him : for I have known him formerly a very civil and modest person . 



Elvi.   You see , Sir , he contradicts himself at every word : he 's plainly mad . 



Alph.   Speak boldly man ! and say what thou wilt stand by : did he strike thee ? 



Gom.   I will speak Boldly : He struck me on the Face before my own threshold , that the very walls cried shame on him . 

[ Lor. holds up again . 't is true , I gave him Provocation , for the man 's as peaceable a Gentleman as any is in all Spain . 



Dom.   Now the Truth comes out in spite of him . 



Ped.   I believe the Friar has bewitched him . 



Alph.   For my part , I see no wrong that has been offered him . 



Gom.   How ? no wrong ? why , he ravished me with the help of two Soldiers , carried me away vi & armis , and would have put me into a Plot against the Government . 

[ Lor. holds up again . I confess , I never could endure the Government , because it was Tyrannical : but my Sides and Shoulders are Black and Blue , as I can strip , and show the Marks of ' 'em . 

[ Lor. again . But that might happen too by a Fall that I got yesterday upon the Pebbles . 



[ All laugh . Dom.   Fresh Straw , and a dark Chamber : a most manifest Judgement , there never comes better of railing against the Church . 



Gom.   Why , what will you have me say ? I think you 'll make me mad : Truth has been at my tongue 's end this half hour , and I have not power to bring it out for fear of this bloody minded Colonel . 



Alph.   What Colonel ? 



Gom.   Why , my Colonel : I mean , my Wife's Colonel that appears there to me like my malus genius , and terrifies me . 



Alph.   ( Turning . ) Now you are mad indeed , Gomez ; this is my Son Lorenzo . 



Gom.   How ! your Son Lorenzo ! it is impossible . 



Alph.   As true as your Wife Elvira is my Daughter . 



Lor.   What , have I taken all this pains about a Sister ? 



Gom.   no , you have taken some about me : I am sure , if you are her Brother , my Sides can show the Tokens of our Alliance . 



Alph.   to Lor.  You know I put your Sister into a Nunnery , with a strict Command , not to see you , for fear you should have wrought upon her to have taken the Habit , which was never my Intention ; and consequently , I married her without your knowledge , that it might not be in your power to prevent it . 



Elvi.   You see , Brother , I had a natural affection to you . 



Lor.   What a delicious Harlot have I lost ! Now , Pox upon me , for being so near akin to thee . 



Elvi.   However , we are both beholding to Friar Dominic , the Church is an indulgent Mother , she never fails to do her part . 



Dom.   Heaven ! what will become of me ? 



Gom.   Why , you are not like to trouble Heaven ; those fat Guts were never made for mounting . 



Lor.   I shall make bold to disburden him of my hundred Pistols , to make him the lighter for his Journey : Indeed , 't is partly out of Conscience , that I may not be accessary to his breaking his Vow of Poverty . 



Alphon.   I have no secular Power to reward the Pains you have taken with my Daughter : But I shall do 't by Proxy , Friar , your Bishop's my Friend , and is too honest to let such as you infect a Cloister . 



Gom.   Aye , do Father-in-law , let him be stripped of his Habit , and dis● ordered — I would fain see him walk in Quirpo , like a cased Rabbit , without his holy Fur upon his Back , that the World may once behold the inside of a Friar . 



Dom.   Farewell , kind Gentlemen : I give you all my Blessing before I go — 

May your Sisters , Wives , and Daughters , be so naturally lewd , that they may have no occasion for a Devil to tempt , or a Friar to pimp for ' 'em . 



[ Exit , with a Rabble pushing him . Enter Torrismond , Leonora , Bertran , Raymond , Teresa , etc.  Tor.   He life's ! he lives ! my Royal Father life's ! 
Let every one partake the general Joy. 
Some Angel with a golden Trumpet sound , 
King Sancho life's ! and let the echoing skies 
From Pole to Pole resound , King Sancho life's . 
OH Bertran , o ! no more my Foe , but , Brother : 
One act like this blots out a thousand Crimes . 


Bertr .  Bad men , when 't is their Interest , may do good : 
I must confess , I counselled Sancho's Murder ; 
And urged the Queen by specious Arguments : 
But still , suspecting that her Love was changed , 
I spread abroad the Rumour of his Death , 
To sound the very Soul of her Designs : 
th' Event you know was answering to my Fears : 
She threw the Odium of the Fact on me , 
And publicly avowed her Love to you . 


Raym.   Heaven guided all to save the Innocent . 


Bert.   I pled no Merit , but a bare Forgiveness . 


Tor.   Not only that , but Favour : Sancho's Life , 
Whether by Virtue or Design preserved , 
Claims all within my power . 


Queen ,  My Prayers are heard ; 
And I have nothing farther to desire , 
But Sancho's leave to authorise our Marriage . 


Tor.   Oh! fear not him ! Pity and he are one ; 
So merciful a King did never live ; 
Loath to revenge , and easy to forgive : 
But let the bold Conspirator beware , 
For Heaven makes Princes its peculiar Care.  


[ Exeunt omnes . FINIS . 

Lately printed . 

Lucius junius Brutus , Father of his Country ; A Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theatre : Written by Mr. Lee.  

Contemplations upon the Life of the Holy jesus , written by the Bishop of Exeter . 

Both sold by I Tonson . 

EPILOGUE , By a Friend of the author 's . 

there 's none I 'm sure , who is a Friend to Love , 
But will our Fryar's Character approve : 
The ablest Spark among you sometimes needs 
Such pious help for charitable Deeds . 
Our Church , alas ! ( as Rome objects ) does want 
These Ghostly Comforts for the falling Saint : 
This gains them their Whore-converts , and may be 
One Reason of the Growth of Popery . 
So Mahomet's Religion came in fashion , 
By the large leave it gave to Fornication . 
Fear not the guilt , if you can pay for 't well , 
There is no Dives in the Roman Hell. 
Gold opens the straight gate , and let's him in ; 
But want of money is a mortal sin . 
For all besides you may discount to Heaven , 
And drop a Bead to keep the Tallies even . 
How are men cozened still with shows of good ! 
The Baud's best Mask is the grave Fryar's Hood . 
Though Vice no more a Clergyman displeases , 
Than Doctors can be thought to hate Diseases : 
't is by your living ill that they live well , 
By your Debauches their fat Paunches swell . 
't is a mock-war between the Priest and Devil , 
When they think fit , they can be very civil . 
As some who did French Counsels most advance , 
To blind the World , have railed in Print at France . 
Thus do the Clergy at your Vices bawl , 
That with more ease they may engross them all . 
By damning yours , they do their own maintain . 
A Church-man's godliness is always gain . 
Hence to their Prince they will superior be ; 
And civil Treason grows Church-loyalty : 
They boast the gift of Heaven is in their power ; 
Well may they give the God they can devour . 
Still to the sick and dead their claims they lay ; 
For 't is on Carrion that the Vermin prey . 
Nor have they lesle Dominion on our Life , 
They troth the Husband , and they place the Wife . 
Rouse up you Cuckolds of the Northern climes , 
And learn from Sweden to prevent such crimes . 
Unman the Friar , And leave the holy Drone 
To hum in his forsaken Hive alone ; 
he 'll work no Honey when his sting is gone . 
Your Wives and Daughters soon will leave the Cells , 
When they have lost the sound of Aaron's Bells . 
FINIS . 

