OEDIPUS : A TRAGEDY . As it is ACTED at His Royal Highness THE Duke's Theatre . 

The AUTHOR'S Mr. DRYDEN , and Mr. LEE . 

High proprium decus & partum indignantur honorem 
Ni teneant . — Virgil.  




Vos exemplaria Graeca , 
Nocturna versate manu , versate diurna . 
Horat.  



LICENCED , Jan. 3. 1678  / 9 ROGER L'ESTRANGE . 

LONDON , Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes in Russel-street in Covent-garden . 1679.  

PREFACE . 

THOUGH it be dangerous to raise too great an expectation , especially in works of this Nature , where we are to please an unsatiable Audience , yet 't is reasonable to prepossess them in favour of an Author , and therefore both the Prologue and Epilogue informed you , that Oedipus was the most celebrated piece of all Antiquity . That Sophocles , not only the greatest Wit , but one of the greatest Men in Athens , made it for the Stage at the Public Cost , and that it had the reputation of being his Masterpiece , not only amongst the Seven of his which are still remaining , but of the greater Number which are perished . Aristole has more than once admired it in his Book of Poetry , Horace has mentioned it : Lucullus , Julius Caesar , and other noble Romans , have written on the same Subject , though their Poems are wholly lost ; but Seneca's is still preserved . In our own Age , Corneille has attempted it , and it appears by his Preface , with great success : But a judicious Reader will easily observe , how much the Copy is inferior to the Original . He tells you himself , that he owes a great part of his success to the happy Episode of Theseus and Dirce ; which is the same thing , as if we should acknowledge , that we were indebted for our good fortune , to the under-plot of Adrastus , Eurydice , and Creon . The truth is , he miserably failed in the Character of his Hero : if he desired that Oedipus should be pitied , he should have made him a better man He forgot that Sophocles had taken care to show him in his first entrance , a just , a merciful , a successful , a Religious Prince , and in short , a Father of his Country : instead of these , he has drawn him suspicious , designing , more anxious of keeping the Theban Crown , than solicitous for the safety of his People : Hectored by Theseus , contemned by Dirce , and scarce maintaining a second part in his own Tragedy . This was an error in the first concoction ; and therefore never to be mended in the second or the third : He introduced a greater Hero than Oedipus himself : for when Theseus was once there , that Companion of Hercules must yield to none : The Poet was obliged to furnish him with business , to make him an Equipage suitable to his dignity , and by following him too close , to lose his other King of Branford in the Crowd . Seneca on the other side , as if there were no such thing as Nature to be minded in a Play , is always running after pompous expression , pointed sentences , and Philosophical notions , more proper for the Study than the Stage : The Frenchman followed a wrong scent ; and the Roman was absolutely at cold Hunting . All we could gather out of Corneille , was , that an Episode must be , but not his way : and Seneca supplied us with no new hint , but only a Relation which he makes of his Tiresias raising the Ghost of Lajus : which is here performed in view of the Audience , the Rites and Ceremonies so far his , as he agreed with Antiquity , and the Religion of the Greeks : but he himself was beholding to Homer's Tiresias in the Odysseys for some of them : and the rest have been collected from Heliodore's , Aethiopiques , and Lucan's Erichtho . Sophocles indeed is admirable every where : And therefore we have followed him as close as possibly we could : But the Athenian Theatre , ( whether more perfect than ours is not now disputed ) had a perfection differing from ours . You see there in every Act a single Scene , ( or two at most ) which manage the business of the Play , and after that succeeds the Chorus , which commonly takes up more time in Singing , than there has been employed in speaking . The Principal person appears almost constantly through the Play ; but the inferior parts seldom above once in the whole Tragedy . The conduct of our Stage is much more difficult , where we are obliged never to lose any considerable character which we have once presented . Custom likewise has obtained , that we must form an under-plot of second persons , which must be depending on the first , and their by-walks must be like those in a Labyrinth , which all of ' em-lead into the great Parterre : or like so many several lodging Chambers , which have their outlets into the same Gallery . Perhaps after all , if we could think so , the ancient method , as 't is the easiest , is also the most Natural , and the best . For variety , as 't is managed , is too often subject to breed distraction : and while we would please too many ways , for want of art in the conduct , we please in none . But we have given you more already than was necessary for a Preface , and for aught we know , may gain no more by our instructions , than that Politic Naton is like to do , who have taught their Enemies to fight so long , that at last they are in a condition to invade them . 

Dramatis Personae . 

Oedipus Mr. Betterton . Adrastus' Mr. Smith . Creon Mr. Samford . Tiresias Mr. Harris . Haemon Mr. Crosby . Alcander Mr. Williams . Diocles Mr. Norris . Pyracmon Mr. Boman . Phorbas Mr. Gillo . Dymas   Aegeon   Ghost of Lajus Mr. Williams . WOMEN .   Jocasta Mistress Betterton . Eurydice Mistress Lee.  Manto . Mistress Evans . Priests , Citizens' , Attendants , etc.    SCENE , THEBES . 

PROLOGUE . 

WHEN Athens all the Grecian State did guide , 
And Greece gave Laws to all the World beside , 
then Sophocles with Socrates did sit , 
Supreme in Wisdom one , and one in Wit : 
And Wit from Wisdom differed not in those , 
But as 't was Sung inverse , or said in Prose . 
then , Oedipus , on Crowded Theaters , 
drew all admiring Eyes and listening Ears ; 
The pleased Spectator shouted every Line , 
The noblest , manliest , and the best Design ! 
And every Critic of each learned Age 
By this just Model has reformed the Stage . 
Now , should it fail , ( as Heaven avert our fear ! ) 
Damn it in silence , lest the World should hear . 
For were it known this Poem did not please , 
You might set up for perfect Savages : 
Your Neighbours would not look on you as men : 
But think the Nation all turned Picts again . 
Faith , as you manage matters , 't is not fit 
You should suspect yourselves of too much Wit. 
Drive not the jest too far , but spare this piece ; 
And , for this once , be not more Wise than Greece . 
See twice ! Do not pellmell to Damning fall , 
Like true born Britain's , who never think at all : 
Pray be advised ; and though at Mons you won , 
On pointed Cannon do not always run . 
With some respect to ancient Wit proceed ; 
You take the four first Councils for your Creed . 
But , when you lay Tradition wholly by , 
And on the private Spirit alone rely , 
You turn Fanatics in your Poetry . 
If , notwithstanding all that we can say , 
You needs will have your pen'worths of the Play : 
And come resolved to Damn , because you pay , 
Record it , in memorial of the Fact , 
The first Play buried since the Woollen Act.  
OEDIPUS . 

ACT. I SCENE Thebes . 

The Curtain rises to a plaintive Tune , representing the present condition of Thebes ; Dead Bodies appear at a distance in the Streets ; Some faintly go over the Stage , others drop . Enter Alcander , Diocles , Pyracmon . Alc.   Methinks we stand on Ruins ; Nature shakes 
About us ; and the Universal Frame 
So loose , that it but wants another push 
To leap from off its Hinges . 


Dioc.   no Sun to cheer us ; but a Bloody Globe 
That rowls above ; a bald and Beamless Fire ; 
His Face o'ergrown with Scurf : the sun 's sick too ; 
Shortly he 'll be an Earth . 


Pyr.   Therefore the Seasons 
Lie all confused ; and , by the heaven 's neglected , 
Forget themselves : Blind Winter meets the Summer 
In his Midway , and , seeing not his Livery , 
Has driven him headlong back : And the raw damps 
With flaggy Wings fly heavily about , 
Scattering their Pestilential Colds and Rheums 
Through all the lazy Air.  


Alc.   Hence Murrains followed 
On bleating Flocks , and on the lowing Herds : 
At last , the Malady 
Grew more domestic , and the faithful Dog 
Died at his Master's Feet . 


Dioc.   And next his Master : 
For all those Plagues which Earth and Air had brooded , 
First on inferior Creatures tried their force ; 
And last they seized on man  


Pyr.   And then a thousand deaths at once advanced , 
And every Dart took place ; all was so sudden , 
That scarce a first man fell ; one but began 
To wonder , and strait fell a wonder too ; 
A third , who stooped to raise his dying Friend , 
Dropped in the pious Act. Herd you that groan ? 
[ Groan within . 

Dioc.   A Troop of Ghosts took flight together there : 
Now Death's grown riotous , and will play no more 
For single Stakes , but Families and Tribes : 
How are we sure we breathe not now our last , 
And that next minute , 
Our Bodies cast into some common Pit , 
Shall not be built upon , and overlaid 
By half a people . 


Alc.   there 's a Chain of Causes 
Linked to Effects ; invincible Necessity 
That what ever is , could not but so have been ; 
that 's my security . 


To them , Enter Creon . Creon .  So had it need , when all our Streets lie covered 
With dead and dying men ; 
And Earth exposes Bodies on the Pavements 
more than she hides in Graves ! 
Betwixt the Bride and Bridegroom have I seen 
The Nuptial Torch do common offices 
Of Marriage and of Death . 


Dios.   Now , Oedipus , 
( If he return from War , our other plague ) 
Will scarce find half he left , to grace his Triumphs . 


Pyr.   A feeble Paean will be sung before him . 


Alc.   He would do well to bring the Wives and Children 
Of conquered Argians , to renew his Thebes . 


Creon .  May Funerals meet him at the City Gates 
With their detested Omen . 


Dioc.   Of his Children . 


Creon .  Nay , though she be my Sister , of his Wife . 


Alc.   OH that our Thebes might once again behold 
A Monarch Theban born ! 


Dioc.   We might have had one . 


Pyr.   Yes , had the people pleased . 


Creon .  Come , y' are my Friends : 
The Queen my Sister , after Lajus' death , 
Feared to lie single ; and supplied his place 
With a young Successor . 


Dioc.   He much resembles 
Her former Husband too ; 


Alc.   I always thought so . 


Pyr.   When twenty Winters more have grizzled his black Locks 
He will be very Lajus . 


Creon .  So he will : 
Mean time she stands provided of a Lajus 
more young and vigorous too , by twenty Springs . 
These Women are such cunning Purveyors ! 
Mark where their Appetites have once been pleased , 
The same resemblance in a younger Lover 
Lies brooding in their Fancies the same Pleasures , 
And urges their remembrance to desire . 


Dioc.   Had merit , not her dotage , been considered , 
then Creon had been King ; but Oedipus , 
A stranger ! 


Creon .  That word stranger , I confess 
Sounds harshly in my Ears . 


Dioc.   We are your Creatures . 
The people prone , as in all general ills , 
To sudden change ; the King in Wars abroad , 
The Queen a Woman weak and unregarded ; 
Eurydice the Daughter of dead Lajus , 
A Princess young and beauteous , and unmarried . 
Methinks from these disjointed propositions 
Something might be produced . 


Creon .  The Gods have done 
Their part , by sending this commodious plague . 
But o the Princess ! her hard heart is shut 
By Adamantine Locks against my Love.  


Alc.   Your claim to her is strong : you are betrothed . 


Pyr.   True ▪ in her Nonage . 


Alc.   But that let 's removed . 


Dioc.   I heard the Prince of Argos , young Adrastus ▪ 
When he was hostage here . — 


Creon .  O name him not ! the bane of all my hopes ; 
That hot-brained , headlong Warrior , has the Charms 
Of youth , and somewhat of a lucky rashness , 
To please a Woman yet more Fool than he . 
That thoughtless Sex is caught by outward form 
And empty noise , and love's itself in man  


Alc.   But since the War broke out about our Frontiers , 
he 's now a Foe to Thebes . 


Creon .  But is not so to her ; see , she appears ; 
Once more I 'll prove my Fortune : you insinuate 
Kind thoughts of me into the multitude ; 
Lay load upon the Court ; gull 'em with freedom ; 
And you shall see 'em toss their Tails , and gad , 
As if the Breeze had stung ' 'em . 


Dioc.   we 'll about it . 
[ Exeunt Alcander , Diocles , Pyracmon . 

Enter Eurydice . Creon .  Hail , Royal Maid ; thou bright Eurydice ! 
A lavish Planet reigned when thou wert born ; 
And made thee of such kindred mould to Heaven , 
thou seem'st more heaven 's than ours . 


Euryd.   Cast round your Eyes ; 
Where late the Streets were so thick sown with men , 
Like Cadmus' Brood they justled for the passage : 
Now look for those erected heads , and see 'em 
Like Pebbles paving all our public ways : 
When you have thought on this , then answer me , 
If these be hours of Courtship . 


Creon .  Yes , they are ; 
For when the Gods destroy so fast , 't is time 
We should renew the Race . 


Euryd.   What , in the midst of horror ! 


Creon .  Why not then ? 
there 's the more need of comfort . 


Euryd.   Impious Creon ! 


Creon .  Unjust Eurydice ! can you accuse me 
Of love , which is Heaven's precept , and not fear 
That Vengeance , which you say pursues our Crimes , 
Should reach your Perjuries ? 


Euryd.   Still th' old Argument . 
I bade you , cast your eyes on othermen , 
Now cast 'em on yourself : think what you are . 


Creon .  A Man  


Euryd.   A Man ! 


Creon .  Why doubt you ? I 'm a man  


Euryd.   't is well you tell me so , I should mistake you 
For any other part o' th' whole Creation , 
Rather than think you man : hence from my sight , 
thou poison to my eyes . 


Creon .  'T was you first poisoned mine ; and yet methinks , 
My face and person should not make you sport . 


Euryd.   You force me , by your importunities , 
To show you what you are . 


Creon .  A Prince , who love's you : 
And since your pride provokes me , worth your love , 
Even at its highest value . 


Euryd.   Love from thee ! 
Why love renounced thee ever thou saw'st the light : 
Nature herself start back when thou wert born ; 
And cried , the work 's not mine : — 
The Midwife stood aghast ; and when she saw 
Thy Mountain back and thy distorted legs , 
Thy face itself , 
Half-minted with the Royal stamp of man ; 
And half overcome with beast , stood doubting long , 
Whose right in thee were more : 
And knew not , if to burn thee in the flames , 
Were not the holier work . 


Creon .  am I to blame if Nature threw my body 
In so perverse a mould ? yet when she cast 
Her envious hand upon my suppling joints , 
Unable to resist , and rumpled 'em 
On heaps in their dark lodging , to revenge 
Her bungled work she stamped my mind more fair : 
And as from Chaos , huddled and deformed , 
The God struck fire , and lighted up the Lamps 
That beautify the sky , so he informed 
This ill-shaped body with a daring soul : 
And making lesle than man , he made me more . 


Euryd.   no ; thou art all one error ; soul and body . 
The first young trial of some unskilled Power ; 
Rude in the making Art , and Ape of Jove . 
Thy crooked mind within hunched out thy back ; 
And wandered in thy limbs : to thy own kind 
Make love , if thou canst find it in the world : 
And seek not from our Sex to raise an off spring , 
Which , mingled with the rest , would tempt the Gods 
To cut off human Kind . 


Creon .  no ; let 'em leave 
The Argian Prince for you : that Enemy 
Of Thebes has made you false , and break the Vows 
You made to me . 


Euryd.   They were my Mother's Vows , 
Made when I was at Nurse . 


Creon .  But hear me , Maid ; 
This blot of Nature , this deformed , loathed Creon , 
Is Master of a Sword , to reach the blood 
Of your young Minion , spoil the Gods fine work , 
And stab you in his heart . 


Euryd.   This when thou dost , 
then mayst thou still be cursed with loving me : 
And , as thou art , be still unpitied , loathed ; 
And let his Ghost — no let his Ghost have rest , 
But let the greatest , fiercest , foulest Fury , 
Let Creon haunt himself . 
[ Exit Eurydice . 

Creon .  't is true , I am 
What she has told me , an offence to sight : 
My body opens inward to my soul , 
And let's in day to make my Vices seen 
By all discerning eyes , but the blind vulgar . 
I must make haste ere Oedipus return , 
To snatch the Crown and her ; for I still love ; 
But love with malice ; as an angry Cur 
Snarls while he feeds , so will I seize and staunch 
The hunger of my love on this proud beauty , 
And leave the scraps for Slaves . 
Enter Tiresias , leaning on a staff , and led by his Daughter Manto . What makes this blind prophetic Foolabroad ! 
Would his Apollo had him , he 's too holy 
For Earth and me ; I 'll eat his walk ; and seek 
My popular friends . 
[ Exit Creon . 

Tiresias .  A little farther ; yet a little farther , 
thou wretched Daughter of a dark old man , 
Conduct my weary steps : and thou who seest 
For me and for thy seif , beware thou tread not 
With impious steps upon dead corpse ; — Now stay : 
Methinks I draw more open , vital air , 
Where are we ? 


Manto .  Under Covert of a wall : 
The most frequented once , and noisy part 
Of Thebes , now midnight silence reigns even here ; 
And grass untrodden springs beneath our feet . 


Tir.   If there be nigh this place a Sunny bank , 
There let me rest a while : a Sunny bank ! 
Alas ! how can it be , where no Sun shines ! 
But a dim winking Taper in the Skies , 
That nods , and scarce holds up his drowsy head 
To glimmer through the damps . 
[ A Noise within , follow , follow , follow , A Creon , A Creon , A Creon . ] Hark! a tumultuous noise , and Creon's name 
Thrice echoed . 


Man   Fly , the tempest drives this way . 


Tir.   whither can Age and blindness take their flight ? 
If I could fly , what could I suffer worse , 
Secure of greater Ills ! 
[ Noise again , Creon , Creon , Creon . 

Enter Creon , Diocles , Alcander , Pyracmon ; followed by the Crowd . Creon .  I thank ye , Countrymen ; but must refuse 
The honours you intent me , they 're too great ; 
And I am too unworthy ; think again , 
And make a better choice . 


1 Cit   Think twice ! I never thought twice in all my life : 
that 's double work . 


2 Cit   My first word is always my second ; and therefore I 'll have 
no second word : and therefore once again I say , A Creon . 


All.   A Creon , A Creon , A Creon . 


Creon .  Yet hear me , Fellow Citizens . 


Dioc.   Fellow Citizens' ! there was a word of kindness ! 


Alc.   When did Oedipus salute you by that familiar name ? 


1 Cit   Never , never ▪ he was too proud . 


Creon .  Indeed he could not , for he was a stranger : 
But under him our Thebes is half destroyed . 
forbid it Heaven the residue should perish 
Under a Theban born . 
't is true , the Gods might send this plague among you , 
Because a stranger ruled : but what of that , 
Can I redress it now ? 


3 Cit   Yes , you or none . 
't is Certain that the Gods are angry with us 
Because he reigns . 


Creon .  Oedipus may return : you may be ruined . 


1 Cit   Nay , if that be the matter , we are ruined already . 


2 Cit   Half of us that are here present , were living men but 
Yesterday , and we that are absent do but drop and drop , 
And no man knows whether he be dead or living . And 
Therefore while we are sound and well , let us satisfy our 
Consciences , and make a new King.  


3 Cit   ha , if we were but worthy to see another Coronation , 
And then if we must die , well go merrily together . 


All.   To the question , to the question . 


Dioc.   Are you content , Creon should be your King ? 


All.   A Creon , A Creon , A Creon . 


Tir.   Hearme , ye Thebans , and thou Creon , hear me . 


1 Cit   who 's that would be heard ; we 'll hear no man : 
We can scarce hear one another . 


Tir.   I charge you by the Gods to hear me . 


2 Cit   O , 't is Apollo's Priest , we must hear him ; 't is the old blind 
Prophet that sees all things . 


3 Cit   He comes from the Gods too , and they are our betters ; 
And therefore in good manners we must hear him : Speak , Prophet . 


2 Cit   For coming from the Gods that 's no great matter , 
They can all say that ; but he 's a great Scholar , he can make 
Almanacs , and he were put to 't , and therefore I say hear him . 


Tir.   When angry Heaven scatters its plagues among you , 
Is it for naught , ye Thebans ! are the Gods 
Unjust in punishing ? are there no Crimes 
Which pull this Vengeance down ? 


1 Cit   Yes , yes , no doubt there are some Sins stirring 
That are the cause of all . 


3 Cit   Yes there are Sins ; or we should have no Taxes . 


2 Cit   For my part I can speak it with a safe Conscience , 
I never sinned in all my life . 


1 Cit   Nor 1  


3 Cit   Nor 1  


2 Cit   then we are all justified , the sin lies not at our doors . 


Tir.   All justified alike , and yet all guilty ; 
Were every man's false dealing brought to light , 
His Envy , Malice , Lying , Perjuries , 
His Weights and Measures , th' other man's Extortions , 
With what Face could you tell offended Heaven 
You had not sinned ? 


2 Cit   Nay , if these be sins , the case is altered ; for my part I never 
Thought any thing but Murder had been a sin . 


Tir.   And yet , as if all these were lesle than nothing , 
You add Rebellion to 'em ; impious Thebans ! 
Have you not sworn before the Gods to serve 
And to obey this Oedipus , your King 
By public voice elected ; answer me , 
If this be true ! 


2 Cit   This is true ; but it 's a hard World Neighbours , 
If a man's Oath must be his master . 


Creon .  Speak Diocles ; all goes wrong . 


Dioc.   How are you Traitors Countrymen of Thebes ? 
This holy Sir , who presses you with Oaths , 
Forgets your first ; were you not sworn before 
To Lajus and his Blood ? 


All.   We were ; we were . 


Dioc.   While Lajus has a lawful Successor , 
Your first ●ath still must bind : Eurydice 
Is Heir to Lajus ; let her marry Creon : 
Offended Heaven will never be appeased 
While Oedipus pollutes the Throne of Lajus , 
A stranger to his Blood.  


All.   we 'll no Oedipus , no Oedipus . 


1 Cit   He puts the Prophet in a Mousehole . 


2 Cit   I knew it would be so ; the last man ever speaks the best reason . 


Tir.   Can benefits thus die , ungrateful Thebans ! 
Remember yet , when , after Lajus' death , 
The Monster Sphinx laid your rich Country waste , 
Your Vineyards spoiled , your labouring Oxen slew ; 
Yourselves for fear mewed up within your Walls . 
She , taller than your Gates , o'erlooked your Town , 
But when she raised her Bulk to sail above you , 
She driven the Air arround her like a Whirlwind , 
And shaded all beneath ; till stooping down , 
She clapped her leathern wing against your Tow'rs , 
And thrust out her long neck , even to your doors . 


Dioc. Alk. Pyr.   we 'll hear no more . 


Tir.   You durst not meet in Temples 
T' invoke the Gods for aid , the proudest he 
Who leads you now , then cowred , like a dared Lark : 
This Creon shaken for fear , 
The blood of Lajus , cruddled in his Veins : 
Till Oedipus arrived . 
Called by his own high courage and the Gods , 
Himself to you a God : ye offered him 
Your Queen , and Crown ; ( but what was then your Crown ! ) 
And Heaven authorised it by his success : 
Speak then , who is your lawful King ? 


All.   't is Oedipus . 


Tir.   't is Oedipus indeed : your King more lawful 
Than yet you dream : for something still there lies 
In Heavens' dark Volume , which I read through mists : 
't is great , prodigious ; 't is a dreadful birth , 
Of wondrous Fate ; and now , just now disclosing . 
I see , I see ! how terribly it dawns . 
And my Soul sickens with it : 


1 Cit   How the God shakes him ! 


Tir.   He comes ! he comes ! Victory ! Conquest ! Triumph ! 
But o ! Guiltless and Guilty : Murder ! Parricide ! 
Incest ; Discovery ! Punishment — 't is ended , 
And all your sufferings o'er . 


A Trumpet within ; Enter Haemon . Haem .  Rouse up ye Thebans ; tune your Jo. Paeans ! 
Your King returns ; the Argians are overcome ; 
Their Warlike Prince in single Combat taken , 
And led in Bands by Godlike Oedipus . 


All.   Oedipus , Oedipus , Oedipus ! 


Creon .  Furies confound his Fortune ! — 
Haste , all haste ; 
And meet with Blessings our Victorious King ; 
Decree Processions ; bid new Holy-days ; 
Crown all the Statues of our Gods with Garlands ; 
And raise a Brazen Column , thus inscribed , 
To Oedipus , now twice a Conqueror ; Deliverer of his Thebes . 
Trust me , I weep for joy to see this day . 
[ aside . [ To them . 

Tir.   Yes , Heaven knows why thou weepest : — go , Countrymen , 
And , as you use to supplicate your Gods — 
So meet your King , with Bays , and Olive-branches : 
Bow down , and touch his Knees , and beg from him 
An end of all your Woes ; for only he 
Can give it you . 
[ Ex. Tiresias , the People following . 

Enter Oedipus in triumph , Adrastus' Prisoner ; Dymas , Train . Creon .  All hail , great Oedipus ; 
thou mighty Conqueror , hail ; welcome to Thebes : 
To thy own Thebes ; to all that 's left of Thebes : 
For half thy Citizens are swept away , 
And wanting to thy Triumphs : 
And we , the happy remnant , only live 
To welcome thee , and die . 


Oedipus .  Thus pleasure never comes sincere to man ; 
But lent by Heaven upon hard Usury : 
And , while Jove holds us out the Bowl of Joy , 
Ever it can reach our Lips it 's dashed with Gall 
By some lefthanded God. OH mournful Triumph ! 
OH Conquest gained abroad and lost at home ! 
OH Argos ! now rejoice , for Thebes lies low ; 
Thy slaughtered Sons now smile and think they wone ; 
When they can count more Theban Ghosts than theirs . 


Adrast.   no ; Argos mourns with Thebes ; you tempered so 
Your Courage while you fought , that Mercy seemed 
The manlier Virtue , and much more prevailed : 
While Argos is a People , think your Thebes 
Can never want for Subjects : Every Nation 
Will crowed to serve where Oedipus commands , 


Creon to Haem .  How mean it shows to fawn upon the Victor ! 


Haem .  Had you beheld him fight , you had said otherwise : 
Come , 't is brave bearing in him , not to envy 
Superior Virtue . 


Oed.   This indeed is Conquest , 
To gain a Friend like you : Why were we Foes ? 


Adrast.   'Cause we were Kings , and each disdained an equal . 
I fought to have it in my power to do 
What thou hast done ; and so to use my Conquest ; 
To show thee , Honour was my only motive , 
Know this , that were my Army at thy Gates , 
And Thebes thus waste , I would not take the Gift , 
Which , like a Toy , dropped from the hands of Fortune , 
Lay for the next chance-comer . 


Oed.   embracing . no more Captive , 
But Brother of the War : 't is much more pleasant , 
And safer , trust me , thus to meet thy love , 
Than when hard Gauntlets clenched our Warlike Hands , 
And kept 'em from soft use . 


Adr.   My Conqueror . 


Oed.   My Friend ! that other name keeps Enmity alive . 
But longer to detain thee were a Crime ; 
To love , and to Eurydice , go free : 
Such welcome as a ruined Town can give 
Expect from me ; the rest let her supply . 


Adr.   I go without a blush , though conquered twice , 
By you and by my Princess . 
[ Ex. Adrastus . 

Creon   aside . then I am conquered thrice ; by Oedipus , 
And her , and even by him , the slave of both : 
Gods , I 'm beholding to you , for making me your Image , 
Woven I could make you mine . 
[ Ex. Creon . 

Enter the People with branches in their hands , holding them up , and kneeling : Two Priests before them . Oedipus .  Alas , my People ! 
What means this speechless sorrow , down cast eyes , 
And lifted hands ! if there be one among you 
Whom grief has left a tongue , speak for the rest . 


1 Pr.   OH Father of thy Country ! 
To thee these knees are bend , these eyes are lifted , 
As to a visible Divinity . 
A Prince on whom Heaven safely might repose 
The business of Mankind : for Providence 
Might on thy careful bosom sleep secure , 
And leave her task to thee . 
But where 's the Glory of thy former acts ? 
Even that 's destroyed when none shall live to speak it . 
Million of Subjects shalt thou have ; but mute . 
A people of the dead ; a crowded desert . 
A Midnight silence at the noon of day . 


Oed.   OH were our Gods as ready with their pity , 
As I with mine , this Presence should be thronged 
With all I left alive ; and my sad eyes . 
Not search in vain for friends , whose promised sight 
Flattered my toils of war.  


1 Pr.   Twice our deliverer . 


Oed.   Nor are now your vows 
Addressed to one who sleeps : 
When this unwelcome news first reached my ears , 
Dymas was sent to Delphos to inquire 
The cause and cure of this contagious ill : 
And is this day returned : but since his message 
Concerns the public , I refused to hear it 
But in this general Presence : let him speak . 


Dymas .  A dreadful answer from the hallowed Urn , 
And sacred tripous did the Priestess give , 
In these Mysterious words , 


The Oracle .  Shed in a cursed hour , by cursed hand , 
Blood-royal unrevenged , has cursed the land 
When Lajus death is expiated well 
Your Plague shall cease : the rest let Lajus tell . 




Oed.   Dreadful indeed ! blood , and a King's blood too : 
And such a Kings , and by his Subjects shed ! 
( Else why this curse on Thebes ? ) no wonder then 
If Monsters , Wars , and plagues revenge such Crimes ! 
If Heaven be just , it 's whole Artillery , 
All must be emptied on us : Not one bolt 
Shall err from Thebes ; but more , be called for more : 
New moulded thunder of a larger size ; 
Driven by whole Jove . What , touch anointed Power ! 
then Gods beware ; Jove would himself be next ; 
Could you but reach him too . 


2.  Pr.   We mourn the sad remembrance . 


Oed.   Well you may : 
Worse than a plague infects you : y' are devoted 
To Mother Earth , and to th' infernal Powers : 
Hell has a right in you : I thank you Gods , 
That I 'm no Theban born : how my blood cruddles ! 
As if this curse touched me ! and touched me nearer 
Than all this presence ! — Yes , 't is a King's blood , 
And I , a King , am tied in deeper bonds 
To expiate this blood : but where , from whom , 
Or how must I atone it ? tell me , Thebans , 
How Lajus fell ? for a confused report 
Pass ▪ d through my ears , when first I took the Crown : 
But full of hurry , like a morning dream , 
It vanished in the business of the day . 


1 Pr.   He went in private forth ; but thinly followed ; 
And never returned to Thebes . 


Oed.   Nor any from him ? came there no attendant ? 
None to bring news ? 


2 Pr.   But one ; and he so wounded , 
He scarce drew breath to speak some few faint words . 


Oed.   What were they ? something may be learned from thence . 


1 Pr.   He said a band of Robbers watched their passage ; 
Who took advantage of a narrow way 
To murder Lajus and the rest : himself 
Left too for dead . 


Oed.   Made you no more enquiry , 
But took this bare relation ? 


2.  Pr.   'T was neglected : 
For then the Monster Sphynx began to rage ; 
And present cares soon buried the remote ; 
So was it hushed , and never since revived . 


Oed.   Mark , Thebans , mark ! 
Just then , the Sphynx began to rage among you ; 
The Gods took hold even of th'offending minute , 
And dated thence your woes : thence will I trace ' 'em . 


1 Pr.   't is Just thou shouldst . 


Oed.   Hear then this dreadful imprecation ; hear it : 
't is laid on all ; not any one exempt : 
Bear witness Heaven , avenge it on the perjured . 
If any Theban born , if any stranger 
Reveal this murder , or produce its Author , 
Ten Attic Talents be his just reward : 
But , if for fear , for favour , or for hire , 
The murder'r he conceal , the curse of Thebes 
Fall heavy on his head : Unite our plagues 
ye Gods , and place 'em there : from Fire and Water , 
Converse , and all things common be he banished . 
But for the murderer's self , unfound by man , 
find him ye powers Celestial and Infernal ; 
And the same Fate or worse , than Lajus met , 
Let be his lot : his children be accursed ; 
His Wife and kindred , all of his be cursed . 


Both Pr.   Confim it Heaven ! 


Enter Jocasta ; Attended by Women . Joc.   At your Devotions ! Heaven succeed your wishes ; 
And bring th' effect of these your pious prayers 
On you , and me , and all . 


Pr.   Avert this Omen , Heaven ! 


Oed.   OH fatal sound , Unfortunate Jocasta ! 
What hast thou said ! an ill hour hast thou chosen 
For these fore-boding words ! why , we were cursing ! 


Joc.   then may that curse fall only where you laid it . 


Oed.   Speak no more ! 
For all thou sayest is ominous : we were cursing ; 
And that dire imprecation hast thou fastened 
On Thebes , and thee and me , and all of us . 


Joc.   Are then my blessings turned into a curse ? 
OH Unkind Oedipus . My former Lord 
Thought me his blessing : be thou like my Lajus . 


Oed.   what yet again ! the third time hast thou cursed me ? 
This imprecation was for Lajus death , 
And thou hast wished me like him . 


Joc.   Horror seizes me ! 


Oed.   why dost thou gaze upon me ? prithee love 
Take off thy eye ; it burdens me too much . 


Joc.   The more I look , the more I find of Lajus : 
His speech , his garb , his action ; nay his frown ; 
( For I have seen it ; ) but never bend on me . 


Oed.   Are we so like ? 


Joc.   In all things but his love . 


Oed.   I love thee more : so well I love , words cannot speak how well . 
no pious Son ere loved his Mother more 
Than I my dear Jocasta . 


Joc.   I love you too 
The self same way : and when you chid , me thought 
A Mother's love start up in your defence , 
And bade me not beangry : be not you : 
For I love Lajus still as wives should love : 
But you more tenderly ; as part of me : 
And when I have you in my arms , methinks 
I lull my child asleep . 


Oed.   then we are blessed : 
And all these curses sweep along the skies 
Like empty clouds ; but drop not on our heads . 


Joc.   I have not joyed an hour since you departed , 
For public Miseries , and for private fears ; 
But this blessed meeting has or'e-payed 'em all . 
Good fortune that comes seldom comes more welcome . 
All I can wish for now , is your consent 
To make my Brother happy . 


Oed.   How , Jocasta ? 


Joc.   By marriage with his Niece , Eurydice ! 


Oed.   Uncle and Niece ! they are too near , my Love ; 
't is too like Incest : 't is offence to Kind : 
Had I not promised , were there no Adrastus , 
no choice but Creon left her of Mankind , 
They should not marry ; speak no more of it ; 
The thought disturbs me . 


Joc.   Heaven can never bless 
A Vow so broken , which I made to Creon ; 
Remember he 's my Brother . 


Oed.   that 's the Bar : 
And she thy Daughter : Nature would abhor 
To be forced back again upon herself , 
And like a whirlpool swallow her own streams . 


Joc.   Be not displeased ; I 'll move the Suit no more . 


Oed.   no , do not ; for , I know not why , it shakes me 
When I but think on Incest ; move we forward 
To thank the Gods for my success , and pray 
To wash the guilt of Royal Blood away . 
[ Exeunt Omnes . 

ACT. II SCENE I  

An open Gallery . A Royal Bedchamber being supposed behind . The Time , Night . Thunder , etc.  Haemon , Alcander , Pyracmon . Haem .  SURE 't is the end of all things ! Fate has torn 
The Lock of Time off , and his head is now 
The ghastly Ball of round Eternity ! 
Call you these Peals of Thunder , but the yawn 
Of bellowing Clouds ? By Jove , they seem to me 
The World's last groans ; and those vast sheets of Flame 
Are its last Blaze ! The Tapers of the Gods , 
The Sun and Moon , run down like waxen-globes ; 
The shooting Stars end all in purple Jellies , 
And Chaos is at hand . 


Pyr.   't is Midnight , yet there 's not a Theban sleeps , 
But such as never must wake . All crowed about 
The Palace , and implore , as from a God , 
Help of the King ; who , from the Battlement , 
By the red Lightning's glare , descried afar , 
Atones the angry Powers . 
Thunder , etc.  

Haem .  Ha! Pyracmon , look ; 
Behold , Alcander , from yon West of Heaven , 
The perfect Figures of a Man and Woman : 
A Sceptre bright with Gems in each right hand , 
Their flowing Robes of dazzling Purple made , 
Distinctly yonder in that point they stand , 
Just West ; a bloody red stains all the place : 
And see , their Faces are quite-hid in Clouds . 


Pyr.   Clusters of Golden Stars hang o'er their heads , 
And seem so crowded , that they burst upon 'em : 
All dart at once their baleful influence , 
In leaking Fire . 


Alc.   Long-bearded Comets stick , 
Like flaming Porcupines , to their left sides , 
As they would shoot their Quills into their hearts . 


Haem .  But see ▪ the King , and Queen , and all the Court ! 
Did ever Day or Night show aught like this ? 
[ thunders again . The Scene draws , and discovers the Prodigies . 

Enter Oedipus , Jocasta , Eurydice , Adrastus , all coming forward with amazement . Oed.   Answer , you Powers Divine ; spare all this noise , 
This rack of Heaven , and speak your fatal pleasure . 
Why breaks yond dark and dusky Orb away ? 
Why from the bleeding Womb of monstrous Night , 
Burst forth such Miriads of abortive Stars ? 
Ha! my Jocasta , look ! the Silver Moon ! 
A settling Crimson stains her beauteous Face ! 
she 's all o'er Blood ! and look , behold again , 
What mean the mistick-heavens , she journeys on ? 
A vast Eclipse darkens the labouring Planet : 
Sound there , sound all our Instruments of War ; 
Clarions and Trumpets , Silver , Brass , and Iron , 
And beaten a thousand Drums to help her Labour . 


Adr.   't is vain ; you see the Prodigies continue ; 
Let 's gaze no more , the Gods are humorous . 


Oed.   Forbear , rash man — Once more I ask your pleasure ▪ 
If that the glow-worm-light of Human Reason 
Might dare to offer at Immortal knowledge , 
And cope with Gods , why all this storm of Nature ? 
Why do the Rocks split , and why rolls the Sea ? 
Why these Portents in Heaven , and Plagues on Earth ? 
Why yon Gygantick Forms , Ethereal Monsters ? 
Alas ! is all this but to fright the Dwarves 
Which your own hands have made ? then be it so . 
Or if the Fates resolve some Expiation 
For murdered Lajus ; Hear me , hear me , Gods ! 
Hear me thus prostrate : Spare this groaning Land , 
Save innocent Thebes , stop the Tyrant Death ; 
Do this , and lo I stand up an Oblation 
To meet your swiftest and severest anger , 
Shoot all at once , and strike me to the Centre . 


The Cloud draws that veiled the he adds of the Figures in the Sky , and shows 'em Crowned , with the names of Oedipus and Jocasta written above in great Characters of Gold.  Adr.   Either I dream , and all my cooler senses 
Are vanished with that Cloud that fleets away ; 
Or just above those two Majestic heads , 
I see , I read distinctly in large gold , 
Oedipus and Jocasta . 


Alc.   I read the same . 


Adr.   't is wonderful ; yet ought not man to wade 
Too far in the vast deep of Destiny . 
[ Thunder ; and the Prodigies vanish . 

Joc.   My Lord , my Oedipus , why gaze you now , 
When the whole Heaven is clear , as if the Gods 
Had some new Monsters made ? will you not turn , 
And bless your People ; who devour each word 
You breathe . 


Oed.   It shall be so . 
Yes , I will die , OH Thebes , to save thee ! 
Draw from my heart my blood , with more content 
Than ever I wore thy Crown . Yet , OH , Jocasta ! 
By all the endearments of miraculous love , 
By all our languish , our fears in pleasure , 
Which oft have made us wonder ; here I swear 
On thy fair hand , upon thy breast I swear , 
I cannot call to mind , from budding Childhood 
To blooming youth , a Crime by me committed , 
For which the awful Gods should doom my death . 


Joc.   't is not you , my Lord , 
But he who murdered Lajus , frees the Land : 
Were you , which is impossible , the man , 
Perhaps my Poniard first should drink your blood ; 
But you are innocent , as your Jocasta , 
From Crimes like those . This made me violent 
To save your life , which you unjust would lose : 
Nor can you comprehend , with deepest thought , 
The horrid Agony you cast me in , 
When you resolved to die . 


Oed.   Is 't possible ? 


Joc.   Alas ! why start you so ? Her stiff'ning grief , 
Who saw her Children slaughtered all at once , 
Was dull to mine : Methinks I should have made 
My bosom bare against the armed God , 
To save my Oedipus ! 


Oed.   I pray , no more . 


Joc.     silenced me , my Lord  


Oed.   Pardon me , dear Jocasta ; 
Pardon a heart that sinks with sufferings , 
And can but vent itself in sobs and murmurs : 
Yet to restore my peace , I 'll find him out . 
Yes , yes , you Gods ! you shall have ample vengeance 
On Lajus murderer . OH , the traitor 's name ! 
I 'll know 't , I will ; Art shall be Conjured for it , 
And Nature all unravelled . 


Joc.   Sacred Sir , — 


Oed.   Rage will have way , and 't is but just ; I 'll fetch him , 
Thou lodged in Air , upon a Dragon's wing , 
Thou Rocks should hide him : nay , he shall be dragged 
From Hell , if Charms can hurry him along : 
His Ghost shall be , by sage Tiresias power , 
( Tiresias , that rules all beneath the Moon ) 
Confined to flesh , to suffer death once more ; 
And then be plunged in his first fires again . 


Enter Creon . Cre.   My Lord , 
Tiresias attends your pleasure . 


Oed.   Haste , and bring him in . 
OH , my Jocasta , Eurydice , Adrastus , 
Creon , and all ye Thebans , now the end 
Of Plagues , of Madness , Murders , Prodigies , 
Draws on : This Battle of the Heavens' and Earth 
Shall by his wisdom be reduced to peace . 
Enter Tiresias , leaning on a staff , led by his Daughter Manto , followed by other Thebans . OH thou , whose most aspiring mind 
Knowest all the business of the Courts above , 
Open'st the Closets of the Gods , and dares 
To mix with Jove himself and Fate at Council ; 
OH Prophet , answer me , declare aloud 
The Traitor who conspired the death of Lajus : 
Or be they more , who from malignant Stars 
Have drawn this Plague that blasts unhappy Thebes . 


Tir.   We must no more than Fate commissions us 
To tell ; yet something , and of moment , I 'll unfold , 
If that the God would wake ; I feel him now , 
Like a strong Spirit Charmed into a Tree , 
That leaps , and moves the Wood without a Wind : 
The roused God , as all this while he lay 
Entombed alive , starts and dilates himself ; 
He struggles , and he tears my aged Trunk 
With holy Fury , my old Arteries burst , 
My riveled skin , 
Like Parchment , crackles at the hallowed fire ; 
I shall be young again : Manto , my Daughter , 
thou hast a voice that might have saved the Bard 
Of Thrace , and foreed the raging Bacchanals , 
With lifted Prongs , to listen to thy airs : 
OH Charm this God , this Fury in my bosom , 
Lull him with tuneful notes , and artful strings , 
With powerful strains ; Manto , my lovely Child , 
Sooth the unruly Godhead to be mild . 


SONG to Apollo . 

Phoebus , God beloved by men ; 
At thy dawn , every Beast is roused in his Den ; 
At thy setting , all the Birds of thy absence complain , 
And we die , all dye till the morning comes again , 
Phoebus , God beloved by men ! 
Idol of the Eastern Kings , 
Awful as the God who flings 
His Thunder round , and the Lightning wings ; 
God of Songs , and Orphean strings , 
Who to this mortal bosom brings , 
All harmonious heavenly things ! 
Thy drowsy Prophet to revive , 
Ten thousand thousand forms before him drive ; 
With Chariots and Horses all o fire awake him , 
Convulsions , and Furies , and Prophecies shake him : 
Let him tell it in groans , though he bend with the load , 
Thou he burst with the weight of the terrible God.  


Tir.   The wretch , who shed the blood of old Labdacides , 
Lives , and is great ; 
But cruel greatness never was long : 
The first of Lajus blood his life did seize , 
And urged his Fate , 
Which else had lasting been and strong . 
The wretch , who Lajus killed , must bleed or fly ; 
Or Thebes , consumed with Plagues , in ruins lie . 


Oed.   The first of Lajus blood ▪ pronounce the person ; 
May the God roar from thy prophetic mouth , 
That even the dead may start up , to behold : 
Name him , I say , that most accursed wretch , 
For by the Stars he dies : 
Speak , I command thee ; 
By Phoebus , speak ; for sudden death 's his doom : 
Here shall he fall , bleed on this very spot ; 
His name , I charge the once more , speak . 


Tir.   't is lost , 
Like what we think can never eat remembrance ; 
Yet of a sudden's gone beyond the Clouds . 


Oed.   Fetch it from thence ; I 'll have 't , where ever it be ▪ 


Cre.   Let me entreat you , sacred Sir , be calm , 
And Creon shall point out the great Offender . 
't is true , respect of Nature might enjoin 
Me silence , at another time ; but , o , 
Much more the power of my eternal Love ! 
That , that should strike me dumb : yet Thebes , my Country — 
I 'll break through all , to succour thee , poor City ! 
OH , I must speak . 


Oed.   Speak then , if ought thou knowest : 
As much thou seem'st to know , delay no longer . 


Cre.   OH Beauty ! OH illustrious Royal Maid ! 
To whom my Vows were ever paid till now , 
And with such modest , chaste , and pure affection , 
The coldest Nymph might read 'em without blushing ; 
Art thou the Murderess then of wretched Lajus ? 
And I , must I accuse thee ! OH my tears ! 
Why will you fall in so abhorred a Cause ? 
But that thy beauteous , barbarous , hand destroyed 
Thy Father ( OH monstrous act ! ) both Gods 
And men at once take notice . 


Oed.   Eurydice ! 


Eur.   Traitor , go on ; I scorn thy little malice , 
And knowing more my perfect innocence , 
Than Gods and men , then how much more than thee , 
Who art their opposite , and formed a Liar , 
I thus disdain thee ! thou once didst talk of Love ; 
Because I hate thy love , 
thou dost accuse me . 


Adr.   Villain , inglorious Villain , 
And Traitor , double damned , who durst blaspheme 
The spotless virtue of the brightest beauty ; 
thou diest : nor shall the sacred Majesty , 
That guards this place , preserve thee from my rage . 
[ Draws and wounds him . 

Oed.   Disarm 'em both : Prince , I shall make you know 
That I can tame you twice . Guards , seize him . 


Adr.   Sir , 
I must acknowledge in another Cause 
Repentance might abash me ; but I glory 
In this , and smile to see the traitor 's blood . 


Oed.   Creon , you shall be satisfied at full . 


Cre.   My hurt is nothing , Sir ; but I appeal 
To wise Tiresias , if my accusation 
Be not most true . The first of Lajus blood 
Gave him his death . Is there a Prince before her ? 
then she is faultless , and I ask her pardon . 
And may this blood never cease to drop , OH Thebes , 
If pity of thy sufferings did not move me 
To show the Cure which Heaven itself prescribed . 


Eur.   Yes , Thebans , I will die to save your lives , 
more willingly than you can wish my fate ; 
But let this good , this wife , this holy man , 
Pronounce my Sentence : for to fall by him , 
By the vile breath of that prodigious Villain , 
Would sink my Soul , though I should die a Martyr . 


Adr.   Unhand me , slaves . OH mightiest of Kings , 
See at your feet a Prince not used to kneel ; 
Touch not Eurydice , by all the Gods , 
As you would save your Thebes , but take my life : 
For , should she perish , Heaven would heap plagues on plagues , 
Rain Sulphur down , hurl kindled bolts 
Upon your guilty heads . 


Cre.   You turn to gallantry , what is but justice : 
Proof will be easy made . Adrastus was 
The Robber who bereft th' unhappy King 
Of life ; because he flatly had denied 
To make so poor a Prince his Son-in-law : 
Therefore 't were fit that both should perish . 


1 Theb.   Both , let both die . 


All Theb.   Both , both ; let 'em die . 


Oed.   Hence , you wild herd ! For your Ringleader here , 
He shall be made Example . Haemon , take him . 


1 Theb.   Mercy , OH mercy . 


Oed.   Mutiny in my presence ! 
Hence , let me see that busy face no more . 


Tir.   Thebans , what madness makes you drunk with rage ? 
Enough of guilty death 's already acted : 
Fierce Creon has accused Eurydice , 
With Prince Adrastus ; which the God reproves 
By inward checks , and leaves their Fates in doubt . 


Oed.   Therefore instruct us what remains to do , 
Or suffer ; for I feel a sleep like death 
Upon me , and I sigh to be at rest . 


Tir.   Since that the powers divine refuse to clear 
The mystic deed , I 'll to the Grove of Furies ; 
There I can force th' Infernal Gods to show 
Their horrid Forms ; 
Each trembling Ghost shall rise , 
And leave their grizly King without a waiter : 
For Prince Adrastus and Eurydice , 
My life 's engaged , I 'll guard 'em in the Fane , 
Till the dark mysteries of Hell are done . 
follow me , Princes ; Thebans , all to rest . 
OH , Oedipus , to morrow — but no more . 
If that thy wakeful Genius will permit , 
Indulge thy brain this night with softer slumbers : 
To morrow , OH to morrow ! — sleep , my Son ; 
And in prophetic dreams thy Fate be shown . 
[ Ex. Tire . Adrast. Eurid . Manto , Thebans . 

Manent Oed. Joc. Creon , Pyrac . Haem . Alcan . Oed.   To bed , my Fair , my Dear , my best Jocasta . 
After the toils of war , 't is wondrous strange 
Our loves should thus be dashed . One moment's thought , 
And I 'll approach the arms of my beloved . 


Joc.   Consume whole years in care , so now and then 
I may have leave to feed my famished eyes 
With one short passing glance , and sigh my vows : 
This , and no more , my Lord , is all the passion 
Of languishing Jocasta . 
[ Exit . 

Oed.   thou softest , sweetest of the World ! good night . 
Nay , she is beauteous too ; yet , mighty Love ! 
I never offered to obey thy Laws , 
But an unusual chillness came upon me ; 
An unknown hand still checked my forward joy , 
Dashed me with blushes , though no light was near : 
That even the Act became a violation . 


Pyr.   he 's strangely thoughtful . 


Oed.   Hark! who was that ? Ha! Creon , didst thou call me ? 


Cre.   Not I , my gracious Lord , nor any here . 


Oed.   that 's strange ! methought I heard a doleful voice 
Cried Oedipus . — The Prophet bade me sleep ; 
He talked of Dreams , and Visions , and to morrow ! 
I 'll muse no more on 't , come what will or can , 
My thoughts are clearer than unclouded Stars ; 
And with those thoughts I 'll rest : Creon , good night . 
[ Ex. with Haemon . 

Cre.   Sleep seal your eyes , Sir , Eternal sleep . 
But if he must sleep and wake again , OH all 
Tormenting Dreams , wild horrors of the night , 
And Hags of Fancy wing him through the air : 
From precipices hurl him headlong down ; 
Charybdis roar , and death be set before him . 


Alc.   Your Curses have already ta'en effect ; 
For he looks very sad . 


Cre.   May he be rooted , where he stands , for ever ; 
His eyeballs never move , brows be unbent , 
His blood , his Entrails , Liver , heart and bowels , 
Be blacker than the place I wish him , Hell.  


Pyr.   no more : you tear yourself , but vex not him . 
Methinks 't were brave this night to force the Temple , 
While blind Tiresias conjures up the Fiends , 
And pass the time with nice Eurydice . 


Alc.   Try promises , and threats , and if all fail , 
Since hell 's broke loose , why should not you be mad ? 
Ravish , and leave her dead , with her Adrastus . 


Cre.   Were the Globe mine , I 'd give a Province hourly 
For such another thought . Lust , and revenge ! 
To stab at once the only man I hate , 
And to enjoy the woman whom I love ! 
I ask no more of my auspicious Stars , 
The rest as Fortune please ; so but this night 
She play me fair , why , let her turn for ever . 


Enter Haemon . Haem .  My Lord , the troubled King is gone to rest ; 
Yet , ever he slept , commanded me to clear 
The Antichambers : none must dare be near him 


Cre.   Haemon , you do your duty ; — 
And we obey . — The night grows yet more dreadful ! 
't is just that all retire to their devotions ; 
The Gods are angry : but to morrow's dawn , 
If Prophets do not lie , will make all clear . 
[ Thunder . [ As they go off . 

Oedipus Enters , walking asleep in his shirt , with a Dagger in his right hand , and a Taper in his left . Oed.   OH , my Jocasta ! 't is for this the wet 
Starved Soldier lies all night on the cold ground ; 
For this he bears the storms 
Of Winter Camps , and freezes in his Arms : 
To be thus circled , to be thus embraced ; 
That I could hold thee ever ! — Ha! where art thou ? 
What means this melancholy light , that seems 
The gloom of glowing embers ? 
The curtain 's drawn ; and see , she 's here again ! 
Jocasta ? Ha! what , fallen asleep so soon ? 
How fares my love ? this Taper will inform me . 
Ha! Lightning blast me , Thunder 
Rivet me ever to Prometheus' Rock , 
And Vultures gnaw out my Incestuous heart , 
By all the Gods ! my Mother Merope ! 
My Sword , a Dagger ; ha , who waits there ? slaves , 
My Sword : what , Haemon , dar'st thou , Villain , stop me ? 
With thy own Poniard perish . Ha! who 's this ? 
Or is 't a change of Death ? By all my Honours , 
New murder ; thou hast slain old Polybus : 
Incest and parricide , thy father 's murdered ! 
Out thou infernal flame : now all is dark , 
All blind and dismal , most triumphant mischief ! 
And now while thus I stalk about the room , 
I challenge Fate to find another wretch 
Like Oedipus ! 
[ Thunder , etc.  

Enter Jocasta attended , with Lights , in a Nightgown . Oed.   Night , Horror , Death , Confusion , Hell , and Furies ! 
Where am I ? OH , Jocasta , let me hold thee , 
Thus to my bosom , ages ; let me grasp thee : 
All that the hardest tempered weathered flesh , 
With fiercest human Spirit inspired , can dare 
Or do , I dare ; but , o you Powers , this was 
By infinite degrees too much for man 
Methinks my deafened ears 
Are burst ; my eyes , as if they had been knocked 
By some tempestuous hand , shoot flashing fire : 
That sleep should do this ! 


Joc.   then my fears were true . 
Methought I heard your voice , and yet I doubted , 
Now roaring like the Ocean , when the winds 
Fight with the waves ; now , in a still small tone 
Your dying accents fell , as racking ships , 
After the dreadful yell , sink murmuring down , 
And bubble up a noise . 


Oed.   Trust me , thou Fairest , best of all thy Kind , 
None ever in Dreams was tortured so before , 
Yet what most shocks the niceness of my temper , 
Even far beyond the kill of my Father , 
And my own death , is , that this horrid sleep 
Dashed my sick fancy with an act of Incest : 
I dreamt , Jocasta , that thou wert my Mother ; 
Which , though impossible , so damps my Spirits , 
That I could do a mischief on myself , 
lest I should sleep and Dream the like again . 


Joc.   OH , Oedipus , too well I understand you ! 
I know the wrath of Heaven , the care of Thebes , 
The cries of its Inhabitants , war's toils , 
And thousand other labours of the State , 
Are all referred to you , and aught to take you 
For ever from Jocasta . 


Oed.   Life of my life , and treasure of my Soul , 
Heaven knows I love thee . 


Joc.   OH , you think me vile , 
And of an inclination so ignoble , 
That I must hide me from your eyes for ever . 
Be witness , Gods , and strike Jocasta dead , 
If an immodest thought , or low desire 
Inflamed my breast , since first our Loves were lighted . 


Oed.   OH rise , and add not , by thy cruel kindness , 
A grief more sensible than all my torments . 
thou think'st my dreams are forged ; but by thyself , 
The greatest Oath , I swear , they are most true : 
But , be they what they will , I here dismiss 'em ; 
Begun , Chimaeras , to your Mother Clouds , 
Is there a fault in us ? Have we not searched 
The womb of Heaven , examined all the Entrails 
Of Birds and Beasts , and tired the Prophets Art 
Yet what avails ? he , and the Gods together , 
Seem like Physicians at a lossto help us : 
Therefore , like wretches that have lingered long , 
we 'll snatch the strongest Cordial of our love ; 
To bed , my Fair.  


Ghost within .  Oedipus ! 


Oed.   Ha! who calls ? 
Didst thou not hear a voice ? 


Joc.   Alas ! I did . 


Ghost .  Jocasta ! 


Joc.   OH my love , my Lord , support me ! 


Oed.   Call louder , till you burst your airy Forms : 
Rest on my hand . Thus , arm ▪ d with innocence , 
I 'll face these babbling Daemons of the air . 
In spite of Ghosts , I 'll on , 
Thou round my Bed the Furies plant their Charms ; 
I 'll break 'em , with Jocasta in my arms : 
Clasped in the folds of love , I 'll wait my doom ; 
And act my joys , though Thunder shake the room . 
[ Exeunt . 

ACT III SCENE I  

A dark Grove . Enter Creon . Cre.   't is better not to be , than to be unhappy . 


Dio.   What mean you by these words ? 


Cre.   't is better not to be , than to be Creon . 
A thinking soul is punishment enough ; 
But when 't is great , like mine , and wretched too , 
then every thought draws blood . 


Dio.   You are not wretched . 


Cre.   I am : my soul 's ill married to my body . 
I would be young , be handsome , be beloved : 
Could I but but breath myself into Adrastus — 


Dio.   You rave ; call home your thoughts . 


Cre.   I prithee let my soul take air awhile ; 
Were she in Oedipus , I were a King ; 
then I had killed a Monster , gained a Battle ; 
And had my Rival prisoner ; brave , brave actions ▪ 
Why have not I done these ? 


Dio.   Your fortune hindered . 


Cre.   there 's it : I have a soul to do 'em all : 
But fortune will have nothing done that 's great , 
But by young handsome fools : Body and brawn 
Do all her work : Hercules was a fool , 
And strait grew famous : a mad boisterous fool , 
Nay worse , a Woman's fool . 
Fool is the stuff , of which Heaven makes a Hero.  


Dio.   A Serpent never becomes a flying Dragon , 
Till he has eat a Serpent . 


Cre.   Goes it there ! 
I understand thee ; I must kill Adrastus . 


Dio.   Or not enjoy your Mistress : 
Eurydice and he are prisoners here , 
But will not long be so : this tell-tale Ghost 
Perhaps will clear 'em both . 


Cre.   Well : 't is resolved . 


Dio.   The Princess walks this way ; 
You must not meet her , 
Till this be done . 


Cre.   I must . 


Dio.   She hate's your sight : 
And more since you accused her . 


Cre.   Urge it not . 
I cannot stay to tell thee my design ; 
For she 's too near . 
Enter Eurydice . How , Madam , were your thoughts employed ! 


Eur.   On death , and thee . 


Cre.   then were they not well sorted : life and me 
Had been the better match . 


Eur.   no , I was thinking 
On two the most detested things in Nature : 
And they are death and thee , 


Cre.   The thought of death to one near death is dreadsul : 
OH 't is a fearful thing to be no more . 
Or if to be , to wander after death ; 
To walk as spirits do , in Brakes all day ; 
And when the darkness comes , to glide in paths 
That lead to Graves : and in the silent Vault , 
Where lies your own pale shroud , to hover o'er it , 
Striving to enter your forbidden Corpse ; 
And often , often , vainly breathe your Ghost 
Into your lifeless lips : 
then , like a loan benighted Traveller 
Shut out from lodging , shall your groans be answered 
By whistling winds , whose every blast will shake 
Your tender Form to Atoms . 


Eur.   Must I be this thin Being ? and thus wander ! 
no quiet after death ! 


Cre.   None : you must leave 
This beauteous body ; all this youth and freshness 
Must be no more the object of desire , 
But a cold lump of Clay ; 
Which than your discontented Ghost will leave , 
And loath it 's former lodging . 
This is the best of what comes after death , 
Even to the best . 


Eur.   What then shall be thy lot ! 
Eternal torments , baths of boiling sulphur : 
Vicissitudes of fires , and then of frosts ; 
And an old Guardian Fiend , ugly as thou art , 
To hollow in thy ears at every lash ; 
This for Eurydice ; these for her Adrastus . 


Cre.   For her Adrastus ! 


Eur.   Yes ; for her Adrastus : 
For death shall never divide us : death , what 's death ! 


Dio.   You seemed to fear it . 


Eur.   But I more fear Creon : 
To take that hunch-backed Monster in my arms . 
Th'excrescence of a man  


Dio. to Cre.   See what   gained . 


Eur.   Death only can be dreadful to the bad : 
To innocence , 't is like a bugbear dressed 
To fright'n Children ; pull but off his Masque 
And he 'll appear a friend . 


Cre.   You talk too slightly 
Of death and hell . Let me inform you better . 


Eur.   You best can tell the news of your own Country . 


Dio.   Nay now you are too sharp . 


Eur.   Can I be so to one who has accused me 
Of murder and of parricide ? 


Cre.   You provoked me : 
And yet I only did thus far accuse you , 
As next of blood to Lajus : be advised , 
And you may live . 


Eur.   The means . 


Cre.   't is offered you . 
The Fool Adrastus has accused himself . 


Eur.   He has indeed , to take the guilt from me . 


Cre.   He says he love's you ; if he does , 't is well : 
He never could prove it in a better time . 


Eur.   then death must be his recompense for love ! 


Cre.   't is a Fool's just reward : 
The wise can make a better use of life : 
But 't is the young man's pleasure ; his ambition : 
I grudge him not that favour . 


Eur.   When he 's dead , 
Where shall I find his equal ! 


Cre.   Everywhere . 
Fine empty things , like him , 
The Court swarms with ' 'em . 
Fine fight things ; in Camps they are so common , 
Crows feed on nothing else : plenty of Fools ; 
A glut of 'em in Thebes . 
And fortune still takes care they should be seen : 
She places 'em aloft , o' th' topmost Spoken 
Of all her Wheel : Fools are the daily work 
Of Nature ; her vocation : if she form 
A man , she loses by 't , 't is too expensive ; 
' Twoved make ten Fools : A man 's a Prodigy . 


Eur.   That is a Creon : OH thou black detractor , 
Who spitt'st thy venom against Gods and man ! 
thou enemy of eyes : 
thou who lov'st nothing but what nothing love's , 
And that 's thyself : who hast conspired against 
My life and fame , to make me loathed by all ; 
And only fit for thee . 
But for Adrastus' death , good Gods , his death ! 
What Curse shall I invent ? 


Dio.   no more : he 's here . 


Eur.   He shall be ever here . 
He who would give his life ; give up his fame . — 
Enter Adrastus . If all the Excellence of womankind 
Were mine ; — no , 't is too little all for him : 
Were I made up of endless , endless joys . — 


Adr.   And so thou art : 
The man who love's like me , 
Would think even Infamy , the worst of ills , 
Were cheaply purchased , were thy love the price : 
Uncrowned , a Captive , nothing left , but Honour ; 
't is the last thing a Prince should throw away ; 
But when the storm grows loud , and threatens love , 
Throw even that overboard , for Love's the Jewel ; 
And last it must be kept . 


Cre. to Dio.   Work him besure 
To rage , he 's passionate ; 
Make him th' Aggressor . 


Dio.   OH false love ; false honour . 


Cre.   Dissembled both , and false ! 


Adr.   dar'st thou say this to me ? 


Cre.   To you ; why what are you , that I should fear you ? 
I am not Lajus : Hear me , Prince of Argos , 
You give what 's nothing , when you give your honour ; 
't is gone ; 't is lost in battle . For your love , 
Vow's made in wine are not so false as that : 
You killed her Father ; you confessed you did : 
A mighty argument to prove your passion to the Daughter . 


Adrast.   aside . Gods , must I bear this brand , and not retort 
The lie to his foul throat ! 


Dio.   Basely you killed him . 


Adr.   aside . OH , I burn inward : my blood 's all o'fire . 
Alcides , when the poisoned shirt sat closest , 
Had but an Ague fit to this my Fever . 
Yet , for Eurydice , even this I 'll suffer , 
To free my love . — Well then , I killed him basely . 


Cre.   Fairly , I 'm sure , you could not . 


Dio.   Nor alone . 


Cre.   You had your fellow-thieves about you , Prince ; 
They conquered , and you killed . 


Adr.   aside . Down swelling heart ! 
't is for thy Princess all . — OH my Eurydice ! — 
[ To her . 

Euryd. to him .  Reproach not thus the weakness of my Sex , 
As if I could not bear a shameful death , 
Rather than see you burdened with a Crime 
Of which I know you free . 


Cre.   You do ill , Madam , 
To let your headlong Love triumph o'er Nature : 
Dare you defend your Father's Murderer ? 


Eur.   You know he killed him not . 


Cre.   Let him say so . 


Dio.   See he stands mute . 


Cre.   OH power of Conscience , even in wicked men ! 
It works , it stings , it will not let him utter 
One syllable , one no to clear himself 
From the most base , detested , horrid act 
That ever could slain a Villain , not a Prince . 


Adr.   Ha! Villain . 


Dio.   Echo to him Groves : cry Villain . 


Adr.   Let me consider ! did I murder Lajus , 
Thus like a Villain ? 


Cre.   Best revoke your words ; 
And say you killed him not . 


Adr.   Not like a Villain ; prithee change me that 
For any other Lye.  


Dio.   no , Villain , Villain . 


Cre.   You killed him not ! proclaim your innocence , 
Accuse the Princess : So I knew 't would be . 


Adr.   I thank thee , thou instruct'st me : 
no matter how I killed him . 


Cre.   aside . Cooled again . 


Eur.   thou , who usurpest the sacred name of Conscience , 
Did not thy own declare him innocent ; 
To me declare him so ? The King shall know it . 


Cre.   You will not be believed , for I 'll forswear it . 


Eur.   what 's now thy Conscience ? 


Cre.   't is my Slave , my Drudge , my suppling Glove , 
My upper Garment , to put on , throw off , 
As I think best : 't is my obedient conscience . 


Adr.   Infamous wretch ! 


Cre.   My Conscience shall not do me the ill office 
To save a Rival's life ; when thou art dead , 
( As dead thou shalt be , or be yet more base 
Than thou think'st me , 
By forfeiting her life , to save thy own . — ) 
Know this , and let it grate thy very Soul , 
She shall be mine : ( she is , if Vows were binding ; ) 
Mark me , the fruit of all thy faith and passion , 
Even of thy foolish death , shall all be mine . 


Adr.   thine , sayest thou , Monster ; 
Shall my love be thine ? 
OH , I can bear no more ! 
Thy cunning Engines , have with labour raised 
My heavy anger , like a mighty weight , 
To fall and pash thee dead . 
See here thy Nuptials ; see , thou rash Ixion , 
Thy promised Juno vanished in a Cloud ; 
And in her room avenging Thunder rowls 
To blast thee thus . — Come both , — 
[ Draws . [ B Draw.  

Cre.   't is what I wished ! 
Now see whose Arm can launch the surer bolt , 
And who 's the better Jove . — 
[ Fight . 

Eur.   Help ; Murder , help ! 


Enter Haemon and Guards , run betwixt them and beaten down their Swords . Haem .  hold ; hold your impious hands : I think the Furies , 
To whom this Grove is hallowed , have inspired you : 
Now , by my soul , the holiest earth of Thebes 
You have profaned with war. Nor Tree , nor Plant 
Grows here , but what is fed with Magic Juice , 
All full of human Souls ; that cleave their barks 
To dance at Midnight by the Moons pale beams : 
At least two hundred years these reverened Shades 
Have known no blood , but of black Sheep and Oxen , 
Shed by the Priests own hand to Proserpina . 


Adr.   Forgive a Stranger's ignorance : I knew not 
The honours of the place . 


Haem .  thou , Creon , didst . 
Not Oedipus , were all his Foes here lodged , 
durst violate the Religion of these Groves , 
To touch one single hair : but must , unarmed , 
Parle as in Truce , or surlily avoid 
What most he longed to kill . 


Cre.   I drew not first ; 
But in my own defence . 


Adr.   I was provoked , 
Beyond Man's patience : all reproach could urge 
Was used to kindle one not apt to bear . 


Haem .  't is Oedipus , not I , must judge this Act : 
Lord Creon , you and Diocles retire : 
Tiresias , and the Brotherhood of Priests , 
Approach the place : None at these Rites assist , 
But you th' accused , who by the mouth of Lajus 
Must be absolved or doomed . 


Adr.   I bear my fortune . 


Eur.   And I provoke my trial . 


Haem .  't is at hand . 
For see the Prophet comes with Vervin crowned , 
The Priests with Yeugh , a venerable band ; 
We leave you to the Gods.  
[ Ex. Haemon with Creon and Diocles.  

Enter Tiresias , led by Manto : The Priests follow ; all clothed in long black Habits . Tir.   Approach , ye Lovers ; 
I'll-fated Pair ! whom , seeing not , I know : 
This day your kindly Stars in Heaven were joined : 
When lo , an envious Planet interposed , 
And threatened both with death : I fear , I fear . 


Eur.   Is there no God so much a friend to love , 
Who can control the malice of our fate ? 
Are they all deaf ? or have the Giant's Heaven ? 


Tir.   The Gods are just . — 
But how can Finite measure Infinite ? 
Reason ! alas , it does not know itself ! 
Yet Man , vain Man , would with this short-lined Plummet , 
Fathom the vast Abyss of Heavenly justice . 
What ever is , is in its causes just ; 
Since all things are by Fate . But purblind Man 
sees but a part o' th' Chain ; the nearest links ; 
His eyes not carrying to that equal Beam 
That poizes all above . 


Eur.   then we must die ! 


Tir.   The danger 's imminent this day . 


Adr.   Why then there 's one day lesle for human ills : 
And who would moan himself , for suffering that , 
Which in a day must pass ? something , or nothing — 
I shall be what I was again , before 
I was Adrastus ; — 
Penurious Heaven canst thou not add a night 
To our one day ; give me a night with her , 
And I 'll give all the rest . 


Tir.   She broke her vow 
First made to Creon : but the time calls on : 
And Lajus death must now be made more plain . 
How loath I am to have recourse to Rites 
So full of horror , that I once rejoice 
I want the use of Sight . — ▪ 


1 Pr.   The Ceremonies stay . 


Tir.   Choose the darkest part o' th' Grove , 
Such as Ghosts at noonday love . 
Dig a Trench , and dig it nigh 
Where the bones of Lajus lie . 
Altars raised of Turf or Stone , 
Will th' Infernal Powers have none . 
Answer me , if this be done ? 


All Pr.   't is done . 


Tir.   Is the Sacrifice made fit ? 
Draw her backward to the pit : 
Draw the barren Heifer back ; 
Barren let her be and black . 
Cut the curled hair that grows 
Full betwixt her horns and brows : 
And turn your faces from the Sun : 
Answer me , if this be done ? 


All Pr.   't is done . 


Tir.   Pour in blood , and blood like wine , 
To Mother Earth and Proserpina : 
Mingle Milk into the stream ; 
Feast the Ghosts that love the steam ; 
Snatch a brand from funeral pile ; 
Toss it in to make 'em boil ; 
And turn your faces from the Sun ; 
Answer me , if all be done ? 


All Pr.   All is done . 
[ Peal of Thunder ; and flashes of Lightning ; then groaning below the Stage . 

Manto .  OH , what Laments are those ? 


Tir.   The groans of Ghosts , that cleave the Earth with pain : 
And heave it up : they pant and stick half way . 
[ The Stage wholly darkened . 

Man   And now a sudden darkness covers all , 
True genuine Night : Night added to the Groves ; 
The Fogs are blown full in the face of Heaven . 


Tir.   am I but half obeyed : Infernal Gods , 
Must you have Music too ? then tune your voices , 
And let 'em have such sounds as Hell never heard 
Since Orpheus bribed the Shades . 


Music first . then Sing . This to be set through . 1.   Hear , ye sullen Powers below : 
Hear , ye taskers of the dead . 


2.   You that boiling Cauldrons blow , 
You that scum the molten Lead . 


3.   You that pinch with Redhot Tongues ; 


1.   You that drive the trembling hosts 
Of poor , poor Ghosts , 
With your Sharpened Prongs ; 


2.   You that thrust 'em off the Brim . 


3.   You that plange 'em when they Swim : 


1.   Till they drown ; 
Till they go 
On a row 
Down , down , down 
Ten thousand thousand , thousand fathoms low . 


Chorus .  Till they drown , etc.  


1.   Music for a while 
Shall your cares beguile : 
Wondering how your pains were eased . 


2.   And disdaining to be pleased ; 


3.   Till Allecto free the dead 
From their eternal bands ; 
Till the snakes drop from her head , 
And whip from out her hands . 


1.   Come away 
Do not stay , 
But obey 
While we play , 
For hell 's broke up , and Ghosts have holiday . 


Chorus .  Come away , etc.  


[ A flash of Lightning : the Stage is made bright ; and the Ghosts are seen passing betwixt the Trees . 1   Lajus ! 


2   Lajus ! 


3   Lajus ! 


1   Hear ! 


2   Hear ! 


3   Hear ! 


Tir.   Hear and appear : 
By the Fates that spun thy thread ; 


Cho.   Which are three , 


Tir.   By the Furies fierce , and dread ! 


Cho.   Which are three , 


Tir.   By the Judges of the dead ! 


Cho.   Which are three , 
Three times three ! 


Tir.   By Hell's blue flame : 
By the Stygian Lake : 
And by Demogorgon's name , 
At which Ghosts quake , 
Hear and appear . 


[ The Ghost of Lajus rises armed in his Chariot , as he was slain . And behind his Chariot , sit the three who were Murdered with him . Ghost of Lajus .  Why hast thou drawn me from my pains below , 
To suffer worse above : to see the day , 
And Thebes more hated ? Hell is Heaven to Thebes . 
For pity send me back , where I may hide , 
In willing night , this Ignominious head : 
In Hell I eat the public scorn ▪ and then 
They hunt me for their sport , and hoot me as I fly : 
Behold even now they grin at my gored side , 
And chatter at my wounds . 


Tir.   I pity thee : 
Tell but why Thebes is for thy death accursed , 
And I 'll unbind the Charm.  


Ghost .  OH spare my shame . 


Tir.   Are these two innocent ? 


Ghost .  Of my death they are . 
But he who holds my Crown , O , must I speak ! 
Was doomed to do what Nature most abhors . 
The Gods foresaw it ; and forbade his being , 
Before he yet was born . I broke their laws , 
And clothed with flesh his pre-existing soul , 
Some kinder power , too weak for destiny , 
took pity , and endued his new formed Mass 
With Temperance , Justice , Prudence , Fortitude , 
And every Kingly virtue : but in vain . 
For Fate , that sent him hoodwinked to the world , 
Performed its work by his mistaking hands . 
Asks thou who murdered me ? 't was Oedipus : 
Who stains my Bed with Incest ? Oedipus : 
For whom then are you cursed , but Oedipus ! 
He comes ; the Parricide : I cannot bear him : 
My wounds ache at him : O his murd'rous breath 
Venom's my airy substance ! hence with him , 
Banish him ; sweep him out ; the Plague he bears 
Will blast your fields , and mark his way with ruin . 
From Thebes , my Throne , my Bed , let him be driven ; 
Do you forbid him Earth , and I 'll forbid him Heaun . 
[ Ghost descends . 

Enter Oedipus , Creon , Haemon , etc.  Oed.   what 's this ! methought some pestilential blast 
Struck me just entering ; and some unseen hand 
Struggled to push me backward ! tell me why 
My hair stands bristling up , why my flesh trembles ! 
You stare at me ! then Hell has been among ye , 
And some lag Fiend yet lingers in the Grove . 


Tir.   What Omen saw ▪ st thou entering ? 


Oed.   A young Stork , 
That bore his aged Parent on his back ; 
Till weary with the weight , he shaken him off , 
And pecked out both his eyes . 


Adr.   O , Oedipus ! 


Eur.   O , wretched Oedipus ! 


Tir.   O! Fatal King ! 


Oed.   What mean these Exclamations on my name ? 
I thank the Gods , no secret thoughts reproach me : 
no : I dare challenge Heaven to turn me outward , 
And shake my Soul quite empty in your sight . 
then wonder not that I can bear unmoved 
These fixed regards , and silent threats of eyes : 
A generous fierceness dwells with innocence ; 
And conscious virtue is allowed some pride . 


Tir.   thou knowest not what thou sayest . 


Oed.   What mutters he ! tell me , Eurydice : 
thou shak'st : thy souls a Woman . Speak , Adrastus ; 
And boldly as thou mettest my Arms in fight ; 
dar'st thou not speak , why then 't is bad indeed : 
Tiresias , thee I summon by the Priesthood , 
Tell me what news from Hell : where Lajus points , 
And who 's the guilty head ! 


Tir.   Let me not answer . 


Oed.   Be dumb then , and betray thy native soil 
To farther Plagues . 


Tir.   I dare not name him to thee . 


Oed.   dar'st thou converse with Hell , and canst thou fear 
An human name ! 


Tir.   Urge me no more to tell a thing , which known 
Would make thee more unhappy : 't will be found 
Thou I am silent . 


Oed.   Old and obstinate ! then thou thyself 
Art Author or Accomplice of this murder , 
And shun'st the Justice , which by public ban 
thou hast incurred . 


Tir.   OH , if the guilt were mine 
It were not half so great : know wretched man , 
thou only , thou art guilty ; thy own Curse 
Falls heavy on thyself . 


Oed.   Speak this again : 
But speak it to the Winds when they are loudest : 
Or to the raging Seas , they 'll hear as soon , 
And sooner will believe . 


Tir.   then hear me Heaven , 
For blushing thou hast seen it : hear me Earth , 
Whose hollow womb could not contain this murder , 
But sent it back to light : and thou Hell , hear me , 
Whose own black Seal has ' firmed this horrid truth , 
Oedipus murdered Lajus . 


Oed.   Rot the tongue , 
And blasted be the mouth that spoke that lie . 
thou blind of sight , but thou more blind of soul.  


Tir.   Thy Parents thought not so . 


Oed.   Who were my Parents ? 


Tir.   thou shalt know too soon . 


Oed.   Why seek I truth from thee ? 
The smiles of Courtiers , and the Harlot's tears , 
The Tradesman's oaths , and mourning of an Heir , 
Are truths to what Priests tell . 
OH why has Priesthood privilege to lie , 
And yet to be believed ! — thy age protects thee — 


Tir.   thou canst not kill me ; 't is not in thy Fate , 
As 't was to kill thy Father ; wed thy Mother ; 
And beget Sons , thy Brothers . 


Oed.   Riddles , Riddles ! 


Tir.   thou art thyself a Riddle ; a perplexed 
Obscure Aenigma , which when thou unty'st , 
thou shalt be found and lost . 


Oed.   Impossible ! 
Adrastus , speak , and as thou art a King , 
Whose Royal word is sacred , clear my fame . 


Adr.   Would I could ! 


Oed.   ha , wilt thou not : can that Plebeian vice 
Of lying mount to Kings ! can they be tainted ! 
then truth is lost on earth . 


Cre.   The Cheats too gross : 
Adrastus is his Oracle , and he , 
The pious Juggler , but Adrastus' Organ . 


Oed.   't is plain , the Priest's suborned to free the Prisoner . 


Cre.   And turn the guilt on you . 


Oed.   OH , honest Creon , how hast thou been belied ? 


Eur.   Hear me . 


Cre.   she 's bribed to save her Lover's life . 


Adr.   If Oedipus thou think'st — 


Cre.   Hear him not speak . 


Adr.   then hear these holy men . 


Cre.   Priests , Priest's all bribed , all Priests . 


Oed.   Adrastus I have found thee : 
The malice of a vanquished man has seized thee . 


Adr.   If Envy and not Truth — 


Oed.   I 'll hear no more : away with him . 
[ Hoemon takes him off by force : Creon and Eurydice follow . To Tir.  Why standest thou here , Impostor ! 
So old , and yet so wicked . — lie for gain ; 
And gain so short as age can promise thee ! 


Tir.   So short a time as I have yet to live 
Exceeds thy pointed hour ; Remember Lajus : 
no more ; if ever we meet again , 't will be 
In Mutual darkness ; we shall feel before us 
To reach each others hand ; Remember Lajus . 
[ Ex. Tiresias : Priests follow . Oedipus Solus . Rememember Lajus ! that 's the burden still : 
Murder , and Incest ! but to hear 'em named 
My Soul starts in me : the good Sentinel 
Stands to her Weapons ; takes the first Alarm 
To Guard me from such Crimes . — Did I kill Lajus ? 
then I walked sleeping , in some frightful dream , 
My Soul then stole my Body out by night ; 
And brought me back to Bed ever Morning-wake . 
It cannot be even this remotest way , 
But some dark hint would justle forward now ; 
And goad my memory . — O my Jocasta ! 


Enter Jocasta . Joc.   Why are you thus disturbed ? 


Oed.   Why , wouldst thou think it ? 
no lesle than Murder ? 


Joc.   Murder ! what of Murder ? 


Oed.   Is Murder then no more ? add Parricide , 
And Incest ; bear not these a frightful sound ? 


Joc.   Alas ! 


Oed.   How poor a pity is Alas 
For two such Crimes ! — was Lajus used to lie ? 


Joc.   O no : the most sincere , plain , honest man — 
One who abhorred a lie . 


Oed.   then he has got that Quality in Hell. 
He charges me — but why accuse I him ? 
I did not hear him speak it : they accuse me ; 
The Priest , Adrastus , and Eurydice , 
Of Murdering Lajus — Tell me , while I think on 't , 
Has old Tiresias practised long this Trade ? 


Joc.   What Trade ? 


Oed.   Why , this foretelling Trade . 


Joc.   For many years . 


Oed.   Has he before this day accused me ? 


Joc.   Never . 


Oed.   Have you ever this enquired , who did this Murder ? 


Joc.   Often ; but still in vain . 


Oed.   jam satisfied . 
then 't is an infant-lye ; but one day old . 
The Oracle takes place before the Priest ; 
The blood of Lajus was to Murder Lajus : 
I 'm not of Lajus' blood . 


Joc.   Even Oracles 
Are always doubtful , and are often forged : 
Lajus had one , which never was fulfilled , 
Nor ever can be now ! 


Oed.   And what foretold it ? 


Joc.   That he should have a Son by me , foredoomed 
The Murderer of his Father : true indeed , 
A Son was born ; but , to prevent that Crime , 
The wretched Infant of a guilty Fate , 
Bored through his untried feet , and bound with cords , 
On a bleak Mountain , naked was exposed : 
The King himself lived many , many years , 
And found a different Fate ; by Robbers Murdered , 
Where three ways meet : yet these are Oracles ; 
And this the Faith we owe owe 'em . 


Oed.   sayst thou , Woman ? 
By Heaven thou hast awakened somewhat in mother , 
That shakes my very Soul ! 


Joc.   What , new disturbance ! 


Oed.   Methought thou saidst , — ( or do I dream thou saidst it ! ) 
This Murder was on Lajus person done , 
Where three ways meet ? 


Joc.   So common Fame reports . 


Oed.   Would it had lied . 


Joc.   Why , good my Lord ? 


Oed.   no questions : 
't is busy time with me ; dispatch mine first ; 
Say where , where was it done ! 


Joc.   Mean you the Murder ? 


Oed.   Couldst thou not answer without naming Murder ? 


Joc.   They say in Phocide ; on the Verge that parts it 
From Daulia , and from Delphos . 


Oed.   So ! — How long ! when happened this ! 


Joc.   Some little time before you came to Thebes , 


Oed.   What will the Gods do with me ! 


Joc.   What means that thought ? 


Oed.   Something : but 't is not yet your turn to ask : 
How old was Lajus , what his shape , his stature , 
His action , and his mien ? quick , quick , your answer — 


Joc.   Big made he was , and tall : his port was fierce , 
Erect his countenance : Manly Majesty 
Sat in his front , and darted from his eyes , 
Commanding all he viewed : his hair just grizzled , 
As in a green old age : bate but his years , 
You are his picture . 


Oed.   aside . Pray Heaven he drew me not ? am I his picture ? 


Joc.   So I have often told you . 


Oed.   True , you have ; 
Add that to the rest : how was the King 
Attended when he travelled ? 


Joc.   By four Servants : 
He went out privately . 


Oed.   Well counted still : 
One scaped I hear ; what since became of him ? 


Joc.   When he beheld you first , as King in Thebes , 
He kneeled , and trembling begged I would dismiss him : 
He had my leave ; and now he life's retired . 


Oed.   This Man must be produced ; he must , Jocasta . 


Joc.   He shall — yet have I leave to ask you why ? 


Oed.   Yes , you shall know : for where should I repose 
The anguish of my Soul ; but in your breast ! 
I need not tell you Corinth claims my birth ; 
My Parents , Polybus and Merope , 
Two Royal Names ; their only Child an I 
It happened once ; 't was at a Bridal Feast , 
One warm with Wine , told me I was a Foundling , 
Not the King's Son ; I stung with this reproach , 
Struck him : my Father , heard of it : the Man 
Was made ask pardon ; and the business hushed . 


Joc.   'T was somewhat odd . 


Oed.   And strangely it perplexed me . 
I stole away to Delphos , and implored 
The God , to tell my certain Parentage . 
He bade me seek no farther : — 't was my Fate 
To kill my Father , and pollute his Bed , 
By marrying her who bore me . 


Joc.   Vain , vain Oracles ! 


Oed.   But yet they frighted me ; 
I looked on Corinth as a place accursed , 
Resolved my destiny should wait in vain ; 
And never catch me there . 


Joc.   Too nice a fear . 


Oed.   Suspend your thoughts ; and flatter not too soon . 
Just in the place you named , where three ways meet , 
And near that time , five persons I encountered ; 
One was too like , ( Heaven grant it prove not him ) 
Whom you describe for Lajus : insolent 
And fierce they were , as Men who lived on spoil . 
I judged 'em Robbers , and by force repelled 
The force they used : In short , four men I slew : 
The fifth upon his knees demanding Life , 
My mercy gave it . — bring me comfort now , 
If I slew Lajus , what can be more wretched ! 
From Thebes and you my Curse has banished me : 
From Corinth Fate . 


Joc.   Perplex not thus your mind ; 
My Husband fell by Multitudes oppressed , 
So Phorbas said : this Band you chanced to meet ; 
And murdered not my Lajus , but revenged him . 


Oed.   there 's all my hope : Let Phorbas tell me this , 
And I shall live again ! — 
To you , good Gods , I make my last appeal ; 
Or clear my Virtues or my Crime reveal : 
If wand'ring in the maze of Fate I run , 
And backward trod the paths I sought to eat , 
Impute my Errors to your own Decree ; 
My hands are guilty , but my heart is free . 
[ Ex. Ambo.  

ACT iv. SCENE I  

Pyracmon , Creon . Pyr.   SOME business of import that Triumph wears 
You seem to go with ; nor is it hard to guests 
When you are pleased , by a malicious joy : 
Whose red and Fiery Beams cast through your Visage 
A glowing pleasure . Sure you smile revenge , 
And I could gladly hear 


Cre.   Wouldst thou believe . 
This giddy hair-braind King , whom old Tiresias 
Has Thunderstruckk , with heavy accusation , 
Thou conscious of no inward guilt , yet fears ; 
He fears Jocasta , fears himself , his shadow ; 
He fears the multitude ; and , which is worth 
An Age of laughter , out of all mankind , 
He chooses me to be his Orator : 
Swears that Adrastus , and the lean-looked Prophet , 
Are joint-conspirators ; and wish me to 
Appease the raving Thebans ; which I swore 
To do . 


Pyr.   A dangerous undertaking ; 
Directly opposite to your own interest . 


Cre.   no , dull Pyracmon ; when I left his presence 
With all the Wings with which revenge could imp 
My flight , I gained the midst o' th' City ; 
There , standing on a Pile of dead and dying , 
I to the mad and sickly multitude , 
With interrupting sobs , cried out , OH Thebes , 
OH wretched Thebes , thy King , thy Oedipus , 
This barbarous stranger , this Usurper , Monster , 
Is by the Oracle , the wise Tiresias , 
Proclaimed the murderer of thy Royal Lajus : 
Jocasta too , no longer now my Sister , 
Is found complotter in the horrid deed . 
Here I renounce all tie of Blood and Nature , 
For thee , OH Thebes , dear Thebes , poor bleeding Thebes . 
And there I wept , and then the Rabble howled , 
And roared , and with a thousand Antic mouths 
Gabbled revenge , Revenge was all the cry . 


Pyr.   This cannot fail : I see you on the Throne ; 
And Oedipus cast out . 


Cre.   then straight came on 
Alcander , with a wild and bellowing Crowd , 
Whom he had wrought ; I whispered him to join , 
And head the Forces while the heat was in 'em : 
So to the Palace I returned , to meet 
The King , and greet him with another story . 
But see , he Enters . 


Enter Oedipus , Jocasta , attended . Oed.   Said you that Phorbas is returned , and yet 
Entreats he may return , without being asked 
Of aught concerning what we have discovered ? 


Joc.   He started when I told him your intent , 
Replying , what he knew of that affair 
Would give no satisfaction to the King ; 
then , falling on his knees , begged , as for life , 
To be dismissed from Court : He trembled too , 
As if Convulsive death had seized upon him , 
And stammered in his abrupt Prayer so wildly , 
That had he been the murderer of Lajus , 
Gild and distraction could not have shaken him more . 


Oed.   By your description , sure as plagues and death 
Lay waste our Thebes , some deed that shuns the light 
begot those fears : If thou respectest my peace , 
Secure him , dear Jocasta ; for my Genius 
Shrinks at his name . 


Joc.   Rather let him go : 
So my poor boding heart would have it be , 
Without a reason . 


Oed.   Hark , the Thebans come ! 
Therefore retire : and , once more , if thou lov'st me , 
Let Phorbas be retained . 


Joc.   You shall , while I 
Have life , be still obeyed : 
In vain you soothe me with your soft endearments ; 
And set the fairest Countenance to view , 
Your gloomy eyes , my Lord , betray a deadness 
And inward languishing : that Oracle 
Eats like a subtle Worm it 's venomed way , 
Preys on your heart , and rots the noble Core , 
Howe'er the beauteous outside shows so lovely . 


Oed.   OH , thou wilt kill me with thy Love's excess ! 
All , all is well ; retire , the Thebans come . 
[ Ex. Jocasta . 

Ghost .  Oedipus ! 


Oed.   Ha! again that scream of woe ! 
Thrice have I heard , thrice since the morning dawned 
It hollowed loud , as if my Guardian Spirit 
Called from some vaulted Mansion , Oedipus ! 
Or is it but the work of melancholy ? 
When the Sun sets , shadows , that showed at Noon 
But small , appear most long and terrible ; 
So when we think Fate hovers o'er our heads , 
Our apprehensions shoot beyond all bounds , 
Owls , Ravens , Crickets seem the watch of death , 
Nature's worst Vermin scare her Godlike Sons . 
Echoes , the very leave of a Voice , 
Grow babbling Ghosts , and call us to our Graves : 
Each Molehill thought swells to a huge Olympus , 
While we fantastic dreamers heave and puff , 
And sweated with an Immagination's weight ; 
As if , like Atlas , with these mortal Shoulders 
We could sustain the burden of the World.  
[ Creon comes forward . 

Cre.   OH , Sacred Sir , my Royal Lord - — 


Oed.   What now ? 
thou seem'st affrighted at some dreadful action , 
Thy breath comes short , thy darted eyes are fixed 
On me for aid , as if thou wert pursued : 
I sent thee to the Thebans , speak thy wonder ; 
Fear not , this Palace is a Sanctuary , 
The King himself 's thy Guard.  


Cre.   For me , alas , 
My life 's not worth a thought , when weighed with yours ! 
But fly , my Lord , fly as your life is sacred , 
Your Fate is precious to your faithful Creon , 
Who therefore , on his knees , thus prostrate begs 
You would remove from Thebes that Vow's your ruin . 
When I but offered at your innocence , 
They gathered Stones , and menaced me with Death , 
And driven me through the Streets , with imprecations 
Against your sacred Person , and those Traitors 
Which justified your Gild : which cursed Tiresias 
Told , as from Heaven , was cause of their destruction . 


Oed.   Rise , worthy Creon , haste and take our Guard , 
Rank 'em in equal part upon the Square , 
then open every Gate of this our Palace , 
And let the Torrent in . Hark , it comes , 
I hear 'em roar : begun , and break down all 
The dams that would oppose their furious passage . 
[ Shout . [ Ex. Creon with Guards . 

Enter Adrastus , his Sword drawn . Adr.   Your City 
Is all in Arms , all bent to your destruction : 
I heard but now , where I was close confined , 
A Thundering shout , which made my Jailers vanish , 
Cry , Fire the Palace ; where 's the cruel King ? 
Yet , by th' Infernal Gods , those awful Powers 
That have accused you , which these ears have heard , 
And these eyes seen , I must believe you guiltless ; 
For , since I knew the Royal Oedipus , 
I have observed in all his acts such truth 
And Godlike clearness ; that to the last gush 
Of blood and Spirits , I 'll defend his life , 
And here have Sworn to perish by his side . 


Oed.   Be witness , Gods , how near this touches me , 
OH what , what recompense can glory make ? 
[ Embracing him . 

Adr.   Defend your innocence , speak like yourself , 
And awe the Rebels with your dauntless virtue . 
But , hark ! the Storm comes nearer . 


Oed.   Let it come . 
The force of Majesty is never known 
But in a general wrack : then , then is seen 
The difference betwixt a Threshold and a Throne . 


Enter Creon , Pyracmon , Alcander , Tiresias , Thebans ! Alc.   Where , where 's this cruel King ? Thebans , behold 
There stands your Plague , the ruin , desolation 
Of this unhappy — speak ; shall I kill him ? 
Or shall he be cast out to Banishment ? 


All Theb.   To Banishment , away with him . 


Oed.   Hence , you Barbarians , to your slavish distance ; 
Fix to the Earth your sordid looks ; for he 
Who stirs , dares more than madmen , Fiends , or Furies : 
Who dares to face me , by the Gods , as well 
May brave the Majesty of Thundering Jove . 
Did I for this relieve you when besieged 
By this fierce Prince , when cooped within your Walls , 
And to the very brink of Fate reduced ; 
When lean-jawed Famine made more havoc of you 
Than does the Plague ? But I rejoice I know you , 
Know the base stuff that tempered your vile Souls : 
The Gods be praised , I needed not your Empire , 
Born to a greater , nobler , of my own ; 
Nor shall the Sceptre of the Earth now win me 
To rule such Brutes , so barbarous a People . 


Adr.   Methinks , my Lord , I see a sad repentance , 
A general consternation spread among ' 'em . 


Oed.   My Reign is at an end ; yet ever I finish — 
I 'll do a justice that becomes a Monarch , 
A Monarch , who , i' th' midst of Swords and Javelins , 
Dares act as on his Throne encompassed round 
With nation 's for his Guard. Alcander , you 
Are nobly born , therefore shall lose your head : 
Here , Haemon , take him : but for this , and this , 
Let Cords dispatch ' 'em . Hence , away with ' 'em . 
[ Seizes him . 

Tir.   OH sacred Prince , pardon distracted Thebes , 
Pardon her , if she acts by Heavens' award ; 
If that th' Infernal Spirits have declared 
The depth of Fate , and if our Oracles 
May speak , OH do not too severely deal , 
But let thy wretched Thebes at least complain : 
If thou art guilty , Heaven will make it known ; 
If innocent , then let Tiresias die . 


Oed.   I take thee at thy word . Run , haste , and save Alcander : 
I swear the Prophet , or the King shall die . 
Be witness , all you Thebans , of my Oath ; 
And Phorbus be the Umpire . 


Tir.   I submit . 
[ Trumpets sound . 

Oed.   What mean those Trumpets ? 


Haem .  From your Native Country , 
Enter Haemon with Alcander , etc.  Great Sir , the famed Aegeon is arrived , 
That renowned Favourite of the King your Father : 
He comes as an Ambassador from Corinth , 
And sues for Audience . 


Oed.   Haste , Haemon , fly , and tell him that I burn 
TO embrace him . 


Haem .  The Queen , my Lord , at present holds him 
In private Conference ; but behold her here . 


Enter Jocasta , Eurydice , etc.  Joc.   Hail , happy Oedipus , happiest of Kings ? 
Henceforth be blessed , blessed as thou canst desire , 
Sleep without fears the blackest nights away ; 
Let Furies haunt thy Palace , thou shalt sleep 
Secure , thy slumbers shall be soft and gentle 
As Infant's dreams . 


Oed.   What does the Soul of all my joys intend ? 
And whither would this rapture ? 


Joc.   OH , I could rave , 
Pull down those lying Fanes , and burn that Vault , 
From whence resounded those false Oracles , 
That robbed my Love of rest : if we must pray , 
Rear in the streets bright Altars to the Gods , 
Let Virgins hands adorn the Sacrifice ; 
And not a graybeard forging Priest come near , 
To pry into the bowels of the Victim , 
And with his dotage mad the gaping World ▪ 
But see , the Oracle that I will trust , 
True as the Gods , and affable as Men.  


Enter Aegeon , Knelt . Oed.   OH , to my arms , welcome , my dear Aegeon ; 
Ten thousand welcomes , OH , my Foster-father , 
Welcome as mercy to a Man condemned ! 
Welcome to me , 
As , to a sinking Mariner , 
The lucky plank that bears him to the shore ! 
But speak , OH tell me what so mighty joy 
Is this thou bring'st , which so transports Jocasta ? 


Joc.   Peace , peace , Aegeon ; let Jocasta tell him ! 
OH that I could for ever Charm , as now , 
My dearest Oedipus : Thy Royal Father , 
Polybus , King of Corinth , is no more . 


Oed.   Ha! can it be ? Aegeon , answer me , 
And speak in short , what my Jocasta's transport 
May over do . 


Aege .  Since in few words , my Royal Lord , you ask 
To know the truth ; King Polybus is dead . 


Oed.   OH all you Powers , is 't possible ? what , dead ! 
But that the Tempest of my joy may rise 
By just degrees , and hit at last the Stars : 
Say , how , how died he ? Ha! by Sword , by Fire , 
Or Water ? by Assassinates , or Poison ? speak : 
Or did he languish under some disease ? 


Aege .  Of no distemper , of no blast he died , 
But fell like Autumn-fruit that mellowed long : 
Even wondered at , because he dropped no sooner . 
Fate seemed to wind him up for fourscore years ; 
Yet freshly ran he on 
Ten Winters more : 
Till , like a Clock worn out with eating time , 
The Wheels of weary life at last stood still . 


Oed.   OH , let me press thee in my youthful arms , 
And smother thy old age in my embraces . 
Yes Thebans , yes Jocasta , yes Adrastus , 
Old Polybus , the King my Father's dead . 
Fires shall be kindled in the midst of Thebes ; 
i' th' midst of Tumults , Wars , and Pestilence , 
I will rejoice for Polybus his death . 
Know , be it known to the limits of the World ; 
Yet farther , let it pass yond dazzling roof , 
The mansion of the Gods , and strike 'em deaf 
With everlasting peals of Thundering joy . 


Tir.   Fate ! Nature ! Fortune ! what is all this world ? 


Oed.   Now , Dotard ; now , thou blind old wizard Prophet , 
Where are your boding Ghosts , your Altars now ; 
Your Birds of knowledge , that , in dusky Air , 
Chatter Futurity ; and where are now 
Your Oracles , that called me Parricide , 
Is he not dead ? deep laid in 's Monument ? 
And was not I in Thebes when Fate attacked him ? 
Avaunt , begun , you Vizors of the Gods ! 
Were I as other Sons , now I should weep ; 
But , as I am , i  reason to rejoice : 
And will , though his cold shade should rise and blast me . 
OH , for this death , let Waters break their bounds , 
Rocks , Valleys , Hills , with splitting Io's ring : 
Io , Jocasta , Io poean sing . 


Tir.   Who would not now conclude a happy end ? 
But all fate 's turns are swift and unexpected . 


Aege .  Your Royal Mother Merope , as if 
She had no Soul since you forsaken the Land , 
Waves all the neighbouring Princes that adore her . 


Oed.   Waves all the Princes ! poor heart ! for what ? OH spe 


Aege .  She , though in full-blown flower of glorious beauty , 
Grows cold , even in the Summer of her Age : 
And , for your sake , has sworn to die unmarried . 


Oed.   How ! for my sake , die , and not marry ! OH , 
My fit returns . 


Aege .  This Diamond , with a thousand kisses blessed , 
With thousand sighs and wishes for your safety , 
She charged me give you , with the general homage 
Of our Corinthian Lords . 


Oed.   there 's Magic in it , take it from my sight ; 
there 's not a beam it darts , but carries Hell , 
Hot flashing lust , and Necromantic Incest : 
Take it from these sick eyes , O hide it from me . 
no , my Jocasta , though Thebes cast me out , 
While Merope's alive , I 'll never return ! 
OH , rather let me walk round the wide World 
A beggar , than accept a Diadem 
On such abhorred conditions . 


Joc.   You make , my Lord , your own unhappiness , 
By these extravagant and needless fears . 


Oed.   Needless ! OH , all you Gods ! By Heaven I 'd rather 
Imbrue my arms up to my very shoulders 
In the dear entrails of the best of Fathers , 
Than offer at the execrable act 
Of damned Incest : therefore no more of her . 


Aege .  And why , OH sacred Sir , if Subjects may 
Presume to look into their Monarch's breast , 
Why should the chaste and spotless Merope 
Infuse such thoughts as I must blush to name ? 


Oed.   Because the God of Delphos did forewarn me , 
With Thundering Oracles . 


Aege .  May I entreat to know ' 'em ? 


Oed.   Yes , my Aegeon ; but the sad remembrance 
Quite blasts my Soul : see then the swelling Priest ! 
Methinks I have his Image now in view ; 
He mounts the Tripos in a minute's space , 
His clouded head knocks at the Temple roof , 
While from his mouth 
These dismal words are heard : 
" Fly , wretch , whom Fate has doomed thy Father's blood to spill , 
" And with preposterous Births , thy Mother's womb to fill . 


Aege .  Is this the Cause 
Why you refuse the Diadem of Corinth . 


Oed.   The Cause ! why , is it not a monstrous one ? 


Aege .  Great Sir , you may return ; and though you should 
Enjoy the Queen ( which all the Gods forbid ) 
The Act would prove no incest . 


Oed.   How , Aegeon ? 
Thou I enjoyed my Mother , not incestuous ! 
thou ravest , and so do I ; and these all catch 
My madness ; look , they 're dead with deep distraction : 
Not Incest ! what , not Ineest with my Mother ? 


Aege .  My Lord , Queen Merope is not your Mother . 


Oed.   Ha! did I hear thee right ? not Merope 
My Mother ! 


Aege .  Nor was Polybus your Father . 


Oed.   then all my days and nights must now be spent 
In curious search , to find out those dark Parents 
Who gave me to the World ; speak then Aegeon , 
By all the God's Celestial and Infernal , 
By all the ties of Nature , blood , and friendship , 
Conceal not from this racked despairing King 
A point or smallest grain of what thou knowest : 
Speak then , OH answer to my doubts directly . 
If Royal Polybus was not my Father , 
Why was I called his Son ? 


Aege .  He , from my Arms , 
Received you as the fairest Gift of Nature . 
Not but you were adorned with all the riches 
That Empire could bestow in costly Mantles 
Upon its Infant Heir . 


Oed.   But was I made the Heir of Corinth's Crown , 
Because Aegeon's hands presented me ? 


Aege .  By my advice , 
Being past all hope of Children , 
He took , embraced , and owned you for his Son.  


Oed.   Perhaps I then am yours ; instruct me , Sir : 
If it be so , I 'll kneel and weep before you , 
With all th' obedience of a penitent Child , 
Imploring pardon . 
Kill me if you please , 
I will not writhe my Body at the wound : 
But sink upon your feet with a last sigh , 
And ask forgiveness with my dying hands . 


Aege .  OH rise , and call not to this aged Cheek 
The little blood which should keep warm my heart ; 
You are not mine , nor ought I to be blessed 
With such a Godlike offspring . Sir , I found you 
Upon the Mount Cithaeron . 


Oed.   OH speak , go on , the Air grows sensible 
Of the great things you utter , and is calm : 
The hurried Orbs , with Storms so Racked of late , 
Seem to stand still , as if that Jove were talking . 
Cithaeron ! speak , the Valley of Cithaeron ! 


Aege .  Ofttimes before I thither did resort , 
Charmed with the conversation of a man 
Who led a Rural life , and had command 
O'er all the Shepherds who about those Vales 
Tended their numerous Flocks : in this man's Arms 
I saw you smiling at a fatal Dagger 
Whose point he often offered at your throat ; 
But than you smiled , and then he drew it back ; 
then lifted it again , you smiled again : 
Till he at last in fury threw it from him , 
And cried aloud , the Gods forbid thy death . 
then I rushed in , and , after some discourse , 
To me he did bequeath your innocent life ▪ 
And I , the welcome care to Polybus . 


Oed.   To whom belongs the Master of the Shepherds ? 


Aege .  His name I knew not , or I have forgot , 
That he was of the Family of Lajus , 
I well remember . 


Oed.   And is your Friend alive ? for if he be 
I 'll buy his presence , tho'it cost my Crown . 


Aege .  Your menial Attendants best can tell 
Whether he life's , or not ; and who has now 
His place . 


Joc.   Winds , bear me to some barren Island , 
Where print of human Feet was never seen , 
O'ergrown with Weeds of such a monstrous height , 
Their baleful tops are washed with bellying Clouds : 
Beneath whose venomous shade I may have vent 
For horrors that would blast the Barbarous World.  


Oed.   If there be any here that knows the person 
Whom he described , I charge him on his life 
To speak ; concealment shall be sudden death : 
But he who brings him forth , shall have reward 
Beyond Ambition's lust . 


Tir.   His name is Phorbas : 
Jocasta knows him well ; but if I may 
Advice , Rest where you are , and seek no farther . 


Oed.   then all goes well ; Since Phorbas is secured 
By my Jocasta . Haste , and bring him forth : 
My Love , my Queen , give Orders . Ha! what means 
These Tears and Groans , and Struggle ? speak , my Fair , 
What are thy troubles ? 


Joc.   Yours ; and yours are mine : 
Let me Conjure you take the Prophet's Counsel , 
And let this Phorbas go . 


Oed.   Not for the World. 
By all the Gods , I 'll know my birth , though death 
Attends the search : I have already past 
The middle of the Stream ; and to return 
Seems greater labour , than to venture o'er . 
Therefore produce him . 


Joc.   Once more , by the Gods , 
I beg , my Oedipus , my Lord , my Life , 
My love , my all , my only utmost hope , 
I beg you banish Phorbas : OH , the Gods , 
I kneel , that you may grant this first request . 
Deny me all things else ; but , for my sake , 
And as you prise your own eternal quiet , 
Never let Phorbas come into your presence . 


Oed.   You must be raised , and Phorbas shall appear , 
Thou his dread eyes were Basilisks . Guards , haste , 
Search the Queen's Lodgings ; find , and force him hither . 
[ Exeunt Guards . 

Joc.   OH , Oedipus , yet send , 
And stop their entrance , ever it be too late : 
Unless you wish to see Jocasta rend 
With Furies , slain out right with mere distraction , 
Keep from your eyes and mine the dreadful Phorbas . 
Forbear this search , I 'll think you more than mortal : 
Will you yet hear me ? 


Oed.   Tempest's will be heard , 
And Waves will dash , though Rocks their basis keep , — 
But see , they Enter . If thou truly lov'st me , 
Either forbear this Subject , or retire . 


Enter Haemon , Guards , with Phorbas . Joc.   Prepare then , wretched Prince , prepare to hear 
A story , that shall turn thee into Stone , 
could there be hewn a monstrous Gap in Nature , 
A flaw made through the Centre , by some God , 
Through which the groans of Ghosts might strike thy ears , 
They would not wound thee , as this Story william 
Hark , hark ! a hollow Voice calls out aloud , 
Jocasta : yes , I 'll to the Royal Bed , 
Where first the Mysteries of our loves were acted , 
And double die it with imperial Crimson ; 
Tear off this curling hair , 
Be gorged with Fire , stab every vital part , 
And , when at last I 'm slain , to Crown the horror , 
My poor tormented Ghost shall cleave the ground , 
To try if Hell can yet more deeply wound . 
[ Ex.  

Oed.   she 's gone ; and as she went , methought her eyes 
Grew larger , while a thousand frantic Spirits 
Seething , like rising bubbles , on the brim , 
Peeped from the Watery brink , and glowed upon me . 
I 'll seek no more ; but hush my Genius up 
That throws me on my Fate . — Impossible ! 
OH wretched Man , whose too too busy thoughts 
Ride swifter than the galloping Heavens' round , 
With an eternal hurry of the Soul : 
Nay , there 's a time when even the rolling year 
Seems to stand still , dead calms are in the Ocean , 
When not a breath disturbs the drowsy Waves : 
But Man , the very Monster of the World , 
Is never at rest , the Soul for ever wakes . 
Come then , since Destiny thus drives us on , 
Let 's know the bottom . Haemon , you I sent : 
Where is that Phorbas . 


Haem .  Here , my Royal Lord  


Oed.   Speak first , Aegeon , say , is this the Man ? 


Aege ,  My Lord , it is : Thou time has ploughed that face 
With many furrows since I saw it first ; 
Yet I 'm too well acquainted with the ground , quite to forget it . 


Oed.   Peace ; stand back a while . 
Come hither Friend ; I hear thy name is Phorbas . 
Why dost thou turn thy face ? I charge thee answer 
To what I shall inquire : Wert thou not once 
The Servant of King Lajus here in Thebes ? 


Phor.   I was , great Sir , his true and faithful Servant ; 
Born and bred up in Court , no foreign Slave . 


Oed.   What Office hadst thou ? what was thy Employment ? 


Phor.   He made me Lord of all his Rural Pleasures ; 
For much he loved 'em : oft I entertained 
With sporting Swains , o'er whom I had command . 


Oed.   Where was thy Residence ? to what part o' th' Country 
Didst thou most frequently resort ? 


Phor.   To Mount Citharon , and the pleasant Valleys 
Which all about lie shadowing its large feet . 


Oed.   Come forth Aegeon . Ha! why starts thou , Phorbas ? 
Forward , I say , and Face to Face confront him ; 
Look wistly on him , through him if thou canst , 
And tell me on thy life , say , dost thou know him ? 
Didst thou ever see him ? converse with him 
Near Mount Cithaeron ? 


Phor.   Who , my Lord , this man ? 


Oed.   This Man , this old , this venerable Man : 
Speak , didst thou ever meet him there ? 


Phor.   Where , sacred Sir.  


Oed.   Near Mount Cithaeron ; answer to the purpose : 
't is a King speaks ; and Royal minutes are 
Of much more worth than thousand Vulgar years : 
Didst thou ever see this Man near Mount Cithaeron . 


Phor.   Most sure , my Lord , I have seen lines like those 
His Visage bears ; but know not where nor when . 


Aege .  Is 't possible you should forget your ancient Friend ? 
There are perhaps 
Particulars , which may excite your dead remembrance . 
Have you forgot I took an Infant from you , 
Doomed to be murdered in that gloomy Vale ? 
The Swadling-bands were purple , wrought with Gold , 
Have you forgot too how you wept and begged 
That I should breed him up , and ask no more . 


Phor.   Whate'er I begged ; thou like a Dotared , speakest 
more than is requisite : and what of this ? 
Why is it mentioned now ? and why , OH why 
Dost thou betray the secrets of thy Friend ? 


Aege .  Be not too rash . That Infant grew at last 
A King : and here the happy Monarch stands . 


Phor.   Ha! whither wouldst thou ? OH what hast thou uttered ! 
For what thou hast said , Death strike thee dumb for ever . 


Oed.   Forbear to Curse the innocent ; and be 
Accursed thyself , thou shifting Traitor , Villain , 
Damned Hypocrite , equivocating Slave . 


Phor.   O Heavens' ! wherein , my Lord , have I offended ? 


Oed.   Why speak you not according to my charge ? 
Bring forth the Rack : since mildness cannot win you , 
Torments shall force . 


Phor.   Hold , hold , OH dreadful Sir ; 
You will not Rack an innocent old man  


Oed.   Speak then . 


Phor.   Alas , what would you have me say ? 


Oed.   Did this old man take from your Arms an Infant ? 


Phor.   He did : And , Oh! I wish to all the Gods , 
Phorbas had perished in that very moment . 


Oed.   Moment ! thou shalt be hours , days , years a dying . 
Here , bind his hands ; he dallies with my fury : 
But I shall find a way — 


Phor.   My Lord , I said 
I gave the Infant to him . 


Oed.   Was he thy own , or given thee by another ? 


Phor.   He was not mine ; but given me by another . 


Oed.   Whence ? and from whom ? what City ? of what House ? 


Phor.   OH , Royal Sir , I bow me to the ground , 
Would I could sink beneath it : by the Gods , 
I do Conjure you to inquire no more . 


Oed.   Furies and Hell ! Haemon , bring forth the Rack ; 
Fetch hither Cords , and Knives , and Sulphurous flames : 
He shall be bound , and gashed , his skin flayed off , 
And burned alive . 


Phor.   OH spare my age . 


Oed.   Rise then , and speak . 


Phor.   Dread Sir , I william  


Oed.   Who gave that Infant to thee ? 


Phor.   One of King Lajus Family . 


Oed.   OH , you immortal Gods ! But say , who was 't ? 
Which of the Family of Lajus gave it ? 
A Servant ; or one of the Royal-blood ? 


Phor.   OH wretched State ! I die , unless I speak ; 
And , if I speak , most certain death attends me ! 


Oed.   thou shalt not die . Speak then , who was it ? speak , 
While I have sense to understand the horror ; 
For I grow cold . 


Phor.   The Queen Jocasta told me 
It was her Son by Lajus . 


Oed.   OH you Gods ! — But did she give it thee ? 


Phor.   My Lord , she did . 


Oed.   wherefore ? for what ? — OH break not yet , my heart ; 
Thou my eyes burst , no matter : wilt thou tell me , 
Or must I ask for ever ? for what end ? 
Why gave she thee her Child ? 


Phor.   To murder it . 


Oed.   OH more than savage ! murder her own bowels ! 
Without a Cause ! 


Phor.   There was a dreadful one , 
Which had foretold , that most unhappy Son 
Should kill his Father , and enjoy his Mother . 


Oed.   But , one thing more , 
Jocasta told me thou wert by the Chariot 
When the old King was slain : Speak , I conjure thee , 
For I shall never ask thee aught again , 
What was the number of th' Assassinates ? 


Phor.   The dreadful deed was acted but by one ; 
And sure that one had much of your resemblance . 


Oed.   't is well ! I thank you , Gods ! 't is wondrous well ! 
Daggers , and Poison ; OH there is no need 
For my dispatch : and you , you merciless Powers , 
Hoord up your Thunder-stones ; keep , keep your Bolts 
For Crimes of little note . 
[ Falls . 

Adr.   Help , Haemon , help , and bow him gently forward ; 
Chafe , chafe his Temples : how the mighty Spirits , 
Half strangled with the damp his sorrows raise ▪ d , 
Struggle for vent : but see , he breathes again , 
And vigorous Nature breaks through all opposition . 
How fares my Royal Friend ? 


Oed.   The worse for you . 
OH barbarous men , and o the hated light , 
Why did you force me back to curse the day ; 
To curse my friends ; to blast with this dark breath 
The yet untainted Earth and circling Air ? 
To raise new Plagues , and call new Vengeance down , 
Why did you tempt the Gods , and dare to touch me ? 
Methinks there 's not a hand that grasps this Hell 
But should run up like Flax all blazing fire . 
Stand from this spot , I wish you as my friends , 
And come not near me , lest the gaping Earth 
Swallow you too — Lo , I am gone already . 
[ Draws , and claps his Sword to his breast , which Adrastus strikes away with his foot . 

Adr.   You shall no more be trusted with your life : 
Creon , Alcander , Haemon , help to hold him . 


Oed.   Cruel Adrastus ! wilt thou , Haemon , too ? 
Are these the Obligations of my Friends ? 
OH worse than worst of my most barbarous Foes ! 
Dear , dear Adrastus , look with half an Eye 
On my unheardof Woes , and judge thyself , 
If it be fit that such a Wretch should live ! 
OH , by these melting Eyes , unused to weep , 
With all the low submissions of a Slave , 
I do conjure thee give my horrors way ; 
Talk not of life , for that will make me rave : 
As well thou may'st advice a tortured wretch , 
All mangled o'er from head to foot with wounds , 
And his bones broke , to wait a better day . 


Adr.   My Lord , you ask me things impossible ; 
And I with Justice should be thought your Foe , 
To leave you in this Tempest of your Soul.  


Tir.   Thou banished Thebes , in Corinth you may Reign ; 
th' Infernal Powers themselves exact no more : 
Calm then your rage , and once more seek the Gods.  


Oed.   I 'll have no more to do with Gods , nor Men : 
Hence , from my Arms , avaunt . Enjoy thy Mother ! 
What , violate , with Beastial appetite , 
The sacred Veils that wrapped thee yet unborn , 
This is not to be born ! Hence ; off , I say ; 
For they who let my Vengeance make themselves 
Accomplices in my most horrid guilt . 


Adr.   Let it be so ; we 'll fence Heavens' fury from you , 
And suffer all together : This perhaps , 
When ruin comes , may help to break your fall . 


Oed.   OH that , as oft I have at Athens seen 
The Stage arise , and the big Clouds descend ; 
So now in very deed I might behold 
The pond'rous Earth , and all you marble Roof 
Meet , like the hands of Jove , and crush Mankind : 
For all the Elements , and all the Powers 
Celestial , nay , Terrestrial and Infernal , 
Conspire the rack of outcast Oedipus . 
Fall darkness then , and everlasting night 
Shadow the Globe ; may the Sun never dawn , 
The Silver Moon be blotted from her Orb ; 
And for an Universal rout of Nature 
Through all the inmost Chambers of the Sky , 
May there not be a glimpse , one Starry spark , 
But Gods meet Gods , and justle in the dark . 
That jars may rise , and wrath Divine be hurled , 
Which may to Atoms shake the solid World.  
[ Exeunt . 

ACTU. SCENE I  

Creon , Alcander , Pyracmon . Cre.   THEBES is at length my own ; and all my wishes , 
Which sure were great as Royalty ever formed , 
Fortune and my auspicious Stars have Crowned . 
OH Diadem , thou Centre of ambition , 
Where all it 's different Lines are reconciled , 
As if thou wert the burning-glass of Glory ! 


Pyr.   Might I be Counsellor , I would entreat you 
To cool a little , Sir ; 
find out Eurydice ; 
And , with the resolution of a man 
Marked out for Greatness , give the fatal Choice 
Of death or marriage . 


Alc.   Surveyed cursed Oedipus , 
As one who , though unfortunate , is beloved , 
Thought innocent , and therefore much lamented 
By all the Thebans ; you must mark him dead : 
Since nothing but his death , not banishment , 
Can give assurance to your doubtful Reign . 


Cre.   Well have you done , to snatch me from the storm 
Of racking Transport , where the little streams 
Of Love , Revenge , and all the under passions , 
As waters are by sucking Whirlpools drawn , 
Were quite devoured in the vast Gulf of Empire : 
Therefore , Pyracmon , as you boldly urged , 
Eurydice shall die , or be my Bride . 
Alcander , Summon to their Master's aid 
My Menial Servants , and all those whom change 
Of State , and hope of the new Monarch's favour , 
Can win to take our part : Away . What now ? 
[ Ex. Alcander . Enter Haemon . When Haemon weeps , without the help of Ghosts , 
I may foretell there is a fatal Cause . 


Haem .  Is 't possible you should be ignorant 
Of what has happened to the desperate King ? 


Cre.   I know no more , but that he was conducted 
Into his Closet , where I saw him fling 
His trembling Body on the Royal Bed ; 
All left him there , at his desire , alone : 
But sure no ill , unless he died with grief , 
could happen , for you bore his Sword away . 


Haem .  I did ; and , having locked the door , I stood ; 
And through a chink I found , not only heard , 
But saw him , when he thought no eye beheld him : 
At first , deep sighs heaved from his woeful heart , 
Murmurs , and groans , that shaken the outward Rooms , 
And art thou still alive , O wretch ! he cried ? 
then groaned again , as if his sorrowful Soul 
Had cracked the strings of Life , and burst away . 


Cre.   I weep , to hear ; how then should I have grieved 
Had I beheld this wondrous heap of Sorrow ! 
But , to the fatal period . 


Haem .  Thrice he struck , 
With all his force , his hollow groaning breast , 
And thus , with out-cries , to himself complained . 
But thou canst weep then , and thou think'st 't is well , 
These bubbles of the shallowest emptiest sorrow , 
Which Children vent for toys , and Women rain 
For any Trifle their fond hearts are set on ; 
Yet these thou think'st are ample satisfaction 
For bloodiest Murder , and for burning Lust : 
no , Parricide ; if thou must weep , weep blood ; 
Weep Eyes , instead of Tears : OH , by the Gods , 
't is greatly thought , he cried , and fits my woes . 
Which said , he smiled revengefully , and leapt 
Upon the floor ; thence gazing at the Skies , 
His Eyeballs fiery red , and glowing vengeance ; 
Gods , I accuse you not , though I no more 
Will view your Heaven , till with more durable glasses , 
The mighty Souls immortal Perspectives , 
I find your dazzling Being's : Take , he cried , 
Take , Eyes , your last , your fatal farewel-view . 
When with a groan , that seemed the call of Death , 
With horrid force lifting his impious hands , 
He snatched , he tore , from forth their bloody Orbs 
The Balls of sight , and dashed 'em on the ground . 


Cre.   A Masterpiece of horror ; new and dreadful ! 


Haem .  I ran to succour him ; but , o ! too late ; 
For he had plucked the remnant strings away . 
What then remains , but that I find Tiresias , 
Who , with his Wisdom , may allay those Furies 
That haunt his gloomy Soul ? 
[ Ex.  

Cre.   Heaven will reward 
Thy care ; most honest , faithful , foolish Haemon ! 
But see , Alcander enters , well attended . 
Enter Alcander , attended . I see , thou hast been diligent . 


Alc.   Nothing these , 
For Number , to the Crowds that soon will follow ; 
Be resolute , 
And call your utmost Fury to revenge . 


Cre.   Ha! thou hast given 
th' Alarm to Cruelty ; and never may 
These eyes be closed , till they behold Adrastus 
Stretched at the feet of false Eurydice . 
But see , they 're here ! retire a while , and mark . 


Enter Adrastus , Eurydice , attended . Adr.   Alas , Eurydice , what fond rash man , 
What inconsiderate and ambitious Fool , 
That shall hereafter read the Fate of Oedipus , 
Will dare , with his frail hand , to grasp a Sceptre ? 


Eur.   't is true , a Crown seems dreadful , and I wish 
That you and I , more lowly placed , might pass 
Our softer hours in humble Cells away : 
Not but I love you to that Infinite height , 
I could ( OH wondrous proof of fiercest Love ! ) 
Be greatly wretched in a Court with you . 


Adr.   Take then this most loved innocence away ; 
Fly from Tumultuous Thebes , 
From blood and Murder , 
Fly from the Author of all Villainies , 
Rapes , Death , and Treason , from that Fury Creon : 
Vowchsafe that I , o'erjoyed , may bear you hence , 
And at your Feet present the Crown of Argos . 
[ Creon and Attendants come up to him . 

Cre.   I have o'erheard thy black design , Adrastus . 
And therefore , as a Traitor to this State , 
Death ought to be thy Lot : let it suffice 
That Thebes surveys thee as a Prince ; abuse not 
Her proffered mercy , but retire betimes , 
lest she repent and hasten on thy Doom . 


Adr.   Think not , most abject , 
Most abhorred of Men , 
Adrastus will vouchsafe to answer thee ; 
Thebans , to you I justify my Love : 
I have addressed my Prayers to this fair Princess ; 
But , if I ever meant a violence , 
Or thought to Ravish , as that Traitor did , 
What humblest Adorations could not win ; 
Brand me , you Gods , blot me with foul dishonour , 
And let men Curse me by the name of Creon ! 


Eur.   Hear me , OH Thebans , if you dread the wrath 
Of her whom Fate ordained to be your Queen , 
Hear me , and dare not , as you prise your lives , 
To take the part of that Rebellious Traitor . 
By the Decree of Royal Oedipus , 
By Queen Jocasta's order , by what 's more , 
My own dear Vows of everlasting Love , 
I here resign to Prince Adrastus' Arms 
All that the World can make me Mistress of . 


Cre.   OH perjured Woman ! 
Draw all ; and when I give the word , fall on . 
Traitor , resign the Princess , or this moment 
Expect , with all those most unfortunate wretches , 
Upon this spot strait to be hewn in pieces . 


Adr.   no , Villain , no ; 
With twice those odds of men , 
I doubt not in this Cause 
To vanquish thee . 
Captain , remember to your care I give 
My Love ; ten thousand thousand times more dear 
Than Life , or Liberty . 


Cre.   Fall on , Alcander . 
Pyracmon , you and I must wheel about 
For nobler Game , the Princess . 


Adr.   Ah , Traitor , dost thou eat me ? 
follow , follow , 
My brave Companions ; see , the Cowards fly . 
[ Ex. fight : Creon's Party beaten off by Adrastus . 

Enter Oedipus . Oed.   OH , 't is too little this , thy loss of sight , 
What has it done ? I shall be gazed at now 
The more ; be pointed at , There goes the Monster ! 
Nor have I hid my horrors from myself ; 
For though corporeal light be lost for ever , 
The bright reflecting Soul , through glaring Optics , 
Presents in larger size her black Ideas , 
Doubling the bloody prospect of my Crimes : 
Holds Fancy down , and makes her act again , 
With Wife and Mother , Tortures , Hell , and Furies . 
Ha! now the baleful off-spring's brought to light ! 
In horrid form they rank themselves before me ; 
What shall I call this Medley of Creation ? 
Here one , with all th' obedience of a Son , 
Borrowing Jocasta's look , knelt at my Feet , 
And calls me Father ; there a sturdy Boy , 
Resembling Lajus just as when I killed him , 
bears up , and with his cold hand grasping mine , 
Cries out , How fares my Brother Oedipus ? 
What , Sons and Brothers ! Sisters and Daughter's too ! 
Fly all , begun , fly from my whirling brain ; 
Hence , Incest , Murder ; hence , you ghastly figures ! 
OH Gods ! Gods , answer ; is there any mean ? 
Let me go mad , or die . 


Enter Jocasta . Joc.   Where , where is this most wretched of mankind , 
This stately Image of Imperial Sorrow , 
Whose story told , whose very name but mentioned , 
Would cool the rage of Fevers , and unlock 
The hand of Lust from the pale virgin 's hair , 
And throw the Ravisher before her feet ? 


Oed.   By all my fears , I think Jocasta's Voice ! 
Hence ; fly ; begun : OH thou far worse than worst 
Of damning Charmers ! OH abhorred , loathed Creature ! 
Fly , by the Gods , or by the Fiends , I charge thee , 
Far as the East , West , North , or South of Heaven ; 
But think not thou shalt ever enter there : 
The golden Gates are barred with Adamant , 
Against thee , and me ; and the Celestial Guards , 
Still as we rise , will dash our Spirits down . 


Joc.   OH wretched Pair ! OH greatly wretched we ! 
Two Worlds of woe ! 


Oed.   Art thou not gone then ? ha ! 
How dar'st thou stand the Fury of the Gods ? 
Or comest thou in the Grave to reap new pleasures ? 


Joc.   Talk on ; till thou mak'st mad my rolling brain ; 
Groan still more Death ; and may those dismal sources 
Still bubble on , and pour forth blood and tears . 
Methinks , at such a meeting , Heaven stands still ; 
The Sea nor Ebbs , nor Flows : this Molehill Earth 
Is heaved no more : the busy Emmets cease ; 
Yet hear me on — 


Oed.   Speak then , and blast my Soul.  


Joc.   OH , my loved Lord , though I resolve a Ruin 
To match my Crimes ; by all my miseries , 
't is horror , worse than thousand thousand deaths , 
To send me hence without a kind Farewell . 


Oed.   Gods , how she shakes me ! stay thee , OH Jocasta , 
Speak something ever thou goest forever from me . 


Joc.   't is Woman's weakness , that I would be pitied ; 
Pardon me then , OH greatest , though most wretched , 
Of all thy Kind : my Soul is on the brink 
And sees the boiling Furnace just beneath : 
Do not thou push me off , and I will go 
With such a willingness , as if that Heaven 
With all its glories glowed for my reception . 


Oed.   OH , in my heart , I feel the pangs of Nature ; 
It works with kindness o'er : Give , give me way ; 
I feel a melting here , a tenderness , 
Too mighty for the anger of the Gods ! 
Direct me to thy knees , yet o forbear : 
lest the dead Emberss should revive , 
Stand off — and at just distance 
Let me groan my horrors — here 
On the Earth , here blow my utmost Gale ; 
Here sob my Sorrows , till I burst with sighing : 
Here gasp and Languish out thy wounded Soul.  


Joc.   In spite of all those Crimes the cruel Gods 
Can charge me with , I know my Innocence ; 
Know yours : 't is Fate alone that makes us wretched , 
For you are still my Husband . 


Oed.   Swear I am , 
And I 'll believe thee ; steal into thy Arms , 
Renew endearments , think 'em no pollutions , 
But chaste as Spirits joys : gently I 'll come , 
Thus weeping blind , like dewy Night , upon thee , 
And fold thee foftly in my Arms to slumber . 
[ The Ghost of Lajus ascends by degrees , pointing at Jocasta . 

Joc.   Begun , my Lord ! Alas , what are we doing ? 
Fly from my Arms ! Whirlwinds , Seas , Continents , 
And Worlds , divide us ! OH thrice happy thou , 
Who hast no use of eyes ; for here 's a ●ight 
Would turn the melting face of mercy 's self 
To a wild Fury . 


Oed.   Ha! what seest thou there ? 


Joc.   the Spirit of my Husband ! OH the Gods ! 
How won he looks ! 


Oed.   thou ravest ; thy husband 's here . 


Joc.   There , there he Mounts , 
In circling fire , amongst the blushing Clouds ! 
And see , he waves Jocasta from the World ! 


Ghost .  Jocasta , Oedipus . 
[ Vanish with Thunder . 

Oed.   What wouldst thou have ? 
thou know'st I cannot come to thee , detained 
In darkness here , and kept from means of death . 
i  heard a spirit 's force is wonderful ; 
At whose approach , when starting from his Dungeon , 
The Earth does shake , and the old Ocean groans , 
Rocks are removed , and Tow'rs are Thundered down : 
And walls of Brass , and Gates of Adamant , 
Are passable as Air , and fleet like Winds.  


Joc.   Was that a Raven's Croak ; or my Son's Voice ? 
no matter which ; I 'll to the Grave , and hide me : 
Earth open , or I 'll tear thy bowels up . 
Hark! he goes on , and blabs the deed of Incest . 


Oed.   Strike then , Imperial Ghost ; dash all at once 
This House of Clay into a thousand pieces : 
That my poor lingering Soul may take her flight 
To your Immortal Dwellings . 


Joc.   Haste thee then , 
Or I shall be before thee : See , thou canst not see ; 
then I will tell thee that my wings are on : 
I 'll mount , I 'll fly , and with a port Divine 
Glide all along the gaudy Milky soil , 
To find my Lajus out ; ask every God 
In his bright Palace , if he knows my Lajus , 
My murdered Lajus ! 


Oed.   Ha! how 's this , Jocasta ? 
Nay , if thy brain be sick , than thou art happy . 


Joc.   Ha! will you not ? shall I not find him out ? 
Will you not show him ? are my tears despised ? 
Why , then I 'll Thunder , yes , I will be mad , 
And fright you with my cries , : yes , cruel Gods , 
Thou Vultures , Eagles , Dragons tear my heart , 
I 'll snatch Celestial flames , fire all your dwellings , 
Melt down your golden Roofs , and make your doors 
Of Crystal fly from off their Diamond Hinges ; 
Drive you all out from your Ambrosial Hives , 
To swarm like Bees about the field of Heaven : 
This will I do , unless you show me Lajus , 
My dear , my murdered Lord OH Lajus ! Lajus ! Lajus ! 
[ Ex. Jocasta . 

Oed.   Excellent grief ! why , this is as it should be ! 
no Mourning can be suitable to Crimes 
Like ours , but what Death makes , or Madness forms . 
I could have wished methought for sight again , 
To mark the Gallantry of her distraction : 
Her blazing Eyes darting the wand'ring Stars , 
T' have seen her mouth the Heavens' , and mate the Gods , 
While with her Thundering Voice she menaced high , 
And every Accent twanged with smarting sorrow ; 
But what 's all this to thee ? thou , Coward , yet 
Art living , canst not , wilt not find the Road 
To the great Palace of magnificent Death ; 
Thou thousand ways lead to histhousand doors , 
Which day and night are still unbarred for all . 
[ Clashing of Swords : Drums and Trumpets without . Hark! 't is the noise of clashing Swords ! the sound 
Comes near : OH , that a Battle would come o'er me ! 
If I but grasp a Sword , or wrist a Dagger , 
I 'll make a ruin with the first that falls . 


Enter Haemon , with Guards . Haem .  Seize him , and bear him to the Western-tow'r . 
Pardon me , sacred Sir ; I am informed 
That Creon has designs upon your life : 
Forgive me then , if , to preserve you from him , 
I order your Confinement . 


Oed.   Slaves , unhand me . 
I think thou hast a Sword : 't was the wrong side . 
Yet , cruel Haemon , think not I will live ; 
He that could tear his eyes out , sure can find 
Some desperate way to stifle this cursed breath : 
Or if I starve ! but that 's a lingering Fate ; 
Or if I leave my brains upon the wall ! 
The Airy Soul can easily o're-shoot 
Those bounds with which thou strive'st to pale her in : 
Yes , I will perish in despite of thee ; 
And , by the rage that stirs me , if I meet thee 
In the other World , I 'll curse thee for this usage . 
[ Exit . 

Haem .  Tiresias , after him ; and , with your Counsel , 
Advice him humbly ; Charm , if possible , 
These feuds within : while I without extinguish , 
Or perish in th' Attempt , the furious Creon ; 
That Brand which sets our City in a Flame . 


Tir.   Heaven prospero your intent , and give a period 
To all your Plagues : what old Tiresias can 
Shall strait be done . Led , Manto the Tower . 
[ Ex. Tir. Manto . 

Haem .  follow me all , and help to part this Fray , 
Or fall together in the bloody broil . 
[ Trumpets again . [ Ex.  

Enter Creon with Eurydice , Pyracmon and his party giving ground to Adrastus . Cre.   Hold , hold your Arms , Adrastus' Prince of Argos , 
Hear , and behold ; Eurydice is my Prisoner . 


Adr.   What wouldst thou , Hellhound ? 


Cre.   See this brandished Dagger : 
Forgo th' advantage which thy Arms have wone , 
Or , by the blood which trembles through the heart 
Of her whom more than life I know thou lov'st , 
I 'll bury to the haste , in her fair breast , 
This Instrument of my Revenge . 


Adr.   Stay thee , damned wretch ; hold , stop thy bloody hand . 


Cre.   Give order then , that on this instant , now , 
This moment , all thy Soldiers strait disband . 


Adr.   Away , my Friends , since Fate has so allotted ; 
Begun , and leave me to the villain 's mercy . 


Eur.   Ah , my Adrastus ! call 'em , call 'em back ! 
Stand there ; come back ! OH , cruel barbarous Men ! 
could you then leave your Lord , your Prince , your King , 
After so bravely having fought his Cause , 
To perish by the hand of this base Villain ? 
Why rather rush you not at once together 
All to his ruin ? drag him through the Streets , 
hang his contagious Quarters on the Gates ; 
Nor let my death affright you . 


Cre.   Dye first thyself then . 


Adr.   OH , I charge thee hold . 
Hence , from my presence all : he 's not my Friend 
That disobeys : See , art thou now appeased ? 
Or is there ought else yet remains to do 
That can atone thee ? slake thy thirst of blood 
With mine : but save , OH save that innocent wretch . 
[ Ex. Attendants . 

Cre.   Forego thy Sword , and yield thyself my Prisoner . 


Eur.   Yet while there 's any dawn of hope to save 
Thy precious life , my dear Adrastus , 
Whate'er thou dost , deliver not thy Sword ; 
With that thou may'st get off , though odds oppose thee : 
For me , OH , fear not ; no , he dares not touch me ; 
His horrid love will spare me . Keep thy Sword ; 
lest I be ravished after thou art slain . 


Adr.   Instruct me , Gods , what shall Adrastus do ? 


Cre.   Do what thou wilt , when she is dead : My Soldiers 
With numbers will o're-pow'r thee . Is (null) thy wish 
Eurydice should fall before thee ? 


Adr.   Traitor , no : 
Better that thou and I , and all mankind 
Should be no more . 


Creon .  then cast thy Sword away , 
And yield thee to my mercy , or I strike . 


Adr.   Hold thy raised Arm ; give me a moment's pause . 
My Father , when he blessed me , gave me this ; 
My Son , said he , let this be thy last refuge ; 
If thou forego'st it , misery attends thee : 
Yet Love now charms it from me ; which in all 
The hazards of my life I never lost . 
't is thine , my faithful Sword , my only trust ; 
Thou my heart tells me that the gift is Fatal . 


Cre.   Fatal ! yes , foolish Lovesick Prince , it shall : 
Thy arrogance , thy scorn , 
My wounds remembrance , 
Turn all at once the Fatal point upon thee . 
Pyracmon , to the Palace , dispatch 
The King : hang Haemon up , for he is Loyal , 
And will oppose me : Come , Sir , are you ready ? 


Adr.   Yes , Villain , for whatever thou canst dare . 


Eur.   Hold , Creon , or through me , through me you wound . 


Adr.   off , Madam , or we perish both ; behold 
I 'm not unarmed , my ponyards in my hand : 
Therefore away . 


Eur.   I 'll guard your life with mine . 


Cre.   Die both then ; there is now no time for dallying . 
[ Kills Eurydice . 

Eur.   Ah , Prince , farewell ; farewel , my dear Adrastus . 
[ Dies . 

Adr.   Unheard of Monster ! eldest-born of Hell ! 
Down , to thy Primitive Flames . 
[ Stabs Creon . 

Cre.   Help , Soldiers , help : 
Revenge me . 


Adr.   more ; yet more : a thousand wounds ! 
I 'll stamp thee still , thus , to the gaping Furies . 
[ Adrastus falls , killed by the Soldiers . Enter Haemon , Guards , with Alcander and Pyracmon bound : the Assassins' are driven off . OH Haemon , I am slain ; nor need I name 
The inhuman Author of all Villainies ; 
There he lies gasping . 


Cre.   If I must plunge in Flames , 
Burn first my Arm ; base instrument , unfit 
To act the dictates of my daring mind : 
Burn , burn for ever , OH weak Substitute 
Of that the God , Ambition . 
[ Dies . 

Adr.   she 's gone ; OH deadly Marksman , in the heart ! 
Yet in the pangs of death she grasps my hand : 
Her lips too tremble , as if she would speak 
Her last farewell . OH , Oedipus , thy fall 
Is great ; and nobly now thou goest attended ! 
They talk of Heroes , and Celestial Beauties , 
And wondrous pleasures in the other World ; 
Let me but find her there , I ask no more . 
[ Dies . 

Enter a Captain to Haemon : with Tiresias and Manto . Cap.   OH , Sir , the Queen Jocasta , swift and wild , 
As a robbed Tygress bounding o'er the Woods , 
Has acted Murders that amaze mankind : 
In twisted Gold I saw her Daughters hang 
On the Bed Royal ; and her little Sons 
Stabbed through the breasts upon the bloody Pillows . 


Haem .  Relentless Heavens' ! is then the Fate of Lajus 
Never to be Atoned ? How sacred ought 
Kings lives be held , when but the death of one 
Demands an empire 's blood for Expiation ? 
But see ! the furious mad Jocasta's here . 
Scene Draws , and discovers Jocasta held by her Women , and stabbed in many places of her bosom , her hair dishevelled ; her Children slain upon the Bed.  Was ever yet a sight of so much horror , 
And pity , brought to view ! 


Joc.   Ah , cruel Women ! 
Will you not let me take my last farewell 
Of those dear Babes ? OH let me run and seal 
My melting Soul upon their bubbling wounds ! 
I 'll Print upon their Coral mouths such Kisses , 
As shall recall their wand'ring Spirits home . 
Let me go , let me go , or I will tear you piecemeal . 
Help , Haemon , help : 
Help Oedipus ; help , Gods ; Jocasta Dies . 


Enter Oedipus above . Oed.   i  found a Window , and I thank the Gods 
't is quite unbarred : sure , by the distant noise , 
The height will fit my Fatal purpose well . 


Joc.   What hoa , my Oedipus ! see , where he stands ! 
His groping Ghost is lodged upon a Tower , 
Nor can it find the Road : Mount , mount , my soul ; 
I 'll wrap thy shivering Spirit in Lambent Flames ! and so we 'll sail . 
But see ! we 're landed on the happy Coast ; 
And all the Golden Strands are covered o'er 
With glorious Gods , that come to try our Cause : 
Jove , Jove , whose Majesty now sinks me down , 
He who himself burns in unlawful fires , 
Shall judge , and shall acquit us , OH , 't is done ; 
't is fixed by Fate , upon Record Divine : 
And Oedipus shall now be ever mine . 
[ Dies . 

Oed.   Speak , Haemon ; what has Fate been doing there ? 
What dreadful deed has mad Jocasta done ? 


Haem .  The Queen herself , and all your wretched Offspring , 
Are by her Fury slain . 


Oed.   By all my woes , 
She has outdone me , in Revenge and Murder ; 
And I should envy her the sad applause : 
But , Oh! my Children ! O , what have they done ? 
This was not like the mercy of the Heavens' , 
To set her madness on such Cruelty : 
This stirs me more than all my sufferings , 
And with my last breath I must call you Tyrants . 


Haem .  What mean you , Sir.  


Oed.   Jocasta ! lo , I come . 
OH Lajus , Labdacus , and all you Spirits 
Of the Cadmean Race , prepare to meet me , 
All weeping ranged along the gloomy Shore : 
Extend your Arms to embrace me ; for I come ; 
May all the Gods too from their Battlements 
Behold , and wonder at a Mortals daring ; 
And , when I knock the Goal of dreadful death , 
Shout and applaud me with a clap of Thunder : 
Once more , thus winged by horrid Fate , I come 
Swift as a falling Meteor ; lo , I fly , 
And thus go downward , to the darker Sky . 
[ Thunder . He flings himself from the Window : The Thebans gather about his Body . 

Haem .  OH Prophet , Oedipus is now no more ! 
OH cursed Effect of the most deep despair ! 


Tir.   Cease your Complaints , and bear his body hence ; 
The dreadful sight will daunt the drooping Thebans , 
Whom Heaven decrees to raise with Peace and Glory : 
Yet , by these terrible Examples warned , 
The sacred Fury thus Alarms the World. 
Let none , though never so Virtuous , great and High , 
Be judged entirely blessed before they Die . 


EPILOGUE . 

WHAT Sophocles could undertake alone , 
Our Poets found a Work for more than one ; 
And therefore Two lay tugging at the piece , 
With all their force , to draw the ponderous Mass from Greece . 
A weight that bend even Seneca's strong Muse , 
And which Corneille's Shoulders did refuse . 
So hard it is th' Athenian Harp to string ! 
So much two Consuls yield to one just King. 
Terror and pity this whole Poem sway ; 
The mightiest Machine's that can mount a Play ; 
How heavy will those Vulgar Souls be found , 
Whom two such Engines cannot move from ground ? 
When Greece and Rome have smiled upon this Birth , 
You can but Damn for one poor spot of Earth ; 
And when your Children find your judgement such , 
they 'll scorn their Sires , and wish themselves born Duchess ; 
Each haughty Poet will infer with ease , 
How much his Wit must underwrite to please . 
As some strong Churl would brandishing advance 
The monumental Sword that conquered France ; 
So you , by judging this , your judgements teach 
Thus far you like , that is , thus far you reach . 
Since then the Vote of full two Thousand years 
Has Crowned this Plot , and all the Dead are theirs . 
Think it a Debt you pay , not Alms you give , 
And in your own defence , let this Play live . 
Think 'em not vain , when Sophocles is shown , 
To praise his worth , they humbly doubt their own . 
Yet as weak States each others power assure , 
Weak Poets by Conjunction are secure . 
Their Treat is what your Palates relish most , 
Charm ! Song ! and Show ! a Murder and a Ghost ! 
We know not what you can desire or hope , 
To please you more , but burning of a Pope . 
FINIS . 

