ALL for LOVE : OR , THE World well Lost. A TRAGEDY , As it is Acted at the THEATRE-ROYAL ; AND Written in Imitation of Shakespeare's Style . 

Written by Mr. Dryden . 

Facile est verbum aliquod arden's ( ut ita dicam ) notare : Idque restinctis animorum incendiis irridere . Cicero . 



In the SAVOY : Printed for H. Herringman , and Sold by R. Bently , J. Tonson , F. Saunders , and T. Bennet . 1692.  

To the Right Honourable , THOMAS Earl of Danby , Viscount Latimer , and Baron OSBORNE of Kiveton in Yorkshire , Lord High Treasurer of England , One of His Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council , and Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter , etc.  

My LORD , 

THE Gratitude of Poets is so troublesome a Virtue to Great Men , that you are often in danger of your own Benefits : For you are threatened with some Epistle , and not suffered to do Good in quiet , or to compound for their Silence whom you have Obliged . Yet , I Confess , I neither am , nor aught to be surprised at this Indulgence ; For your Lordship has the same Right to Favour Poetry which the Great and Noble have ever had . 

Carmen amat , quisquis carmine digna gerit . 

There is somewhat of a tie in Nature betwixt those who are Born for Worthy Actions , and those who can transmit them to Posterity : And though ours be much the inferior part , it comes at least within the Verge of Alliance ; nor are we unprofitable Members of the Commonwealth , when we animate others to those Virtues , which we Copy and Describe from you . 

't is indeed their Interest , who endeavour the Subversion of Governments , to discourage Poets and Historians ; for the best which can happen to them is to be forgotten : But such , who , under KINGS , are the Fathers of their Country , and by a Just and Prudent ordering of Affairs preserve it , have the same Reason to Cherish the Chroniclers of their Actions , as they have to lay up in safety the Deeds and Evi●… of their Estates : For such Records are their undoubted Titles to the Love and Reverence of After-ages . Your Lordship's Administration has already taken up a considerable part of the English Annals ; and many of its most happy Years are owing to it . His MAJESTY , the most knowing Judge of Men , and the best Master , has acknowledged the Ease and Benefit he Receives in the Incomes of His Treasury , which you found not only Disordered , but Exhausted . All Things were in the Confusion of a Chaos , without Form or Method , if not reduced beyond it , even to Annihilation : So that you had not only to separate the Jarring Elements , but ( if that boldness of Expression might be allowed me ) to create them . Your Enemies had so Embroiled the Management of your Office , that they looked on your Advancement as the Instrument of your Ruin . And as if the clogging of the Revenue , and the Confusion of Accounts , which you found in your Entrance , were not sufficient , they added their own weight of Malice to the Public Calamity , by forestall the Credit which should Cure it : Your Friends on the other side were only capable of Pitying , but not of Aiding you : no farther Help or Counsel was remaining to you , but what was founded on yourself ; And that indeed was your Security : For your Diligence , your Constancy , and your Prudence , wrought more surely within , when they were not disturbed by any outward Motion . The highest Virtue is best to be trusted with its Self , for Assistance only can be given by a Genius Superior to that which it Assists . And 't is the Noblest kind of Debt , when we are only obliged to God and Nature . This then , My Lord , is your just Commendation , That you have wrought out yourself a way to Glory , by those very Means that were designed for your Destruction : You have not only restored , but advanced the Revenues of your Master without Grievance to the Subject : And as if that were little yet , the Debts of the Exchequer , which lay heaviest both on the Crown , and on private persons , have by your Conduct been Established in a certainty of Satisfaction . An Action so much the more Great and Honourable , because the Case was without the ordinary Relief of Laws ; above the Hopes of the Afflicted , and beyond the Narrowness of the Treasury to Redr●…ss , had it been managed by a lesle able Hand . 't is certainly the Happiest , and most Unenvied part of all your Fortune , to do Good to many , while you do Injury to none : To receive at once the Prayers of the Subject , and the Praises of the Prince : And by the care of your Conduct ; to give Him Means of Exerting the chiefest , ( if any be the chiefest ) of His Royal Virtues : His distributive Justice to the Deserving , and His Bounty and Compassion to the Wanting . The Disposition of Princes towards their People , cannot better be discovered than in the choice of their Ministers ; who , like the Animal Spirits betwixt the Soul and Body , participate somewhat of both Natures , and make the Communication which is betwixt them . A King , who is Just and Moderate in his Nature , who Rules according to the Laws , whom God made Happy by Forming the Temper of His Soul to the Constitution of His Government , and who makes us Happy , by assuming over us no other Sovereignty than that wherein our Welfare and Liberty consists ; A Prince , I say , of so excellent a Character , and so suitable to the Wishes of all Good Men , could not better have conveyed Himself into His People's Apprehensions , than in your Lordship's Person ; who so lively express the same Virtues , that you seem not so much a Copy , as an Emanation of Him. Mod●…ration is doubtless an Establishment of Greatness ; but there is a steadiness of Temper which is likewise requisite in a Minister of State : So equal a mixture of both Virtues , that he may stand like an Isthmus betwixt the two Encrooching Seas of Arbitrary Power , and Lawless Anarchy . The Undertaking would be difficult to any but an Extraordinary Genius , to stand at the Line , and to divide the Limits ; to pay what is due to the Great Representative of the Nation , and neither to enhance , nor to yield up the undoubted Prerogatives of the Crown . These , My Lord , are the proper Virtues of a Noble Englishman , as indeed they are properly English Virtues : no People in the World being capable of using them , but we who have the Happiness to be Born under so equal , and so well-poised a Government . A Government which has all the Advantages of Liberty beyond a Commonwealth , and all the Marks of Kingly Sovereignty without the danger of a Tyranny . Both my Nature , as I am an Englishman , and my Reason , as I am a Man , have bred in me a Loathing to that specious Name of a Repu●…ck ; That mock-appearance of a Liberty , where all who have not part in the Government , are Slaves ; And Slaves they are of a viler Note than such as are Subjects to an absolute Dominion . For no Christian Monarchy is so Absolute , but 't is Circumscribed with Laws : But when the Executive Power is in the Lawmakers' , there is no farther check upon them ; and the People must suffer without a Remedy , because they are Oppressed by their Representatives . If I must s●…rve , the number of my Masters , who were Born my Equals , would but add to 〈◊〉 Ignominy of my Bondage . The Nature of our Government above all others , is exactly Suited both to the Situation of our Country , and the Temper of the Natives : An Island being more proper for Commerce and for Defence , than for extending its Dominions on the Continent : For what the Valour of its Inhabitants might gain , by Reason of its Remoteness , and the Casualties of the Seas , it could not so easily preserve : And therefore , neither the Arbitrary Power of one in a Monarchy , n●…r of many in a Commonwealth , could make us greater than we are . 't is true , that vaster and more frequent Taxes might be gathered , when the Cons●…nt of the People was not Asked or Needed ; but this were only by Conquering abroad to be Poor at home : And the Examples of our Neighbours teach us , that they are not always the Happiest Subjects whose Kings extend their Dominions farthest . Since therefore we cannot win by an Offensive War , at least a Land-war , the Model of our Government seems Naturally contrived for the Defensive part : And the Cons●…nt of a People is easily obtained to contribute to that Power which must protect it . Felice's nimium bona si sua nôrint , Angligenae ! And yet there are not wanting Malcontents amongst us , who Surf●…iting themselves on too much Happiness , would perswàde the People that they might be Happier by a Change. 'T was indeed the Policy of their old For father , when himself was fallen from the Station of Glory , to seduce Mankind into the same Rebellion with him , by telling him he might yet be freer than he was : That is , more free than his Nature would allow , or ( if I may so say ) than God could make him . We have already all the Liberty which Freeborn Subjects can enjoy ; and all beyond it is but Licence . But if it be Liberty of Conscience which they pretend , the Moderation of our Church is such , that its Practice extends not to the severity of Persecution , and its Discipline is withal so easy , that it allows more freedom to Dissenters than any of the Sects would allow to it . In the mean time , what Right can be pretended by these Men to attempt Innovations in Church or State ? Who made them the Trustees , or ( to Speak a little nearer their own Language ) the Keepers of the Liberty of England ? If their Call be extraordinary , let them Convince us by working Miracles ; for ordinary Vocation they can have none to disturb the Government under which they were Born , and which protects them . He who has often changed his Party , and always has made his Interest the Rule of it , gives little Evidence of his Sincerity for the Public Good : 't is manif●…st he changes but for himself , and takes the People for Tools to work his Fortune . Yet the Experience of all Ages might ●…t him know , that they who trouble the Waters first , have s●…ldom the benefit of the Fishing : As they who began the late Rebellion , enjoyed not the Fruit of their Undertaking , but were crushed themselves by the Usurpation of their own Instrument . Neither is it enough for them to Answer , that they only intent a Reformation of the Government , but not the Subversion of it : On such pretences all Insurrections have been founded ; 't is striking at the Root of Power , which is Obedience . Every Remonstrance of private Men , has the seed of Treason in it ; and Discourses which are couched in ambiguous Terms , are therefore the more dangerous , because they do all the Mischief of open Sedition , yet are safe from the Punishment of the Laws . These , My Lord , are Considerations which I should not pass so lightly over , had I room to manage them as they deserve : for no Man can be so inconsiderable in a Nation , as not to have a share in the welfare of it ; and if he be a true Englishmen , he must at the same time be fired with Indignation , and revenge himself as he can on the Disturbers of his Country . And to whom could I more fitly apply myself , than to your Lordship , who have not only an inborn , but an Hereditary Loyalty ? The memorable constancy and sufferings of your Father , almost to the ●…uine of his Estate for the Royal Cause , were an earnest of that , which such a Parent and such an Institution would produce in the Person of a Son. But so unhappy an occasion of manifesting your own Zeal in suffering for his present Majesty , the Providence of God , and the Prudence of your Administration , will , I hope , prevent . That as your Father's Fortune waited on the unhappiness of his Sovereign , so your own may participate of the better Fate which attends his Son. The Relation which you have by Alliance to the Noble Family of your Lady , serves to confirm to you both this happy Angury . For what can deserve a greater place in the English Chronicle , than the Loyalty and Courege , the Actions and Death of the General of an Army Fight for His Prince and Country ? The Honour and Gallantry of the Earl of Lindsey , is so illustrious a Subject , that 't is fit to adorn an Heroic Poem ; for He was the Proto-martyr of the Cause , and the Type of his unfortunate Royal Master . 

Yet , after all , My Lord , if I may speak my thoughts , you are happy rather to us than to yourself : for the Multiplicity , the Cares , and the Vexations of your Employment , have betrayed you from yourself , and given you up into the Possession of the Public . You are Robbed of your Privacy and Friends , and scarce any hour of your Life you can call your own . Those who envy your Fortune , if they wanted not good Nature , might more justly pity it ; and when they see you watched by a Crowd of Suitors , whose importunity 't is impossible to avoid , would conclude with Reason , that you have lost much more in true Content , than you have gained by Dignity ; and that a private Gentleman is better attended by a single Servant , than your Lordship with so clamorous a Train . Pardon me , My Lord , If I speak like a Philosopher on this Subject ; the Fortune which makes a Man uneasy , cannot make him Happy : and a Wise Man must think himself uneasy , when few of his Actions are in his Choice . 

This last Consideration has brought me to another , and a very seasonable one for your Relief ; which is , That while I pity your want of leisure , I have impertinently Detained you so long a time . I have put off my own Business , which was my Dedication , till 't is so late , that I am now ashamed to begin it : And therefore I will say nothing of the Poem , which I Present to you , because I know not if you are like to have an Hour , which , with a good Conscience , you may throw away in perusing it : And for the Author , I have only to beg the continuance of your Protection to him , who is , 

MY LORD , Your Lordships , most Obliged , most Humble , and most Obedient Servant , JOHN DRYDEN . 

PREFACE . 

The death of Anthony and Cleopatra , is a Subject which has been treated by the greatest Wits of our Nation , after Shakespeare ; and by all so variously , that their Example has given me the confidence to try my self in this Bow of Ulysses amongst the Crowd of Suitors ; and , withal , to take my own measures , in aiming at the Mark. I doubt not but the same Motive has prevailed with all of us in this attempt ; I mean the excellency of the Moral : for the chief persons represented , were famous Patterns of unlawful Love ; and their end accordingly was unfortunate . All reasonable Men have long since concluded , That the Hero of the Poem , ought not to be a Character of perfect Virtue , for , then , he could not , without injustice , be made unhappy ; nor yet altogether wicked , because he could not then be pitied : I have therefore steered the middle course ; and have drawn the character of Anthony as favourably as Plutarch , Appian , and Dion Cassius would give me leave : the like I have observed in Cleopatra . That which is wanting to work up the pity to a greater height , was not afforded me by the story : for the crimes of Love which they both committed , were not occasioned by any necessity , or fatal ignorance , but were wholly voluntary ; since our passions are , or aught to be , within our power . The Fabric of the Play is regular enough , as to the inferior parts of it ; and the Unities of Time , Place and Action , more exactly observed , than , perhaps , the English Theatre requires . Particularly , the Action is so much one , that it is the only of the kind without Episode , or Underplot ; every Scene in the Tragedy conducing to the main design , and every Act concluding with a turn of it . The greatest error in the contrivance seems to be in the person of Octavia : For , though I might use the privilege of a Poet , to introduce her into Alexandria , yet I had not enough considered , that the compassion she moved to herself and Children , was destructive to that which I reserved for Anthony and Cleopatra ; whose mutual love being founded upon vice , must lessen the favour of the Audience to them , when Virtue and Innocence were oppressed by it . And , though I justified Anthony in some measure , by making Octavia's departure , to proceed wholly from herself ; yet the force of the first Machine still remained ; and the dividing of pity , like the cutting of a River into many Channels , abated the strength of the natural Stream . But this is an Objection which none of my Critics have urged against me ; and therefore I might have let it pass , if I could have resolved to have been partial to myself . The faults my Enemies have found , are rather cavils concerning little , and not essential Decencies ; which a Master of the Ceremonies may decide betwixt us . The French Poets , I confess , are strict Observers of these Punctilios : They would not , for example , have suffered Cleopatra and Octavia to have met ; or if they had met , there must only have passed betwixt them some cold civilities , but no eagerness of repartée , for fear of offending against the greatness of their Characters , and the modesty of their Sex. This Objection I foresaw , and at the same time contemned : for I judged it both natural and probable , that Octavia , proud of her new-gained Conquest , would search out Cleopatra to triumph over her ; and that Cleopatra , thus attacked , was not of a spirit to eat the encounter : and 't is not unlikely , that two exasperated Rivals should use such Satyr as I have put into their mouths ; for after all , though the one were a Roman , and the other a Queen , they were both Women . 't is true , some actions , though natural , are not fit to be represented ; and broad obscenities in words , aught in good-manners to be avoided : expressions therefore are a modest clothing of our thoughts , as Breeches and Petticoats are of our Bodies . If I have kept myself within the bounds of modesty , all beyond it is but nicety and affectation ; which is no more but Modesty depraved into a Vice : they betray themselves who are too quick of apprehension in such cases , and leave all r●…asonable Men to imagine worse of them , than of the Poet.  

Honest Montaigne goes yet farther : Nous ne sommes que ceremony ; lafoy ceremony n●…s us emporte , & laissons la substance des choses : Nous nous tenons aux b●…cheses , & abandonnons' le tronc & le corpse . Nous avons appris aux Dames de rougir , oyans seulement no●…nmer ce qu' elles ne craignent aucunement 〈◊〉 : Nous n'esons appeller a droict nos membres , & ne craignons par de les employer a toute sort de debauche . La ceremony nous defend d'exprimer par paroles les choses licites & naturelles , & nous l'en croyons ; la raison nous defend de n'en fair point d'illicites & mauvaises , & personne ne l'en croid . My comfort is , that by this opinion my Enemies are but sucking Critics , who would fain be nibbling ere their Teeth are come . 

Yet ; in this nicety of manners does the excellency of French Poetry consist : their Heroes are the most civil people breathing ; but their good breeding seldom extends to a word of sense : All their Wit is in their Ceremony ; they want the Genius which animates our Stage ; and therefore 't is but necessary when they cannot please , that they should take care not to offend . But , as the civilest Man in the company is commonly the dullest , so these Authors , while they are afraid to make you laugh or cry , out of pure good manners , make you sleep . They are so careful not to exasperate a Critic , that they never leave him any work ; so busy with the Broom , and make so clean a riddance , that there is little left either for censure or for praise : for no part of a Poem is worth our discommending , where the whole is insipid ; as when we have once tasted of palled Wine , we stay not to examine it Glass by Glass . But while they affect to shine in ttifles , they are often careless in essentials . Thus their Hippolytus is so scrupulous in point of decency , that he will rather expose himself to death , than accuse his Stepmother to his Father ; and my Critics I am sure will commend him for it : but we of grosser apprehensions , are apt to think that this excess of generosity , is not practicable but with Fools and Madmen . This was good manners with a vengeance ; and the Audience is like to be much concerned at the misfortunes of this admirable Hero : but take Hippolytus out of his Poetic Fit , and I suppose he would think it a wiser part , to set the Saddle on the right Horse , and choose rather to live with the reputation of a plain-spoken honest Man , than to die with the infamy of an incestuous Villain . In the mean time we may take notice , that where the Poet ought to have preserved the character as it was delivered to us by Antiquity , when he should have given us the Picture of a rough young Man , of the Amazonian strain , a jolly Huntsman , and both by his profession and his early rising a Mortal Enemy to Love , he has chosen to give him the turn of Gallantry , sent him to travel from Athens to Paris , taught him to make Love and transformed the Hipp●…litus of Euripides into Monsieur Hippolyta . I should not have troubled myself thus far with French Poets , but that I find our Chedreux Critics wholly form their Judgements by them . But for my part , I desire to be tried by the Laws of my own Country , for it see●…s unjust to me , that the French should prescribe here , till they have 〈◊〉 Our little Sonnettiers who follow them , have too narrow 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 or Poetry . Poets themselves are the most proper , though I conclude 〈◊〉 the only Critics . But till some Genius as Universal , as Aristotle , shall arise , who can penetrate into all Arts and Sciences , without the practice of them , I shall think it reasonable , that the Judgement of an Artificer in his own Art should be preferable to the opinion of another Man ; at least where he is not bribed by interest , or prejudiced by malice : and this , I ●…uppose , is manifest by plain induction : For , first , the Crowd cannot be presumed to have more than a gross instinct , of what pleases or displeases them : every Man will grant me this ; but then , by a particular kindness to himself , he draws his own stake first , and will be distinguished from the multitude , of which other Men may think him one . But , if I come closer to those who are allowed for witty Men , either by the advantage of their quality , or by common fame , and affirm that neither are they qualified to decide Sovereignly , concerning Poetry , I shall yet have a strong party of my opinion ; for most of them severally will exclude the rest , either from the number of witty Men , or at least of able Judges . But here again they are all indulgent to themselves : and every one who believes himself a Wit , that is , every Man , will pretend at the same time to a right of judging . But to press it yet farther , there are many witty Men , but few Poets , neither have all Poets a taste of Tragedy . And this is the Rock on which they are daily splitting . Poetry , which is a Picture of Nature , must generally please : but 't is not be understood that all parts of is must please every Man ; therefore is not Tragedy to be judged by a witty Man , whose taste is only confined to Comedy . Nor is every Man who love's Tragedy a sufficient Judge of it : he must understand the excellencies of it too , or he will only prove a blind Admirer , not a Critic . From hence it comes that so many Satyrs on Poets , and censures of their writings , fly abroad . Men of pleasant Conversation , ( at least esteemed so ) and endued with a trifling kind of Fancy , perhaps helped out with some smattering of Latin , are ambitious to distinguish themselves from the Herd of Gentlemen , by their Poetry ; 

Rarus enim fermè sensus communis in illâ 
F●…rtunâ . 
And is not this a wretched affectation , not to be contented with what Fortune has done for them , and sit down quietly with their Estates , but they must call their Wits in question , and needlessly expose their nakedness to public view ? Not considering that they are not to expect the same approbation from sober Men , which they have found from their flatterers after the third Bottle ? If a little glittering in discourse has passed them on us for witty Men , where was the necessity of undeceiving the World ? Would a Man who has an ill Title to an Estate , but yet is in possession of it , would he bring it of his own accord , to be tried at Westminster ? We who write , if we want the Talon , yet have the excuse that we do it for a poor subsistence ; but what can be urged in their defence , who not having the Vocation of Poverty to scribble out of mere wantonness , take pains to make themselves ridiculous ? Horace was certainly in the right , where he said , That no Man is satisfied with his own condition . A Poet is not pleased because he is not rich ; and the Rich are discontented , because the Poets will not admit them of their number . Thus the case is hard with Writers : if they succeed not , they must starve ; and if they do , some malicious Satyr is prepared to levelly them for daring to please without their leave . But while they are so eager to destroy the fame of others , their ambition is manifest in their concernment : some Poem of their own is to be produced , and the Slaves are to be laid flat with their faces on the ground , that the Monarch may appear in the greater Majesty . 

Dionysius and Nero had the same longings , but with all their power they could never bring their business well about . 't is true , they proclaimed themselves Poets by sound of Trumpet ; and Poets they were upon pain of death to any Man who durst call them otherwise . The Audience had a fine time on 't , you may imagine ; they sat in a bodily fear , and looked as demurely as they could : for 't was a hanging matter to laugh unseasonably ; and the Tyrants were suspicious , as they had reason , that their Subjects had 'em in the wind ; so , every man in his own defence set as good a face upon the business as he could : 'T was known beforehand that the Monarches were to be Crowned Laureates ; but when the Show was over , and an honest Man was suffered to depart quietly , he took out his Laughter which he had stifled ; with a firm resolution never more to see an Emperor's Play , though he had been ten years a making it . In the mean time , the true Poets were they who made the best Markets , for they had Wit enough to yield the Prize with a good grace , and not contend with him who had thirty ●…egionss : They were sure to be rewarded if they confessed themselves bad Writers , and that was somewhat better than to be Martyrs for their Reputation . Lucan's example was enough to teach them manners ; and after he was put to Death , for overcoming Nero , the Emperor carried it without dispute for the best Poet in his Dominions : no man was ambitious of that grinning Honour ; for if he heard the malicious Trumpeter proclaiming his Name before his Betters , he knew there was but one way with him . Maecenas took another Course , and we know he was more than a great Man , for he was witty too : but finding himself far gone in Poetry , which Seneca assures us was not his Talon , he thought it his best way to be well with Virgil and with Horace ; that at least he might be a Poet at the second hand ; and we see how happily it has succeeded with him ; for his own bad Poetry is forgotten , and their Panegyrics of him still remain . But they who should be our Patrons , are for no such expensive ways to fame : they have much of the Poetry of Maecenas , but little of his Liberality . They are for persecuting Horace and Virgil , in the persons of their Successors , ( for such is every Man , who has any part of their Soul and Fire , though in a lesle degree . ) Some of their little Zanies yet go farther ; for they are Persecutors even of Horace himself , as far as they are able , by their ignorant and vile Imitations of him ; by making an unjust use of his Authority , and turning his Artillery against his Friends . But how would he disdain to be Copied by such hands ! I dare answer for him , he would be more uneasy in their Company , than he was with Crispinus their Forefather in the Holy Way ; and would no more have allowed them a place amongst the Critics , than he would Demetrius the Mimic , and Tigellius the Buffoon ; 

— Demetri , teque Tigelli , 
Discipulorum inter jubeo plorare Cathedras . 


With what scorn would he look down on such miserable Translators , who make Doggrel of his Latin , mistake his meaning , misapply his Censures , and often contradict their own ? He is fixed as a Landmark to set out the bounds of Poetry , 

— Saxum , antiquum ingens 
Limbs agro positus litem ut discerneret arvis : 


But other Arms than theirs , and other Sinews are required , to raise the weight of such an Author ; and when they would toss him against their Enemies , 

Genua labant , gelidus concrevit frigore sanguis , 
Tum lapis ipse , viri vacuum per inane volutus 
Nec spatium evasit totum , nec pertulit ictum . 


For my part , I would wish no other revenge , either for myself or the rest of the Poets , from this Rhyming Judge of the Twelve-penny Gallery , this Legitimate Son of Sternhold , than that he would subscribe his Name to his Censure , or ( not to tax him beyond his Learning ) set his Mark : for should he own himself publicly , and come from behind the Lion's Skin , they whom he condemns would be thankful to him , they whom he praises would choose to be Condemned ; and the Magistrat●… whom he has Elected , would modestly withdraw from their Employment , to avoid the scandal of his Nomination . The sharpness of ●…is Satyr , next to himself , falls most heavily on his Friends , and they ought never to forgive him for commending them perpetually the wrong way , and sometimes by contraries . If he have a Friend whose hastiness in writing is his greatest fault , Horace would have taught him to 〈◊〉 minced the matter , and to have called it read●…ness of thought , and a flowing Fancy ; for Friendship will allow a Man to Christen an imperfection by the Name of some Neighbour virtue : 

Vellem in amicitiâ sic erraremus ; & isti 
Errori , nomen virtus poss●…sset honestum . 


But he would never have allowed him to have called a slow Man hasty , or a hasty Writer a slow Drudge , as Juvenal explains it : 

— — Canibus pigris , scabieque vetust●… 
Levibus , & siccae lambentibus or a lueernae 
Nomen erit , Pa●…dus , Tigris , Leo ; si quid adhuc est , 
Quod fremit in terris violentius . 


Yet Lucretius Laughs at a foolish Lover , even for excusing the Imperfections of his Mistress : 

Nigra 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 est , immunda & foetida 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 
Balba loqui non quit , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; muta pudens est , etc.  


But to drive it , ad Aethiopem Cygnum is not to be endured . I leave him to interpret this by the Benefit of his French Version on the other side , and without farther considering him , than I have the rest of my illiterate Censors , whom I have disdained to Answer , because they are not qualified for Judges . It remains that I acquaint the Reader , that I have endeavoured in this Play to follow the practice of the Ancients , who , as Mr. Rymer has judiciously observed , are and aught to be our Masters . Horace likewise gives it for a Rule in his Art of Poetry , 

— — Vos exemplaria Graeca 
Nocturnâ versate manu , versate diurnâ . 


Yet , though their Models are regular , they are too little 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 lish Tragedy ; which requires to be built in a larger Compa●… 〈◊〉 could give an instance in the Oedipus Tyrannus , which was the Masterpiece of Sophocles ; but I reserve it for a more fit occasion , which I hope to have hereafter . In my Style I have professed to imitate ●…e Divine Shakespeare ; which that I might perform more freely , I have disincumbered myself from Rhyme . Not that I condemn my former way , but that this is more proper to my present Purpose . I hope I need not to explain myself , that I have not Copied my Author servile●…y : Words and Phrases must of necessity receive a Change in succeeding Ages : but 't is almost a Miracle that much of his Language remains so pure ; and that he who began Dramatic Poetry amongst us , untaught by any , and , as Ben. Johnson tells us , without Learning , should by the force of his own Genius perform so much , that in a manner he has left no Praise for any who come after him . The occasion is fair , and the Subject would be pleasant to handle the difference of Styles betwixt him and Fletcher , and wherein , and how far they are both to be imitated . But since I must not be over-consident of my own performance after him , it will be prudence in me to be silent . Yet I hope I may affirm , and without vanity , that by imitating him , I have excelled myself throughout the Play ; and particularly , that I prefer the Scene betwixt Anthony and Ventidius in the first Act , to any thing which I have written in this kind . 

PROLOGUE to Anthony and Cleopatra . 

What Flocks of Critics hover here to day , 
As Vultures wait on Armies for their Prey , 
All gaping for the Carcase of a Play ! 
With Croaking Notes they bided some dire event ; 
And follow dying Poets by the scent . 
Ours gives himself for gone ; you've watched your time ! 
He fights this day unarmed ; without his Rhyme . 
And brings a Tale which often has been told ; 
As sad as Dido's ; and almost as old . 
His Hero , whom you Wits his Bully call , 
Bates of his mettle ; and scarce rants at all : 
he 's somewhat lewd ; but a wellmeaning mind ; 
Weeps much ; fights little ; but is wondrous kind . 
In short , a Pattern , and Companion fit , 
For all thee keeping Tonyes' of the Pit. 
I could name more ; A Wife , and Mistress too ; 
Both ( to be plain ) too good for most of you : 
The Wife well-natured , and the Mistress true . 
Now , Poets , if your fame has been his care ; 
Allow him all the Candour you can spare . 
A brave Man scorns to quarrel once a day ; 
Like Hector's , in at every petty fray , 
Let those find fault whose wit 's so very small , 
  need to show that they can think at all : 
Errors like Straws upon the surface flow ; 
He who would search for Pearls must dive below . 
Fops may have leave to levelly all they can ; 
As Pigmies would be glad to lop a Man 
Half-wits are Fleas ; so little and so light ; 
We scarce could know they live ; but that they by't . 
But , as the Rich , when tired with daily Feasts , 
For change , become their next poor Tenants Guests ; 
Drink hearty Draughts of Ale , from plain brown Bowls , 
And snatch the homely Rasher from the Coals : 
So you , retiring from much better Cheer , 
For once , may venture to do penance here . 
And since that plenteous Autumn now is past , 
Whose Grapes and Peaches have Indulged your taste , 
Take in good part from our poor Poet's board , 
Such riveled Fruits as Winter can afford . 
persons Represented . 

  By Marc Anthony , Mr. Hart.  Ventidius , his General , Mr. Mohun . Dollabella , his Friend , Mr. Clarke . Alexas , the Queen's Eunuch , Mr. Goodman . Serapion , Priest of Isis , Servant to Anthony , Mr. Griffin . Another Priest , Servant to Anthony , Mr. Coysh . Cleopatra , Queen of Egypt , Mistress Boutell . Octavia , Anthony's Wife , Mistress Corey . Charmion , Cleopatra is Maids . Iras , Anthony's two little Daughters .   

Scene Alexandria . 

ALL for LOVE ; OR , THE World well Lost.  

ACT. I SCENE , The Temple of Isis.  

Enter Serapion , Myris , Priests of Isis.  Serap .  Portents and Prodigies are grown so frequent , 
That they have lost their Name . Our fruitful Nile 
Flowed ever the wont Season , with a Torrent 
So unexpected , and so wondrous fierce , 
That the wild Deluge overtook the haste , 
Even of the Hinds that watched it : Men and Beasts 
Were born above the tops of Trees , that grew 
On th' utmost Margin of the Water-mark . 
then , with so swift an Ebb , the Flood driven backward 
It slipped from underneath the Scaly Herd : 
Here monstrous Phocoe panted on the Shore ; 
Forsaken Dolphins there , with their broad Tails , 
Lay lashing the departing Waves : Hard by 'em , 
Sea-horses floundring in the slimy Mud , 
Tossed up their heads , and dashed the ooze about ' 'em . 
Enter Alexas behind them . 

Myr.   Avert these Omens , Heaven . 


Serap .  Last night , between the hours of Twelve and One , 
In a loan Isle o' th' Temple , while I walked , 
A Whirlwind rose , that , with a violent blast , 
Shaken all the Dome : the Doors around me clap , 
The Iron Wicket that defends the Vault , 
Where the long Race of P●…olomies' is laid , 
Burst open , and disclosed the mighty dead . 
From out each Monument , in order placed , 
An Armed Ghost start up : the Boy-king last 
Reared his inglorious head . A peal of groans 
then followed , and a lamentable Voice 
Cried , Egypt is no more . My blood ran back , 
My shaking Knees against each other knocked ; 
On the cold Pavement , down I fell 〈◊〉 , 
And so unfinished left the horrid Scene . 


Alexas showing himself .  And , Dreamed you this ? or , Did invent the Story ? 
To frighten our Egyptian Boys withal , 
And train 'em up betimes in fear of Priesthood ? 


Serap .  My Lord , I saw you not , 
Nor meant my words should reach your Ears ; but what 
I uttered was most true . 


Alex.   A foolish Dream , 
bred from the fumes of indigested Feasts , 
And holy Luxury . 


Serap .  I know my duty : 
This goes no farther . 


Alex.   't is not fit it should . 
Nor would the times now bear it , were it true . 
All Southern , from you Hills , the Roman Camp 
Hangs over us black and threatening , like a Storm 
Just breaking on our Heads . 


Serap .  Our faint Egyptians pray for Antony ; 
But in their Servile Hearts they own Octavius . 


Myr.   Why then does Antony dream out his hours , 
And tempts not Fortune for a noble Day , 
Which might redeem what Actium lost ? 


Alex.   He thinks 't is past recovery . 


Serap .  Yet the Foe 
Seems not to press the Siege . 


Alex.   OH , there 's the wonder . 
Maecenas and Agrippa , who can most 
With Caesar are his Foes . His Wife Octavia , 
Driven from his House , solicits her Revenge ; 
And Dolabella , who was once his Friend , 
Upon some private grudge , now seeks his ruin : 
Yet still War seems on either side to sleep . 


Serap .  't is strange that Antony , for some days past , 
Has not beheld the face of Cleopatra ; 
But here , in Isis' Temple , life's retired , 
And makes his Heart a Prey to black despair . 


Alex.   't is true ; and we much fear he hopes by absence 
To cure his mind of Love.  


Serap .  If he be vanquished , 
Or make his peace , Egypt is doomed to be 
A Roman Province ; and our plenteous Harvests 
Must then redeem the sca●…eness of their Soil . 
While Antony stood firm , our Alexandria 
Rivalled proud Rome ( Dominions other Seat ) 
And fortune striding , like a vas●… Colossus , 
Could fix an equal foot of Empire here . 


Alex.   Had I my wish , these 〈◊〉 of all Nature 
Who Lord it over Mankind , should perish , perish , 
Each by the others Sword ; but , since our Will 
Is lamely followed by our power , we must 
Depend on one ; with him to rise or fall . 


Serap .  How stands the Queen affected ? 


Alex.   OH , she dotes , 
She dotes , Serapion , on this vanquished Man , 
And winds herself about his mighty ruins , 
Whom would she yet forsake , yet yield him up , 
This hunted Prey , to his pursuers hands , 
She might preserve us all ; but 't is in vain — 
This changes my designs , this blasts my Counsels , 
And makes me use all means to keep him here , 
Whom I could wish divided from her Arms 
Far as the Earth's deep Centre . Well , you know 
The state of things ; no more of your ill Omens , 
And black Prognostics ; labour to confirm 
The People's Hearts . 
Enter Ventidius , talking aside with a Gentleman of Antony's . 

Serap .  These Romans will o'er hear us . 
But , who 's that Stranger ? By his warlike port , 
His fierce demeanour , and erected look , 
he 's of no vulgar note . 


Alex.   OH 't is Ventidius , 
Our Emp'rors' great Lieutenant in the East , 
Who first showed Rome , that Parthia could be Conquered . 
When Antony returned from Syria last , 
He left this Man to guard the Roman Frontiers . 


Serap .  You seem to know him well . 


Alex.   Too well . I saw him in Cilicia first , 
When Cleopatra there met Antony : 
A mortal Foe he was to us , and Egypt . 
But , let me witness to the worth I hate , 
A braver Roman never drew a Sword. 
Firm to his Prince ; but , as a Friend , not Slave . 
He ne'er was of his Pleasures ; but precides 
O'er all his cooler hours and morning counsels : 
In short , the plainness , fierceness , rugged virtue 
Of an old true-stampt Roman lives in him . 
His coming bodes I know not what of ill 
To our affairs . Withdraw , to mark him better ; 
And I 'll acquaint you , why I sought you here , 
And what 's our present work , 
They withdraw to a corner of the Stage ; and Ventidius , with the other , comes forward to the front . 

Ventidius .  Not see him , say you ? 
I say , I must and william  


Gent.   He has commanded , 
On pain of Death , none should approach his Presence : 


Ven.   I bring him news will raise his drooping Spirits , 
Give him new life . 


Gent.   He sees not Cleopatra . 


Ven.   Would he had never seen her . 


Gent.   He Eats not , Drinks not , Sieeps not , has no use 
Of any thing , but Thought ; or , if he Talks , 
't is to himself , and then 't is perfect Raving : 
then he defies the World , and bids it pass ; 
Sometimes he gnaws his Lip , and Curses loud 
The Boy Octavius ; then he draws his Mouth 
Into a scornful Smile , and cries , Take all , 
The world 's not worth my care . 


Ven.   Just , just his nature . 
virtue 's his path ; but sometimes 't is too narrow 
For his vast Soul ; and then he starts out wide , 
And bounds into a Vice that bears him far 
From his first course , and plunges him in ills : 
But , when his danger makes him find his fault , 
Quick to observe , and full of sharp remorse , 
He censures eagerly his own misdeeds , 
Judging himself with Malice to himself , 
And not forgiving what as Man he did , 
Because his other parts are more than Man 
He must not thus be lost . 
[ Alexas and the Priests c●…e forward . 

Alex.   You have your full Instructions , now advance ; 
Proclaim your Orders loudly . 


Serap .  Romans , Egyptians , hear the Queen's Command . 
Thus Cleopatra bids , Let Labour cease , 
To Pomp and Triumphs give this happy day , 
That gave the World a Lord : 't is Antony's . 
Live , Antony ; and Cleopatra live . 
Be this the general voice sent up to Heaven , 
And every public place repeat this echo . 


Ven.   aside . Fine Pageantry ! 


Serap .  Set out before your doors 
The Images of all your sleeping Fathers , 
With Laurels crowned ; with Laurels wreathe your posts , 
And strew with Flowers the Pavement ; Let the Priests 
Do present Sacrifice ; pour out the Wine , 
And call the Gods to join with you in gladness . 


Ven.   Curse on the Tongue that bids this general joy . 
Can they be friends of Antony , who Revel 
When Antony's in danger ? hide , for shame , 
You Romans , your Great Grandsire's Images , 
For fear their Souls should animate their Marbles , 
To blush at their degenerate Progeny . 


Alex.   A Love which knows no bounds to Antony , 
Would mark the Day with Honours ; when all Heaven 
Laboured for him , when each propitious Star 
Stood wakeful in his Orb , to watch that Hour , 
And shed his better influence . Her own Birthday 
Our Queen neglected , like a vulgar Fate , 
That passed obscurely by . 


Ven.   Would it had slept , 
Divided far from his ; till some remote 
And future Age had called it out , to ruin 
Some other Prince , not him . 


Alex.   Your Emperor . 
Tho' grown unkind , would be more gentle , than 
T' upbraid my Queen for loving him too well . 


Ven.   Does the mute Sacrifice upbraid the Priest ? 
He knows him not his Executioner . 
OH , she has decked his ruin with her Love , 
Led him in Golden Bands to gaudy slaughter , 
And made perdition pleasing : She has left him 
The blank of what he was ; 
I tell thee , Eunuch , she has unmanned him : 
Can any Roman see , and know him now , 
Thus altered from the Lord of half Mankind , 
Unbent , unsinewed made a Woman's Toy , 
Shrunk from the vast extent of all his Honours , 
And cramped within a corner of the World ? 
OH , Antony ! 
thou bravest Soldier , and thou best of Friends ! 
Bounteous as Nature ; next to nature 's God 
Couldst thou but make new Worlds , so wouldst thou give 'em , 
As Bounty were thy Being , Rough in Battle , 
As the first Romans , when they went to War ; 
Yet , after Victory , more pitiful , 
Than all their Praying Virgins left at home ! 


Alex.   Would you could add to those more shining Virtues , 
His Truth to her who love's him . 


Ven.   Would I could not . 
But , wherefore waste I precious hours with thee ? 
thou art her Darling mischief , her chief Engine , 
Antony's other Fate . Go , tell thy Queen , 
Ventidius is arrived , to end her Charms . 
Let your Egyptian Timbrels play alone ; 
Nor mix Effeminate Sounds with Roman Trumpets . 
You dare not fight for Antony ; go Pray , 
And keep your Cowards-holy-day in Temples . 
[ Exeunt Alex. Serap . Re-enter the Gentleman of M. Antony . 

2 Gent.   The Emperor approaches , and commands , 
On pain of death that none presume to stay . 


1 Gent.   I dare not disobey him . 
[ Going out with the other . 

Vent .  Well , I dare . 
But , I 'll observe him first unseen , and find 
Which way his humour drives : the rest I 'll venture . 
[ Withdraws . Enter Antony , walking with a disturbed Motion , before he speaks . 

Antony .  They tell me 't is my Birthday , and I 'll keep it 
With double pomp of sadness 
't is what the Day deserves , which gave me breath . 
Why was I raised the Meteor of the World , 
Hung in the Skies , and blazing as I travelled , 
Till all my fires were spent ; and then cast downward 
To be trodden out by Caesar ? 


Ven.   aside . On my Soul , 
't is mournful , wondrous mournful ! 


Anto.   Count thy Gains . 
Now , Antony , Wouldst thou be born for this ? 
Glutton of Fortune , thy devouring youth 
Has starved thy wanting Age.  


Ven.   How Sorrow shakes him ! 
[ aside . So , now the Tempest tears him ●…p by th' Roots , 
And on the ground extends the noble Ruin.  
Ant. having thrown himself down . Lie there , thou shadow of an Emperor ; 
The place thou pressest on thy Mother-earth 
Is all thy Empire now : now it contains thee ; 
Some few days hence , and then 't will be too large , 
When thou 'rt contracted in thy narrow Urn , 
Shrunk to a few cold Ashes ; then Octavia , 
( For Cleopatra will not live to see it ) 
Octavia then will have thee all her own , 
And bear thee in her Widowed hand to Caesar ; 
Caesar will weep , the Crocodile will weep , 
To see his Rival of the Universe 
Lie still and peaceful there . I 'll think no more on 't . 
Give me some Music ; look that it be sad : 
I 'll soothe my Melancholy till I swell , 
And burst myself with sighing — 
Sofe Music . 't is somewhat to my humour . Stay , I fancy 
I 'm now turned wild , a Commoner of Nature ; 
Of all forsaken , and forsaking all ; 
Live in a shady Forest's Sylvan Scene , 
Stretched at my length beneath some blasted Oak ; 
I lean my head upon the Mossy Bark , 
And look just of a piece , as I grew from it : 
My uncombed Locks , matted like Misleto , 
hang o'er my hoary Face ; a murmuring Brook 
Runs at my foot . 


Ven.   Methinks I fancy 
Myself there too . 


Ant.   The Herd come jumping by me , 
And fearless , quench their thirst , while I look on , 
And take me for their fellow-citizen , 
more of this Image , more ; it lulls my thoughts . 
[ Soft Music again . 

Ven.   I must disturb him ; I can hold no longer . 
[ Stands before him . 

Ant.   starting up . Art thou Ventidius ? 


Ven.   Are you Antony ? 
I 'm liker what I was , than you to him 
I left you last . 


Ant.   I 'm angry . 


Ven.   So am I  


Ant.   I would be private : leave me . 


Ven.   Sir , I love you . 
And therefore will not leave you . 


Ant.   Will not leave me ? 
Where have you learned that Answer ? Who am I ? 


Ven.   My Emperor ; the Man I love next Heaven : 
If I said more , I think 't were scarce a Sin ; 
y' are all that 's good , and good-like . 


Ant.   All that 's wretched . 
You will not leave me then ? 


Ven.   'T was to presuming 
To say I would not ; but I dare not leave you : 
And , 't is unkind in you to chide me hence 
So soon , when I so far have come to see you . 


Ant.   Now thou hast seen me , art thou satisfied ? 
For , if a Friend , thou hast beheld enough ; 
And , if a Foe , too much . 


Ven.   weeping . Look , Emperor , this is no common Dew . 
I have not wept this Forty years ; but now 
My Mother comes afresh into my Eyes ; 
I cannot help her softness . 


Ant.   By Heaven , he weeps , poor good old Man , he weeps ! 
The big round drops course one another down 
The furrows of his Cheeks . Stop 'em , Ventidius , 
Or I shall blush to death : they set my shame , 
That caused 'em , full before me . 


Ven.   I 'll do my best . 


Ant.   Sure there 's contagion in the tears of Friends : 
See , I have caught it too . Believe me , 't is not 
For my own griefs , but thine — Nay , Father . 


Ven.   Emperor . 


Ant.   Emperor ! Why , that 's the style of victory , 
The Conquering Soldier , read with unfelt wounds , 
Salutes his General so : but never more 
Shall that sound reach my Ears . 


Ven.   I warrant you . 


Ant.   Actium , Actium ! O — 


Ven.   It sits too near you . 


Ant.   Here , here it lies ; a lump of Lead by day , 
And , in my short distracted nightly slumbers , 
The Hag that rides my Dreams — 


Vent .  Out with it ; give it vent . 


Ant.   Urg not my shame . 
I lost a Battle . 


Vent .  So has Julius done . 


Ant.   thou favourest me , and speakest not half thou think'st ; 
For Julins fought it out , and lost it fairly : 
But Antony — 


Ven.   Nay , stop not . 


Ant.   Antony . 
( Well , thou wilt have it ) like a Coward fled , 
Fled while his Soldiers fought ; fled first , Ventidius . 
thou longest to curse me , and I give the leave . 
I know thou comest prepared to rail . 


Ven.   I did . 


Ant.   I 'll help thee — — I have been a Man , Ventidius . 


Ven.   Yes , and a brave one ; but — 


Ant.   I know thy meaning . 
But , I have lost my Reason , have disgraced 
The name of Soldier , with inglorious ease . 
In the full Vintage of my flowing honours , 
Sat still , and saw it pressed by other hands . 
Fortune came smiling to my youth , and wooed it , 
And purple greatness met my ripened years . 
When first I came to Empire , I was born 
On Tides of people , crowding to my Triumphs ; 
The wish of Nations ; and the willing World 
Received me as its pledge of future peace ; 
I was so great , so happy , so beloved , 
Fate could not ruin me ; till I took pains 
And worked against my Fortune , chid her from me , 
And turned her loose ; yet still she came again . 
My careless days , and my luxurious nights , 
At length have wearied her , and now she 's gone , 
gone , gone , divorced for ever . Help me , Soldier , 
To curse this Madman , this industrious Fool , 
Who laboured to be wretched : prithee curse me . 


Ven.   No.  


Ant.   Why ? 


Ven.   You are too sensible already 
Of what you've done , too conscious of your failing , 
And , like a Scorpion , whipped by others first 
To fury , sting yourself in mad revenge . 
I would bring Balm and pour it in your Wounds , 
Cure your distempered mind , and heal your fortunes . 


Ant.   I know thou wouldst . 


Ven.   I william  


Ant.   ha , ha , ha , ha . 


Ven.   You Laugh . 


Ant.   I do , to see officious love 
Give Cordials to the dead . 


Ven.   You would be lost then ? 


Ant.   I am . 


Ven.   I say , you are not . Try your fortune . 


Ant.   I have to th' utmost . Dost thou think me desperate . 
Without just cause ? no , when I found all lost 
Beyond repair , I hid me from the World , 
And learned to scorn it here ; which now I do 
So heartily , I think it is not worth 
The cost of keeping . 


Ven.   Caesar thinks not so : 
he 'll thank you for the gift he could not take . 
You would be killed , like Tully , would you ? do , 
Hold out your Throat to Caesar , and die tamely . 


Ant.   no , I can kill myself ; and so resolve . 


Ven.   I can die with you too , when time shall serve ; 
But Fortune calls upon us now to live , 
To Fight , to Conquer . 


Ant.   Sure thou Dreamest , Ventidius . 


Ven.   no , 't is you Dream ; you sleep away your hours 
In desperate sloth , miscalled Philosophy . 
Up , up , for Honour's sake ; twelve Legions wait you , 
And long to call you Chief : by painful Journeys , 
I led 'em , patient , both of heat and hunger , 
Down from the Parthian Marches , to the Nile . 
'T will do you good to see their Sunburnt Faces , 
Their scared Cheeks and chopped hands ; there 's virtue in 'em , 
they 'll sell those mangled Limbs at dearer Rates 
Than you trim Bands can buy . 


Ant.   Where left you them ? 


Ven.   I said , in lower Syria . 


Ant.   Bring 'em hither ; 
There may be life in these . 


Ven.   They will not come . 


Ant.   Why didst thou mock my hopes with promised aids 
To double my despair ? they 're mutinous . 


Ven.   Most firm and loyal . 


Ant.   Yet they will not March 
To succour me . O trifler ! 


Ven.   They petition 
You would make haste to head ' 'em . 


Ant.   I 'm besieg●…d . 


Ven.   there 's but one way shut up : How came I hither ? 


Ant.   I will not stir . 


Ven.   They would perhaps desire 
A better reason . 


Ant.   I have never used 
My Soldiers to demand a reason of 
My actions . Why did they refuse to March ? 


Ven.   They said , they would not fight for Cleopatra . 


Ant.   What was 't they said ? 


Venus   They said they would not fight for Cleopatra . 
Why should they fight , indeed , to make her Conquer , 
And make you more a Slave ? to gain you Kingdoms , 
Which , for a Kiss , at your next Midnight Feast , 
you 'll sell to her ? then she new names her Jewels , 
And calls this Diamond such or such a Tax , 
Each Pendant in her ear shall be a Province . 


Ant.   Ventidius , I allow your Tongue free licence 
On all my other faults ; but , on your life , 
no word of Cleopatra : She deserves 
more World's than I can lose . 


Ven.   Behold , you Powers , 
To whom you have entrusted Humankind ; 
See Europe , Africa , Asia , put in balance , 
And all weighed down by one light worthless Woman ! 
I think the Gods are Antony's , and give 
Like Prodigals , this nether World away , 
To none but wasteful hands . 


Ant.   You grow presumptuous . 


Ven.   I take the privilege of plain love to speak . 


Antony's   Plain love ! plain arrogance , plain insolence : 
Thy Men are Cowards ; thou an envious Traitor ; 
Who , under seeming honesty , hast vented 
The burden of thy rank o'reflowing Gall. 
OH that thou wert my equal ; great in Arms. 
As the first Caesar was , that I might kill thee 
Without a Stain to Honour ! 


Ven.   You may k●…e ; 
You have done more already , called me Traitor . 


Ant.   Art thou not one ? 


Ven.   For showing you yourself , 
Which none else durst have done ; but had I been 
That name , which I disdain to speak again , 
I needed not have sought your abject fortunes , 
Come to partake your fate , to die with you . 
What hindered me t' have led my Conquering Eagles 
To fill Octavius' Bands ? I could have been 
A Traitor then , a glorious happy Traitor , 
And not have been so called . 


Ant.   Forgive me , Soldier : 
i  been too passionate , 


Ven.   You thought me false ; 
Thought my old Age betrayed you : kill me , Sir ; 
Pray kill me ; yet you need not , your unkindness 
Has left your Sword no work . 


Ant.   I did not think so ; 
I said it in my rage : prithee forgive me : 
Why didst thou tempt my Anger , by discovery 
Of what I would not hear ? 


Ven.   no Prince but you , 
could merit that sincerity I used , 
Nor durst another Man have ventured it ; 
But you , ever Love misled your wand'ring Eyes , 
Were sure the chief and best of Human Race , 
Framed in the very pride and boast of Nature , 
So perfect , that the Gods who formed you , wondered 
At their own skill , and cried , A lucky hit 
Has mended our design . Their envy hindered , 
Else you had been Immortal , and a pattern , 
When Heaven would work for ostentation sake , 
To copy out again . 


Ant.   But Cleopatra — 
Go on ; for I can bear it now . 


Ven.   no more . 


Ant.   thou dar'st not trust my Passion ; but thou may'st : 
thou only lov'st ; the rest have flattered me . 


Ven.   Heavens' blessing on your heart for that kind word . 
May I believe you love me ? speak again . 


Ant.   Indeed I do . Speak this , and this , and this . 
[ Hugging him . Thy praises were unjust ; but I 'll deserve 'em , 
And yet mend all . Do with me what thou wilt , 
Led me to victory , thou knowest the way . 


Ven.   And , Will you leave this — 


Ant.   Prithee do not curse her , 
And I will leave her ; though , Heaven knows , I love 
Beyond Life , Conquest , Empire ; all , but Honour , 
But I will leave her . 


Ven.   that 's my Royal Master . 
And , Shall we Fight ? 


Ant.   I warrant thee , old Soldier , 
thou shalt behold me once again in Iron , 
And at the head of our old Troops , that beaten 
The Parthians , cry aloud , Come follow me . 


Ven.   OH now I hear my Emperor ! in that word 
Octavius fell . Gods , let me see that day , 
And if I have Ten years behind , take all ; 
Ill thank you for th' exchange . 


Ant.   O Cleopatra ! 


Ven.   Again ? 


Ant.   i  done : in that last Sigh she went. 
Caesar shall know what 't is to force a Lover , 
From all he holds most dear . 


Ven.   Methinks you breathe 
Another Soul : Your looks are more Divine ; 
You speak a Hero , and you move a God.  


Ant.   OH , thou hast fired me ; my soul 's up in Arms , 
And Man's each part about me : once again , 
That noble eagerness of Fight has seized me ; 
That eagerness with which I darted upward 
To Cassius' Camp : In vain the steepy Hill. 
Opposed my way ; in vain a War of Spears 
Sung round my head ; and planted all my shield : 
I won the Trenches , while my foremost Men 
Lagged on the Plain below . 


Ven.   ye Gods , ye Gods , 
For such another hour . 


Ant.   Come on , my Soldier ! 
Our Hearts and Arms are still the same : I long 
Once more to meet our Foes ; that thou and I , 
Like Time and Death , marching before our Troops , 
May taste fate to 'em ; Mowe 'em out a passage , 
And entering where the foremost Squadrons yield , 
●…egin the noble Harvest of the Field . 
[ Exeunt . 

ACT. II  

Cleopatra , Iras , and Alexas . Cleop.   What shall I do , or whither shall I turn ? 
Ventidius has overcome , and he will go . 


Alex.   He goes to Fight for you . 


Cleo.   then he would see me ever he went to fight : 
Flatter me not : if once he goes , he 's lost : 
And all my hopes destroyed . 


Alex.   Does this weak passion 
Become a Mighty Queen ? 


Cleo.   I am no Queen ; 
Is this to be a Queen , to be besieged 
By yond insulting Roman ; and to wait 
Each hour the Victor's Chain ? These ills are small ; 
For Antony is lost , and I can Mourn 
For nothing else but him . Now come , Octavius , 
I have no more to lose ; prepare thy Bands ; 
I 'm fit to be a Captive : Antony 
Has taught my mind the fortune of a Slave . 


Iras.   Call Reason to assist you . 


Cleo.   I have none . 
And none would have : my love 's a noble madness . 
Which shows the cause deserved it . Moderate sorrow 
Fits vulgar Love ; and for a vulgar Man : 
But I have loved with such transcendent passion , 
I soared , at first , quite out of Reason's view , 
And now am lost above it — no , I 'm proud 
't is thus , would Antony could see me now ; 
Think you he would not sigh ? though he must leave me , 
Sure he would sigh ; for he is noble-natured , 
And bears a tender heart ●… I know him well . 
Ah , no , I know him not ; I knew him once , 
But now 't is past . 


Iras.   Let it be passed with you : 
Forget him , Madam . 


Cleo.   Never , never , Iras. 
He once was mine ; and once , though now 't is gone , 
Leaves a faint Image of possession still . 


Alex.   Think him unconstant , cruel , and ungrateful : 


Cleo.   I cannot : if I could , those thoughts were vain ; 
Faithless , ungrateful , cruel , though he be , 
I still must love him . 
Enter Charmion . Now , What news my Charmion ? 
Will he be kind ? and Will he not forsake me ? 
am I to live , or die ? nay , Do I live ? 
Or am I dead ? for when he gave his answer , 
Fate took the word , and then I lived , or died . 


Char.   I found him , Madam — 


Cleo.   A long Speech preparing ? 
If thou bring'st comfort , haste , and give it me ; 
For never was more need . 


Iras.   I know he love's you . 


Cleo.   Had he been kind , her Eyes had told me so , 
Before her Tongue could speak it : now she studies , 
To soften what he said ; but give me death , 
Just as he sent it , Charmion , undisguised , 
And in the words he spoken . 


Char.   I sound him then 
Encompassed round , I think , with Iron Statues , 
So mute , so motionless his Soldiers stood , 
While awfully he cast his Eyes about , 
And every Leaders hopes or fears surveyed : 
Methought he looked resolved , and yet not pleased . 
When he beheld me struggling in the crowd , 
He blushed , and bad , make way . 


Alex.   there 's comfort yet . 


Char.   Ventidius fixed his Eyes upon my passage , 
Severely , as he meant to frown me back , 
And sullenly gave place : I told my message . 
Just as you gave it , broken and disordered ; 
I numbered in it all your sighs and tears , 
And while I moved your pitiful request , 
That you but only begged a last farewel , 
He fetch an inward groan , and every time 
I named you , sighed , as if his heart were breaking , 
But shunned my Eyes , and guiltily looked down ; 
He seemed not now that awful Antony 
Who shaken an Armed Assembly with his Nod , 
But making show as he would rub his Eyes , 
Disguised and blotted out a falling tear . 


Cleo.   Did he then weep ? and , Was I worth a tear ? 
If what thou hast to say be not as pleasing , 
Tell me no more , but let me die contented . 


Char.   He bid me say , He knew himself so well , 
He could deny you nothing , if he saw you ; 
And therefore — 


Cleo.   thou would say , he would not see me ? 


Charm.   And therefore begged you not to use a power , 
Which he could ill resist ; yet he should ever 
Respect you as he ought . 


Cleo.   Is that a word 
For Antony to use to Cleopatra ? 
O that faint word , Respect ! how I disdain it ! 
Disdain myself , for loving after it ! 
He should have kept that word for cold Octavia . 
Respect is for a Wife : am I that thing , 
That dull insipid lump , without desires , 
And without power to give ' 'em ? 


Alex.   You misjudge ; 
You see through Love , and that deludes your sight : 
As , what is straight , seems crooked through the Water ; 
But I , who bear my reason undisturbed , 
Can see this Antony , this dreaded Man , 
A fearful slave , who fain would run away , 
And shuns his Master's Eyes : if you pursue him , 
My life on 't , he still drags a chain along , 
That needs must clog his flight . 


Cleo.   could I believe thee ! — 


Alex.   By every circumstance I know he Love's . 
True , he 's hard pressed , by Interest and by Honour ; 
Yet he but doubts , and parleys , and casts out 
Many a long looked for succour . 


Cleo.   He sends word , 
He fears to see my face , 


Alex.   And would you more ? 
He shows his weakness who declines the Combat ; 
And you must urge your fortune . could he speak 
more plainly ? To my Ears , the Message sounds 
Come to my rescue , Cleopatra , come ; 
Come , free me ●…rom Ventidius ; from my Tyrant : 
See me , and give me a pretence to leave him . 
I hear his Trumpets . This way he must pass . 
Please you , retire a while ; I 'll work him first , 
That he may bend more easy . 


Cleo.   You shall rule me ; 
But all , I fear , in vain . 
[ Exit with Char. and Iras 

Alex.   I fear so too ! 
Though I concealed my thoughts , to make her b●…ld : 
But , 't is our utmost means , and Fate befriend it . 
[ Withdraws . Enter Lictors with Fasces ; one bearing the Eagle : then Enter Antony with Ventidius , followed by other Commanders . 

Ant.   Octavius is the Minion of blind Chance , 
But holds from Virtue nothing . 


Ven.   Has he courage ? 


Ant.   But just enough to season him from Coward . 
OH , 't is the coldest youth upon a Charge , 
The most deliberate fighter ! if he ventures 
( As in Illyria once they say he did 
To storm a Town ) 't is when he cannot choose , 
When all the World have fixed their Eyes upon him ; 
And then he life's on that for seven years after , 
But , at a close revenge he never fails . 


Ven.   I heard , you challenged him . 


Ant.   I did , Ventidius . 
What think'st thou was his answer ? 't was so tame , — 
He said he had more ways than one to die ; 
I had not . 


Ven.   Poor ! 


Ant.   He has more ways than one ; 
But he would choose 'em all before that one . 


Ven.   He first would choose an Ague , or a Fever : 


Ant.   no : it must be an Ague , not a Fever ; 
He has not warmth enough to die by that . 


Ven.   Or old Age , and a Bed.  


Ant.   ay , there 's his choice . 
He would live , like a Lamp , to the last wink , 
And crawl upon the utmost verge of life : 
OH Hercules ! Why should a Man like this , 
Who dares not trust his fate for one great action , 
Be all the care of Heaven ? Why should he Lord it 
O'er Fourscore thousand Men , of whom , each one 
Is braver than himself ? 


Ven.   You conquered for him : 
Philippi knows it : there you shared with him 
That Empire , which your Sword made all your own . 


Ant.   Fool that I was , upon my eagle Wings 
I bore this Wren , till I was tired with soaring , 
And now he mounts above me . 
Good Heavens' , Is this , is this the Man who braves me ? 
Who bids my age make way : drives me before him , 
To the World's ridge , and sweeps me off like rubbish ? 


Ven.   Sir , we loose time ; the Troops are mounted all . 


Ant.   then give the word to March : 
I long to leave this Prison of a Town , 
To join thy Legions ; and , in open Field , 
Once more to show my Face . Led , my Deliverer . 
Enter Alex.  

Alex.   Great Emperor , 
In mighty Arms renowned above Mankind , 
But , in soft pity to th' oppressed , a God : 
This message sends the mournful Cleopatra 
To her departing Lord  


Ven.   Smooth Sycophant ! 


Alex.   A thousand Wishes , and ten thousand Prayers , 
Million of Blessings wait you to the Wars , 
Million of Sighs and Tears she sends you too , 
And would have sent 
As many dear embraces to your Arms , 
As many parting Kisses to your Lips ; 
But those , she fears , have wearied you already . 


Ven.   aside . False Crocodyle ! 


Alex.   And yet she begs not now , you would not leave her , 
That were a wish too mighty for her hopes , 
Too presuming for her low Fortune , and your ebbing Love , 
That were a wish for her more prosperous days , 
Her blooming Beauty , and your growing kindness . 


Ant.   aside . Well , I must Man it out ; What would the Queen ? 


Alex.   First , to these Noble Warriors , who attend , 
Your daring Courage in the chase of Fame , 
( Too daring , and too dangerous for her Quiet ) 
She humbly recommends all she holds dear , 
All her own Cares and Fears , the care of you . 


Ven.   Yes , witness Actium . 


Ant.   Let him speak , Ventidius . 


Alex.   You , when his matchless Valour bears him forward , 
With Ardour too Heroic , on his Foes 
Fall down , as she would do , before his Feet ; 
Lie in his way , and stop the paths of Death ; 
Tell him , this God is not invulnerable , 
That absent Cleopatra bleeds in him ; 
And , that you may remember her Petition , 
She begs you wear these Trifles , as a pawn , 
Which , at your wished return , she will redeem . 
Gives Jewels to the Commanders . With all the Wealth of Egypt : 
This , to the great Ventidius she presents , 
Whom she can never count her Enemy , 
Because he love's her Lord  


Ven.   Tell her I 'll none on 't ; 
I 'm not ashamed of honest Poverty : 
Not all the Diamonds of the East can bribe 
Ventidius from his Faith. I hope to see 
These , and the rest of all her sparkling store , 
Where they shall more deservingly be placed . 


Ant.   And who must wear 'em then ? 


Ven.   The wronged Octavia . 


Ant.   You might have spared that word . 


Ven.   And he that Bribe . 


Ant.   But have I no remembrance ? 


Alex.   Yes , a dear one : 
Your Slave , the Queen — 


Ant.   My Mistress . 


Alex.   then your Mistress , 
Your Mistress would , she says , have sent her Soul , 
But that you had long since ; she humbly begs 
This Ruby Bracelet , set with bleeding Hearts , 
( The emblems of her own ) may bind your Arm.  
[ Presenting a Bracelet : 

Ven.   Now , my best Lord , in Honour's name , I ask you , 
For Manhood's sake , and for your own dear safety , 
Touch not these poisoned Gifts , 
Infected by the Sender , touch 'em not , 
Miriads of bluest Plagues lie underneath 'em , 
And more than Aconite has dipped the Silk . 


Ant.   Nay , now you grow too Cynical , Ventidius . 
A Lady's Favours may be worn with Honor. 
What , to refuse her Bracelet ! On my Soul , 
When I lie pensive in my Tent alone , 
'T will pass the wakeful hours of Winter nights , 
To tell these pretty Beads upon my Arm , 
To count for every one a soft embrace , 
A melting Kiss at such and such a time ; 
And now and then the fury of her Love. 
When — And what harm 's in this ? 


Alex.   None , none my Lord , 
But what 's to her , that now 't is past for ever . 


Ant.   going to tie it . We Soldiers are so awkward — — help me tie it . 


Alex.   In faith , my Lord , we Courtiers too are awkward 
In these Affairs : so are all Men indeed ; 
Even I , who am not one . But shall I speak ? 


Ant.   Yes , freely . 


Alex.   then , my Lord , fair hands alone 
Are fit to tie it ; She , who sent it , can . 


Ven.   Hell , Death ; this Eunuch Pandarus ruins you . 
You will not see her ? 
[ Alexas whispers an Attendant , who goes out . 

Ant.   But to take my leave . 


Ven.   then I have washed an Aethiope . y' are undone ; 
y' are in the Toils ; y' are taken ; y' are destroyed : 
Her Eyes do Caesar's Work.  


Ant.   You fear too soon . 
I 'm constant to myself : I know my strength ; 
And yet she shall not think me barbarous , neither . 
Born in the depths of Africa : I 'm a Roman . 
bred to the Rules of soft Humanity . 
A guest , and kindly used , should bid farewell . 


Ven.   You do not know 
How weak you are to her , how much an Infant : 
You are not proof against a Smile or Glance ; 
A Sighs will quite disarm you . 


Ant.   See , she comes ! 
Now you shall find your error . Gods , I Thank you : 
I formed the danger greater than it was , 
And , now 't is near , 't is lessened . 


Ven.   Mark the end yet . 
Enter Cleopatra , Charmion and Iras.  

Ant.   Well , Madam , we are met . 


Cleo.   Is this a Meeting ? 
then , we must part ? 


Ant.   We must . 


Cleo.   Who says we must ? 


Ant.   Our own hard fates . 


Cleo.   We make those Fates ourselves . 


Ant.   Yes , we have made 'em ; we have loved each other 
Into our mutual Ruin.  


Cleo.   The Gods have seen my Joys with envious Eyes ; 
I have no Friends in Heaven ; and all the World , 
( As 't were the business of Mankind to part us ) 
Is armed against my Love : even you yourself 
Join with the rest ; you , you are armed against me . 


Ant.   I will be justified in all I do 
To late Posterity , and therefore hear me . 
If I mix a Lie 
With any Truth , reproach me freely with it ; 
Else , favour me with silence . 


Cleo.   You command me , 
And I am dumb . 


Ven.   I like this well : he shows Authority . 


Ant.   That I derive my ruin 
From you alone — — 


Cleo.   O Heavens' ! I ruin you ! 


Ant.   You promised me your silence , and you break it 
Ever I have scarce begun . 


Cleo.   Well , I obey you . 


Ant.   When I beheld you first , it was in Egypt , 
Ever Caesar saw your Eyes ; you gave me love , 
And were too young to know it , that I settled 
Your Father in his Throne , was for your sake , 
I left the acknowledgement for time to ripen . 
Caesar stepped in , and with a greedy hand 
Plucked the green Fruit , ever the first blush of red 
Yet cleaving to the bough . He was my Lord , 
And was , beside , too great for me to Rival , 
But , I deserved you first , though he enjoyed you . 
When after , I beheld you in Cilicia , 
An Enemy to Rome , I pardoned you . 


Cleo.   I cleared myself — 


Ant.   Again you break your Promise . 
I loved you still , and took your weak excuses , 
took you into my Bosom , stained by Caesar , 
And not half mine : I went to Egypt with you , 
And hid me from the business of the World , 
Shut out enquiring Nations from my sight , 
To give whole years to you . 


Ven.   Yes , to your shame be 't spoken . 
[ aside . 

Ant.   How I loved 
Witness ye Days and Nights , and all your Hours , 
That Danced away with Down upon your Feet , 
As all your business were to count my Passion . 
One day passed by , and nothing saw but Love ; 
Another came , and still 't was only Love : 
The Suns were wearied out with looking on , 
And I untired with Loving . 
I saw you every day , and all the day ; 
And every day was still but as the first : 
So eager was I still to see you more . 


Ven.   't is all too true . 


Ant.   Fulvia , my Wife , grew jealous , 
As she indeed had reason ; raised a War 
In Italy to call me back . 


Ven.   But yet 
You went not . 


Ant.   While within your Arms I lay , 
The World sell mouldering from my Hands each Hour , 
And left me scarce a grasp ( I thank your love for 't . ) 


Ven.   Well pushed : that last was home . 


Cleop.   Yet may I speak ? 


Ant.   If I have urged a falsehood , yes , else , not . 
Your silence says I have not . Fulvio died ; 
( Pardon , you gods , with my unkindness died ) 
To set the World at Peace , I took Octavia , 
This Caesar's Sister ; in her pride of youth 
And flower of Beauty did I wed that Lady , 
Whom blushing I must praise , because I left her . 
You called ; my Love obeyed the fatal Summons : 
This raised the Roman Arms ; the Cause was yours , 
I would have sought by Land , where I was stronger ; 
You hindered it : yet , when I fought at Sea , 
Forsaken me fight ; and ( O stain to Honour ! 
O lasting shame ! ) I knew not that I fled ; 
But fled to follow you . 


Ven.   What haste she made to hoist her purple Sails ! 
And to appear magnificent in flight , 
drew half our strength away . 


Ant.   All this you caused . 
And , Would you multiply more ruins on me ? 
This honest Man , my best , my only Friend , 
Has gathered up the Shipwreck of my Fortunes ; 
Twelve Legions I have left , my last recruits , 
And you have watched the news , and bring your eyes 
To seize them too . If you have aught to answer , 
Now speak , you have free leave . 


Alex.   aside . She stands confounded : 
Despair is in her Eyes . 


Ven.   Now lay a sigh i' th' way , to stop his passage : 
Prepare a Tear , and bid it for his Legions ; 
't is like they shall be fold . 


Cleo.   How shall I pled my cause , when you , my Judge 
Already have condemned me ? Shall I bring 
The Love you bore me for my Advocate ? 
That now is turned against me , that destroys me ; 
For , love once past , is , at the best , forgotten ; 
But oftener sours to hate : 't will please my Lord 
To ruin me , and therefore I 'll be guilty . 
But , could I once have thought it would have pleased you , 
That you would pry , with narrow searching Eyes 
Into my faults , severe to my destruction : 
And watching all advantages with care , 
That serve to make me wretched ? Speak , my Lord , 
For I end here . Though I deserve this usage , 
Was it like you to give it ? 


Ant.   OH you wrong me , 
To think I sought this parting , or desired 
To accuse you more than what will clear myself , 
And justify this breach . 


Cleo.   Thus low I thank you . 
And since my innocence will not offend , 
I shall not blush to own it . 


Ven.   After this 
I think she 'll blush at nothing . 


Cleo.   You seem grieved , 
( And therein you are kind ) that Caesar first 
Enjoyed my love , though you deserved it better : 
I grieve for that , my Lord , much more than you ; 
For , had I first been yours , it would have saved 
My second choice : I never had been his , 
And ne'er had been but yours . But Caesar first , 
You say , possessed my love . Not so , my Lord ; 
He first possessed my Person ; you my Love : 
Caesar loved me ; but I loved Antony . 
If I endured him after , 't was because 
I judged it due to the first name of Men ; 
And , half constrained , I gave , as to a Tyrant , 
What he would take by force . 


Ven.   OH Siren ! Siren ! 
Yet grant that all the love she boasts were true , 
Has she not ruined you ? I still urge that , 
The fatal consequence . 


Cleo.   The consequence indeed , 
For I dare challenge him , my greatest Foe , 
To say it was designed : 't is true , I loved you , 
And kept you far from an uneasy Wife , 
( Such Fulvia was . ) 
Yes , but he 'll say , you left Octavia for me ; — 
And , Can you blame me to receive that love , 
Which quit such desert , for worthless me ? 
How often have I wished some other Caesar , 
Great as the first , and as the second young , 
Would court my Love to be refused for you ! 


Ven.   Words , words ; but Actium , Sir , remember Actium . 


Cleo.   Even there , I dare his Malice . True , I Counselled 
To fight at Sea ; but I betrayed you not . 
I fled ; but not to the Enemy . 'T was fear ; 
Would I had been a Man , not to have feared , 
For none would then have envied me your friendship , 
Who envy me your Love.  


Ant.   we 're both unhappy : 
If nothing else , yet our ill fortune parts us . 
Speak ; Would you have me perish , by my stay ? 


Cleo.   If as a friend you ask my Judgement , go ; 
If as a Lover , stay . If you must perish : 
't is a hard word ; but stay . 


Ven.   See now th' effects of her so boasted love ! 
She strives to drag you down to ruin with her : 
But , could she escape without you , o how soon 
Would she let go her hold , and haste to shore , 
And never look behind ! 


Cleo.   then judge my love by this . 
[ Giving Antony a Writing . could I have born 
A life or death , a happiness or woe 
From yours divided , this had given me means . 


Ant.   By Hercules , the Writing of Octavius ! 
I know it well ; 't is that prescribing hand , 
Young as it was , that led the way to mine , 
And left me but the second place in Murder . — 
See , see , Ventidius ! here he offers Egypt , 
And joins all Syria to it as a present , 
So , in requital , she forsake my fortunes , 
And join her Arms with his . 


Cleo.   And yet you leave me ! 
You leave me , Antony ; and yet I love you . 
Indeed I do : I have refused a Kingdom , 
that 's a Trifle : 
For I could part with life ; with any thing , 
But only you . OH let me die , but with you ! 
Is that a hard request ? 


Ant.   Next living with you , 
't is all that Heaven can give . 


Alex.   aside . He melts ; We conquer . 


Cleo.   no : you shall go : your Interest calls you hence ; 
Yes , your dear interest pulls too strong , for these 
Weak Arms to hold you here . — 
[ Takes his hand . Go ; leave me , Soldier ; 
( For you 're no more a Lover : ) leave me dying : 
Push me all pale and panting from your Bosom , 
And , when your March begins , let one run after 
Breathless almost for Joy ; and cry , she 's dead : 
The Soldiers shout ; you then perhaps may sigh , 
And muster all your Roman Gravity ; 
Ventidius chides ; and straight your Brow clears up . 
As I had never been . 


Ant.   Gods , 't is too much ; too much for Man to bear ! 


Cleo.   What is 't for me then , 
A weak forsaken Woman ? and a Lover ? — 
Here let me breathe my last : envy me not 
This minute in your Arms : I 'll die apace : 
As fast as ever I can ; and end your trouble . 


Ant.   Die ! Rather let me perish : loos'nd Nature 
Leap from its hinges . Sink the props of Heaven , 
And fall the Skies to crush the nether World. 
My Eyes , my Soul ; my all ! — 
[ Embraces her . 

Ven.   And what 's this Toy 
In balance with your Fortune , Honour , Fame ? 


Ant.   What is 't , Ventidius ? it outweighs 'em all ; 
Why , we have more than Conquered Caesar now : 
My queen 's not only Innocent , but Love's me . 
This , this is she who drags me down to ruin ! 
' Butt , could she escape without me , with what haste 
Would she let slip her hold , and make to shore , 
And never look behind ! 
Down on thy knees , Blasphemer as thou art , 
And ask forgiveness of wronged Innocence . 


Ven.   I 'll rather die , than take it . Will you go ? 


Ant.   Go ! whither ? go from all that 's excellent ! 
Faith , Honour , Virtue , all good things forbid , 
That I should go from her , who sets my love 
Above the price of Kingdoms . Give , you Gods , 
Give to your Boy , your Caesar , 
This Rattle of a Globe to play withal , 
This Gu-gau World , and put him cheaply off : 
I 'll not be pleased with lesle than Cleopatra . 


Cleo.   She wholly yours . My heart 's so full of joy , 
That I shall do some wild extravagance 
Of Love in public ; and the foolish World , 
Which knows not tenderness , will think me Mad.  


Ven.   OH Women ! Women ! Women ! all the Gods 
Have not such power of doing good to Man , 
As you of doing harm . 
[ Exit . 

Ant.   Our Men are Armed . 
Unbar the Gate that looks to Caesar's Camp ; 
I would revenge the Treachery he mea●… me ; 
And long security makes Conquest easy . 
I 'm eager to return before I go ; 
For , all the pleasures I have known , beaten thick 
On my remembrance : how I long for Night ! 
That both the sweets of mutual love may try , 
And once Triumph over Caesar ever we die . 
[ Exeunt . 

ACT III  

At one door , Enter Cleopatra , Charmion , Iras , and Alexas , a Train of Egyptians : at the other , Antony and Romans . The entrance on both sides is prepared by Music ; the Trumpets first sounding on Antony's part : then answered by Timbrels , etc. on Cleopatra's . Charmion and Iras hold a Laurel Wreath betwixt them . A Dance of Egyptians . After the Ceremony , Cleopatra Crowns Antony . Ant.   I Thought how those white arms would fold me in , 
And strain me close , and melt me into love ; 
So pleased with that sweet Image , I sprung forward , 
And added all my strength to every blow . 


Cleo.   Come to me , come my Soldier , to my Arms , 
  been too long away from my embraces ; 
But , when I have you fast , and all my own , 
With broken murmurs , and with amorous sighs , 
I 'll say , you were unkind , and punish you , 
And mark you red with many an eager kiss . 


Ant.   My Brighter Venus ! 


Cleo.   OH my greater Mars ! 


Ant.   thou joinst us well , my Love ! 
Suppose me come from the Phlegraean Plains , 
Where gasping Giants lay , cleft by my Sword : 
And Mountain tops pared off each other blow , 
To bury those I slew : receive me , Goddess : 
Let Caesar spread his subtle Nets , like Vulcan , 
In thy embraces I would be beheld 
By Heaven and Earth at once : 
And make their envy what they meant their sport 
Let those who took us blush ; I would love on 
With awful State , regardless of their frowns , 
As their superior God. 
there 's no satiety of Love , in thee ; 
Enjoyed , thou still art new ; perpetual Spring 
Is in thy arms ; the ripened fruit but falls , 
And blossoms rise to fill its empty place ; 
And I grow rich by giving . 
Enter Ventidius , and stands apart . 

Alex.   OH , now the danger 's past , your General 〈◊〉 
He joins not in your joys , nor mind's your Triumphs , 
But , with contracted brows , looks frowning on , 
As envying your Success . 


Ant.   Now , on my Soul , he love's me ; truly love's me ; 
He never flattered me in any vice , 
But awes me with his virtue : even this minute 
Methinks he has a right of chiding me . 
Led to the Temple : I 'll avoid his presence ; 
It cheques too strong upon me . 
[ Exeunt the rest . As Antony is going , Ventidius pulls him by the Robe . 

Ven.   Emperor . 


Ant.   looking back . 't is the old argument ; I prithee spare me . 


Ven.   But this one hearing , Emperor . 


Ant.   Let go 
My Robe ; or , by my Father Hercules — . 


Ven.   By Hercules his Father , that 's yet greater , 
I bring you somewhat you would wish to know . 


Ant.   thou seest we are observed ; attend me here , 
And I 'll return . 
[ Exit . 

Ven.   I 'm waning in his favour , yet I love him ; 
I love this Man , who runs to meet his ruin ; 
And , sure the Gods , like me , are fond of him : 
His Virtues lie so mingled with his Crimes , 
As would confound their choice to punish one , 
And not reward the other . 
Enter Antony . 

Ant.   We can conquer , 
You see , without your aid . 
We have dislodged their Troops , 
They look on us at distance , and , like Curs 
Scaped from the Lion's paws , they bay far off , 
And lick their wounds , and saintly threaten War. 
Five thousand Romans with their faces upward , 
●…ye breathless on the Plain . 


Ven.   't is well : and he 
Who lost 'em , could have spared Ten thousand more , 
Yet if , by this advantage , you could gain 
An easier Peace , while Caesar doubts the Chance 
Of Arms ! — 


Ant.   OH think not on 't , Ventidius ; 
The Boy pursues my ruin , he●…ll no peace : 
His malice is considerate in advantage ; 
OH , he 's the coolest Murderer , so staunch , 
He kills , and keeps his temper . 


Ven.   Have you no friend 
In all his Army , who has power to move him , 
Maecenas , or Agrippa might do much . 


Ant.   they 're both too deep in Caesar's interests , 
we 'll work it out by dint of Sword , or perish , 


Ven.   ●…ain I would find some other . 


Ant.   Thank thy love . 
Some four or five such Victories as this , 
Will save thy farther pains . 


Ven.   Expect no more ; Caesar is on his Guard : 
I know , Sir , you have conquered against odds ; 
But still you draw Supplies from one poor Town , 
And of Egyptians : He has all the World , 
And , at his back , Nations come pouring in , 
To fill the gaps you make . Pray think again . 


Ant.   Why dost thou drive me from myself , to search 
For Foreign aids ? to hunt my memory , 
And range all over a waist and barren place 
To find a Friend ? The wretched have no Friends — 
Yet I had one , the bravest Youth of Rome , 
Whom Caesar love's beyond the Love of Women ; 
He could resolve his mind , as Fire does Wax , 
From that hard rugged Image , melt him down , 
And mould him in what softer form he pleased . 


Ven.   Himulco would I see ; that Man of all the world : 
Just such a one we want . 


Ant.   He loved me too . 
I was his Soul ; he lived not but in me : 
We were so closed within each others Breasts , 
The Rivets were not found that joined us first . 
That does not reach us yet : we were so mixed , 
As meeting Streams , both to ourselves were lost ; 
We were one Mass ; we could not give or take , 
But from the same ; for he was I , I he . 


Ven.   aside . He moves as I would wish him . 


Ant.   After this , 
I need not tell his Name : 't was Dollabella . 


Ven.   he 's now in Caesar's Camp.  


Ant.   no matter where , 
Since he 's no longer mine . He took unkindly 
That I forbade him Cleopatra's sight ; 
Because I feared he loved her : he confessed 
He had a warmth , which , for my sake , he stifled ; 
For 't were impossible that two , so one , 
Should not have loved the same . When he departed , 
He took no leave ; and that confirmed my thoughts . 


Ven.   It argues that he loved you more than her , 
●…lse he had stayed ; but he perceived you jealous , 
And would not grieve his Friend : I know he love you . 


Ant.   I should have seen him then ere now . 


Ven.   Perhaps 
He has thus long been labouring for your Peace . 


Ant.   Would he were here . 


Ven.   Would you believe he loved you ? 
I read your Answer in your Eyes ; you would . 
Not to conceal it longer , he has sent 
A Messenger from Caesar's Camp , with Letters . 


Ant.   Let him appear . 


Ven.   I 'll bring him instantly . 
Exit Ventidius , and Reenters immediately with Dollabella . 

Ant.   't is he himself , himself , by holy Friendship 
[ Runs to embrace him . Art thou returned at last , my better half ? 
Come , give me all myself . 
Let me not live , 
If the young Bridegroom , jonging for his Night , 
Was ever half so fond . 


Dolla .  I must be silent ; for my Soul is busy 
About a noble Work : she 's new come home , 
Like a long absent Man , and wanders over 
Each Room , a Stranger to her own , to loo●… 
If all be safe . 


Ant.   thou hast what 's left of m●… 
For I am now so sunk from what I was , 
thou findest me at my lowest Water-mark . 
The Rivers that ran in , and raised my Fortunes , 
Are all dried up , or take another course : 
What I have left is from my native Spring ; 
i  still a Heart that swells , in scorn of Fate . 
And lists me to my Banks . 


Dolla .  Still you are Lord of all the World to me . 


Ant.   Why , then I yet am so ; for thou art all . 
If I had any Joy when thou wert absent , 
I grudged it to myself ; methought I robbed 
Thee of thy part . But , O my Dollabella ! 
thou hast beheld me other than I am . 
Hast thou not seen my morning Chambers filled 
With Sc●…ptered Slaves , who waited to salute me : 
With Eastern Monarches , who forgot the Sun , 
To worship my uprising ? Menial Kings 
ran coursing up and down my Palace-yard , 
Stood silent in my Presence , watched my Eyes , 
And , at my least Command , all started out 
Like Racers to the Gaol . 


Dolla .  Slaves to your Fortune . 


Ant.   Fortune is Caesar's now ; and what am I ? 


Ven.   What you have made yourself ; I will not flatter . 


Ant.   Is this friendly done ? 


Dolla .  Yes , when his end is so , I must join with him ; 
Indeed I must , and yet you must not chide : 
Why am I else your Friend ? 


Ant.   Take heed , young Ma●… , 
How thou upbraid'st my Love : The Queen has Eyes , 
And thou too hast a Soul. Canst thou remember 
When , swelled with hatred , thou beheld'st her first 
As Accessary to thy Brother's Death ? 


Dolla .  Spare my Remembrance ; 't was a guilty day , 
And still the blush hangs here . 


Ant.   To clear herself , 
For sending him no Aid , she came from Egypt . 
Her Galley down the Silver Cydnos rowed , 
The Tackling Silk , the Streamers waved with Gold , 
The gentle Winds were lodged in Purple Sails : 
Her Nymphs , like Nereids , round her Couch , were placed ; 
Where she , another Sea-born Venus , lay . 


Dolla .  no more : I would not hear it . 


Ant.   OH , you must ! 
She lay , and leaned her Cheek upon her Hand , 
And cast a Look so languishingly sweet , 
As if , secure of all Beholder's Hearts , 
Neglecting she could take 'em : boy 's , like Cupid's , 
Stood fanning , with their painted Wings , the Winds 
That played about her Face : But if she smiled , 
A darting Glory seemed to blaze abroad : 
That Mens desiring Eyes were never wearied ; 
But hung upon the Object : To soft Flutes 
The Silver Oars kept Time ; and while they played , 
The Hearing gave new Pleasure to the Sight ; 
And both to Thought : 't was Heaven or somewhat more ; 
For she so charmed all Hearts , that gazing Crowds 
Stood panting on the shore , and wanted Breath 
To give their welcome Voice . 
then , Dollabella , where was then thy Soul ? 
Was not thy Fury quite disarmed with Wonder ? 
Didst tho●… not shrink behind me from those Eyes , 
And whisper in my Ears ? O , tell her not 
That I accused her wi●…h my Brother's Death ! 


Dolla   And should my Weakness be a Plea for yours ? 
Mine was an Age when Love might be excused , 
When kindly war●…th , and when my springing youth 
Made it a Debt to Nature . Yours — 


Ven.   Speak boldly . 
Yours , he would say ; in your declining Age , 
When no more heat was left but what you forced , 
When all the Sapritius was needful for the Trunk , 
When it went down , than you constrained the Course , 
And robbed from Nature , to supply Desire ; 
In you ( I would not use so harsh a Word ) 
But 't is plain Dotage . 


Ant.   Ha!  


Dolla   'T was urged too home . 
But yet the loss was private that I made ; 
'T was but myself I lost : I lost no Legions ; 
I had no World to lose , no People's Love.  


Ant.   This from a Friend ? 


Dolla .  Yes , Anthony , a true one ; 
A Friend so tender , that each Word I speak 
Stab my own Heart , before it reach your Ear. 
OH , judge me not lesle kind because I chide : 
To Caesar I excuse you . 


Antony's   OH ye Gods ! 
Have I then lived to be excused to Caesar ? 


Dolla .  As to your Equal : 
While I wear this , he never shall be more . 


Dolla   I bring Conditions from him . 


Ant.   Are they Noble ? 
Methinks thou shouldst not bring 'em else ; yet he 
Is full of deep dissembling ; knows no Honour , 
Divided from his Interest . Fate mistake him ; 
For Nature meant him for an Usurer , 
he 's fit indeed to buy , not conquer Kingdoms . 


Ven.   then , granting this , 
What Power was theirs who wrought so hard a Temper 
To honourable Terms ! 


Ant.   It was my Dollabella , or some God.  


Dolla .  Nor I ; nor yet Maecenas , nor Agrippa : 
They were your Enemies ; and I a Friend 
Too weak alone ; yet 't was a Roman's Deed.  


Ant.   'T was like a Roman done : show me that Man 
Who has preserved my Life , my Love , my Honour ; 
Let me but see his Face . 


Ven.   That task is mine , 
And , Hea●…'n thou knowest how pleasing . 
Exit Vent . 

Dolla .  you 'll remember 
To whom you stand obliged ? 


Ant.   When I forget it , 
Be thou unkind , and that 's my greatest curse . 
My Queen shall thank him too . 


Dolla .  I fear she will not . 


Ant.   But she shall do 't : the Queen , my Dollabella ! 
Hast thou not still some grudge of thy Fever ? 


Dolla .  I would not see her lost . 


Ant.   Wh●…n I sorsake her , 
Leave me , my be●…ter Sta●…s ; f●…r she has truth 
Beyond her beauty . Caesar tempted her , 
At no lesle price than Kingdoms , to betray me ; 
But she resisted all : and yet thou chidest me 
For loving her too well . could I do so ? 


Dolla .  Yes there 's my reason . 
Re-enter Ventidius , with Octavia , leading Antony's two little Daughters . 

Ant.   Where ? — Octavia there ! 
( Starting back . ) 

Ven.   What , is she poison to you ? a Disease ? 
Look on her , view her well ; and those she brings : 
Are they all Strangers to your eyes ? has Nature 
no secret Call , no whisper they are yours ? 


Dolla .  For shame , my Lord , if not for Love , receive 'em 
With kinder Eyes . If you confess a Man , 
Meet 'em , embrace 'em , bid 'em welcome to you . 
Your Arms should open , even without ; your knowledge , 
To clasp 'em in ; your Feet should turn to Wings , 
To bear you to 'em ; and your Eyes dart out , 
And aim a kiss ere you could reach the Lips.  


Ant.   I stood amazed to think how they came hither . 


Vent .  I sent for 'em ; I brought 'em in , unknown 
To Cleopatra's Guards . 


Dolla .  Yet are you cold ? 


Octau.   Thus long I have attended for my welcome ; 
Which , as a Stranger , sure I might expect , 
Who am I ? 


Ant.   Caesar's Sister . 


Octau.   that 's unkind ! 
Had I been nothing more than Caesar's Sister , 
Know , I had still remained in Caesar's Camp ; 
But you Octavi●… , your much injured Wise , 
Thou banished from your Bed , driven from your House , 
In spite of Caesar's Sister , still is yours . 
't is true , I have a heart disdains your Coldness , 
And prompts me not to seek what you should offer ; 
But a Wife's Virtue still surmounts that Pride : 
I come to claim you as my own ; to show 
My Duty first , to ask , nay beg , your kindness : 
Your hand , my Lord ; 't is mine , and I will have it . 
[ T●…king h●…s hand . 

Ven.   Do , take it , thou deservest it . 


Dolla .  On my Soul , 
And so she does : she 's neither too submissive , 
Nor yet too haughty ; but so just a mean , 
Shows , as it ought , a Wife and Roman too . 


Ant.   I ●…ear , Octavia , you have begged my Life . 


Octau.   Begged it , my Lord ? 


Ant.   Yes , begged it , my Ambassadress , 
Poorly and basely begged it of your Brother . 


Octau.   Poorly and bafely I could never beg ; 
Nor could my Brother grant . 


Ant.   Shall I , who , to my kneeling Slave , could say , 
Rise up , and be a King ; shall I fall down 
And cry , Forgive me , Caesar ? shall I set 
A Man , my Equal , in the place of Jove , 
As he could give me being ? no ; that word , 
Forgive , would choke me up , 
And die upon my Tongue . 


Dolla .  You shall not need it . 


Ant.   I will not need it . Come ,   all betrayed me : 
My Friend too ! To receive some vile Conditions . 
My Wife has bought me , with her Prayers and Tears ; 
And now I must become her branded Slave : 
In every peevish Mood she will upbraid 
The Life she gave : if I but look awry , 
She cries , I 'll tell my Brother . 


Octau.   My hard Fortune 
Subjects me still to your unkind mistakes . 
But the Conditions I have brought are such 
You need not blush to take : I love your Honour , 
Because 't is mine ; it never shall be said 
Octavia's Husband was her Brother's Slave . 
Sir , you are Free ; Free , even from her you loath ; 
For , though my Brother bargains for your Love , 
Makes me the Price and Cement of your Peace , 
I have a Soul like yours ; I cannot take 
Your Love as Alms , nor beg what I deserve . 
I 'll tell my Brother we are reconciled ; 
He shall draw back his Troops , and you shall march 
To rule the East : I may be dropped at Athens ; 
no matter where , I never will complain , 
But only keep the barren Name of Wife , 
And rid you of the trouble . 


Ven.   Was ever such a strife of sullen Honour ! 
Both scorned to be obliged . 


Dolla .  O , she has touched him in the tenderest part ; 
S●…e how he reddens with despite and shame 
To be outdone in Generosity ! 


Ven.   See how he winks ! how he dries up a Tear , 
That fain would fall ! 


Ant.   Octavia , I have heard you , and must praise 
The greatness of your Soul ; 
But cannot yield to what you have proposed : 
For I can never be conquered but by Love ; 
A●…d you do all for Duty . You would free me , 
And would be dropped at Athens ; was 't not so ? 


Octau.   It was , my Lord  


Ant.   then I must be obliged 
To one who Love's me not , who , to herself , 
May call me thankless and ungrateful Man : 
I 'll not endure it , no.  


Ven.   I 'm glad it pinches there . 


Octau.   Would you triumph over poor Octavia's Virtue ? 
That Pride was all I had to bear me up ; 
That you might think you owed me for your Life , 
And owed it to my Duty , not my Love. 
I have been injured , and my haughty Soul 
could brook but ill the Man who sleights my Bed.  


Ant.   Therefore you Love me not . 


Octau.   Therefore , my Lord , 
I should not love you . 


Ant.   Therefore you would leave me ? 


Octau.   And therefore I should leave you — if I could . 


Dolla .  Her soul 's too great , after such injuries , 
To say she Love's ; and yet she let's you see it . 
Her modesty and silence pled her Cause . 


Ant.   O , Dollabella , which way shall I turn ? 
I find a secret yielding in my Soul ; 
But Cleopatra , who would die with me , 
Must she be left ? Pity pleads for Octavia ; 
But does it not pled more for Cleopatra ? 


Ven.   Justice and Pity both pled for Octavia ; 
For Cleopatra , neither . 
One would be ruined with you ; but she first 
Had ruined you : the other , you have ruined , 
And yet she would preserve you . 
In every thing their Merits are unequal . 


Ant.   O , my distracted Soul ! 


Octau.   Sweet Heaven compose it . 
Come , come , my Lord , if I can pardon you , 
Methinks you should accept it . Look on these ; 
Are they not yours ? Or stand they thus neglected 
As they are mine ? Go to him , Children , go ; 
Kneel to him , take him by the hand , speak to him ; 
For you may speak , and he may own you too , 
Without a Blush ; and so he cannot all 
His Children : go , I say , and pull him to me , 
And pull him to yourselves , from that bad Woman . 
You , Agrippina , hang upon his Arms ; 
And you , Antonia , clasp about his Waste : 
If he will shake you off , if he will dash you 
Against the Pavement , you must bear it , Children ; 
For you are mine , and I was born to suffer . 
[ Hear the Children go to him , etc.  

Ven.   Was ever sight so moving ! Emperor ! 


Dolla .  Friend ! 


Octau.   Husband ! 


Both Childr .  Father ! 


Ant.   I am vanquished : take me , 
Octavia ; take me , Children ; share me all . 
( Embracing them . ) i  been a thriftless Debtor to your Loves , 
And run out much , in Riot , from your Stock ; 
But all shall be amended . 


Octau.   OH blessed hour ! 


Dolla .  OH happy Change ! 


Ven.   My joy stops at my tongue ; 
But it has found two Channels here for one , 
And Bubbles out above . 


Ant. to Octau.   This is thy Triumph ; lead me where thou wilt ; 
Even to thy Brothers Camp.  


Octau.   All there are yours . 
Enter Alexas hastily . 

Alex.   The Queen , my Mistress , Sir , and yours — 


Ant.   't is past . Octavia , you shall stay this night ; To morrow , 
Caesar and we are one . 
[ Ex. leading Octavia , Doll . and the Children follow . 

Ven.   there 's News for you ; run , 
My officious Eunuch , 
Be sure to be the first ; haste forward : 
Haste , my dear Eunuch , haste . 
Exit . 

Alex.   This downright fight Fool , this thick-sculled Hero , 
This blunt unthinking Instrument of Death , 
With plain dull Virtue , has outgone my Wit : 
Pleasure forsaken my early'st Infancy , 
The Luxury of others robbed my Cradle , 
And ravished thence the Promise of a Man : 
Cast out from Nature , disinherited 
Of what her meanest Children claim by kind ; 
Yet , Greatness kept me from Contempt : that 's gone . 
Had Cleopatra followed my advice , 
then he had been betrayed , who now forsakes . 
She dies for love ; but she has known its joys : 
Gods , is this just , that I , who knows no joys , 
Must die , because she love's ? 
Enter Cleopatra , Charmion , Iras , Train . O , Madam , I have seen what blasts my Eyes ! 
Octavia's here ! 


Cleop.   Peace with that Raven's note . 
I know it too ; and now am in 
The Pangs of Death . 


Alex.   You are no more a Queen ; 
Egypt is lost . 


Cleop.   What tell'st thou me of Egypt ? 
My Life , my Soul is lost ! Octavia has him ! 
OH fatal Name to Cleopatra's love ! 
My kisses , my embraces now are hers ; 
While I — But thou hast seen my Rival ; speak , 
Does she deserve this Blessing ? Is she fair , 
Bright as a Goddess ? and is all perfection 
Confined to her ? It is . Poor I was made 
Of that course matter which , when she was finished , 
The Gods threw by , for rubbish . 


Alex.   she 's indeed a very Miracle . 


Cleop.   Death to my hopes , a Miracle ! 


Alex.   bowing . A Miracle ; 
I mean of Goodness ; for in Beauty , Madam , 
You make all Wonders cease . 


Cleop.   I was too rash : 
Take this in part of recompense . But , O , 
[ Giving a Ring . I fear thou flatterest me . 


Char.   She comes ! she 's here ! 


Iras.   Fly , Madam , Caesar s Sister ! 


Cleop.   Were she the Sister of the Thund'rer Jove , 
And bore her Brother's Lightning in her Eyes , 
Thus would I face my Rival . 
[ Meets Octau. with Ventid . Octau. bears up to her . Their Trains come up on either side . 

Octau.   I need not ask if you are Cleopatra , 
Your haughty Carriage — 


Cleop.   Shows I am a Queen : 
Nor need I ask you who you are . 


Octau.   A Roman : 
A Name that makes , and can unmake a Queen . 


Cleop.   Your Lord , the Man who serves me , is a Roman . 


Octau.   He was a Roman , till he lost that Name 
To be a Slave in Egypt ; but I come 
To free him thence . 


Cleop.   Peace , peace , my Lover's Juno . 
When he grew weary of that Houshold-clog , 
He choose my easier Bonds . 


Octau.   I wonder not 
Your Bonds are easy ; you have long been practised 
In that lascivious Art : he 's not the first 
For whom you spread your snares : let Caesar witness . 


Cleop.   I loved not Caesar ; 't was but gratitude 
I paid his Love : the worst your Malice can , 
Is but to say the greatest of Mankind 
Has been my Slave . The next , but far above him , 
In my Esteem , is he whom Law calls yours , 
But whom his Love made mine . 
Oct. coming up close to her . I would view nearer 
That Face , which has so long usurped my right , 
To find th' inevitable Charms , that catch 
Mankind so sure , that ruined my dear Lord  


Cleop.   OH , you do well to search ; for had you known 
But half these Charms , you had not lost his heart . 


Octau.   Far be their knowledge from a Roman Lady , 
Far from a modest Wife . Shame of our Sex , 
Dost thou not Blush , to own those black Endearments 
That make sin pleasing ? 


Cleop.   You may Blush , who want 'em : if bounteous Nature , if indulgent Heaven 
Have given me Charms to please the bravest Man ; 
Should I not thank ' 'em ? should I be ashamed , 
And not be Proud ? I am , that he has loved me ; 
And , when I love not him , Heaven change this Face 
For one like that . 


Octau.   thou lov'st him not so well . 


Cleop.   I Love him better , and deserve him more . 


Octau.   You do not ; cannot : you have been his ruin . 
W●…o made him cheap at Rome , but Cleopatra ? 
Who made him scorned abroad , but Cleopatra ? 
At Actium , who betrayed him ? Cleopatra . 
Who made his Children Orphans ? and poor me 
A wretched Widow ? only Cleopatra ? 


Cleop.   Yet she who love's him best is Cleopatra . 
If you have suffered , I have suffered more . 
You bear the specious Title of a Wife , 
To gilled your Cause , and draw the pitying World 
To favour it : the World contemns poor me ; 
For I have lost my Honour , lost my Fame , 
And stained the Glory of my Royal House , 
And all to bear the branded Name of Mistress . 
There wants but Life , and that too I would lose 
For him I love . 


Octau.   Be 't so then ; take thy Wish . 
Exit cum suis.  

Cleop.   And 't is my Wish , 
Now he is lost for whom alone I lived . 
My sight grows dim , and every Object dances , 
And swims before me , in the maze of Death . 
My Spirits , while they were opposed , kept up ; 
They could not sink beneath a Rival's scorn : 
But now she 's gone they faint . 


Alex.   Mine have had leisure 
To recollect their Strength , and furnish Counsel , 
To ruin her ; who else must ruin you . 


Cleop.   Vain Promiser ! 
Led me , my Charmion ; nay , your hand too , Iras : 
My Grief has weight enough to sink you both . 
Conduct me to some Solitary Chamber , 
And draw the Curtains round ; 
then leave me to myself , to take alone 
My fill of Grief : 
There I till Death will his unkindness weep : 
As harmless Infants moan themselves asleep . 
Exeunt . 

ACT IU.  

Antony , Dollabella . Dolla .  Why would you shifted it from yourself , on me ? 
Can you not tell her you must part ? 


Ant.   I cannot , 
I could pull out an Eye , and bid it go , 
And tother should not weep . O , Dollabella , 
How many Deaths are in this word Departed ! 
I dare not trust my tongue to tell her so : 
One Look of hers , would thaw me into Tears , 
And I should melt till I were lost again . 


Dolla .  then let Ventidius ; 
he 's rough by Nature . 


Ant.   O , he 'll speak too harshly ; 
he 'll kill her with the News : thou , only thou . 


Dolla .  Nature has cast me in so soft a Mould , 
That but to hear a Story feigned for Pleasure 
Of some sad Lover's Death , moistens my Eyes , 
And robs me of my Manhood . — I should speak 
So faintly ; with such fear to grieve her Heart , 
she 'd not believe it earnest . 


Ant.   Therefore ; therefore 
thou only , thou art fit : think thyself i , 
And when thou speakest ( but let it first be long ) 
Take off the edge from every Sharper sound , 
And let our parting be as gently made 
As other Love's begin : wilt thou do this ? 


Dolla .  What you have said , so sinks into my Soul , 
That , if I must speak , I shall speak just so . 


Ant.   I leave you then to your sad task : Farewell . 
I sent her word to meet you . 
( Goes to the door , and comes back . ) I forgot ; 
Let her be told , I 'll make her peace with mine : 
Her Crown and Dignity shall be preserved , 
If I have power with Caesar. — OH , be sure 
To think on that . 


Dolla .  Fear not , I will remember . 
[ Ant●…ny goes agi●… to the door , and c●…mes back . 

Ant.   And tell her , too , how much I was constrained ; 
I did not this , but with extremest force : 
D●…sire her not to hate my Memory , 
For I still cherish hers ; — insist on that . 


Dolla .  Trust me , I 'll not forget it . 


Ant.   then that 's all . 
( Goes out , and returns again . ) wilt thou forgive my fondness this once more ? 
Tell her , though we shall never meet again , 
If I should hear she took another Love , 
The News would break my Heart . — Now I must go ; 
For every time I have returned , I feel 
My Soul more tender ; and my next Command 
Would be to bid her stay , and ruin both . 
Exit . 

Dolla .  Men are but Children of a larger growth , 
Our Appetites as apt to change as theirs , 
And full as craving too , and full as vain ; 
And yet the Soul , shut up in her dark Room , 
Viewing so clear abroad , at home sees nothing ; 
But , like a Mole in Earth , busy and blind , 
Works all her folly up , and casts it outward 
To the World's open view : thus I discovered , 
And blamed the Love of ruined Antony ; 
Yet wish that I were he , to be so ruined . 
Enter Ventidius above . 

Ven.   Alone ? and Talking to himself ? concerned too ? 
Perhaps my Guess is right ; he loved her once , 
And may pursue it still . 


Dolla .  OH Friendship ! Friendship ! 
Ill canst thou answer this ; and Reason , worse : 
Unfaithful in th' Attempt ; hopeless to win ; 
And , if I win , undone : mere madness all . 
And yet th' occasion 's fair . What injury , 
To him , to wear the Robe which he throws by ? 


Ven.   None , none at all . This happens as I wish , 
To ruin her yet more with Antony . 
Enter Cleopatra , talking with Alexas , Charmion , Iras on the other side . 

Dolla .  She comes ! What Charms have sorrow on that Face ! 
Sorrow seems pleased to dwell with so much sweetness ; 
Yet , now and then , a Melancholy smile 
Breaks loose , like Lightning , in a Winter's night , 
And shows a moment's day . 


Ven.   If she should love him too ! Her Eunuch there ! 
That Porpoise bodes ill weather . Draw , draw nearer , 
Sweet Devil , that I may hear . 


Alex.   Believe me ; try 
[ Dollabella goes over to Charmi●…n and Iras ; seems to talk with them . To make him jealous ; jealousy is like 
A polished Glass held to the lips when life 's in doubt : 
If there be Breath , 't will catch the damp and show it . 


Cleop.   I grant you jealousy 's a Proof of Love , 
But 't is a weak and unavailing Medicine ; 
It puts out the Disease , and makes it show , 
But has no power to cure . 


Alex.   't is your last Remedy , and strongest too : 
And then this Dollabella , who so fit 
To practise on ? he 's handsome , valiant , young , 
And looks as he were laid for Nature's bait 
To catch weak Woman's Eyes . 
He stands already more than half suspected 
Of loving you : the least kind word , or glance , 
You give this Youth , will kindle him with Love : 
then , like a burning Vessel set adrift , 
you 'll send him down amain before the Wind , 
To fire the Heart of jealous Antony . 


Cleop.   Can I do this ? Ah no ; my love 's so true , 
That I can neither hide it where it is , 
Nor show it where it is not . Nature meant me 
A Wife , a silly harmless household Dove , 
Fond without Art ; and kind without Deceit ; 
But Fortune , that has made a Mistress of me , 
Hast thrust me out to the wide World , unfurnished 
Of falsehood to be happy . 


Alex.   Force yourself . 
th' event will be , your Lover will return 
Doubly desirous to possess the good 
Which once he ●…ared to lose . 


Cleop.   I must Attempt it ; 
But O with what regret ! 
Exit . Alex. ( She comes up to Dollabella . ) 

Ven.   So , now the Scene draws near ; they 're in my reach . 


Cleop. to Dol.   Discoursing with my Women ! Might not I 
Share in your Entertainment ? 


Char.   You have been 
The Subject of it , Madam . 


Cleop.   How ; and how ? 


●…as .  Such praises of your Beauty ! 


Cleop.   Mere Poetry . 
Your Roman Wits , your Gallus and Tibullus , 
Have taught you this ●…rom Citheris and Delia.  


Dolla .  Those Roman Wits have never been in Egypt , 
Citheris and Delia else had been unsung : 
I , who have seen — had I been born a Poet , 
Should choose a nobler Name . 


Cleop.   You flatter me . 
But , 't is your nation 's vice : all of your Country 
Are flatterers , and all false . Your friend 's like you . 
I 'm sure he sent you not to speak these words . 


Dolla .  no , Madam ; yet he sent me — 


Cleop.   Well , he sent you — 


Dolla .  Of a lesle pleasing Errand . 


Cleop.   How lesle pleasing ? 
Lesle to you self , or me ? 


Dolla .  Madam , to both ; 
For you must mourn , and I must grieve to cause it . 


Cleop.   You , Charmion , and your Fellow , stand at distance . 
( Aside . ) Hold up , my Spirits . — Well , now your mournful matter ; 
For I 'm prepared , perhaps can Guests it too . 


Dolla .  I wish you would ; for 't is a thankless office 
To tell ill News : and I , of all your Sex , 
Most fear displeasing you . 


Cleop.   Of all your Sex , 
I soon could forgive you , if you should . 


Venus   Most delicate advances ! Woman ! Woman ! 
Dear damned , inconstant Sex ! 


Cleop.   In the first place , 
I am to be forsaken ; is 't not so ? 


Dolla .  I wish I could not Answer to that Question . 


Cleop.   then pass it over , because it trouble's you : 
I should have been more grieved another time . 
Next , I 'm to lose my Kingdom . — Farewell , Egypt . 
Yet , is there any more ? 


Dolla .  Madam , I fear 
Your too deep Sense of Grief has turned your Reason . 


Cleop.   no , no , I 'm not run mad ; I can bear Fortune : 
And Love may be expelled by other Love , 
As Poisons are by Poisons . 


Dolla .  — You o'erjoy me , Madam , 
To find your Griefs so moderately born . 
  heard the worst ; all are not false , like him . 


Cleop.   no ; Heaven forbid they should . 


Dolla .  Some Men are constant . 


Cleop.   And Constancy deserves Reward , that 's certain . 


Dolla .  Deserves it not ; but give it leave to hope . 


Ven.   I 'll swear thou hast my leave . I have enough : 
But how to manage this ! Well , I 'll consider . 
Exit . 

Dolla .  I came prepared , 
To tell you heavy News ; News , which I thought , 
Would fright the Blood from your pale Cheeks to hear : 
But you have met it with a Cheerfulness 
That makes my Task more easy ; and my Tongue , 
Which on another's Message was employed , 
Would gladly speak its own . 


Cleop.   Hold , Dollabella . 
First tell me , were you chosen by my Lord ? 
Or sought you this Employment ? 


Dolla .  He picked me out ; and , as his Bosom-friend , 
He Charged me with his words . 


Cleop.   The Message than 
I know was tender , and each Accent smooth , 
To molli●…e that rugged word Departed . 


Dolla .  O , you mistake : he choose the harshest words , 
With fiery Eyes , and with contracted Brows , 
He Coined his Face in the severest stamp : 
And fury shaken his Fabric like an Earthquake ; 
He heaved for vent , and burst like bellowing Aetna , 
In Sounds scarce human , " Hence , away for ever : 
" Let her be gone , the blot of my renown , 
" And bane of all my hopes : 
[ All the time of this Speech , Cleop. seems more and more concerned , till she sinks quite down . " Let her be driven a●… far as Men can think 
" From Man's commerce : she 'll poison to the Centre . 


Cleop.   O , I can bear no more ! 


Dolla .  Help , help : O Wretch ! O cursed , cursed Wretch ! 
What have I done ? 


Char.   Help , chafe her Temples , Iras.  


Iras.   bend , bend her forward quickly . 


Char.   Heaven be praised , 
She comes again . 


Cleop.   O , let him not approach me . 
Why have you brought me back to this loathed Being , 
th' abode of Falsehood , violated Vows , 
And injured Love ? For Pity , let me go ; 
For , if there be a place of long repose , 
I 'm sure I want it . My disdainful Lord 
Can never break that quiet ; nor awake 
The sleeping Soul , with hollowing in my Tomb 
Such words as fright her hence , Unkind , unkind . 


Dolla .  kneeling . Believe me , 't is against myself I speak , 
That sure deserves Belief ; I inju●…ed him : 
My Friend never spoke those words . O , had you seen 
How often he came back , and every time 
With something more obliging and more kind , 
To add to what he said ; what dear Farewells ; 
How almost vanquished by his Love he parted , 
And leaned to what unwillingly he left : 
I , Traitor as I was , for love of you , 
( But what can you not do , who made me false ! ) 
I forged that Lie ; for whose forgiveness knelt 
This self-accused , self-punished Criminal . 


Cleop   With how much ease believe we what we wish ! 
Rise , D●…llabella ; if you have been Guilty , 
I have contributed , and too much Love 
Has made me Guilty too . 
The advance of kindness which I made , was feigned , 
To call back fleeting Love by Jealousy ; 
But 't would not last . O , rather let me lose 
Than so ignobly trifle with his heart . 


Dolla .  I find your Breast fenced round from human reach , 
Transparent as a Rock of solid Crystal ; 
Seen through , but never pierced . My Friend , my Friend ! 
What endless Treasure hast thou thrown away , 
And scattered , like an Infant , in the Ocean , 
Vain sums of Wealth which none can gather thence . 


Cleop.   could you not beg 
An hours Admittance to his private Ear ? 
Like one who wanders through long barren Wilds , 
And yet foreknows no Hospitable Inn. 
Is near to succour Hunger , 
Eats his fill , before his painful March : 
So would I feed a while my famished Eyes 
B for●… we part ; for I have far to go , 
If Death be far , and never must return . 
Ventidius , with Octavia , behind . 

Ven.   From hence you may discover — O , sweet , sweet ! 
Would you indeed ? the pretty hand in Earnest ? 
[ Takes her hand . 

Dolla .  I will , for this Reward . — Draw it not back , 
't is all I ever will beg . 


Ven.   They turn upon us . 


Octau.   What quick Eyes has Gild ! 


Ven.   Seem not to have observed 'em , and go on . 
They Enter . 

Dolla .  saw you the Emperor , Ventidius ? Ven. No. 
I sought him ; but I heard that he was private , 
None with him , but Hipparchus his Freedman . 


Dolla .  Know you his business ? 


Ven.   Giving him Instructions , 
And Letters , to his Brother C●…r . 


Dolla .  Well , 
He must be found . 
Exeunt Dol. and Cleop.  

Octau.   Most glorious impudence ! 


Ven.   She looked methought 
As she would say , Take your old Man , Octavia ; 
Thank you , I 'm better here . 
Well , but what use 
Make we of this Discovery ? 


Octau.   Let it die . 


Venus   I pity Dollabella ; but she 's dangerous : 
Her Eyes have power beyond Thessalian Charms 
To draw the Moon from Heaven ; for Eloquence , 
The Sea-green Sirens taught her Voice their flattery ; 
And , while she speaks , Night steals upon the Day , 
Unmarked of those that hear : then she 's so charming , 
Age buds at sight of her , and swells to youth : 
The holy Priests gaze on her when she smiles ; 
And with heaved hands forgetting Gravity , 
They bless her wanton Eyes : Even I who hate her , 
With a malignant joy behold such Beauty ; 
And , while I Curse , desire it . Anthony 
Must needs have some remains of Passion still , 
Which may ferment into a worse Relapse , 
If now no●… fully cured . I know , this minute , 
With C●…sar he 's endeavouring her Peace . 


Octav   You have prevailed : — but for a farther purpose Walks off . 
I 'll prove how he will relish this Discovery . 
What , make a S●…rumpet's' peace : it swells my Heart : 
It must not , ●…na ' not be 


Ven.   His Guards appear . 
Let me begin , and you shall second me . 
Enter Antony . 

Ant.   Octavia , I was looking you , my Love : 
What , are your Letters ready ? I have given 
My last Instructions . 


Octau.   Mine , my Lord , are written . 


Ant.   Ventidius ! 
[ Drawirg 〈◊〉 ●…de . 

Ven.   My Lord ? 


Ant.   A word in private . 
When saw you Dollabella ? 


Ven.   Now , my Lord , 
He parted hence ; and Cleopatra with him . 


Ant.   Speak softly . 'T was by my Command he went , 
To bear my last farewell . 


Ven.   aloud . It looked indeed 
Like your farewell . 


Ant.   more softly . — My farewell ? 
What secret meaning have you in those words 
Of my Farewell ? He did it by my Order . 


Ven.   aloud . then he obeyed your Order . I suppose 
You bid him do it with all Gentleness , 
All kindness , and all — love . 


Ant.   How she mourned , 
The poor forsaken Creature ! 


Ven.   She took it as she ought ; she bore your parting 
As she did Caesar's , as she would another's , 
Were a new Love to come . 


Ant.   aloud . thou dost belie her ; 
Most basely , and maliciously belie her . 


Ven.   I thought not to displease you ; I have done . 


Octau.   coming up . You seem disturbed , my Lord  


Ant.   A very trifle . 
Retire , my Love.  


Ven.   It was indeed a trifle . 
He sent — 


Ant.   angrily . no more . Look how thou disobey'st me ; 
Thy Life shall answer it . 


Octau.   then 't is no trifle . 


Ven. to Octau.   't is lesle ; a very nothing : you too saw it , 
As well as I , and therefore 't is no Secret.  


Ant.   She saw it ! 


Ven.   Yes : she saw young Dollabella — 


Ant.   Young Dollabella ! 


Ven.   Young , I think him young , 
And handsome too ; and so do others think him . 
But what of that ? He went by your Command , 
Indeed 't is probable , with some kind Message ; 
For she received it graciously ; she smiled : 
And then he grew familiar with her Hand , 
Squeezed it , and worried it with ravenous Kisses ; 
She blushed , and sighed , and smiled , and blushed again ; 
At last she took occasion to Talk softly , 
And brought her Cheek up close , and leaned on his : 
At which , he whispered Kisses back on hers ; 
And then she cried aloud , That Constancy 
Should be rewarded . 


Octau.   This I saw and heard . 


Ant.   What Womam was it , whom you heard and saw 
So playful with my Friend ! 
Not Cleopatra ? 


Ven.   Even she , my Lord ! 


Ant.   My Cleopatra ? 


Ven.   Your Cleopatra ; 
Dollabella's Cleopatra ? 
Every Man's Cleopatra . 


Ant.   Tou ●…t . 


Ven.   I do not lie , my Lord 
Is this so strange ? should Mistresses be left , 
And not provide against a time of Change ? 
You know she 's not much used to lonely Nights . 


Ant.   I 'll think no more on 't . 
I know 't is false , and see the Plot betwixt you . 
You needed not have gone this way , Octavia . 
What harms it you that Cleopatra's just ? 
she 's mine no more . I see ; and I forgive : 
Urge it no farther , Love.  


Octau.   Are you concerned 
That she 's found false ? 


Ant.   I should be , were it so ; 
For , though 't is past , I would not that the World 
Should Tax my former Choice : That I loved one 
Of so light Note ; but I forgive you both . 


Ven.   What has my Age deserved , that you should think 
I would abuse your Ears with Perjury ? 
If Heaven be true , she 's false . 


Ant.   Thomas Heaven and ' Earth 
Should witness it , I 'll not believe her tainted . 


Ven.   I 'll bring you then a Witness 
From Hell to prove her so . Nay , go not back ; 
[ Seeing Alexas just entering , and starting back . For stay you must and shall . 


Alex.   What means my Lord ? 


Ven.   To make you do what most you hate ; speak truth . 
You are of Cleopatra's private Counsel , 
Of her Bed-counsel , her lascivious hours ; 
Are conscious of each Nightly change she makes , 
And watch her , as Chaldeans do the Moon , 
Can tell what Signs she passes through , what day . 


Alex.   My Noble Lord  


Ven.   My most Illustrious Pander , 
no fine set Speech , no Cadence , to turned Periods , 
But a pla●… homespun Truth , is what I ask : 
I did , myself , over hear your Queen make love 
To Dollabella . Speak ; for I will know , 
By your Confession , what more past betwixt 'em ; 
How near the business draws to your Employment ; 
And when the happy hour . 


Ant.   Speak truth , Alexas , whether it offend 
Or please Ventidius , care not : justify 
Thy injured Queen from Malice : dare his worst . 


Oct.   aside . See how he gives him Courage ! how he fears 
To find her false ! and shuts his Eyes to truth , 
Willing to be mi●…ed ! 


Alex.   As far as love may pled for Woman's frailty , 
U ged by desert and greatness of the Lover ; 
So far ( Divine Octavia ! ) may my Queen 
Stand eu●… excused to yo●… , for loving him , 
Who is your Lord : so far , from brave Venttdius , 
May her past Actions hope a fair Report . 


Ant.   't is well , and truly spoken : mark , Ventidius . 


Alex.   To you , most Noble Emperor , her strong Passion 
Stands not excused , but wholly justified . 
Her Beauty's Charms alone , without her Crown , 
From Ind and Meroe drew the distant Vows 
Of sighing Kings ; and at her Feet were laid 
The Sceptres of the Earth , exposed on heaps , 
To choose where she would Reign : 
She thought a Roman only could deserve her ; 
And , of all Romans , only Antony . 
And , to be l●…ss than Wife to you , disdained 
Their lawful Passion . 


Ant.   't is but Truth . 


Alex.   And yet , though Love , and your unmatched Desert , 
Have drawn her from the due regard of Honour , 
At last , Heaven opened her unwilling Eyes 
To see the wrongs she offered fair Octavia , 
Whose holy Bed she lawfully usurped , 
The sad Effects of this improsperous War , 
Confirmed those pious Thoughts . 


Ven.   aside . OH , wheel you there ? 
Observe him now ; the Man begins to mend , 
And Talk substantial Reason . Fear not , Eunuch , 
The Emperor has given thee leave to speak . 


Alex.   Else had I never dared to offend his Ears 
With what the last necessity has urged 
On my forsaken Mistress ; yet I must not 
Presume to say her Heart is wholly altered . 


Ant.   no , dare not for thy Life , I Charge thee dare not , 
Pronounce that fatal word . 


Octau.   aside . Must I bear this ? good Heaven , afford me patience . 


Ven.   On , sweet Eunuch ; my dear half Man , proceed . 


Alex.   Yet Dollabella 
Has loved her long , he , next my Godlike Lord , 
Deserves her best ; and should she meet his Passion , 
Rejected , as she is , by him she loved — — 


Ant.   Hence , from my sight ; for I can bear no more : 
Let Furies drag thee quick to Hell ; each torturing hand 
Do thou employ , till Cleopatra comes , 
then join thou too , and help to torture her . 
Exit Alexas , thrust out by Antony . 

Octau.   't is not well , 
Indeed , my Lord , 't is much unkind to me , 
To show this Passion , this extreme Concernment 
For an abandoned , faithless Prostitute . 


Ant.   Octavia , leave me : I am much disordered . 
Leave me , I say . 


Octau.   My Lord ? 


Ant.   I bid you leave me . 


Ven.   Obey him , Madam : best withdraw a while , 
And see how this will work . 


Octau.   Wherein have I offended you , my Lord , 
That I am bid to leave you ? am I false , 
Or infamous ? am I a Cleopatra ? 
Were I she , 
Base as she is , you would not bid me leave you ; 
But hang upon my Neck , take slight Excuses , 
And fawn upon my Falsehood . 


Ant.   't is too much , 
Too much , Octavia ; I am pressed with Sorrows 
Too heavy to be born ; and you add more : 
I would retire , and recollect what 's left 
Of Man within , to aid me . 


Octau.   You would mourn 
In private , for your Love , who has betrayed you ; 
You did but half return to me : your kindness 
Lingered behind with her . I hear , my Lord , 
You make Conditions for her , 
And would include her Treaty . Wondrous proofs 
Of Love to me ! 


Ant.   Are you my Friend , Ventidius ? 
Or are you turned a Dollabella too , 
And let this Fury loose ? 


Ven.   O , be advised , 
Sweet Madam , and retire . 


Octau.   Yes , I will go ; but never to return . 
You shall no more be haunted with this Fury . 
My Lord , my Lord , Love will not always last , 
When urged with long unkindness , and disdain ; 
Take her again whom you perfer to me ; 
She stays but to be called . Poor cozened Man ! 
Let a feigned parting give her back your Heart , 
Which a feigned Love first got ; for injured me , 
Thomas my just Sense of wrongs forbid my stay , 
My Duty shall be yours . 
To the dear Pledges of our former Love , 
My tenderness and care shall be transferred , 
And they shall Cheer , by Turns , my Widowed Nights : 
So , take my last farewell ; for I despair 
To have you whole , and scorn to take you half . 
Exit . 

Ven.   I combat Heaven , which blasts my best Designs : 
My last Attempt must be to win her back ; 
But O , I fear in vain . 
Exit . 

Ant.   Why was I framed with this plain honest Heart , 
Which knows not to disguise its Griefs , and Weakness , 
But bears its workings outward to the World ? 
I should have kept the mighty Anguish in , 
And forced a Smile at Cleopatra's falsehood : 
Octavia had believed it , and had stayed ; 
But I am made a shallow-forded Stream , 
Seen to the Bottom : all my clearness scorned , 
And all my Faults exposed ! — See , where he comes 
Enter Dollabella . Who has profaned the Sacred Name of Friend , 
And worn it into Vileness ! 
With how secure a Brow , and specious Form 
He gilds the secret Villain ! Sure that Face 
Was meant for Honesty ; but Heaven mismatched it , 
And furnished Treason out with Nature's Pomp , 
To make its work more easy . 


Dolla .  OH , my Friend ! 


Ant.   Well , Dollabella , you performed my Message ? 


Dolla .  I did , unwillingly . 


Ant.   Unwillingly ? 
Was it so hard for you to bear our parting ? 
You should have wished it . 


Dolla .  Why ? 


Ant.   Because you love me . 
And she received my Message , with as true , 
With as unfeigned a Sorrow , as you brought it ? 


Dolla .  She love's you , even to madness . 


Ant.   O , I know it . 
You , Dollabella , do not better know 
How much she love's me . And should I 
Forsake this Beauty ? This all-perfect Creature ? 


Dolla .  I could not , were she mine . 


Ant.   And yet you first 
Persuaded me : how come you altered since ? 


Dolla .  I said at first I was not fit to go ; 
I could not hear her sighs , and see her tears , 
But Pity must prevail : and so , perhaps , 
It may again with you ; for I have promised 
That she should take her last farewell : and , see , 
She comes to claim my word . 


Enter Cleopatra . 

Ant.   False Dollabella ! 


Dolla .  what 's false , my Lord ? 


Ant.   Why , Dollabella's false ; 
And Cleopatra's false ; both false and faithless . 
Draw near , you well-joyned wickedness , you Serpents , 
Whom I have , in my kindly Bosom , warm 
Till I am stung to Death . 


Dolla .  My Lord , have I 
Deserved to be thus used ? 


Cleop.   Can Heaven prepare 
A newer Torment ? Can it find a Curse 
Beyond our Separation ? 


Ant.   Yes , if Fate 
Be just , much greater : Heaven should be ingenious 
In punishing such Crimes . The rolling Stone , 
And gnawing Vulture , we slight Pains , invented 
When Jove was young , and no Examples known 
Of mighty Ills ; but you have ripened sin 
To such a monstrous growth , 't will pose the Gods 
To find an equal Torture . Two , two such , 
O there 's no farther Name , two such — to me , 
To me , who locked my Soul within your Breasts , 
Had no Desires , no Joys , no Life , but you ; 
When half the Globe was mine , I gave it you 
In Dowry with my Heart ; I had no use , 
no fruit of all , but you : a Friend and Mistress 
Was what the World could give . O , Cleopatra ! 
O , Dollabella ! how could you betray 
This tender Hea●…t , which with an Infant-fondness . 
Lay lulled betwixt your Bosoms , and there slept 
Secure of injured Faith ? 


Dolla .  If she has wronged you , 
Heaven , Hell , and You revenge it . 


Ant.   If she wronged me , 
thou wouldst evade thy part of Gild ; but swear 
thou lov'st not her . 


Dolla .  Not so as I love you . 


Ant.   Not so ! Swear , swear , I say ; thou dost not love her ; 


Dolla .  no more than Friendship will allow . 


Ant.   no more ? 
Friendship allows thee nothing : thou art perjured . — 
And yet thou didst not swear thou lov'dst her not ; 
But 〈◊〉 so much , no more . O trifling Hypocrite , 
Who dar'st not own to her thou dost not love , 
Not own to me thou dost ! Ventidius heard it ; 
Octavia saw it . 


Cleop.   They are Enemies . 


Antony's   Alexas Is not so : he , he confessed it . 
He , who , next Hell , best knew it , he avowed it . 
( To Dol. ) Why do I seek a Proof beyond yourself ? 
You whom I sent to bear my last Farewell , 
Returned to pled her stay . 


Dolla .  What shall I Answer ? 
If to have loved be guilt , than I have sinned ; 
But if to have repent of that Love 
Can wash away my Crime , I have repent . 
Yet , if I have offended past forgiveness , 
Let not her suffer : she is innocent . 


Cleop   Ah , what will not a Woman do who love's ! 
What means will she refuse , to keep that Heart 
Where all her joys are placed ! 'T was I encouraged , 
' was I blew up the Fire that scorched his Soul , 
To make you jealous ; and by that regain you . 
But all in vain ; I could not Counterfeit : 
In spite of all the Damss , my Love broke over , 
And drowned my Heart again : Fate took th' occasion ; 
And thus one minutes feigning has destroyed 
My whole Life's truth . 


Ant.   Thin Cobweb Arts of Falsehood ; 
Se●…n , and broke through at first . 


Dolla .  Forgive your Mistress . 


Cleop.   Forgive you Friend . 


Ant.   You have convinced yourselves , 
You pled each others Cause : What Witness have you , 
That you but meant to raise my Jealousy ? 


Cleop.   Ourselves , and Heaven . 


Ant.   Gild witnesses for Gild . Hence , Love and Friendship ; 
You have no longer place in human Breasts , 
These two have driven you out : avoid my sight ; 
I would not kill the Man whom I loved ; 
And cannot hurt the Woman ; but avoid me , 
I do not know how long I can be tame ; 
For , if I stay one minute more to think 
How I am wronged , my Justice and Revenge 
Will cry so loud within me , that my Pity 
Will not be heard for either . 


Dolla .  Heaven has but 
Our sorrow for our sins ; and then delights 
To pardon erring Man : sweet Mercy seems 
It's darling Attribute , which limits Justice ; 
As if there were Degrees in Infinite ; 
And Infinite would rather want perfection 
Than punish to extent . 


Ant.   I can forgive 
A Foe ; but not a Mistress , and a Friend : 
Treason is there in its most horrid shape , 
Where trust is greatest : and the Soul resigned 
Is stabbed by its own Guards : I 'll hear no more ; 
Hence from my sight for ever . 


Cleop.   How ? for ever , 
I cannot go one moment from your sight , 
And must I go for ever ? 
My Joys , my only Joys are centred here : 
What place have I to go to ? my own Kingdom ? 
That I have lost for you : or to the Romans ? 
They hate me for your sake : or must I wander 
The wide World over , a helpless , banished Woman , 
Banished for love of you ; banished from you ? 
ay , there 's the Banishment ! O hear me ; hear me , 
With strictest Justice : For I beg no favour : 
And if I have offended you : then kill me , 
But do not banish me . 


Ant.   I must not hear you . 
I have a Fool within me takes your part ; 
But Honour stops my Ears . 


Cleop.   For pity hear me ! 
Would you cast off a Slave who followed you , 
Who crouched beneath your Spurn ? — He has no pity ! 
See , if he gives one tear to my Departure ; 
One look , one kind farewell : O Iron heart ! 
Let all the Gods look down , and judge betwixt us , 
If he did ever love ! 


Anth.   no more : Alexas ! 


Dolla .  A perjured Villain ! 


Anth. to Cleop.   Your Alexas ; yours . 


Cleop.   OH 't was his Plot : his ruinous Design 
●…'ingage you in my love by jealousy . 
Hear him ; confront him with me ; let him speak . 


Anth.   I have ; I have . 


Cleop.   And if he clear me not — 


Ant.   Your Creature ! one who hangs upon your Smiles ! 
Watch's your Eye to say or to unsay 
Whate'er you please ! I am not to be moved . 


Cleop.   then must we part ? Farewell , my cruel Lord , 
th' appearance is against me ; and I go 
Unjustified , for ever from your sight . 
How I have loved , you know ; how yet I love , 
My only Comfort is , I know myself : 
I love you more , even now you are unkind , 
Than when you loved me most ; so well , so truly , 
I 'll never strive against it ; but die pleased 
To think you once were mine . 


Ant.   Good Heaven , they weep at parting . 
Must I weep too ? that calls 'em innocent . 
I must not weep ; and yet I must , to think 
That I must not forgive — 
Live ; but live wretched , 't is but just you should , 
Who made me so : Live from each others sight : 
Let me not hear you meet : Set all the Earth , 
And all the Seas , betwixt your sundered Loves : 
View nothing common but the Sun and Skies : 
Now , all take several ways ; 
And each your own sad fate with mine deplore ; 
That you were false , and I could trust no more . 
Exeunt severally . 

ACT v.  

Cleopatra , Charmion , Iras.  Char.   BE juster , Heaven : such Virtue punished thus , 
Will make us think that Chance rules all above , 
And shuffles , with a Random hand , the Lots 
Which Man is forced to draw . 


Cleop.   I could tear out these Eyes , that gained his Heart , 
And had not power to keep it . OH the Curse 
Of doting on , even when I find it Dotage ! 
Bear witness , Gods , you heard him bid me go ; 
You whom he mocked with imprecating Vows 
Of promised Faith — I 'll die , I will not bear it . 
You may hold me . — 
[ She pulls out her Dagger , and they hold her . But I can keep my Breath ; I can die inward , 
And choke this Love.  
Enter Alexas . 

Iras.   Help , OH Alexas help ! 
The Queen grows desperate , her Soul struggles in her , 
With all the Agonies of Love and Rage , 
And strives to source its Passage . 


Cleop.   Let me go . 
Art thou there , Traitor ! — OH 
OH , for a little Breath , to vent my Rage ! 
Give , give me way , and let me lose upon him . 
— — 


Alex.   Yes , I deserve it , for my ill-timed truth . 
Was it for me to prop 
The Ruins of a falling Majesty ? 
To place myself beneath the mighty flaw , 
Thus to be crushed , and pounded into Atoms , 
By its o'erwhelming weight ? 't is too presuming 
For Subjects , to preserve that wilful power 
Which Court's its own Destruction . 


Cleop.   I would reason 
more calmly with you . Did not you overrule , 
And force my plain , direct , and open Love 
Into these crooked paths of Jealousy ? 
Now , what 's th' event ? Octavia is removed ; 
But Cleopatra's banished . thou , thou , Villain , 
Has pushed my Boat , to open Sea ; to prove , 
At my sad Cost , if thou canst steer it back . 
It cannot be ; I 'm lost too far ; I 'm ruined : 
Hence , thou Impostor , Traitor , Monster , Devil . — 
I can no more : thou , and my Griefs , have sunk 
Me down so low , that I want voice to Cu●…e thee . 


Alex.   Suppose from Shipwrecked Seaman near the shore , 
Dropping and faint , wi●…h climbing up the Cliff , 
If , from above , some Charitable hand 
Pull him to safety , hazarding himself 
To draw the others weight ; would he look back 
And Curse him for his Pains ? The Case is yours ; 
But one step more , and you have gained the height . 


Cleop.   Sunk , never more to rise . 


Alex.   Octavia's gone , and Dollabella banished . 
Believe me , Madam , Antony is yours . 
His Heart was never lost ; but started off 
To Jealousy , Love's last retreat and covert : 
Where it lies h●…d in Shades , watchful in silence , 
And listening for the Sound that calls it back , 
Some other , any Man , ( 't is so advanced ) 
May perfect this unfinished work , which I 
( Unhappy only to myself ) have lest 
So easy to his hand . 


Cleop.   Look well thou do 't ; else — 


Alex.   Else , what your silence threatens — Antony 
Is mounted up the Pharos ; from whose Turret , 
He stands surveying our Egyptian Galleys , 
Engaged with Caesar's Fleet : now Death , or Conquest . 
If the first happen , Fate acquits my Promise : 
If we overcome , the Conqueror is yours . 
A distant shout within . 

Char.   Have comfort , Madam : did you mark that Shout ? 
Second Shout nearer . 

Iras.   Hark ; they redouble it . 


Alex.   't is from the Port. 
The loudness shows it near : good News , kind Heavens . 


Cleop.   Osiris make it so . 
Enter Serapion . 

Serap .  Where , where 's the Queen ? 


Alex.   How frightfully the holy Coward stairs ! 
As if not yet recovered of th' Assault , 
When all his Gods , and what 's more dear to him , 
His Offerings were at stake . 


Serap .  OH horror , horror ! 
Egypt has been ; our latest hour is come : 
The Queen of Nations from her ancient Seat , 
Is Sunk for ever in the dark Abyss : 
Time has unrowled her Glories to the last , 
And now closed up the Volume . 


Cleop.   Be more plain : 
Say , whence thou comest , ( though Fate is in thy Face , 
Which from thy haggard Eyes looks wildly out , 
And threatens ere thou speakest . ) 


Serap .  I came from Pharos ; 
From viewing ( spare me and imagine it ) 
Our Lands last hope , your Navy . — 


Cleop.   Vanquished ? 


Serap .  No. 
They fought not . 


Cleop.   then they fled . 


Serap .  Nor that . I saw , 
With Antony , your well appointed Fleet 
Row out ; and thrice he waved his hand on high , 
And thrice with cheerful Cries they shouted back : 
'T was then , false Fortune , like a fawning Strumpet , 
●…out to leave the Bankrupt Prodigal , 
With a dissembling Smile would kiss at parting , 
And flatter to the last ; the well-timed Oars 
Now dipped from every Bank , now smoothly run 
To meet the Foe ; and soon indeed they met , 
But not as Foes . In few , we saw their Caps 
On either side thrown up ; the Egpptian Galleys 
( Received like Friends ) passed through , and fell behind 
The Roman rear : and now , they all come forward , 
And ride within the Po●…t . 


Cleop.   Enough , Serapion : 
i  heard my doom . This needed not , you Gods : 
When I lost Antony , your work was done ; 
't is but 〈◊〉 malice . where 's my Lord ? 
How bears he this last ●…low ? 


Serap .  His fury cannot be expressed by words : 
Thrice he Attempted headlong to have fallen 
Full on his Foes , and aimed at Caesar's Galley : 
Withheld , he raves on you ; Cries , he 's betrayed 
Should he now find you . — 


Alex.   eat him , ' seek your safety , 
Till you can clear your Innocence . 


Cleop.   I 'll stay . 


Alex.   You must not , haste you to your Monument , 
While I make speed to Caesar.  


Cleop.   Caesar ! no , 
I have no business with him . 


Alex.   I can work him . 
To spare your Life , and let this Madman perish . 


Cleop.   Base fawning Wretch ! wouldst thou betray him too ? 
Hence from my sight , I will not hear a Traitor ; 
'T was thy Design brought all this ruin on us ; 
Serapion , thou art honest ; Counsel me : 
But haste , each moment's precious . 


Serap .  Retire ; you must not yet see Antony . 
He who began this mischief , 
't is just he tempt the Danger : let him clear you ; 
And , since he offered you his servile tongue , 
To gain a poor precarious Life from Caesar , 
Let him expose that fawning Eloquence , 
And speak to Antony . 


Alex.   OH Heavens ! I dare not , 
I meet my certain Death . 


Cleop.   Slave , thou deservest it . 
Not that I fear my Lord , will I avoid him ; 
I know him Noble : when he banished me , 
And thought me false , he scorned to take my Life ; 
But I 'll be justified , and then die with him . 


Alex.   OH pity me , and let me follow you . 


Cleop.   To Death , if thou stir hence . Speak , if thou canst , 
Now for thy Life , which basely thou wouldst save ; 
While mine I prise at this . Come , good Serapion . 
Exeunt Clop . Serap . Char. Iras.  

Alex.   OH that I lesle could fear to lose this Being , 
Which , like a Snowball , in my Coward hand , 
The more 't is grasped , the faster melts away . 
Poor Reason ! what a wretched Aid art thou ! 
For still in spite of thee , 
These two long Lovers , Soul and Body , dread 
Their final Separation . Let me think : 
What can I say , to save myself from Death ? 
no matter what becomes of Cleopatra . 


Ant. within .  Which way ? where ? 


Ven. within .  This leads to th' Monument . 


Alex.   Ah me ! I hear him ; yet I 'm unprepared : 
My gift of lying gone ; 
And this Court-devil , which I so oft have raised , 
Forsakes me at my need . I dare not stay ; 
Yet cannot far go hence . 
Enter Antony and Ventidius . Exit . 

Ant.   OH happy Caesar ! thou hast Men to lead : 
Think not 't is thou hast conquered Antony ; 
B●…t Rome has conquered Egypt . I 'm betrayed . 


Ven.   Curse on this treacherous Train ! 
Their So●…l and Heaven infect 'em all with Baseness : 
And their young Souls come tainted to the World 
With the first breath they draw . 


Ant.   th' Original Villain sure no God created ; 
He was a Bastard of the Sun , by Nile . 
Aped into Man : with all his Mother's Mud 
Crusted about his Soul.  


Ven.   The Nation is 
One Universal Traitor ; and their Queen 
The very Spirit and Extract of 'em all . 


Ant.   Is there yet left 
A possibility of Aid from Valour ? 
Is there one God unsworn to my Destruction ? 
The least unmortgaged hope ? for , if there be , 
Methinks I cannot fall beneath the Fate 
Of such a Boy as Caesar. 
The world 's one half is yet in Antony ; 
And , from each Limb of it that 's hewed away , 
The Soul comes back to me . 


Ven.   There yet remain 
Three Legions in the Town . The last Assault 
Lopped off the rest : if Death be your Design ; 
( As I must wish it now ) these are sufficient 
To make a heap about us of dead Foes , 
An honest Pile for burial . 


Ant.   they 're enough . 
we 'll not divide our-stars ; but side by side 
Fight em●…lous : and with malicious Eyes 
Surveyed each other's Acts : so every Death 
thou giv'st , I 'll take on me , as a just Debt , 
And pay thee back a Soul.  


Ven.   Now you shall see I love you . Not a word 
Of chiding more . By my few hours of Life , 
I am so pleased with this brave Roman Fate , 
That I would not be Caesar , to outlive you . 
When we put off this Flesh , and mount together , 
I shall be shown to all th' Etherial crowd ; 
Lo , this is he who died with Antony . 


Ant.   Who knows but we may pierce through all their Troops , 
And reach my Veterans yet ? 't is worth the tempting , 
TO overleap this Gulf of Fate , 
And leave our wandering Destinies behind . 
Enter Alexas , trombling . 

Ven.   See , see , that Villain ; 
See Cleopatra stamped upon that Face , 
With all her cunning , all her Arts of Falsehood ! 
How she looks out through those dissembling Eyes ! 
How he sets his Countenance for deceit ; 
And promises a Lie , before he speaks ! 
Let me dispatch him first . 
( Drawing ) 

Alex.   OH , spare me , spare me . 


Ant.   Hold ; he 's not worth your kill . On thy Life , 
( Which thou mayst keep , because I scorn to take it ) 
no Syllable to justify thy Queen ; 
Save thy base tongue its Office.  


Alex.   Sir she 's gone , 
Where she shall never be molested more 
By Love , or you . 


Ant.   Fled to her Dollabella ! 
Die , Traitor , I revoke my Promise , die . 
( Going to kill him . ) 

Alex.   OH hold , she is not fled . 


Ant.   She is : my Eyes 
Are open to her Falsehood ; my whole Life 
Has been a Golden dream , of Love and Friendship . 
But , now I wake , I 'm like a Merchant , roused 
From soft repose , to see his Vessel sinking , 
And all his Wealth cast over . Ingrateful Woman ! 
Who followed me , but as the Swallow Summer , 
Hatching her young ones in my kindly Beams , 
Singing her flatteries to my morning wake ; 
But , now my Winter comes , she spread her wings , 
And seeks the Spring of Caesar.  


Alex.   Think not so : 
Her Fortunes have , in all things , mixed with yours . 
Had she betrayed her Naval force to Rome , 
How easily might she have gone to Caesar , 
Secure by such a Bride ! 


Ven.   She sent it first , 
To be more welcome after . 


Ant.   't is too plain ; 
Else would she have appeared , to clear herself . 


Alex.   Too fatally she has ; she could not bear 
To be accused by you ; but shut herself 
Within her Monument : looked down , and sighed ; 
While , from her unchanged face , the silent tears 
Dropped , as they had not leave , but stole their parting . 
Some undistinguished words she inly murmured ; 
At last , she raised her Eyes ; and , with such Looks 
As dying Lucrece cast , — 


Ant.   My heart forbodes . — 


Ven.   All for the best : go on . 


Alex.   She snatched her Poniard , 
And , ere we could prevent the fatal Blow , 
Plunged it within her Breast : then turned to me , 
Go , bear my Lord ( said she ) my last Farewell ; 
And ask him if he yet suspect my Faith. 
More she was saying , but Death rushed betwixt . 
She half pronounced your Name with her last Breath , 
And buried half within her . 


Ven.   Heaven be praised . 


Ant.   then art thou innocent , my poor dear Love ? 
And art thou dead ? 
OH those two words ! their Sound should be divided : 
Hadst thou been false , and died ; or hadst thou lived , 
And hadst been true — . But Innocence and Death ! 
This shows not well above . then what am I , 
The Murderer of this Truth , this Innocence ! 
Thoughts cannot form themselves in words so horrid 
As can express my Gild ! 


Ven.   Is 't come to this ? The Gods have been too graciou : 
And thus you thank 'em for 't . 


Ant. to Alex.   Why stayest thou here ? 
Is 〈◊〉 ●…or thee to spy upon my Soul , 
And see its inward mourning ? Get thee hence ; 
thou art not worthy to behold , what now 
Becomes a Roman Emperor to perform . 


Alex.   Aside . He love's her still : 
His grief betrays it . Good ! The joy to find 
she 's yet alive , completes the Reconcilement . 
i  saved myself , and her . But , Oh! the Romans ! 
Fate comes too fast upon my Wit. 
Hunt's me too hard , and meets me at each double : 
Exit . 

Ven.   Would she had died a little sooner though , 
Before Octavia went ; you might have treated : 
Now 't will look tame , and would not be received . 
Come , rouse yourself , and le 's die warm together . 


Ant.   I will not fight : there 's no more work for War. 
The business of my angry hours is done . 


V●…n .  Caesar is at your Gates . 


Ant.   Why , let him enter , 
〈◊〉 welcome now . 


Ven.   What Lethargy has crept into your Soul ? 


Ant.   't is but a scorn of Life , and just desire 
To free myself from Bondage . 


Ven.   Do it bravely . 


Ant.   I will ; but not by fight . OH , Ventidius ! 
What should I fight for now ? My Queen is dead . 
I was but great for her ; my Power , my Empire , 
Were but my Merchandise to buy her Love ; 
And conquered Kings , my Factors . Now she 's dead , 
Let Caesar take the World , — 
An Empty Circle , since the jewel 's gone 
Which made it worth my strife : my Being's nauseous ; 
For all the Bribes of Life are gone away . 


Ven.   Would you be taken ? 


Ant.   Yes , I would be taken ; 
But , as a Roman ought , dead , my Ventidius : 
For I 'll convey my Soul from Caesar's reach , 
And lay down life myself . 't is time the World 
Should have a Lord , and know whom to obey . 
We two have kept its Homage in suspense , 
And bend the Globe on whose each side we trod , 
Tell it was dinted innards : Let him walk 
Alone upon 't ; I 'm weary of my part . 
My Torch is out ; and the World stands before me 
Like a black Desert , at the approach of Night : 
I 'll lay me down , and stray no ●…arther on . 


Ven.   I could be grieved , 
But that I 'll not outlive you : choose your Death ; 
For , I have seen him in such various shapes , 
I care not which I take : I 'm only troubled 
The Life I bear , is worn to such a Rag , 
't is scarce worth giving . I could wish indeed 
We threw it from us with a better Grace ; 
That , like two Lions taken in the Toils , 
We might at last thrust out our paws , and wound 
The Hunters that enclose us . 


Ant.   I have thought on 't . 
Ventidius , you must live . 


Ven.   I must not Sir.  


Ant.   wilt thou not live , to speak some good of me ? 
To stand by my fair Fame , and guard th' approaches 
From the ill Tongues of Men ? 


Ven.   Who shall guard mine , 
For living after you ? 


Ant.   Say , I command it . 


Ven.   If we die well , our Deaths w●…ll speak themselves , 
And need no living Witness . 


Ant.   thou hast loved me , 
And ●…ain I would reward thee : I must die ; 
Kill me , and take the Merit of my Death 
To make thee Friends with C●…sar . 


Ven.   Thank your kindness . 
You said I loved you ; and , in recompense , 
You bid me turn a Traitor : did I think 
You would have used me thus ? that I should die 
With a hard thought of you ? 


Ant.   Forgive me , Roman . 
Since I have heard of Cleopatra's Death , 
My Reason bears no rule upon my Tongue , 
But let's my thoughts break all at Random out : 
i  thought better ; do not deny me twice . 


Ven.   By Heaven , I will not . 
Let it not be to outlive you . 


Ant.   Kill me first , 
And then die thou : for 't is but just thou serve 
Thy Friend , before thyself . 


Ven.   Give me your ha●…d . 
We soon shall meet again . Now farewell , Emperor . 
( Embrace . ) Methinks that word 's too cold to be my last : 
Since Death sweeps dsstinctions , Farewell , Friend . 
that 's all . — — 
I will not make a business of a trifle : 
And yet I cannot look on you , and kill you ; 
Pray turn your Face . 


Ant.   I do : strike home sure . 


Ven.   Home , as my Sword will reach . 
( Kills himself . ) 

Ant.   OH , thou mistak'st ; 
That wound was none of thine : give it me back : 
thou robbest me of my Death . 


Ven.   I do indeed ; 
But , think 't is the first time I ever deceived you ; 
I●… that may pled my Pardon . And you , Gods , 
Forgive me , if you will ; for I die perjured , 
Rather than kill my Friend . 
( Dyes . ) 

Ant.   Farewell . Ever my Leader , even in Death ! 
My Queen and thou have got the start of me , 
And I 'm the lag of Honour . — — gone so soon ? 
Is Death no more ? He used him carelessly , 
With a familiar kindness : ere he knocked , 
ran to the Door , and took him in his Arms , 
As who should say , YE are welcome at all hours , 
A Friend need give no warning . Books had spoiled him ; 
●…or all the Learned are Cowards by profession . 
't is not worth 
My farther thought : for Death , for aught I know , 
Is but to think no more here 's to be satisfied . 
( Falls on his Sword. ) i  missed my heart . OH unperforming hand ! 
thou never couldst have erred in a worse time . 
My Fortune jade's me to the last ; and Death , 
Like a great Man , takes state , and makes me wait 
For my Admittance — — . 
( Trampling within . ) Some perhaps from Caesar : 
If he should find me living , and suspect 
That I played booty with my Life ! I 'll mend 
My work , ere they can reach me . 
( Rises upon his Knees . ) Enter Cleopatra , Charmion , Iras.  

Cleop.   Where is my Lord ? where is he ? 


Char.   There he lies , 
And dead Ven●…idius by him . 


Cleop.   My sears were Prophets ; I am come too late . 
OH that accursed Alexas ! 
( Runs to him . ) 

Ant.   Art thou living ? 
Or am I dead before I knew ? and thou 
T●…e first kind Ghost that meets me ? 


Cleop.   Help me Seat him . 
send quickly , send for help . 
( They place him in a Chair . ) 

Ant.   I am answered . 
We live both . Sat thee down , my Cleopatr●… : 
I 'll make the most I can of Life , to stay 
A moment more with thee . 


Cleop.   How is it with you ? 


Ant.   't is as with a Man 
Removing in a hurry ; all packed up , 
But one dear Jewel that his haste forgot ; 
And he , for that returns upon the spur : 
So I come back , for thee . 


Cleop.   Too long , you Heavens' , you have been cruel to me ; 
Now show your mended Faith , and give me back 
His fleeting Life . 


Ant.   It will not be , my Love. 
I keep my Soul by force . 
Say but thou art not false . 


Cleop.   't is now too late 
To say I 'm true : I 'll prove it , and die with you , 
Unknown to me , Alexas feigned my Death : 
Which , when I knew , I hasted to prevent 
This ●…atal consequence . My Fleet betrayed 
Both you and me . 


Ant.   And Dollabella . — — 


Cleop.   Scarce esteemed before he loved ; but hated now . 


Ant.   Enough : my life 's not long enough for more . 
thou sayst thou wilt come after : I believe thee ; 
For I can now believe whate'er thou sayst , 
That we may part more kindly . 


Cleop.   I will come : 
Doubt not , my Life , I 'll come , and quickly too : 
Caesar shall triumph over no part of thee . 


Ant.   But grieve not , while thou stayest 
My last disastrous Times : 
Think we have had a clear and glorious day ; 
And Heaven did kindly to delay the Storm 
Just till our close of Evening . Ten year's love , 
And not a moment lost , but all improved 
To th' utmost Joys : What Ages have we lived ? 
And now to die each others ; and , so dying , 
While hand in hand we walk in Groves below , 
Whole Troops of Lovers Ghosts shall flock about u●… , 
And all the Train be ours . 


Cleop.   Your words are like the Notes of dying Swans , 
Too sweet to last . Were there so many hours 
For your unkindness , and not one for Love ? 


Ant.   no , not a minute . — This one kiss — more worth 
Than all I leave to Caesar.  
( Dyes . 

Cleop.   OH , tell me so again , 
And take Ten thousand kisses , for that word . 
My Lord , my Lord : speak , if you yet have being ; 
Sigh to me , if you cannot speak ; or cast 
O●…e look : Do any thing that shows you live . 


Iras.   he 's gone too far , to hear you ; 
And this you see , a Lump of senseless ●…lay , 
The leave of a Soul.  


C●…ar .  Remember Madam , 
He charged you not to grieve . 


Cleop.   And I 'll obey him . 
I have not loved a Roman not to know 
What should become of his Wife ; his Wife , my Charmion●… 
For 't is to that high Title I aspire , 
And now I 'll not die lesle . Let dull Octavia 
Survive , to mourn him dead : my Nobler Fate 
Shall knit our Spousals with a tie too strong 
For Roman Laws to break . 


Iras.   Will you then die ? 


Cleop.   Why shouldst thou make that Question ? 


Iras.   Caesar is most merciful . 


Cleop.   Let him be so●… 
To ●…hose that want his Mercy : my poor Lord 
Made no such Covenant with him to spare me 
When he was dead . Yield me to Caesar's pride ? 
What , to be led in Triumph through the Streets , 
A Spectacle to base Plebeian Eyes ; 
While some dejected Friend of Antony's , 
Close in a Corner , shakes his Head , and mutters 
A Secret Curse on her who ruined him ? 
I 'll none of that . 


Char.   Whatever you resolve , 
I 'll follow even to Death . 


Iras.   I only feared 
For you ; but more should fear to live without you . 


Cleop.   Why , now 't is as it should be . Quick , my Friends , 
Dispatch ; ere this , the town 's in Caesar's hands : 
My Lord looks down concerned , and fears my stay , 
lest I should be surprised ; 
Keep him not waiting for his Love too long . 
You , Charmion , bring my Crown and richest Jewels , 
With 'em , the Wreath of Victory I made 
( Vain Augury ! ) for him who now lies dead ; 
You , Iras , bring the Cure of all our Ills.  


Iras.   The Aspics , Madam ? 


Cleop.   Must I bid you twice ? 
Exeunt Char. and I●…as . 't is sweet to die , when they would force life on me , 
To rush into the dark abode of Death , 
And seize him first ; if he be like my Love , 
He is not frightful sure . 
we 're now alone , in secrecy and silence ; 
And is not this like Lovers ? I may kiss 
These pale , cold Lips ; Octavia does not see me ; 
And , Oh! 't is better far to have him thus , 
Than see him in her Arms. — OH welcome , welcome . 
Enter Charmion , Iras.  

Char.   What must be done ? 


Cleop.   Short Ceremony , Friends : 
But yet it must be decent . First , this Laurel 
Shall Crown my Hero's Head : he fell not basely , 
Nor left his Shield behind him . Only thou 
Couldst triumph over thyself ; and thou alone 
Wert worthy so to triumph . 


Char.   To what end 
These Ensigns of your Pomp and Royalty ? 


Cleop.   Dull , that thou art ! why , 't is to meet my Love ; 
As when I saw him first , on Cydnos bank , 
All sparkling , like a Goddess ; so adorned , 
I 'll find him once again : my second Spousals 
Shall match my first , in Glory . Haste , haste , both , 
And dress the Bride of Antony . 


Char.   't is done . 


Cleop.   Now seat me by my Lord I claim this place ; 
For I must Conquer Caesar too , like him , 
And win my share o' th' World. Hail , you dear Relics 
Of my Immortal Love ! 
OH let no Impious hand remove you hence ; 
But rest for ever here : let Egypt give 
His Death that Peace , which it denied his Life . 
Reach me the Casket . 


I●…ss .  Underneath the fruit the Aspic lies . 


Cleop.   putting aside the leaves Welcome , thou kind Deceiver ! 
thou best of Thiefs ; who , with an easy key , 
Dost open Life , and unperceived by us , 
Even steal us from ourselves : discharging so 
Death's dreadful Office , better than himself , 
Touching our Limbs so gently into slumber , 
That Death stands by , deceived by his own Image , 
And thinks himself but Sleep . 


Serap . within .  The Queen , where is she ? 
The Town is yielded , Caesar's at the Gates . 


Cleop.   He comes too late to invade the Rights of Death . 
Haste , bore my Arm , and rouse the Serpent's fury . 
[ Holds out her Arm and draws it back . Coward Flesh — 
Wouldst thou conspire with Caesar , to betray me , 
As thou wert none of mine ? I 'll force thee to 't , 
And not be sent by him , 
But bring myself , my Soul to Antony . 
[ Turns aside , and then shows her Arm bloody . Take hence ; the work is done . 


Serap . within .  Break open the Door , 
And guard the Traitor well . 


Char.   The next is ours . 


Iras.   Now , Charmion , to be worthy 
Of your great Queen and Mistress . 
[ They apply the Aspics . 

Cleop.   Already , Death I feel thee in my Veins ; 
I go with such a will to find my Lord , 
That we shall quickly meet . 
A heavy numbness creeps through every Limb , 
And now 't is at my Head : my Eyelids fall , 
And my dear Love is vanished in a Mist. 
Where shall I find him , where ? OH turn me to him , 
And lay me on his Breast . — Caesar , thy worst ; 
Now part us , if thou caused . 
( Dyes . ) Iras sinks down at her feet , and dies Charmion stands behind her Chair , as dressing her Head.  Enter S●…on , two Priests , Alexas bond , Egyptians . 

2.  Pr●… .  〈◊〉 , Serapion , what havoc Death has made ! 


Serap .  'T was 〈◊〉 ●…ared . 
Charmion , is this well done ? 


Char.   Yes , 't is well done , and like a Queen , the last 
Of her great Race : I follow her . 
( Sinks down ; Dyes . ) 

Alexas .  't is true , 
She has done well : much better thus to die , 
Than live to make a Holiday in Rome . 


Serap .  See , see how the Lovers sit in State together , 
As they were giving Laws to half Mankind . 
th' impression of a Smile left in her Face , 
Shows she died pleased with him for whom she lived , 
And went to Charm him in another World. 
Caesars' just entering ; grief has now no leisure . 
Secure that Villain , as our pledge of safety 
To grace th' Imperial Triumph . Sleep , blessed Pair , 
Secure from human Chance , long Ages out , 
While all the Storms of Fate fly over your Tomb ; 
And Fame , to late Posterity , shall tell , 
no Lovers lived so great , or died so well . 


Epilogue . 

Poets , like Disputants , when Reasons fail , 
Have one sure Refurge left and that 's to rail ; 
Fop , Coxcomb , Fool , are thundered through the Pit ; 
And this is all their Equipage of Wit. 
We wonder how the Devil this difference grows , 
Betwixt our Fools in Verse , and yours in Prose ? 
For , I'faith , the quarrel rightly understood , 
't is Civil War with their own Flesh and Blood. 
The Threadbare Author hate's the gaudy Coat ; 
And swears at the gilt Coach , but swears a foot : 
For 't is observed of every Scribbling Man , 
He grows a Fop as fast as ever he can ; 
Prunes up , and asks his Oracle the Glass , 
If Pink or Purple best become his Face . 
For our poor Wretch , he neither rails nor prays ; 
Nor likes your Wit just as you like his Plays ; 
He has not yet so much of Mr. Bays . 
He does his best ; and , if he cannot please , 
Would quietly sue out his Writ of Ease . 
Yet , if he might his own Grand Jury call , 
By the Fair Sex he begs to stand or fall . 
Let Caesar's Power the men's ambition move , 
But grace you him who lost the World for Love. 
Yet if some ' antiquated Lady say , 
The last Age is not Copied in his Play ; 
Heaven help the Man who for that Face must drudge , 
Which only has the wrinkles of a Judge . 
Let not the Young and Beauteous join with those ; 
For should you raise such numerous Hosts of Foes , 
Young Wits and Spark he to his aid must call ; 
't is more than one Man's work to please you all . 
FINIS . 

