C r 

Honi soit qvi mal y pense 

Dieu et mon droit 



Astraea redux . A poem on the happy restoration & return of his sacred majesty Charles the second . by John Driden . 

jam redit & virgo , redeunt Saturnia regna . 

Virgil . 

London , printed by j. m. for Henry Herringman , and are to be sold at his shop , at the Blue-anchor , in the lower walk of the New-exchange , 1660.  

Astraea redux . A poem on the happy restoration and return of his sacred majesty Charles the second . 

Now with a general peace the world was blessed , 
While ours , a world divided from the rest , 
A dreadful quiet felt , and worse far 
Than arms , a sullen interval of war : 
Thus when black clouds draw down the labouring skies , 
Ere yet abroad the winged thunder flies 
An horrid stillness first invades the ear , 
And in that silence we the tempest fear . 
Th' ambitious Swede like restless billows tossed , 
On this hand gaining what on that he lost , 
Though in his life he blood and ruin breathed 
To his now guideless kingdom peace bequeathed . 
And heaven that seemed regardless of our fate , 
For France and Spain did miracles create , 
Such mortal quarrels to compose in peace 
As nature bred and interest did increase . 
We sighed to hear the fair Iberian bride 
Must grow a lily to the lilies side , 
while our cross stars denied us Charles his bed 
Whom our first flames and virgin love did wed . 
For his long absence church and state did groan ; 
Madness the pulpit , faction seized the throne : 
Experienced age in deep despair was lost 
To see the rebel thrive , the loyal crossed : 
Youth that with joys had unacquainted been 
Envied grey hairs that once good days had seen : 
We thought our sires , not with their own content , 
Had ere we came to age our portion spent . 
Nor could our nobles hope their bold attempt 
Who ruined crowns would coronets exempt : 
For when by their designing leaders taught 
To strike at power which for themselves they sought , 
The vulgar gulled into rebellion , armed , 
Their blood to action by the prize was warmed . 
The sacred purple then and scarlet gown 
Like sanguine dye to elephants was shown . 
Thus when the bold Typheous scaled the sky , 
And forced great Jove from his own heaven to fly , 
( What King , what crown from treason's reach is free , 
If Jove and heaven can violated be ? ) 
The lesser gods that shared his prosperous state 
All suffered in the exiled thund'rers fate . 
The rabble now such freedom did enjoy , 
As winds at sea that use it to destroy : 
Blind as the Cyclops , and as wild as he , 
They owned a lawless savage liberty , 
Like that our painted ancestors so prized 
Ere empire's arts their breasts had civilised . 
How great were then our Charles his woes , who thus 
Was forced to suffer for himself and us ! 
He tossed by fate , and hurried up and down , 
Heir to his father's sorrows , with his crown , 
Could taste no sweets of youths desired age , 
But found his life too true a pilgrimage . 
Unconquered yet in that forlorn estate 
His manly courage overcame his fate . 
His wounds he took like Romans on his breast , 
Which by his virtue were with laurels dressed . 
As souls reach heaven while yet in bodies penned , 
So did he live above his banishment . 
That sun which we beheld with cous'ned eyes 
Within the water , moved along the skies . 
How easy 't is when destiny proves kind 
With full spread sails to run before the wind , 
But those that 'gainst stiff gales laveering go 
Must be at once resolved and skilful too . 
He would not like soft Otho hope prevent 
But stayed and suffered fortune to repent . 
These virtues Galba in a stranger sought ; 
And Piso to adopted empire brought . 
How shall i then my doubtful thoughts express 
That must his sufferings both regret and bless ! 
For when his early valour heaven had crossed , 
And all at Worcester but the honour lost , 
Forced into exile from his rightful throne 
He made all countries where he came his own . 
And viewing monarchs secret arts of sway 
A royal factor for their kingdoms lay . 
Thus banished David spent abroad his time . 
When to be God's anointed was his crime 
And when restored made his proud neighbours rue 
Those choice remarks he from his travels drew , 
nor is he only by afflictions shown 
To conquer others realms but rule his own : 
Recou'ring hardly what he lost before 
His right indears it much , his purchase more . 
Enured to suffer ere he came to reign 
No rash procedure will his actions stain . 
To business ripened by digestive thought 
His future rule is into method brought : 
As they who first proportion understand 
With easy practice reach a Master's hand . 
Well Might the ancient poets than confer 
On night the honoured name of counsellor , 
Since struck with rays of prosperous fortune blind 
We light alone in dark afflictions find . 
In such adversities to sceptres trained 
The name of great his famous grandsire gained : 
Who yet a King alone in name and right , 
With hunger , cold and angry Jove did fight ; 
Shocked by a covenanting leagues vast powers 
As holy and as Catholic as ours : 
Till fortune's fruitless spite had made it known 
Her blows not shaken but riveted his throne . 
Some lazy ages lost in sleep and ease 
No action leave to busy chronicles ; 
Such whose supine felicity but makes 
In story chasmes , in Epoche's mistakes ; 
O'er whom time gently shakes his wings of down 
Till with his silent sickle they are mown : 
Such is not Charles his too too active age , 
Which governed by the wild distempered rage 
Of some black star infecting all the skies , 
Made him at his own cost like Adam wise . 
Tremble ye nations who secure before 
Laughed at those arms that 'gainst ourselves we bore ; 
Roused by the lash of his own stubborn tail 
Our lion now will foreign foes assail . 
With alga who the sacred altar strews ? 
To all the sea-gods Charles an offering owes : 
A bull to thee Portunus shall be slain 
A lamb to you the tempests of the main : 
For those loud storms that did against him roar 
Have cast his shipwracked vessel on the shore . 
Yet as wise artists mix their colours so 
That by degrees they from each other go , 
Black steals unheeded from the neighbouring white 
Without offending the well cous'ned sight : 
So on us stole our blessed change ; while we 
Th' effect did feel but scarce the manner see . 
Frosts that constrain the ground , and birth deny 
To flowers , that in its womb expecting lie , 
Do seldom their usurping power withdraw , 
But raging floods pursue their hasty thaw : 
Our thaw was mild , the cold not chased away 
But lost in kindly heat of lengthened day . 
Heaven would no bargain for its blessings drive 
But what we could not pay for , freely give . 
The Prince of peace would like himself confer 
A gift unhoped without the price of war . 
Yet as he knew his blessings worth , took care 
That we should know it by repeated prayer ; 
Which stormed the skies and ravished Charles from thence 
As heaven itself is took by violence . 
booth's forward valour only served to show 
He durst that duty pay we all did owe : 
th' attempt was fair ; but heavens' prefixed hour 
Not come ; so like the watchful traveller 
That by the moons mistaken light did rise , 
Lay down again , and closed his weary eyes . 
'T was Monck whom providence designed to loose 
Those real bonds false freedom did impose . 
The blessed saints that watched this turning scene 
Did from their stars with joyful wonder lean , 
To see small clues draw vastest weights along , 
Not in their bulk but in their order strong . 
Thus pencils can by one slight touch restore 
Smiles to that changed face that wept before . 
With ease such fond chimeras we pursue 
As fancy frames for fancy to subdue , 
But when ourselves to action we betake 
It shuns the mint like gold that chemists make : 
How hard was then his task , at once to be 
What in the body natural we see 
Man's architect distinctly did ordain 
The charge of muscles , nerves , and of the brain ; 
Through viewless conduits spirits to dispense , 
The springs of motion from the seat of sense . 
'T was not the hasty product of a day , 
But the well ripened fruit of wise delay . 
He like a patient angler , ere he struck 
Would let them play a while upon the hook . 
Our healthful food the stomach labours thus 
At first embracing what it strait doth crush . 
Wise leeches will not vain receipts obtrude , 
While growing pains pronounce the humours crude ; 
Deaf to complaints they wait upon the ill 
Till some safe crisis authorise their skill . 
Nor could his acts too close a vizard wear 
To scape their eyes whom guilt had taught to fear , 
And guard with caution that polluted nest 
Whence legion twice before was dispossessed . 
Once sacred house which when they entered in 
They thought the place could sanctify a sin ; 
Like those that vainly hoped kind heaven would wink 
While to excess on martyrs tombs they drink . 
And as devouter Turks first warn their souls 
To part , before they taste forbidden bowls , 
So these when their black crimes they went about 
First timely charmed their useless conscience out . 
Religion's name against itself was made ; 
The shadow served the substance to invade : 
Like zealous missions they did care pretend 
Of souls in show , but made the gold their end . 
Th' incensed powers beheld with scorn from high 
An heaven so far distant from the sky , 
Which durst with horse's hoofs that beat the ground 
And martial brass belie the thunder's sound . 
'T was hence at length just vengeance thought it fit 
To speed their ruin by their impious wit . 
Thus Sforza cursed with a too fertile brain 
Lost by his wiles the power his wit did gain . 
Henceforth their fogue must spend at lesser rate 
Then in its flames to wrap a nations fate . 
Suffered to live , they are like helots set 
A virtuous shame within us to beget . 
For by example most we sinned before , 
And glass-like clearness mixed with frailty bore . 
But since reform by what we did amiss , 
We by our sufferings learn to prize our bliss . 
Like early lovers whose unpractised hearts 
Were long the may-game of malicious arts , 
When once they find their jealousies were vain 
With double heat renew their fires again . 
'T was this produced the joy that hurried o'er 
Such swarms of English to the neighbouring shore , 
To fetch that prize , by which Batavia made 
So rich amends for our impoverished trade . 
Oh had you seen from Schevelines barren shore 
( Crowded with troops , and barren now no more , ) 
Afflicted Holland to his farewell bring 
True sorrow , Holland to regret a King ; 
While waiting him his royal fleet did ride 
And willing winds to their low'rd sails denied . 
The wavering streamers , flags , and standart out 
The merry seman's rude but cheerful shout , 
And last the cannon's voice that shook the skies 
And , as it fares in sudden ecstasies 
At once bereft us both of ears and eyes . 
The Naseby now no longer England's shame 
But better to be lost in Charles his name 
( Like some unequal bride in nobler sheets ) 
Receives her Lord : the joyful London meets 
The princely York , himself alone a freight ; 
The swiftsure groans beneath great gloc'sters weight . 
Secure as when the halcyon breeds , with these 
He that was born to drown Might cross the seas . 
Heaven could not own a providence and take 
The wealth three nations ventured at a stake . 
The same indulgence Charles his voyage blessed 
Which in his right had miracles confessed . 
The winds that never moderation knew 
Afraid to blow too much , too faintly blue ; 
or out of breath with joy could not enlarge 
Their straightened lungs , or conscious of their charge . 
The British Amphitryte smooth and clear 
In richer azure never did appear ; 
Proud her returning Prince to entertain 
With the submitted fasces of the main . 
And welcome now ( great monarch ) to your own ; 
Behold th' approaching cliffs of Albion ; 
It is no longer motion cheats your view , 
As you meet it , the land approacheth you . 
The land returns , and in the white it wears 
The marks of penitence and sorrow bears . 
But you , whose goodness your descent doth show , 
Your heavenly parentage and earthly too ; 
By that same mildness which your father's crown 
Before did ravish , shall secure your own . 
Not tied to rules of policy , you find 
Revenge less sweet than a forgiving mind . 
Thus when th' almighty would to Moses give 
A sight of all he could behold and live ; 
A voice before his entry did proclaim 
Long-suff'ring , goodness , mercy in his name . 
Your power to justice doth submit your cause , 
Your goodness only is above the laws ; 
Whose rigid letter while pronounced by you 
Is softer made . So winds that tempests brew 
When through Arabian groves they take their flight 
Made wanton with rich odours , lose their spite . 
And as those lees that trouble it , refine 
The agitated soul of generous wine , 
so tears of joy for your returning spilt , 
Work out and expiate our former guilt . 
Methinks i see those crowds on dovers strand 
Who in their haste to welcome you to land 
Choked up the beach with their still growing store , 
And made a wilder torrent on the shore . 
While spurred with eager thoughts of past delight 
Those who had seen you , court a second sight ; 
Preventing still your steps , and making haste 
To meet you often where so ere you past . 
How shall i speak of that triumphant day 
When you renewed the expiring pomp of May ! 
( A month that owns an interest in your name : 
You and the flowers are its peculiar claim . ) 
That star that at your birth shone out so bright 
It stained the duller sun's meridian light , 
Did once again its potent fires renew 
Guiding our eyes to find and worship you . 
And now times whiter series is begun 
Which in soft centuries shall smoothly run ; 
Those clouds that overcast your morn shall fly 
Dispelled to farthest corners of the sky . 
Our nation with united interest blessed 
Not now content to poise , shall sway the rest . 
Abroad your empire shall no limits know , 
But like the sea in boundless circles flow . 
Your much loved fleet shall with a wide command 
Besiege the petty monarchs of the land : 
And as old time his offspring swallowed down 
Our ocean in its depths all seas shall drown . 
Their wealthy trade from pirates rapine free 
Our merchants shall no more adventurers be : 
nor in the farthest East those dangers fear 
Which humble Holland must dissemble here . 
Spain to your gift alone her Indies owes ; 
For what the powerful takes not he bestows . 
And France that did an exiles presence fear 
May justly apprehend you still too near . 
At home the hateful names of parties cease 
And factious souls are wearied into peace . 
The discontented now are only they 
Whose crimes before did your just cause betray : 
Of those your edicts some reclaim from sins , 
But most your life and blessed example wins . 
Oh happy Prince whom heaven hath taught the way 
By paying vows , to have more vows to pay ! 
Oh happy age ! Oh times like those alone 
By fate reserved for great Augustus' throne ! 
When the joint growth of arms and arts foreshow 
The world a monarch , and that monarch you.  






