AMBOYNA : A TRAGEDY . 

As it is ACTED At the THEATRE-ROYAL , 

Written by JOHN DRYDEN Servant to His Majesty . 

— Manet altâ ment repostum . 


LONDON : Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman , and are to be sold at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange . 1673.  

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE Lord Clifford of CHUDLEIGH . 

My Lord ; 

After so many Favours , and those so great , Conferred on me by Your Lordship these many years ; which , I may call more properly one Continued Act of Your Generosity and Goodness ; I know not whether I should appear either more Ungrateful in my Silence , or more Extravagantly Vain in my endeavours to acknowledge them . For , since all Acknowledgements bear a Face of Payment , it may be thought , That I have flattered myself into an Opinion of being able to return some part of my Obligements to You ; the just despair of which Attempt , and the due Veneration I have for his Person , to whom I must Address , have almost driven me , to Receive only with a profound Submission the effects of that Virtue , which is never to be Comprehended but by Admiration : And the greatest note of Admiration is Silence . 't is that noble Passion , to which Poets raise their Audience in highest Subjects , and they have then gained over them the greatest Victory , when they are Ravished into a Pleasure , which is not to be expressed by Words . To this Pitch , My Lord , the sense of my Gratitude had almost raised me : to receive your Favours as the jews of old received their Law , with a mute Wonder , to think , that the Loudness of Acclamation , was only the Praise of Men to Men , and that the secret homage of the Soul was a greater Mark of Reverence , than an outward ceremonious joy , which might be sergeant , and must be irreverent in its Tumult . Neither , My Lord , have I a particular right to pay you my Acknowledgements : You have been a Good so Universal , that almost every Man in three Nations may think me Injurious to his Propriety , that I invade your Praises , in undertaking to celebrate them alone . And , that have assumed to myself a Patron , who was no more to be circumscribed than the Sun and Elements , which are of Public benefit to human kind . 

As it was in much your power to oblige all who could pretend to Merit from the Public , so it was more in your Nature and Inclination . If any went ill-satisfyed from the Treasury , while , it was in your Lordship's Management , it proclaimed the want of Desert , and not of Friends : You Distributed your Master's Favour with so equal hands , that justice herself could not have held the Scales more even : but , with that Natural Propensity to do good , that had that Treasure been your own , your Inclination to Bounty must have ruined you : no Man attended to be denied : no Man bribed for Expedition : want , and desert were pleas sufficient . By your own Integrity and your Prudent Choice of those whom you employed , the King gave all that He intended , and Gratuities to His Officers made not vain His Bounty . This , My Lord , you were in your Public capacity of High-treasurer , to which you ascended by such degrees , that your Royal Master saw your Virtues still growing to His Favours faster than they could rise to you . Both at home , and abroad , with your Sword and with your Counsel , you have served Him with unbiased Honour , and with unshaken resolution : making His Greatness , and the true Interest of your Country , the standard and measure of your actions Fortune may desert the wise and brave ; but , true Virtue never will forsake itself . 't is the Interest of the World that Virtuous Men should attain to Greatness , because it gives them the power of doing good . But , when by the Iniquity of the Times they are brought to that extremity , that they must either quit their Virtue or their Fortune , they owe themselves so much , as to retire to the private exercise of their Honour ; to be great within , and by the constancy of their Resolutions , to teach the inferior World , how they ought to judge of such Principles , which are asserted with so generous and so unconstrained a Trial . 

But , this voluntary neglect of Honours , has been of rare Example in the World : few Men have frowned first upon Fortune , and precipitated themselves from the top of her Wheel , before they felt at least the Declination of it . We read not of many Emperors like Dioclesian , and Charles the Fifth , who have preferred a Garden , and a Cloister , before a Crowd of Followers , and the troublesome Glory of an Active Life , which robs the Possessor of his rest and quiet , to secure the safety and happiness of others . Seneca , with the help of his Philosophy , could never attain to that pitch of Virtue . He only endeavoured to prevent his fall by descending first ; and , offered to resign that Wealth which he knew he could no longer hold . He would only have made a Present to his Master of what he foresaw would become his Prey : He striven to avoid the Jealousy of a Tyrant ; You dismissed yourself from the Attendance and Privacy of a Gracious King. Our Age has afforded us many Examples of a contrary nature : but your Lordship is the only one of this . 't is easy to discover in all Governments those who wait so close on Fortune , that they are never to be shaken off at any turn : Such who seem to have taken up a resolution of being Great , to continue their Stations on the Theatre of Business : to change with the Scene , and shifted the Vizard for another part . These Men condemn in their Discourses that Virtue which they dare not practice . But the sober part of this present Age , and impartial Posterity will do right , both to your Lordship and to them . And when they read on what Accounts , and with how much Magnanimity you quit those Honours , to which the highest Ambition of an English Subject could aspire , will apply to you with much more reason , what the Historian said of a Roman Emperor ; Multi diuti●s Imperium tenuerunt ; Nemo fortius reliquit . 

To this Retirement of your Lordship , I wish I could bring a better Entertainment , than this Play ; which , though it succeeded on the Stage , will scarcely bear a serious perusal , it being contrived and written in a Month , the Subject barren , the persons low , and the Writing not heightened with many laboured Scenes . The consideration of these defects ought to have prescribed more modesty to the Author , than to have presented it to that person in the World , for whom he has the greatest Honour , and of whose Patronage , the best of his Endeavours had been unworthy . But , I had not satisfied myself in staying longer , and could never have paid the Debt with a much better Play. As it is , the meaness of it will show at least , that I pretend not by it to make any manner of return for your Favours ; and , that I only give you a new Occasion of Exercising your Goodness to me , in pardoning the Failing and Imperfections of , My Lord , 

Your Lordships , Most Humble , Most Obliged , Most Obedient Servant , I Dryden . 

PROLOGUE TO AMBOYNA . 

AS needy Gallants in the Scriv'ners' hands , 
Court the rich Knave that gripe's their Mortgaged Lands , 
The first fat Buck of all the Seasons sent 
And Keeper takes no Fee in Compliment : 
The doteage of some Englishmen is such 
To fawn on those who ruin them ; the Dutch. 
They shall have all rather than make a War 
With those who of the same Religion are . 
The straits , the Guiney Trade , the Herrings too , 
Nay , to keep friendship , they shall pickle you : 
Some are resolved not to find out the Cheat , 
But Cuckold like , love's him who does the Feat : 
What injuries soe'er upon us fall , 
Yet still the same Religion answers all : 
Religion wheedled you to Civil War , 
drew English Blood , and Dutchman's now would spare : 
Be gulled no longer , for you 'll find it true , 
They have no more Religion faith — than you ; 
interest 's the God they worship in their State , 
And you , I take it , have not much of that . 
Well Monarchys may own Religion's name , 
But States are Atheists in their very frame . 
They share a sin , and such proportions fall 
That like astink , 't is nothing to 'em all . 
How they love England , you shall see this day : 
no Map shows Holland truer than our Play : 
Their Pictures and Inscriptions well we know ; 
We may be bold one Medal sure to show . 
View then their Falsehoods , Rapine , Cruelty ; 
And think what once they were ▪ they still would be : 
But hope not either Language , Plot , or Art , 
'T was written in haste , but with an English Heart : 
And lest Hope , Wit , in Dutchmen that would be 
As much improper as would Honesty . 
persons Represented . 

By 
Captain Gabriel Towerson . Mr. Hart.  
Mr. Beaumont English Merchants his Friends . Mr. Mohun . 
Mr. Collins English Merchants his Friends . Mr. Lydal . 
Captain Middleton , An English Sea Captain . Mr. Watson . 
Perez . A Spanish Captain . Mr. Burt.  
Harman Senior , Governor of Amboyna . Mr. Cartwright . 
The Fiscal . Mr. Wintershal . 
Harman Junior , Son to the Governor . Mr. Kynaston . 
Van Herring , A Dutch Merchant . Mr. Beeston . 
By 
Ysabinda Betrothed to Towerson An Indian Lady . Mistress Marshal . 
julia Wife to Perez . Mistress james.  
An English Woman . Mistress Cory . 
Page of Towerson . 
A Skipper . 
Two Dutch Merchants . 
SCENE Amboyna . 

AMBOYNA , OR THE CRUELTIES OF THE DUTCH TO THE ENGLISH MERCHANTS . 

ACT I  

SCENE , I A Castle on the Sea.  

Enter Harman Senior , the Governor , the Fiscal , and Van Herring : Guards . Fisc.   A Happy , day to our Noble Governor . 



Har.   Morrow Fiscal . 



Van Herald   Did the last Ships which came from Holland to these parts , bring us no news of Moment ? 



Fisc.   Yes , the best that ever came into Amboyna , since we set footing here , I mean as to our interest . 



Harm .  I wonder much my Letters then , gave me so short accounts ; they only said , The Orange Party was grown strong again , since Barnevelt had suffered . 



Van Herald   Mine inform me farther , the price of Pepper , and of other Spices was raised of late in Europe . 



Harm .  I wish that news may hold ; but much suspect it , while the English maintain their Factories among us in Amboyna , or in the neighbouring Plantations of Seran . 



Fisc.   Still I have news that tickles me within , ha , ha , ha . I faith it does , and will do you and all our Countrymen . 



Harm .  Prithee do not torture us , but tell it . 



Van Herald   Whence comes this news ? 



Fisc.   From England . 



Harm .  Is their East-india Fleet bound outward for these parts , or cast away , or met at Sea by Pirates ? 



Fisc.   Better , much better yet , ha , ha , ha . 



Harm .  Now am I famished for my part of the laughter . 



Fisc.   then my brave Governor , if you 're a true Dutchman , I 'll make your fat sides heave with the conceit on 't , till you 're blown like a pair of large Smith's Bellowss , here look upon this Paper . 

Harman reading . You may remember we did endamage the English East-india Company , the value of Five hundred thousand pounds , all in one year ; a Treaty is now Signed , in which the business is ta'en up for fourscore thousand . This is news indeed ; would I were upon the Castle Wall , that I might throw my Cap into the Sea , and my Gold Chain after it , this is golden news , boys . 



Van Herald   This is news would kindle a thousand Bonfires , and make us piss 'em out again in Rhenish Wine . 



Harm .  send presently to all our Factories , acquaint them with these blessed tidings : if we can scape to cheap , 't will be no matter what villainies henceforth we put in practice . 



Fisc.   Hum , why this now gives encouragement to a certain Plot , which I have long been brewing , against these Skellum English. I almost have it here in Pericranio , and 't is a sound one faith , no lesle , then to cut all their Throats , and seize all their Effects within this Island . I warrant you we may compound again . 



Van Herald   Seizing their Factories , I like well enough , it has some Savour in 't , but for this whoreson cutting of Throats , it goes a little against the grain , because 't is so Notoriously known in Christendom , that they have preserved ours from being cut by the Spaniards . 



Harm .  hang 'em base English sterts , let 'em even take their part of their own old Proverb , save a Thief from the Gallows ; they would needs protect us Rebels , and see what comes to themselves . 



Fisc.   you 're i' th' right on 't Noble Harman , their assistance , which was a Mercy , and a Providence to us , shall be a Judgement upon them . 



Van Herald   A little favour would do well ; though , not that I would stop the Current of your Wit , or any other Plot to do them mischief , but they were first discoverers of this Isle , first Traded hither , and showed us the way . 



Fisc.   I grant you that , nay more , that by composition made after many long and tedious quarrels , they were to have a third part of the Traffic , we to build Forts , and they to contribute to the charge . 



Harm .  Which we have so increased each year upon 'em , we being in power , and therefore Judges of the Cost , that we exact what ever we please , still more than half the charge , and on pretence of their Nonpayment , or the least delay , do often stop their Ships , detain their Goods , and drag 'em into Prisons , while our Commodities go on before , and still forestall their Markets . 



Fisc.   These I confess are pretty tricks , but will not do our business , we must ourselves be ruined at long run , if they have any Trade here ; I know our charge at length will eat us out ; I would not let these English from this Isle , have Cloves enough to stick an Orange with , not one to throw into their bottle-ale . 



Harm .  But to bring this about now , there 's the cunning . 



Fisc.   Let me alone a while , I have it as I told you here ; mean time we must put on a feeming kindness , call 'em our Benefactors , and dear brethren , pipe 'em within the danger of our Net , and then we 'll draw it o'er 'em : when they 're in , no mercy , that 's my maxim . 



Van Herald   Nay , Brother , I am not too obstinate for saving Englishmen ; 't was but a qualm of conscience which profit will dispel : I have as true a Dutch Antipathy to England , as the proudest He in Amsterdam , that 's a bold word now . 



Harm .  We are secure of our Superiors there ; well , they may give the King of Great Britain a Verbal satisfaction , and with submissive fawning promises , make show to punish us , but interest is their God as well as ours : to that Almighty , they will sacrifice a thousand English Lives , and break a hundred thousand Oaths , ever they will punish those that make 'em rich , and pull their Rivals down . Guns go off within . 



Van Herald   Herd you those Guns ? 



Harm .  Most plainly . 



Fisc.   The sound comes from the Port , some Ship arrived salutes the Castle , and I hope , brings more good news from Holland . Guns again . 



Harm .  Now they answer 'em from the Fortress . 



Enter Beaumont and Collins . Van Herald   Beaumont and Collins , English Merchants both , perhaps they 'll certify us . 



Beam.   Captain Harman Van Spelt , good-day to you . 



Harm .  Dear , kind Mr. Beaumont , a thousand and a thousand good days to you , and all our friends the English.  



Fisc.   Came you from the Port , Gentlemen ? 



Coll.   We did ; and saw arrive , our honest , and our gallant Countryman , brave Captain Gabriel Towerson . 



Beam.   Scent to these parts from our Employers of the East-india Company in England , as General of the Voyage . 



Fisc.   Is the brave Towerson returned ? 



Coll.   The same , Sir.  



Harm .  He shall be nobly welcome . He has already spent twelve years upon , or near these rich Molucca Isles , and home returned with honour and great wealth . 



Fisc.   The Devil give him joy of both , or I will for him . 



Aside . Beam.   he 's my particular Friend , I lived with him , both at Ternate , Tydore , and at Seran . 



Van Herald   Did he not leave a Mistress in these parts , a Native of this Island of Amboyna ? 



Col.   He did , I think they call her Ysabinda , who received Baptism for his sake , before he hence departed . 



Harm .  't is much against the will of all her friends , she love's your Countryman , but they are not disposers of her person ; she 's beauteous , rich , and young , and Towerson well deserves her . 



Beam.   I think , without flattery to my friend , he does . Were I to choose of all mankind , a Man , on whom I would rely for Faith and Counsel , or more , whose personal aid I would invite , in any worthy cause to second me , it should be only Gabriel Towerson ; daring he is , and there to fortunate : yet soft and apt to pity the distressed , and liberal to relieve 'em : I have seen him not alone to pardon Foes , but by his bounty win 'em to his love : if he has any fault , 't is only that , to which great minds can only subject be , he thinks all honest , 'cause himself is so , and therefore none suspects . 



Fisc.   I like him well for that ; this fault of his great mind , as Beaumont calls it , may give him cause to wish he was more wary , when it shall be too late . Aside . 



Harm .  I was in some small hope , this Ship had been of our own Country , and brought back my son . For much about this season I expect him , good morrow Gentlemen , I go to fill a Brendice to my Noble Captain's health , pray tell him so ; the youth of our Amboyna , I 'll send before to welcome him . 



Col.   we 'll stay , and meet him here . 



Exeunt Harman , Fiscal , and Van Herring . Beam.   I do not like these fleering Dutchmen , they over act their kindness . 



Col.   I know not what to think of 'em , that old fat Governor Harman van Spelt , I have known long ; they say he was a Cooper in his Country , and took the measure of his Hoops for Tuns , by his own Belly : I love him not , he makes a jest of men in misery ; the first fat merry fool I ever knew that was ill natured . 



Beam.   he 's absolutely governed by this Fiscal , who was as I have heard , an ignorant Advocate in Rotterdam , such as in England we call a Pettifogging Rogue ; one that knows nothing , but the worst part of the Law , its tricks and snares : I fear he hate's us English mortally . Pray Heaven we feel not the effects on 't . 



Col.   Neither he , nor Harman , will dare to show their malice to us , now Towerson is come . For though 't is true , we have no Castle here , he has an awe upon 'em in his worth , which they both fear and reverence . 



Beam.   I wish it so may prove , my mind is a bad Prophet to me , and what it does forebode of ill , it seldom fails to pay me . Here a comes . 



Col.   And in his company , young Harman , Son to our Dutch Governor , I wonder how they met . 



Enter Towerson , Harman junior , and a Skipper . Towers .  entering to the Skipper . These Letters see conveyed with speed to our Plantations . This to Cambello , and to Hitto this , this other to Loho . Tell 'em their Friends in England greet 'em well ; and when I left 'em , were in perfect health . 



Skip .  Sir , you shall be obeyed . Exit Skipper . 



Beam.   I heartily rejoice that our employers have chose you for this place , a better choice they never could have made , or for themselves , or me . 



Col.   This I am sure of , that our English Factories , in all these parts have wished you long the man , and none could be so welcome to their hearts . 



Harm . Iu.   And let me speak for my Countrymen the Dutch , I have heard my Father say , he 's your sworn Brother : And this late accident at Sea , when you relieved me from the Pirates , and brought my Ship in safety off , I hope will well secure you of our gratitude . 



Towers .  You overrate a little courtesy : In your deliverance I did no more , than what I had myself from you expected : The common ties of our Religion , and those yet more particular of Peace , and strict Commerce , betwixt us and your Nation , exacted all I did , or could have done . 

To Beaumont . For you my Friend , let me never breathe our English air again ; but I more joy to see you , than myself , to have escaped the storm , that tossed me long , doubling the Cape , and all the sultry heats , in passing twice the Line : For now I have you here , methinks this happiness should not be bought at a lesle price . 



Har.   I 'll leave you with your friends , my duty binds me to hasten to receive a Father's blessing . 



Exit Harman junior . Beam.   y' are so much a friend , that I must tax you for being a slack lover . You have not yet enquired of Ysabinda . 



Towers .  no , I durst not , Friend , I durst not , I love too well and fear to know my doom ; there 's hope , in doubt , but yet I fixed my eyes on yours , I looked with earnestness , and asked with them : If aught of ill had happened , sure I had met it there ; and since , methinks , I did not , I have now recovered courage , and resolve to urge it from you . 



Beam.   Your Ysabinda then — 



Towers .  You have said all in that , my Ysabinda , if she still be so . 



Beam.   Enjoys as much of health , as fear for you , and sorrow for your absence would permit . Music within . 



Col.   Hark , Music I think approaching . 



Beam.   't is from our Factory ; some sudden entertainment I believe designed for your return . 



Enter Amboyner is , Men and Women with Timbrels before them . A Dance . After the Dance , Enter Harman Senior , Harman junior , Fiscal , and Van Herring . Harm . Sen.   embracing Towerson . O my sworn Brother , my dear Captain Towerson ; the man whom I love better than a stiff gale , when I am becalmed at Sea ; to whom , I have received the Sacrament , never to be falsehearted . 



Towers .  You never shall have occasion on my part : the like I promise for our Factories , while I continue here : This I 'll yields Spice enough for both ; and Europe , Ports , and Chapmen , were to vend them . 



Har. Sen.   It does , it does , we have enough , if we can be contented . 



Towers .  And Sir , why should we not , what mean these endless jars of Trading Nations ? 't is true , the World was never large enough for Avarice or Ambition ; but those who can be pleased with moderate gain , may have the ends of Nature , not to want : nay , even its Luxuries may be supplied from her overflowing bounties in these parts : from whence she yearly sends Spices , and Gums , the Food of Heaven in Sacrifice . And besides these , her Gems of richest value , for Ornament , more than necessity . 



Har. Sen.   You are i' th' right , we must be very friends , I faith we must , I have an old Dutch heart , as true and trusty as your English Oak . 



Fisc.   We never can forget the Patronage of your Elizabeth , of famous memory ; when from the Yoke of Spain , and Alva's Pride , her potent Succours , and her well timed Bounty , freed us , and gave us credit in the World.  



Towers .  For this we only ask a fair Commerce and Friendliness of Conversation here : and what our several Treaties bind us to , you shall , while Towerson life's , see so performed , as fits a Subject to an English King.  



Harm . Sen.   Now by my faith you ask too little friend , we must have more than bare Commerce betwixt us : receive me to your bosom , by this Beard I will never deceive you . 



Beam.   I do not like his Oath , there 's treachery in that judas coloured Beard . aside . 



Fisc.   Pray use me as your Servant . 



Van Herald   And me too Captain . 



Tower.   I receive you both as Jewels , which I 'll wear in either Ear , and never part with you . 



Harm . Sen.   I cannot do enough for him to whom I owe my Son.  



Harm . Iu.   Nor I , till fortune send me such another brave occasion of fight so for you . 



Harm . Sen.   Captain , very shortly , we must use your Head in a certain business , ha , ha , ha , my dear Captain . 



Fisc.   We must use your Head indeed Sir.  



Tower.   Sir , Command me , and take it as a debt I owe your Love.  



Harm . Sen.   Talk not of Debt , for I must have your Heart . 



Van Herald   Your Heart indeed , good Captain . 



Harm . Sen.   You are weary now I know , Sea beaten , and weary , 't is time we respite further Ceremony ; besides , I see one coming , whom I know you long to embrace , and I should be unkind to keep you from her Arms.  



Enter Ysabinda and Julia.  Ysabin .  Do I hold my Love , do I embrace him , after a tedious absence of three years ? are ye indeed returned , are ye the same ? do you still love your Ysabinda ? speak before I ask you twenty questions more : for I have so much Love , and so much Joy : that if you do not love as well as I , I shall appear distracted . 



Towers .  We meet then both out of ourselves , for I am nothing else , but Love and Joy ; and to take care of my discretion now , would make me much unworthy of that passion , to which you set no bounds . 



Ysab.   How could you be so long away ? 



Towers .  How can you think I was : I still was here , still with you , never absent in my mind . 



Harm . jun.   she 's a most charming Creature , I wish I had not seen her . aside . 



Ysab.   Now I shall love your God , because I see that he takes care of Lovers : but my dear Englishman , I prithee let it be our last of absence , I cannot bear another parting from thee , nor promise thee to live three other years , if thou again goest hence . 



Towers .  I never will without you . 



Harm . Sen.   I said before , we should but trouble ye . 



Towers .  You make me blush , but if you ever were a Lover , Sir , you will forgive a folly , which is sweet , though I confess , 't is much extravagant . 



Harm . jun.   A has but too much cause for this excess of Joy , o happy , happy Englishman , but I unfortunate . aside . 



Towers .  Now when you please , lead on . 



Harm . Sen.   This day you shall be feasted at the Castle , where our Great Guns shall loudly speak your welcome . 
All signs of joy shall through the I 'll be shown , 
Whilst in full Romers we our friendship crown . 


Exeunt omnes . ACT II  

SCENE . I  

Enter Ysabinda , Harman Jun.  Ysab.   This to me , from you , against your friend . 



Harm .  Have I not Eyes , are you not fair ? why does it seem so strange ? 



Ysab.   Come , 't is a plot betwixt you : my Englishman is jealous , and has sent you to try my faith , he might have spared the experiment after a three year's absence ; that was a proof sufficient of my constancy . 



Harm .  I heard him say he never had returned , but that his Masters of the East-india Company , proffered him large conditions . 



Ysab.   You do belie him basely . 



Harm .  As much as I do you , in saying you are fair ; or as I do myself , when I declare I die for you . 



Ysab.   If this be earnest ,   done a most unmanly and ungrateful part , to court the intended Wife of him , to whom you are most obliged . 



Harm .  Leave me to answer that : assure yourself I love you violently , and if you are wise , you 'll make some difference betwixt Towerson and me . 



Ysab.   Yes , I shall make a difference , but not to your advantage . 



Harm .  You must , or falsify your knowledge ; an Englishman , part Captain , and part Merchant ; his Nation of declining interest here : consider this , and weigh against that fellow , not me , but any , the least and meanest Dutchman in this Isle . 



Ysab.   I do not weigh by bulk : I know your Countrymen have the advantage there . 



Harm .  Hold back your hand , from firming of your faith ; you 'll thank me in a little time , for staying you so kindly from embarking in his ruin . 



Ysab.   His fortune is not so contemptible as you 'd make it seem . 



Harm .  Wait but one month for the event . 



Ysab.   I will not wait one day , though I were sure to sink with him the next : so well I love my Towerson , I will not lose another Sun , for fear a should not rise to morrow . For yourself , pray rest assured , of all Mankind , you should not be my choice , after an act of such ingratitude . 



Harm .  You may repent your scorn at leisure . 



Ysab.   Never , unless I married you . 



Enter Towerson . Towers .  Now my dear Ysabinda , I dare pronounce myself most happy : since I have gained your Kindred , all difficulties cease . 



Ysab.   I wish we find it so . 



Towers .  Why , is aught happened since I saw you last ? methinks a sadness dwells upon your Brow , like that I saw before my last long absence . You do not speak : my friend dumb too ? Nay then I fear some more than ordinary cause produces this . 



Harm .  You have no reason Towerson to be sad , you are the happy man  



Towers .  If I have any , you must needs have some . 



Har.   no , you are loved , and I am bid despair . 



Towers .  Time , and your Services , will perhaps , make you as happy as I am in my Ysabinda's love . 



Harm .  I thought I spoke so plain , I might be understood ; but since I did not , I must tell you Towerson , I wear the Title of your friend no longer , because I am your Rival . 



Towers .  Is this true Ysabinda ? 



Ysab.   I should not , I confess , have told you first , because I would not give you that disquiet ; but since he has , it is too sad a truth . 



Towers .  Leave us my Dear a little to ourselves . 



Ysab.   I fear you 'll quarrel , for he seemed incensed , and threatened you with ruin . To him aside . 



Towers .  't is to prevent an ill , which may be fatal to us both , that I would speak with him . 



Ysab.   Swear to me by your Love you will not fight . 



Towers .  Fear not my Ysabinda ; things are not grown to that extremity . 



Ysab.   I leave you , but I doubt the consequence . 



Exit Ysab.  Towers .  I want a name to call you by , Friend , you declare you are not , and to Rival , I am not yet enough accustomed . 



Harm .  Now I consider on 't , it shall be yet in your free choice , to call me , one or other ; for , Towerson , I do not decline your Friendship , but then yield Ysabinda to me . 



Towers .  Yield Ysabinda to you ? 



Harm .  Yes , and preserve the Blessing of my Friendship ; I 'll make my Father yours , your Factories shall be no more oppressed , but thrive in all advantages with ours ; your gain shall be beyond what you could hope for from the Treaty : in all the Traffic of these Eastern parts , ye shall — 



Towers .  Hold , you mistake me Harman , I never gave you just occasion to think I would make Merchandise of Love ; Ysabinda you know is mine , contracted to me ever I went for England and must be so till death . 



Har.   She must not Towerson ; you know you are not strongest in these parts , and 't will be ill contesting with your Masters . 



Towers .  Our Masters ? Harman you durst not once have named that Word in any part of Europe . 



Har.   Here I both dare and Will , you ha' no Castles in Amboyna . 



Towers .  Though we have not , we yet have English Hearts and Courages , not to endure Affronts . 



Har.   They may be tried . 



Towers .  Your Father sure will not maintain you in this Insolence , I know he is too honest . 



Har.   Assure yourself , he will Espouse my Quarrel . 



Towers .  We would complain to England . 



Har.   Your Country Men have tried that course so often , methinks they should grow wiser , and desist : but now there is no need of troubling any others but ourselves ; the sum of all is this , you either must Resign me Ysabinda , or instantly resolve , to clear your Title to her by your Sword.  



Towers .  I will do neither now . 



Har.   then I 'll believe you dare not fight me fairly . 



Towers .  You know I durst have fought , though I am not vain enough to boast it , nor would upbraid you with remembrance of it . 



Har.   You destroy your benefit with Rehearsal of it , but that was in a Ship , backed by your Men , single Duel is a fairer Trial of your courage . 



Towers .  I 'm not to be provoked out of my temper : here I am a Public Person , entrusted by my King and my Employers , and should I kill you Harman , — 



Har.   O never think you can , Sir.  



Towers .  I should betray my Countrymen to suffer not only worse Indignities , than those they have already born , but for aught I know , might give 'em up to general Imprisonment , perhaps betray them to a Massacre . 



Har.   These are but pitiful and weak excuses , I 'll force you to confess you dare not fight , you shall have provocations . 



Towers .  I will not stay to take 'em : Only this before I go , if you are truly Gallant , insult not where you have power , but keep your Quarrel secret , we may have time and place out of this Island : mean while , I go to Mary Isabinda , that you shall see I dare : no more , follow me not an Inch beyond this place no not an Inch , adieu . 



Exit Towerson . Har.   thou goest to thy Grave , or I to mine . 



Is going after him . Enter Fiscall . Fisc.   whither so fast Min Here ? 



Har.   After that English Dog , whom I believe you saw . 



Fisc.   Whom , Towerson ? 



Har.   Yes , let me go , I 'll have his blood . 



Fisc.   Let me advice you first , you young Men are so violently hot . 



Har.   I say I 'll have his Blood.  



Fisc.   To have his Blood is not amiss , so far I go with you , but take me with you further for the means : first what 's the injury ? 



Har.   Not to detain you with a tedious Story , I love his Mistress , Courted her , was slighted ; into the heat of this he came , I offered him the best Advantages , he could or to himself propose , or to his Nation , would he quit her Love.  



Fisc.   So far you are prudent , for she 's exceeding rich . 



Har.   He refused all , than I threatened him with my Father's power . 



Fisc.   That was unwisely done ; your Father , underhand , may do a mischief , but 't is too gross above board . 



Har.   At last , naught else prevailing , I defied him to single Duel , this he refused , and I believe ' was fear . 



Fisc.   no , no , mistake him not , 't is a stout Whoreson , you did ill to press him , 't will not sound well in Europe , He being here a public Minister ; having no means of scaping should he kill you , besides exposing all his Countrymen to a Revenge . 



Har.   that 's all one , I 'm resolved I will pursue my course and Fight him . 



Fisc.   Pursue your end , that 's to enjoy the Woman , and her Wealth ; I would , like you , have Towerson dispatched ; for as I am a true Dutchman , I do hate him , but I would convey him smoothly out of the World , and without noise ; they 'll say we are Ingrateful else , in England , and barbarously cruel ; now I could swallow down the thing Ingratitude , and the thing Murder , but the Names are odious . 



Har.   What would you have me do then ? 



Fisc.   Let him enjoy his Love a little while , 't will break no squares , in the long run of a man's life ; you shall have enough of her , and in convenient time . 



Har.   I cannot bear he should enjoy her first ; no , 't is determined ; I will kill him bravely . 



Fisc.   ay , a right young Man's bravery , that 's Folly : Let me alone , something I 'll put in practice , to rid you of this Rival ever he Marries , without your once appearing in it . 



Har.   If I durst trust you now ? 



Fisc.   If you believe that I have Wit , or Love you . 



Har.   Well Sir , you have prevailed ; be speedy ; for once I will rely on you ; farewell : Exit Harman . 



Fisc.   This hopeful business will be quickly spoiled , if I not take exceeding care of it . 

Stay , — Towerson to be killed and privately , that must be laid down as the groundwork , for stronger reasons than a young Man's Passion , but who shall do 't , no English Man will , and much I fear , no Dutchman dares attempt it . 

Enter Perez . Well said , I faith old Devil let thee alone , when once a Man is plotting Villainy , to find him a fit Instrument . 

This Spanish Captain , who commands our Slaves , is bold enough , and is beside in want , and proud enough to think he merit's Wealth . 



Perez .  This Fiscal love's my Wife , I 'm jealous of him , and yet must speak him fair to get my Pay ; O , there 's the Devil for a Castilian , to stoop to one of his own Master's Rebels who has , or who designs to Cuckold him . aside . 

To Fiscal : I come to kiss your hand again Sir , six Months I am in arrear , I must not starve , and Spaniards cannot beg . 



Fisc   i  been a better Friend to you , than perhaps you think Captain . 



Perez .  I fear you have indeed . aside . 



Fisc.   And faithfully solicited your business ; send but your Wife to morrow Morning early , the Money shall be ready . 



Perez .  What if I come myself . 



Fisc.   Why ye may have it if you come yourself Captain , but in case your occasions should call you any other way , you dare trust her to receive it . 



Perez .  She has no skill in Money . 



Fisc.   It shall be told into her hand , or given her upon honour , in a lump ; but Captain , you were saying you did want , now I should think three hundred Dobloons would do you no great harm , they 'll serve to make you Merry on the Watch.  



Perez .  Must they be told into my Wife's hand too ? 



Fisc.   no , those you may receive you self , if you dare Merit ' 'em . 



Perez .  I am a Spaniard Sir , that implies Honour : I dare all that is possible . 



Fisc.   then you dare Kill a Man  



Perez .  So it be fairly . 



Fisc.   But what if he will not be so civil to be killed that way ? he 's a sturdy Fellow , I know you stout , and do not question your Valour ; but I would make sure work , and not endanger you who are my Friend . 



Perez .  I fear the Governor will Execute me . 



Fisc.   The Governor will thank you : 't is he shall be your Paymaster ; you shall have your Pardon drawn up before hand , and remember , no transitory Sum , three hundred Quadruples in your own Country Gold.  



Perez .  Well , name your Man  



Enter Julia.  Fisc.   Your Wife comes , take it in whisper . 



They whisper . jul.   yonder 's my Master , and my Dutch Servant , how lovingly they talk in private ; if I did not know my Don's temper to be monstrously jealous , I should think , they were driving a secret Bargain for my Body ; but Cuerno is not to be digested by my Castilian . Mi Mohen , my Wife and my Mistress , a lays the Emphasis on me , as if to Cuckold him were a worse sin , then breaking the Commandment . If my English Lover Beaumont , my Dutch Love the Fiscall , and my Spanish Husband , were Painted in a piece with me amongst 'em , they would make a Pretty Emblem of the two Nations , that Cuckold his Catholic Majesty in his Indi's . 



Fisc.   you 'll undertake it then ? 



Perez .  I have served under Towerson as his Lieutenant , served him well , and though I say 't , bravely , yet never have been rewarded , though he promised largely ; 't is resolved , I 'll do 't . 



Fisc.   And swear secrecy . 



Perez .  By this Beard . 



Fisc.   Go wait upon the Governor from me , confer with him about it in my name , this Seal will give you credit . 



Gives him his Seal . Perez .  I go . 

Goes a step or two , while the other approaches his Wife . What shall I be , before I come again ? Exit . 



Fisc.   Now my fair Mistress we shall have the opportunity which I have long desired . To Julia.  



Perez .  The Governor is now a sleeping , this is his hour of afternoons repose , I 'll go when he 's awake . Returning . 



Fisc.   He slept early this afternoon , I left him newly waked . 



Perez .  Well , I go then , but with an aching heart 



Exit . Fisc.   So , at length he 's gone . 



jul.   But you may find a was jealous by his delay . 



Fisc.   If I were as you , I would give evident proofs , should cure him of that disease for ever after . 



Enter Perez again . Perez .  I have considered on 't , and if you would go along with me to the Governor , it would do much better . 



Fisc.   no , no , that would make the matter more suspicious . The Devil take thee for an impertinent Cuckold . 



aside . Perez .  Well I must go then . Exit Perez . 



jul.   Nay there was never the like of him , but it sha'ned serve his turn , we 'll Cuckolded him most furiously . 



Enter Perez again . Per.   I had forgot one thing , dear sweet heart go home quickly , and oversee our business , it won't go forward without one of us . 



Fisc.   I warrant you , take no care of your business , leave it to me , I 'll put it forward in your absence , go go , you 'll lose your oppportunity ; I 'll be at home before you , and sup with you to night . 



Per.   You shall be welcome , but — 



Fisc.   Three hundred Quadruples . 



Perez .  that 's true but — 



Fisc.   But three hundred Quadruples . 



Perez .  The Devil take the Quadruples . 



Enter Beaumont . Beam.   there 's my Cuckold that must be , and my fellow swager the Dutchman , with my Mistress , my Nose is wiped to day , I must retire for the Spaniard is jealous of me . 



Perez .  O Mr. Beaumont , I 'm to ask a favour of you . 



Beam.   This is unusual , pray command it Sennor . 



Perez .  I am going upon urgent business , pray sup with me to night , and in the mean time , bear my worthy friend here company . 



Beam.   With all my heart . 



Perez .  So , now I am secure ; though I dare not trust her with one of 'em , I may with both ; they 'll hinder one another , and preserve my honour into the bargain . Now for my Dobloons . Exit . 



Beam.   Now Mr. Fiscall , you are the happy Man with the Ladies , and have got the precedence of Traffic here too ;   the Indie's in your Arms , yet I hope a poor English Man may come in for a third part of the Merchandise . 



Fisc.   O Sir , in these Commodities here 's enough for both , here 's Mace for you , and Nutmegg for me in the same Fruit ; and yet the owner has to spare for other friends too . 



jul.   My Husband's Plantations like to thrive well betwixt you . 



Beam.   Horn him , he deserves not so much happiness as he enjoys in you ; he 's jealous . 



jul.   't is no wonder if a Spaniard looks yellow . 



Beam.   Betwixt you and me ; 't is a little kind of venture , that we make in doing this Don's drudgery for him ; for the whole Nation of 'em is generally so Pocky , that 't is no longer a Disease , but a second nature in ' 'em . 



Fisc.   I have heard indeed , that 't is incorporated among 'em , as deeply as the Moors and Jews are , there 's scarce a Family , but 't is crept into their blood like the new Christians . 



jul.   Come I 'll have no whispering betwixt you , I know you were talking of my Husband , because my Nose itches . 



Beam.   Faith Madam , I was speaking in favour of your Nation : what pleasant lives I have known Spaniards to live in England . 



jul.   If you love me , let me hear a little . 



Beam.   We observed 'em to have much of the nature of our Flies , they buzzed abroad a Month or two i' th' Summer , would venture about Dog days to take the Air in the Park , but all the Winter slept like Dormice , and if ever they appeared in public after Michaelmass , their Faces showed the difference betwixt their Country and ours , for they look in Spain as if they were Roasted , and in England as if they were Sodden . 



julia.   I 'll not believe your description . 



Fisc.   Yet our observations of 'em in Holland , are not much unlike it ; i  known a great Don at the Hague , with the Gentleman of his Horse , his Mayor Domo , and two Secretaryes , all Dine at four several Tables , on the Quarters of a single Pullet : the Victuals of the under Servants were weighed out in ounces , by the Don himself ; with so much Garlic in the other Scale : a thin slice of Bacon , went through the Family a week together : for it was daily put into the Pot for Pottage ; was served in the midst of the Dish at Dinners , and taken out and weighed by the Steward , at the end of every Meal , to see how much it lost ; till at length , looking at it against the Sun , it appeared transparent , and then he would have whipped it up , as his own Fees , at a Morsel ; but that his Lord barred the Dice , and reckoned it to him for a part of his Board Wages . 



Beam.   In few words Madam , the general Notion we had of 'em , was , that they were very frugal of their Spanish Coin , and very liberal of their Neapolitan . 



julia.   I see Gentlemen , you are in the way of Rallying ; therefore let me be no hindrance to your sport ; do as much for one another , as you have done for our Nation . 

Pray Min Heer Fiscal , what think you of the English.  



Fisc.   O , I have an Honour for the Country . 



Beam.   I beseech you leave your ceremony , we can hear of our faults without choler , therefore speak of us with a true Amsterdam spirit , and do not spare us . 



Fisc.   Since you command me , Sir , 't is said of you , I know not how truly , that for your Fishery at home , you 're like Dogs in the Manger , you will neither manage it yourselves , nor permit your neighbours ; so that for your Sovereignty of the Narrow Seas , if the Inhabitants of 'em , the Herrings , were capable of being Judges , they would certainly award it to the English , because they were then sure to live undisturbed , and quiet under you . 



Beam.   Very good , proceed , Sir.  



Fisc.   't is true , you gave us aid in our time of need , but you paid yourselves with our Cautionary Towns : and that you have since delivered them up , we can never give sufficient commendation , either to your Honesty , or to your Wit ; For both which qualities , you have purchased such an immortal Fame , that all Nations are instructed , how to deal with you another time . 



Beam.   A most grateful acknowledgement , sweet Sir , go on . 



Fisc.   For your Trade abroad , if you should obtain it , you are so horribly expensive , that you would undo yourselves and all Christendom : for you would sink under your very profit , and the gains of the Universal World would beggar you : you devour a Voyage to the Indi's , by the Multitude of Mouths with which you Man your Vessels : providence has contrived it well , that the Indi's are Managed by us , an Industrious and frugal people , who distribute its Merchandise to the rest of Europe , and suffer it not to be consumed in England , that the other members might be starved , while you of Great Britain , as you call it , like a Rickety head , would only swell and grow bigger by it . 



jul.   I have heard enough of England ; have you nothing to return upon the Neatherlands ? 



Beam.   Faith very little , to any purpose ; he has been before hand with us , as his Countrymen are in their Trade , and taken up so many vices for the use of England , that a has left almost none for the Low Countries . 



jul.   Come a word however . 



Beam.   In the first place you showed your ambition , when you began to be a State : for not being Gentlemen , you have stolen the Arms of the best Families of Europe ; and wanting a name , you made bold with the first of the divine Attributes ; and called yourselves the HIGH and MIGHTY : though , let me tell you , that , besides the Blasphemy , the Title is ridiculous ; for HIGH is no more proper for the Neatherlands then MIGHTY is for seven little rascally Provinces , no bigger in all than a Shire in England . For my main Theme , your Ingratitude , you have in part acknowledged it , by your laughing at our easy delivery of your Cautionary Towns : the best is , we are used by you , as well as your own Princes of the House of Orange , We and They have set you up , and you undermine their Power , and circumvent our Trade . 



Fisc.   And good reason , if our interest requires it . 



Beam.   That leads me to your Religion , which is only made up of Interest : at home , ye tolerate all Worships , in them who can pay for it ; and abroad , you were lately so civil to the Emperor of Pegu , as to do open sacrifice to his Idols . 



Fisc.   Yes , and by the same token you English were such precise fools as to refuse it . 



Beam.   For frugality in Trading , we confess we cannot compare with you ; for our Merchants live like Noblemen : your Gentlemen , if you have any , live like Boars ; you traffic for all the rarities of the World , and dare use none of 'em yourselves ; so that in effect , you are the Mill Horses of Mankind , that labour only for the wretched Provender you eat : a pot of Butter and a pickled Herring is all your riches ; and in short , you have a good Title to cheat all Europe , because in the first place , you cousin your own Backs and Bellies . 



Fisc.   We may enjoy more when ever we please . 



Beam.   Your liberty is a grosser cheat than any of the rest ; for you are ten times more Taxed , than any People in Christendom : you never keep any League with Foreign Princes : you flatter our Kings , and ruin their Subjects : you never denied us satisfaction at home for injuries , nor ever gave it us abroad . 



Fisc.   You must make yourselves more feared when you expect it 



Beam.   And I prophesy that time will come , when some generous Monarch of our Island , will undertake our quarrel , reassume the Fishery of our Seas ▪ and make them as considerable to the English as the indies are to you . 



Fisc.   Before that comes to pass , you may repent your over lavish tongue . 



Beam.   I was no more in earnest than you were . 



jul.   Pray let this go no further , my Husband has invited both to supper . 



Beam.   If you please , I 'll fall to before he comes , or at least while he is conferring in private with the Fiscal . aside to her . 



jul.   Their private businesses let them agree , 
The Dutch for him , the Englishman for me . 


Exeunt . ACT III  

SCENE 1.  

Enter Perez . Perez .  True , the Reward proposed is great enough , I want it too , besides this Englishman has never paid me , since , as his Lieutenant , I served him once against the Turk at Sea , yet he confessed I did my duty well , when twice I cleared our Decks ; he has long promised me , but what are promises to starving Men , this is his House , he may walk out this morning . 

Enter a Page and another Servant , walking by , not seeing him . These belong to him , I 'll hide till they are passed . 



Ser.   He sleeps sound for a Man who is to be married when he wakes . 



Page .  He does well to take his time , for he does not know when he 's Married , whether ever he shall have a sound sleep again . 



Ser.   He bid we should not wake him , but some of us in good manners should have stayed , and not have left him quite alone . 



Page .  In good manners , I should indeed , but I 'll venture a Master's anger at any time for a Mistress , and that 's my case at present . 



Seru.   I 'll tempt as great a danger as that comes to , for good old English fellowship ; I am invited to a morning's draught . 



Page .  Good morrow Brother , good morrow ; by that time you have filled your Belly , and I have emptied mine , it will be time to meet at home again . Exeunt severally . 



Perez .  So , this makes well for my design , he 's left alone , unguarded and asleep : Satan , thou art a bounteous friend , and liberal of occasions to do mischief , my pardon I have ready if I am taken , my Money half before hand ; up Perez , rouse thy Spanish courage up , if he should wake , I think I dare attempt him , than my revenge is nobler , and revenge , to injured Men is full as sweet as profit . Exit . 



The Scene drawn , discovers Towerson asleep on a Couch in his Nightgown . A Table by him , Pen , Ink , and Paper onit . 

Re-enter Perez with a Dagger . Perez .  Asleep as I imagined , and as fast , as all the Plummets of eternal night were hung upon his Temples : o that some courteous Daemon in the other world , would let him know , 't was Perez sent him thither : a Paper by him too , he little thinks it is his Testament , the last he ever shall make : I 'll read it first . takes it up . 

O by the Inscription , 't is a memorial of what he means to do this day : what 's here ? my name in the first line ? I 'll read it . reads . 

Memorandum , That my first action this morning shall be to find out my true and valiant Lieutenant , Captain Perez , and as a testimony of my gratitude for his honourable Service to bestow on him five hundred English pounds , making my just excuse , I had it not before , within my power to reward him . [ lays down the paper . And was it then for this I sought his life ; o base degenerate Spaniard , hadst thou done it , thou hadst been worse than damned ; Heaven took more care of me , than I of him , to expose this paper to my timely view . Sleep on thou Honourable Englishman , I 'll sooner now , pierce my own breast than thine ; see , he smiles too in his slumber , as if his Guardian Angel in a dream , told him , he was secure ; I 'll give him warning , though to prevent danger from another hand . 



Writes on Towersons Paper , then sticks his Dagger in it . Stick there , that when he wakens he may may know , 
To his own Virtue he his Life does owe. Exi Perez . 


Towerson awakens . Towers .  I have o'reslept my hour this morning , if to enjoy a pleasing dream , can be to sleep too long : me thought my dear Ysabinda and myself , were lying in an Arbour , wreathed about with Myrtle and with Cypress ; my Rival Harman reconciled again to his friendship , strewed us with Flowers , and put on each a Crimson coloured Garment , in which we strait way mounted to the Skies , and with us , many of my English friends , all clad in the same Robes : if dreams have any meaning , sure this portends some good — what 's that I see , a Dagger stuck into the paper of my Memorial ? and written below , Thy Virtue saved thy life ; it seems some one has been within my chamber whilst I slept ; something of consequence hangs upon this accident : what ho , who waits without — None answer me : are ye all dead ? — what ho ! — 



Enter Beaumont . Beam.   How is it friend : I thought entering your House , I heard you call . 



Towers .  I did , but as it seems without effect , none of my Servants are within reach of my voice . 



Beam.   You seem amazed at somewhat ! 



Towers .  A little discomposed : — read that , and see if I have no occasion , that Dagger was stuck there , by him who written it . 



Beam.   I must confess you have too just a cause : I am myself surprised at an event so strange . 



Towers .  I know not who can be my Enemy within this Island , except my Rival Harman , and for him , I truly did relate , what passed betwixt us yesterday . 



Beam.   You bore yourself in that as it became you , as one who was a witness to himself of his own courage , and while by necessary care of others , you were forced to decline fight , showed how much you did despise the Man who sought the quarrel : 't was base in him , so backed as he is here , to offer it , much more to press you to it . 



Towers .  I may find a foot of ground in Europe , to tell the insulting Youth , he better had provoked some other Man , but sure I cannot think 't was he , who left that Dagger there . 



Beam.   no , for it seems too great a Nobleness of Spirit , for one like him to practice : 't was certainly an Enemy , who came to take your sleeping life ; but thus to leave unfinished the design , proclaims the act , no Dutchman . 



Towers .  That , time will best discover , I 'll think no further of it . 



Beam.   I confess you have more pleasing thoughts to employ your mind at present ; I left your Bride just ready for the Temple , and came to call you to her . 



Towers .  I 'll strait attend you thither . 



Enter Harman signior , Fiscal , and Van Herring . Fisc.   Remember , Sir , what I advised you ; you must seemingly make up the business . To Harman . 



Harm .  I warrant you . What my brave bonny Bridegroom , not yet dressed , you are a lazy Lover , I must chide you . 



To Towerson . Towerson .  I was just preparing . 



Harm .  I must prevent part of the Ceremony : you thought to go to her , she is by this time at the Castle , where she is invited with our common friends ; for you shall give me leave , if you so please , to entertain you both . 



Towers .  I have some reasons , why I must refuse the Honour you intent me . 



Harm .  You must have none ; what my old friend steal a Wedding from me ? In troth you wrong our friendship . 



Beam.   to him aside . Sir , go not to the Castle , you cannot in Honour accept an invitation from the Father , after an affront from the Son.  



Towers .  Once more I beg your pardon , Sir.  



Harm .  Come , come , I know your reason of refusal , but it must not prevail ; My Son has been to blame , I 'll not maintain him in the least neglect , which he should show to any Englishman , much lesle to you , the best , and most esteemed of all my friends . 



Towers .  I should be willing , Sir , to think it was a young Man's rashness , or perhaps the Rage of a successless Rival , yet he might have spared some words . 



Harm .  Friend , he shall ask your pardon , or I 'll no longer own him ; what , ungrateful to a Man , whose Valour has preserved him ? he shall do 't , he shall indeed , I 'll make you friends upon your own conditions , he 's at the door , pray let him be admitted : this is a day of general jubilee . 



Towers .  You Command here , you know Sir.  



Fisc.   I 'll call him in , I am sure he will be proud at any rate to redeem your kind opinion of him . 



Exit Fiscal , and reenters with Harman junior . Harm . jun.   Sir , my Father , I hope , has in part satisfied you , that what I spoke , was only an effect of sudden passion , of which I am now ashamed , and desire it may be no longer lodged in your remembrance , than it is now in my intention to do you any injury . 



Towers .  Your Father may Command me to more difficult employments , then to receive the friendship of a Man , of whom I did not willingly embrace an ill opinion . 



Harm . jun.   Nothing henceforward , shall have power to take from me that happiness , in which you are so generously pleased to reinstate me . Exeunt . 



Harm . Sen.   Why this is as it should be , trust me I weep for joy . 



Beam.   Towerson is easy , and too credulous . I fear 't is all dissembled on their parts . aside . 



Harm . Sen.   Now set we forward to the Castle , the Bride is there before us . 



Towers .  Sir , I wait you . 



Ezeunt Harman Sen. Towerson , Beaumont and Van Herring . Enter Captain Perez . Fisc.   Now Captain , when perform you what you promised concerning Towersons death ? 



Perez .  Never — There judas , take your hire of blood again . Throws him a Purse . 



Harm . jun.   Your reason for this sudden change . 



Perez .  I cannot own the name of Man and do 't 



Harm . jun.   Your Head shall answer the neglect of what you were Commanded . 



Perez .  If it must , I cannot eat my destiny . 



Fisc.   Harman , you are too rash , pray hear his reasons first . 



Perez .  I have 'em to myself , I 'll give you none . 



Fis .  None , that 's hard ; well , you can be secret Captain , for your own sake I hope . 



Perez .  That I have sworn already , my oath binds me . 



Fisc.   that 's enough : we have now changed our minds , and do not wish his death , at least as you shall know . aside . 



Perez .  I am glad on 't , for he 's a brave and worthy Gentleman , I would not for the wealth of both the indies , have had his Blood upon my Soul to answer . 



Fisc.   aside to Harman . I shall find a time to take back our secret from him , at the price of his life , when he least dreams of it ; mean time 't is fit we speak him fair . To Perez . 

Captain , a reward attend you greater than you could hope , we only meant to try your honesty . I am more than satisfied of your reasons . 



Perez .  I still shall labour to deserve your kindness in any honourable way . Exit Perez . 



Harm .  I told you that this Spaniard had not courage enough for such an enterprise . 



Fisc.   He rather had too much of honesty . 



Harm .  O you have ruined me , you promised me this day , the death of Towerson , and now instead of that , I see him happy ; I 'll go and fight him yet , I swear he never shall enjoy her . 



Fisc.   He sha'nnot , that I swear with you , but you are too rash ; the business never can be done your way . 



Harm .  I 'll trust no other Arm but my own in it . 



Fisc.   Yes , mine you shall , I 'll help you , this evening as he goes from the Castle , we 'll find some way to meet him in the dark , and then make sure of him for getting Maidenheads to night ; to morrow I 'll bestow a Pill upon my Spanish Don , lest he discover what he knows . 



Harm .  Give me your Hand , you 'll help me . 



Fisc.   By all my hopes , I will : in the mean time , with a feigned Mirth , 't is fit we gild our Faces ; the troth is , that we may smile in earnest , when we look upon the Englishman , and think how we will use him . 



Harm .  Agreed , come to the Castle . 



Exeunt . Enter Harman Senior , Towerson , and Ysabinda , Beaumont , Collins , Van Herring : they seat themselves . Epithalamium . 

The day is come , I see it rise , 
Betwixt the Bride's and Bridegroom's Eyes , 
That Golden day they wished so long , 
Love picked it out amid the throng ; 
He destined to himself this Sun , 
And took the Reinss and driven him on ; 
In his own Beams he dressed him bright , 
Yet bid him bring a better night . 
The day you wished arrived at last , 
You wish as much that it were passed , 
One Minute more and night will hide , 
The Bridegroom and the blushing Bride . 
The Virgin now to Bed does go : 
Take care o Youth , she rise not so ; 
She pants and trembles at her doom , 
And fears and wishes thou wouldst come . 
The Bridegroom comes , He comes apace 
With Love and Fury in his Face ; 
She shrinks away , He close pursues ▪ 
And Prayers and Threats , at once does use , 
She softly sighing begs delay , 
And with her hand put his away , 
Now out a loud for help she cries , 
And now despairing shuts her Eyes . 
Har. Sen.   I like this Song , 't was sprightly , it would restore me twenty years of Youth , had I but such a Bride . 



A DANCE . After the Dance : Enter Harman junior and Fiscal . Beam.   Come let me have the Sea fight , I like that better , than a thousand of your wanton Epithalamiums . 



Har. jun.   He means that Fight in which he freed me from the Pirates . 



Towers .  Prithee Friend oblige me , and call not for that Song , 't will breed ill blood . to Beaumont . 



Beam.   Prithee be not scrupulous , ye fought it bravely . Young Harman is ungrateful if he does not acknowledge it . I say , sing me the Sea Fight . The Sea Fight . 

Who ever saw a noble sight , 
That never viewed a brave Sea Fight : 
hang up your bloody Colours in the Air , 
Up with your Fights and your Netting prepare , 
Your Merry Mates cheer , with a lusty bold spirit , 
Now each Man his brindice , and then to the Fight , 
St. George , St. George we cry , 
The shouting Turks reply . 
O now it begins , and the Gunroom grows hot , 
Ply it with Culverin and with small shot ; 
Hark does it not Thunder , no 't is the Guns roar , 
The Neighbouring Billows are turned into Gore , 
Now each man must resolve to die , 
For here the Coward cannot fly . 
Drums and Trumpets toll the Knell , 
And Culverins the Passing Bell. 
Now now they Grapple , and now board a Main , 
Blow up the Hatches , they 're off all again : 
Give 'em a broadside , the dice run at all , 
Down comes the Mast and Yard , and tackle fall , 
She grows giddy now like blind fortunes wheel , 
She sinks there , she sinks , she turns up her Keel , 
Who ever beheld so noble a sight 
As this so brave , so bloody Sea Fight . 






Har. jun.   See the Insolence of these English , they cannot do a brave Action in an Age , but presently they must put it into Meter , to upbraid us with their benefits . 



Fisc.   Let 'em laugh that win at last . 



Enter Captain Middleton and a Woman with him , all pale and and weakly , and in tattered Garments . Towerson .  Captain Middleton , you are arrived in a good hour , to be partaker of my happiness , which is as great this day , as Love and Expectation can make it . 



Rising up to salute Middleton . Mid.   And may it long continue so . 



Towers .  But how happens it that setting out with us from England , you came not sooner hither ? 



Mid.   It seems the Winds favoured you with a quicker passage : you know I lost you in a Storm on tother side the Cape , with which disabled , I was forced to put into St. Helen's Isle , there 't was my Fortune to preserve the life of this our Country Woman , the rest let her relate . 



Ysab.   Alas , she seems half starved , unfit to make relations . 



Van Herald   How the Devil came she off , I know her but too well , and fear she knows me too . 



Towers :  Pray Country Woman speak . 



English Woman :  then thus in brief ; In my dear Husband's Company , I parted , from our sweet Native Isle : we to Lantore were bound , with Letters from the States of Holland , gained for reparation of great damages , sustained by us ; when by the insulting Dutch , our Countrymen , against all show of Right , were dispossessed , and Naked sent away from that rich Island , and from Poleroon . 



Harm . Sen.   Woman , you speak with too much spleen , I must not hear my Countrymen affronted . 



Woman .  I wish they did not merit much worse of me than I can say of them : well we sailed forward with a Merry Gale , till near St. Helen's Isle we were o'ertaken , or rather waylayed by a Holland Vessel , the Captain of which Ship , whom here I see , the Man who quit us , of all we had in those rich parts before , now fearing to restore his ill got Goods , first Hailed , and then Invited us on Board , keeping himself concealed ; his base Lieutenant plied all our English Mariners with Wine , and when in dead of night they lay secure in silent sleep ; most barbarously commanded , they should be thrown o'er board . 



Fisc.   Sir , do not hear it out . 



Har. Sen.   This is all false and scandalous . 



Towers .  Pray Sir , attend the Story . 



Eng. Woman :  The Vessel Rifled , and the rich Hold rummaged , they sink it down to rights ; but first I should have told you , ( Grief alas has spoilt my Memory ) that my dear Husband wakened at the Noise before they reached the Cabin where we lay , took me all trembling with the sudden Fright , and leapt into the Boat ; we cut the Cordage , and so put out to Sea , driving at mercy of the Waves and Wind ; so scaped we in the dark . To sum up all , we got to shore , and in the Mountains hid us , until the barbarous Hollanders were gone . 



Towers .  Where is your Husband , Country woman . 



Woman :  Dead with grief ; with these two hands I scratched him out a Grave ; on which I placed a Cross , and every day wept o'er the ground where all my joys lay buried . The manner of my Life who can express ! the Fountain Water was my only Drink , the crabbed Juice and rind of half ripe Lemons , almost my only food , except some Roots ; my House the Widowed Cave of some wild Beast : in this sad State , I stood upon the Shore , when this brave Captain with his Ship approached , whence holding up and waving both my hands , I stood , and by my Actions begged their Mercy , yet when they nearer came , I would a fled , had I been able , lest they should have proved those Murderous Dutch , I more than Hunger feared . 



Herald Sen.   What say you to this accusation Van Herring ? 



Van Herald   't is as you said Sir , false and scandalous . 



Herald Sen.   I told you so ; all false and scandalous . 



Ysabinda :  On my soul it is not : her Heart speaks in her Tongue , and were she silent , her Habit and her Face speak for her . 



Beam :  Sir , you have heard the proofs , 



Fiscal .  Mere Allegations and no Proofs : seem not to believe it Sir.  



Harm . Sen.   Well , well , we 'll hear it another time . 



Middleton :  You seem not to believe her Testimony , but my whole Crew can witness it . 



Van Herald   Aye , they are all English men . 



Towers .  that 's a Nation too generous to do bad Actions , and too sincere to justify 'em done ; I wish their Neighbours were of the same temper . 



Har. Sen.   Nay now you kindle Captain , this must not be , we are your Friends and Servants . 



Midl .  't is well you are by Land , at Sea you would be Masters ; there I myself have met with some Affronts , which though I wanted power then to return , I hailed the Captain of the Holland Ship , and told him he should dearly answer it , if ever I met him in the Narrow Seas : his answer was , ( mark but the insolence ) if I should hang thee Middleton , up at thy Main Yard , and sink thy Ship ; here 's that about my neck , ( pointing to his Gold Chain ) would answer it when I came into Holland . 



Har. jun.   Yes , this is like the other . 



Towers .  I find we must complain at home , there 's no redress to be had here . 



Ysab.   Come Country woman , I must call you so ; since he who owns my Heart is English born ; be not dejected at your wretched Fortune , my House is yours , my Clotheses shall Habit you , even these I wear , rather than see you thus . 



Har Sen.   Come , come , no more complaints let us go in : I have ten Romers ready to the Bride ; as many times shall all our Guns discharge , to speak the general gladness of this day . I 'll lead you Lady . takes the Bride by the hand . 



Towers .  A heavy Omen to my Nuptials ! 
My Country Men oppressed by Sea and Land , 
And I not able to redress the wrong , 
So weak are we , our Enemies so strong . 


Exeunt omnes . ACT IU.  

SCENE . A Wood  

Enter Harman junior , and Fiscal , with Swords , and disguised in Vizards . Harm .  WE are disguised enough ; the evening now grows dusk , I would the deed were done . 



Enter Perez with a Soldier , and overhears them . Fisc.   'T will now be suddenly , if we have courage ; in this wild woody Walk , hot with the Feast , and plenteous Bowls , the Bridal company are walking to enjoy the cooling breeze ; I spoke to Towerson as I said I would , and on some private business of great moment , desired , that he would leave the company and meet me single here . 



Harm .  Where if he comes , he never shall return ; but Towerson stays too long for my revenge ; I am in haste to kill him . 



Fisc.   He promised me to have been here ever now , if you think fitting , I 'll go back and bring him . 



Harm .  Do so , I 'll wait you in this place . Exit Fiscal . 



Perez .  Was ever villainy like this ? of these unknown Assassinate's ? Towerson , in vain I saved thy sleeping life ; if now I let thee lose it , when thou wakest ; thou lately hast been bountiful to me , and this way I 'll acknowledge it . Yet to disclose their crimes were dangerous . What must I do ? This generous Englishman will straight be here , and consultation then perhaps will be too late ; I am resolved . Lieutenant you have heard as well as I , the bloody purpose of these Men.  



Sould.   I have ; and tremble at the mention of it . 



Perez .  Dare you adventure on an action as brave as theirs is base ? 



Sould.   Command my life . 



Perez .  no more ; help me dispatch that murderer , ever his Accomplice come ; the Men I know not ; but their design is treacherous and bloody . 



Sould.   And he they mean to kill , is brave himself , and of a Nation I much love . 



Perez .  Come on then . both draw . To Harm . Villain thou diest , thy conscience tells thee why ; I need not urge the crime . They assault him . 



Harm .  Murder , ! I shall be basely murdered ; help . 



Enter Towerson . Towers .  Hold Villains ; what unmanly odds is this ? Courage , who ever thou art , I 'll succour thee . 



Towerson fights with Perez , and Harman with the Lieutenant , and drive them off the Stage . Harm .  Though , ( brave unknown ; ) night takes thee from my knowledge , and I want time to thank thee now ; take this and wear it for my sake : Gives him a Ring . Hereafter I 'll acknowledge it more largely . Exit . 



Towers .  That voice i  heard , but cannot call to mind , except it be young Harman's — Yet who should put his life in danger thus ? this Ring I would not take as Salary , but as a gage of his free heart who left it : and when I know him , I 'll restore the pledge ; sure 't was not far from hence I made the appointment : I know not what this Dutchmans' business is , yet I believe 't was somewhat from my Rival ; it shall go hard but I will find him out , and then rejoin the Company . Exit . 



Re-enter Harman junior , and Fiscal . Fisc.   The accident was wondrous strange : did you neither know your Assassinate's , nor your deliverer ? 



Harm .  'T was all a hurry , yet upon better recollecting of myself , the Man who freed me , must be Towerson . 



Fisc.   Hark , I hear the company walking this way , will you withdraw ? 



Harm .  Withdraw , and Ysabinda coming ! 



Fisc.   The Wood is full of Murderers , every Tree methinks hides one behind it . 



Harm .  You have two qualities my friend , that sort but ill together , as mischievous as Hell could wish you , but fearful in the execution . 



Fisc.   There is a thing within me called a Conscience , which is not quite o'ercome , now and then it rebel's a little , especially when I am alone , or in the dark . 



Harm .  The Moon begins to rise , and glitters through the Trees . 



Ysabinda within . Ysab.   Pray let us walk this way , that farther Lawn between the Groves , is the most green and pleasant of any in this Isle . 



Harm .  I hear my Siren's voice , I cannot stir from hence . Dear friend , if thou wilt ever oblige me , divert the company a little , and give me opportunity a while to talk alone with her . 



Fisc.   you 'll get nothing of her , except it be by force . 



Harm .  You know not with what eloquence , Love may inspire my tongue : the guiltiest wretch when ready for his sentence , has something still to say . 



Fisc.   Well , they come , I 'll put you in a way , and wish you good success ; but do ye hear ; remember you are a Man , and she a Woman ; a little force it may be would do well . 



Enter Ysabinda , Beaumont , Middleton , Collins , Harman Senior , and Julia.  Ysab.   Who saw the Bridegroom last ? 



Harm . Sen.   He refused to pledge the last Romer ; so I am out of charity with him . 



Beam.   Come , shall we backward to the Castle , I 'll take care of you Lady . 



julia.   O , you have drunk so much you are passed all care . 



Coll.   But where can be this jolly Bridegroom ? answer me that , I will have the Bride satisfied . 



Fisc.   He walked alone this way ; we met him lately . 



Ysab.   I beseech you , Sir , conduct us . 



Har. jun.   I 'll bring you to him , Madam . 



Fiscal   to Harman jun.  Remember , now 's your time , if you o'er slip this minute , fortune perhaps will never send another , 



Harm . jun.   I am resolved . 



Fisc.   Come Gentlemen , I 'll tell you such a pleasant accident , you 'll think the evening short . 



jul.   I love a Story , and a Walk by Moonshine . 



Fisc.   Lend me your hand then Madam ; Takes her by the one hand 



Beam.   But one , I beseech you then ; I must not quit her so . Takes her by the other hand . 



Exeunt . Re-enter Harman jun. and Ysabinda . Ysab.   Come Sir , which is the way ? I long to see my love . 



Harm . jun.   You may have your wish , and without stirring hence . 



Ysab.   My Love so near ? sure you delight to mock me . 



Harm . jun.   't is you delight to torture me ; behold the Man who love's you more than his own Eyes , more than the joys of Earth , or hopes of Earth . 



Ysab.   When you renewed your friendship with my Towerson , I thought these vain desires were dead within you . 



Harm . jun.   Smothered they were , not dead , your Eyes can kindle no such petty fires as only blaze a while and strait go out . 



Ysab.   You know when I had far lesle ties upon me , I would not hear you ; therefore wonder not if I withdraw , and find the company . 



Harm . jun.   That would be too much cruelty to make me wretched , and then leave me so . 



Ysab.   am I in fault if you are miserable ? so you may call the rich man's wealth , the cause and object of the Robbers guilt : pray do not persecute me farther : you know I have a Husband now , and would be loath to afflict his knowledge with your second folly . 



Har. jun.   What wondrous care you take to make him happy ! yet I approve your Method . Ignorance , o 't is a Jewel to a Husband , that , 't is peace in him , 't is virtue in his Wife , 't is Honour in the World ; he has all this , while he is ignorant . 



Ysab.   You pervert my meaning : I would not keep my actions from his knowledge ; your bold attempts I would : but yet henceforth conceal your impious flames ; I shall not ever be thus indulgent to your shame , to keep it from his notice . 



Harm .  You are a Woman ; have enough of Love for him and me ; I know the plenteous Harvest all is his : he has so much of joy , that he must labour under it . In charity you may allow some glean to a Friend . 



Ysab.   Now you grow rude : I 'll hear no more . 



Harm . jun.   You must . 



Ysab.   Leave me . 



Har. jun.   I cannot . 



Ysab.   I find I must be troubled with this idle talk some Minutes more , but 't is your last . 



Har. Iu.   And therefore I 'll improve it : pray resolve to make me happy by your free consent ; I do not love these half Enjoyments , t'enervate my delights with using force , and neither give myself nor you that full content , which two can never have , but where both join with equal eagerness to bless each other . 



Ysab.   Bless me ye kind Inhabitants of Heaven , from hearing words like these : 



Harm . jun.   You must do more than hear 'em ▪ you know you were now going to your Bridal Bed. Call your own thoughts but to a strict account , they 'll tell you all this day , your fancy ran on nothing else ; 't is but the same Scene still you were to act ; only the person changed , it may be for the better . 



Ysab.   You dare not , sure , attempt this villainy . 



Harm . jun.   Call not the act of Love by that gross name , you 'll give it a much better when 't is done ; and woo me to a second . 



Ysab.   Dost thou not fear a Heaven ! 



Harm .  no , I hope one in you . Do it , and do it heartily ; time is precious ; it will prepare you better for your Husband . — Come . Lays hold on her . 



Ysab.   O Mercy , Mercy , O pity your own Soul , and pity mine : think how you 'll wish undone this horrid act when your hot Lust is slacked : think what will follow when my Husband knows it , if shame will let me live to tell it him ; and tremble at a power above , who sees , and surely will revenge it . 



Harm .  I have thought ! 



Ysab.   then I am sure you 're penitent . 



Harm .  no , I only gave you scope to let you see all you have urged I knew : you find 't is to no purpose either to talk or strive . 



Ysabinda   running . Some succour , help , o help . 



She breaks from him . Harm .  running after her . That too is vain , you cannot scape me . Exit . 



Harm .  within . Now you are mine ; yield , or by force I 'll take it . 



Ysab.   within . O kill me first . 



Harm .  within . I 'll bear you where your cries shall not be heard . 



Ysab.   as farther of . Succour sweet Heaven , o succour me . 



Enter Harman Senior , Fiscal , Van Herring , Beaumont , Collins , Julia.  Beam.   You have led us here a Fairies round in the Moonshine , to seek a Bridegroom in a Wood , till we have lost the Bride . 



Coll.   I wonder what 's become of her ? 



Harm . Sen.   Got together , got together I warrant you , before this time ; you Englishmen are so hot , you cannot stay for Ceremonies , a good honest Dutchman would have been plying the Glass all this while , and drunk to the hopes of Hans in Kelder till 't was Bedtime . 



Beam.   Yes , and then have rolled into the sheets , and turned o' th' tother side to snore , without so much as a parting blow ; till about midnight he would have wakened in a maze , and found first he was Married by putting forth a Foot and feeling a Woman by him ; and it may be then in stead of kissing , desired yough From to hold his head . 



Coll.   And by that night's work have given her a Proof what she might expect for ever after . 



Beam.   In my Conscience you Hollanders never get your Children , but in the Spirit of Brandee ; you are exalted then a little above your Natural Phlegm , and only that which can make you fight and destroy Men , makes you get ' 'em . 



Fisc.   You may live to know , that we can kill Men when we are sober . 



Beam.   then they must be drunk , and not able to defend themselves . 



julia.   Pray leave this talk , and let us try if we can surprise the Lovers under some convenient tree : shall we separate and look them ? 



Beam.   Let you and I go together then , and if we cannot find them , we shall do as good , for we shall find one another . 



Fisc.   Pray take that path , or that , I will pursue this . 



Exeunt all but the Fiscall . Fisc.   So , now I have diverted them from Harman : I 'll look for him myself ; and see how he speeds in his adventure . 



Enter Harman junior . Harm . Jun.   Who goes there ? 



Fisc.   A Friend : I was just in quest of you , so are all the Company : Where have you left the Bride ? 



Har. Jun.   Tied to a Tree and Gagged , and — 



Fisc.   And what ? Why do you stare and tremble ? answer me like a man  



Har. Jun.   O , I have nothing left of Manhood in me ; I am turned Beast or Devil ; Have I not Horns , and Tail , and Leathern wings ? methinks I should have by my Actions — O I have done a Deed so ill , I cannot name it . 



Fisc.   Not name it , and yet do it ? that 's a Fool's Modesty : Come , I 'll name it for you : You have enjoyed your Mistress ? 



Har. Jun.   How easily so great a Villainy comes from thy mouth ! I have done worse , I have ravished her . 



Fisc.   that 's no harm , so you have killed her afterwards . 



Harm .  Killed her ! Why thou art a worse Fiend then I  



Fisc.   Those Fits of Conscience in another might be excusable ; but , in you , a Dutchman , who are of a Race that are born Rebels , and live every where on Rapine ; Woven you degenerate , and have remorse ? Pray what makes any thing a sin but Law ; and , What Law is there here against it ? Is not your Father Chief ? Will he condemn you for a petty Rape ? The Woman an Amboyner , and what 's lesle , now Married to an Englishman : Come , if there be a Hell , 't is but for those that sin in Europe , not for us in Asia ; Heathens have no Hell. Tell me , How was 't ? Prithee the History . 



Harm .  I forced her — What resistance She could make she did , but 't was in vain ; I bound her as I told you to a tree : 



Fisc.   And she exclaimed I warrant — 



Harm .  Yes , and called Heaven and Earth to witness . 



Fisc.   Not after it was done . 



Harm .  more than before — Desired me to have killed her . Even when I had not left her power to speak , she cursed me with her eyes . 



Fisc.   Nay , then , you did not please her ; if you had she never had cursed you heartily ; but , we loose time : since you have done this action , 't is necessary you proceed ; we must have no tales told . 



Harm .  What do you mean ? 



Fisc.   To dispatch her immediately ; Could you be so senseless to ravish her , and let her live ? What if her Husband should have found her ? What if any other English ? Come there 's no dallying ; It must be done : My other plot is ripe , which shall destroy 'em all to morrow . 



Harm .  I love her still to Madness , and never can consent to have her killed , we 'll thence remove her if you please , and keep her safe till your intended Plot shall take effect ; And , when her husband 's gone , I 'll win her Love by every circumstance of kindness . 



Fisc.   You may do so ; but , tother is the safer way : but I 'll not stand with you for one life . I could have wished that Towerson had been killed before I had proceeded to my plot ; but since it cannot be , we must go on ; Conduct me where you left her . 



Harm .  O that I could forget both Act and Place . 



Exeunt . Scene Drawn discovers Ysabinda bound 

Enter Towerson . Towers .  Sure I mistake the place , I 'll wait no longer , something within me does forebode me ill ; I stumbled when I entered first this Wood : My Nostrils bled three drops : then stopped the Blood , and not one more would follow . what 's that which seems to bear a Mortal sees Ysabinda . shape , yet neither stirs nor speaks ! or , Is it some Illusion of the Night ? some Spectre , such as in these Asian parts more Frequently appear ; What ever it be I 'll venture to approach it ; My Ysabinda bound and Gagged ! ye Powers Goes near . I tremble while I free her , and scarce dare restore her liberty of Speech for fear of knowing more . 



Unbinds her , and Vngaggs her . Ysab.   no longer Bridegroom thou , nor I a Bride ; those names are vanished ; Love is now no more ; Look on me as thou wouldst on some foul Leper ; and do not touch me : I am all polluted , all shame , all o'er dishonour ; fly my sight , and , for my sake , fly this detested Isle , where horrid Ills so black and fatal dwell , as Indians could not guests , till Europe taught . 



Towers .  Speak plainer , I am recollected now : I know I am a Man , the sport of fate ; Yet , O my better half , had Heaven so pleased , I had been more content , to suffer in myself then thee . 



Ysab.   What shall I say ! That Monster of a Man , Harman ; now I have named him , think the rest . Alone , and singled like a timorous Hind from the full Herd , by flattery drew me first , than forced me to an Act , so base and Brutal , Heaven knows my Innocence : but , Why do I call that to Witness ! Heaven saw , stood silent : Not one flash of Lightning shot from the Conscious Firmament to show its Justice : O had it struck us both , it had saved me ! 



Towers .  Heaven suffered more in that than you , or I : wherefore have I been faithful to my trust , true to my Love , and tender to th' oppressed ? am I condemned to be the second man , who e'er complained , he virtue served in vain ? But dry your tears , these sufferings all are mine . Your breast is white , and cold as falling Snow . You still as fragrant as your Eastern Groves ; and your whole frame as innocent , and holy , as if your being were all soul and spirit , without the gross allay of flesh and blood . Come to my arms again . 



Ysab.   O never , never , I am not worthy now ; My soul indeed is free from sin , but the foul speckled stains are from my body ne'er to be washed out , but in my death . Kill me , my Love , or I must kill myself ; else you may think I was a black Adulteress in my mind , and some of me consented . 



Towers .  Your wish to die , shows you deserve to live . I have proclaimed you guiltless to myself . Self-homicide , which was in Heathens honour , in us is only sin . 



Ysab.   I thought th' Eternal Mind had made us Masters of these mortal frames ; you told me he had given us wills to choose , and reason to direct us in our choice ; if so , why should he tie us up from dying , when death 's the greater good ? 



Towers .  Can death , which is our greatest enemy , be good ? Death is the dissolution of our nature ; and nature therefore does abhor it most , whose greatest Law is to preserve our beings . 



Ysab.   I grant , it is its great general Law : But as Kings , who are , or should be above Laws , dispense with 'em when levelled at themselves ; Even so may man , without offence to Heaven , dispense with what concerns himself alone : Nor is death in itself an ill ; then holy Martyrs sinned , who ran uncalled to snatch their Martyrdom : And blessed Virgins , whom you celebrate for voluntary death , to free themselves from that which I have suffered . 



Towers .  They did it to prevent what might ensue ; your shame 's already past . 



Ysab.   It may return , if I am yet so mean to live a little longer . 



Towers .  You know not , Heaven may give you succour yet ; you see it sends me to you . 



Ysab.   't is too late , you should have come before . 



Towers .  Yet you may live to see yourself revenged . Come you shall stay for that , then I 'll die with you . You have convinced my reason , nor am I ashamed to learn from you . To Heaven's Tribunal my appeal I make ; if as a Governor he sets me here , to guard this weak built Citadel of Life , when 't is no longer to be held , I may with honour quit the Fort. But first I 'll both revenge myself and you . 



Ysab.   Alas , you cannot take revenge , your Countrymen are few , and those unarmed . 



Towers .  Though not on all the Nation , as I would ; yet I at least can take it on the man  



Ysab.   Leave me to Heaven's revenge , for thither I will go , and pled myself my own just cause . there 's not an injured Saint of all my Sex , but kindly will conduct me to my Judge , and help me tell my story . 



Towers .  I 'll send th' offender first , though to that place he never can arrive : ten thousand Devils damned for lesle crimes than he , and Tarquin in their head , waylay his Soul , to , pull him down in triumph , and to show him in pomp among his Countrymen ; for sure Hell has its Netherlands , and its lowest Country must be their lot . 



Enter Harman junior , and Fiscal . Harm .  'T was hereabout I left her tied . The rage of Love renews again within me . 



Fisc.   she 'll like th' effects on 't better now . By this time it has sunk into her imagination , and given her a more pleasing Idea of the man , who offered her so sweet a violence . 



Ysab.   Save me , sweet Heaven , the Monster comes again . 



Harm .  O here she is : My own fair Bride , for so you are , not Towersons : Let me unbind you ; I expect that you should bind yourself about me now , and tie me in your arms . 



Towers .  [ drawing ] no , Villain , no ; hot Satyr of the Woods ! Expect another entertainment now . Behold revenge for injured chastity , this Sword Heaven draws against thee , and here has placed me like a fiery Cherub , to guard this Paradise from any second Violation . 



Fisc.   We must dispatch him , Sir , we have the odds ; and when he is killed , leave me to invent the excuse . 



Harm .  Hold a little : As you shunned fight formerly with me , so would I now with you . The mischiefs I have done are past recall . Yield then your useless right in her I love , since the possession is no longer yours ; so is your Honour safe , and so is hers , the Husband only altered . 



Towers   ye trifle , there 's no room for treaty here : The shame 's too open , and the wrong too great . Now all the Saints in Heaven look down to see the Justice I shall do , for 't is their cause ; and all the Fiends below prepare thy Tortures . 



Ysab.   If Towerson would , think'st thou my soul so poor to own thy sin , and make the base act mine , by choosing him who did it ? Know , bad man , I 'll die with him , but never live with thee . 



Towers .  Prepare , I shall suspect you stay for further help , and think not this enough . 



Fisc.   We are ready for you . 



Harm .  Stand back , I 'll fight with him alone . 



Fisc.   Thank you for that ; so if he kills you , I shall have him single upon me . 



All three fight . Ysab.   Heaven assist my Love.  



Harm .  There , Englishman , 't was meant well to thy heart . 



Towerson wounded . Fisc.   O you can bleed , I see , for all your cause . 



Towers .  Wounds but awaken English courages . 



Harm .  Yet yield me Ysabinda , and besafe . 



Towers .  I 'll fight myself all scarlet o'er first ; were there no love , or no revenge , I could not now desist in point of honour . 



Harm .  Resolve me first one question , Did you not draw your sword this night before , to rescue one oppressed with odds ? 



Towers   Yes , in this very Wood : I bear a Ring , the badge of gratitude from him I saved . 



Harm .  That Ring was mine ; I should be loath to kill the frank redeemer of my life . 



Towers .  I quit that obligation . But we loose time . Come , Ravisher . 



They fight again , Towerson closes with Harman and gets him down ; as he is going to kill him , the Fiscal gets over him . Fisc.   Hold , and let him rise ; for if you kill him , at the same instant you die too . 



Towers .  Dog , do thy worst , for I would so be killed ; I 'll carry his soul captive with me into the other world . 



Stabs Harman . Harm .  O mercy , mercy , Heaven . dies . 



Fisc.   Take this then in return . 



As he 's going to stab him , Ysabinda takes hold of his hand . Ysab.   Hold , hold , the weak may give some help . 



Towers .  ( rising ) Now , Sir , I am for you . 



Fisc.   ( retiring ) Hold , Sir , there is no more resistance made , I beg you by the honour of your Nation , do not pursue my life , I tender you my sword . 



Holds his sword by the point to him . Towers .  Base beyond example of any Country , but thy own . 



Ysab.   Kill him , sweet Love , or we shall both repent it . 



Fisc.   ( kneeling to her ) Divinest Beauty ! abstract of all that 's excellent in Woman , can you be friend to murder ? 



Ysab.   't is none to kill a Villain , and a Dutchman . 



Fisc.   ( kneeling to Towers . ) Noble Englishman , give me my life , unworthy of your taking . By all that 's good and holy here I swear , before the Governor to pled your cause ; and to declare his son's detested crime , so to secure your lives . 



Towers .  Rise , take thy life , though I can scarce believe thee ; if for a coward it be possible , become an honest man  



Enter Harman signior , Van Herring , Beaumont , Collins , Julia , the Governors Guard.  Fisc.   to Harm . O Sir , you come in time to rescue me ; the greatest Villain who this day draws breath stands here before your Eyes ; behold your Son , that Worthy , Sweet ; unfortunate young Man lies there , the last cold breath yet hover betwixt his trembling Lips.  



Towers .  O Monster of Ingratitude ! 



Harm .  O my unfortunate old age , whose prop , and only staff is gone , dead ever I die , these should have been his tears , and I have been that Body to be mourned . 



Beam.   I am so much amazed , I scarce believe my Senses . 



Fisc.   And will you let him live , who did this Act ? shall Murder , and of your own Son , and such a Son go free ? he life's too long by this one Minute which he stays behind him . 



Ysab.   O Sir , remember , in that place you hold , you are a common Father to us all ; we beg but justice of you ; harken first to my lamented story . 



Fisc.   First hear me , Sir.  



Towers   Thee slave , thou liv'st but by the breath I gave thee , didst thou but now pled on thy knees for life ? and offer'dst to make known my innocence in Harman's injuries . 



Fisc.   I offered to have cleared thy innocence who basely murdered him ? but words are needless ; Sir , you see evidence before your eyes , and I the witness , on my oath to Heaven how clear your Son , how criminal this Man  



Coll.   Towerson could do nothing but what was noble . 



Beam.   We know his Native worth . 



Fisc.   His Worth ? behold it on the Murderer's hand , a Robber first , he took degrees in mischief , and grew to what he is : know you that Diamond , and whose it was ? see if he dares deny 't ? 



Towers .  Sir , 't was your Sons , that freely I acknowledge ; but how I came by it — 



Harm .  no , 't is too much , I 'll hear no more . 



Fisc.   The Devil of Jealousy , and that of Avarice , both I believe possessed him ; or your Son was innocently talking with his Wife , and he perhaps had found 'em ; this I guests , but saw it not , because I came too late , I only viewed the sweet Youth , just expiring , and Towerson stooping down to take the Ring : she kneeling by to help him ; when he saw me , he would , you may be sure have sent me after , because I was a witness of the fact ; this on my Soul is true . 



Towers .  False as that soul , each Word , each Syllable ; the Ring he put upon my hand this night , when in this Wood unknown , and near this place , without my timely help he had been slain . 



Fisc.   See this unlikely story , what enemies had he who should assault him , or is it probable that very Man who actually did kill him afterwards , should save his life so little time before . 



Ysab.   Base Man thou knowest the reason of his death ; he had committed on my Person Sir an impious Rape ; first tied me to that tree , and there my Husband found me , whose revenge was such , as Heaven and Earth will justify . 



Harm .  I know not what Heaven will , but Earth shall not . 



Beam.   Her story carries such a face of Truth , ye cannot but believe it . 



Coll.   The other a malicious ill-patched lie . 



Fisc.   Yes , you are proper Judges of his crime , who with the rest of your Accomplices , your Countrymen , and Towerson the chief , whom we too kindly used , would have surprised , the Fort , and made us Slaves ; that shall be proved , more soon than you imagine ; I found it out this evening . 



Towers .  Sure the Devil has lent thee all his stock of falsehood , and must be forced hereafter to tell truth . 



Beam.   Sir , 't is impossible you should believe it . 



Harm .  Seize 'em all . 



Coll.   You cannot be so base . 



Harm .  I 'll be so just till I can hear your plea against this plot , which if not proved , and fully , you are quit , mean time , resistance is but vain . 



Towers .  Provided that we may have equal hearing , I am content to yield , though I declare , you have no power to judge us . Gives his sword . 



Beam.   Barbarous ungrateful Dutch.  



Harm .  See 'em conveyed apart to several prisons , lest they combine to forge some specious Lie in their excuse , let Towerson and that Woman too be parted . 



Ysab.   Was ever such a sad divorce made on a Bridal night ! but we before were parted ne'er to meet , farewel , farewel , my last and only Love.  



Towers .  Curse on my fond credulity , to think there could be Faith or Honour in the Dutch : Farewell my Ysabinda , and farewel my much wronged Countrymen ; remember yet that no unmanly weakness in your sufferings disgrace the Native Honour of our Isle ; 

For you I mourn ; grief for myself were vain , 
I have lost all , and now would lose my pain . 


Exeunt . ACT v.  

SCENE I A Table set out . 

Enter Harman , Fiscal , Van Herring , and two Dutchmen they sit , Boy , and waiters , Guards . Harm .  MY sorrow cannot be so soon digested for losing of a Son I loved so well , but I consider , great advantages must with some loss be bought ▪ as this rich Trade which I this day have purchased with his death , yet let me be revenged , and I shall still live on , and eat , and drink down all my griefs . Now to the matter , Fiscal . 



Fisc.   Since we may freely speak among ourselves , all I have said of Towerson was most false ; you were consenting , Sir , as well as I , that Perez should be hired to murder him , which he refusing when he was engaged , 't is dangerous to let him longer live . 



Van Herald   Dispatch him , he will be a shroud witness against us , if he return to Europe . 



Fisc.   I have thought better , if you please , to kill him by form of Law , as accessary to the English plot , which I have long been forging . 



Harm .  send one to seize him straight . Exit a Messenger . But what you said , that Towerson was guiltless of my Son's death ; I easily believe ; and never thought otherwise , though I dissembled . 



Van Herald   Nor I ; but 't was well done to feign that story . 



1.  Dutch.   The true one was too foul . 



2.  Dutch.   And afterwards to draw the English off from his concernment , to their own , I think 't was rarely managed that . 



Harm .  So far , 't was well ; now to proceed , for I would gladly know whether the grounds are plausible enough of this pretended plot . 



Fisc.   With favour of this Hovourable Court , give me but leave to smooth the way before you . Some two or three nights since , ( it matters not ; ) a japan Soldier under Captain Perez came to a Sentinel upon the Guard , and in familiar talk did question him about this Castle , of its strength ; and how he thought it might be taken ; this discourse the other told me early the next morning : I thereupon did issue private order , to wrack the japonnese , myself being present . 



Harm .  But what 's this to the English ? 



Fisc.   You shall hear , I asked him when his pains were strongest on him , if Towerson , or the English Factory , had never hired him to betray the Fort , he answered , ( as 't was true ) they never had : nor was his meaning more in that discourse then as a Soldier to inform himself , and so to pass the time . 



Van Herald   Did he confess no more ? 



Fisc.   You interrupt me , I told him I was certainly informed the English had designs upon the Castle , and if he frankly would confess their Plot , he should not only be Released from Torment , but bounteously rewarded : present pain and future hopes , in fine so wrought upon him , he yielded to subscribe what e'er I pleased ; and so he stands committed . 



Har.   Well contrived , a fair way made upon this accusation , to put them all to Torture . 



2 Dutch.   By his confession , all of 'em shall die , even to their General Towerson . 



Har.   He stands convicted of another Crime , for which he is to suffer . 



Fisc.   This does well , to help it though . For Towerson is here a Person publicly Employed from England , and if he should appeal , as sure he will , you have no power to Judge him in Amboyna . 



Van Herald   But in regard of the late League and Union , betwixt the Nations , how can this be answered . 



1 Dutch :  To Torture Subjects to so great a King , a pain never heard of in their happy Land , will sound but ill in Europe . 



Fisc.   Their English Laws , in England have their force ; and we have ours , different from theirs ; at home ; It is enough , they either shall confess ; or we will falsity their hands to make 'em ; then for th' Apology let me alone ; I have it written already to a Tittle , of what they shall subscribe ; this I will publish , and make our most unheard of Cruelties , to seem most just , and legal . 



Har.   then in the name of him , who put it first into thy Head to form this damned false Plot , proceed we to the Execution of it ; and to begin ; first seize we their Effects , Rifle their Chests , their Boxes , writings , Books , and take of 'em a seeming Inventory ; but all to our own use ; I shall grow young with thought of this , and lose my Son's remembrance . 



Fisc.   Will you not please to call the Prisoners in ? at least inquire , what Torments have extorted . 



Har.   Go thou and bring us word ▪ Exit Fiscal . 

Boy , give me some Tobacco , and a stoup of Wine , Boy . 



Boy :  I shall Sir.  



Har.   And a Tub to leak in Boy ; when was this Table without a leaking Vessel . 



Van. Herald   that 's an Omission . 



1 Dutch :  A great Omission . 

't is a Member of the Table , I take it so . 



Har.   Never any thing of Moment was done at our Counsel Table , without a leaking Tub ; at least in my time ; great affairs require great Consultations , great Consultations require great Drinking , and great Drinking a great leaking Vessel . 



Van Herald   I am even drunk with joy already , to see our godly business in this forwardness . 



Enter Fiscall . Har.   Where are the Prisoners ? 



Fisc.   At the door , 



Har.   Bring 'em in ; I 'll try if we can face 'em down by Impudence , and make 'em to confess . 

Enter Beaumont and Collins Guarded . You are not ignorant of our Business with you ; the cries of your Accomplices already have reached your Ears ; and your own Consciences , above a thousand Summons , thousand Tortures instruct you what to do . no farther Juggle , nothing but plain sincerity and truth to be delivered now ; a free confession , will first atone for all your sins above ; and may do much below to gain your Pardons , let me exhort you therefore , be you merciful , first to yourselves , and make acknowledgement of your Conspiracy ? 



Beam.   What Conspiracy . 



Fisc.   Why lafoy you , that the Devil should go Masked with such a seeming honest face ; I warrant you know of no such thing . 



Har.   Were not you Mr. Beaumont , and you Collins both accessary to the horrid Plot , for the Surprisal of this Fort and Island . 



Beam.   As I shall reconcile my Sins to Heaven , in my last Article of Life , I 'm innocent . 



Collins :  And so am I  



Har.   So , you are first upon the Negative . 



Beam.   And will be so till death . 



Collins :  What Plot is this you speak of ? 



Fisc.   Here are Impudent Rogues , now after confession of two Japonnese , these English Starts dare ask what Plot it is . 



Har.   Not to inform your knowledge , but that Law may have its course in every circumstance ; Fiscal , sum up their accusation to 'em . 



Fisc.   You stand accused , that New years day late passed , there met at Captain Towersons House , you present , and many others of your Factory : there , against Law and Justice , and all Ties of Friendship , and of Partnership betwixt us , you did conspire to seize upon the Fort , to Murder this our Worthy Governor ; and by the help of your Plantations near , of jacatra , and Banda , and Loho , to keep it for yourselves . 



Beam.   What proofs have you of this ? 



Fisc.   The confession of two japonnese hired by you to attempt it . 



Harm .  I hear they have been forced by Torture to it . 



Harm .  It matters not which way the truth come out ; take heed , for their Example is before you . 



Beam.   ye have no right , ye dare not Torture us , we owe you no subjection . 



Fisc.   That Sir , must be disputed at the Hague ; in the mean time we are in possession here . 



2 Dutch.   And we can make ourselves to be obeyed . 



Van Herald   In few words Gentlemen confess . There is a Beverage ready for you else , which you 'll not like to swallow . 



Collins :  how 's this ? 



Har.   You shall be muffled up like Ladies , with an Oiled Cloth put underneath your Chins , than Water poured above ; which either you must drink or must not breathe . 



1 Dutch :  that 's one way , we have others . 



Har.   Yes , we have two Elements at your Service , Fire , as well as Water ; certain things called Matches to be tied to your Finger's ends , which are as sovereign as Nutmegs , to quicken your short Memories . 



Beam.   You are inhuman , to make your Cruelty your Pastime ; Nature made me a Man , and not a Whale , to swallow down a flood . 



Har.   you 'll grow a Corpulent Gentleman like me ; I shall love you the better for 't , now you are but a spare rib . 



Fisc.   These things are only offered to your choice ; you may avoid your Tortures and confess . 



Collins :  Kill us first , for that we know is your design at last ; and 't is more Mercy now . 



Beam.   Be kind , and , Execute us , while we bore the shapes of Men , ever Fire and Water have destroyed our Figures ; let me go whole out of the World , I care not ; and find my Body when I rise again so , as I need not be ashamed on 't . 



Har.   't is well you 're Merry ; will you yet confess ? 



Beam.   Never . 



Har.   Bear 'em away to Torture . 



Van Herald   we 'll try your Constancy . 



Beam.   we 'll shame your Cruelty ; if we deserve our Tortures , 't is first for freeing such an infamous Nation , that aught to have been slaves , and then for trusting them as Partners , who had cast off the Yoke of their lawful Sovereign . 



Har.   Away , I 'll hear no more , now who comes the next ? 



Exeunt the English with a Guard.  Fisc.   Towersons Page , a Ship Boy , and a Woman . 



Har.   Call 'em in . Exit a Messenger . 



Van-her .  We shall have easy work with them . 



Fisc.   Not so easy as you imagine , they have endured the Beverage already ; all Master of their pain , no one confessing . 

the devil 's in these English , those brave Boys would prove stout Topers if they lived . 

Enter two Boys and a Woman led as from Torture . Come hither ye perverse Imps , they say , you have endured the Water Torment , we 'll try what Fire will do with you : you Sirrah , confess , were not you knowing of Towersons Plot , against this Fort and Island . 



Page .  I have told your Hangman no , twelve times within this hour ; when I was at the last Gasp , and that 's a time I think , when a Man should not dissemble . 



Har.   A Man , mark you that now ; you English Boys have learned a trick of late , of growing Men betimes , and doing men's Work too , before you come to twenty . 



Van. Herald   Sirrah , I will try if you are a Salamander , and can live i' th' Fire . 



Page .  Sure you think my Father got me of some Dutch Woman , and that I am but of a half strain courage ; but you shall find that I am all o'er English , as well in Fire as Water . 



2 Boy .  Well of all Religions , I do not like your Duchess  



Fisc.   no , and why young stripling . 



2 Boy .  Because your Penance comes before Confession . 



Har.   Do you mock us Sirrah , to the Fire with him . 



2.  Boy .  Do so , all you shall get by it , is this ; before I answered no , now I 'll be sullen and will talk no more . 



Har.   Best cutting off these little Rogues betime , if they grow Men , they 'll have the Spirit of Revenge in 'em . 



Page .  Yes , as your Children have that of Rebellion ; O that I could but live to be Governor here , to make your fat Guts pledge me in that Beverage I drunk , you Sir john Falstaff of Amsterdam . 



2 Boy .  I have a little Brother in England , that I intent to appear to , when you have killed me ; and if he does not promise me the Death of ten Dutchmen in the next War , I 'll haunt him instead of you . 



Har.   What say you Woman ? have compassion of yourself , and confess ; you are of a softer Sex.  



Wom.   But of a Courage full as Manly ; there is no Sex in Souls ; would you have English Wives show lesle of Bravery then their Children do ? to lie by an English Man's side , is enough to give a Woman Resolution . 



Fisc.   here 's a Hen of the Game too , but we shall tame you in the fire . 



Wom.   My Innocence shall there be tried like Gold , till it come out the purer . When you have burned me all into one Wound , cram Gunpowder into 't , and blow me up , I 'll not confess one word to shame my Country . 



Har.   I think we have got here the Mother of the Maccabees ; away with them all three . Exeunt the English Guarded . I 'll take the pains myself to see these Tortured . 



Exeunt Harman , Van Herring , and the two Dutchmen with the English : manet Fiscal . Enter Julia to the Fiscal . julia.   O you have ruined me , you have undone me , in the Person of my Husband ! 



Fisc.   If he will needs forfeit his Life to the Laws , by joining with the English in a Plot , 't is not in me to save him ; but dearest julia be satisfied , you shall not want a Husband . 



julia.   Do you think , I 'll ever come into a Bed with him , who robbed me of my dear sweet Man ? 



Fisc.   Dry up your Tears , I 'm in earnest , I will Mary you , i'faith I will ; it is your destiny . 



julia.   Nay if it be my Destiny : but I vow I 'll never be yours but upon one condition . 



Fisc.   Name your desire and take it . 



julia.   then save poor Beamonts' Life . 



Fisc.   This is the most unkind Request you could have made , it shows you Love him better : therefore in prudence I should hast his Death . 



julia.   Come , I 'll not be denied , you shall give me his Life , or I 'll not love you , by this Kiss you shall Child ; 



Fisc.   Pray ask some other thing . 



julia.   I have your word for this , and if you break it , how shall I trust you for your Marrying me . 



Fisc.   Well , I will do 't to oblige you . aside . 

But to prevent her new designs with him , I 'll see him shipped away for England strait . 



julia.   I may build upon your promise then : 



Fisc.   Most firmly : I hear company . 



Enter Harman , Van Herring , and the two Dutchmen with Towerson Prisoner . Harm .  Now Captain Towerson you have had the Privilege to be examined last : this on the score of my old Friendship with you , though you have ill deserved it . But here you stand accused of no lesle Crimes than Robbery first , than Murder , and last Treason : what can you say to clear yourself ? 



Towers .  you 're interested in all , and therefore partial ; I have considered on 't , and will not pled , because I know you have no right to judge me : for the last Treaty betwixt our King and you expressly said , that cause's Criminal were first to be Examined , and then Judged , not here , but by the Council of Defence ; to whom I make Appeal . 



Fisc.   This Court conceives that it has power to judge you ; derived from the most High and Mighty States , who in this Island are Supreme , and that as well in Criminal , as Civil Causes . 



1 Dutchman .  You are not to question the Authority of the Court which is to Judge you . 



Towers .  Sir , by your favour , I both must , and will : I 'll not so far betray my Nations right ; we are not here your Subjects , but your Partners : and that Supremacy of power you claim , extends but to the Natives , not to us : dare you , who in the British Seas strike Sail , nay more , whose Lives and Freedom are our Alms , presume to sit and judge your Benefactors . Your base new upstart Commonwealth should blush , to doom the Subjects of an English King , the meanest of whose Merchants would disdain the narrow life , and the Domestic baseness of one of those you call your mighty States . 



Fisc.   You spend your Breath in Railing ; speak to the purpose . 



Har.   Hold yet : because you shall not call us cruel , or pled I would be judge in my own cause ; I shall accept of that appeal you make , concerning my Son's death ; provided first you clear yourself from what concerns the public ; for that relating to our general safety , the judgement of it cannot be deferred ; but with our common danger . 



Towers .  Let me first be bold to question you : what circumstance can make this your pretended Plot seem likely ? the Natives first you tortured , their confession Extorted so , can prove no crime in us . Consider next the strength of this your Castle ; it 's Garrison above two hundred Men , besides as many of your City Burghers , all ready on the least Alarm , or Summons , to Reinforce the others , for ten English , and Merchants they , not Soldiers , with the Aid of ten japanners ; all of 'em unarmed , except five Swords , and not so many Muskets ; th' attempt had only been for Fools or Madmen . 



Fisc.   We cannot help your want of Wit ; proceed . 



Towers .  Grant then we had been desperate enough to hazard this ; we must at least forecast how to secure possession when we had it . We had no Ship nor Pinnace in the Harbour ; nor could have Aid from any Factory : the nearest to us forty Leagues from hence , and they but few in number : you besides this Fort , have yet three Castles in this Isle amply provided for , and eight tall Ships riding at Anchor near ; considering this , and think what all the World will judge of it . 



Harm .  Nothing but Falshood is to be expected from such a Tongue , whose Heart is fouled with Treason . Give him the Beverage . 



Fisc.   't is ready Sir.  



Harm .  Hold ; I have some reluctance to proceed to that extremity : he was my Friend , and I would have him frankly to confess : push open that Prison door , and set before him the image of his pains in other Men.  



The Scene opens , and discovers the English Tortured , and the Dutch tormenting them . Fisc.   Now Sir , how does the Object like you ? 



Towers .  Are you Men or Devils ! D'alva , whom you condemn for cruelty did never the like ; he knew original Villainy was in your Blood : your Fathers all are damned for their Rebellion ; when they Rebelled , they were well used to this : these Tortures never were hatched in Human Breasts , but as your Country lies confined on Hell , just on its Marches , your black Neighbours taught ye , and just such pains as you invent on Earth , Hell has reserved for you . 



Harm .  Are you yet moved ? 



Towers .  But not as you would have me . I could weep tears of Blood to view this usage ; but you , as if not made of the same Mould , see with dry eyes the Miseries of Men , as they were Creatures of another kind , not Christians , nor Allies , nor Partners with you , but as if Beasts , transfixed on Theatres , to make you cruel sport . 



Har.   These are but vulgar Objects , bring his Friend ; let him behold his Tortures ; shut that door . The Scene closed . 



Enter Beaumont led , with Matches tied to his Hands . Towers .  embracing him . O my dear friend , now I am truly wretched ! even in that part which is most sensible , my friendship : how have we lived to see the English name , the scorn of these , the vilest of Mankind . 



Beam.   Courage my friend , and rather praise we Heaven , that it has chose two such as you and me , who will not shame our Country with our pains , but stand like Marble Statues in their fires , scorched and defaced perhaps , not melted down . So let 'em burn this Tenement of Earth ; they can but burn me naked to my soul ▪ thats of a Nobler frame , and will stand Firm , Upright , and Unconsumed . 



Fisc.   Confess ; if you have kindness , save your friend . 



Towers .  Yes , by my death I would , not by my confession ; he is so brave , he would not so be saved ; but would renounce a friendship built on shame . 



Harm .  Bring more Candles , and burn him from the Wrists up to the Elbows . 



Beam.   Do , I 'll enjoy the Flames like Scaevola ; and when one 's roasted , give the other hand . 



Towers .  Let me embrace you while you are a Man , now you must lose that form ; be parched and riveled like a dried Mummy , or dead Malefactor , exposed in Chains , and blown about by Winds . 



Beam.   Yet this I can endure , Go on , and weary out two Elements ; Vex Fire and Water with th' Experiments of pains far worse than death . 



Towers .  O let me take my turn ; you will have double pleasure , I 'm ashamed to be the only Englishman untortured . 



Van Herald   You soon should have your wish ; but that we know in him you suffer more . 



Harm .  Fill me a brim full Glass : now Captain , here 's to all your Countrymen ; I wish your whole East India Company were in this room , that we might use them thus . 



Fisc.   They should have Fires of Cloves and Cinnamon , we would cut down whole Groves to Honour 'em , and be at cost to burn 'em nobly . 



Beam.   Barbarous Villains ! now you show yourselves . 



Harm .  Boy , take that Candle thence , and bring it hither , I am exalted , and would light my Pipe just where the Wyck is fed with English Fat.  



Van Herald   So would I ; o the Tobacco tastes Divinely after it . 



Towers .  We have friends in England who would weep to see this acted on a Theatre , which here you make your pastime . 



Boam .  O that this Flesh were turned a cake of Ice , that I might in an instant melt away , and become nothing , to escape this Torment , there is not cold enough in all the North to quench my burning blood . 



Fiscal whispers Harman . Harm .  Do with Beaumont as you please , so Towerson die . 



Fisc.   you 'll not confess yet Captain ? 



Towers .  Hangman , no. I would have don 't before , if ever I would : to do it when my friend has suffered this , were to be lesle than he . 



Fisc.   Free him . To Beaumont aside . 



They free Beaumont . Beaumont   I have not sworn you should not suffer , but that you should not die ; thank julia for 't , but on your life do not delay this hour to post from hence ; so to your next Plantation ; I cannot suffer a loved Rival near me . 



Beam.   I almost question if I will receive my life from thee : 't is like a cure from Witches ; 't will leave a sin behind it . 



Fisc.   Nay , I 'm not lavish of my courtesy ; I can on easy terms resume my gift . 



Harm .  Captain , you 're a dead man ; I 'll spare your torture for your Quality ; prepare for execution instantly . 



Towers .  I am prepared . 



Fisc.   You die in charity I hope . 



Towers .  I can forgive even thee ; my innocence I need not name , you know it . One farewel kiss of my dear Ysabinda , and all my business here on earth is done . 



Harm .  Call her , she 's at the door . Exit Fiscal . 



Towes .  to Beam. embracing . A long and last farewell ; I take my death with the more cheerfulness because thou liv'st behind me : tell my friends I died so as became a Christian and a Man ; give to my brave Employers of the East India Company , the last remembrance of my faithful service ; tell 'em I Seal that Service with my Blood ; and dying , wish to all their Factories , and all the famous Merchants of our Isle , that Wealth their generous Industry deserves ; but dare not hope it with Dutch partnership . Last , there 's my heart , I give it in this kiss — Kisses him . Do not answer me ; friendship 's a tender thing , and it would ill become me now to weep . — 



Beam.   Adieu , if I would speak , I cannot . — Exit . 



Enter Ysabinda . Ysab.   Is it permitted me to see your Eyes once more , before Eternal night shall close ' 'em . 



Towers .  I summoned all I had of Man to see you , 't was well the time allowed for it , was short , I could not bear it long : 't is dangerous , and would divide my Love betwixt Heaven and you . I therefore part in haste ; think I am going a sudden journey , and have not the leisure to take a ceremonious long farewell . 



Ysab.   Do you still love me ? 



Towers .  Do not suppose I do , 't is for your ease , since you must stay behind me ; to think I was unkind , you 'll grieve the lesle ! 



Harm .  Though I suspect you joined in my Son's Murder , yet since it is not proved , you have your life . 



Ysab.   I thank you for 't , I 'll make the noblest use of your sad gift ; that is , to die unforced ; I 'll make a present of my life to Towerson ; to let you see , though worthless of his Love , I would not live without him . 



Towers .  I charge you love my memory , but live . 



Harm .  She shall be strictly guarded from that violence , she means against herself . 



Ysab.   Vain Men ! there are so many paths to death , you cannot stop 'em all ; o'er the green Turf where my love 's laid , there will I mourning sit , and draw no air but from the damps that rise out of that hallowed Earth ; and for my Diet , I mean my Eyes alone shall feed my Mouth . Thus will I live , till he in pity rise , and the pale shroud take me in his cold Arms , and lay me kindly by him in his Grave , 



Enter Collins , and then Perez , Julia following him . Harm .  no more ; your time 's now come , you must away . 



Coll.   Now Devils ; you have done your worst with tortures , death 's a privation of pain ; but they were a continual dying , 



julia.   Farewell my dearest , I may have many Husbands , but never one like thee . 



Perez .  As you love my Soul , take hence that Woman ; my English friends , I 'm not ashamed of death , while I have you for part'ners ; I know you innocent , and so am I , of this pretended plot ; but I am guilty of a greater crime ; For , being married in another Country : the Governor's persuasions , and my love to that ill Woman , made me leave the first , and make this fatal choice . I 'm justly punished , for her sake I die ; the Fiscal to enjoy her has accused me . There is another cause — by his procurement I should have killed . — 



Fisc.   Away with him , and stop his mouth . He is led off . 



Towers .  I leave thee Life with no regret at parting , full of whatever thou couldst give , I rise from thy neglected Feast , and go to sleep : yet on this brink of death , my Eyes are opened , and Heaven has bid me prophecy to you th' unjust contrivers of this Tragic Scene ; An Age is coming , when an English Monarch with Blood , shall pay that blood which you have shed : to save your Cities from victorious Arms , you shall invite the Waves to hide your Earth , and trembling to the tops of Houses fly , while Deluges invade your lower rooms : then , as with Waters you have swelled our Bodies , with damps of Waters shall your Heads be swollen ; 

Till at the last your sapped foundations fall , 
And Universal Ruin swallows all . 


he 's led out with the English ; the Dutch remain . Van Herald   Aye , aye , we 'll venture both ourselves , and Children for such another pull . 



1.  Dutch.   Let him prophecy when his head 's off . 



2.  Dutch.   there 's ne'er a Nostradamus' of 'em all shall fright us from our gain . 



Fisc.   Now for a smooth Apology , and then a fawning Letter to the King of England ; and our work 's done . 



Harm .  't is done as I would wish it . Now brethren , at my proper cost and charges , three days you are my Guests ; in which good time we will divide their greatest Wealth by Lots , while wantonly we rifle for the rest : 

then in full Romers , and with joyful Hearts 
we 'll drink confusion to all English Starts Exeunt . 


Epilogue . 

A Poet once the Spartan's led to fight , 
And made 'em Conquer in the Muse's right : 
So would our Poet lead you on this day : 
Showing your tortured Fathers in his Play. 
To one well born , th' affront is worse and more , 
When he 's abused , and baffled by a Boar : 
With an ill Grace the Dutch their mischiefs do , 
  both ill Nature and ill Manners too . 
Well may they boast themselves an ancient Nation , 
For they were bred ever Manners , were in fashion : 
And their new Common wealth has set 'em free , 
Only from Honour and Civility . 
Venetians do not more uncouthly ride , 
Than did their Lubber-state Mankind bestride . 
Their sway became 'em with as ill a Mien , 
As their own Paunches swell above their Chin : 
Yet is their Empire no true Growth but Humour , 
And only two King's Touch can cure the Tumour . 
As Cato did his Affricque Fruits display : 
So we before your Eyes their Indieses lay : 
All Loyal English will like him conclude , 
Let Caesar Live , and Carthage be subdued . 
FINIS . 

