LICENCED , 

April the 11th , 1687.  

THE HIND AND THE PANTHER . 

A POEM , 

In Three Parts . 

— Antiquam exquirite matrem . 
Et vera , incessu , patuit Dea. — 
Virg.  



LONDON , Printed for jacob Tonson , at the judge's Head in Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet , 1687.  

TO THE READER . 

THE Nation is in too high a Ferment , for me to expect either fair War , or even so much as fair Quarter from a Reader of the opposite Party . All Men are engaged either on this side or that : and though Conscience is the common Word , which is given by both , yet if a Writer fall among Enemies , and cannot give the Marks of Their Conscience , he is knocked down before the Reasons of his own are heard . A Preface , therefore , which is but a bespeaking of Favour , is altogether useless . What I desire the Reader should know concerning me , he will find in the Body of the Poem ; if he have but the patience to peruse it . Only this Advertisement let him take before hand , which relates to the Merits of the Cause . no general Characters of Parties , ( call 'em either Sects or Churches ) can be so fully and exactly drawn , as to Comprehend all the several Members of 'em ; at least all such as are received under that Denomination . For example ; there are some of the Church by Law Established , who envy not Liberty of Conscience to Dissenters ; as being well satisfied that , according to their own Principles , they ought not to persecute them . Yet these , by reason of their fewness , I could not distinguish from the Numbers of the rest with whom they are Embodied in one common Name : On the other side there are many of our Sects , and more indeed than I could reasovably have hoped , who have withdrawn themselves from the Communion of the Panther ; and embraced this Gracious Indulgence of His Majesty in point of Toleration . But neither to the one nor the other of these is this Satyr any way intended : 't is aimed only at the refractory and disobedient on either side . For those who are come over to the Royal Party are consequently supposed to be out of Gunshot . Our Physicians have observed , that in Process of Time , some Diseases have abated of their Virulence , and have in a manner worn out their Malignity , so as to be no longer Mortal : and why may not I suppose the same concerning some of those who have formerly been Enemies to Kingly Government , As well as Catholic Religion ? I hope they have now another Notion of both , as having found , by Comfortable Experience , that the Doctrine of Persecution is far from being an Article of our Faith.  

't is not for any Private Man to Censure the proceedings of a Foreign Prince : but , without suspicion of Flattery , I may praise our own , who has taken contrary Measures , and those more suitable to the Spirit of Christianity . Some of the Dissenters in their Addresses to His Majesty have said That he has restored God to his Empire over Conscience : I Confess I dare not stretch the Figure to so great a boldness : but I may safely say , that Conscience is the Royalty and Prerogative of every Private man He is absolute in his own Breast , and accountable to no Earthly Power , for that which passes only betwixt God and Him. Those who are driven into the Fold are , generally speaking , rather made Hypocrites then Converts . 

This Indulgence being granted to all the Sects , it ought in reason to be expected , that they should both receive it , and receive it thankfully . For at this time of day to refuse the Benefit , and adhere to those whom they have esteemed their Persecutors , what is it else , but publicly to own that they suffered not before for Conscience sake ; but only out of Pride and Obstinacy to separate from a Church for those Impositions , which they now judge may be lawfully obeyed ? After they have so long contended for their Classical Ordination , ( not to speak of Rites and Ceremonies ) will they at length submit to an Episcopal ? if they can go so far out of Complaisance to their old Enemies , methinks a little reason should persuade 'em to take another step , and see whether that would lead ' 'em . 

Of the receiving this Toleration thankfully , I shall say no more , than that they ought , and I doubt not they will consider from what hands they received it . 't is not from a Cyrus , a Heathen Prince , and a Foreigner , but from a Christian King , their Native Sovereign : who expects a Return in Specie from them ; that the Kindness which He has Graciously shown them , may be retaliated on those of his own persuasion . 

As for the Poem in general , I will only thus far satisfy the Reader : That it was neither imposed on me , nor so much as the Subject given me by any man It was written during the last Winter and the beginning of this Spring ; though with long interruptions of ill health , and other hindrances . About a Fortnight before I had finished it , His Majesty's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience came abroad : which , if I had so soon expected , I might have spared myself the labour of writing many things which are contained in the third , part of it . But I was always in some hope , that the Church of England might have been persuaded to have taken off the Penal Laws and the Test , which was one Design of the Poem when I proposed to myself the writing of it . 

't is evident that some part of it was only occasional , & not first intended . I mean that defence of myself , to which every honest man is bound , when he is injuriously attacked in Print : and I refer myself to the judgement of those who have read the Answer to the Defence of the late King's Papers , and that of the Duchess , ( in which last I was concerned ) how charitably I have been represented there . I am now informed both of the Author and Supervisers of his Pamphlet : and will reply when I think he can affronted me : for I am of Socrates' Opinion that all Creatures cannot . In the mean time let him consider , whether he deserved not a more severe reprehension than I gave him formerly ; for using so little respect to the Memory of those whom he pretended to answer : and , at his leisure look out for some Original Treatise of Humility , written by any Protestant in English , ( I believe I may say in any other Tongue : ) for the magnified Piece of Duncomb on that Subject , which either he must mean or none , and with which another of his Fellows has upbraided me , was Translated from the Spanish of Rodriguez : though with the Omission of the 17th , the 24th , the 25th , and the last Chapter , which will be found in comparing of the Books . 

He would have insinuated to the World that Her late Highness died not a Roman Catholic : He declares himself to be now satisfied to the contrary ; in which he has given up the Cause : for matter of Fact was the Principal Debate betwixt us . In the mean time he would dispute the Motives of her Change : how preposterously let all men judge , when he seemed to deny the Subject of the Controversy , the Change itself . And because I would not take up this ridiculous Challenge , he tells the World I cannot argue : but he may as well infer that a Catholic can not fast , because he will not take up the Cudgels against Mistress James , to confute the Protestant Religion . 

I have but one word more to say concerning the Poem as such , and abstracting from the Matters either Religious or Civil which are handled in it . The first part , consisting most in general Characters and Narration , I have endeavoured to raise , and give it the Majestic Turn of Heroic Poesy . The second , being Matter of Dispute , and chiefly concerning Church Authority , I was obliged to make as plain and perspicuous as possibly I could : yet not wholly neglecting the Numbers , though I had not frequent occasions for the Magnificence of Verse . The third , which has more of the Nature of Domestic Conversation , is , or aught to be more free and familiar than the two former . 

There are in it two Episodes , or Fables , which are interwoven with the main Design ; so that they are properly parts of it , though they are also distinct Stories of themselves . In both of these I have made use of the Common Places of Satyr , whether true or false , which are urged by the Members of the one Church against the other . At which I hope no Reader of either Party will be scandalised ; because they are not of my Invention : but as old , to my knowledge , as the Times of Boccace and Chawcer on the one side , and as those of the Reformation on the other . 

THE HIND AND THE PANTHER . 

A Milk white Hind , immortal and unchanged , 
Fed on the lawns , and in the forest ranged ; 
Without unspotted , innocent within , 
She feared no danger , for she knew no sin . 
Yet had she oft been chased with horns and hounds , 
And Scythian shafts ; and many winged wounds 
Aimed at Her heart ; was often forced to fly , 
And doomed to death , though fated not to die . 
Not so her young , for their unequal line 
Was Heroe's make , half human , half divine . 
Their earthly mould obnoxious was to fate , 
th' immortal part assumed immortal state . 
Of these a slaughtered army lay in blood , 
Extended over the Caledonian wood , 
Their native walk ; whose vocal blood arose , 
And cried for pardon on their perjured foes ; 
Their fate was fruitful , and the sanguine seed 
Endued with souls , increased the sacred breed . 
So Captive Israel multiplied in chains 
A numerous Exile , and enjoyed her pains . 
With grief and gladness mixed , their mother viewed 
Her martyred offspring , and their race renewed ; 
Their corpse to perish , but their kind to last , 
So much the deathless plant the dying fruit surpassed . 
Panting and pensive now she ranged alone , 
And wandered in the kingdoms , once Her own . 
The common Hunt , though from their rage restrained 
By sov'reign power , her company disdained : 
Grinned as They passed , and with a glaring eye 
Gave gloomy signs of secret enmity . 
't is true , she bounded by , and tripped so light 
They had not time to take a steady sight . 
For truth has such a face and such a mien 
As to be loved needs only to be seen . 
The bloody Bear an Independent beast , 
Unlicked to form , in groans her hate expressed . 
Among the timorous kind the Quaking Hare 
Professed neutrality , but would not swear . 
Next her the Buffoon Ape , as Atheists use , 
Mimicked all Sects , and had his own to choose : 
Still when the Lion looked , his knees he bend , 
And paid at Church a courtier 's Compliment . 
The bristled Baptist Boar , impure as He , 
( But whitned with the foam of sanctity ) 
With fat pollutions filled the sacred place , 
And mountains levelled in his furious race , 
So first rebellion founded was in grace . 
But since the mighty ravage which he made 
In Germane Forests , had his guilt betrayed , 
With broken tusks , and with a borrowed name 
He shunned the vengeance , and concealed the shame ; 
So lurked in Sects unseen . With greater guile 
False Reynard fed on consecrated spoil : 
The graceless beast by Athanasius first 
Was chased from Nice ; then by Socinus nursed 
His impious race their blasphemy renewed , 
And nature's King through nature's optics viewed . 
Reversed they viewed him lessened to their eye , 
Nor in an Infant could a God descry : 
New swarming Sects to this obliquely tend , 
Hence they began , and here they all will end . 
What weight of ancient witness can prevail 
If private reason hold the public scale ? 
But , gracious God , how well dost thou provide 
For erring judgements an unerring Guide ? 
Thy throne is darkness in th' abyss of light , 
A blaze of glory that forbids the sight ; 
OH teach me to believe Thee thus concealed , 
And search no farther than thyself revealed ; 
But her alone for my Director take 
Whom thou hast promised never to forsake ! 
My thoughtless youth was winged with vain desires , 
My manhood , long misled by wand'ring fires , 
Followed false lights ; and when their glimpse was gone , 
My pride struck out new sparkles of her own . 
Such was I , such by nature still I am , 
Be thine the glory , and be mine the shame . 
Good life be now my task : my doubts are done , 
( What more could fright my faith , than Three in One ? ) 
Can I believe eternal God could lie 
Disguised in mortal mould and infancy ? 
That the great maker of the world could die ? 
And after that , trust my imperfect sense 
Which calls in question his omnipotence ? 
Can I my reason to my faith compel , 
And shall my sight , and touch , and taste rebel ? 
Superior faculties are set aside , 
Shall their subservient organs be my guide ? 
then let the moon usurp the rule of day , 
And winking tapers show the sun his way ; 
For what my senses can themselves perceive 
I need no revelation to believe . 
Can they who say the Host should be descried 
By sense , define a body glorified ? 
Impassable , and penetrating parts ? 
Let them declare by what mysterious arts 
He shot that body through th' opposing might 
Of bolts and bars impervious to the light , 
And stood before his train confessed in open sight . 
For since thus wondrously he passed , 't is plain 
One single place two bodies did contain , 
And sure the same omnipotence as well 
Can make one body in more places dwell . 
Let reason then at Her own quarry fly , 
But how can finite grasp infinity ? 
't is urged again that faith did first commence 
By miracles , which are appeals to sense , 
And thence concluded that our sense must be 
The motive still of credibility . 
For latter ages must on former wait , 
And what began belief , must propagate . 
But winnow well this thought , and you shall find , 
't is light as chaff that fly's before the wind . 
Were all those wonders wrought by power divine 
As means or ends of some more deep design ? 
Most sure as means , whose end was this alone , 
To prove the godhead of th' eternal Son. 
God thus asserted : man is to believe 
Beyond what sense and reason can conceive . 
And for mysterious things of faith rely 
On the Proponent , heaven's authority . 
If then our faith we for our guide admit , 
Vain is the farther search of human wit , 
As when the building gains a surer stay , 
We take th' unuseful scaffolding away : 
Reason by sense no more can understand , 
The game is played into another hand . 
Why choose we then like Bilanders to creep 
Along the coast , and land in view to keep , 
When safely we may launch into the deep ? 
In the same vessel which our Saviour bore 
Himself the Pilot , let us leave the shore , 
And with a better guide a better world explore . 
could He his godhead veil with flesh and blood 
And not veil these again to be our food ? 
His grace in both is equal in extent , 
The first affords us life , the second nourishment . 
And if he can , why all this frantic pain 
To construe what his clearest words contain , 
And make a riddle what He made so plain ? 
To take up half on trust , and half to try , 
Name it not faith , but bungling biggottry . 
Both knave and fool the Merchant we may call 
To pay great sums , and to compound the small . 
For who would break with heaven , and would not break for all ? 
Rest then , my soul , from endless anguish freed ; 
Nor sciences thy guide , nor sense thy creed . 
Faith is the best ensurer of thy bliss ; 
The Bank above must fail before the venture miss . 
But heaven and heav'n-born faith are far from Thee 
thou first Apostate to Divinity . 
Unkenneled range in thy Polonian Plains ; 
A fiercer foe th' insatiate Wolf remains . 
Too boastful Britain please thyself no more , 
That beasts of prey are banished from thy shore : 
The Bear , the Boar , and every savage name , 
Wild in effect , though in appearance tame , 
Lay waste thy woods , destroy thy blissful bower , 
And muzzled though they seem , the mutes devour . 
more haughty than the rest the wolfish race , 
Appear with belly Gaunt , and famished face : 
Never was so deformed a beast of Grace . 
His ragged tail betwixt his legs he wears 
Close clapped for shame , but his rough crest he rears , 
And pricks up his predestinating ears . 
His wild disordered walk , his haggered eyes , 
Did all the bestial citizens surprise . 
Though feared and hated , yet he ruled awhile 
As Captain or Companion of the spoil . 
Full many a year his hateful head had been 
For tribute paid , nor since in Cambria seen : 
The last of all the litter scaped by chance , 
And from Geneva first infested France . 
Some authors thus his pedigree will trace , 
But others write him of an upstart race : 
Because of Wickliff's brood no mark he brings 
But his innate antipathy to kings . 
These last deduce him from th' Helvetian kind 
Who near the Leman lake his Consort lined . 
That fi'ry Zuynglius first th' affection bred , 
And meager Calvin blessed the nuptial bed . 
In Israel some believe him whelped long since 
When the proud Sanhedrim oppressed the Prince . 
Or , since he will be jew , derive him high'r 
When Corah with his brethren did conspire , 
From Moses' hand the sov'reign sway to wrist , 
And Aaron of his Ephod to divest : 
Till opening earth made way for all to pass , 
And could not bear the burd'n of a class . 
The Fox and he came shuffled in the dark , 
If ever they were stowed in Noah's ark : 
Perhaps not made ▪ for all their barking train 
The Dog ( a common species ) will contain . 
And some wild curs , who from their masters ran 
Abhorring the supremacy of man , 
In woods and caves the rebel-race began . 
OH happy pair , how well have you increased , 
What ills in Church and State have you redressed ! 
With teeth untried , and rudiments of claws 
Your first essay was on your native laws : 
Those having torn with ease , and trampled down 
Your Fangs you fastened on the mitred crown , 
And freed from God and monarchy your town . 
What though your native kennel still be small 
Bounded betwixt a puddle and a wall , 
Yet your victorious colonies are sent 
Where the north ocean girds the continent . 
Quickened with fire below your monsters breed , 
In Fenny Holland and in fruitful Tweed . 
And like the first the last affects to be 
Drawn to the dregss of a Democracy . 
As where in fields the fairy rounds are seen , 
A rank sour herbage rises on the green , 
So , springing where these midnight Elves advance , 
Rebellion prints the footsteps of the Dance . 
Such are their doctrines , such contempt they show 
To heaven above , and to their Prince below , 
As none but Traitors and Blasphemers know . 
God , like the Tyrant of the skies is placed , 
And kings like slaves beneath the crowd debased . 
So fulsome is their food , that flocks refuse 
To bite , and only dogs for physic use . 
As where the lightning runs along the ground , 
no husbandry can heal the blasting wound 
Nor bladed grass , nor bearded corn succeeds , 
But scales of scurf , and putrefaction breeds : 
Such wars , such waste , such fiery tracks of dearth 
Their zeal has left , and such a teemless earth . 
But as the Poisons of the deadliest kind ▪ 
Are to their own unhappy coasts confined , 
As only Indian shades of sight deprive , 
And magic plants will but in Colchos thrive , 
So Preby'try and pestilential zeal 
Can only flourish in a common-weal . 
From Celtique woods is chased the wolfish crew ; 
But ah ! some pity even to brutes is due : 
Their native walks , methinks , they might enjoy 
Curbed of their native malice to destroy . 
Of all the tyrannies on human kind 
The worst is that which persecutes the mind . 
Let us but weigh at what offence we strike , 
't is but because we cannot think alike . 
In punishing of this , we overthrew 
The laws of nations and of nature too . 
Beasts are the subjects of tyrannic sway , 
Where still the stronger on the weaker prey . 
Man only of a softer mould is made ; 
Not for his fellows ruin , but their aid . 
Created kind , beneficent and free , 
The noble image of the Deity . 
One portion of informing fire was given 
To Brutes , th' inferior family of heaven : 
The Smith divine , as with a careless beaten , 
Struck out the mute creation at a heat : 
But , when arrived at last to human race , 
The godhead took a deep considering space : 
And , to distinguish man from all the rest , 
Unlocked the sacred treasures of his breast : 
And mercy mixed with reason did impart ; 
One to his head , the other to his heart : 
Reason to rule , but mercy to forgive : 
The first is law , the last prerogative . 
And like his mind his outward form appeared ; 
When issuing naked , to the wondering herd● 
He charmed their eyes , & for they loved , they feared . 
Not armed with horns of arbitrary might , 
Or claws to seize their furry spoils in fight , 
Or with increase of feet t' o'ertake 'em in their flight . 
Of easy shape , and pliant every way ; 
Confessing still the softness of his clay , 
And kind as kings upon their coronation day : 
With open hands , and with extended space 
Of arms , to satisfy a large embrace . 
Thus kneaded up with milk , the new made man 
His kingdom over his kindred world began : 
Till knowledge misapplyed , misunderstood , 
And pride of Empire soured his balmy blood . 
then , first rebelling , his own stamp he coins ; 
The murderer Cain was latent in his loins , 
And blood began its first and loudest cry 
For differing worship of the Deity . 
Thus persecution rose , and farther space 
Produced the mighty hunter of his race . 
Not so the blessed Pan his flock increased , 
Content to sold 'em from the farnished beast : 
Mildred were his laws ; the Sheep and harmless Hind 
Were never of the persecuting kind . 
Such pity now the pious Pastor shows , 
Such mercy from the British Lion flows , 
That both provide protection for their foes . 
O happy Regions , Italy and Spain , 
Which never did those monsters entertain ! 
The Wolf , the Bear , the Boar , can there advance 
no native claim of just inheritance . 
And self-preserving laws , severe in show , 
May guard their fences from th' invading foe . 
Where birth has placed 'em let 'em safely share 
The common benefit of vital air . 
Themselves unharmfull , let them live unharmed ; 
Their jaws disabled , and their claws disarmed : 
Here , only in nocturnal howl bold , 
They dare not seize the Hind nor leap the fold . 
more powerful , and as vigilant as they , 
The Lion awfully forbids the prey . 
Their rage repressed , though pinched with famine sore , 
They stand aloof , and tremble at his roar ; 
Much is their hunger , but their fear is more . 
These are the chief ; to number over the rest , 
And stand , like Adam , naming every beast , 
Were weary work ; nor will the Muse describe 
A slimy-born and sun-begotten Tribe : 
Who , far from steeples and their sacred sound , 
In fields their sullen conventicles found : 
These gross , half-animated lumps I leave ; 
Nor can I think what thoughts they can conceive . 
But if they think at all , 't is sure no high'r 
Than matter , put in motion , may aspire . 
Souls that can scarce ferment their mass of clay ; 
So drossy , so divisible are They , 
As would but serve pure bodies for allay : 
Such souls as Shards produce , such beetle things 
As only buzz to heaven with evening wings ; 
Strike in the dark , offending but by chance , 
Such are the blindfold blows of ignorance . 
They know not beings , and but hate a name , 
To them the Hind and Panther are the same . 
The Panther sure the noblest , next the Hind , 
And fairest creature of the spotted kind ; 
O , could her inborn stains be washed away , 
She were too good to be a beast of Prey ! 
How can I praise , or blame , and not offend , 
Or how divide the frailty from the friend ! 
Her faults and virtues lie so mixed , that she 
Nor wholly stands condemned , nor wholly free . 
then , like her injured Lion , let me speak , 
He can not bend her , and he would not break . 
Unkind already , and estranged in part , 
The Wolf begins to share her wand'ring heart . 
Though unpolluted yet with actual ill , 
She half commits , who sin's but in Her william 
If , as our dreaming Platonists report , 
There could be spirits of a middle sort , 
Too black for heaven , and yet too white for hell , 
Who just dropped half way down , nor lower fell ; 
So poised , so gently she descends from high , 
It seems a soft dismission from the sky . 
Her house not ancient , whatsoever pretence 
Her clergy Heralds make in her defence . 
A second century not halfway run 
Since the new honours of her blood begun . 
A Lion old , obscene , and furious made 
By lust , compressed her mother in a shade . 
then , by a lefthand marr'age weds the Dame , 
Covering adult'ry with a specious name : 
So schism begot ; and sacrilege and she , 
A well-matched pair , got graceless heresy . 
God's and king's rebels have the same good cause , 
To trample down divine and human laws : 
Both would be called Reformers , and their hate , 
Alike destructive both to church and state : 
The fruit proclaims the plant ; a lawless Prince 
By luxury reformed incontinence , 
By ruins , charity ; by riots , abstinence . 
Confessions , fasts and penance set aside ; 
O with what ease we follow such a guide ! 
Where souls are starved , and senses gratified . 
Where marr'age pleasures , midnight prayer supply , 
And mattin bells ( a melancholy cry ) 
Are tuned to merrier notes , increase and multiply . 
Religion shows a Rosy coloured face ; 
Not hattered out with drudging works of grace , 
A downhill Reformation rolls apace . 
What flesh and blood would crowd the narrow gate` 
Or , till they waste their pampered paunches , wait ? 
All would be happy at the cheapest rate . 
Though our lean faith these rigid laws has given , 
The full fed Musulman goes fat to heaven ; 
For his Arabian Prophet with delights 
Of sense , allured his eastern Proselytes . 
The jolly Luther , reading him , began 
T' interpret Scriptures by his Alcoran ; 
To grub the thorns beneath our tender feet , 
And make the paths of Paradise more sweet : 
Bethought him of a wife ever half way gone , 
( For 't was uneasy travailing alone ; ) 
And in this masquerade of mirth and love , 
Mistake the bliss of heaven for Bacchanals above . 
Sure he presumed of praise , who came to stock 
th' etherial pastures with so fair a flock , 
Burnished , and bat'ning on their food , to show 
The diligence of careful herds below . 
Our Panther though like these she changed her head , 
Yet , as the mistress of a monarch's bed , 
Her front erect with majesty she bore , 
The Crozier wielded , and the Mitre wore . 
Her upper part of decent discipline 
Showed affectation of an ancient line : 
And fathers , councils , church and church's head , 
Were on her reverend Phylacteries read . 
But what disgraced and disavowed the rest , 
Was Calvin's brand , that stigmatised the beast . 
Thus , like a creature of a double kind , 
In her own labyrinth she life's confined . 
To foreign lands no sound of Her is come , 
Humbly content to be despised at home . 
Such is her faith , where good cannot be had , 
At least she leaves the refuse of the bad . 
Nice in her choice of ill , though not of best , 
And least deformed , because reformed the least . 
In doubtful points betwixt her differing friends , 
Where one for substance , one for sign contends , 
Their contradicting terms she strives to join , 
Sign shall be substance , substance shall be sign . 
A real presence all her sons allow , 
And yet 't is flat Idolatry to bow , 
Because the godhead's there they know not how . 
Her Novices are taught that bread and wine 
Are but the visible and outward sign 
Received by those who in communion join . 
But th' inward grace , or the thing signified , 
His blood and body , who to save us died ; 
The faithful this thing signified receive . 
What is 't those faithful then partake or leave ? 
For what is signified and understood , 
Is , by her own confession , flesh and blood . 
then , by the same acknowledgement , we know 
They take the sign , and take the substance too . 
The lit'ral sense is hard to flesh and blood , 
But nonsense never can be understood . 
Her wild belief on every wave is tossed , 
But sure no church can better morals boast . 
True to her king her principles are found ; 
O that her practice were but half so sound ! 
Steadfast in various turns of state she stood , 
And sealed her vowed affection with her blood ; 
Nor will I meanly tax her constancy , 
That interest or obligement made the tie , 
( bound to the fate of murdered Monarchy : ) 
( Before the ●ounding Axe so falls the Vine , 
Whose tender branches round the Poplar twine . ) 
She choose her ruin , and resigned her life , 
In death undaunted as an Indian wife : 
A rare example : but some souls we see 
Grow hard , and stiffen with adversity : 
Yet these by fortunes favours are undone , 
Resolved into a base form they run , 
And bore the wind , but cannot bear the sun . 
Let this be nature's frailty or her fate , 
Or Isgrim's counsel , her new chosen mate ; 
Still she 's the fairest of the fallen crew , 
no mother more indulgent but the true . 
Fierce to her foes , yet fears her force to try , 
Because she wants innate authority ; 
For how can she constrain them to obey 
Who has herself east off the lawful sway ? 
Rebellion equals all , and those who toil 
In common theft will share the common spoil 
Let her produce the title and the right 
Against her old superiors first to fight ; 
If she reform by Text , even that was plain 
For her own Rebels to reform again . 
As long as words a different sense will bear . 
And each may be his own Interpreter , 
Our ai'ry faith will no foundation find : 
The word 's a weathercock for every wind : 
The Bear , the Fox , the Wolf , by turns prevail , 
The most in power supplies the present gale . 
The wretched Panther cries aloud for aid 
To church and councils , whom she first betrayed ; 
no help from Fathers or traditions train , 
Those ancient guide's she taught us to disdain , 
And by that scripture which she once abused 
To Reformation , stands herself accused . 
What bills for breach of laws can she prefer , 
Expounding which she owns herself may err ? 
And , after all her winding ways are tried , 
If doubts arise she slips herself aside , 
And leaves the private conscience for the guide . 
If then that conscience set th' offender free , 
It bars her claim to church authority . 
How can she censure , or what crime pretend , 
But Scripture may be construed to defend ? 
Even those whom for rebellion she transmits' 
To civil power , her doctrine first acquits ; 
Because no disobedience can ensue , 
Where no submission to a Judge is due . 
Each judging for himself , by her consent , 
Whom thus absolved she sends to punishment . 
Suppose the Magistrate revenge her cause , 
't is only for transgressing human laws . 
How answ'ring to its end a church is made , 
Whose power is but to counsel and persuade ? 
OH solid rock , on which secure she stands ! 
Eternal house , not built with mortal hands ! 
OH sure defence against th' infernal gate , 
A patent during pleasure of the state ! 
Thus is the Panther neither loved nor feared , 
A mere mock Queen of a divided Herd ; 
Whom soon by lawful power she might control , 
Herself a part submitted to the whole . 
then , as the Moon who first receives the light 
By which she makes our nether regions bright , 
So might she shine , reflecting from afar 
The rays she borrowed from a better star : 
Big with the beams which from her mother flow 
And reigning over the rising tides below : 
Now , mixing with a savage crowd , she goes 
And meanly flatters her invet'rate foes . 
Ruled while she rules , and losing every hour 
Her wretched remnants of precarious power . 
One evening while the cooler shade she sought , 
Revolving many a melancholy thought , 
Alone she walked , and looked around in vain , 
With rueful visage for her vanished train : 
None of her sylvan subjects made their court ; 
Leveés and coucheés passed without resort . 
So hardly can Usurpers manage well 
Those , whom they first instructed to rebel : 
more liberty begets desire of more , 
The hunger still increases with the store . 
Without respect they brushed along the wood 
Each in his clan , and filled with loathsome food 
Asked no permission to the neighbouring flood . 
The Panther full of inward discontent 
Since they would go , before 'em wisely went : 
Supplying want of power by drinking first , 
As if she gave 'em leave to quench their thirst . 
Among the rest , the Hind , with fearful face 
Beheld from far the common watering place , 
Nor durst approach ; till with an awful roar 
The sovereign Lion bade her fear no more . 
Encouraged thus she brought her younglings nigh . 
Watching the motions of her patron 's eye , 
And drank a sober draught ; the rest amazed 
Stood mutely still , and on the stranger gazed : 
Surveyed her part by part , and sought to find 
The ten-horned monster in the harmless Hind , 
Such as the Wolf and Panther had designed . 
They thought at first they dreamed , for 't was offence 
With them , to question certitude of sense , 
Their guide in faith ; but nearer when they drew , 
And had the faultless object full in view , 
Lord , how they all admired her heavenly hue ! 
Some , who before her fellowship disdained , 
Scarce , and but scarce , from in born rage restrained , 
Now frisked about her , and old kindred feigned . 
Whether for love or interest , every sect 
Of all the savage nation showed respect : 
The Viceroy Panther could not awe the herd , 
The more the company the lesle they feared . 
The surly Wolf with secret envy burst , 
Yet could not howl , the Hind had seen him first : 
But what he durst not speak , the Panther durst . 
For when the herd sufficed did late repair 
To ferny heaths , and to their forest lare , 
She made a mannerly excuse to stay , 
Proff'ring the Hind to wait her half the way : 
That since the Sky was clear , an hour of talk , 
Might help her to beguile the tedious walk . 
With much goodwill the motion was embraced , 
To chat awhile on their adventures passed : 
Nor had the grateful Hind so soon forgot 
Her friend and fellow-suff'rer in the plot . 
Yet wondering how of late she grew estranged , 
Her forehead cloudy , and her countenance changed , 
She thought this hour th' occasion would present 
To learn her secret cause of discontent , 
Which , well she hoped , might be with ease redressed , 
Considering Her a well-bred civil beast , 
And more a Gentlewoman than the rest . 
After some common talk what rumours ran , 
The Lady of the spotted-muff began . 
THE HIND AND THE PANTHER . The Second Part.  

DAME , said the Panther , times are mended well 
Since late among the Philistines you fell , 
The toils were piched , a spacious tract of ground 
With expert huntsmen was encompassed round ; 
th' Enclosure narrowed ; the sagacious power 
Of hounds and death , drew nearer every hour . 
't is true , the younger Lion scaped the snare , 
But all your priestly calves lay struggling there ; 
As sacrifices on their Altars laid ; 
While you their careful mother wisely fled 
Not trusting destiny to save your head . 
For , what ever promises you have applied 
To your unfailing church , the surer side 
Is four fair legs in danger to provide . 
And what ever tales of Peter's chair you tell , 
Yet , saving reverence of the miracle , 
The better luck was yours to escape so well . 
As I remember , said the sober Hind , 
Those toils were for your own dear self designed , 
As well as me ; and , with the self same throw , 
To catch the quarry , and the vermin too , 
( Forgive the slanderous tongues that called you so . ) 
How ever you take it now , the common cry 
then ran you down for your rank loyalty ; 
Besides , in Popery they thought you nursed , 
( As evil tongues will ever speak the worst , ) 
Because some forms , and ceremonies some 
You kept , and stood in the main question dumb . 
Dumb you were born indeed , but thinking long 
The Test it seems at last has loosed your tongue . 
And , to explain what your forefathers meant , 
By real presence in the sacrament , 
( After long fencing pushed , against a wall , ) 
Your salvo comes , that he 's not there at all : 
There changed your faith , and what may change may fall . 
Who can believe what varies every day , 
Nor ever was , nor will be at a stay ? 
Tortures may force the tongue untruths to tell , 
And I never owned myself infallible , 
Replied the Panther ; grant such Presence were , 
Yet in your sense I never owned it there . 
A real virtue we by faith receive , 
And that we in the sacrament believe . 
then said the Hind , as you the matter state 
Not only jesuits can equivocate ; 
For real , as you now the word expound , 
From solid substance dwindles to a sound . 
Methinks an Aesop's fable you repeat , 
You know who took the shadow for the meat : 
Your church's substance thus you change at will , 
And yet retain your former figure still . 
I freely grant you spoke to save your life , 
For than you lay beneath the butchers ' knife . 
Long time you fought , redoubled battery bore , 
But , after all , against yourself you swore ; 
Your former self , for every hour your form 
Is chopped and changed , like winds before a storm . 
Thus fear and interest will prevail with some , 
For all have not the gift of martyrdom . 
The Panther grinned at this , and thus replied ; 
That men may err was never yet denied . 
But , if that common principle be true , 
The Cannon , Dame , is levelled full at you . 
But , shunning long disputes , I fain would see 
That wondrous wight infallibility . 
Is he from heaven this mighty champion come , 
Or lodged below in subterranean Rome ? 
First , seat him somewhere , and derive his race , 
Or else conclude that nothing has no place . 
Suppose ( though I disown it ) said the Hind , 
The certain mansion were not yet assigned , 
The doubtful residence no proof can bring 
Against the plain existence of the thing . 
Because Philosophers may disagree , 
If sight b'emission or reception be , 
Shall it be thence inferred , I do not see ? 
But you require an answer positive , 
Which yet , when I demand , you dare not give , 
For fallacies in Universals live . 
I then affirm that this unfailing guide 
In Pope and general councils must reside ; 
Both lawful , both combined , what one decrees 
By numerous votes , the other ratifies : 
On this undoubted sense the church relies . 
't is true , some Doctors in a scantier space , 
I mean in each apart contract the place . 
Some , who to greater length extend the line , 
The churches after acceptation join . 
This last circumference appears too wide , 
The church diffused is by the council tied ; 
As members by their representatives 
Obliged to laws which Prince and Senate gives : 
Thus some contract , and some enlarge the space ; 
In Pope and council who denies the place , 
Assisted from above with God's unfailing grace ? 
Those Canons all the needful points contain ; 
Their sense so obvious , and their words so plain , 
That no disputes about the doubtful Text 
Have , hitherto , the labouring world perplexed : 
If any should in after times appear , 
New Councils must be called , to make the meaning clear . 
Because in them the power supreme resides ; 
And all the promises are to the guides . 
This may be taught with sound and safe defence : 
But mark how sandy is your own pretence , 
Who setting Councils , Pope , and Church aside , 
Are every man his own presuming guide . 
The sacred books , you say , are full and plain , 
And every needful point of truth contain : 
All who can read , Interpreters may be : 
Thus though your several churches disagree , 
Yet every Saint has to himself alone 
The secret of this Philosophic stone . 
These principles your jarring sects unite , 
When differing Doctors and disciples fight . 
Though Luther , Zuinglius , Calvin , holy chiefs 
Have made a battle Royal of beliefs ; 
Or like wild horses several ways have whirled 
The tortured Text about the christian World ; 
Each jehu lashing on with furious force , 
That Turk or jew could not have used it worse . 
no matter what dissension leaders make 
Where every private man may save a stake , 
Ruled by the Scripture and his own advice 
Each has a blind by-path to Paradise ; 
Where driving in a circle flow or fast , 
Opposing sects are sure to meet at last . 
A wondrous charity you have in store 
For all reformed to pass the narrow door : 
So much , that Mahomet had scarcely more . 
For he , kind Prophet , was for damning none , 
But Christ and Moses were to save their own : 
Himself was to secure his chosen race , 
Though reason good for Turks to take the place , 
And he allowed to be the better man 
In virtue of his holier Alcoran . 
True , said the Panther , I shall never deny 
My breth'rens may be saved as well as I : 
Though Huguenots contemn our ordination , 
Succession , ministerial vocation , 
And Luther , more mistaking what he read , 
Misjoins the sacred Body with the Bread ; 
Yet , Lady , still remember I maintain , 
The Word in needful points is only plain . 
Needless or needful I not now contend , 
For still you have a loophole for a friend , 
( Rejoined the Matron ) but the rule you lay 
Has led whole flocks , and leads them still astray 
In weighty points , and full damnation's way . 
For did not Arius first , Socinus now , 
The son 's eternal godhead disavow , 
And did not these by Gospel Texts alone 
Condemn our doctrine , and maintain their own ? 
Have not all heretics the same pretence 
To pled the Scriptures in their own defence ? 
How did the Nicene council then decide 
That strong debate , was it by Scripture tried ? 
no , sure to those the Rebel would not yield , 
Squadrons of Texts he marshaled in the field ; 
That was but civil war , an equal set , 
Where Piles with piles , and eagles Eagles met . 
With Texts point-blank and plain he faced the Foe ▪ 
And did not Satan tempt our Saviour so ? 
The good old Bishops took a simpler way , 
Each asked but what he heard his Father say , 
Or how he was instructed in his youth , 
And by traditions force upheld the truth . 
The Panther smiled at this , and when , said she , 
Were those first Councils disallowed by me ? 
Or where did I at sure tradition strike , 
Provided still it were Apostolic ? 
Friend , said the Hind , you quit your former ground , 
Where all your Faith you did on Scripture found ; 
Now 't is tradition joined with holy writ , 
But thus your memory betrays your wit.  
no , said the Panther , for in that I view , 
When your tradition's forged , and when 't is true . 
I set 'em by the rule , and as they square 
Or deviate from undoubted doctrine there 
This Oral fiction , that old Faith declare . 
( Hind . ) The Council steered it seems a different course , 
They tried the Scripture by tradition's force ; 
But you tradition by the Scripture try ; 
Pursued , by Sects , from this to that you fly , 
Nor dare on one foundation to rely . 
The word is then deposed , and in this view , 
You rule the Scripture , not the Scripture you . 
Thus said the Dame , and , smiling , thus pursued , 
I see tradition then is disallowed , 
When not evinced by Scripture to be true , 
And Scripture , as interpreted by you . 
But here you tread upon unfaithful ground ; 
Unless you could infallibly expound . 
Which you reject as odious Popery , 
And throw that doctrine back with scorn on me . 
Suppose we on things traditive divide , 
And both appeal to Scripture to decide ; 
By various texts we both uphold our claim , 
Nay , often ground our titles on the same : 
After long labour lost , and times expense , 
Both grant the words , and quarrel for the sense . 
Thus all disputes for ever must depend ; 
For no dumb rule can controversies end . 
Thus when you said tradition must be tried 
By Sacred Writ , whose sense yourselves decide , 
You said no more , but that yourselves must be 
The judges of the Scripture sense , not we . 
Against our church tradition you declare 
And yet your Clerks would sit in Moyse's chair : 
At lest 't is proved against your argument , 
The rule is far from plain , where all dissent . 
If not by Scriptures how can we be sure 
( Replied the Panther ) what tradition's pure ? 
For you may palm upon us new for old , 
All , as they say , that glitters is not gold . 
How but by following her , replied the Dame , 
To whom derived from sire to son they came ; 
Where every age does on another move , 
And trusts no farther than the next above ; 
Where all the rounds like Iacob's ladder rise , 
The lowest hid in earth , the topmost in the skies . 
Sternly the savage did her answer mark , 
Her glowing eye ' balls glitt'ring in the dark , 
And said but this , since lucre was your trade , 
Succeeding times such dreadful gaps have made 
't is dangerous climbing : to your sons and you 
I leave the ladder , and its omen too . 
( Hind . ) The Panther's breath was ever famed for sweet , 
But from the Wolf such wishes oft I meet : 
You learned this language from the blatant beast , 
Or rather did not speak , but were possessed . 
As for your answer 't is but barely urged ; 
You must evince tradition to be forged ; 
Produce plain proofs ; unblemished authors use 
As ancient as those ages they accuse ; 
Till when 't is not sufficient to defame : 
An old possession stands , till Elder quits the claim . 
then for our interest which is named alone 
To load with envy , we retort your own . 
For when traditions in your faces fly , 
Resolving not to yield , you must decry : 
As when the cause goes hard , the guilty man 
Excepts , and thins his jury all he can ; 
So when you stand of other aid bereft , 
You to the twelve Apostles would be left . 
Your friend the Wolf did with more craft provide 
To set those toys traditions quite aside : 
And Fathers too , unless when reason spent 
He cites 'em but sometimes for ornament . 
But , Madam Panther , you , though more sincere , 
Are not so wise as your Adulterer : 
The private spirit is a better blind 
Than all the dodging tricks your authors find . 
For they , who left the Scripture to the crowd , 
Each for his own peculiar judge allowed ; 
The way to please 'em was to make 'em proud . 
Thus : with full sails , they ran upon the shelf , 
Who could suspect a cozenage from himself ? 
On his own reason safer 't is to stand , 
Than be deceived and damned at second hand . 
But you who Fathers and traditions take , 
And garble some , and some you quite forsake , 
Pretending church authority to fix , 
And yet some grains of private spirit mix , 
Are like a Mule made up of differing seed , 
And that 's the reason why you never breed ; 
At least not propagate your kind abroad , 
For home-dissenters are by statutes awed . 
And yet they grow upon you every day , 
While you ( to speak the best ) are at a stay , 
For sects that are extremes , abhor a middle way . 
Like tricks of state , to stop a raging flood , 
Or mollify a madbrained Senate's mood : 
Of all expedients never one was good . 
Well may they argue , ( nor can you deny ) 
If we must fix on church authority , 
Best on the best , the fountain , not the flood , 
That must be better still , if this be good . 
Shall she command , who has herself rebelled ? 
Is Antichrist by Antichrist expelled ? 
Did we a lawful tyranny displace , 
To set aloft a bastard of the race ? 
Why all these wars to win the Book , if we 
Must not interpret for ourselves , but she ? 
Either be wholly slaves or wholly free . 
For purging fires traditions must not fight ; 
But they must prove Episcopacy's right : 
Thus those led horses are from service freed ; 
You never mount 'em but in time of need . 
Like mercenary's , hired for home defence , 
They will not serve against their native Prince . 
Against domestic foes of Hierarchy 
These are drawn forth , to make fanatics fly , 
But , when they see their countrymen at hand , 
Marching against 'em under church-command , 
Strait they forsake their colours , and disband . 
Thus she , nor could the Panther well enlarge 
With weak defence against so strong a charge ; 
But said , for what did Christ his Word provide , 
If still his church must want a living guide ? 
And if all saving doctrines are not there , 
Or sacred Penmen could not make 'em clear , 
From after ages we should hope in vain 
For truths , which men inspired , could not explain . 
Before the Word was written , said the Hind : 
Our Saviour preached his Faith to human kind , 
From his Apostles the first age received 
Eternal truth , and what they taught , believed . 
Thus by tradition faith was planted first , 
Succeeding flocks succeeding Pastors nursed . 
This was the way our wise Redeemer choose , 
( Who sure could all things for the best dispose , ) 
To fence his sold from their encroaching foes . 
He could have written himself , but well foresaw 
th' event would be like that of Moses' law ; 
Some difference would arise , some doubts remain , 
Like those , which yet the jarring jews maintain . 
no written laws can be so plain , so pure , 
But wit may gloss , and malice may obscure , 
Not those indicted by his first command , 
A Prophet graved the text , an Angel held his hand . 
Thus faith was ever the written word appeared , 
And men believed , not what they read , but heard . 
But since th' Apostles could not be confined , 
To these , or those , but severally designed 
Their large commission round the world to blow ; 
To spread their faith they spread their labours too . 
Yet still their absent flock their pains did share , 
They harkened still , for love produces care . 
And as mistakes arose , or discords fell , 
Or bold seducers taught 'em to rebel , 
As charity grew cold , or faction hot , 
Or long neglect , their lessons had forgot , 
For all their wants they wisely did provide , 
And preaching by Epistles was supplied : 
So great Physicians cannot all attend , 
But some they visit , and to some they send . 
Yet all those letters were not written to all ; 
Nor first intended , but occasional . 
Their absent sermons , nor if they contain 
All needful doctrines , are those doctrines plain . 
Clearness by frequent preaching must be wrought , 
They written but seldom , but they daily taught . 
And what one Saint has said of holy Paul , 
He darkly written , is true applied to all . 
For this obscurity could heaven provide 
more prudently than by a living guide , 
As doubts arose , the difference to decide ? 
A guide was therefore needful , therefore made , 
And , if appointed , sure to be obeyed . 
Thus , with due rev'rence , to th' Apostles written , 
By which my sons are taught , to which , submit ; 
I think , those truths their sacred works contain , 
The church alone can certainly explain , 
That following ages , leaning on the past , 
May rest upon the Primitive at last . 
Nor would I thence the word no rule infer , 
But none without the church interpreter . 
Because , as I have urged before , 't is mute , 
And is itself the subject of dispute . 
But what th' Apostles their successors taught , 
They to the next , from them to us is brought , 
th' undoubted sense which is in scripture sought . 
From hence the church is armed ▪ when errors rise , 
To stop their entrance , and prevent surprise ; 
And safe entrenched within , her foes without defies . 
By these all festering sores her councils heal , 
Which time or has disclosed , or shall reveal , 
For discord cannot end without a last appeal . 
Nor can a council national decide 
But with subordination to her Guide : 
( I wish the cause were on that issue tried . ) 
Much lesle the scripture ; for suppose debate 
Betwixt pretenders to a fair estate , 
Bequeathed by some Legator's last intent ; 
( Such is our dying Saviour's Testament : ) 
The will is proved , is opened , and is read ; 
The doubtful heirs their differing titles pled : 
All vouch the words their interest to maintain , 
And each pretends by those his cause is plain . 
Shall then the testament award the right ▪ 
no , that 's the Hungary for which they fight ; 
The field of battle , subject of debate , 
The thing contended for , the fair estate . 
The sense is intricate , 't is only clear 
What vowels and what consonants are there . 
Therefore 't is plain , its meaning must be tried 
Before some judge appointed to decide . 
Suppose , ( the fair Apostate said , ) I grant , 
The faithful flock some living guide should want , 
Your arguments an endless chase pursue : 
Produce this vaunted Leader to our view , 
This mighty Moses of the chosen crew . 
The Dame , who saw her fainting foe retired , 
With force renewed , to victory aspired ; 
( And looking upward to her kindred sky , 
As once our Saviour owned his Deity , 
Pronounced his words — she whom ye seek am I ) 
Nor lesle amazed this voice the Panther heard , 
Than were those jews to hear a god declared . 
then thus the matron modesty renewed , 
Let all your prophets and their sects be viewed , 
And see to which of 'em yourselves think fit 
The conduct of your conscience to submit : 
Each Proselyte would vote his Doctor best , 
With absolute exclusion to the rest : 
Thus would your Polish Diet disagree , 
And end as it began in Anarchy : 
Yourself the fairest for election stand , 
Because you seem crown-gen'ral of the land , 
But soon against your superstitious lawn 
Some Presbyterian Sabre would be drawn : 
In your established laws of sovereignty 
The rest some fundamental flaw would see , 
And call Rebellion gospel-liberty . 
To church-decrees your articles require 
Submission modified , if not entire ; 
Homage denied , to censures you proceed ; 
But when Curtana will not do the deed , 
You lay that pointless clergy-weapon by , 
And to the laws , your sword of justice , fly . 
Now this your sects the more unkindly take 
( Those prying varlets hit the blots you make ) 
Because some ancient friends of yours declare , 
Your only rule of faith the Scriptures are , 
Interpreted by men of judgement sound , 
Which every sect will for themselves expound : 
Nor think lesle rev'rence to their doctors due 
For sound interpretation , than to you . 
If then , by able heads , are understood 
Your brother prophets , who reformed abroad , 
Those able heads expound a wiser way , 
That their own sheep their shepherd should obey . 
But if you mean yourselves are only sound , 
That doctrine turns the reformation round , 
And all the rest are false reformers found . 
Because in sundry points you stand alone , 
Not in communion joined with any one ; 
And therefore must be all the church , or none . 
then , till you have agreed whose judge is best , 
Against this forced submission they protest : 
While sound and sound a different sense explains 
Both play at hard-head till they break their brains : 
And from their chairs each others force defy , 
While unregarded thunders vainly fly . 
I pass the rest , because your church alone 
Of all usurpers best could fill the throne . 
But neither you , nor any sect beside 
For this high office can be qualified , 
With necessary gifts required in such a guide . 
For that which must direct the whole , must be 
bound in one bond of faith and unity : 
But all your several churches disagree . 
The Consubstantiating church and Priest 
Refuse communion to the Calvinist ; 
The French reformed , from preaching you restrain , 
Because you judge their ordination vain ; 
And so they judge of yours , but Donors must ordain . 
In short , in doctrine , or in discipline 
Not one reformed can with another join : 
But all from each , as from damnation fly ; 
no union , they pretend , but in Non-popery . 
Nor should their members in a synod meet ; 
Could any church presume to mount the seat 
Above the rest , their discords to decide ; 
None would obey , but each would be the guide : 
And face to face dissensions would increase ; 
For only distance now preserves the peace ▪ 
All in their turns accusers , and accused : 
Babel was never half so much confused 
What one can pled , the rest can pled as well ; 
For amongst equals lies no last appeal ▪ 
And all confess themselves are fallible . 
Now since you grant some necessary guide , 
All who can err are justly laid aside : 
Because a trust so sacred to confer 
Shows want of such a sure interpreter : 
And how can he be needful who can err ▪ 
then , granting that unerring guide we want , 
That such there is you stand obliged to grant : 
Our Saviour else were wanting to supply 
Our needs , and obviate that necessity . 
It than remains that church can only be 
The guide , which owns unfailing certainty ; 
Or else you slip your hold , and change your side , 
Relapsing from a necessary guide . 
But this annexed condition of the crown , 
Immunity from errors , you disown . 
Here than you shrink , & lay your weak pretensions down . 
For petty royalties you raise debate ; 
But this unfailing universal state 
You eat ; nor dare succeed to such a glorious weight . 
And for that cause those promises detest 
With which our Saviour did his Church invest : 
But strive t'evade , and fear to find 'em true , 
As conscious they were never meant to you : 
All which the mother church asserts her own , 
And with unrivalled claim ascends the throne . 
So when of old th' Almighty father sat 
In Council , to redeem our ruined state , 
Million of million at a distance round , 
Silent the sacred Consistory crowned , 
To hear what mercy mixed with justice could propound . 
All prompt with eager pity , to fulfil 
The full extent of their Creatour's will : 
But when the stern conditions were declared , 
A mournful whisper through the host was heard , 
And the whole hierarchy with heads hung down 
Submissively declined the ponderous proffered crown . 
then , not till then , th' eternal Son from high 
Rose in the strength of all the Deity ; 
Stood forth to accept the terms , and underwent 
A weight which all the frame of heaven had bend ▪ 
Nor he Himself could bear , but as omnipotent . 
Now , to remove the least remaining doubt , 
That even the blear-eyed sects may find her out , 
Behold what heavenly rays adorn her brows , 
What from his Wardrobe her beloved allows 
To deck the wedding-day of his unspotted spouse . 
Behold what marks of majesty she brings ; 
Richer than ancient heirs of Eastern kings : 
Her right hand holds the sceptre and the keys , 
To show whom she commands , and who obeys : 
With these to bind , or set the sinner free 
With that to assert spiritual Royalty . 
One in herself not rend by schism , but sound , 
Entire , one solid shining Diamond , 
Not sparkles shattered into sects like you , 
One is the church , and must be to be true : 
One central principle of unity . 
As undivided so from errors free , 
As one in faith , so one in sanctity . 
Thus she , and none but she , th' insulting rage 
Of Heretics opposed from age to age : 
Still when the Gyant-brood invades her throne 
She stoops from heaven , and meets 'em half way down , 
And with paternal thunder vindicates her crown . 
But like Egyptian Sorcerers you stand , 
And vainly lift aloft your magic wand , 
To sweep away the swarms of vermin from the land : 
You could like them , with like infernal force 
Produce the plague , but not arrest the course . 
But when the boils and botches , with disgrace 
And public scandal sat upon the face , 
Themselves attacked , the Magi. striven no more , 
They saw God's finger , and their fate deplore ; 
Themselves they could not cure of the dishonest sore . 
Thus one , thus pure , behold her largely spread 
Like the fair ocean from her mother bed ; 
From East to West triumphantly she rides , 
All shores are watered by her wealth Tides . 
The Golspel's-sound diffused from Pole to Pole , 
Where winds can carry , and where waves can roll . 
The self same doctrine of the Sacred page 
Conveyed to every clime in every age . 
Here let my sorrow give my satyr place , 
To raise new blushes on my British race ; 
Our sailing ships like common shores we use , 
And through our distant colonies diffuse 
The draughts of Dungeons , and the stench of stews . 
Whom , when their homebred honesty is lost , 
We disembogue on some far Indian coast : 
Thiefs , Panders , Palliards , sins of every sort , 
Those are the manufactures we export ; 
And these the Missionaires our zeal has made : 
For , with my country's pardon be it said , 
Religion is the least of all our trade . 
Yet some improve their traffic more than we , 
For they on gain , their only God , rely ; 
And set a public price on piety . 
Industrious of the needle and the chart 
They run full sail to their japponian Mart : 
Prevention fear , and prodigal of fame 
sell all of Christian to the very name : 
Nor leave enough of that to hide their naked shame . 
Thus , of three marks which in the Creed we view , 
Not one of all can be applied to you : 
Much lesle the fourth ; in vain alas you seek 
th' ambitious title of Apostolic : 
Godlike descent ! 't is well your blood can be 
Proved noble , in the third or fourth degree : 
For all of ancient that you had before 
( I mean what is not borrowed from our store ) 
Was Error fulminated over and over . 
Old Heresies condemned in ages past , 
By care and time recovered from the blast . 
't is said with ease , but never can be proved , 
The church her old foundations has removed , 
And built new doctrines on unstable sands : 
Judge that ye winds and reinss ; you proved her , yet she stands . 
Those ancient doctrines charged on her for new , 
Show when , and how , and from what hands they grew . 
We claim no power when Heresies grow bold 
To coin new faith , but still declare the old . 
How else could that obscene disease be purged 
When controverted texts are vainly urged ? 
To prove tradition new , there 's somewhat more 
Required , than saying , 't was not used before . 
Those monumental arms are never stirred 
Till Schism or Heresy call down Goliah's sword . 
Thus , what you call corruptions , are in truth , 
The first plantations of the gospel's youth , 
Old standard faith : but cast your eyes again 
And view those errors which new sects maintain 
Or which of old disturbed the churches peaceful reign , 
And we can point each period of the time , 
When they began , and who begot the crime ; 
Can calculate how long th' eclipse endured , 
Who interposed , what digits were obscured : 
Of all which are already passed away , 
We know the rise , the progress and decay . 
Despair at our foundations then to strike ▪ 
Till you can prove your faith Apostolic ; 
A limpid stream drawn from the native source ; 
Succession lawful in a lineal course . 
Prove any church opposed to this our head , 
So one , so pure , so unconfin'dly spread , 
Under one chief of the spiritual state , 
The members all combined , and all subordinate . 
Show such a seamless coat , from schism so free , 
In no communion joined with heresy : 
If such a one you find , let truth prevail : 
Till when your weights will in the balance fail : 
A church unprincipled kicks up the scale . 
But if you cannot think , ( nor sure you can ) 
Suppose in God what were unjust in man , 
That he , the fountain of eternal grace , 
Should suffer falsehood for so long a space 
To banish truth , and to usurp her place : 
That nine successive ages should be lost 
And preach damnation at their proper cost ; 
That all your erring ancestors should die , 
Drowned in th' Abyss of deep Idolatry ; 
If piety forbid such thoughts to rise , 
Awake and open your unwilling eyes : 
God has left nothing for each age undone 
From this to that wherein he sent his Son : 
then think but well of him , and half your work is done . 
See how his church adorned with every grace 
With open arms , a kind forgiving face , 
Stands ready to prevent her long lost sons embrace . 
Not more did joseph over his brethren weep , 
Nor lesle himself could from discovery keep , 
When in the crowd of suppliants they were seen , 
And in their crew his best beloved Benjamin . 
That pious joseph in the church behold , 
To feed your famine , and refuse your gold ; 
The joseph you exiled , the joseph whom you sold.  
Thus , while with heavenly charity she spoke , 
A streaming blaze the silent shadows broke : 
Shot from the skies a cheerful azure light ; 
The birds obscene to forests winged their flight , 
And gaping groves received the wand'ring guilty spirit . 
Such were the pleasing triumphs of the sky 
For james his late nocturnal victory ; 
The pledge of his Almighty patron's love , 
The fireworks which his angel made above . 
I saw myself the lambent easy light 
Gild the brown horror and dispel the night ; 
The messenger with speed the tidings bore ; 
News which three labouring nations did restore , 
But heavens own Nuntius was arrived before . 
By this , the Hind had reached her lonely cell ; 
And vapours rose , and dews unwholesome fell . 
When she , by frequent observation wise , 
As one who long on heaven had fixed her eyes , 
Discerned a change of weather in the skies . 
The Western borders were with crimson spread , 
The moon descending look looked all flaming red , 
She thought good manners bound her to invite 
The stranger Dame to be her guest that night . 
't is true , course dye● and a mort repast , 
( She said ) were weak inducements to the ●ast 
Of one so nicely bred , and so unused to fast . 
But what plain fare her cottage could afford , 
A hearty welcome at a homely board 
Was freely hers ; and , to supply the rest , 
An honest meaning and an open breast ▪ 
Last , with content of mind , the poorman's Wealth ; 
A grace-cup to their common patron 's health ▪ 
This she desired her to accept and stay , 
For fear she might be wildered in her way , 
Because she wanted an unerring guide ; 
And then the due drops on her silken hide 
Her tender constitution did declare , 
Too Ladylike a long fatigue to bear ▪ 
And rough inclemencies of raw nocturnal air . 
But most she feared that travelling so late 
Some evil minded beasts might lie in wait ▪ 
And without witness wreak their hidden hate ▪ 
The Panther , though she lent a listening ear , 
Had more of Lion in her than to fear : 
Yet wisely weighing , since she had to deal 
With many foes , their numbers might prevail , 
Returned her all the thanks she could afford ; 
And took her friendly hostess at her word . 
Who entering first her lowly roof , ( a shed 
With hoary moss and winding Ivy spread , 
Honest enough to hide an humble Hermit's head , 
Thus graciously bespoke her welcome guest : 
So might these walls , with your fair presence blessed 
Become your dwelling-place of everlasting rest , 
Not for a night , or quick revolving year , 
Welcome an owner , not a sojourner . 
This peaceful Seat my poverty secures , 
War seldom enters but where wealth allures ; 
Nor yet despise it , for this poor abode 
Has oft received , and yet receives a god ; 
A god victorious of the stygian race 
Here laid his sacred limbs , and sanctified the place . 
This mean retreat did mighty Pan contain ; 
Be emulous of him , and pomp disdain , 
And dare not to debase your soul to gain . 
The silent stranger stood amazed to see 
Contempt of wealth , and wilful poverty : 
And , though ill habits are not soon controlled , 
A while suspended her desire of gold . 
But civility drew in her sharpened paws ▪ 
Not violating hospitable laws . 
And pacified her tail , and licked her frothy jaws . 
The Hind did first her country ●ates provide ; 
then couched herself securely by her side . 
THE HIND AND THE PANTHER . The Third Part.  

MUCH malice mingled with a little wit 
Perhaps may censure this mysterious writ , 
Because the Muse has peopled Caledon 
With Panthers , Bears , and Wolves , and Beasts unkown , 
As if we were not stocked with monsters of our own . 
Let Aesop answer , who has set to view , 
Such kinds as Greece and Phrygia never knew ; 
And mother Hubbard in her homely dress 
Has sharply blamed a British Lioness , 
That Queen , whose feast the factious rabble keep , 
Exposed obscenely naked and asleep . 
Led by those great examples , may not I 
The wanted organs of their words supply ? 
If men transact like brutes 't is equal then 
For brutes to claim the privilege of men . 
others our Hind of folly will indite , 
To entertain a dangerous guest by night . 
Let those remember that she cannot die 
Till rolling time is lost in round eternity ; 
Nor need she fear the Panther , though untamed , 
Because the Lion's peace was now proclaimed , 
The wary savage would not give offence , 
To forfeit the protection of her Prince ; 
But watched the time her vengeance to complete , 
When all her furry sons in frequent Senate met . 
Mean while she quenched her fury at the flood , 
And with a Lenten salad cooled her blood . 
Their commons , though but course , were nothing scant , 
Nor did their minds an equal banquet want . 
For now the Hind , whose noble nature striven 
T' express her plain simplicity of love , 
Did all the honours of her house so well , 
no sharp debates disturbed the friendly meal . 
She turned the talk , avoiding that extreme , 
To common dangers past , a sadly pleasing theme ; 
Remembering every storm which tossed the state , 
When both were objects of the public hate , 
And dropped a tear betwixt for her own children's fate . 
Nor failed she then a full review to make 
Of what the Panther suffered for her sake . 
Her lost esteem , her truth , her loyal care , 
Her faith unshaken to an exiled Heir , 
Her strength to endure , her courage to defy ; 
Her choice of honourable infamy . 
On these prolixly thankful , she enlarged , 
then with acknowledgements herself she charged : 
For friendship of itself , an holy tie , 
Is made more sacred by adversity . 
Now should they part , malicious tongues would say , 
They met like chance companions on the way , 
Whom mutual fear of robbers had possessed ; 
While danger lasted , kindness was professed ; 
But that once over , the short lived union ends : 
The road divides , and there divide the friends . 
The Panther nodded when her speech was done , 
And thanked her coldly in a hollow tone . 
But said her gratitude had gone too far 
For common offices of Christian care . 
If to the lawful Heir she had been true , 
She paid but Caesar what was Caesar's due . 
I might , she added , with like praise describe 
Your suffering sons , and so return your bribe ; 
But incense from my hands is poorly prized , 
For gifts are scorned where givers are despised . 
I served a turn , and then was cast away ; 
You , like the gaudy fly , your wings display , 
And sip the sweets , and bask in your Great Patron 's day . 
This heard , the Matron was not slow to find 
What sort of malady had seized her mind ; 
Disdain , with gnawing envy , fell despite , 
And cankered malice stood in open sight . 
Ambition , interest , pride without control , 
And jealousy , the jaundice of the soul ; 
Revenge , the bloody minister of ill , 
With all the lean torments of the william 
'T was easy now to guests from whence arose 
Her new made union with her ancient foes , 
Her forced civilities , her faint embrace , 
Affected kindness with an altered face : 
Yet durst she not too deeply probe the wound , 
As hoping still the nobler parts were sound ; 
But striven with Anodynes t' assuage the smart , 
And mildly thus her medicine did impart . 
Complaints of Lovers help to ease their pain , 
It shows a Rest of kindness to complain , 
A friendship loath to quit its former hold , 
And conscious merit may be justly bold . 
But much more just your jealousy would show , 
If others good were injury to you : 
Witness ye heavens how I rejoice to see 
Rewarded worth , and rising loyalty . 
Your Warrior Offspring that upheld the crown , 
The scarlet honours of your peaceful gown , 
Are the most pleasing objects I can find , 
Charms to my sight , and cordials to my mind : 
When virtue spoomes before a prosperous gale 
My heaving wishes help to fill the sail , 
And if my prayers for all the brave were heard , 
Caesar should still have such , and such should still reward . 
The laboured earth your pains have sowed and tilled : 
't is just you reap the product of the field . 
Yours be the harvest , 't is the beggar's gain 
To glean the fall of the loaded wain . 
Such scattered ears as are not worth your care , 
Your charity for alms may safely spare , 
And alms are but the vehicles of prayer . 
My daily bread is litt'rally implored , 
I have no barns nor granaries to hoard ; 
If Caesar to his own his hand extends , 
Say which of yours his charity offends : 
You know he largely gives to more than are his friends . 
Are you defrauded when he feeds the poor , 
Our mite decreases nothing of your store ; 
I am but few , and by your fare you see 
My crying sins are not of luxury . 
Some juster motive sure your mind withdraws , 
And makes you break our friendships holy laws , 
For barefaced envy is too base a cause . 
Show more occasion for your discontent , 
Your love , the Wolf , would help you to invent , 
Some Germane quarrel , or , as times go now , 
Some French , where force is uppermost , will do . 
When at the fountains head , as merit aught 
To claim the place , you take a swilling draught , 
How easy 't is an envious eye to throw , 
And tax the sheep for troubling streams below , 
Or call her , ( when no farther cause you find , ) 
An enemy professed of all your kind . 
But then , perhaps , the wicked World would think , 
The Wolf designed to eat as well as drink . 
This last allusion gauled the Panther more , 
Because indeed it rubbed upon the sore . 
Yet seemed she not to winch , though shrewdly pained : 
But thus her Passive character maintained . 
I never grudged , whatever my foes report , 
Your flaunting fortune in the Lion's court . 
You have your day , or you are much belied , 
But I am always on the suffering side : 
You know my doctrine , and I need not say 
I will not , but I cannot disobey . 
On this firm principle I ever stood : 
He of my sons who fails to make it good , 
By one rebellious act renounces to my blood . 
Ah , said the Hind , how many sons have you 
Who call you mother , whom you never knew ! 
But most of them who that relation pled 
Are such ungracious youths as wish you dead . 
They gape at rich revenues which you hold , 
And fain would nible at your grandam gold ; 
Inquire into your years , and laugh to find 
Your crazy temper shows you much declined . 
Were you not dim , and doted , you might see 
A pack of cheats that claim a pedigree , 
no more of kin to you than you to me . 
Do you not know , that for a little coin , 
Herald's can foist a name into the line , 
They ask you blessing but for what you have , 
But once possessed of what with care you save , 
The wanton boys would piss upon your grave . 
Your sons of Latitude that court your grace , 
Though most resembling you in form and face , 
Are far the worst of your pretended race . 
And , but I blush your honesty to blot , 
Pray god you prove 'em lawfully begot : 
For , in some Popish libels I have read , 
The Wolf has been too busy in your bed . 
At least their hinder parts , the belly piece , 
The paunch , and all that Scorpio claims are his . 
Their malice too a sore suspicion brings ; 
For though they dare not bark , they snarl at kings : 
Nor blame 'em for intruding in your line , 
Fat Bishoprics are still of right divine . 
Think you your new French Proselytes are come 
To starve abroad , because they staryed at home ? 
Your benefices twinkled from afar , 
They found the new Messiah by the star : 
Those Swisses fight on any side for pay , 
And 't is the living that conforms , not they ▪ 
Mark with what management their tribes divide , 
Some stick to you , and some to to other side , 
That many churches may for many mouths provide . 
more vacant pulpits would more converts make , 
All would have latitude enough to take ; 
The rest unbeneficed , your sects maintain 
For ordinations without cures are vain , 
And chamber practice is a silent gain . 
Your sons of breadth at home , are much like these , 
Their soft and easy metals run with ease , 
They melt , and take the figure of the mould : 
But harden , and preserve it best in gold . 
Your Delphic Sword , the Panther then replied , 
Is double edged , and cuts on either side . 
Some sons of mine who bear upon their shield , 
Three steeples Argent in a sable field , 
Have sharply taxed your converts , who unfed 
Have followed you for miracles of bread ; 
Such who themselves of no religion are , 
Allured with gain , for any will declare . 
bare lies with bold assertions they can face , 
But dint of argument is out of place . 
The grim Logician puts 'em in a fright , 
't is easier far to flourish than to fight . 
Thus our eighth Henry's marriage they defame ; 
They say the schism of beds began the game , 
Devorcing from the Church to wed the Dame. 
Though largely proved , and by himself professed 
That conscience , conscience would not let him rest , 
I mean not till possessed of her he loved , 
And old , uncharming Catherine was removed . 
For sundry years before did he complain , 
And told his ghostly Confessor his pain . 
With the same impudence , without a ground , 
They say , that look the reformation round , 
no Treatise of Humility is found . 
But if none were , the Gospel does not want , 
Our Saviour preached it , and I hope you grant , 
The Sermon in the mount was Protestant : 
no doubt , replied the Hind , as sure as all 
The writings of Saint Peter and Saint Paul 
On that decision let it stand or fall . 
Now for my converts , who you say unfed 
Have followed me for miracles of bread , 
Judge not by hearsay , but observe at least , 
If since their change , their loaves have been increased ▪ 
The Lion buys no Converts , if he did , 
Beasts would be sold as fast as he could bid . 
Tax those of interest who conform for gain , 
Or stay the market of another reign . 
Your broad-way sons would never be too nice 
To close with Calvin , if he paid their price ; 
But raised three steeples high'r , would change their note , 
And quit the Cassock for the Canting-coat . 
Now , if you damn this censure , as too bold , 
Judge by yourselves , and think not others sold.  
Meantime my sons accused , by fame's report 
Pay small attendance at the Lion's court , 
Nor rise with early crowds , nor flatter late , 
( For silently they beg who daily wait . ) 
Preferment is bestowed that comes unsought , 
Attendance is a bribe , and then 't is bought . 
How they should speed , their fortune is untried , 
For not to ask , is not to be denied . 
For what they have , their God and King they bless , 
And hope they should not murmur , had they lesle . 
But , if reduced subsistence to implore , 
In common prudence they would pass your door ; 
Unpitied Hudibrass , your Champion friend , 
Has shown how far your charities extend . 
This lasting verse shall on his tomb be read , 
He shamed you living , and upbraids you dead . 
With odious Atheist name's you load your foes , 
Your liberal Clergy why did I expose ? 
It never fails in charities like those . 
In climes where true religion is professed , 
That imputation were no laughing jest . 
But Imprimatur , with a Chaplain's name , 
Is here sufficient licence to defame . 
What wonder is 't that black detraction thrives , 
The Homicide of names is lesle than lives ; 
And yet the perjured murderer survives . 
This said , she paused a little , and suppressed 
The boiling indignation of her breast ; 
She knew the virtue of her blade , nor would 
Pollute her satyr with ignoble blood : 
Her panting foes she saw before her lie , 
And back she drew the shining weapon dry : 
So when the generous Lion has in sight 
His equal match , he rouses for the fight ; 
But when his 〈◊〉 lies prostrate on the plain , 
He sheaths his paws , uncurls his angry mane ; 
And , pleased with bloudless honours of the day , 
Walks over , and disdains th' inglorious Prey . 
So JAMES , if great with lesle we may compare , 
Arrests his rolling thunderbolts in air ; 
And grants ungrateful friends a lengthened space , 
T' implore the remnants of long suffering grace . 
This breathing-time the Matron took ; and then , 
Resumed the third of her discourse again . 
Be vengeance wholly left to powers divine , 
And let heaven judge betwixt your sons and mine : 
If joys hereafter must be purchased here 
With loss of all that mortals hold so dear , 
then welcome infamy and public shame , 
And , last , a long farewell to worldly fame . 
't is said with ease , but o , how hardly tried 
By haughty souls to human honour tied ! 
OH sharp convulsive pangs of agonizing pride ! 
Down then thou rebel , never more to rise , 
And what thou didst , and dost so dearly prize , 
That fame , that darling fame , make that thy sacrifice . 
't is nothing thou hast given , then add thy tears 
For a long race of unrepenting years : 
't is nothing yet ; yet all thou hast to give , 
then add those may-be years thou hast to live . 
Yet nothing still : then poor , and naked come , 
Thy father will receive his unthrift home , 
And thy blessed Saviour's blood discharge the mighty sum . 
Thus ( she pursued ) I discipline a son 
Whose unchecked fury to revenge would run : 
He champs the bit , impatient of his loss , 
And starts aside , and flounder at the cross . 
Instruct him better , gracious God , to know , 
As thine is vengeance , so forgiveness too . 
That suffering from ill tongues he bears no more 
Than what his Sovereign bears , and what his Saviour bore . 
It now remains for you to school your child , 
And ask why God's anointed he reviled ; 
A King and Princess dead ! did Shimei worse ? 
The curser's punishment should fright the curse : 
Your son was warned , and wisely gave it o'er , 
But he who counselled him , has paid the score : 
The heavy malice could no higher tend , 
But woe to him on whom the weights descend : 
So to permitted ills the Daemon flies : 
His rage is aimed at him who rules the skies ; 
Constrained to quit his cause , no succour found , 
The foe discharges every Tire around , 
In clouds of smoke abandoning the fight , 
But his own thundering peals proclaim his flight . 
In Henry's change his charge as ill succeeds , 
To that long story little answer needs , 
Confront but Henry's words with Henry's deeds . 
Were space allowed , with ease it might be proved , 
What spring's his blessed reformation moved . 
The dire effects appeared in open sight , 
Which from the cause , he calls a distant flight , 
And yet no larger leap than from the sun to light . 
Now last your sons a double Poean sound , 
A Treatise of Humility is found . 
't is found , but better it had never been sought 
Than thus in Protestant procession brought . 
The famed original through Spain is known , 
Rodriguez work , my celebrated son , 
Which yours , by ill-translating made his own , 
Concealed its author , and usurped the name , 
The basest and ignoblest theft of fame . 
My Altars kindled first that living coal , 
Restore , or practice better what you stole : 
That virtue could this humble verse inspire , 
't is all the restitution I require . 
Glad was the Panther that the charge was closed , 
And none of all her favourite sons exposed . 
For laws of arms permit each injured man , 
To make himself a saver where he can . 
Perhaps the plundered merchant cannot tell 
The names of Pirates in whose hands he fell : 
But at the den of thiefs he justly fly's , 
And every Algerine is lawful prize . 
no private person in the foes estate 
Can pled exemption from the public fate . 
Yet Christian laws allow not such redress ; 
then let the greater supersede the lesle . 
But let th' Abettors of the Panther's crime 
Learn to make fairer wars another time . 
Some characters may sure be found to write 
Among her sons , for 't is no common sight 
A spotted Dam , and all her offspring white . 
The Savage , though she saw her plea controlled , 
Yet would not wholly seem to quit her hold , 
But offered fairly to compound the strife ; 
And judge conversion by the converts life . 
't is true , she said , I think it somewhat strange 
So few should follow profitable change : 
For present joys are more to flesh and blood , 
Than a dull prospect of a distant good . 
'T was well alluded by a son of mine , 
( I hope to quote him is not to purloin . ) 
Two magnets , heaven and earth , allure to bliss , 
The larger loadstone that , the nearer this : 
The weak attraction of the greater fails , 
We nod awhile , but neighbourhood prevails : 
But when the greater proves the nearer too , 
I wonder more your converts come so slow . 
Methinks in those who firm with me remain , 
It shows a nobler principle than gain . 
Your inference would be strong the Hind replied ) 
If yours were in effect the suffering side : 
Your clergy sons their own in peace possess , 
Nor are their prospects in reversion lesle . 
My Proselytes are struck with awful dread , 
Your bloody Comet-laws hang blazing o'er their head . 
The respite they enjoy but only lent , 
The best they have to hope , protracted punishment . 
Be judge yourself , if interest may prevail , 
Which motives , yours or mine , will turn the scale . 
While pride and pomp allure , and plenteous ease , 
That is , till man's predominant passions cease , 
Admire no longer at my slow increase . 
By education most have been misled , 
So they believe , because they so were bred . 
The Priest continues what the nurse began , 
And thus the child imposes on the man 
The rest I named before , nor need repeat : 
But interest is the most prevailing cheat , 
The fly seducer both of age and youth ; 
They study that , and think they study truth : 
When interest fortifies an argument 
Weak reason serves to gain the wills assent ; 
For souls already warped receive an easy bent . 
Add long prescription of established laws , 
And picque of honour to maintain a cause , 
And shame of change , and fear of future ill , 
And Zeal , the blind conductor of the will , 
And chief among the still mistaking crowd , 
The fame of teachers obstinate and proud , 
And more than all , the private Judge allowed . 
Disdain of Fathers which the dance began , 
And last , uncertain who 's the narrower span , 
The clown unread , and half-read gentleman . 
To this the Panther , with a scornful smile : 
Yet still you travail with unwearied toil , 
And range around the realm without control 
Among my sons , for Proselytes to prole , 
And here and there you snap some silly soul. 
You hinted fears of future change in state , 
Pray heaven you did not prophesy your fate ; 
Perhaps you think your time of triumph near , 
But may mistake the season of the year ; 
The Swallows fortune gives you cause to fear . 
For charity ( replied the Matron ) tell 
What sad mischance those pretty birds befell . 
Nay , no mischance , ( the savage Dame replied ) 
But want of wit in their unerring guide , 
And eager haste , and gaudy hopes , and giddy pride . 
Yet , wishing timely warning may prevail , 
Make you the moral , and I 'll tell the tale . 
The Swallow , privileged above the rest 
Of all the birds , as man's familiar Guest , 
Pursues the Sun in summer brisk and bold , 
But wisely shuns the persecuting cold : 
Is well to chancels and to chimneys known , 
Though 't is not thought she feeds on smoke alone . 
From hence she has been held of heavenly line , 
Endued with particles of soul divine . 
This merry Chorister had long possessed 
Her summer seat , and feathered well her nest : 
Till frowning skies began to change their cheer 
And time turned up the wrong side of the year ▪ 
The shedding trees began the ground to strew 
With yellow leaves , and bitter blasts to blow . 
Sad auguries of winter thence she drew , 
Which by instinct , or Prophecy , she knew : 
When prudence warned her to remove betimes 
And seek a better heaven , and warmer climes . 
Her sons were summoned on a steeples height , 
And , called in common council , vote a flight ; 
The day was named , the next that should be fair , 
All to the general rendezvouz repair , 
They try their fluttering wings and trust themselves in air . 
But whether upward to the moon they go , 
Or dream the winter out in caves below , 
Or hawk at flies elsewhere , concerns not us to know . 
Southwards , you may be sure , they bend their flight , 
And harboured in a hollow rock at night : 
Next morn they rose and set up every sail , 
The wind was fair , but blew a mackrel gale : 
The sickly young sat shiuring on the shore , 
Abhorred salt-water never seen before , 
And prayed their tender mothers to delay 
The passage , and expect a fairer day . 
With these the Martin readily concurred , 
A church-begot , and church-believing bird ; 
Of little body , but of lofty mind , 
Round bellied , for a dignity designed , 
And much a dunce , as Martyns are by kind . 
Yet often quoted Cannon-laws , and Code , 
And Fathers which he never understood , 
But little learning needs in noble blood . 
For , soothe to say , the Swallow brought him in , 
Her household Chaplain , and her next of kin . 
In Superstition silly to excess , 
And casting Schemes , by planetary guess : 
In fine , shortwinged , unfit himself to fly , 
His fear foretold foul weather in the sky . 
Besides , a Raven from a withered Oak , 
Left of their lodging , was observed to croak . 
That omen liked him not , so his advice 
Was present safety , bought at any price . 
( A seeming pious care , that covered cowardice . ) 
To strengthen this , he told a boding dream , 
Of rising waters , and a troubled stream , 
Sure sign of anguish , dangers and distress , 
With something more not lawful to express : 
By which he slyly seemed to intimate 
Some secret revelation of their fate . 
For he concluded , once upon a time , 
He found a leaf inscribed with sacred rhyme , 
Whose antique characters did well denote 
The Sibyl's hand of the Cumaean Grott : 
The mad Divineress had plainly written , 
A time should come ( but many ages yet , ) 
In which , sinister destinies ordain , 
A Dame should drown with all her feathered train , 
And seas from thence be called the Chelidonian main . 
At this , some shaken for fear , the more devout 
Arose , and blessed themselves from head to foot . 
't is true , some stagers of the wiser sort 
Made all these idle wonderments their sport : 
They said , their only danger was delay , 
And he who heard what every fool could say , 
Would never fix his thoughts , but trim his time away . 
The passage yet was good , the wind , 't is true , 
Was somewhat high , but that was nothing new , 
Nor more than usual Equinoxes blue . 
The Sun ( already from the scales declined ) 
Gave little hopes of better days behind , 
But change from bad to worse of weather and of wind . 
Nor need they fear the dampness of the Sky 
Should flag their wings , and hinder them to fly , 
'T was only water thrown on sails too dry . 
But , least of all Philosophy presumes 
Of truth in dreams , from melancholy fumes : 
Perhaps the Martin , housed in holy ground , 
Might think of Ghosts that walk their midnight round , 
Till grosser atoms tumbling in the stream 
Of fancy , madly met and clubbed into a dream . 
As little weight his vain presages bear ▪ 
Of ill effect to such alone who fear . 
Most prophecies are of a piece with these , 
Each Nostradamus' can foretell with ease : 
Not naming persons , and confounding times , 
One casual truth supports a thousand lying rhymes . 
th' advice was true , but fear had seized the most , 
And all good counsel is on cowards lost . 
The question crudely put , to eat delay , 
'T was carried by the mayor part to stay . 
His point thus gained , Sir Martin dated thence 
His power , and from a Priest became a Prince . 
He ordered all things with a busy care , 
And cells , and refectories did prepare , 
And large provisions laid of winter fare . 
But now and then let fall a word or two 
Of hope , that heaven some miracle might show , 
And , for their sakes , the sun should backward go ; 
Against the laws of nature upward climb , 
And , mounted on the Ram , renew the prime : 
For which two proofs in Sacred story lay , 
Of Ahaz dial , and of Ioshuah's day . 
In expectation of such times as these 
A chapel housed 'em , truly called of ease : 
For Martin much devotion did not ask , 
They prayed sometimes , and that was all their task . 
It happened ( as beyond the reach of wit 
Blind prophecies may have a lucky hit ) 
That , this accomplished , or at least in part , 
Gave great repute to their new Merlin's art . 
Some Swifts , the Giants of the Swallow kind , 
Large limbed , stouthearted , but of stupid mind , 
( For swisses , or for Gibeonites designed , ) 
These Lubbers , peeping through a broken pane , 
To suck fresh air , surveyed the neighbouring plain , 
And saw ( but scarcely could believe their eyes ) 
New blossoms flourish , and new flowers arise ; 
As God had been abroad , and walking there , 
Had left his footsteps , and reformed the year : 
The sunny hills from far were seen to glow 
With glittering beams , and in the meads below 
The burnished brooks appeared with liquid gold to flow . 
At last they heard the foolish Cuckoo sing , 
Whose note proclaimed the holy day of spring . 
no longer doubting , all prepare to fly , 
And repossess their patrimonial sky . 
The Priest before 'em did his wings display ; 
And , that good omens might attend their way , 
As luck would have it , 't was Saint Martyn's day . 
Who but the Swallow now triumphs alone , 
The Canopy of heaven is all her own , 
Her youthful offspring to their haunts repair ; 
And glide along in glades , and skim in air , 
And dip for infects in the purling springs , 
And stoop on rivers to refresh their wings . 
Their mothers think a fair provision made , 
That every son can live upon his trade , 
And now the careful charge is off their hands , 
Look out for husbands , and new nuptial bands : 
The youthful widow longs to be supplied ; 
But first the lover is by Lawyers tied 
To settle jointure-chimneys on the bride . 
So thick they couple , in so short a space , 
That Martyns marr'age offsprings rise apace ; 
Their ancient houses , running to decay , 
Are furbished up , and cemented with clay ; 
They teem already ; store of eggs are laid , 
And brooding mothers call Lucina's aid . 
Fame spreads the news , and foreign fowls appear 
In flocks to greet the new returning year , 
To bless the founder , and partake the cheer . 
And now 't was time ( so fast their numbers rise ) 
To plant abroad , and people colonies ▪ 
The youth drawn forth , as Martin had desired , 
( For so their cruel destiny required ) 
Were sent far off-on an ill fated day ; 
The rest would need conduct 'em on their way , 
And Martin went , because he feared alone to stay . 
So long they flew with inconsiderate haste 
That now their afternoon began to waste ; 
And , what was ominous , that very morn 
The Sun was entered into Capricorn ; 
Which , by their bad Astronomers accounted , 
That week the virgin balance should remount ; 
An infant moon eclipsed him in his way , 
And hid the small remainders of his day : 
The crowed amazed , pursued no certain mark ; 
But birds met birds , and justled in the dark ; 
Few mind the public in a Panic fright ; 
And fear increased the horror of the night . 
Night came , but unattended with repose , 
Alone she came , no sleep their eyes to close , 
Alone , and black she came , no friendly stars arose . 
What should they do , beset with dangers round , 
no neighbouring Dorp , no lodging to be found , 
But bleaky plains , and bare unhospitable ground . 
The latter brood , who just began to fly 
Sick-feathered , and unpractised in the sky , 
For succour to their helpless mother call , 
She spread her wings ; some few beneath 'em craul , 
She spread 'em wider yet , but could not cover all . 
T' augment their woes , the winds began to move 
Debate in air , for empty fields above , 
Till Boreas got the skies , and poured amain 
His rattling hailstones mixed with snow and rain . 
The joyless morning late arose , and found 
A dreadful desolation reign around , 
Some buried in the Snow , some frozen to the ground : 
The rest were struggling still with death , and lay 
The Crows and Ravens rights , an undefended prey ; 
Excepting Martyn's race , for they and he 
Had gained the shelter of a hollow tree , 
But soon discovered by a sturdy clown , 
He headed all the rabble of a town , 
And finished 'em with bats , or polled 'em down 
Martin himself was caught alive , and tried 
For treas'nous crimes , because the laws provide 
no Martin there in winter shall abide . 
High on an Oak which never leaf shall bear , 
He breathed his last , exposed to open air , 
And there his corpse , unblessed , are hanging still , 
To show the change of winds with his prophetic bill . 
The patience of the Hind did almost fail , 
For well she marked the malice of the tale : 
Which Ribbald art their church to Luther owes , 
In malice it began , by malice grows , 
He sowed the Serpent's teeth , an iron-harvest rose . 
But most in Martyn's character and fate , 
She saw her slandered sons , the Panther's hate , 
The people's rage , the persecuting state : 
then said , I take th' advice in friendly part , 
You clear your conscience , or at least your heart : 
Perhaps you failed in your foreseeing skill , 
For Swallows are unlucky birds to kill : 
As for my sons , the family is blessed , 
Whose every child is equal to the rest : 
no church reformed can boast a blameless line ; 
Such Martyns build in yours , and more than mine : 
Or else an old fanatic Author lies 
Who summed their Scandals up by Centuries . 
But , through your parable I plainly see 
The bloody laws , the crowds barbarity : 
The sunshine that offends the purblind sight , 
Had some their wishes , it would soon be night . 
Mistake me not , the charge concerns not you , 
Your sons are malcontents , but yet are true , 
As far as nonresistance makes 'em so , 
But that 's a word of neutral sense you know , 
A passive term which no relief will bring , 
But trims betwixt a rebel and a king . 
Rest well assured the Pardelis replied , 
My sons would all support the regal side , 
Though heaven forbid the cause by battle should be tried . 
The Matron answered with a loud Amen , 
And thus pursued her argument again . 
If as you say , and as I hope no lesle , 
Your sons will practise what yourself profess , 
What angry power prevents our present peace ? 
The Lion , studious of our common good , 
Desires , ( and King's desires are ill withstood , ) 
To join our Nations in a lasting love ; 
The bars betwixt are easy to remove , 
For sanguinary laws were never made above . 
If you condemn that Prince of Tyranny 
Whose mandate forced your Gallic friends to fly , 
Make not a worse example of your own , 
Or cease to rail at causeless rigour shown , 
And let the guiltless person throw the stone . 
His blunted sword , your suffering brotherhood 
Have seldom felt , he stops it short of blood : 
But you have ground the persecuting knife , 
And set it to a razor edge on life . 
Cursed be the wit which cruelty refines , 
Or to his father's rod the Scorpion joins ; 
Your finger is more gross than the great Monarch's loins ▪ 
But you perhaps remove that bloody note , 
And stick it on the first Reformers coat . 
O let their crime in long oblivion sleep , 
'T was theirs indeed to make , 't is yours to keep . 
Unjust , or just , is all the question now , 
't is plain , that not repealing you allow . 
To name the Test would put you in a rage , 
You charge not that on any former age , 
But smile to think how innocent you stand 
Armed by a weapon put into your hand . 
Yet still remember that you wield a sword 
Forged by your foes against your Sovereign Lord 
Designed to hew th' imperial Cedar down , 
Defraud Succession , and dis-heir the Crown . 
TO abhor the makers , and their laws approve , 
Is to hate Traitors , and the treason love . 
What means it else , which now your children say , 
We made it not , nor will we take away . 
Suppose some great Oppressor had by slight 
Of law , disseised your brother of his right , 
Your common sire surrendering in a fright ; 
Would you to that unrighteous title stand , 
Left by the villain's will to heir the land ? 
more just was judas , who his Saviour sold ; 
The sacrilegious bribe he could not hold , 
Nor hang in peace , before he rendered back the gold . 
What more could you have done , than now you do , 
Had Oats and Bedlow , and their Plot been true ? 
Some specious reasons for those wrongs were found ; 
The dire Magicians threw their mists around , 
And wise men walked as on enchanted ground . 
But now when time has made th' imposture plain , 
( Late though he followed truth , & limping held her train , ) 
What new delusion charms your cheated eyes again ? 
The painted Harlot might awhile bewitch , 
But why the Hag uncased , and all obscene with itch ? 
The first Reformers were a modest race , 
Our Peers possessed in peace their native place : 
And when rebellious arms o'erturned the state , 
They suffered only in the common fate ; 
But now the Sov'reign mounts the regal chair 
And mitred seats are full , yet David's bench is bare : 
Your answer is , they were not dispossessed , 
They need but rub their mettle on the Test 
To prove their ore : 't were well if gold alone 
Were touched and tried on your discerning stone ; 
But that unfaithful Test , unfound will pass 
The dross of Atheists , and sectarian brass : 
As if th' experiment were made to hold 
For base productions , and reject the gold : 
Thus men ungodded may to places rise , 
And sects may be preferred without disguise : 
no danger from the church or state from these , 
The Papist only has his Writ of ease . 
no gainful office gives him the pretence 
To grinned the Subject or defraud the Prince . 
Wrong conscience , or no conscience may deserve 
To thrive , but ours alone is privileged to starve . 
Still thank yourselves you cry , your noble race 
We banish not , but they forsake the place . 
Our doors are open : true , but ever they come , 
You toss your censing Test , and fume the room ; 
As if 't were Toby's rival to expel , 
And fright the fiend who could not bear the smell . 
To this the Panther sharply had replied , 
But , having gained a Verdict on her side , 
She wisely gave the loser leave to chide ; 
Well satisfied to have the But and peace , 
And for the Plaintiff's cause she cared the lesle , 
Because she sued in formâ Pauperis ; 
Yet thought it decent something should be said , 
For secret guilt by silence is betrayed : 
So neither granted all , nor much denied , 
But answered with a yawning kind of pride . 
Methinks such terms of proffered peace you bring 
As once Aeneas to th' Italian King : 
By long possession all the land is mine , 
You strangers come with your intruding line , 
To share my sceptre , which you call to join . 
You pled like him an ancient Pedigree , 
And claim a peaceful seat by fates decree . 
In ready pomp your Sacrificer stands , 
T'unite the Trojan and the Latin bands , 
And that the League more firmly may be tied , 
Demand the fair Lavinia for your bride . 
Thus plausibly you veil th' intended wrong , 
But still you bring your exiled gods along ; 
And will endeavour in succeeding space , 
Those household Poppits on our hearths to place . 
Perhaps some barbarous laws have been preferred , 
I spoke against the Test , but was not heard ; 
These to rescind , and Peerage to restore , 
My gracious Sov'reign would my vote implore : 
I owe him much , but owe my conscience more . 
Conscience is then your Plea , replied the Dame , 
Which well-informed will ever be the same . 
But yours is much of the Chameleon hew , 
To change the dye with every different view . 
When first the Lion sat with awful sway 
Your conscience taught you duty to obey : 
He might have had your Statutes and your Test , 
no conscience but of subjects was professed . 
He found your temper , and no farther tried , 
But on that broken reed your church relied . 
In vain the sects assayed their utmost art 
With offered treasure to espouse their part , 
Their treasures were a bribe too mean to move his heart . 
But when by long experience you had proved , 
How far he could forgive , how well he loved ; 
A goodness that excelled his godlike race , 
And only short of heaven's unbounded grace : 
A flood of mercy that overflowed our Isle , 
Calm in the rise , and fruitful as the Nile , 
Forgetting whence your Egypt was supplied , 
You thought your Sov'reign bound to send the tide : 
Nor upward looked on that immortal spring , 
But vainly deemed , he durst not be a king : 
then conscience , unrestrained by fear , began 
To stretch her limits , and extend the span , 
Did his indulgence as her gift dispose , 
And made a wise Alliance with her foes . 
Can conscience own th' associating name , 
And raise no blushes to conceal her shame ? 
For sure she has been thought a bashful Dame. 
But if the cause by battle should be tried , 
You grant she must espouse the regal side : 
OH Proteus Conscience , never to be tied ! 
What Phoebus from the Tripod shall disclose , 
Which are in last resort , your friends or foes ? 
Homer , who learned the language of the sky , 
The seeming Gordian knot would soon untie ; 
Immortal powers the term of conscience know , 
But interest is her name with men below . 
Conscience or interest be 't , or both in one ; 
( The Panther answered in a surly tone , ) 
The first commands me to maintain the Crown , 
The last forbids to throw my barriers down . 
Our penal laws no sons of yours admit , 
Our Test excludes your Tribe from benefit . 
These are my banks your ocean to withstand , 
Which proudly rising overlooks the land : 
And once let in , with unresisted sway 
Would sweep the Pastors and their flocks away . 
Think not my judgement leads me to comply 
With laws unjust , but hard necessity : 
Imperious need which cannot be withstood 
Makes ill authentic , for a greater good . 
Possess your soul with patience , and attend : 
A more auspicious Planet may ascend ; 
Good fortune may present some happier time , 
With means to cancel my unwilling crime ; 
( Unwilling , witness all ye Powers above ) 
To mend my errors and redeem your love : 
That little space you safely may allow , 
Your all-dispensing power protects you now . 
Hold , said the Hind , 't is needless to explain ; 
You would postpone me to another reign : 
Till when you are content to be unjust , 
Your part is to possess , and mine to trust . 
A fair exchange proposed of future chance , 
For present profit and inheritance : 
Few words will serve to finish our dispute , 
Who will not now repeal would persecute ; 
To ripen green revenge your hopes attend , 
Wishing that happier Planet would ascend : 
For shame let Conscience be your Plea no more , 
To will hereafter , proves she might before ; 
But she 's a Bawd to gain , and holds the Door . 
Your care about your Banks , infers a fear 
Of threatening Floods , and Inundations near ; 
If so , a just Reprise would only be 
Of what the Land usurped upon the Sea ; 
And all your Jealousies but serve to show 
Your Ground is , like your Neighbour-nation , low . 
TO entrench in what you grant unrighteous Laws , 
Is to distrust the justice of your Cause ; 
And argues that the true Religion lies 
In those weak Adversaries you despise . 
Tyrannic force is that which lest you fear , 
The sound is frightful in a Christian's ear ; 
Avert it , Heaven ; nor let that Plague be sent 
To us from the dispeopled Continent . 
But Piety commands me to refrain ; 
Those Prayers are needless in this Monarch's Reign . 
Behold ! how he protects your Friends oppressed , 
Receives the Banished , succours the Distressed : 
Behold , for you may read an honest open Breast . 
He stands in Daylight , and disdains to hide 
An Act to which , by Honour he is tied 
A generous , laudable , and Kingly Pride . 
Your Test he would repeal , his Peers restore , 
This when he says he means , he means no more . 
Well , said the Panther , I believe him just , 
And yet — 
And yet , 't is but because you must , 
You would be trusted , but you would not trust . 
The Hind thus briefly , and disdained to enlarge 
On Power of Kings , and their Superior charge , 
As Heavens' Trustees before the People's choice : 
Thou sure the Panther did not much rejoice 
To hear those Echoes given of her once Loyal voice . 
The Matron wooed her Kindness to the last , 
But could not win ; her hour of Grace was passed . 
Whom thus persisting when she could not bring 
To leave the Wolf , and to believe her King , 
She gave Her up , and fairly wished her Joy 
Of her late Treaty with her new Alley : 
Which well she hoped would more successful prove , 
Than was the Pigeons , and the Buzzards love . 
The Panther asked , what concord there could be 
Betwixt two kinds whose Natures disagree ? 
The Dame replied , 't is sung in every Street , 
The common chat of Gossips when they meet : 
But , since unheard by you , 't is worth your while 
To take a wholesome Tale , though told in homely stile . 
A Plain good Man , whose Name is understood , 
( So few deserve the name of Plain and Good ) 
Of three fair lineal Lordships stood possessed , 
And lived , as reason was , upon the best ; 
Enured to hardships from his early Youth , 
Much had he done , and suffered for his truth : 
At Land , and Sea , in many a doubtful Fight , 
Was never known a more adven'trous Knight , 
Who oftener drawn his Sword , and always for the right . 
As Fortune woven ( his fortune came though late ) 
He took Possession of his just Estate : 
Nor racked his Tenants with increase of Rent , 
Nor lived too sparing , nor too largely spent ; 
But overlooked his Hinds , their Pay was just , 
And ready , for he scorned to go on trust : 
Slow to resolve , but in performance quick ; 
So true , that he was awkard at a trick . 
For little Souls on little shifts rely , 
And coward Arts of mean Expedients try : 
The noble Mind will dare do any thing but lie . 
False Friends , ( his deadliest foes , ) could find no way 
But shows of honest bluntness to betray ; 
That unsuspected plainness he believed , 
He looked into Himself , and was deceived . 
Some lucky Planet sure attends his Birth , 
Or Heaven would make a Miracle on Earth ; 
For prosperous Honesty is seldom seen : 
To bear so dead a weight , and yet to win . 
It looks as Fate with Nature's Law would strive , 
To show Plain dealing once an age may thrive : 
And , when so tough a frame she could not bend , 
Exceeded her Commission to befriend . 
This grateful man , as Heaven increased his Store , 
Gave God again , and daily fed his Poor ; 
His House with all convenience was purveyed , 
The rest he found , but raised the Fabric where he prayed ; 
And in that Sacred Place , his beauteous Wife 
Employed Her happiest hours of Holy Life . 
Nor did their Alms extend to those alone 
Whom common Faith more strictly made their own , 
A sort of Doves were housed too near their Hall , 
Who across the Proverb , and abound with Gall. 
Thou some 'tis true , are passively inclined , 
The greater Part degenerate from their kind ; 
Voracious Birds , that hotly Bill and breed , 
And largely drink , because on Salt they feed . 
Small Gain from them their Bounteous Owner draws , 
Yet , bound by Promise , he supports their Cause , 
As Corporations privileged by Laws . 
That House which harbour to their kind affords 
Was built , long since , God knows , for better Birds ; 
But fluttering there they nestle near the Throne , 
And lodge in Habitations not their own , 
By their high Crops , and Corny Gizzards known . 
Like Harpy's they could scent a plenteous board , 
then to be sure they never failed their Lord 
The rest was form , and bare Attendance paid , 
They drunk , and eat , and grudgingly obeyed . 
The more they fed , they ravened still for more , 
They drained from Dan , and left Beersheba poor ; 
All this they had by Law , and none repined , 
The pref'rence was but due to Levi's Kind , 
But when some Lay-preferment fell by chance 
The Gourmands made it their Inheritance . 
When once possessed , they never quit their Claim , 
For then 't is sanctified to Hea'vens high Name ; 
And Hallowed thus they cannot give Consent , 
The Gift should be profaned by Worldly management . 
Their Flesh was never to the Table served , 
Thou 't is not thence inferred the Birds were starved ; 
But that their Master did not like the Food , 
As rank , and breeding Melancholy Blood. 
Nor did it with His Gracious Nature suit , 
Even though they were not Doves , to persecute : 
Yet He refused , ( nor could they take Offence ) 
Their Glutton Kind should teach him abstinence . 
Nor Consecrated Grain their Wheat he thought , 
Which new from treading in their Bills they brought : 
But left his Hinds each in his Private Power , 
That those who like the Bran might leave the Flower . 
He for himself , and not for others chose , 
Nor would He be imposed on , nor impose ; 
But in their Faces His Devotion paid , 
And Sacrifice with Solemn Rites was made , 
And Sacred Incense on His Altars laid . 
Besides these jolly Birds whose Crops impure , 
Repaid their Commons with their Salt Manure ; 
Another Farm he had behind his House , 
Not overstocked , but barely for his use ; 
Wherein his poor Domestic Poultry fed , 
And from His Pious Hands received their Bread. 
Our pampered Pigeons with malignant Eyes , 
Beheld these Inmates , and their Nurseries : 
Thou hard their fare , at Evening , and at Morn 
A Cruise of Water and an Ear of Corn ; 
Yet still they grudged that Modi'um , and thought 
A Sheaf in every single Grain was brought ; 
Feign would they filch that little Food away , 
While unrestrained those happy Gluttons prey . 
And much they grieved to see so nigh their Hall , 
The Bird that warned St. Peter of his Fall ; 
That he should raise his mitred Crest on high , 
And clap his Wings , and call his Family 
To Sacred Rites ; and vex th' Etherial Powers 
With midnight Matins , at uncivil Hours : 
Nay more , his quiet Neighbours should molest , 
Just in the sweetness of their Morning rest . 
Beast of a Bird , supinely when he might 
Lie snugg and sleep , to rise before the light : 
What if his dull Forefathers used that cry , 
Could he not let a Bad Example die ? 
The World was fallen into an easier way , 
This Age knew better , than to Fast and Pray . 
Good Sense in Sacred Worship would appear 
So to begin , as they might end the year . 
Such feats in former times had wrought the falls 
Of crowing Chanticleers in Cloistered Walls . 
Expelled for this , and for their Lands they fled , 
And Sister Partlet with her hooded head 
Was hooted hence , because she would not pray a Bed. 
The way to win the restless World to God , 
Was to lay by the Disciplining Rod , 
Unnatural Fasts , and Foreign Forms of Prayer ; 
Religion frights us with a mien severe . 
't is Prudence to reform her into Ease , 
And put Her in undressed to make Her pleas : 
A lively Faith will bear aloft the Mind , 
And leave the Luggage of Good Works behind . 
Such Doctrines in the Pigeon-house were taught , 
You need not ask how wondrously they wrought ; 
But sure the common Cry was all for these 
Whose Life , and Precept both encouraged Ease . 
Yet fearing those alluring Baits might fail , 
And Holy Deeds o'er all their Arts prevail : 
( For Vice , though frontless , and of hardened Face 
Is daunted at the sight of awful Grace ) 
An hideous Figure of their Foes they drew , 
Nor Lines , nor Looks , nor Shades , nor Colours true ; 
And this Grotesque design , exposed to Public view . 
One would have thought it an Egyptian Piece , 
With Garden-gods , and barking Deities , 
more thick than Ptolomey has stuck the Skies . 
All so perverse a Draught , so far unlike , 
It was no Libel where it meant to strike : 
Yet still the daubing pleased , and Great and Small 
To view the Monster crowded Pigeon-hall . 
There Chanticleer was drawn upon his knees 
Adoring Shrines , and Stocks of Sainted Trees , 
And by him , a mishapen , ugly Race ; 
The Curse of God was seen on every Face : 
no Holland Emblem could that Malice mend , 
But still the worse the look the fitter for a Fiend . 
The Master of the Farm displeased to find 
So much of Rancour in so mild a kind , 
Enquired into the Cause , and came to know , 
The Passive Church had struck the foremost blow : 
With grounless Fears , and Jealousies possessed , 
As if this troublesome intruding Guest 
Would drive the Birds of Venus , from their Nest. 
A Deed his inborn Equity abhorred , 
But Interest will not trust , though God should plight his Word . 
A Law , the Source of many Future harms , 
Had banished all the Poultry from the Farms ; 
With loss of Life , if any should be found 
To crow or peck on this forbidden Ground . 
That Bloody Statute chiefly was designed 
For Chanticleer the white , of Clergy kind ; 
But after-malice did not long forget 
The Lay that wore the Robe , and Coroner ; 
For them , for their Inferiors and Allies , 
Their Foes a deadly Shibboleth device : 
By which unrighteously it was decreed , 
That none to Trust , or Profit should succeed , 
Who would not swallow first a poisonous wicked Weed , 
Or that , to which old Socrates was cursed , 
Or Henbane-juice to swell 'em till they burst . 
The Patron ( as in reason ) thought it hard 
To see this Inquisition in his Yard , 
By which the Sovereign was of Subjects use debarred . 
All gentle means he tried , which might withdraw 
th' Effects of so unnatural a Law : 
But still the Dove-house obstinately stood 
Deaf to their own , and to their Neighbours good : 
And which was worse , ( if any worse could be ) 
Repent of their boasted Loyalty : 
Now made the Champions of a cruel Cause , 
And drunk with Fumes of Popular Applause ; 
For those whom God to ruin has designed , 
He fits for Fate , and first destroys their Mind . 
New Doubts indeed they daily striven to raise , 
Suggested Dangers , interposed Delays , 
And Emissary Pigeons had in store , 
Such as the Meccan Prophet used of yore , 
To whisper Counsels in their Patron's Ear , 
And veiled their false Advice with Zealous Fear . 
The Master smiled to see 'em work in vain , 
To wear him out , and make an idle reign : 
He saw , but suffered their Protractive Arts , 
And striven by mildness to reduce their Hearts ; 
But they abused that Grace to make Allies , 
And fond closed with former Enemies ; 
For Fools are double Fools endeav'ring to be wise . 
After a grave Consult what course were best , 
One more mature in Folly than the rest , 
Stood up , and told 'em , with his head aside , 
That desperate Cures must be to desperate Ills applied : 
And therefore since their main impending fear 
Was from th' increasing race of Chanticleer : 
Some Potent Bird of Prey they ought to find , 
A Foe professed to him , and all his kind : 
Some haggared Hawk , who had her every nigh , 
Well pounced to fasten , and well winged to fly ; 
One they might trust , their common wrongs to wreak : 
The Musket , and the Coystrel were too weak , 
Too fierce the Falton , but above the rest , 
The noble Buzzard ever pleased me best ▪ 
Of small Renown , 't is true , for not to lie , 
We call him but a Hawk by courtesy . 
I know he haunts the Pigeon House and Farm , 
And more , in time of War , has done us harm ; 
But all his hate on trivial Points depends , 
Give up our Forms , and we shall soon be friends . 
For Pigeons flesh he seems not much to care , 
Crammed Chickens are a more delicious fare ; 
On this high Potentate , without delay , 
I wish you would confer the Sovereign sway : 
Petition him to accept the Government , 
And let a splendid Embassy be sent . 
This pithy Speech prevailed , and all agreed , 
Old Enmity's forgot , the Buzzard should succeed . 
Their welcome Suit was granted soon as heard , 
His Lodgings furnished , and a Train prepared , 
With B's upon their Breast , appointed for his Guard. 
He came , and Crowned with great Solemnity , 
God save King Buzzard , was the general cry . 
A Portly Prince , and goodly to the sight , 
He seemed a Son of Anach for his height : 
Like those whom stature did to Crowns prefer ; 
Black-browed , and bluff , like Homer's jupiter : 
Broad-backed , and Brawny built for Love's delight , 
A Prophet formed , to make a female Proselyte . 
A Theologue more by need than genial bent , 
By Breeding sharp , by Nature confident . 
Interest in all his Actions was discerned ; 
more learned than Honest , more a Wit than learned . 
Or forced by Fear , or by Ambition led , 
Or both conjoined , his Native clime he fled : 
But brought the Virtues of his Heaven along ; 
A fair Behaviour , and a fluent Tongue . 
And yet with all his Arts he could not thrive ; 
The most unlucky Parasite alive . 
Loud Praises to prepare his Paths he sent , 
And then himself pursued his Compliment : 
But , by reverse of Fortune chased away , 
His Gifts no longer than their Author stay : 
He shakes the Dust against th' ungrateful race , 
And leaves the stench of Ordures in the place . 
oft has he flattered , and blasphemed the same , 
For in his Rage , he spares no Sov'rains name : 
The Hero , and the Tyrant change their style 
By the same measure that they frown or smile ; 
When well received by hospitable Foes , 
The kindness he returns , is to expose : 
For Courtesies , though undeserved and great , 
no gratitude in Fellon-minds beget , 
As tribute to his Wit , the churl receives the treat . 
His praise of Foes is venemously Nice , 
So touched , it turns a Virtue to a Vice : 
A Greek , and bountiful forewarns us twice . 
Sev'n Sacraments he wisely does disown , 
Because he knows Confession stands for one ; 
Where Sins to sacred silence are conveyed , 
And not for Fear , or Love , to be betrayed : 
But he , uncalled , his Patron to control , 
Divulged the secret whispers of his Soul : 
Stood forth th' accusing Satan of his Crimes , 
And offered to the Moloch of the Times . 
Prompt to assail , and careless of defence , 
Invulnerable in his Impudence ; 
He dares the World , and eager of a name , 
He thrusts about , and justles into fame . 
Frontless , and Satyr-proof he scow'rs the streets , 
And runs an Indian muck at all he meets . 
So fond of loud Report , that not to miss 
Of being known ( his last and utmost bliss ) 
He rather would be known , for what he is . 
Such was , and is the Captain of the test ; 
Thou half his Virtues are not here expressed ; 
The modesty of Fame conceals the rest . 
The spleenful Pigeons never could create 
A Prince more proper to revenge their hate : 
Indeed , more proper to revenge , than save ; 
A King , whom in his wrath , th' Almighty gave : 
For all the Grace the Landlord had allowed , 
But made the Buzzard and the Pigeons proud ; 
Gave time to fix their Friends , and to seduce the crowd . 
They long their Fellow-subjects to enthral , 
Their Patrons promise into question call , 
And vainly think he meant to make 'em Lords of all . 
False Fears their Leaders failed not to suggest , 
As if the Doves were to be dispossessed ; 
Nor Sighs , nor Groans , nor gogling Eyes did want ; 
For now the Pigeons too had learned to Cant. 
The House of Prayer is stocked with large increase ; 
Nor Doors , nor Windows can contain the Press : 
For Birds of every feather fill th' abode ; 
Even Atheists out of envy own a God : 
And reeking from the Stews , Adult'rers come , 
Like Goths and Vandals to demolish Rome . 
That Conscience which to all their Crimes was mute , 
Now calls aloud , and cries to Persecute . 
no rigour of the Laws to be released , 
And much the lesle , because it was their Lord's request : 
They thought it great their Sov'rain to control , 
And named their Pride , Nobility of Soul.  
't is true , the Pigeons , and their Prince Elect 
Were short of Power their purpose to effect : 
But with their Quills , did all the hurt they could , 
And cuffed the tender Chickens from their food : 
And much the Buzzard in their Cause did stir , 
Thou naming not the Patron , to infer 
With all respect , He was a gross Idolater . 
But when th' Imperial owner did espy 
That thus they turned his Grace to villainy , 
Not suffering wrath to discompose his mind , 
He striven a temper for th' extremes to find , 
So to be just , as he might still be kind . 
then , all Maturely weighed , pronounced a Doom 
Of Sacred Strength for every Age to come . 
By this the Doves their Wealth and State possess , 
no Rights infringed , but licenced to oppress : 
Such Power have they as Factious Lawyers long 
To Crowns ascribed , that Kings can do no wrong . 
But , since His own Domestic Birds have tried 
The dire Effects of their destructive Pride , 
He deems that Proof a Measure to the rest , 
Concluding well within his Kingly Breast , 
His Fowl of Nature too unjustly were oppressed . 
He therefore makes all Birds of every Sect 
Free of his Farm , with promise to respect 
Their several Kind's alike , and equally protect . 
His Gracious Edict the same Franchise yields 
To all the wild Increase of Woods and Fields , 
And who in Rocks aloof , and who in Steeples builds . 
To Crows the like Impartial Grace affords , 
And Choughs and Daws , and such Republic Birds : 
Secured with ample Privilege to feed , 
Each has his District , and his Bounds decreed : 
Combined in common Interest with his own , 
But not to pass the Pigeon Rubicon . 
Here ends the Reign of this pretended Dove ; 
All Prophecies accomplished from above , 
For Shiloh comes the Sceptre to Remove . 
Reduced from Her Imperial High Abode , 
Like Dyonysius to a private Rod : 
The Passive Church , that with pretended Grace 
Did Her distinctive Mark in Duty place , 
Now Touched , Reviles Her Maker to his Face . 
What after happened is not hard to guests ; 
The small Beginnings had a large Increase , 
And Arts and Wealth succeed ( the secret spoils of Peace . ) 
't is said the Doves repent , though too late , 
Become the Smiths of their own Foolish Fate : 
Nor did their Owner hasten their ill hour : 
But , sunk in Credit , they decreased in Power : 
Like Snows in warmth that mildly pass away , 
Dissolving in the Silence of Decay . 
The Buzzard not content with equal place , 
Invites the feathered Nimrods' of his Race , 
To hide the thinness of their Flock from Sight , 
And all together make a seeming , goodly Flight : 
But each have sep'rate Int'rests of their own , 
Two Czars , are one too many for a Throne . 
Nor can th' Usurper long abstain from Food , 
Already he has tasted Pigeons Blood : 
And may be tempted to his former fare , 
When this Indulgent Lord shall late to Heaven repair . 
bare benting times , and moulting Months may come , 
When lagging late , they cannot reach their home : 
Or Rend in Schism , ( for so their Fate decrees , ) 
Like the Tumultuous College of the Bees ; 
They fight their Quarrel , by themselves oppressed , 
The Tyrant smiles below , and waits the falling feast . 
Thus did the gentle Hind her fable end , 
Nor would the Panther blame it , nor commend ; 
But , with affected Yawning at the close , 
Seemed to require her natural repose . 
For now the streaky light began to peep ; 
And setting stars admonished both to sleep . 
The Dame withdrew , and , wishing to her Guest 
The peace of Heaven , betook herself to rest . 
Ten thousand Angels on her slumbers wait 
With glorious Visions of her future state . 
Errata . 

Page 84.  Line 5. for easy , read yielding . p. 105. l. 15. for offsprings , r. offerings . p. 114. l. 17. for no dangers from , r. no dangers to . p. 129. l. 5. for Modi'um , r. Modicum . p. 130. l. 12. for restless , r. restiff . ibid. l. 17. for undressed , r. undress . p. 142. l. 4. for but licenced , r. but licence . 

Page 129.  Line 5. for Modi'um read Modicum . p. 130. l. 12. for restless r. restiff . ibid. l. 17. for undressed r. undress . p. 142. l. 4. for but licenced r. but licence . 

Books printed for jacob Tonson at the judge's Head in Chancery-lane , near Fleetstreet . 

Miscellany Poems in two parts , Containing a new Translation of Virgil's Eclogues , Ovid's Love Elegies ; several parts of Virgil , Lucretius , Horace , and Theocritus ; with several Original Poems . By the most Eminent hands . Published by Mr. Dryden . 
Ovid's Epistles , Englished by the Earl of Mulgrave , Sr. Ca Scrope , Mr. Dryden , and several other hands . 
Poems upon several occasions , with a Voyage to the Island of Love. By Mistress Behn . 
The Works of Horace , Translated into English by Mr. Creech . 
Absalon and Achitophel : A Poem in two parts . 
The Medal : Or , a Satyr upon Sedition . 
Thraenodia Augustalis . A Pindaric Poem Sacred to the Happy Memory of King Charles the Second . By Mr. Dryden . 
Seneca's Troas : A Tragedy . Translated from the Latin by I T.  




Vid. Pres. to Heyl. Hist. of Presb.  The Wolf . 

Marks of the Catholic Church from the Nicene Creed . The renunciation of the Benedictines to the Abbey Lands . 〈◊〉 loquitur . 

 Otherwise , called Martlets . 