AURENG-ZEBE : A TRAGEDY . Acted at the Royal Theatre . 

Written by JOHN DRYDEN , Servant to his Majesty . 

— Sed , cum fregit subsellia versu , 
Esurit , intactam Paridi nisi vendat Agaven . 
Juu.  



Licenced , ROGER L'ESTRANGE . 

LONDON , Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman , at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange . 1676.  

To the Right Honourable , JOHN , Earl of MULGRAVE , Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber , and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter . 

My Lord , 

't is a severe Reflection which Montaign has made on Princes , That we ought not , in reason , to have any expectations of Favour from them ; and that 't is kindness enough , if they leave us in possession of our own . The boldness of the Censure shows the free Spirit of the Author : And the Subjects of England may justly congratulate to themselves , that both the Nature of our Government , and the Clemency of our King , secure us from any such Complaint . ay , in particular , who subsist wholly by his Bounty , am obliged to give postcrity a far other account of my Royal Master , than what Montaign has left of his . Those Accusations had been more reasonable , if they had been placed on inferior persons . For in all Courts , there are too many , who make it their business to ruin Wit : And Montaign , in other places , tells us , what effects he found of their good Natures . He describes them such , whose Ambition , Lust , or private Interest , seem to be the only end of their Creation . If good accrue to any from them , 't is only in order to their own designs : conferred most commonly on the base and infamous ; and never given , but only happening sometimes on well deservers . Dulness has brought them to what they are ; and Malice secures them in their Fortunes . But somewhat of Specious they must have , to recommend themselves to Princes , ( for Folly will not easily go down in its own natural form with discerning judges . ) And diligence in waiting , is their gild of the Pill ; for that looks like Love , though 't is only Interest . 't is that which gains 'em their advantage over witty Men ; whose love of Liberty and Ease , makes them willing too often to discharge their burden of Attendance on these officious Gentlemen . 't is true , that the nauseousness of such Company is enough to disgust a reasonable Man ; when he sees , he can hardly approach Greatness , but as a Moated Castle ; he must first pass through the Mud and Filth with which it is encompassed . These are they , who wanting Wit , affect Gravity , and go by the name of Solid men : and a solid man is , in plain English , a solid , solemn Fool. Another disguise they have , ( for Fools , as well as Knaves , take other names , and pass by an Alias ) and that is the Title of honest Fellows . But this honesty of theirs aught to have many Grains for its Allowance ; for certainly they are no farther honest , than they are silly : They are naturally mischievous to their power ; and if they speak not maliciously , or sharply , of witty men , 't is only because God has not bestowed on them the gift of utterance . They fawn and crouch to men of parts , whom they cannot ruin : quote their Wit when they are present , and when they are absent , steal their jests : But to those who are under 'em , and whom they can crush with ease , they show themselves in their natural Antipathy ; there they treat Wit like the common Enemy , and give it no more quarter , than a Dutchman would to an English Vessel in the indies ; they strike Sail where they know they shall be mastered , and murder where they can with safety . 

This , my Lord , is the Character of a Courtier without Wit ; and therefore that which is a Satire to other men , must be a Panegyric to your Lordship , who are a Master of it . If the least of these Reflections could have reached your Person , no necessity of mine could have made me to have sought so earnestly , and so long to have cultivated your kindness . As a Poet , I cannot but have made some observations on Mankind : The lowness of my Fortune has not yet brought me to flatter Vice ; and 't is my duty to give testimony to Virtue . 't is true , your Lordship is not of that nature , which either seeks a Commendation , or want it . Your mind has always been above the wretched affectation of Popularity . A popular man is , in truth , no better than a Prostitute to common Fame , and to the People . He lies down to every one he meets for the hire of praise ; and his Humility is only a disguised Ambition . Even Cicero himself , whose Eloquence deserved the admiration of Mankind ; yet by his insatiable thirst of Fame , he has lessened his Character with succeeding Ages : His Action against Catiline may be said to have ruined the Consul , when it saved the City : for it so swelled his Soul , which was not truly great , that ever afterwards it was apt to be overset with vanity . And this made his Virtue so suspected by his Friends , that Brutus , whom of all men he adored , refused him a place in his Conspiracy . A Modern Wit has made this Observation on him , That coveting to recommend himself to Posterity , he begged it as an Alms of all his Friends , the Historians , to remember his Consulship : And observe , if you please , the odness of the event ; all their Histories are lost , and the vanity of his request stands yet recorded in his own writings . How much more great and manly in your Lordship , is your contempt of popular applause , and your retired Virtue , which shines only to a few ; with whom you live so easily and freely , that you make it evident , you have a Soul which is capable of all the tenderness of Friendship ; and that you only retire yourself from those , who are not capable of returning it . Your kindness , where you have once placed it , is inviolable : And 't is to that only I attribute my happiness in your love . This makes me more easily forsake an Argument , on which I could otherwise delight to dwell : I mean , your judgement in your choice of Friends ; because I have the honour to be one . After which , I am sure you will more easily permit me to be silent , in the care you have taken of my Fortune ; which you have rescued , not only from the power of others , but from my worst of Enemies , my own modesty and Laziness . Which favour , had it been employed on a more deserving Subject , had been an effect of justice in your Nature ; but , as placed on me , is only Charity . Yet , withal , 't is conferred on such a man , as prefers your kindness itself , before any of its Consequences ; and who values , as the greatest of your Favours , those of your Love , and of your Conversation . From this constancy to your Friends , I might reasonably assume , that your Resentments would be as strong and lasting , if they were not restrained by a nobler Principle of good Nature and Generosity . For certainly , 't is the same composition of Mind , the same Resolution and Courage , which makes the greatest Frienships' , and the greatest Enmities . And he who is too lightly reconciled , after high Provocations , may recommend himself to the World for a Christian , but I should hardly trust him for a Friend . The Italians have a Proverb to that purpose , To forgive the first time shows me a good Catholic , the second time a Fool. To this firmness in all your Actions ( though you are wanting in no other Ornaments of Mind and Body , yet to this ) I principally ascribe the Interest your Merits have acquired you in the Royal Family . A Prince , who is constant to himself , and steady in all his undertake ; one with whom that Character of Horace will agree , Si fractus illabatur orbis 
Impavidum ferient ruinae , 


Such an one cannot but place an esteem , and repose a confidence on him , whom no Adversity , no change of Courts , no Bribery of Interests , or Cabals of Factions , or Advantages of Fortune , can remove from the solid foundations of Honour and Fidelity . 

Ille meos , primus qui me sibi junxit , amores 
Abstulit ; ille habeat secum , servetque sepulcro . 


How well your Lordship will deserve that praise , I need no inspiration to foretell . You have already left no room for Prophecy : your early undertake have been such , in the service of your King and Country , when you offered yourself to the most dangerous employment , that of the Sea ; when you choose to abandon those delights , to which your Youth and Fortune did invite you , to undergo the hazards , and , which was worse , the company of common Seamen , that you have made it evident , you will refuse no opportunity of rendering yourself useful to the Nation , when either your Courage or Conduct shall be required . The same zeal and faithfulness continues in your Blood , which animated one of your Noble Ancestors to sacrifice his life in the Quarrel of his Sovereign : though , I hope , both for your sake , and for the public Tranquillity , the same occasion will never be offered to your Lordship , and that a better Destiny will attend you . But I make haste to consider you as abstracted from a Court , which ( if you will give me leave to use a term of Logic ) is only an Adjunct , not a Propriety of Happiness . The Academics , I confess , were willing to admit the Goods of Fortune into their Notion of Felicity ; but I do not remember , that any of the Sects of old Philosophers did ever leave a room for Greatness . Neither an I formed to praise a Court , who admire and covet nothing , but the easiness and quiet of retirement . I naturally withdraw my sight from a Precipice ; and admit the Prospect be never so large and goodly , can take no pleasure even in looking on the downfull , though I am secure from the danger . Methinks there 's something of a malignant joy in that excellent description of Lucretius , Suave mari magno turbantibus aequora ventis 
E ter●â magnum alterius spectare laborem ; 
Non quia vexari quenquam est jucunda voluptas 
Sed quibus ipse malis caicas , quiâ cernere suave est . 


I am sure his Master Epicurus , and my better Master Cowley , preferred the solitude of a Garden , and the conversation of a friend to any consideration , so much as a regard , of those unhappy People , whom in our own wrong , we call the great . True greatness , if it be any where on Earth , is in a private Virtue ; removed from the notion of Pomp and Vanity , confined to a contemplation of itself , and centring on itself : Omnis enim per se Divum natura , necesse est 
Immortali aevo summâ cum pace fruatur ; 
— Curâ semota , metuque 
Ipsa suis pollens opibus — 


If this be not the life of a Deity , because it cannot consist with Providence ; 't is at lest a godlike life : I can be contented , ( and I am sure I have your Lordship of my opinion ) with an humbler station in the Temple of Virtue , than to be set on the Pinnacle of it . Despicere unde queas alios , passimque videre 
Errare , atque viam palantis quaerere vitae . 


The truth is , the consideration of so vain a Creature as man , is not worth our pains . I have fool enough at home without looking for it abroad : and am a sufficient Theatre to myself of ridiculous actions , without expecting company , either in a Court , a Town , or Playhouse . 't is on this account that I am weary with drawing the deformities of Life , and Lazars of the People , where every figure of imperfection more resembles me than it can do others . If I must be condemned to Rhyme , I should find some ease in my change of punishment . I desire to be no longer the Sisyphus of the Stage ; to roll up a Stone with endless labour ( which to follow the proverb , gathers no Moss ) and which is perpetually falling down again . I never thought myself very fit for an Employment , where many of my Predecessors have excelled me in all kinds ; and some of my Contemporaries , even in my own partial judgement , have outdone me in Comedy . Some little hopes I have yet remaining , and those too , considering my abilities , may be vain , that I may make the world some part of amends , for many ill Plays , by an Heroic Poem . Your Lordship has been long acquainted with my design ; the subject of which you know is great , the story English , and neither too far distant from the present Age , nor too near approaching it . Such it is in my opinion that I could not have wished a nobler occasion to do honour by it to my King , my Country , and my friends ; most of our ancient Nobility being concerned in the Action . And your Lordship has one particular reason to promote this undertaking , because you were the first who gave me the opportunity of discoursing it to his Majesty , and his Royal Highness : They were then pleased , both to commend the Design , and to encourage it by their Commands . But the vnsettl'dness of my condition has hitherto put a stop to my thoughts concerning it . As I am no successor to Homer in his Wit , so neither do I desire to be in his Poverty . I can make no Rhapsodies , nor go a begging at the Grecian doors , while I sing the praises of their Ancestors . The times of Virgil please me better , because he had an Augustus for his Patron . And to draw the Allegory nearer you , I am sure I shall not want a Maecenas with him . 't is for your Lordship to stir up that remembrance in his Majesty , which his many avocations of business have caused him , I fear , to lay aside . And , ( as himself and his Royal Brother are the Heroes of the Poem ) to represent to them the Images of their Warlike Predecessors ; as Achilles is said to be roused to Glory , with the sight of the Combat before the Ships . For my own part , I am satisfied to have offered the Design ; and it may be to the advantage of my Reputation to have it refused me . 

In the mean time , my Lord , I take the confidence to present you with a Tragedy ; the Characters of which are the nearest to those of an Heroic Poem . 'T was dedicated to you in my heart , before 't was presented on the Stage . Some things in it have passed your approbation , and many your amendment . You were likewise pleased to recommend it to the King's perusal , before the last hand was added to it , when I received the favour from him , to have the most considerable event of it modelled by his Royal Pleasure . It may be some vanity in me to add his Testimony then , and which he graciously confirmed afterwards , that it was the best of all my Tragedies ; in which he has made Authentic my private opinion of it ; at least , he has given it a value by his Commendation , which it had not by my Writing . 

That which was not pleasing to some of the fair Ladies in the last Act of it , as I dare not vindicate , so neither can I wholly condemn , till I find more reason for their Censures . The procedure of Indamora and Melesinda , seems yet , in my judgement , natural , and not unbecoming of their Characters . If they who arraign them fail not more , the World will never blame their conduct : And I shall be glad , for the honour of my Country , to find better Images of Virtue drawn to the life in their behaviour , than any I could feign to adorn the Theatre . I confess , I have only represented a practicable Virtue , mixed with the frailties and imperfections of human life . I have made my Heroine fearful of death , which neither Cassandra nor Cleopatra would have been ; and they themselves , I doubt it not , would have outdone Romance in that particular . Yet their Mandana ( and the Cyrus was written by a Lady ) was not altogether so hardhearted : for she sat down on the cold ground by the King of Assyria , and not only pitied him , who died in her defence ; but allowed him some favours , such , perhaps , as they would think , should only be permitted to her Cyrus . I have made my Melesinda , in opposition to Nourmahal , a Woman passionately loving of her Husband , patient of injuries and contempt , and constant in her kindness , to the last : and in that , perhaps , I may have erred , because it is not a Virtue much in use . Those Indian Wives are loving Fools , and may do well to keep themselves in their own Country , or , at least , to keep company with the Arria's and Portia's of old Rome : some of our Ladies know better things . But , it may be , I am partial to my own writings : yet I have laboured as much as any man , to divest myself of the self-opinion of an Author ; and am too well satisfied of my own weakness , to be pleased with any thing I have written . But on the other side , my reason tells me , that , in probability , what I have seriously and long considered , may be as likely to be just and natural , as what an ordinary judge ( if there be any such amongst those Ladies ) will think fit , in a transient Presentation , to be placed in the room of that which they condemn . The most judicious Writer is sometimes mistaken , after all his care : but the hasty Critic , who judges on a view , is full as liable to be deceived . Let him first consider all the Arguments , which the Author had , to write this , or to design the other , before he arraigns' him of a fault : and then , perhaps , on second thoughts , he will find his Reason oblige him to revoke his Censure . Yet , after all , I will not be too positive . Homo sum , humani à me nihil alienum puto . As I am a Man , I must be changeable : and sometimes the gravest of us all are so , even upon ridiculous accidents . Our minds are perpetually wrought on by the temperament of our Bodies : which makes me suspect , they are nearer allied , than either our Philosophers or School-divines will allow them to be . I have observed , says Montaign , that when the Body is out of Order , its Companion is seldom at his ease . An ill Dream , or a Cloudy day , has power to change this wretched Creature , who is so proud of a reasonable Soul , and make him think what he thought not yesterday . And Homer was of this opinion , as Cicero is pleased to translate him for us : Tales sunt hominum mentes quali pater ipse 
Jupiter , auctiferâ lustravit lampade terras . 


Or as the same Anthor , in his Thusculane Questions , speaks with more modesty than usual of himself : Nos in diem vivimus ; quodcunque animos nostros probabilitate percussit , id dicimus . 't is not therefore impossible , but that I may alter the conclusion of my Play , to restore myself into the good Graces of my fair Critics . And your Lordship , who is so well with them , may do me the Office of a Friend and Patron , to intercede with them on my promise of amendment . The Impotent Lover in Petronius , though his was a very unpardonable crime , yet was received to mercy on the terms I offer . Summa excusationis meae haec est : placebo tibi , si culpam emendare permiseris . 

But I am conscious to myself of offering at a greater boldness , in presenting to your view what my meanness can produce , than in any other error of my Play. And therefore make haste to break off this tedious Address , which has , I know not how , already run itself into so much of Pedantry , with an excuse of Tully's , which he sent with his Books De Finibus , to his Friend Brutus , De ipsis rebus autem , saepenumerò Brutus vereor ne reprehendar , cum haec ad te scribam , qui tum in Poesi , ( I change it from Philosophiâ ) tum in optimo genere Poeseos tantum processeris . Quod si facerem quasi te erudiens , jure reprehenderer . Sed ab eo plurimùm absum : nec , ut ea cognoscas quae tibi notissima sunt ad te mitto : sed quià facillimè in nomine tuo acquiesco , & quia te habeo aequissimum eorum studiorum , quae mihi communia tecum sunt , aestimatorem & judicem . Which you may please , my Lord , to apply to yourself , from him , who is 

Your Lordship's most obedient humble Servant , DRYDEN . 

PROLOGUE . 

Our Author by experience finds it true , 
't is much more hard to please himself than you : 
And out of no feigned modesty , this day , 
Damns his laborious Trifle of a Play : 
Not that its worse than what before he written , 
But he has now another taste of Wit ; 
And to confess a truth , ( though out of time ) 
Grows weary of his long-loved Mistress , Rhyme . 
passion 's too fierce to be in Fetters bound , 
And Nature fly's him like Enchanted Ground . 
What Verse can do , he has performed in this , 
Which he presumes the most correct of his : 
But spite of all his pride a secret shame , 
Invades his breast at Shakespear's sacred name : 
Aw'd when he hears his Godlike Romans rage , 
He , in a just despair , would quit the Stage . 
And to an Age lesle polished , more unskilled , 
Does , with disdain the foremost Honours yield . 
As with the greater Dead he dares not strive , 
He would not match his Verse with those who live : 
Let him retire , betwixt two Ages cast , 
The first of this , and hindmost of the last . 
A losing Gamester , let him sneak away ; 
He bears no ready Money from the Play. 
The Fate which governs Poets , thought it fit , 
He should not raise his Fortunes by his Wit. 
The Clergy thrive , and the litigious Bar ; 
Dull Heroes fatten with the spoils of War : 
All Southern Vices , Heaven be praised , are here ; 
But wit 's a luxury you think too dear . 
When you to cultivate the Plant are loath , 
't is a shrewd sign 't was never of your growth : 
And Wit in Northern Climates will not blow , 
Except , like Orange-trees , 't is housed from Snow . 
There needs no care to put a Playhouse down , 
't is the most desert place of all the Town . 
We and our Neighbours , to speak proudly , are 
Like Monarches , ruined with expensive War. 
While , like wise English , unconcerned , you sit , 
And see us play the Tragedy of Wit.  
persons Represented By The old Emperor . Mr. Mohun . Aureng-zebe his Son.  Mr. Hart.  Morat , his younger Son.  Mr. Kynaston . Arimant , Governor of Agra . Mr. Wintershal . Dianet . Indian Lords , or Omrahs' , of several Factions . Solyman .   Mir Baba .   Abas .   Asaph Chan.    Fazel Chan.    Nourmahal , the Empress . Mistress Marshal . Indamora , a Captive Queen . Mistress Cox.  Melesinda , Wife to Morat . Mistress Corbet . Zayda , Favourite Slave to the Empress . Mistress Vphil . 

SCENE , Agra , in the Year 1660.  

AURENG-ZEBE , A TRAGEDY . 

ACT I  

Arimant , Asaph chawn , Fazel Chawn . Arim.   Heaven seems the Empire of the East to lay 
On the success of this important day : 
Their Arms are to the last decision bend , 
And Fortune labour's with the vast event : 
She now has in her hand the greatest stake , 
Which for contending Monarches she can make . 
What e'er can urge ambitious Youth to fight , 
She pompously displays before their sight : 
Laws , Empire , All permitted to the Sword , 
And Fate could ne'er an ampler Scene afford . 


Asaph .  Four several Armies to the Field are led , 
Which , high in equal hopes four Prince's Head : 
Indus and Ganges , our wide Empire's Bounds , 
Swell their died Currents with their Natives wounds : 
Each purple River winding , as he runs , 
His bloody arms about his slaughtered Sons . 


Fazel .  I well remember you foretold the Storm , 
When first the Brothers did their Factions form : 
When each , by cursed Cabals of Women , striven 
To draw th'indulgent King to partial Love.  


Arim.   What Heaven decrees , no prudence can prevent . 
To cure their mad Ambition , they were sent 
To rule a distant Province each alone . 
What could a careful Father more have done ? 
He made provision against all , but Fate ; 
While , by his health , we held our peace of State. 
The weight of seventy Winters pressed him down , 
He bend beneath the burden of a Crown : 
Sickness , at last ▪ did his spent Body seize , 
And life almost sunk under the disease : 
Mortal 't was thought , at least by them desired , 
Who , impiously , into his years enquired : 
As at a Signal , straight the Sons prepare 
For open force , and rush to sudden War : 
Meeting , like Winds broke loose upon the Main , 
To prove , by Arms , whose Fate it was to Reign . 


Asaph .  Rebels and Parricides ! 


Arim.   Brand not their actions with so foul a name : 
Pity , at least , what we are forced to blame . 
When death 's cold hand has closed the Father's eye , 
You know the younger Sons are doomed to die . 
Lesle ills are chosen greater to avoid , 
And Nature's Law are by the States destroyed . 
What courage tamely could to death consent , 
And not , by striking first , the blow prevent ? 
Who falls in fight , cannot himself accuse , 
And he dies greatly who a Crown pursues . 


To them , Solyman Agah . Solym.   A new Express all Agra does affright : 
Darah and Aureng-zebe are joined in Fight ; 
The Press of people thickens to the Court , 
th' impatient crowd devouring the report . 


Arim.   T' each changing news they changed affections bring , 
And servilely from Fate expect a King.  


Solym.   The Ministers of State , who gave us Law , 
In corners , with selected Friends , withdraw : 
There , in deaf murmurs , solemnly are wise ; 
Whispering , like Winds , ere Hurricanes arise . 
The most corrupt are most obsequious grown , 
And those they scorned , officiously they own . 


Asaph .  In change of Government , 
The Rabble rule their great Oppressor's Fate : 
Do Sovereign Justice , and revenge the State.  


Solym.   The little Courtiers , who ne'er come to know 
The depth of Factions , as in Mazes go , 
Where Int'rests meet and cross so oft , that they 
With too much care are wildered in their way . 


Arim.   What of the Emperor ? 


Solym.   Unmoved , and brave , he like himself appears , 
And , meriting no ill , no danger fears : 
Yet mourns his former vigour lost so far , 
To make him now spectator of a War : 
Repining that he must preserve his Crown 
By any help or courage but his own : 
Wishes , each minute , he could unbeget 
Those Rebel-sons , who dare t' usurp his Seat : 
To sway his Empire with unequal skill , 
And mount a Throne , which none but he can fill . 


Arim.   Oh! had he still that Character maintained , 
Of Valour , which in blooming Youth he gained ! 
He promised in his East a glorious Race ; 
Now , sunk from his Meridian , sets apace . 
But as the Sun , when he from Noon declines , 
And with abated heat , lesle fiercely shines , 
Seems to grow milder as he goes away , 
Pleasing himself with the remains of Day : 
So he who , in his Youth , for Glory striven , 
Would recompense his Age with Ease and Love.  


Asaph .  The name of Father hateful to him grows , 
Which , for one Son , produces him three Foes . 


Fazel .  Darah , the elder , bears a generous mind ; 
But to implacable revenge inclined . 
Too openly does Love and hatred show : 
A bounteous Master , but a deadly Foe . 


Solym.   From Suja's valour I should much expect , 
But he 's a Bigot of the Persian Sect : 
And , by a Foreign Interest seeks to Reign , 
Hopeless by Love and Sceptre to obtain . 


Asaph .  Morat's too insolent , too much a Brave , 
His Courage to his Envy is a Slave . 
What he attempts , if his endeavours fail 
T' effect , he is resolved no other shall . 


Arim.   But Aureng-zebe , by no strong passion swayed , 
Except his Love , more temperate is , and weighed : 
This Atlas must our sinking State uphold ; 
In Council cool , but in Performance bold : 
He sums their Virtues in himself alone , 
And adds the greatest , of a Loyal Son : 
His Father's Cause upon his Sword he wears , 
And with his Arms , we hope , his Fortune bears . 


Solym.   Two vast Rewards may well his courage move , 
A parent 's Blessing , and a Mistress Love. 
If he succeed , his recompense , we hear , 
Must be the Captive Queen of Cassimere . 


To them , Abas . Abas .  Mischiefs on mischiefs , greater still , and more : 
The neighbouring Plain with Arms is covered o'er : 
The Vale an Iron-harvest seems to yield 
Of thick-sprung Lances in a waving Field . 
The polished Steel gleams terribly from far , 
And every moment nearer shows the War. 
The Horses Neighing by the Wind is blown , 
And Castl'd-elephants o'r-look the Town . 


Arim.   If , as I fear , Morat these Powers commands , 
Our Empire on the brink of ruin stands , 
th' ambitious Empress with her Son is joined , 
And , in his Brother's absence , has designed 
The unprovided Town to take with ease , 
And then , the Person of the King to seize . 


Solym.   To all his former Issue she has shown 
Long hate , and laboured to advance her own . 


Ab.   These Troops are his . 
Surat he took ; and thence , preventing Fame , 
By quick and painful Marches hither came . 
Since his approach , he to his Mother sent , 
And two long hours in close debate were spent . 


Arim.   I 'll to my Charge , the Citadel , repair , 
And show my duty by my timely care . 


To them the Emperor with a Letter in his hand : after him , an Ambassador , with a Train following . Asaph .  But see , the Emperor ! a fiery red 
His Brows and glowing Temples does o'r-spread , 
Morat has some displeasing Message sent . 


Amb.   Do not , great Sir , misconstrue his intent ; 
Nor call Rebellion what was prudent care , 
To guard himself by necessary War : 
While he believed you living , he obeyed : 
His Governments but as your Viceroy swayed : 
But , when he thought you gone , 
T' augment the number of the Blessed above , 
He deemed 'em Legacies of Royal love : 
Nor armed his Brother's Portions to invade , 
But to defend the present you had made . 


Emp.   By frequent Messages , and strict Commands , 
He knew my pleasure to discharge his Bands : 
Proof of my life my Royal Signet made ; 
Yet still hearmed , came on , and disobeyed . 


Amb.   He thought the Mandate forged , your death concealed : 
And but delayed , till truth should be revealed . 


Emp.   News of my death from Rumour he received ; 
And what he wished , he easily believed : 
But long demurred , though from my hand he knew 
I lived , so loathe he was to think it true . 
Since he pleads ignorance to that command , 
Now let him show his duty , and disband . 


Amb.   His Honour , Sir , will suffer in the Cause , 
He yields his Arms unjust if he withdraws : 
And begs his Loyalty may be declared , 
By owning those he leads to be your guard . 


Emp.   ay , in myself , have all the Guard I need ; 
Bid the presumptuous Boy draw off with speed : 
If his audacious Troops one hour remain , 
My Cannon from the Fort shall scour the Plain . 


Amb.   Since you deny him entrance , he demands 
His Wife , whom cruelly you hold in Bands : 
Her , if unjustly you from him detain , 
He justly will by force of Arms regain . 


Emp.   O'er him , and his , a right from Heaven I have ; 
Subject , and Son , he 's doubly born my Slave . 
But whatsoever his own demerits are , 
Tell him , I shall not make on Women , War. 
And yet I 'll do her Innocence the grace , 
To keep her here , as in the safer place . 
But thou , who dar'st this bold defiance bring , 
May'st feel the rage of an offended King. 
Hence from my sight , without the least reply : 
One word , nay , one look more , and thou shalt die . 


Exit Ambassador . Re-enter Arimant . Arim.   May Heaven , great Monarch , still augment your bliss 
With length of days , and every day like this . 
For , from the Banks of Gemna news is brought , 
Your Army has a bloody Battle fought : 
Darah from Loyal Aureng-zebe is fled ; 
And forty thousand of his Men lie dead . 
To Sujah next your conquering Army drew ; 
Him they surprised , and easily o'r-threw . 


Emp.   't is well . 


Arim.   But well ! what more could at your wish be done , 
Than two such Conquests gained by such a Son ? 
Your pardon , mighty Sir ; 
You seem not high enough your Joys to rate ; 
You stand indebted a vast sum to Fate : 
And should large thanks for the great Blessing pay . 


Emp.   My fortune owes me greater every day . 
And , should my joy more high for this , appear , 
It would have argued me before of fear . 
How is Heaven kind , where I have nothing wone , 
And Fortune only pays me with my own ? 


Arim.   Great Aureng-zebe did duteous care express : 
And durst not push too far his good success . 
But lest Morat the City should attack , 
Commanded his victorious Army back ; 
Which , left to march as swiftly as they may , 
Himself comes first , and will be here this day , 
Before a close-formed Siege shut up his way . 


Emp.   Prevent his purpose , hence , hence with all thy speed . 
Stop him ; his entrance to the Town forbid . 


Arim.   How , Sir ? your Loyal , your Victorious Son ? 


Emp.   Himulco would I , more than all the Rebels , eat . 


Arim.   Whom with your power and fortune , Sir , you trust ; 
Now to suspect is vain , as 't is unjust . 
He comes not with a Train to move your fear , 
But trusts himself , to be a prisoner here . 
You knew him brave , you know him faithful now : 
He aims at Fame , but Fame from serving you . 
't is said , Ambition in his breast does rage : 
Who would not be the Hero of an Age ? 
All grant him prudent : prudence interest weighs , 
And interest bids him seek your love and praise . 
I know you grateful ; When he marched from hence , 
You bade him hope an ample recompense : 
He conquered in that hope ; and from your hands , 
His Love , the precious pledge he left , demands . 


Emp.   no more ; you search too deep my wounded mind : 
And show me what I fear , and would not find . 
My Son has all the debts of duty paid : 
Our Prophet sends him to my present aid . 
Such virtue to distrust were base and low : 
I 'm not ungrateful — or I was not so ! 
Inquire no farther , stop his coming on : 
I will not , cannot , dare not see my Son.  


Arim.   't is now too late his entrance to prevent : 
Nor must I to your ruin give consent . 
At once your People's heart and son 's you loose : 
And give him all , when you just things refuse . 


Emp.   thou lov'st me sure ; thy faith has oft been tried , 
In ten pitched Fields , not shrinking from my side , 
Yet giv'st me no advice to bring me ease . 


Arim.   Can you be cured , and tell not your disease ? 
I asked you , Sir.  


Emp.   — thou shouldst have asked again : 
There hangs a secret shame on guilty men . 
thou shouldst have pulled the secret from my breast , 
Torn out the bearded Steel to give me rest : 
At least , thou shouldst have guessed — 
Yet thou art honest , thou couldst near have guessed . 
Hast thou been never base ? did Love ne'er bend 
Thy frailer Virtue , to betray thy Friend ? 
Flatter me , make thy Court , and say , It did : 
Kings in a Crowd would have their Vices hid . 
We would be kept in countenance , saved from shame : 
And owned by others who commit the same . 
Nay , now I have confessed . — 
thou seest me naked , and without disguise : 
I look on Aureng-zebe with Rivals eyes . 
He has abroad my enemies o'ercome , 
And I have sought to ruin him at home . 


Arim.   This free confession shows you long did strive : 
And virtue , though oppressed , is still alive . 
But what success did your injustice find ? 


Emp.   What it deserved , and not what I designed . 
Unmoved she stood , and deaf to all my prayers , 
As Seas and Winds to sinking Mariners . 
But Seas grow calm , and Winds are reconciled : 
Her Tyrant beauty never grows more mild . 
Prayers , promises , and threats were all in vain . 


Arim.   then cure yourself by generous disdain . 


Emp.   Virtue , disdain , despair , I oft have tried , 
And foiled , have with new Arms my Foe defied 
This made me with so little joy to hear 
The Victory , when I the Victor fear . 


Arim.   Something you swiftly must resolve to do , 
lest Aureng-zebe your secret Love should know . 
Morat without does for your ruin wait ; 
And would you lose the Buckler of your State ? 
A jealous Empress lies within your Arms , 
Too haughty to endure neglected Charms . 
Your Son is duteous , but ( as Man ) he 's frail . 
And just revenge o'er virtue may prevail . 


Emp.   Go then to Indamora , say from me , 
Two Lives depend upon her secrecy . 
Bid her conceal my passion from my Son. 
Though Aureng-zebe return a Conqueror , 
Both he and she are still within my power . 
Say , I 'm a Father , but a Lover too : 
Much to my Son , more to myself I owe. 
When she receives him , to her words give Law : 
And even the kindness of her glances awe . 
See , he appears ! 


After a short whisper , Arimant departs . Enter Aureng-zebe , Dianet , and Attendants . Aurengzebe knelt to his Father , and kisses his hand . Aur.   My Vows have been successful as my Sword : 
My prayers are heard , you have your health restored . 
Once more 't is given me to behold your face : 
The best of Kings and Fathers to embrace . 
Pardon my tears ; 't is joy which bids 'em flow , 
A joy which never was sincere till now . 
That which my Conquest gave I could not prise ; 
Or 't was imperfect till I saw your eyes . 


Emp.   Turn the discourse : I have a reason why 
I would not have you speak so tenderly . 
knew you what shame your kind expressions bring , 
You would in pity spare a wretched King.  


Aur.   A King ! you rob me , Sir , of half my due : 
You have a dearer name , a Father too . 


Emp.   I had that name . 


Aur.   — What have I said or done , 
That I no longer must be called your Son ? 
't is in that name , Heaven knows , I glory more , 
Than that of Prince , or that of Conqueror . 


Emp.   then you upbraid me ; I am pleased to see 
you 're not so perfect , but can fail , like me . 
I have no God to deal with . 


Aur.   — Now I find 
Some sly Court-devil has seduced your mind : 
Filled it with black suspicions , not your own : 
And all my actions through false Optics shown . 
I ne'er did Crowns ambitiously regard : 
Honour I sought , the generous mind's reward . 
Long may you live ! while you the Sceptre sway 
I shall be still most happy to obey . 


Emp.   O , Aureng-zebe ! thy virtues shine too bright , 
They flash too fierce : I , like the Bird of Night , 
Shut my dull eyes , and sicken at the sight . 
thou hast deserved more love than I can show : 
But 't is thy fate to give , and mine to owe. 
thou seest me much distempered in my mind : 
Pulled back , and then pushed forward to be kind . 
Virtue , and — feign I would my silence break , 
But have not yet the confidence to speak . 
Leave me , and to thy needful rest repair . 


Aur.   Rest is not suiting with a Lover's care . 
I have not yet my Indamora seen . Is going . 


Emp.   Somewhat I had forgot ; come back again : 
So weary of a Father's company ! 


Aur.   Sir , you were pleased yourself to licence me . 


Emp.   You made me no relation of the Fight . 
Besides , a Rebel's Army is in sight . 
Advice me first : yet go — 
He goes to Indamora ; I should take Aside . 
A kind of envious joy to keep him back . 
Yet to detain him makes my love appear : 
I hate his presence , and his absence fear . Exit . 


Aur.   To some new Clime , or to thy native Sky . 
O friendless and forsaken Virtue fly . 
Thy Indian Air is deadly to thee grown : 
Deceit and cankered malice rule thy Throne . 
Why did my Arms in Battle prosperous prove , 
To gain the barren praise of Filial love ? 
The best of Kings by Women is misled , 
Charmed by the Witchcraft of a second Bed. 
Against myself I Victories have won , 
And by my fatal absence am undone . 
To him Indamora , with Arimant . But here she comes ! 
In the calm Harbour of whose gentle breast , 
My Tempest-beaten Soul may safely rest . 
O , my heart's joy ! what e'er my sorrows be , 
They cease and vanish , in beholding thee ! 
Care shuns thy walks ; as at the cheerful light , 
The groaning Ghosts , and Birds obscene take flight . 
By this one view , all my past pains are paid : 
And all I have to come more easy made . 


Ind.   Such sullen Planets at my Birth did shine , 
They threaten every Fortune mixed with mine . 
Fly the pursuit of my disastrous love , 
And from unhappy Neighbourhood remove . 


Aur.   Bid the laborious Hind , 
Whose hardened hands did long in Tillage toil , 
Neglect the promised Harvest of the Soil . 
Should I , who cultivated Love with Blood , 
Refuse possession of approaching good ? 


Ind.   Love is an airy good Opinion makes : 
Which he who only thinks he has , partakes . 
Seen by a strong Imagination's Beam ; 
That tricks and dresses up the gaudy Dream . 
Presented so , with rapture 't is enjoyed : 
Raised by high Fancy , and by low destroyed . 


Aur.   If Love be Vision , mine has all the fire 
Which , in first Dreams , young Prophets does inspire : 
I dream , in you , our promised Paradise : 
An Age's tumult of continued bliss . 
But you have still your happiness in doubt : 
Or else 't is past , and you have dreamt it out . 


Ind.   Perhaps not so . 


Aur.   — Can Indamora prove 
So altered ? Is it but , Perhaps you Love ? 
then farewell all ! I thought in you to find 
A Balm , to cure my much distempered mind . 
I came to grieve a Father's heart estranged ; 
But little thought to find a Mistress changed . 
Nature herself is changed to punish me : 
Virtue turned Vice , and Faith Inconstancy . 


Ind.   You heard me not Inconstancy confess : 
'T was but a Friend's advice to love me lesle . 
Who knows what adverse Fortune may befall ? 
Arm well your mind : hope little , and fear all . 
Hope , with a goodly prospect , feeds your Eye : 
Shows , from a rising ground , possession nigh : 
Shortens the distance , or o'r-looks it quite : 
So easy 't is to travel with the sight ▪ 


Aur.   then to despair you would my Love betray , 
By taking hope , its last kind Friend , away . 
You hold the Glass , but turn the Perspective ; 
And farther off the lessened Object drive . 
You bid me fear : in that your change I know : 
You would prepare me for the coming blow . 
But , to prevent you , take my last Adieu ; 
I 'll sadly tell myself you are untrue , 
Rather than stay to hear it told by you ▪ Going . 


Ind.   Stay , Aureng-zebe , I must not let you go . 
And yet believe yourself , your own worst Foe , 
Think I am true , and seek no more to know . 
Let in my breast the fatal Secret lie , 
't is a sad Riddle , which , if known , we die . Seeming to pause . 


Aur.   Fair Hypocrite , you seek to cheat in vain ; 
Your silence argues you ask time to feign . 
Once more , farewell : the snare in sight is laid , 
't is my own fault if I am now betrayed . Going again . 


Ind.   Yet once more stay ; you shall believe me true , 
Though in one Fate I wrap myself and you . 
Your absence — 


Arim.   — Hold ; you know the hard Command 
I must obey : you only can withstand 
Your own mishap . I beg you on my Knee , 
Be not unhappy by your own Decree . 


Aur.   Speak , Madam , by ( if that be yet an Oath ) 
Your Love , I 'm pleased we should be ruined both . 
Both is a sound of joy . 
In Death's dark Bowers our Bridals we will keep : 
And his cold hand 
Shall draw the Curtain when we go to sleep . 


Ind.   Know then , that Man whom both of us did trust , 
Has been to you unkind , to me unjust . 
The Guardian of my Faith so false did prove , 
As to solicit me with lawless Love : 
Prayed , promised , threatened , all that Man could do , 
Base as he 's great ; and need I tell you who ? 


Aur.   Yes ; for I 'll not believe my Father meant : 
Speak quickly , and my impious thoughts prevent . 


Ind.     said ; I wish I could some other name ! 


Arim.   My duty must excuse me , Sir , from blame . 
A Guard there . 


Enter Guards . Aur.   — Slave , for me ? 


Arim.   — My Orders are 
To seize this Princess , whom the Laws of War 
Long since made Prisoner . 


Aur.   — Villain . 


Arim.   — Sir , I know 
Your Birth , nor durst another call me so . 


Aur.   I have redeemed her ; and as mine she 's free . 


Arim.   You may have right to give her liberty : 
But with your Father , Sir , that right dispute ; 
For his commands to me were absolute ; 
If she disclosed his love , to use the right 
Of War , and to secure her from your sight . 


Aur.   I 'll rescue her , or die . Draws . 
And you , my friends , though few , are yet too brave 
To see your Generals Mistress made a Slave . All draw . 


Ind.   Hold , my dear Love ! if so much power there lies , 
As once you owned , in Indamora's Eyes , 
Loose not the Honour you have early won ; 
But stand the blameless pattern of a Son. 
My love your claim inviolate secures : 
't is written in Fate , I can be only yours . 
My sufferings for you make your heart my due : 
Be worthy me , as I am worthy you . 


Aur.   ( Putting up his sword . ) i  thought , and blessed be you who gave me time : 
My Virtue was surprised into a Crime . 
Strong Virtue , like strong Nature , struggles still : 
Exerts itself , and then throws off the ill . 
I to a son 's and Lover's praise aspire : 
And must fulfil the parts which both require . 
How dear the cure of jealousy has cost ! 
With too much care and tenderness y' are lost . 
So the fond Youth from Hell redeemed his Prize , 
Till ▪ looking back , she vanished from his eyes ! 


Exeunt severally . ACT II Betwixt the Acts , a Warlike Tune is played , shooting off Guns , and shouts of Soldiers are heard , as in an Assault . 

Aureng-zebe , Arimant , Asaph Chawn , Fazel Chawn , Solyman . Aur.   What man could do , was by Morat performed : 
The Fortress thrice himself in person stormed . 
Your valour bravely did th' assault sustain ; 
And filled the Moats and Ditches with the Slain . 
Till , mad with rage , into the Breach he fired : 
slew Friends and Foes , and in the Smoke retired . 


Arim.   To us you give what praises are not due : 
Morat was thrice repulsed , but thrice by you . 
High , over all , was your great conduct shown : 
You sought our safety , but forgot your own . 


Asaph .  Their Standard , planted on the Battlement , 
Despair and death among the Soldiers sent : 
You , the bold Omrah tumbled from the Wall ; 
And shouts of Victory pursued his fall . 


Fazel .  To you , alone , we owe this prosperous day : 
Our Wives and Children rescued from the prey : 
Know your own interest Sir , where e'er you lead , 
We jointly vow to own no other Head.  


Solym.   Your wrongs are known . Impose but your commands ; 
This hour shall bring you twenty thousand hands . 


Aur.   Let them who truly would appear my friends , 
Employ their Swords , like mine , for noble ends . 
no more : remember you have bravely done : 
Shall Treason end , what Loyalty begun ? 
I own no wrongs ; some grievance I confess , 
But Kings , like Gods , at their own time redress . 
Yet , some becoming boldness I may use : 
i  well deserved , nor will he now refuse . Aside . 
I 'll strike my Fortunes with him at a heat : 
And give him not the leisure to forget . 


Exit , attended by the Omrahs' . Arim.   Oh! Indamora , hide these fatal Eyes ; 
Too deep they wound whom they too soon surprise : 
My Virtue , Prudence , Honour , Interest , all 
Before this Universal Monarch fall . 
Beauty , like Ice , our footing does betray ; 
Who can tread sure on the smooth slippery way ? 
Pleased with the passage , we slide swiftly on : 
And see the dangers which we cannot eat . 


To him , Indamora . Ind.   I hope my liberty may reach thus far : 
These Terras Walks within my limits are . 
I came to seek you , and to let you know , 
How much I to your generous Pity owe. 
The King , when he designed you for my Guard , 
Resolved he would not make my Bondage hard : 
If otherwise , you have deceived his end ; 
And whom he meant a Guardian , made a Friend . 


Arim.   A guardian 's Title I must own with shame : 
But should be prouder of another Name . 


Ind.   And therefore 't was I changed that Name before : 
I called you Friend , and could you wish for more ? 


Arim.   I dare not ask for what you would not grand : 
But wishes , Madam , are extravagant . 
They are not bounded with things possible : 
I may wish more than I presume to tell : 
desire 's the vast extent of human mind , 
It mounts above , and leaves poor hope behind . 
I could wish — 


Ind.   What ? 


Arim.   Why did you speak ?   dashed my Fancy quite : 
Even in th' approaching minute of delight . 
I must take breath — 
E'er I the Rapture of my wish renew , 
And tell you then , It terminates in you . 


Ind.   Have you considered what th' event would be ? 
Or know you , Arimant , yourself , or me ? 
Were I no Queen , did you my beauty weigh , 
My Youth in bloom , your Age in its decay ? 


Arim.   I my own Judge , condemned myself before : 
For pity aggravate my crime no more . 
So weak I am , I with a frown am slain ; 
You need have used but half so much disdain . 


Ind.   I am not cruel yet to that degree : 
Have better thoughts both of yourself , and me . 
Beauty a Monarch is , 
Which Kingly power magnificently proves , 
By crowds of Slaves , and peopled Empire love's . 
And such a Slave as you , what Queen would lose ? 
Above the rest , I Arimant would choose : 
For counsel , valour , truth , and kindness too , 
All I could wish in man , I find in you . 


Arim.   What Lover could to greater joy be raised ! 
I am , methinks , a God by you thus praised . 


Ind.   To what may not desert , like yours , pretend ? 
You have all qualities — that fit a Friend . 


Arim.   So Mariners mistake the promised Coast : 
And , with full Sails , on the blind Rocks are lost . 
Think you my aged veins so faintly beaten , 
They rise no higher than to Friendships' heat ? 
So weak your Charms , that , like a Winter's night , 
Twinkling with Stars , they freeze me while they light ? 


Ind.   Mistake me not , good Arimant , I know 
My Beauty's power , and what my charms can do . 
You your own Talon have not learned so well ; 
But practise one , where you can ne'er excel . 
You can at most , 
To an indiff'rent Lover's praise pretend : 
But you would spoil an admirable Friend . 


Arim.   Never was Amity so highly prized ; 
Nor ever any Love so much despised . 
Even to myself ridiculous I grow ; 
And would be angry , if I knew but how . 


Ind.   Do not . Your Anger , like your Love , is vain : 
When e'er I please , you must be pleased again . 
Knowing what power I have your will to bend , 
I 'll use it ; for I need just such a Friend . 
You must perform , not what you think is fit : 
But , to what ever I propose , submit . 


Arim.   Madam , you have a strange Ascendant gained ; 
You use me like a Courser , spurred and reined : 
If I fly out , my fierceness you command , 
then sooth , and gently struck me with your hand . 
Impose ; but use your power of Taxing well : 
When Subjects cannot Pay , they soon Rebel . 


Enter the Emperor , unseen by them . Ind.   My Rebel's punishment would easy prove : 
You know y' are in my power by making Love.  


Arim.   Would I , without dispute , your will obey , 
And could you , in return , my life betray ? 


Emp.   What danger , Arimant , is this you fear ? 
Or what Love-secret which I must not hear ? 
These altered looks some inward motion show . 
His cheeks are pale , and yours with blushes glow . To her . 


Ind.   't is what , with justice , may my anger move : 
He has been bold , and talked to me of Love.  


Arim.   I am betrayed , and shall be doomed to die ! Aside . 


Emp.   Did he , my Slave , presume to look so high ? 
That crawling Insect , who from Mud began , 
Warmed by my Beams , and kindled into Man ? 
durst he , who does but for my pleasure live , 
Entrench on Love , my great Prerogative ? 
Print his base Image on his Sovereign's Coin ? 
't is Treason if he stamp his Love with mine . 


Arim.   't is true , I have been bold ; but if it be 
A crime — 


Ind.   — He means , 't is only so to me . 
You , Sir , should praise , what I must disapprove : 
He insolently talked to me of Love : 
But , Sir , 't was yours , he made it in your name : 
You , if you please , may all he said disclaim . 


Emp.   I must disclaim what e'er he can express : 
His grovelling sense will show my passion lesle . 
But stay , if what he said my message be , 
What fear , what danger could arrive from me ? 
He said , He feared you would his life betray . 


Ind.   Should he presume again , perhaps I may . 
Though in your hands he hazard not his life , 
Remember , Sir , your fury of a Wife ; 
Who , not content to be revenged on you , 
The Agents of your passion will pursue . 


Emp.   If I but hear her named , I 'm sick that day ; 
The sound is mortal , and frights life away . 
Forgive me , Arimant , my jealous thought : 
Distrust in Lovers is the tenderest fault . 
Leave me , and tell thyself in my excuse , 
Love , and a Crown , no Rivalship can bear ; 
And precious things are still possessed with fear . 
Exit Arimant bowing . This , Madam , my excuse to you may pled ; 
Love should forgive the faults which Love has made . 


Ind.   From me , what pardon can you hope to have , 
Robbed of my Love , and treated as a Slave ? 


Emp.   Force is the last relief which Lovers find : 
And 't is the best excuse of Wooman-kind . 


Ind.   Force never yet a generous Heart did gain : 
We yield on parley , but are stormed in vain . 
Constraint , in all things , makes the pleasure lesle ; 
Sweet is the Love which comes with willingness . 


Emp.   no ; 't is resistance that inflames desire : 
Sharpens the Darts of Love , and blows his Fire . 
Love is disarmed that meets with too much ease : 
He languishes , and does not care to please . 
And therefore 't is your golden Fruit you guard 
With so much care , to make possession hard . 


Ind.   Was 't not enough you took my Crown away , 
But cruelly you must my Love betray ? 
I was well pleased to have transferred my right , 
And better changed your Claim of Lawless might , 
By taking him , whom you esteemed above 
Your other Sons , and taught me first to love . 


Emp.   My Son , by my command his course must steer : 
I bade him love , I bid him now forbear . 
If you have any kindness for him still , 
Advice him not to shock a Father's william  


Ind.   Must I advice ? 
then let me see him , and I 'll try t' obey . 


Emp.   I had forgot , and dare not trust your way . 
But send him word , 
He has not here an Army to command : 
Remember he and you are in my hand . 


Ind.   Yes , in a Father's hand , whom he has served ; 
And , with the hazard of his life , preserved . 
But piety to you , unhappy Prince , 
Becomes a crime , and duty an offence : 
Against yourself , you with your Foes combine , 
And seem your own destruction to design . 


Emp.   You may be pleased your Politics to spare : 
I 'm old enough , and can myself take care . 


Ind.   Advice from me was , I confess , too bold : 
y' are old enough it may be , Sir , too old . 


Emp.   You please yourself with your contempt of Age : 
But Love , neglected , will convert to Rage . 
If on your head my fury does not turn , 
Thank that fond dotage which so much you scorn . 
But , in another's person , you may prove , 
there 's warmth for Vengeance left , though not for Love.  


Re-enter Arimant . Arimant .  The Empress has the Antichambers past , 
And this way moves with a disordered haste : 
Her brows , the stormy marks of anger bear . 


Emp.   Madam , retire : she must not find you here . 


Exit Indamora with Arimant . Enter Nourmahal hastily . Nour.   What have I done , that Nourmahal must prove 
The scorn and triumph of a Rival's Love ? 
My eyes are still the same , each glance , each grace , 
Keep their first lustre , and maintain their place ; 
Not second yet to any other face . 


Emp.   What rage transports you ? are you well awake ? 
Such Dreams distracted minds in Fevers make . 


Nour.   Those Fevers you have given , those Dreams have bred , 
By broken Faith , and an abandoned Bed. 
Such Visions hourly pass before my sight ; 
Which from my eyes their Balmy slumbers fright , 
In the severest silence of the night . 
Visions , which in this Citadel are seen ; 
Bright , glorious Visions of a Rival Queen . 


Emp.   Have patience , my first flames can ne'er decay : 
These are but Dreams , and soon will pass away . 
thou knowest , my Heart , my Empire , all is thine : 
In thy own Heaven of Love serenely shine : 
Fair as the face of Nature did appear , 
When Flowers first peeped , and Trees did Blossoms bear , 
And Winter had not yet deformed th'inverted Year . 
Calm as the Breath which fans our Eastern Groves , 
And bright as when thy Eyes first lighted up our Loves . 
Let our eternal Peace be sealed by this , 
With the first ardour of a Nuptial Kiss . Offers to kiss her . 


Nour.   Mendoza would you have , me your faint kisses prove , 
The dregss and droppings of enervate Love ? 
Must I your cold long-labouring age sustain , 
And be to empty joys provoked in vain ? 
Receive you sighing after other Charms , 
And take an absent Husband in my Arms ? 


Emp.   Even these reproaches I can bear from you : 
You doubted of my Love , believe it true . 
Nothing but Love this patience could produce ; 
And I allow your rage that kind excuse . 


Nour.   Call it not patience ; 't is your guilt stands mute : 
You have a cause too foul to bear dispute . 
You wrong me first , and urge my rage to rise , 
then I must pass for mad ; you , meek and wise , 
Good man , pled merit by your soft replies . 
Vain privilege poor Women have of tongue : 
Men can stand silent , and resolve on wrong . 


Emp.   What can I more ? my friendship you refuse , 
And even my mildness , as my crime , accuse . 


Nour.   Your sullen silence cheats not me , false Man ; 
I know you think the bloodiest things you can . 
could you accuse me , you would raise your voice : 
Watch for my crimes , and in my guilt rejoice . 
But my known virtue is from scandal free , 
And leaves no shadow for your calumny . 


Emp.   Such virtue is the plague of human life : 
A virtuous Woman , but a cursed Wife . 
In vain of pompous chastity y' are proud : 
virtue 's adultery of the Tongue , when loud , 
I , with lesle pain , a Prostitute could bear , 
Than the shrill sound of Virtue , virtue hear . 
In unchaste Wives — 
there 's yet a kind of recompensing ease : 
Vice keeps 'em humble , gives 'em care to please : 
But against clamorous Virtue , what defence ? 
It stops our mouths , and gives your noise pretence . 


Nour.   Since Virtue does your indignation raise , 
't is pity but you had that Wife you praise . 
Your own wild appetites are prone to range ; 
And than you tax our humours with your change . 


Emp.   What can be sweeter than our native home ! 
Thither for ease , and soft repose , we come : 
Home is the sacred refuge of our life : 
Secured from all approaches , but a Wife . 
If thence we fly , the cause admits no doubt : 
None but an Inmate Foe could force us out . 
Clamours , our privacies uneasy make : 
Birds leave their Nests disturbed , and Beasts their Haunts forsake . 


Nour.   honour 's my crime that has your loathing bred : 
You take no pleasure in a virtuous Bed.  


Emp.   What pleasure can their be in that estate , 
Which your unquietness has made me hate ? 
I shrink far off — 
Dissembling sleep , but wakeful with the fright . 
The day takes off the pleasure of the night . 


Nour.   My thoughts no other joys but power pursue : 
Or , if they did , they must be lost in you . 
And yet the fault 's not mine — 
Though Youth and Beauty cannot warmth command ; 
The Sun in vain shines on the barren Sand.  


Emp.   't is true , of Marriage-bands I 'm weary grown . 
Love scorns all ties , but those that are his own . 
Chains that are dragged , must needs uneasy prove : 
For there 's a Godlike liberty in Love.  


Nour.   what 's Love to you ? 
The bloom of Beauty other year's demands ; 
Nor will be gathered by such withered hands : 
You importune it with a false desire : 
Which sparkles out , and makes no solid fire . 
This impudence of Age , whence can it spring ? 
All you expect , and yet you nothing bring . 
Eager to ask , when you are passed a grant ; 
Nice in providing what you cannot want . 
Have conscience ; give not her you love this pain : 
Solicit not yourself , and her , in vain . 
All other Debts may compensation find : 
But Love is strict , and will be paid in kind . 


Emp.   Sure of all ills , Domestic are the worst ; 
When most secure of blessings , we are cursed . 
When we lay next us what we hold most dear , 
Like Hercules , envenomed Shirts we wear ; 
And cleaving mischiefs . 


Nour.   — What you merit , have : 
And share , at least , the miseries you gave . 
Your days , I will alarm , I 'll haunt your nights : 
And , worse than Age , disable your delights . 
May your sick Fame still languish , till it die : 
All Offices of Power neglected lie , 
And you grow cheap in every Subject's eye . 
then , as the greatest Curse that I can give ; 
Unpitied , be deposed ; and after live . Going off . 


Emp.   Stay ; and now learn , 
How criminal soe'er we Husbands are , 
't is not for Wives to push our crimes too far . 
Had you still Mistress of your temper been , 
I had been modest , and not owned my Sin. 
Your fury hardens me : and what e'er wrong 
You suffer , you have cancelled by your tongue . 
A Guard there ; seize her : she shall know this hour , 
What is a husband 's and a Monarch's power , 


Guard seizes her . Enter Aureng-zebe . Nour.   I see for whom your Charter you maintain : 
I must be fettered , and my Son be slain , 
That Zelyma's ambitious Race may reign . 
Not so you promised , when my Beauty drew 
All Asia's Vows ; when Persia left for you 
The Realm of Candahar for Dow'r I brought : 
That long contended Prize for which you fought . 


Aur.   The name of Stepmother , your practised Art , 
By which you have estranged my Father's heart , 
All you have done against me , or design , 
Shows your aversion , but begets not mine . 
Long may my Father India's Empire guide : 
And may not breach your Nuptial Vows divide . 


Emp.   Since Love obliges not , I from this hour , 
Assume the right of Man's Despotie power : 
Man is by Nature formed your Sex's head : 
And is himself the Canon of his Bed. 
In Bands of Iron fettered you shall be : 
An easier yoke than what you put on me . 


Aur.   Though much I fear my interest is not great , Kneeling . 
Let me your Royal Clemency entreat . 
Secrets of Marriage still are Sacred held : 
There sweet and bitter by the wise concealed . 
Errors of Wives reflect on Husbands still : 
And , when divulged , proclaim   chosen ill . 
And the mysterious power of Bed and Throne , 
Should always be maintained , but rarely shown . 


Emp.   To so perverse a Sex all Grace is vain : 
It gives 'em courage to offend again : 
For with feigned tears they penitence pretend : 
Again are pardoned , and again offend . 
Fathom our pity when they seem to grieve ; 
Only to try how far we can forgive . 
Till launching out into a Sea of strife , 
They scorn all pardon , and appear all Wife . 
But be it as you please : for your loved sake , 
This last and fruitless trial I will make . 
In all requests , your right of merit use : 
And know , There is but one I can refuse . 


He signs to the Guards , and they remove from the Empress . Nour.     done enough , for you designed my Chains : 
The Grace is vanished , but th' affront remains . 
Nor is 't a Grace , or for his merit done ; 
You durst no farther , for you feared my Son. 
This you have gained by the rough course you prove ; 
I 'm past Repentance , and you past my Love. Exit . 


Emp.   A Spirit so untamed the world ne'er bore . 


Aur.   And yet worse usage had incensed her more . 
But since by no obligement she is tied , 
You must betimes for your defence provide . 
I cannot idle in your danger stand ; 
But beg once more I may your Arms command : 
Two Battles your auspicious Cause has won ; 
My Sword can perfect what it has begun , 
And , from your Walls , dislodge that haughty Son.  


Emp.   My Son , your valour has , this day , been such , 
None can enough admire , or praise too much . 
But now , with reason , your success I doubt : 
Her Faction's strong within , his Arms without . 


Aur.   I left the City in a Panic fright : 
Lions they are in Council , Lambs in Fight . 
But my own Troops , by Mirzah led , are near : 
I , by to morrow's dawn , expect 'em here . 
To favour 'em , I 'll Sally out ere day , 
And through our slaughtered Foes enlarge their way . 


Emp.   Age has not yet 
So shrunk my Sinews , or so chilled my Veins , 
But conscious Virtue in my breast remains . 
But had I now 
That strength , with which my boiling Youth was fraught ; 
When in the Vale of Balasor I fought , 
And from Bengale their Captive Monarch brought ; 
When Elephant against Elephant did rear 
His Trunk , and Castles justled in the Air ; 
My Sword thy way to Victory had shown : 
And owed the Conquest to itself alone . 


Aur.   Those fair Ideas to my aid I 'll call , 
And emulate my great Original . 
Or , if they fail , I will invoke in Arms , 
The power of Love , and Indamora's Charms . 


Emp.   I doubt the happy influence of your Star : 
T' invoke a Captives name bodes ill in War.  


Aur.   Sir , give me leave to say , What ever now 
The Omen prove , it boded well to you . 
Your Royal Promise , when I went to fight , 
Obliged me to resign a Victor's right . 
Her liberty I fought for , and I won : 
And claim it as your General , and your Son.  


Emp.   My ears still ring with noise , I 'm vexed to death : 
Tongue-killed , and have not yet recover'd-breath . 
Nor will I be prescribed my time by you : 
First end the War , and then your Claim renew . 
While to your Conduct I my Fortune trust , 
To keep this pledge of duty is but just . 


Aur.   Some hidden cause your jealousy does move , 
Or you could ne'er suspect my Loyal Love.  


Emp.   What love soever by an Heir is shown , 
He waits but time to step into the Throne . 
you 're neither justified , nor yet accused : 
Mean while , the Prisoner with respect is used . 


Aur.   I know the kindness of her Guardian such , 
I need not fear too little , but too much . 
But how , Sir , how have you from virtue swerved ? 
Or what so ill return have I deserved ? 
You doubt not me , nor have I spent my blood , 
To have my faith no better understood : 
Your soul 's above the baseness of distrust : 
Nothing but Love could make you so unjust . 


Emp.   You know your Rival then ; and know 't is fit , 
The Son's should to the Father's Claim submit . 


Aur.   Sons may have right , which they can never quit . 
Yourself first made that Title which I claim : 
First bid me love , and authorised my flame . 


Emp.   The value of my gift I did not know : 
If I could give , I can resume it too . 


Aur.   Recall your gift , for I your power confess : 
But first , take back my life , a gift that 's lesle . 
Long life would now but a long burden prove : 
you 're grown unkind , and I have lost your love . 
My grief let unbecoming speeches fall : 
I should have died , and not complained at all . 


Emp.   Witness ye Powers , 
How much I suffered , and how long I striven 
Against th' assaults of this imperious Love ! 
I represented to myself the shame 
Of perjured Faith , and violated Fame . 
Your great deserts , how ill they were repaid ; 
All arguments , in vain , I urged and weighed : 
For mighty Love , who Prudence does despise , 
For Reason , showed me Indamora's Eyes . 
What would you more , my crime I sadly view , 
Acknowledge , am ashamed , and yet pursue . 


Aur.   Since you can love , and yet your error see , 
The same resistless power may pled for me . 
With no lesle ardour I my claim pursue : 
I love , and cannot yield her even to you . 


Emp.   Your elder Brothers , though overcome , have right : 
The youngest yet in Arms prepared to fight . 
But , yielding her , I firmly have decreed , 
That you alone to Empire shall succeed . 


Aur.   To after Ages let me stand a shame , 
When I exchange for Crowns my Love or Fame . 
You might have found a mercenary Son , 
To profit of the Battles he had wone : 
Had I been such , what hindered me to take 
The Crown ? nor had th' exchange been yours to make . 
While you are living , I no right pretend ; 
Wear it , and let it where you please descend . 
But from my Love , 't is Sacrilege to part : 
There , there 's my Throne in Indamora's heart . 


Emp.   't is in her heart alone that you must Reign : 
you 'll find her person difficult to gain . 
Give willingly what I can take by force : 
And know , Obedience is your safest course . 


Aur.   I 'm taught , by Honour's precepts , to obey : 
Fear to Obedience is a slavish way . 
If ought my want of duty could beget ; 
You take the most prevailing means , to threat . 
Pardon your Blood that boils within my veins ; 
It rises high , and menacing disdains . 
Even death 's become to me no dreadful name : 
i  often met him , and have made him tame : 
In fight fields , where our acquaintance grew , 
I saw him , and contemned him first for you . 


Emp.   Of formal duty make no more thy boast : 
thou disobey'st where it concerns me most . 
Fool , with both hands thus to push back a Crown : 
And headlong cast thyself from Empire down . 
Though Nourmahal I hate , her Son shall Reign : 
Inglorious thou , by thy own fault remain . 
Thy younger Brother I 'll admit this hour : 
So mine shall be thy Mistress , his thy Power . Exit . 


Aur.   How vain is Virtue which directs our ways 
Through certain danger to uncertain praise ! 
Barren , and airy name ! thee Fortune fly's ; 
With thy lean Train , the Pious and the Wise. 
Heaven takes thee at thy word , without regard ; 
And let's thee poorly be thy own reward . 
The World is made for the bold impious man ; 
Who stops at nothing , seizes all he can . 
Justice to merit does weak aid afford ; 
She trusts her Balance , and neglects her Sword. 
Virtue is nice to take what 's not her own ; 
And , while she long consults , the Prize is gone . 


To him , Dianet . Dia.   Forgive the Bearer of unhappy news : 
Your altered Father openly pursues 
Your ruin ; and , to compass his intent , 
For violent Morat in haste has sent . 
The Gates he ordered all to be unbarred : 
And from the Marketplace to draw the Guard.  


Aur.   How look the People in this turn of State ? 


Dia.   They mourn your ruin as their proper Fate . 
Cursing the Empress : for they think it done 
By her procurement , to advance her Son. 
Himulco too , though awed , they scarcely can forbear : 
His pride they hate , his violence they fear . 
All bend to rise , would you appear their Chief , 
Till your own Troops come up to your relief . 


Aur.   Ill treated , and forsaken , as I am , 
I 'll not betray the glory of my name : 
't is not for me , who have preserved a State , 
To buy an Empire at so base a rate . 


Dia.   The points of Honour Poets may produce ; 
Trappingss of life , for Ornament , not Use : 
Honour , which only does the name advance , 
Is the mere raving madness of Romance . 
Pleased with a word , you may sit tamely down ; 
And see your younger Brother force the Crown . 


Aur.   I know my fortune in extremes does lie : 
The Sons of Indostan must Reign , or die . 
That desperate hazard Courage does create ; 
As he plays frankly , who has least Estate , 
And that the World the Coward will despise , 
When life 's a Blank , who pulls not for a Prize . 


Dia.   Of all your knowledge , this vain fruit you have , 
To walk with eyes broad open to your Grave . 


Aur.   From what i  said , conclude , without reply , 
I neither would Usurp , nor tamely die . 
th' attempt to fly , would guilt betray , or fear : 
Besides , 't were vain ; the fort 's our Prison here . 
Somewhat I have resolved — 
Morat , perhaps , has Honour in his breast : 
And , in extremes , bold Counsels are the best . 
Like Emp'ric Remedies , they last are tried ; 
And by th' event condemned , or justified . 
Presence of mind and courage in distress , 
Are more than Armies to procure success . Exit . 


ACT III  

Arimant , with a Letter in his hand : Indamora . Arim.   And I the Messenger to him from you ? 
Your Empire you to Tyranny pursue : 
You lay commands , both cruel and unjust , 
To serve my Rival , and betray my trust . 


Ind.   You first betrayed your trust in loving me , 
And should not I my own advantage see ? 
Serving my Love , you may my Friendship gain , 
You know the rest of your pretences vain . 
You must , my Arimant , you must be kind : 
't is in your Nature , and your Noble Mind . 


Arim.   I 'll to the King , and straight my trust resign . 


Ind.   His trust you may , but you shall never mine . 
Heaven made you love me for no other end , 
But to become my Confident and Friend : 
As such , I keep no Secret from your sight , 
And therefore make you judge how ill I write : 
Read it , and tell me freely then your mind : 
If 't is indicted as I meant it , kind . 


Arim.   ( reading ) I ask not Heaven my freedom to restore , 
But only for your sake — I 'll read no more : 
And yet I must — 
( Reading ) Lesle for my own , than for your sorrow , sad — 
Another line , like this , would make me mad — 
( As reading ) Heaven ! she goes on — yet more — and yet more kind ! 
Each Sentence is a Dagger to my mind . 
( Reading ) See me this night — 
Thank Fortune , who did such a Friend provide , 
For faithful Arimant shall be your Guide . 
Not only to be made an Instrument , 
But preingaged without my own consent ! 


Ind.   Unknown t' engage you still augments my score , 
And gives you scope of meriting the more . 


Arim.   The best of men 
Some interest in their actions must confess ; 
None merit but in hope they may possess . 
The fatal Paper rather let me tear , 
Than , like Bellerophon , my own Sentence bear . 


Ind.   You may ; but 't will not be your best advice : 
'T will only give me pains of writing twice . 
You know you must obey me , soon or late : 
Why should you vainly struggle with your Fate ? 


Arim.   I thank thee , Heaven , thou hast been wondrous kind ! 
Why am I thus to slavery designed , 
And yet am cheated with a freeborn mind ? 
Or make thy Orders with my reason suit , 
Or let me live by Sense a glorious Brutus — 
She frowns . You frown , and I obey with speed , before 
That dreadful Sentence comes , See me no more : 
See me no more ! that sound , methinks , I hear 
Like the last Trumpet thundering in my ear . 


Enter Solyman . Solym.   The Princess Melesinda , bathed in tears , 
And tossed alternately with hopes and fears , 
If your affairs such leisure can afford , 
Would learn from you the fortunes of her Lord  


Arim.   Tell her , that I some certainty may bring ; 
I go this minute to attend the King.  


Ind.   This lonely Turtle I desire to see : 
Grief , though not cured , is eased by Company . 


Arim.   ( to Solym. ) Say , if she please , she hither may repair , 
And breathe the freshness of the open Air. Exit Solym.  


Ind.   Poor Princess ! how I pity her estate , 
Wrapped in the ruins of her Husband's Fate ! 
She mourned Morat should in Rebellion rise ; 
Yet he offends , and she 's the Sacrifice . 


Arim.   Not knowing his design , at Court she stayed ; 
Till , by command , close prisoner she was made . 
Since when , 
Her Chains with Roman Constancy she bore ; 
But that , perhaps , an Indian Wife's is more . 


Ind.   Go , bring her comfort ; leave me here alone . 


Arim.   My love must still be in obedience shown . Exit Arim.  


Enter Melesinda , led by Solyman , who retires afterwards . Ind.   When graceful sorrow in her pomp appears , 
Sure she is dressed in Melesinda's tears . 
Your head reclined , ( as hiding grief from view , ) 
Droops , like a Rose surcharged with morning Dew . 


Mel.   Can Flowers but droop in absence of the Sun , 
Which waked their sweets ? and mine , alas ! is gone . 
But you the noblest Charity express : 
For they who shine in Courts still eat distress . 


Ind.   Distressed myself , like you , confined I live : 
And therefore can compassion take , and give . 
we 're both Love's Captives , but with Fate so cross , 
One must be happy by the others loss . 
Morat , or Aureng-zebe must fall this day . 


Mel.   Too truly Tamerlain's Successors they , 
Each thinks a World too little for his sway . 
could you and I the same pretences bring , 
Mankind should with more ease receive a King : 
I would to you the narrow World resign , 
And want no Empire while Morat was mine . 


Ind.   Wished freedom I presage you soon will find ; 
If Heaven be just , and be to Virtue kind . 


Mel.   Quite otherwise my mind foretells my Fate : 
Short is my life , and that unfortunate . 
Yet should I not complain , would Heaven afford 
Some little time , ere death , to see my Lord  


Ind.   These thoughts are but your melancholy's food ; 
Raised from a lonely life , and dark abode : 
But whatsoever our jarring fortunes prove , 
Though our Lords hate , methinks we two may love . 


Mel.   Such be our Loves as may not yield to Fate : 
I bring a heart more true than fortunate . 


Giving their hands . To them Arimant . Arim.   I come with haste suprising news to bring : 
In two hour's time , since last I saw the King , 
th' affairs of Court have wholly changed their face : 
Unhappy Aureng-zebe is in disgrace : 
And your Morat , ( proclaimed the Successor ) 
Is called , to awe the City with his power . 
Those Trumpets his triumphant Entry tell . 
And now the Shouts waft near the Citadel . 


Ind.   See , Madam , see th' event by me foreshown : 
I envy not your chance , but grieve my own . 


Mel.   A change so unexpected must surprise : 
And more , because I am unused to joys . 


Ind.   May all your wishes ever prosperous be , 
But I 'm too much concerned th' event to see . 
My eyes too tender are — 
To view my Lord become the public scorn . 
I came to comfort , and I go to mourn . Taking her leave . 


Mel.   Stay , I 'll not see my Lord , 
Before I give your sorrow some relief ; 
And pay the charity you lent my grief . 
Here he shall see me first with you confined : 
And , if your virtue fail to move his mind , 
I 'll use my interest that he may be kind . 
Fear not , I never moved him yet in vain . 


Ind.   So fair a Pleader any Cause may gain . 


Mel.   I have no taste , methinks , of coming joy ; 
For black presages all my hopes destroy . 
Die , something whispers , Melesinda , die ; 
Fulfil , fulfil thy mournful Destiny . 
Mine is a gleam of bliss , too hot to last , 
Watery it shines , and will be soon o'r-cast . 


Indamora and Melesinda re-enter , as into the Chamber : Arim.   Fortune seems weary grown of Aureng-zebe , 
While to her new-made Favourite , Morat , 
Her lavish hand is wastefully profuse : 
With Fame and flowing Honours tided in , 
Born on a swelling Current smooth beneath him . 
The King and haughty Empress , to our wonder , 
If not atoned , yet seemingly at peace . 
As Fate for him that Miracle reserved . 


Enter in Triumph , Emperor , Morat , and Train . Emp.   I have confessed I love . 
As I interpret fairly your design , 
So look not with severer eyes on mine . 
Your Fate has called you to th' imperial Seat : 
In duty be , as you in Arms are , great . 
For Aureng-zebe a hated name is grown , 
And Love lesle bears a Rival than the Throne . 


Mor.   To me , the cries of fight Fields are Charms : 
Keen be my Sable , and of proof my Arms. 
I ask no other blessing of my Stars : 
no prize but Fame , nor Mistress but the Wars . 
I scarce am pleased I tamely mount the Throne : 
Would Aureng-zebe had all their Souls in one : 
With all my elder Brothers I would fight , 
And so from partial Nature force my right . 


Emp.   Had we but lasting Youth , and time to spare , 
Some might be thrown away on Fame and War : 
But Youth , the perishing good , runs on too fast : 
And unenjoyed will spend itself to waste ; 
Few know the use of life before 't is past . 
Had I once more thy vigour to command , 
I would not let it die upon my hand : 
no hour of pleasure should pass empty by , 
Youth should watch joys , and shoot 'em as they fly . 


Mor.   Methinks all pleasure is in greatness found . 
Kings , like Heavens' Eye , should spread their beams around . 
Pleased to be seen while Glory's race they run : 
Rest is not for the Chariot of the Sun. 
Subjects are stiffnecked Animals , they soon 
Feel slackened Reinss , and pitch their Rider down . 


Emp.   To thee that drudgery of Power I give : 
Cares be thy lot : Reign thou , and let me live . 
The Fort I 'll keep for my security , 
Business , and public State resign to thee . 


Mor.   Luxurious Kings are to their People lost ; 
They live , like Drones , upon the public cost . 
My Arms , from Pole to Pole , the World shall shake : 
And , with myself , keep all Mankind awake . 


Emp.   Believe me , Son , and needless trouble spare ; 
't is a base World , and is not worth our care . 
The Vulgar , a scarce animated Clod , 
Ne'er pleased with ought 'em , above Prince or God. 
Were I a God , the drunken Globe should roll : 
The little Emmets with the human Soul 
Care for themselves , while at my ease I sat , 
And second Causes did the work of Fate . 
Or , if I would take care , that care should be 
For Wit that scorned the World , and lived like me . 


To them , Nourmahal , Zayda , and Attendants . Nour.   My dear Morat , Embracing her Son.  
This day propitious to us all has been : 
you 're now a Monarch's Heir , and I a Queen . 
Your youthful Father now may quit the State , 
And finds the ease he sought , indulged by Fate . 
Cares shall not keep him on the Throne awake , 
Nor break the golden Slumbers he would take . 


Emp.   In vain I struggled to the Goal of Life , 
While Rebel-sons , and an imperious Wife 
Still dragged me backward into noise and strife . 


Mor.   Be that remembrance lost ; and be 't my pride 
To be your pledge of peace on either side . 


To them , Aureng-zebe . Aur.   With all th' assurance Innocence can bring , 
Fearless without , because secure within , 
Armed with my courage , unconcerned I see 
This pomp ; a shame to you , a pride to me . 
Shame is but where with wickedness 't is joined ; 
And , while no baseness in this breast I find , 
I have not lost the birthright of my mind . 


Emp.   Children ( the blind effect of Love and Chance , 
Formed by their sportive Parent's ignorance ) 
Bear from their birth th'impressions of a Slave : 
Whom Heaven for play-games first , and then for service gave . 
One than may be displaced , and one may Reign : 
And want of Merit , tender Birthright vain . 


Mor.   Comes he t' upbraid us with his innocence ? 
Seize him , and take the preaching Brachman hence . 


Aur.   Stay , Sir ; I , from my years , no merit pled : To his Father . 
All my designs and acts to duty lead . 
Your Life and Glory are my only end ; 
And for that Prize I with Morat contend . 


Mor.   Not him alone ; I all Mankind defy . 
Who dares adventure more for both than I ? 


Aur.   I know you brave , and take you at your word : 
That present service which you vaunt , afford . 
Our two Rebellious Brothers are not dead : 
Though vanquished , yet again they gather head . 
I dare you , as your Rival in renown , 
March out your Army from th' imperial Town : 
Choose whom you please , the other leave to me : 
And set our Father absolutely free . 
This , if you do , to end all future strife , 
I am content to lead a private life : 
Disband my Army to secure the State , 
Nor aim at more , but leave the rest to Fate . 


Morat .  I 'll do 't . Draw out my Army on the Plain : 
War is to me a pastime , Peace a pain . 


Emp.   ( to Mor. ) Think better first . 
( To Aurelia ) You see yourself enclosed beyond escape , 
And therefore , Proteus-like , you change your shape . 
Of promise prodigal , while power you want , 
And preaching in the Selfdenying Cant.  


Morat .  Plot better ; for these Arts too obvious are , 
Of gaining time , the Masterpiece of War : 
Is Aureng-zebe so known ? 


Aur.   — If Acts like mine , 
So far from interest , profit , or design , 
Can show my heart , by those I would be known : 
I wish you could as well defend your own . 
My absent Army for my Father fought : 
Yours , in these Walls ▪ is to enslave him brought . 
If I come singly , you an armed guest , 
The World with ease may judge whose Cause is best . 


Mor.   My Father saw you ill designs pursue : 
And my admission showed his fear of you . 


Aur.   Himself best knows why he his Love withdraws : 
I owe him more than to declare the cause . 
But still I press our duty may be shown 
By Arms.  


Mor.   — I 'll vanquish all his foes alone . 


Aur.   You speak as if you could the Fates command , 
And had no need of any other hand . 
But , since my Honour you so far suspect , 
't is just I should on your designs reflect . 
To prove yourself a Loyal Son , declare 
you 'll lay down Arms when you conclude the War.  


Mor.   no present answer your demand requires ; 
The War once done , I 'll do what Heaven inspires . 
And while the Sword this Monarchy secures , 
't is managed by an abler Arm than yours . 


Emp.   Morat's design a doubtful meaning bears : Apart . 
In Aureng-zebe true Loyalty appears . 
He , for my safety , does his own despise ; 
Still , with his wrongs , I find his duty rise . 
I feel my Virtue struggling in my Soul , 
But stronger Passion does its power control . 
Yet be advised your ruin to prevent . To Aur. apart . 
You might be safe , if you would give consent . 


Aur.   So to your welfare I of use may be , 
My life or death are equal both to me . 


Emp.   The People's hearts are yours ; the Fort yet mine : 
Be wise , and Indamora's love resign . 
I am observed : remember that I give 
This my last proof of kindness , die , or live . 


Aur.   Life , with my Indamora , I would choose ; 
But , losing her , the end of living lose . 
I had considered all I ought before ; 
And fear of death can make me change no more . 
The People's love so little I esteem , 
Condemned by you , I would not live by them . 
May he who must your favour now possess , 
Much better serve you , and not love you lesle . 


Emp.   i  heard you ; and , to finish the debate , Aloud . 
Commit that Rebel prisoner to the State.  


Mor.   The deadly draught he shall begin this day : 
And languish with insensible decay . 


Aur.   I hate the lingering summons to attend , 
Death all at once would be the nobler end . 
Fate is unkind ! methinks a General 
Should warm , and at the head of Armies fall . 
And my ambition did that hope pursue , 
That so I might have died in fight for you . To his Father . 


Mor.   Would I had been disposer of thy Stars ; 
thou shouldst have had thy wish , and died in Wars . 
't is I , not thou , have reason to repine , 
That thou shouldst fall by any hand , but mine . 


Aur.   When thou wert formed , Heaven did a Man begin ; 
But the brute Soul , by chance , was shuffled in . 
In Woods and Wilds thy Monarchy maintain : 
Where valiant Beasts , by force and rapine , reign . 
In Life's next Scene , if Transmigration be , 
Some Bear or Lion is reserved for thee . 


Mor.   Take heed thou comest not in that Lion's way : 
I prophesy thou wilt thy Soul convey 
Into a Lamb , and be again my Prey . 
Hence with that dreaming Priest.  


Nour.   — Let me prepare 
The poisonous draught : his death shall be my care . 
Near my Apartment let him prisoner be : 
That I his hourly ebbs of life may see . 


Aur.   My life I would not ransom with a prayer : 
't is vile , since 't is not worth my Father's care . 
I go not , Sir , indebted to my grave : 
You paid yourself , and took the life you gave . Exit . 


Emp.   OH that I had more sense of virtue left , Aside . 
Or were of that , which yet remains , bereft . 
i  just enough to know how I offend , 
And , to my shame , have not enough to mend . 
Led to the Mosque — 


Mor.   Love's pleasures why should dull devotion stay ? 
Heaven to my Melesinda's but the way . 


Exeunt Emperor , Morat , and Train . Zayd .  Sure Aureng-zebe has somewhat of Divine , 
Whose virtue through so dark a cloud can shine . 
Fortune has from Morat this day removed 
The greatest Rival , and the best beloved . 


Nour.   He is not yet removed . 


Zayd .  — He life's , 't is true ; 
But soon must die , and , what I mourn , by you . 


Nour.   My Zayda , may thy words prophetic be : Embracing her eagerly . 
I take the Omen , let him die by me . 
He stifled in my arms shall lose his breath : 
And Life itself shall envious be of Death . 


Zay .  Bless me , you Powers above ! 


Nour.   — Why dost thou start ? 
Is Love so strange ? or have not I a heart ? 
could Aureng-zebe so lovely seem to thee , 
And I want eyes that noble worth to see ? 
Thy little Soul was but to wonder moved : 
My sense of it was higher , and I loved . 
That Man , that Godlike Man , so brave , so great ; 
But these are thy small praises I repeat . 
I 'm carried by a Tide of Love away : 
he 's somewhat more than I myself can say . 


Zay .  Though all th'idea's you can form be true , 
He must not , cannot be possessed by you . 
If contradicting int'rests could be mixed , 
Nature herself hast cast a bar betwixt . 
And , ere you reach to this incestuous Love , 
You must Divine and Human Rights remove , 


Nour.   Count this among the Wonders Love has done : 
I had forgot he was my husband 's Sun ! 


Zay .  Nay , more ; you have forgot who is your own : 
For whom your care so long designed the Throne . 
Morat must fall , if Aureng-zebe should rise . 


Nour.   't is true ; but who was ere in love , and wise ? 
Why was that fatal knot of Marriage tied , 
Which did , by making us too near , divide ? 
Divides me from my Sex ! for Heaven , I find 
Excludes but me alone of Womankind . 
I stand with guilt confounded , lost with shame , 
And yet made wretched only by a name . 
If names have such command on human Life , 
Love sure 's a name that 's more Divine than Wife . 
That Sovereign power all guilt from action takes , 
At least the stains are beautiful it makes . 


Zay .  Th'incroaching ill you early should oppose : 
Flattered 'tis worse , and by indulgence grows . 


Nour.   Alas ! and what have I not said or done ? 
I fought it to the last : and Love has won . 
A bloody Conquest ; which destruction brought , 
And ruined all the Country where he fought . 
Whether this Passion from above was sent 
The Fate of him Heaven favours to prevent , 
Or as the curse of Fortune in excess ; 
That , stretching , would beyond its reach possess : 
And , with a taste which plenty does deprave , 
Loathes lawful good , and lawless ill does crave ? 


Zay .  But yet consider — 


Nour.   — no , 't is loss of time : 
Think how to farther , not divert my crime . 
My artful Engines instantly I 'll move : 
And choose the soft and gentlest hour of Love. 
The Under-provost of the Fort is mine . 
But see , Morat ! I 'll whisper my design . 


Enter Morat with Arimant , as talking : Attendants . Arim.   And for that cause was not in public seen : 
But stays in Prison with the captive Queen . 


Mor.   Let my Attendants wait ; I 'll be alone : 
Where least of State , there most of Love is shown . 


Nour.   My Son , your business is not hard to guess ; To Mor.  
Long absence makes you eager to possess : 
I will not importune you by my stay ; 
She merit's all the Love which you can pay . 


Exit with Zayda . Re-enter Arimaut , with Melesinda ; than Exit . Morat runs to Melecinda , and embraces her . Mor.   Should I not chide you , that you choose to stay 
In gloomy shades , and lost a glorious day ? 
Lost the first fruits of joy you should possess 
In my return , and made my Triumph lesle ? 


Mel.   Should I not chide , that you could stay and see 
Those joys , preferring public Pomp to me ? 
Through my dark Cell your shouts of Triumph rung : 
I heard with pleasure ; but I thought 'em long . 


Mor.   The Public will in Triumphs rudely share . 
And Kings the rudeness of their joys must bear : 
But I made haste to set my Captive free : 
And thought that work was only worthy me . 
The Fame of ancient Matrons you pursue ; 
And stand a blameless pattern to the new . 
I have not words to praise such Acts as these : 
But take my Heart , and mould it as you please . 


Mel.   A trial of your kindness I must make , 
Though not for mine so much as virtue 's sake . 
The Queen of Cassimeer — 


Mor.   — no more , my love ; 
That only suit I beg you not to move . 
That she 's in Bonds for Aureng-zebe I know , 
And should , by my consent , continue so . 
The good old man , I fear , will pity show . 
My Father dotes , and let him still dote on ; 
He buys his Mistress dearly with his Throne . 


Mel.   See her ; and then be cruel if you can . 


Mor.   't is not with me as with a private Man 
Such may be swayed by Honour , or by Love ; 
But Monarches , only by their interest move . 


Mel.   Heaven does a Tribute for your power demand : 
He leaves th' oppressed and poor upon your hand . 
And those who Stewards of his pity prove , 
He blesses , in return , with public Love. 
In his distress , some Miracle is shown : 
If exiled , Heaven restores him to his Throne . 
He needs no Guard while any Subjects near : 
Nor , like his Tyrant Neighbours , lives in fear : 
no Plots th' alarm to his retirements give : 
't is all Mankind's concern tha● he should live . 


Mor.   You promised friendship in your low estate ▪ 
And should forget it in your better Fate ; 
Such Maxims are more plausible than true ; 
But somewhat must be given to Love and you . 
I 'll view this Captive Queen ; to let her see , 
Prayers and complaints are lost on such as me . 


Mel.   I 'll bear the news : Heaven knows how much I 'm pleased , 
That , by my care , th' afflicted may be eased . 


As she is going off , Enter Indamora . Ind.   I 'll spare your pains , and venture out alone , 
Since you , fair Princess , my protection own . 
But you , brave Prince , a harder task must find ; To Morat kneeling , who takes her up . 
In saving me , you would but half be kind . 
An humble Suppliant at your feet I lie ; 
You have condemned my better part to die . 
Without my Aureng-zebe I cannot live ; 
Revoke his Doom , or else my Sentence give . 


Mel.   If Melesinda in your love have part , 
Which , to suspect , would break my tender heart : 
If Love , like mine , may for a Lover pled , 
By the chaste pleasures of our Nuptial Bed , 
By all the interest my past sufferings make , 
And all I yet would suffer for your sake ; 
By you yourself , the last and dearest tie — 


Mor.   You move in vain ; for Aureng-zebe must die . 


Ind.   could that Decree from any Brother come ? 
Nature herself is sentenced in your doom . 
Piety is no more , she sees her place 
Usurped by Monsters , and a savage Race . 
From her soft Eastern Climes you drive her forth , 
To the cold Mansions of the utmost North. 
How can our Prophet suffer you to Reign , 
When he looks down , and sees your Brother slain ? 
Avenging Furies will your life pursue : 
Think there 's a Heaven , Morat , though not for you . 


Mel.   Her words imprint a terror on my mind . 
What if this death , which is for him designed , 
Had been your Doom , ( far be that Augury ! ) 
And you , not Aureng-zebe , condemned to die ? 
Weigh well the various turns of Human Fate , 
And seek , by Mercy , to secure your State.  


Ind.   Had Heaven the Crown for Aureng-zebe designed , 
Pity , for you , had pierced his generous mind . 
Pity does with a Noble Nature suit : 
A Brother's life had suffered no dispute . 
All things have right in life , our Prophet's care 
commands the being's eve'n of Brutes to spare . 
Though interest his restraint has justified , 
Can life , and to a Brother , be denied ? 


Mor.   All Reasons for his safety urged , are weak : 
And yet , methinks , 't is Heaven to hear you speak . 


Mel.   't is part of your own being to invade — 


Mor.   Nay , if she fail to move , would you persuade ? Turning to Inda . 
My Brother does a glorious Fate pursue . 
I envy him , that he must fall for you . 
He had been base had he released his right : 
For such an Empire none but Kings should fight . 
If with a Father , he disputes this prize , 
My wonder ceases when I see these Eyes . 


Mel.   And can you then deny those Eyes you praise ? 
Can Beauty wonder , and not pity raise ? 


Mor.   Your intercession now is needless grown : 
Retire , and let me speak with her alone . 
Melesinda retires , weeping , to the side of the Theatre . Queen , that you may not fruitless tears employ , Taking Indamora is hand . 
I bring you news to fill your heart with joy : 
Your Lover King of all the East shall Reign : 
For Aureng-zebe to morrow shall be slain . 


Ind.   The hopes you raised   blasted with a breath : Starting back . 
With Triumphs you began , but end with Death . 
Did you not say , my Lover should be King ? 


Mor.   ay , in Morat , the best of Lovers bring ? 
For one forsaken both of Earth and Heaven , 
Your kinder Stars a nobler choice have given : 
My Father , while I please , a King appears ; 
His Power is more declining than his Years . 
An Emperor and Lover , but in show : 
But you , in me , have Youth and Fortune too . 
As Heaven did to your eyes and form Divine , 
Submit the Fate of all th' imperial Line ; 
So was it ordered by its wise Decree , 
That you should find 'em all comprised in me . 


Ind.   If , Sir , I seem not discomposed with rage , 
Feed not your fancy with a false presage . 
Farther to press your Courtship is but vain : 
A cold refusal carries more disdain , 
Unsettled Virtue stormy may appear ; 
Honour , like mine , serenely is severe . 
To scorn your person , and reject your Crown , 
Disorder not my face into a frown . Turns from him . 


Mor.   Your Fortune you should rev'rently have used : 
Such offers are not twice to be refused . 
I go to Aureng-zebe , and am in haste : 
For your Commands , they 're like to be the last . 


Ind.   Tell him , 
With my own death I would his life redeem ; 
But , lesle than Honour , both our Lives esteem . 


Mor.   Have you no more ? 


Ind.   — What shall I do or say ? Aside . 
He must not in this fury go away . 
Tell him , I did in vain his Brother move ; 
And yet he falsely said , he was in love . 
Falsely ; for had he truly loved , at least , 
He would have given one day to my request . 


Mor.   A little yielding may my love advance : 
She darted from her eyes a sidelong glance , 
Just as she spoke ; and , like her words , it flew : 
Seemed not to beg , what yet she bid me do . 
To her . A Brother , Madam , cannot give a day ; 
A Servant , and who hopes to merit , may . 


Mel.   If , Sir — coming to him . 


Mor.   no more — set speeches , and a formal tale , 
With none but Statesmen and grave Fools prevail . 
Dry up your tears , and practise every Grace , 
That fits the Pageant of your Royal place . Exit . 


Mel.   Madam , the strange reverse of Fate you see : To Ind.  
I pitied you , now you may pity me . Exit after him . 


Ind.   Poor Princess ! thy hard Fate I could bemoan , 
Had I not nearer sorrows of my own . 
Beauty is seldom fortunate , when great : 
A vast Estate , but overcharged with Debt . 
Like those whom want to baseness does betray : 
I 'm forced to flatter him I cannot pay . 
OH would he be content to seize the Throne : 
I beg the life of Aureng-zebe alone . 
Whom Heaven would bless , from Pomp it will remove , 
And make their wealth in privacy and Love. Exit . 


ACT IU.  

Aureng-zebe solus . Distrust , and darkness , of a future state , 
Make poor Mankind so fearful of their Fate . 
Death , in itself , is nothing ; but we fear 
To be we know not what , we know not where . Soft Music.  
This is the Ceremony of my Fate : 
A parting Treat ; and I 'm to die in State. 
They lodge me , as I were the Persian King : 
And with luxurious Pomp my death they bring . 
To him Nourmahal . Nour.   I thought , before you drew your latest breath , 
To smooth your passage , and to soften death ; 
For I would have you , when you upward move , 
Speak kindly of me , to our Friends above : 
Nor name me there th' occasion of your Fate ; 
Or what my Interest does , impute to Hate . 


Aur.   I ask not for what end your Pomp's designed ; 
Whether t'insult , or to compose my mind : 
I marked it not ; 
But , knowing Death would soon th' assault begin , 
Stood firm collected in my Strength within : 
To guard that breach did all my Forces guide , 
And left unmanned the quiet Senses side . 


Nour.   Because Morat from me his being took , 
All I can say will much suspected look : 
't is little to confess your Fate I grieve ; 
Yet more than you would easily believe . 


Aur.   Since my inevitable death you know , 
You safely unavailing pity show : 
't is Popular to mourn a dying Foe . 


Nour.   You made my Liberty your late request : 
Is no return due from a grateful breast ? 
I grow impatient , till I find some way 
Great Offices , with greater , to repay . 


Aur.   When I consider Life , 't is all a cheat ; 
Yet , fooled with hope , men favour the deceit ; 
Trust on , and think to morrow will repay : 
To morrow's falser than the former day ; 
Lies worse ; and while it says , We shall be blessed 
With some new joys , cuts off what we possessed . 
Strange cozenage ! none would live passed years again , 
Yet all hope pleasure in what yet remain ; 
And , from the dregss of Life , think to receive 
What the first sprightly running could not give . 
I 'm tired with waiting for this Chymic Gold , 
Which fools us young , and beggars us when old . 


Nour.   't is not for nothing that we life pursue ; 
It pays our hopes with something still that 's new : 
Each day 's a Mistress , unenjoyed before ; 
Like Travellers , we 're pleased with seeing more . 
Did you but know what joys your way attend , 
You would not hurry to your journey's end . 


Aur.   I need not haste the end of Life to meet ; 
The precipice is just beneath my feet . 


Nour.   Think not my sense of Virtue is so small : 
I 'll rather leap down first , and break your fall . 
My Aureng-zebe , ( may I not call you so ? ) Taking him by the hand . 
Behold me now no longer as your Foe ; 
I am not , cannot be your Enemy : 
Look , is there any malice in my eye ? 
Pray sit — Both sit . 
That distance shows too much respect , or fear : 
you 'll find no danger in approaching near . 


Aur.   Forgive th' amazement of my doubtful state : 
This kindness from the Mother of Morat ! 
Or is 't some Angel , pitying what I bore , 
Who takes that shape , to make my wonder more ? 


Nour.   Think me your better Genius in disguise ; 
Or any thing that more may charm your eyes . 
Your Guardian Angel never could excel 
In care , nor could he love his charge so well . 


Aur.   Whence can proceed so wonderful a change ? 


Nour.   Can kindness to desert , like yours , be strange ? 
Kindness by secret Sympathy is tied ; 
For Noble Souls in Nature are allied . 
I saw with what a brow you braved your Fate ; 
Yet with what mildness bore your Father's hate . 
My Virtue , like a String wound up by Art , 
To the same sound , when yours was touched , took part , 
At distance shaken , and trembled at my heart . 


Aur.   I 'll not complain my Father is unkind , 
Since so much pity from a Foe I find . 
Just Heaven reward this act . 


Nour.   't is well the debt no payment does demand , 
You turn me over to another hand . 
But happy , happy she , 
And with the Blessed above to be compared , 
Whom you yourself would , with yourself , reward : 
The greatest , nay , the fairest of her kind , 
Would envy her that Bliss which you designed . 


Aur.   Great Princes thus , when Favourites they raise , 
To justify their Grace , their Creatures praise . 


Nour.   As Love the Noblest Passion we accounted , 
So to the highest Object it should mount . 
It shows you brave when mean desire's you eat . 
An Eagle only can behold the Sun : 
And so must you ; if yet , presage Divine 
There be in Dreams , or was 't a Vision mine ? 


Aur.   Of me ? 


Nour.   — And who could else employ my thought ? 
I dreamed , your Love was by Love's Goddess sought ; 
Officious Cupid's , hovering o'er your head , 
Held Myrtle wreaths : beneath your feet were spread 
What Sweets soe'er Sabean Springs disclose , 
Our Indian Jasmine , or the Syrian Rose : 
The wanton Ministers arround you striven 
For service , and inspired their Mother's Love : 
Close by your side , and languishing , she lies , 
With blushing cheeks , short breath , and wishing eyes ; 
Upon your breast supinely lay her head , 
While , on your face , her famished sight she fed . 
then , with a sigh , into these words she broke , 
( And gathered humid kisses as she spoke . ) 
Dull , and ingrateful ! must I offer love ? 
Desired of Gods , and envied even by jove : 
And dost thou ignorance or fear pretend ? 
Mean Soul ! and dar'st not gloriously offend ? 
then , pressing thus his hand — 


Aur.   — I 'll hear no more . Rising up . 
'T was impious to have understood before ; 
And I , till now , endeavoured to mistake 
th' incestuous meaning which too plain you make . 


Nour.   And why this niceness to that pleasure shown , 
Where Nature sums up all her joys in one ; 
Gives all she can , and labouring still to give , 
Makes it so great , we can but taste and live : 
So fills the Senses , that the Soul seems fled , 
And thought it self-does , for the time , lie dead ; 
Till , like a String screwed up with eager haste , 
It breaks , and is too exquisite to last ? 


Aur.   Heavens' ! can you this , without just vengeance , hear ? 
When will you thunder , if it now be clear ? 
Yet her alone let not your Thunder seize : 
I , too , deserve to die , because I please . 


Nour.   Custom our Native Royalty does awe ; 
Promiscuous Love is Nature's general Law : 
For whosoever the first Lovers were , 
Brother and Sister made the second Pair , 
And doubled , by their love , their piety . 


Aur.   Hence , hence , and to some barbarous Climate fly , 
Which only Brutes in human form does yield , 
And Man grows wild in Nature's common Field . 
Who eat their Parents , piety pretend ; 
Yet there no Sons their Sacred Bed ascend . 
To veil great Sins , a greater Crime you choose ; 
And , in your Incest , your Adult'ry lose . 


Nour.   In vain this haughty fury you have shown . 
How I adore a Soul so like my own ! 
You must be mine , that you may learn to live : 
Know joys , which only she who loves can give . 
Nor think that action you upbraid , so ill : 
I am not changed ; I love my Husband still ; 
But love him as he was , when youthful grace , 
And the first down began to shade his face : 
That Image does my Virgin-flames renew , 
And all your Father shines more bright in you . 


Aur.   In me a horror of myself you raise ; 
Cursed by your love , and blasted by your praise . 
You find new ways to prosecute my Fate ; 
And your least-guilty passion was your Hate . 


Nour.   I beg my death , if you can Love deny . Offering him a Dagger . 


Aur.   I 'll grant you nothing ; no , not even to die . 


Nour.   Know then , you are not half so kind as I  
Stamps with her foot . Enter Mutes , some with Swords drawn , one with a Cup.    chosen , and may now repent too late . 
Behold th' effect of what you wished , my Hate . 
This Cup , a cure for both our ills has brought : Taking the Cup to present him . 
You need not fear a Philtre in the Draught . 


Aur.   All must be poison which can come from thee ; Receiving it from her . 
But this the least . T'immortal Liberty 
This first I pour — like dying Socrates ; Spilling a little of it . 
Grim though he be , Death pleases when he frees . 


As he is going to drink , Enter Morat attended . Mor.   Make not such haste , you must my leisure stay : 
Your fate 's deferred , you shall not die to day . Taking the Cup from him . 


Nour.   What foolish pity has possessed your mind , 
To alter what your prudence once designed ? 


Mor.   What if I please to lengthen out his date 
A day , and take a pride to cozen Fate ? 


Nour.   'T will not be safe to let him live an hour . 


Mor.   I 'll do 't , to show my Arbitrary power . 


Nour.   Fortune may take him from your hands again , 
And you repent th' occasion lost in vain . 


Mor.   I smile at what your Female fear foresees : 
I 'm in fate 's place , and dictate her Decrees . 
Let Arimant be called . Exit one of his Attendants . 


Aur.   Give me the poison , and I 'll end your strife : 
I hate to keep a poor precarious life . 
Would I my safety on base terms receive , 
Know , Sir , I could have lived without your leave . 
But those I could accuse , I can forgive : 
By my disdainful silence , let 'em live . 


Nour.   What am I , that you dare to bind my hand ? To Mor.  
So low , i  not a Murder at command ! 
Can you not one poor Life to her afford , 
Her who gave up whole Nations to your Sword ? 
And from th' abundance of whose Soul and Heat , 
Th'o'rflowing served to make your mind so great . 


Mor.   What did that greatness in a Woman's mind ? 
Ill lodged , and weak to act what it designed . 
pleasure 's your portion , and your slothful ease : 
When man 's at leisure , study how to please . 
Soften his angry hours with servile care , 
And when he calls , the ready Feast prepare . 
From Wars , and from affairs of State abstain : 
Women Emasculate a Monarch's Reign ; 
And murmuring Crowds , who see 'em shine with Gold , 
That pomp , as their own ravished Spoils behold . 


Nour.   Rage chokes my words : 't is Womanly to weep : Aside . 
In my swollen breast my close revenge I 'll keep ; 
I 'll watch his tenderest part , and there strike deep . Exit . 


Aur.   Your strange proceeding does my wonder move ; 
Yet seems not to express a Brother's love . 
Say to what Cause my rescued life I owe.  


Mor.   If what you ask would please , you should not know . 
But since that knowledge , more than Death , will grieve , 
Know , Indamora gained you this Reprieve . 


Aur.   And whence had she the power to work your change ? 


Mor.   The power of Beauty is not new or strange . 
Should she command me more , I could obey ; 
But her request was bounded with a day . 
Take that ; and , if you 'll spare my farther crime , 
Be kind , and grieve to death against your time . 
Enter Arimant . Remove this Prisoner to some safer place : 
He has , for Indamora's sake , found grace : 
And , from my Mother's rage must guarded be , 
Till you receive a new Command from me . 


Arim.   Thus Love , and Fortune , persecute me still , 
And make me Slave to every Rivals william Aside . 


Aur.   How I disdain a Life , which I must buy 
With your contempt , and her inconstancy ! 
For a few hours , my whole content I pay : 
You shall not force on me another day . 


Exit with Arimant . Enter Melesinda . Mel.   I have been seeking you this hour 's long space , 
And feared to find you in another place ; 
But , since you 're here , my jealousy grows lesle : 
You will be kind to my unworthiness . 
What shall I say ? I love to that degree , 
Each glance another way is robbed from me . 
Absence , and Prisons , I could bear again ; 
But sink , and die , beneath your least disdain . 


Mor.   Why do you give your mind this needless care , 
And , for yourself , and me , new pains prepare ? 
I ne'er approved this passion in excess : 
If you would show your love , distrust me lesle . 
I hate to be pursued from place to place : 
Meet , at each turn , a stale domestic face . 
Th'approach of jealousy Love cannot bear , 
he 's wild , and soon on wing , if watchful eyes come near . 


Mel.   From your loved presence , how can I depart ? 
My eyes pursue the object of my heart . 


Mor.   You talk as if it were our Bridal night : 
Fondness is still th' effect of new delight ; 
And Marriage but the pleasure of a day : 
The metal 's base the Gild worn away . 


Mel.   I fear I 'm guilty of some great offence , 
And that has bred this cold indifference . 


Mor.   The greatest in the world to flesh and blood : 
You fond love much longer than you should . 


Mel.   If that be all which makes your discontent , 
Of such a crime I never can repent . 


Mor.   Would you force Love upon me , which I eat ? 
And bring course fare , when appetite is gone ? 


Mel.   Why did I not , in Prison , die before 
My fatal freedom made me suffer more ? 
I had been pleased to think I died for you , 
And doubly pleased , because you then were true : 
then I had hope ; but now , alas , have none . 


Mor.   You say you love me ; let that love be shown . 
't is in your power to make my happiness . 


Mel.   Speak quickly : to command me is to bless . 


Mor.   To Indamora you my Suit must move : 
you 'll sure speak kindly of the man you love . 


Mel.   Oh! rather let me perish by your hand , 
Than break my heart , by this unkind command : 
Think 't is the only one I could deny ; 
And that 't is harder to refuse than die . 
Try , if you please , my Rival's heart to win : 
I 'll bear the pain , but not promote the sin . 
You own what e'er perfections man can boast , 
And if she view you with my eyes , she 's lost . 


Mor.   Here I renounce all love , all Nuptial ties : 
Hence forward live a stranger to my eyes : 
When I appear , see you avoid the place , 
And haunt me not with that unlucky face . 


Mel.   Hard , as it is , I this command obey , 
And haste , while I have life , to go away : 
In pity stay some hours , till I am dead , 
That blameless you may court my Rival's Bed. 
My hated face I 'll not presume to show ; 
Yet I may watch your steps where e'er you go . 
Unseen , I 'll gaze ; and with my latest breath , 
Bless , while I die , the Author of my death . Weeping . 


Enter Emperor . Emp.   When your Triumphant Fortune high appears , 
What cause can draw these unbecoming tears ? 
Let cheerfulness on happy Fortune wait , 
And give not thus the Counter-time to Fate . 


Mel.   Fortune long frowned , and has but lately smiled : 
I doubt a Foe so newly reconciled . 
You saw but sorrow in its waning form , 
A working Sea remaining from a Storm ; 
When the now weary Waves roll o'er the Deep , 
And faintly murmur ere they fall asleep . 


Emp.   Your inward griefs you smother in your mind ; 
But Fame's loud voice proclaims your Lord unkind . 


Mor.   Let Fame be busy where she has to do : 
Tell of fought Fields , and every pompous Show . 
Those Tales are fit to fill the People's ears ; 
Monarches , unquestioned , move in higher Spheres . 


Mel.   Believe not Rumour , but yourself ; and see 
The kindness betwixt my plighted Lord and me . Kissing Morat . 
This is our State ; thus happily we live ; 
These are the quarrels which we take and give . 
( Aside to Mor. ) I had no other way to force a Kiss . 
Forgive my last Farewell to you , and Bliss . Exit . 


Emp.   Your haughty carriage shows too much of scorn , 
And love , like hers , deserves not that return . 


Mor.   you 'll please to leave me judge of what I do , 
And not examine by the outward show . 
Your usage of my Mother might be good : 
I judged it not . 


Emp.   — Nor was it fit you should . 


Mor.   then , in as equal Balance weigh my deeds . 


Emp.   My Right , and my Authority , exceeds . 
Suppose ( what I 'll not grant ) Injustice done ; 
Is judging me the duty of a Son ? 


Mor.   Not of a Son , but of an Emperor : 
You cancelled Duty when you gave me power . 
If your own Actions on your Will you ground , 
Mine shall hereafter know no other bound . 
What meant you when you called me to a Throne ? 
Was it to please me with a Name alone ? 


Emp.   'T was that I thought your gratitude would know 
What to my partial kindness you did own : 
That what your Birth did to your Claim deny , 
Your merit of Obedience might supply . 


Mor.   To your own thoughts such hopes you might propose ; 
But I took Empire not on terms like those . 
Of business you complained ; now take your ease : 
Enjoy what ever decrepit Age can please : 
Eat , Sleep , and tell long Tales of what you were 
In flower of Youth , if any one will hear , 


Emp.   Power like new Wine , does your weak Brain surprise , 
And its mad fumes , in hot discourses , rise ; 
But time these giddy vapours will remove ; 
Mean while I 'll taste the sober joys of Love.  


Mor.   You cannot Love , nor pleasures take , or give ; 
But life begin , when 't is too late to live . 
On a tired Courser you pursue delight , 
Let slip your morning and set out at night . 
If you have lived , take thankfully the past : 
Make , as you can , the sweet remembrance last . 
If you have not enjoyed what Youth could give , 
But life sunk through you like a leaky Sieve , 
Accuse yourself you lived not while you might ; 
But , in the Captive Queen resign your right . 
i  now resolved to fill your useless place ; 
I 'll take that Post to cover your disgrace , 
And love her , for the honour of my Race . 


Emp.   thou dost but try how far I can forbear , 
Nor art that Monster which thou wouldst appear : 
But do not wantonly my passion move ; 
I pardon nothing that relates to Love. 
My fury does , like jealous Forts , pursue 
With death , even Strangers who but come to view . 


Mor.   I did not only view , but will invade : 
could you shed venom from your reverend shade , 
Like Trees , beneath whose arms 't is death to sleep ; 
Did rolling Thunder your fenced Fortress keep , 
Thence would I snatch my Semele , like jove , 
And midst the dreadful Rack enjoy my Love.  


Emp.   Have I for this , ungrateful as thou art , 
When Right , when Nature , struggled in my heart ; 
When Heaven called on me for thy Brother's claim , 
broke all , and fullied my unspotted Fame ? 
Wert thou to Empire , by my baseness , brought , 
And wouldst thou ravish what so dear I bought ? 
Dear ! for my Conscience and its peace I gave : 
Why was my Reason made my passion's slave ? 
I see Heavens' Justice ; thus the Powers Divine , 
Pay Crimes with Crimes and punish mine by thine . 


Mor.   Crimes let them pay , and punish as they please : 
What Power makes mine , by Power I mean to seize . 
Since 't is to that they their own greatness owe 
Above , why should they question mine below ? Exit . 


Emp.   Prudence , thou vainly in our Youth art sought , 
And with Age purchased art too dearly bought : 
we 're passed the use of Wit , for which we toil ; 
Late Fruit , and planted in too cold a Soil . 
My Stock of Fame is lavished and decayed ; 
no profit of the vast profusion made . 
Too late my folly I repent ; I know 
My Aureng-zebe would ne'er have used me so . 
But , by his ruin I prepared my own ; 
And , like a naked Tree , my shelter gone , 
To Winds and Winter-storms must stand exposed alone . Exit . 


Aureng-zebe , Arimant . Arim.   Give me not thanks , which I will ne'er deserve ; 
But know , 't is for a Nobler Price I serve . 
By Indamora's will you 're hither brought : 
All my reward , in her command I sought . 
The rest your Letter tells you . — See , like Light , 
She comes ; and I must vanish , like the Night . Exit . 


Enter Indamora . Ind.   't is now that I begin to live again : 
Heavens' , I forgive you all my fear and pain : 
Since I behold my Aureng-zebe appear , 
I could not buy him at a Price too dear . 
His name alone afforded me relief , 
Repeated as a charm to cure my grief . 
I that loved name did , as some God , invoke , 
And printed kisses on it while I spoke . 


Aur.   Short ease ; but long , long pains from you I find : 
Health , to my eyes ; but poison , to my mind . 
Why are you made so excellently fair ? 
So much above what other Beauties are , 
That , even in cursing , you new form my breath ; 
And make me bless those Eyes which give me death ? 


Ind.   What reason for your curses can you find ? 
My Eyes your conquest , not your death , designed . 
If they offend , 't is that they are too kind . 


Aur.   The ruins they have wrought , you will not see : 
Too kind they are , indeed , but not to me , 


Ind.   Think you base Interest Souls , like mine , can sway ? 
Or that , for Greatness , I can Love betray ? 
no , Aureng-zebe , you merit all my heart , 
And I 'm too Noble but to give a part . 
Your Father , and an Empire ! am I known 
no more ? or have so weak a judgement shown , 
In choosing you , to change you for a Throne ? 


Aur.   How , with a Truth , you would a Falsehood blind ! 
't is not my Father's love you have designed ; 
Your choice is fixed where Youth and Power are joined . 


Ind.   Where Youth and Power are joined ! has he a name ? 


Aur.   You would be told ; you glory in your shame : 
there 's Music in the Sound ; and , to provoke 
Your pleasure more , by me it must be spoken . 
then , than it ravishes , when your pleased ear 
The sound does from a wretched Rival hear . 
Morat's the name your heart leaps up to meet , 
While Aureng-zebe lies dying at your feet . 


Ind.   Who told you this ? 


Aur.   — Are you so lost to shame ? 
Morat , Morat , Morat : You love the name 
So well , your every question ends in that ; 
You force me still to answer you , Morat . 
Morat , who best could tell what you revealed ; 
Morat , too proud to keep his joy concealed . 


Ind.   Howe'er unjust your jealousy appear , 
It shows the loss , of what you love , you fear ; 
And does my pity , not my anger move : 
I 'll fond it , as the froward Child of Love. 
To show the truth of my unaltered breast , 
Know , that your life was given at my request : 
At least Reprieved . When Heaven denied you aid , 
She brought it ; she , whose falsehood you upbraid . 


Aur.   And 't is by that you would your falsehood hide ; 
Had you not asked , how happy had I died ! 
Accursed Reprieve ! not to prolong my breath , 
It brought a lingering , and more painful death . 
I have not lived since first I heard the news ; 
The gift the guilty giver does accuse . 
You knew the price , and the request did move , 
That you might pay the Ransom with your love . 


Ind.   Your accusation must , I see , take place ; 
And I am guilty , infamous , and base ! 


Aur.   If you are false , those Epithets are small ; 
you 're then the things , the abstract of 'em all . 
And you are false : you promised him your love . 
no other price a heart so hard could move . 
Do not I know him ? could his Brutal mind 
Be wrought upon ? could he be just , or kind ? 
Insultingly , he made your love his boast ; 
Gave me my life , and told me what it cost . 
Speak ; answer . I would fain yet think you true : 
Lie ; and I 'll not believe myself , but you . 
Tell me you love ; I 'll pardon the deceit , 
And , to be fooled , myself assist the cheat . 


Ind.   no ; 't is too late : I have no more to say . 
If you 'll believe I have been false , you may . 


Aur.   I would not ; but your crimes too plain appear : 
Nay , even that I should think you true , you fear . 
Did I not tell you , I would be deceived ? 


Ind.   I 'm not concerned to have my truth believed . 
You would be cozined ! would assist the cheat ! 
But I 'm too plain to join in the deceit : 
I 'm pleased you think me false — 
And , whatsoever my Letter did pretend , 
I made this meeting for no other end . 


Aur.   Kill me not quite , with this indifference : 
When you are guiltless , boast not an offence . 
I know you better than yourself you know : 
Your heart was true , but did some frailty show : 
You promised him your Love , that I might live ; 
But promised what you never meant to give . 
Speak , was 't not so ? confess ; I can forgive . 


Ind.   Forgive what dull excuses you prepare ! 
As if your thoughts of me were worth my care . 


Aur.   Ah Traitress ! Ah ingrate ! Ah faithless mind ! 
Ah Sex , invented first to damn Mankind ! 
Nature took care to dress you up for sin : 
Adorned , without ; unfinished left , within . 
Hence , by no judgement you your loves direct ; 
Talk much , ne'er think , and still the wrong affect . 
So much self-love in your composures mixed , 
That love to others still remains unfixed : 
Greatness , and Noise , and Show , are your delight ; 
Yet wise men love you , in their own despite : 
And , finding in their native Wit no ease . 
Are forced to put your folly on to please . 


Ind.   Now you shall know what cause you have to rage ; 
But to increase your fury , not assuage : 
I found the way your Brother's heart to move , 
Yet promised not the least return of Love. 
His Pride , and Brutal fierceness I abhor ; 
But scorn your mean suspicions of me more . 
I owed my Honour and my Fame this care : 
Know what your folly lost you , and despair . Turning from him . 


Aur.   Too cruelly your innocence you tell ; 
Show Heaven , and damn me to the pit of Hell. 
Now I believe you ; 't is not yet too late : 
You may forgive , and put a stop to Fate : 
Save me , just sinking , and no more to rise . She frowns . 
How can you look with such relentless eyes ? 
Or let your mind by penitence be moved , 
Or I 'm resolved to think you never loved . 
You are not cleared , unless you mercy speak : 
I 'll think you took th' occasion thus to break . 


Ind.   Small jealousies , 't is true , inflame desire ; 
Too great , not Fan , but quite blow out the Fire : 
Yet I did love you , till such pains I bore , 
That I dare trust myself and you no more . 
Let me not love you ; but here end my pain : 
Distrust may make me wretched once again . 
Now , with full Sails , into the Port I move , 
And safely can unlade my breast of Love ; 
Quiet , and calm : why should I then go back , 
To tempt the second hazard of a Wrack ? 


Aur.   Behold these dying eyes , see their submissive awe ; 
These tears , which fear of death could never draw : 
Herd you that sigh ? from my heaved heart it passed , 
And said , If you forgive not , 't is my last . 
Love mounts , and rowls about my stormy mind , 
Like Fire , that 's born by a tempestuous Wind. 
O , I could stifle you , with eager haste ! 
Devour your kisses with my hungry taste ! 
Rush on you ! eat you ! wander o'er each part , 
Raving with pleasure , snatch you to my heart ! 
then hold you off , and gaze ! then , with new rage , 
Invade you , till my conscious Limbs presage 
Torrents of joy , which all their banks overflow ! 
So lost , so blessed , as I but then could know ! 


Ind.   Be no more jealous . Giving him her hand . 


Aur.   — Give me cause no more : 
The danger 's greater after , than before , 
If I relapse ; to cure my jealousy 
Let me ( for that 's the easiest parting ) die . 


Ind.   My life ! 


Aur.   — My Soul ! 


Ind.   — My all that Heaven can give ! 
Death's life with you ; without you , death to live . 


To them Arimant hastily . Arim.   O , we are lost , beyond all human aid ! 
The Citadel is to Morat betrayed . 
The Traitor , and the Treason , known too late ; 
The false Abas delivered up the Gate . 
Even , while I speak , we 're compassed round with Fate . 
The Valiant cannot fight , or Coward fly ; 
But both in undistinguished Crowds must die . 


Aur.   then my Prophetic fears are come to pass : 
Morat was always bloody ; now , he 's base : 
And has so far in Usurpation gone , 
He will by Parricide secure the Throne . 


To them the Emperor . Emp.   am I forsaken , and betrayed , by all ? 
Not one brave man dare , with a Monarch , fall ? 
then , welcome death , to cover my disgrace ; 
I would not live to Reign o'er such a Race . 
My Aureng-zebe ! Seeing Aureng-zebe . 
But thou no more art mine ; my cruelty 
Has quite destroyed the right I had in thee . 
I have been base , 
Base even to him from whom I did receive 
All that a Son could to a Parent give : 
Behold me punished in the selfsame kind , 
th' ungrateful does a more ungrateful find . 


Aur.   Accuse yourself no more ; you could not be 
Ungrateful : could commit no crime to me : 
I only mourn my yet uncancelled score : 
You put me past the power of paying more : 
That , that 's my grief , that I can only grieve , 
And bring but pity , where I would relieve ; 
For had I yet ten thousand lives to pay , 
The mighty sum should go no other way . 


Emp.   Can you forgive me ? 't is not fit you should . 
Why will you be so excellently good ? 
'T will stick too black a brand upon my name : 
The Sword is needless ; I shall die with shame . 
What had my age to do with Love's delight , 
Shut out from all enjoyments but the sight ? 


Arim.   Sir , you forget the danger 's imminent : 
This minute is not for excuses lent . 


Emp.   Disturb me not — 
How can my latest hour be better spent ? 
To reconcile myself to him is more , 
Than to regain all I possessed before . 
Empire , and Life are now not worth a prayer : 
His love , alone , deserves my dying care . 


Aur.   Fight for you , my death will glorious be . 


Ind.   Seek to preserve yourself , and live for me . 


Arim.   Loose then no farther time . 
Heaven has inspired me with a sudden thought , 
Whence your unhoped for safety may be wrought , 
Though with the hazard of my blood 't is bought . 
But , since my life can ne'er be fortunate , 
't is so much sorrow well redeemed from Fate . 
You , Madam , must retire ; 
Your Beauty is its own security , 
And leave the conduct of the rest to me . 
Glory will crown my life , if I succeed ; 
If not , she may afford to love me dead . Aside . 


Aur.   My Father's kind ; and , Madam , you forgive : 
Were Heaven so pleased , I now could wish to live . 
And , I shall live . 
With Glory , and with Love , at once I burn : 
I feel th'inspiring heat , and absent God return . Exeunt . 


ACT. v.  

Indamora alone . The night seems doubled with the fear she brings , 
And , o'er the Citadel , new spreads her wings . 
The Morning , as mistaken , turns about , 
And all her early fires again go out . 
Shouts , cries , and groans , first pierce my ears , and then 
A flash of Lightning draws the guilty Scene , 
And shows me Arms , and Wounds , and Dying men . 
Ah , should my Aureng-zebe be fight there , 
And envious Winds distinguished to my ear , 
His dying groans , and his last accents bear ! 
To her Morat , attended . Mor.   The bloody business of the Night is done , 
And , in the Citadel , an Empire won . 
Our Swords so wholly did the Fates employ , 
That they , at length , grew weary to destroy : 
Refused the work we brought ; and , out of breath , 
Made Sorrow and Despair attend for Death . 
But what of all my Conquest can I boast ? 
My haughty pride , before your eyes , is lost : 
And Victory but gains me to present 
That Homage , which our Eastern World has sent . 


Ind.   Your Victory , alas , begets my fears : 
Can you not then triumph without my tears ? 
Resolve me ; ( for you know my Destiny 
In Aureng-zebe's ) say , do I live , or die ? 


Mor.   Urged by my Love , by hope of Empire fired ; 
't is true , I have performed what both required : 
What Fate decreed ; for when great Souls are given , 
They bear the marks of Sovereignty from Heaven . 
My Elder Brothers my forerunners came ; 
Rough-draughts of Nature , ill designed , and lame : 
Blown off , like Blossoms , never made to bear ; 
Till I came , finished ; her last laboured care . 


Ind.   This Prologue leads to your succeeding sin : 
Blood ended what Ambition did begin . 


Mor.   'T was rumoured , but by whom I cannot tell , 
My Father scaped from out the Citadel : 
My Brother too may live . 


Ind.   — He may . 


Mor.   — He must : 
I killed him not : and a lesle fate 's unjust . 
Heaven owes it me , that I may fill his room ; 
A Phoenix-lover , rising from his Tomb. 
In whom you 'll lose your sorrows for the dead ; 
more warm , more fierce , and fitter for your Bed.  


Ind.   Should I from Aureng-zebe my heart divide , 
To love a Monster , and a Parricide ? 
These names your swelling Titles cannot hide . 
Severe Decrees may keep our Tongues in awe ; 
But to our thoughts , what Edict can give Law ? 
Even you yourself , to your own breast , shall tell 
Your crimes ; and your own Conscience be your Hell.  


Mor.   What business has my Conscience with a Crown ? 
She sinks in Pleasures , and in Bowls will drown . 
If mirth should fail , I 'll busy her with cares ; 
Silence , her clamorous voice with louder Wars : 
Trumpets and Drums shall fright her from the Throne , 
As sounding Cymbals aid the labouring Moon . 


Ind.   Repelled by these , more eager she will grow ; 
Spring back more strongly than a Scythian Bow : 
Amid your Train , this unseen Judge will wait ; 
Examine how you came by all your State ; 
Upbraid your impious Pomp ; and , in your ear , 
Will hollow , Rebel , Tyrant , Murderer . 
Your ill-got Power wan looks and care shall bring : 
Known but by discontent to be a King. 
Of Crowds afraid , yet anxious when alone ; 
you 'll sit and brood your sorrows on a Throne . 


Mor   Birthright's a vulgar road to Kingly sway ; 
't is every dull-got Elder Brother's way . 
Dropped from above , he lights into a Throne ; 
Grows of a piece with that he sits upon , 
Heavens' choice , a low , inglorious , rightful Drone . 
But who by force a Sceptre does obtain , 
Shows he can govern that which he could gain . 
Right comes of course , what e'er he was before ; 
Murder and Usurpation are no more . 


Ind.   By your own Laws you such Dominion make , 
As every stronger Power has right to take : 
And Parricide will so deform your name , 
That dispossessing you will give a claim . 
Who next Usurps , will a just Prince appear ; 
So much your ruin will his Reign endear . 


Mor.   I without guilt , would mount the Royal Seat ; 
But yet 't is necessary to be great . 


Ind.   All Greatness is in Virtue understood : 
't is only necessary to be good . 
Tell me , what is 't at which great Spirits aim , 
What av-s_d yourself desire ? 


Mor.   — Renown , and Fame , 
And Power , as uncontroled as is my william  


Ind.   How you confound desires of good and ill ! 
For true renown is still with Virtue joined ; 
But lust of Power le 's lose th'unbridled mind . 
Yours is a Soul irregularly great , 
Which wanting temper , yet abounds with heat : 
So strong , yet so unequal pulses beaten . 
A Sun which does , through vapours dimly shine : 
What pity 't is you are not all Divine ! 
New moulded , thorough lightened , and a breast 
So pure , to bear the last severest test ; 
Fit to command an Empire you should gain 
By Virtue , and without a blush to Reign . 


Mor.   You show me somewhat I ne'er learned before ; 
But 't is the distant prospect of a Shore , 
Doubtful in mists ; which , like enchanted ground , 
Fly's from my sight , before 't is fully found . 


Ind.   Dare to be great , without a guilty Crown ; 
View it , and lay the bright temptation down : 
't is base to seize on all , because you may ; 
that 's Empire , that which I can give away : 
there 's joy when to wild Will you Laws prescribe , 
When you bid Fortune carry back her Bribe : 
A joy , which none but greatest minds can taste ; 
A Fame , which will to endless Ages last . 


Mor.   Renown , and Fame , in vain , I courted long ; 
And still pursued 'em , though directed wrong . 
In hazard , and in toils , I heard they lay ; 
Sailed farther than the Coast , but missed my way ▪ 
Now you have given me Virtue for my guide ; 
And , with true Honour , ballasted my Pride . 
Unjust Dominion I no more pursue ; 
I quit all other claims but those to you . 


Ind.   O be not just to halves ! pay all you owe : 
Think there 's a debt to Melesinda too . 
To leave no blemish on your after life ; 
Reward the virtue of a Suffering Wife : 


Mor.   To love once past , I cannot backward move ; 
Call yesterday again , and I may love . 
'T was not for nothing I the Crown resigned ; 
I still must own a Mercenary mind : 
I , in this venture , double gains pursue , 
And laid out all my Stock to purchase you . 
To them Asaph Chan.  Now , what success ? does Aureng-zebe yet live ? 


Asaph .  Fortune has given you all that she can give , 
Your Brother — 


Mor.   — Hold ; thou showest an impious joy , 
And think'st I still take pleasure to destroy : 
Know , I am changed , and would not have him slain . 


Asaph .  't is past ; and you desire his life in vain . 
He prodigal of Soul , rushed on the stroke 
Of lifted Weapons , and did wounds provoke : 
In scorn of Night , he would not be concealed ; 
His Soldiers , where he fought , his name revealed : 
In thickest crowds , still Aureng-zebe did sound : 
The vaulted Roofs did Aureng-zebe rebound , 
Till late , and in his fall , the name was drowned . 


Ind.   Whither that hand which brought him to his fate , 
And blasted be the tongue which did relate . 


Asaph .  His Body — 


Mor.   — Cease to inhanse her misery : 
Pity the Queen , and show respect to me . 
't is every Painter's Art to hide from sight , 
And cast in shades , what seen would not delight . 
Your grief , in me such sympathy has bred , To her . 
I mourn ; and wish I could recall the dead . 
Love softens me ; and blows up fires , which pass 
Through my tough heart , and melt the stubborn Mass.  


Ind.   Break , heart ; or choke , with sobs , my hated breath ; 
Do thy own work : admit no foreign death . 
Alas ! why do I make this useless moan ? 
I 'm dead already , for my Soul is gone . 


To them , Mirabel Baba . Mir.   What tongue the terror of this night can tell , 
Within , without , and round the Citadel ! 
A new-formed Faction does your power oppose ; 
The fight 's confused , and all who meet are foes : 
A second clamour , from the Town , we hear ; 
And the far noise so loud , it drowns the near . 
Abas , who seemed our Friend , is either fled ; 
Or , what we fear , our Enemies does head : 
Your frighted Soldiers scarce their ground maintain . 


Mor.   I thank their fury ; we shall fight again : 
They rouse my rage ; I 'm eager to subdue : 
't is fatal to withhold my eyes from you . 


Exit with the two Omrahs' . Enter Melesinda . Mel.   Can misery no place of safety know ? 
The noise pursues me wheresoe'er I go , 
As Fate sought only me , and where I fled , 
Aimed all its Darts at my devoted head . 
And let it ; I am now past care of life ; 
The last of Women ; an abandoned Wife . 


Ind.   Whether Design or Chance has brought you here , 
I stand obliged to Fortune , or to Fear : 
Weak Women should , in danger , herd like Deer . 
But say , from whence this new combustion spring's ? 
Are there yet more Morats ? more fight Kings ? 


Mel.   Him from his Mother's love your eyes divide , 
And now her Arms the cruel strife decide . 


Ind.   What strange misfortunes my vexed life attend ? 
Death will be kind , and all my sorrows end . 
If Nourmahal prevail , I know my fate . 


Mel.   I pity , as my own , your hard estate ; 
But what can my weak charity afford ? 
I have no longer interest in my Lord : 
Nor in his Mother , He : she owns her hate 
Aloud , and would herself Usurp the State.  


Ind.   I 'm stupefied with sorrow , past relief 
Of tears : parched up , and withered with my grief . 


Mel.   Dry mourning will decays more deadly bring , 
As a North Wind burns a too forward Spring . 
Give sorrow vent , and let the sluices go . 


Ind.   My tears are all congealed , and will not flow . 


Mel.   Have comfort ; yield not to the blows of Fate . 


Ind.   Comfort , like Cordials after death , comes late . 
Name not so vain a word ; my hopes are fled : 
Think your Morat were kind , and think him dead . 


Mel.   I can no more — 
can no more arguments , for comfort , find : 
Your boding words have quite overwhelmed my mind . 


Clattering of weapons within . Ind.   The noise increases , as the Billows roar , 
When rolling from afar they threat the Shore . 
She comes ; and feeble Nature now I find 
Shrinks back in danger , and forsakes my mind . 
I wish to die , yet dare not death endure ; 
Detest the Medicine , yet desire the Cure. 
I would have death ; but mild , and at command : 
I dare not trust him in another's hand . 
In Nourmahals , he would not mine appear ; 
But armed with terror , and disguised with fear . 


Mel.   Beyond this place you can have no retreat : 
Stay here , and I the danger will repeat . 
I fear not death , because my life I hate : 
And envious death will eat th' unfortunate . 


Ind.   You must not venture . 


Mel.   — Let me : I may do 
Myself a kindness , in obliging you . 
In your loved name , I 'll seek my angry Lord ; 
And beg your safety from his conquering Sword : 
So his protection all your fears will ease , 
And I shall see him once , and not displease . Exit . 


Ind.   O wretched Queen ! what power thy life can save ? 
A stranger , and unfriended , and a slave ! 
Enter Nourmahal , Zayda , and Abas , with Soldiers . Alas , she 's here ! 


Indamora withdraws to the inner part of the Scene . Nour.   Heartless they fought , and quit soon their ground , 
While ours with easy victory were crowned . 
To you , Abas , my Life and Empire too , 
And , what 's yet dearer , my Revenge , I owe.  


Abas .  The vain Morat , by his own rashness wrought , 
Too soon discovered his ambitious thought ; 
Believed me his , because I spoke him fair , 
And pitched his head into the ready snare : 
Hence 't was I did his Troops at first admit ; 
But such , whose numbers could no fears beget ; 
By them th' emperor's Party first I slew , 
then turned my Arms the Victors to subdue . 


Nour.   Now let the headstrong Boy my will control : 
virtue 's no slave of Man ; no Sex confines the Soul : 
ay , for myself , th' imperial Seat will gain , 
And he shall wait my leisure for his Reign . 
But Aureng-zebe is no where to be found . 
And now perhaps in Death's cold arms he lies : 
I fought , and conquered , yet have lost the prize . 


Zayd .  The chance of War determined well the strife , 
That racked you , betwixt the Lover and the Wife . 
he 's dead , whose love had sullied all your Reign , 
And made you Empress of the World in vain . 


Nour.   no ; I my power and pleasure would divide : 
The Drudge had quenched my flames , and then had died . 
I rage , to think without that Bliss I live ; 
That I could wish what Fortune would not give : 
But , what Love cannot , Vengeance must supply ; 
She , who bereaved me of his heart , shall die . 


Zayd .  I 'll search : far distant hence she cannot be . Goes in . 


Nour.   This wondrous Masterpiece I fain would see ; 
This fatal Helen , who can Wars inspire , 
Make Kings her Slaves , and set the World on fire . 
My Husband locked his Jewel from my view ; 
Or durst not set the false one by the true . 


Re-enter Zayda , leading Indamora . Zay .  Your frighted Captive , ere she dies , receive ; 
Her soul 's just going else , without your leave . 


Nour.   A fairer Creature did my eyes ne'er see ! 
Sure she was formed by Heaven in spite to me ! 
Some Angel copied , while I slept , each grace , 
And moulded every feature from my face . 
Such Majesty does from her forehead rise , 
Her cheeks such blushes cast , such rays her eyes , 
Nor I , nor Envy , can a blemish find ; 
The Palace is , without , too well designed : 
Conduct me in , for I will view thy mind . To her . 
Speak , if thou hast a Soul , that I may see , 
If Heaven can make throughout another Me.  


Ind.   My tears and miseries must pled my cause ; Kneeling . 
My words , the terror of your presence awes : 
Mortals , in sight of Angels , mute become ; 
The Nobler Nature strikes th' inferior dumb . 


Nour.   The Palm is , by the Foes confession , mine ; 
But I disdain what basely you resign . 
Heaven did , by me , the outward model build : 
it 's inward work , the Soul , with rubbish filled . 
Yet , Oh! th' imperfect Piece moves more delight ; 
't is gilded o'er with Youth , to catch the sight . 
The Gods have poorly robbed my Virgin bloom , 
And what I am , by what I was , overcome . 
Traitress , restore my Beauty and my Charms , 
Nor steal my Conquests with my proper Arms.  


Ind.   What have I done , thus to inflame your hate ? 
I am not guilty , but unfortunate . 


Nour.   Not guilty , when thy looks my power betray , 
Seduce Mankind , my Subject , from my Sway , 
Take all my Hearts , and all my Eyes away ? 
My Husband first ; but that I could forgive : 
He only moved , and talked , but did not live . 
My Aureng-zebe , for I dare own the name , 
The glorious sin , and the more glorious flame ; 
Him , from my beauty , have thy eyes misled , 
And starved the joys of my expected Bed.  


Ind.   His love , so sought , he 's happy that he 's dead . 
OH had I courage but to meet my Fate ; 
That short dark passage to a future state ; 
That melancholy Riddle of a breath . 


Nour.   That something , or that nothing , after death : 
Take this , and teach thyself . Giving a D 


Ind.   Alas ! 


Nour.   — Why dost thou shake ? 
Dishonour not the vengeance I designed : 
A Queen , and own a base Plebeian mind ! 
Let it drink deep in thy most vital part : 
Strike home , and do me reason in thy heart . 


Ind.   I dare not . 


Nour.   — Do 't , while I stand by and see , 
At my full gust , without the drudgery . 
I love a Foe , who dares my stroke prevent , 
Who gives me the full Scene of my content , 
Shows me the flying Soul's convulsive strife , 
And all the anguish of departing life : 
Disdain my mercy , and my rage defy ; 
Curse me with thy last breath ; and make me see 
A Spirit worthy to have Rivalled me . 


Ind.   O , I desire to die ; but dare not yet : 
Give me some respite , I 'll discharge the debt . 
Without my Aureng-zebe I would not live . 


Nour.   thine , Traitress ! thine ! that word has winged thy fate , 
And put me past the tedious forms of hate . 
I 'll kill thee with such eagerness and haste , 
As Fiends , let loose , would lay all Nature waste . 


Indamora runs back : as Nourmahal is running to her . Clashing of Swords is heard within . Sold.   Yield , y' are o'er pow'red : resistance is in vain . Within . 


Mor.   then death 's my choice : submission I disdain . Within . 


Nour.   Retire , you Slaves : Ah whether does he run At the door . 
On pointed Swords ? Disarm , but save my Son.  


Enter Morat staggering , and upheld by Soldiers . Mor.   She life's ! and I shall see her once again ! 
I have not thrown away my life in vain . 
Catches hold of Indamora is Gown , and falls by her : she sits . I can no more ; yet , even in death , I find 
My fainting body biased by my mind : 
I fall toward you ; still my contending Soul 
Points to your breast , and trembles to its Pole.  


To them Melesinda , hastily , casting herself on the other side of Morat . Mel.   Ah woe , wo , wo ! the worst of woes I find ! 
Live still : O live ; live even to be unkind . 
With half-shut eyes he seeks the doubtful day ; 
But , Ah! he bends his sight another way . 
He faints ! and in that sigh his Soul is gone ; 
Yet Heaven's unmoved , yet Heaven looks careless on . 


Nour.   Where are those Powers which Monarches should defend ? 
Or do they vain Authority pretend , 
O'er human Fates , and their weak Empire show , 
Which cannot guard their Images below ? 
If , as their Image , he was not Divine , 
They ought to have respected him as mine . 
I 'll waken them with my revenge ; and she 
Their Indamora shall my Victim be , 
And Helpless Heaven shall mourn in vain , like me . 


As she is going to stab Indamora , Morat raises himself , and holds her hand . Mor.   Ah , what are we , 
Who dare maintain with Heaven this wretched strife , 
Puffed with the pride of Heavens' own gift , frail life ? 
That blast which my ambitious Spirit swelled , 
See by how weak a Tenure it was held ! 
I only stay to save the Innocent : 
O envy not my Soul its last content . 


Ind.   no , let me die ; I 'm doubly summoned now ; 
First , by my Aureng-zebe ; and , since , by you . 
My Soul grows hardy , and can death endure : 
Your Convoy makes the dangerous way secure . 


Mel.   Let me , at least , a Funeral Marriage crave ; 
Nor grudge my cold embraces in the Grave . 
I have too just a Title in the strife : 
By me , unhappy me , he lost his life : 
I called him hither ; 't was my fatal breath ; 
And I the Screech-owl that proclaimed his death . 


Shout within . Abas .  What new Alarms are these ? I 'll haste and see . Exit . 


Nour.   Look up , and live : an Empire shall be thine . 


Mor.   That I contemned , even when I thought it mine . 
O , I must yield to my hard Destinies , To Indamora . 
And must for ever cease to see your eyes . 


Mel.   Ah turn your sight to me , my dearest Lord ! 
Can you not one , one parting look afford ? 
Even so unkind in death ? but 't is in vain ; 
I loose my breath , and to the Winds complain : 
Yet 't is as much in vain your cruel scorn ; 
Still I can love , without this last return . 
Nor Fate , nor You , can my vowed faith control ; 
Dying , I 'll follow your disdainful Soul : 
A Ghost , I 'll haunt your Ghost ; and , where you go , 
With mournful murmurs fill the Plains below . 


Mor.   Be happy , Melesinda , cease to grieve , 
And , for a more deserving Husband , live : 
Can you forgive me ? 


Mel.   — Can I ! O my heart ! 
Have I heard one kind word before I part ? 
I can , I can forgive : is that a task 
To love , like mine ? Are you so good to ask ? 
One kiss — O 't is too great a blessing this ; [ Kisses him ] 
I would not live to violate the bliss . 


Re-enter Abas . Abas .  Some envious Devil has ruined us yet more ▪ 
The fort 's revolted to the Emperor ; 
The Gates are opened , the Portcullis drawn ; 
And deluges of Armies , from the Town , 
Come pow'ring in : I heard the mighty flaw , 
When first it broke ; the crowding Ensigns saw , 
Which choked the passage ; and , ( what lest I feared , ) 
The waving Arms of Aureng-zebe appeared , 
Displayed with your Morat's : 
In either's Flag the golden Serpents bear , 
Erected Crests alike , like Volumes rear , 
And mingle friendly hissing in the Air. 
Their Troops are joined , and our destruction nigh . 


Nour.   't is vain to fight , and I disdain to fly . 
I 'll mock the Triumphs which our Foes intent ; 
And , spite of Fortune , make a glorious end . 
In poisonous draughts my liberty I 'll find : 
And from the nauseous World set free my mind . Exit . 


At the other end of the Stage , Enter Aureng-zebe , Dianet , and Attendants . Aureng-zebe turns back , and speaks , entering . Aur.   The lives of all , who cease from combat , spare ; 
My brother 's be your most peculiar care : 
Our impious use no longer shall obtain ; 
Brothers no more , by Brothers , shall be slain . 
Seeing Indamora and Morat . Ha! do I dream ? is this my hoped success ? 
I grow a Statue , stiff , and motionless . 
Look , Dianet ; for I dare not trust these eyes ; 
They dance in mists , and dazzle with surprise . 


Dia.   Sir , 't is Morat ; dying he seems , or dead : 
And Indamora's hand — 


Aur.   — Supports his head . Sighing . 
thou shalt not break yet heart , nor shall she know 
My inward torments , by my outward show ; 
To let her see my weakness were too base ; 
Dissembled Quiet sit upon my face : 
My sorrow to my eyes no passage find , 
But let it inward sink , and drown my mind . 
Falshood shall want its Triumph : I begin 
To stagger ; but I 'll prop myself within . 
The specious Tower no ruin shall disclose , 
Till down , at once , the mighty Fabric goes . 


Mor.   In sign that I die yours , reward my love , To Ind.  
And seal my Passport to the Blessed above . Kissing her hand . 


Ind.   O stay ; or take me with you when you go : 
there 's nothing now worth living for below . 


Mor.   I leave you not ; for my expanded mind 
Grows up to Heaven , while it to you is joined : 
Not quitting , but enlarged ! A blazing Fire , 
Fed from the Brand. Die . 


Mel.   Ah me ! he 's gone ! I die ! Swoons . 


Ind.   — O dismal day ! 
Fate , thou hast ravished my last hope away . 
OH Heaven ! my Aureng-zebe — She turns , and sees Aureng-zebe standing by her , and starts . 
What strange surprise ! 
Or does my willing mind delude my eyes , 
And shows the Figure always present there ? 
Or liv'st thou ? am I blessed , and see thee here ? 


Aur.   My Brother's body see conveyed with care , Turning from her , to his Attendants . 
Where we may Royal Sepulture prepare . 
With speed to Melesinda bring relief ; 
Recall her spirits , and moderate her grief . — Half turning to Ind.  
I go , to take for ever from your view 
Both the loved Object , and the hated too . 


Going away after the Bodies , which are carried off . Ind.   Hear me ; yet think not that I beg your stay : Laying hold of him . 
I will be heard , and after take your way . 
Go ; but your late repentance shall be vain : He struggles still ; She let's him go . 
I 'll never , never see your face again . Turning away . 


Aur.   Madam , I know what ever you can say : 
You might be pleased not to command my stay . 
All things are yet disordered in the Fort ; 
I must crave leave your audience may be short , 


Ind.   You need not fear I shall detain you long ; 
Yet you may tell me your pretended wrong . 


Aur.   Is that the business ? then my stay is vain . 


Ind.   How are you injured ? 


Aur.   — When did I complain ? 


Ind.   Leave off your forced respect — 
And show your rage in its most furious form : 
I 'm armed with innocence to brave the Storm . 
You heard , perhaps , your Brother's last desire ; 
And after saw him in my arms expire : 
saw me , with tears , so great a loss bemoan : 
Herd me complaining my last hopes were gone . 


Aur.   O stay , and take me with you when you go . 
there 's nothing now worth living for below . 
Unhappy Sex ! whose Beauty is your snare ; 
Exposed to trials ; made too frail to bear . 
I grow a fool , and show my rage again : 
't is Nature's fault ; and why should I complain ? 


Ind.   Will you yet hear me ? 


Aur.   — Yes , till you relate 
What powerful Motives did your change create . 
You thought me dead , and prudently did weigh 
Tears were but vain , and brought but Youth's decay . 
then , in Morat , your hopes a Crown designed ; 
And all the Woman worked within your mind . 
I rave again , and to my rage return , 
To be again subjected to your scorn . 


Ind.   I wait till this long storm be overblown . 


Aur.   I 'm conscious of my folly : I have done . 
I cannot rail ; but silently I 'll grieve . 
How did I trust ! and how did you deceive ! 
O , Arimant , would I had died for thee ! 
I dearly buy thy generosity . 


Ind.   Alas , is he then dead ? 


Aur.   — Unknown to me , 
He took my Arms ; and while I forced my way , 
Through Troops of Foes , which did our passage stay , 
My Buckler o'er my aged Father cast , 
Still fight , still defending as I passed , 
The noble Arimant usurped my name ; 
Fought , and took from me , while he gave me , fame . 
To Aureng-zebe , he made his Soldier's cry , 
And seeing not , where he heard danger nigh , 
Shot , like a Star , through the benighted Sky . 
A short , but mighty aid : at length he fell . 
My own adventures 't were lost time to tell ; 
Or how my Army , entering in the night , 
Surprised our Foes : the dark disordered fight : 
How my appearance , and my Father shown , 
Made peace ; and all the rightful Monarch own . 
i  summed it briefly , since it did relate 
th' unwelcome safety of the man you hate . 


Ind.   As briefly will I clear my innocence : 
Your altered Brother died in my defence . 
Those tears you saw , that tenderness I showed , 
Were just effects of grief and gratitude . 
He died my Convert . 


Aur.   — But your Lover too : 
I heard his words , and did your actions view ; 
You seemed to mourn another Lover dead : 
My sighs you gave him , and my tears you shed . 
But worst of all , 
Your gratitude for his defence was shown : 
It proved you valued life when I was gone . 


Ind.   Not that I valued life ; but feared to die : 
Think that my weakness , not inconstancy . 


Aur.   Fear showed you doubted of your own intent : 
And she who doubts becomes lesle innocent . 
Tell me not you could fear ; 
fear 's a large promiser , who subject live 
To that base passion , know not what they give . 
no circumstance of grief you did deny ; 
And what could she give more who durst not die ? 


Ind.   My love , my faith . 


Aur.   — Both so adulterate grown , 
When mixed with fear , they never could be known . 
I wish no ill might her I love befall ; 
But she ne'er loved who durst not venture all . 
Her life and fame should my concernment be ; 
But she should only be afraid for me . 


Ind.   My heart was yours ; but , Oh! you left it here , 
Abandoned to those Tyrants , Hope and Fear : 
If they forced from me one kind look or word , 
could you not that , not that small part afford ? 


Aur.   If you had loved , you nothing yours could call : 
Giving the least of mine , you gave him all . 
True love 's a Miser ; so tenacious grown , 
He weighs to the least grain of what 's his own . 
more delicate than Honour's nicest sense : 
Neither to give nor take the least offence . 
With , or without you , I can have no rest : 
What shall I do ? y' are lodged within my breast : 
Your Image never will be thence displaced ; 
But there it lies , stabbed , mangled , and defaced . 


Ind.   Yet , to restore the quiet of your heart , 
there 's one way left . 


Aur.   — O name it . 


Ind.   — 't is to part . 
Since perfect bliss with me you cannot prove , 
I scorn to bliss by halves the man I love . 


Aur.   Now you distracted me more : shall then the day , 
Which views my Triumph , see our love's decay ? 
Must I new bars to my own joy create ? 
Refuse , myself , what I had forced from Fate ? 
What though I am not loved ? 
Reason's nice taste does our delights destroy : 
Brutes are more blessed , who grossly feed on joy . 


Ind.   Such endless jealousies your love pursue , 
I can no more be fully blessed than you . 
I therefore go , to free us both from pain : 
I prized your Person , but your Crown disdain . 
Nay , even my own — 
I give it you ; for since I cannot call 
Your heart my Subject , I 'll not Reign at all . Exit . 


Aur.   Go : though thou leav'st me tortured on the Rack , 
Betwixt Shame and Pride , I cannot call thee back . 
she 's guiltless , and I should submit ; but Oh! 
When she exacts it , can I stoop so low ? 
Yes ; for she 's guiltless ; — but she 's haughty too 
Great Souls long struggle ere they own a crime : 
she 's gone ; and leaves me no repenting time . 
I 'll call her now ; sure , if she love's , she 'll stay ; 
Linger at least , or not go far away , 
Looks to the door , and returns . For ever lost , and I repent too late . 
My foolish pride , would set my whole Estate , 
Till , at one throw , I lost all back to Fate . 


To him the Emperor , drawing in Indamora : Attendants . Emp.   It must not be , that he , by whom we live , 
Should no advantage of his gift receive . 
Should he be wholly wretched ? he alone , 
In this blessed day , a day so much his own ? To Indamora . 
I have not quit yet a Victor's right : 
I 'll make you happy in your own despite . 
I love you still ; and if I struggle hard 
To give , it shows the worth of the reward . 


Ind.   Suppose he has overcome ; must I find place 
Among his conquered Foes , and sue for grace ? 
Be pardoned , and confess I loved not well ? 
What though none live my innocence to tell ? 
I know it : Truth may own a generous pride : 
I clear myself , and care for none beside . 


Aur.   O , Indamora , you would break my heart ! 
could you resolve , on any terms , to part ? 
I thought your love eternal : was it tied 
So loosely , that a quarrel could divide ? 
I grant that my suspicions were unjust ; 
But would you leave me for a small distrust ? 
Forgive those foolish words — Kneeling to her . 
They were the froth my raging folly moved , 
When it boiled up : I knew not then I loved ; 
Yet then loved most . 


Ind.   ( to Aurelia ) You would but half be blessed ! Giving her hand , smiling . 


Aur.   — O do but try 
My eager love : I 'll give myself the lie . 
The very hope is a full happiness ; 
Yet scantly measures what I shall possess . 
Fancy itself , even in enjoyment , is 
But a dumb Judge , and cannot tell its bliss . 


Emp   Her eyes a secret yielding do confess , 
And promise to partake your happiness . 
May all the joys I did myself pursue , 
Be raised by her , and multiplied on you . 


A Procession of Priests , Slaves following , and last Melesinda in white . Ind.   Alas ! what means this Pomp ? 


Aur.   't is the Procession of a Funeral Vow , 
Which cruel Laws to Indian Wives allow , 
When fatally their Virtue they approve ; 
Cheerful in flames , and Martyrs of their Love.  


Ind.   O my foreboding heart ! th' event I fear ; 
And see ! sad Melesinda does appear . 


Mel.   You wrong my love ; what grief do I betray ? 
This is the Triumph of my Nuptial day . 
My better Nuptials ; which , in spite of Fate , 
For ever join me to my dear Morat . 
Now I am pleased ; my jealousies are o'er : 
he 's mine ; and I can lose him now no more . 


Emp.   Let no false show of Fame your reason blind . 


Ind.   You have no right to die ; he was not kind . 


Mel.   Had he been kind , I could no love have shown : 
Each vulgar Virtue would as much have done . 
My love was such , it needed no return ; 
But could , though he supplied no fuel , burn . 
Rich in itself , like Elemental fire , 
Whose pureness does no Aliment require . 
In vain you would bereave me of my Lord ; 
For I will die : die is too base a word ; 
I 'll seek his breast , and kindling by his side , 
Adorned with flames , I 'll mount a glorious Bride . Exit . 


Enter Nourmahal distracted , with Zayda . Zay .  she 's lost , she 's lost ! but why do I complain 
For her , who generously did life disdain ! 
Poisoned , she raves — 
Th'invenomed Body does the Soul attack ; 
Th'invenomed Soul works its own poison back . 


Nour.   I burn , I more than burn ; I am all fire ▪ 
See how my mouth and nostrils flame expire . 
I 'll not come near myself — 
Now I 'm a burning Lake , it rowls and flows ; 
I 'll rush , and pour it all upon my Foes . 
Pull , pull that reverend piece of Timber near : 
Throw 't on — 't is dry — 't will burn — 
ha , ha ! how my old Husband crackles there ! 
Keep him down , keep him down , turn him about : 
I know him ; he 'll but whiz , and straight go out . 
Fan me , you Winds : what , not one breath of Air ? 
I burn 'em all , and yet have flames to spare . 
Quench me : pour on whole Rivers . 't is in vain : 
Morat stands there to drive 'em back again : 
With those huge Bellowss in his hands , he blows 
New fire into my head : my Brainpan glows . 
See , see ! there 's Aureng-zebe too takes his part ; 
But he blows all his fire into my heart . 


Aur.   Alas , what fury 's this ? 


Nour.   — that 's he , that 's he ! Staring upon him , and catching at him . 
I know the dear man's voice : 
And this my Rival , this the cursed she . 
They kiss ; into each others arms they run : 
Close , close , close ! must I see , and must have none ? 
thou art not hers : give me that eager kiss . 
Ingrateful ! have I lost Morat for this ? 
Will you ? — before my face ? — poor helpless I 
See all ▪ and have my Hell before I die ! Sinks down . 


Emp.   With thy last breath thou hast thy crimes confessed : 
Farewell ; and take , what thou ne'er gav'st me , rest . 
But you , my Son , receive it better here : Giving him Indamora is hand . 
The just rewards of Love and Honour wear . 
Receive the Mistress you so long have served ; 
Receive the Crown your Loialty preserved . 
Take you the Reinss , while I from cares remove , 
And sleep within the Chariot which I driven . 


Epilogue . 

A Pretty task ! and so I told the Fool , 
Who needs would undertake to please by Rule : 
He thought that , if his Characters were good , 
The Scenes entire , and freed from noise and blood ; 
The Action great , yet circumscribed by Time , 
The Words not forced , but sliding into Rhyme , 
The Passions raised and calmed by just Degrees , 
As Tides are swelled , and then retire to Seas ; 
He thought , in hitting these , his business done , 
Though he , perhaps , has failed in every one : 
But , after all , a Poet must confess , 
His art 's like Physic , but a happy guess . 
Your Pleasure on your Fancy must depend : 
The lady 's pleased , just as she likes her Friend . 
no Song ! no Dance ! no Show ! he fears you 'll say , 
You love all naked Beauties , but a Play. 
He much mistakes your methods to delight ; 
And , like the French , abhors our Target-fight : 
But those damned Dogs can never be i' th' right . 
True English hate your monsieur 's paltry Arts ; 
For you are all Silk-weavers , in your hearts . 
Bold Britons , at a brave Bear-garden Fray , 
Are roused : and , clatt'ring Sticks , cry , Play , play , play . 
Mean time , your filthy Foreigner will stare , 
And mutter to himself , ha gens Barbare ! 
And , Gad , 't is well he mutters ; well for him ; 
Our Butchers else would tear him limb from limb . 
't is true , the time may come , your Sons may be 
Infected with this French civility ; 
But this in After-ages will be done : 
Our Poet writes a hundred years too soon . 
This Age comes on too slow , or he too fast : 
And early Springs are subject to a blast ! 
Who would excel , when few can make a Test 
Betwixt indiff'rent Writing and the best ? 
For Favours cheap and common , who would strive , 
Which , like abandoned Prostitutes , you give ? 
Yet scattered here and there I some behold , 
Who can discern the Tinsel from the Gold : 
To these he writes ; and , if by them allowed , 
't is their Prerogative to rule the Crowd . 
For he more fears ( like a presuming Man ) 
Their Votes who cannot judge , than theirs who can . 
FINIS . 

