Three sermons preached upon several public occasions . 

By John Gauden , d.d.  

London , printed by r. Bishop , for Andrew Crook , and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the green dragon in Paul's churchyard . 1642.  

To the right honourable Robert Earl of Warwick , Baron of lees , one of his majesty's most honourable privy council . 

My very honourable Lord , 

The many noble favours which i have received from your lordship chiefly , and from others of your noble family , compel me ( Since these sermons will needs be public , beyond my intentions ) to add to them the honour of your lordship's name ; and to set upon them this seal of gratitude , from a heart that unfeignedly prays for all those increases to your lordship and yours , which May make both your lordship and them truly honourable in this , and ever happy in the other world : for so i must profess to all the world , your nobleness hath abundantly deserved of your lordship's most humble , and obliged servant , 

John Gauden . 

A sermon preached before his majesty 

hebr. 12.14 . 

Follow peace with all men , and holiness , without which no man shall see the Lord . 



Though there needs a large preface and apology for the speaker ( As Elihu used to Job and his friends ) being a stranger to this place , and no way proportionable to so great and sacred a presence ; yet i am sure there needs no apology for the text i have read unto you . The weight of the matter being of greatest and highest concernment to every one of your souls May , by the favour of your patience , piety , and wisdom , much supply the want of gravity and sufficiency in the speaker . The subject i have propounded being so necessary and indispensable , that without it none that hear me this day , from the least to the greatest , from the cottage to the palace , from the mill to the throne , neither hearer nor speaker , shall ever be happy to see the face of God . 

And certainly in this brokenness and distraction of minds and times , every one almost going a several way , full of fractions and divisions , crossing and thwarting each other ; if we could all be so happy as to learn this lesson , and conspire to follow these two , peace and holiness , no doubt it would much abate and compose our distances , while like lines we all tend to one centre , God ; or run parallel to that straight rule of his will : and this is the will of God , even your sanctification . 

I should be too happy , and abundantly excusable for my boldness in speaking to you this day , if , through God's assistance , and your patience , i Might be able so to represent to you that smooth , safe , and beautiful way of peace and holiness ; that by the serious and conscientious following of them , all of us Might orderly and cheerfully go together , the Prince with the persons ; and the persons with the Prince ; the hearts of each drawing nearer to other , and all to God ; to the sight and fruition of him in whose presence is fullness of joy , and life for evermore . 

The text is a sacred and solemn exhortation , by which the spirit of God directs all men the next and only way to attain the most sovereign good , and desirable end , the happy sight of God . 

In it we have , 1 the precept or direction , follow peace with all men , and holiness . 

2 the motive or inducement , without which no man shall see God : not promissory and affirmative , for in so doing you shall see God ; but menacing and negative : such being indeed the temper of men's hearts , that they are more terrified with loss , than won and invited with the hopes of good ; the misery of suffering prevailing more with our hardness , than the happiness of enjoying . The horror of being ever separated from the sight of God , the chiefest good of the soul , which can import no less than hell and extreme misery , this happily May scare many one to follow peace and holiness , whom neither the pleasantness of the way , nor the ampleness of the reward , would induce to forsake their pleasing , but yet impure and dangerous courses . 

In the precept we have 1 the object , which is double , peace and holiness . 2 the act , or duty , but one , and serves to both ; follow them . we will consider the objects severally in their natures , and carry along the act or duty with them . 

1 of peace : follow peace with all men . 

Now although the beauty , sweetness , and usefulness of this subject ( Which is so agreeable to my mind , and so necessary to our times , that i should be glad to meet it in every sermon i make or hear , and in every man with whom i deal ) though ( I say ) it Might deserve and justify a large and renewed discourse upon it ; yet i May but sparingly now speak of it , and only sprinkle you with a few drops of this pure and crystal stream , which makes all to flow with milk and honey wheresoever it runs ; in the conscience , in the church , or in the state , and civil societies ; because i have , not long ago , in a public , though far inferior , assembly , largely discoursed of it : and i would not seem to do what i need not , that is , drive two mills with one stream , since the plenty of the other branch of holiness will afford matter sufficient , and worthy your attention , my speech , and all our practices . 

Only give me leave to point out briefly to you these three things : 1 what this peace is . 2 how and by whom to be followed . 3 why.  

1 for this general peace , we can better tell what it is by the fruition , than any description of it . 

What health is to the body , and calmness to the sea , and serenity to the day , such is peace to the hearts and conversation of men : it is a kind of sweet , divine , and heavenly consent , harmony , and beauty of minds and manners , of affections and actions : it is one of the fairest and pleasantest fruits of that which among Christians we call charity , by which each is endeared to other by a mutual love , and study of one another's good , welfare , and happiness , as their own , both private and public , temporal and eternal . 

This must be followed to the latitude and extension of the subject , with all men , rom. 12.18 . as much as in you lies ( if it be possible ) live peaceably with all men . as far as the common bounds of our nature extend we are to follow peace with all men , so far as men ; pax cum hominibus , bellum cum vitiis . the more thou art an enemy to their enemies , their sins and vices , the more faithful friend thou art to them . peccata interficio homines amplector is the motto not only of every good magistrate , but of every good man ; hate and slay their sins , but love and save their souls . 

There is a double bond for it , 1 commune vinculum naturae , the common tie of our nature , being all of one metal , binds us to peace , by making us sociable ; God having sweetened our nature beyond the savageness and fierceness of other creatures , which are prone and armed to offend : God hath tempered our dust , and softened our clay with a spring of tears , a fountain of pity , humanity , and compassion above other creatures . Principio indulsit communis conditor illis 
Tantùm animam , nobis animum quoque , mutuus ut nos 
Affectus petere auxilium , & praestare juberet . 


and again , — mollissima corda 
Humano generi dare se natura fatetur , 
Cum lachrymas dedit . 




2 there is commune vinculum indigentiae : we are weak and wanting in many things , if alone and at distance , which society and communion strengthens and supplies us withal . So that nothing more agrees to the nature of man , nothing more suits to his necessities , than to follow peace together , both public and private . 

2 how must we all follow peace ? As of pride and envy comes strife and contention , so this universal peacefulness proceeds from humility , self-denying , low and moderate opinion of ourselves , studying our own nothingness and unworthiness , in honour preferring one another . This sweetens , plains and polisheth the roughness and asperity of men's minds and manners , and fits them to follow peace , 1 by avoiding to give offence . 2 by loathness to take offence . 3 by a forwardness and easiness to be reconciled , though unjustly offended . 4 by seeking for peace , and a fair understanding between ourselves and others ; though at present , through human infirmities , things cannot be so well composed . 

Thus all must follow peace with all men , seriously , freely , cheerfully , heartily , constantly , not to be damped or discouraged ; we must prosequi till we do assequi , follow till we overtake and obtain it . 

But who ? 1 Princes , and sovereign magistrates , the great arbitrators of war and peace , they must follow peace with all men , by equal and impartial distributions of justice and righteousness , which makes kingdoms to flourish with peace . He that will be Melchisalem , King of peace , must be Melchisedec , King of righteousness , as Christ was both . 

Further , peace deserves sometimes to be fomented by favourable moderation and indulgence in Princes ; clemency being {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ( As Synesius ) the most regal ornament , and in some sort a debt which is due to the weakness of human nature : and sometimes the malignity of times , minds , and affairs , May be such , that peace is to be preserved rather by gracious remissions , than rigorous , though just exactions . wise Princes , that have the keys of Janus his temple , will not easily open the gate to war , when they May with safety and honour keep it shut to peace . 

2 as Princes , so the persons and subjects must follow peace with all men , but especially with their Prince , the great and public father of their peace , and the numerous blessings that issue from it ; who ought to be in their esteem as those loyal and valiant hearts said of David , worth ten thousand of us . they must follow it . 1 by an orderly and willing obedience and submission to wholesome laws , which are but the interpreters of the mind of a just Prince . 2 by faithful and humble counsels of peace . 3 by free , liberal , and seasonable aids and subsidies to maintain peace . 4 those that contribute least to peace , yet May follow the King , the church , the commonweal , and all men , with their daily and fervent prayers , that God who makes men to be of one mind in a house and kingdom , would give to all the blessing of peace . 

3 why should we follow peace with all men ? 1 God hath commanded it , whose commands will return upon accounts , and he will exact of us how we have kept them : certainly the conscience of obeying God , is the powerfullest motive , and the noblest reward of our obedience . 

2 Christ hath deserved this of us , our great and ever-blessed peacemaker , who followed our peace so far , that he seemed to have lost himself , and to have been forsaken of his father . He followed us with thoughts , and offers , and promises of peace , when we were at greater distance and defiance , than can be between us and any man never so much our enemy . He made his own soul an offering for peace , rather than fail to procure our peace . 

Oh show we follow Christ by following of peace . 

3 follow it for thy brother's sake ; 1 as a man , that name bespeaks thee much . 2 as a Christian , more . 3 thy countryman , and thy neighbour too . When all these ties of nature , country , and vicinity ; of religion , of the same God and saviour , of the same hopes , faith , and heaven ; when ( I say ) all these do bind thy heart and hands from breaking the peace , should they not prevail more with thee to follow it , than any poor mistakes and injuries should do to violate or fly from it ? 3 consider thy brother's good in it . Every man should study to be {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} as public , diffusive , and preventive in his goodness as May be . Now distance , defiance , and disaffections with men , do extremely harden and shut up their hearts , that thou hast not those opportunities and advantages to do them that good , which love , and sweetness , and peacefulness , do put into thy hands by softening and melting them . 

4 for thy own sake follow peace with all men , 1 for thy own safety , and sweetness of living : who but turbulent and inhuman dispositions , like salamanders , would willingly live in the fire of strife and dissension ? which as it cannot but be unpleasing , so it May be dangerous and unsafe : for no man's anger is to be despised , much less the displeasure of many men , which May embroil the public , and in that , thy private happiness . Even the tallest cedars , and mighty oaks , which are as the Princes of the forest , have their share of safety and flourishing in peace , as well as the lower shrubs and bushes : nay , the violent blasts of war , like vehement winds , threaten them more , and make greater impressions on their height , than on inferiors , whose inferiority is a great point of their safety . Divide , & regnare desine . peace and union are the mutual preservation as well of head as members . 

2 for thy own honour follow peace , though it be through the bushes and asperities of some injuries and offences . it is the glory of a man to pass by offences ( Saith the wisest of Kings ) especially in the pursuit of peace . the greater indeed the person is , the greater the offence ; but the greater the offence , the greater glory in passing by it , because it brings us nearest to the imitation of God's infinite mercy , patience , and forgiveness . one victory over a man's self is more glorious , than many over an enemy . The triumphs of reason , virtue , morality and grace , over our passions , are far more honourable than those of the sword , and power of arms in the field , which are stained and deformed with the blood of men . pax una triumphis innumeris potior : one fair and spotless lily of preserved peace is a greater ornament to a Prince's diadem , than to have it beset round with many red roses of bloody triumphs . 

May his memory be ever blessed , and his precious name had in honour , who first of Princes , next after Christ , gave that for his word , beati pacifici . and May they be blessed , who being heirs to his crown , are also heirs to his princely virtues , and peaceful disposition . And have we not all causes to bless God , who hath inclined their hearts ; and to bless them who have followed those inclinations , to re-establish our late dubious and endangered peace , and lengthen out our tranquillity ? May the great God of peace crown their persons , posterity , and kingdoms , with abundance of mercy and peace , so long as the sun and moon endure . 

3 follow peace with all men , for thy own internal and eternal peace with God . God is surely an enemy to those that are enemies to peace ; since they are contrary , 1 to his nature , which is happy in an unmoved and eternal tranquillity . 2 to his word , which seeks , by the message of peace , to bring us nearer , and make us liker to himself . 3 a peaceless and unquiet disposition , like troubled waters , is less apt for the sweet and clear reflections of God's love to it , or the operations of his spirit in it ; which creates that internal and unexpressible peace , which no man knows the price of , but he that hath it . 4 lastly , they only shall rest with God in peace , who have followed after peace , and in so doing , after God . They shall die in peace , and lie in peace , and rise in peace , and reign in peace with God for ever . the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace . 

But i have done with the first object , and the duty , follow peace with all men : we come now to the second . 

2.  and holiness . 

peaceableness and holiness must go together , and indeed it is pity they should be separated ; yet they are oftentimes : for many are of sweet , soft , and calm natures , not far from the kingdom of heaven ; yet they rise not to the height of holiness , which must exceed and amend the best of natures . vae optimae naturae , nisi superveniat gratia . Good natures , like small and shallow brooks , May empty themselves , and carry us to that narrow lake of human love , honour , and approbation ; but holiness only is that great and noble stream which conveys the soul to heaven , and loseth it in the ocean of God's infinite happiness . 

Oh let us not content ourselves with the study of peace , and neglect holiness . Peace will soon corrupt and sour , to troubles inward and outward , which is not preserved and eternised with holiness . there is no peace to the wicked , saith God ; no true , inward , and durable peace : we must follow peace as men , and holiness as Christians . what is it to have peace with men , and war with God ? Let us therefore see , 

1 what holiness is . 2 who must follow it . 3 how we must follow it . 4 wherefore . 

1 what holiness is . 

Holiness is a word of various acceptation . 

1 there is a holiness transcendent , essential , and absolute , which is in God , or rather which is God himself ; who is the eternal , first , and only rule to himself ; by his immutable goodness , unerring wisdom , and irresistible power ; who is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , thrice holy , as the seraphins cry , holy , holy , holy Lord God of hosts , &c.  Holy in his will , in his word , and in his works ; in his justice , mercy , and power : and therefore {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , infinitely great and powerful , because infinitely good and holy . The father is holy , and the son holy , and the spirit holy ; in their essence , in their relations , and in their operations . This holiness we must follow . mat. 5.48 . be ye perfect , as your heavenly father is perfect . 1 pet. 1.15 . be ye holy , as he that hath called you is holy . here is the rule , pattern , idea , and prototype of holiness ; the fountain , sun , and sea of holiness , from whence it derives itself in the second place to reasonable creatures , angels and men , who only are capable of holiness in a strict and proper sense . 

2 all creatures have a goodness of nature and being by creation , only the reasonable are vessels of holiness ; which properly is , or at least ought to be in us , a full and exact conformity of the soul in all its motions and operations to the will and mind of God . in the blessed angels it is , and was in man at first a gift of creation , whereby they and we were made in the image of God , in righteousness and true holiness . since our fall holiness is a gift of free grace , a supernatural quality or habit infused into the soul by the holy spirit , which by degrees reneweth us to a conformity ( Or an unfeigned study at least of conformity ) to the will of God ; doing all out of conscience to his command , regulating all by to his word , and directing all to his glory . 

This holiness we must also follow , as the true and only beauty , honour , riches , pleasure , and perfection of the soul . For , as much as men by reason exceed beasts , so much do Christians by holiness exceed mere men , in their unholy and unregenerate state . By holiness we recover our station and nearness to angels , our claim to heaven , our kindred and relation to God , not only as his creatures , but as his sons , regenerate by his holy spirit . 

3 there is yet a holiness in a low and inferior sense , not of virtue or grace , but of use and relation ; which is in scripture and common speech applied to things unreasonable and inanimate too . This is a holiness of dedication , when things are devote and consecrate to the worship and service of the most holy God , set apart from common and civil uses to sacred . 

This likewise we must follow , not as conceiving any inherent quality of holiness to be in those things , whereby they are able to work on thy spirit , or recommend thee and thy service to a greater degree of acceptation , by conferring a greater degree of holiness ( Except in respect to God's special appointment and promise , as of old ) but only so far we must follow this relative holiness , as to a decent use and reverential comportment ; such as becomes the gravity , majesty , and solemnity of Christian religion ; and those outward services God requireth of us : sancta sanctè , holiness becomes the house and worship of God for ever . 

But take heed that thy superstitious mind do not impute to , nor expect to find any active or virtual holiness , in or from times , places , pictures , relics , garments , or postures ; when that must be , as it only can be , in thy heart : there is that sanctum sanctorum , the immediate residence and operation of God's holy spirit . It is preposterous and vain to imagine or seek it in other things : if thou hast it not there , thou Mayst profane them ; they cannot sanctify thee , nor thy services . 

Yet here it is that superstition is prone to dote and flatter itself in its outward formalities of holiness ( As Lewis the eleventh did in his leaden gods pardon , and the protection of an hermit and his relics , with which he had fortified and barricadoed himself against the invasions of death , but all in vain . ) 

superstition , i say , which is the ape and mimic of religion , having a dream and fancy of external holiness , when indeed it is the moth and rust both of true religion , and proper holiness ; the paint and meretricious beauty of a church or person ; the ivy which by secret and unsensible steps creeps upon and overspreads its supporter , religion ; stealing away the sap of piety , which should be in the heart and inward man ( In spirit and truth ) to the pleasing of the senses and fancy only , by nourishing them with external and pompous formalities . 

It is indeed a heavy incubus , when once it hath seized upon a church or conscience , oppressing it with needless scruples , and ceremonious burdens , which extremely abate , if not quite take away that beauty , vigour , and majesty of true religion and holiness , which keeps the medium between superstition and profaneness . 

Yet must holiness have an universal influence upon the whole man , all faculties , motions , and actions , inward and outward ; on the soul and body . In the soul there must be a holiness of mind or understanding , by seeing and believing the saving truth of God ; of the will , by applying , embracing , and subjecting to it ; of the affections ( Fear , love , joy , anger , hope , sorrow , zeal , &c. ) when they are by God's spirit carried to their right objects , and moderated in their measure to them ; thus is truth , rectitude , and order , the holiness of the mind , will , and affections . 

Further , holiness must have an influence on the external expressions . truth and purity are the holiness of speech ; so chastity , temperance , meekness , humility , modesty , &c. are the holiness of our outward manners and comportments . as morality improves the affections , and regulates the motions of the will to virtues , so holiness beautifies and raiseth those virtues to graces ; and of the philosopher's alchemy produceth the Christians pure gold : while it keeps all our actions , desires , and affections , within those bounds of honour and moderation , which reason and religion do require . 

Holiness is the souls fitting for God , its union and tie to God , its communion with him ; in some sort deifying us , and making us partakers of the divine nature . what light is to the sun and day , what clearness to the fountain , what fruitfulness to the earth , what beauty and health are to the body ; that indeed is holiness to the soul , to the whole man , and all our actions . 

holiness is the supernatural and universal beauty of the reasonable creature . 

We are corruption , till holiness make us sound ; ruined , till holiness repair us ; we are barrenness , till that make us fruitful ; we are deformity , till that make us beautiful ; we are darkness , till holiness enlighten us ; dead , till that enliven us ; depraved , till that rectify us ; we are sin , till holiness make us gracious ; we are hell , till holiness make us heavenly ; we are devils , till holiness make us saints ; we are damned wretches , till holiness sets us in a capacity of salvation , and seeing of God : whose enemies we are , till holiness have endeared us ; from whom sin would separate us forever , being filthy and abominable in his sight , till holiness wash and cleanse us through faith in the blood of Christ . 

In the sight of the most holy God , all beauty is deformity , all wisdom folly , all honour baseness , all plenty poverty , all liberty bondage , all happiness misery , all life but a death , all our splendid works but dead and damnable , without holiness . 

All words and human notions are too gross to set forth to you this spiritual beauty of holiness , like dead colours to paint the light and heat of the sun : one beam discovers it better than all the shadows of words or pencils could do ; so the best knowledge of holiness is experimental in the soul and conscience . 

For it is not only in words , in notion , fancy , or speculation , or outward shows , but in reality of effects ; serious and solid without vanity or ostentation , or affectation , settled upon indisputable principles , and unmovable grounds , the revealed will of God : who since he is the author of our being , nothing is more gratefully just , than that his will should prescribe a rule to our actions : to which the more we study to apply and conform ourselves in all our actions , the more we follow holiness . 

This , this is that frame and temper of our souls and lives , which God our father , and Christ our saviour , and the holy spirit our sanctifier , the word our instructor , the sacraments our confirmers , the saints our forerunners , the angels our protectors : all with one voice recommend to us follow holiness , oh ye sons of men , without which yet shall never see the face of God . 

Our most holy faith and profession ; the precepts , promises , and hopes revealed ; all our duties of preaching , hearing , reading , meditating , praying , receiving , fasting , almsgiving , &c. all are to advance this quality of holiness in us . 

This is one great intent of Christ's coming , his living with us , and dying for us , that he Might sanctify , as well as justify us ; save us from the power as well as the punishment of sin ; that he Might give us a most perfect and excellent example , and purchase to himself a holy persons , Luke 1.74 . that we being delivered from our enemies , Might serve him without fear , in righteousness and holiness all the days of our life , so Titus 2.11 . the grace of God that bringeth salvation to all men hath appeared , teaching us that denying , &c.  1 cor. 1.30 . Christ is made to us wisdom , righteousness , sanctification , and redemption . 

This is the fire that inflames , and the incense that perfumes all our duties , sacrifices , and services to God , so as to make them accepted through Christ . 

This sets a value on two mites , and a cup of cold water , and a handful of meal , without which all external pomp and cost of services , is not only not pleasing , but fulsome , nauseous , and abominable to God , Esay 1.12 offer no more vain oblations ; who hath required these things at your hands ? yet the law did , but not in such a manner , with unwashed hands , and unholy hearts , prov. 21.27 . even the prayers and sacrifices of the wicked are abomination to God . 

The heathen saw this well , and hath admirably expressed it , — quin demus superis — 
Compositum jus , fasque animi , sanctosque recessus 
Mentis , & incoctum generoso pectus honesto , 
Haec cedò , ut admoveam templis & far litabo . 




Holiness is the ladder of heaven , whose lowest step is humility , and the highest love , and devotion ; by which the soul descends to men in charity , and ascends to God in piety . 

This is that which prepares and disposeth the soul for heaven ; without which heaven itself would be no heaven , or not pleasing to us : better be holy in hell , if possible than unholy in heaven ; though these two are unseparable , holiness and happiness ; differing only in degree , not in kind . For holiness is the spark of happiness , and happiness the flame of holiness . 

Holiness is the infancy of happiness , and happiness the complete stature of holiness . 

Holiness is the morning of happiness , and happiness the meridian or noontide of holiness . Holiness is the seedtime , and happiness the full harvest : for heaven is not , as grosser minds imagine , only an impunity , or freedom from punishment , and fruition of pleasures , &c. but rather it consists in an immunity from sin , and a perfection of holiness . 

This is that one thing necessary , and required of the sons of men , as the condition of seeing God ; 't is not without riches no man shall see God ; or without beauty , honour , strength , learning , wit , &c.  No , but without holiness : all other additaments thou Mayst dispense with , and yet be happy ; but holiness is indispensable . 

By the paths of holiness only our wearied and wand'ring souls May return to paradise , that happy state and station , whence we fell , and were driven out : all other ways are severely kept against us , by the flaming sword of God's irreconciliable anger and hatred against sin : no unholy thing shall enter ( Much less remain ) in the holy city ; all such shall be cast out , rev. 21.27 . psal. 5.4 . thou art the god that hast no pleasure in wickedness , nor shall any evil dwell with thee . God is of so pure eyes that he cannot behold iniquity , no more than the sun can behold darkness ; for its appearing turns all darkness into light ; much less can darkness look upon light , or sinners on God ; this is hell neither to see , nor to be seen of God ; whose favourable presence is the life , his absence the death of the soul forever . 

But i have done with the first particular , what holiness is . 

The second thing is , who must follow it ? 

Every one that hath a soul to save , or a mind to see God . The exclusion is peremptory and universal ; without holiness no man shall see God : with this no man need despair , though never so defective for other things ; without this no man May presume , God is no accepter of persons . not the rich , nor great , nor noble , nor valiant , nor beautiful ; not the morally civil , not the witty and learned scholars , not the deep statesmen , and dark politicians , not the potent Princes and mighty monarchs of the world ; none of them May flatter themselves to reach heaven without holiness : God will cast deformity on all your so much flattered and self-admiring beauty , which is deceitful to the owner , and dangerous to others ; unless the beauty of holiness be added to thee , like apples of gold in pictures of silver , which makes thee lovely not only to good minds on earth , but also to the angels , and God himself in heaven . 

God will infatuate all your fallacious wisdom and self-destroying wit : he will discover the shallowness of all your imaginary depths and counsels . He will one day appear the only true wise man , who is wise for his soul to God and to eternity , which is none but the holy man . 

God will make to vanish all the dreams and shadows of your imaginary greatness , and flat the swelling sails of your titles of honour , filled only with popular breath and opinion of men , yourselves and others : he will be then truly and only honourable who hath sought God's honour , more than his own , whom God will admit to his sacred presence and favour : this is none but the holy man . 

Nay God will cast contempt upon Princes , as the psalmist speaks , and in stead of robes of majesty , they shall be covered with their own confusion as with a cloak , unless they be sacred in heart as well as in title ; consecrate to God as well as exalted above men ; except there be the inward anointing of God's holy spirit , as well as the outward of the prelate . As they are near to God in greatness and place , so they must be in grace and holiness , if ever they hope to attain to glory and happiness . Even in Princes God tells Samuel , he looks not at the outward appearance , but at the heart . 

That , that indeed is truly sacred majesty in Princes , when being God's vicegerents on earth , they do that which they are persuaded in their conscience God himself or Christ would do , if they reigned visibly as King on earth : when being vmbratiles dij , the back parts and shadows of God , they most fully represent in a human model , the divine perfections . 

Certainly nothing sets forth Princes to a more divine honour , love and veneration , than their exemplary virtues and holiness . 

hic animus , atque hae sunt generosi principis arts . this even they , the greatest of men , must follow , since they are but mortales dij , and must die like men ; unless they mean to come infinitely below the meanest of their good subjects in the other world , whom in this they so much exceed . 

Indeed all of us , both great and small must follow holiness , since all have relation to so holy a creator , to so holy a redeemer , and to so holy a comforter , being subjects to the King of saints . 

Yea , we are , or should be the habitation and temple wherein God will delight to dwell , 1 cor. 3.17 . if any man defile the temple of God , him will God destroy . 

Nay we are the heaven where God resides : every saint ( Saith saint Bernard ) is God's sanctuary , and every holy heart a heaven ; therefore that is called the heaven of heavens where the saints are ; in every of whom God dwells more gloriously than in any material heaven . 

In all callings and states of life holiness is necessary ; every action should be a step to arrive nearer to God : holiness is the poor man's riches , the mean man's honour , the weak man's strength , the banisheds' home , the prisoner's freedom , the young man's glory , the old man's crown , the sick man's health , the dying man's hope and life : in a word it is all in all to all men dying and living . The weight of this text lies upon all , to move them to follow holiness , and those especially who have most impediments and diversions , yet their actions are most exemplary , whether they be good or bad . 

Oh when power and piety , greatness and goodness , height and holiness meet together , and make up one magistrate , one minister , one King , how divine , how glorious , how attractive , and commanding all hearts to a love or fear , are their lives and actions ! Like a noble constellation which consists of many stars , no less benign and propitious for their influence , than eminent and conspicuous for their light . 

And if i were to speak to men of my own calling , superiors or equals ( As i see i am likely to do to some ) i should with all humble and respective earnestness recommend holiness to their hearts , thoughts , words , lives , gestures , looks , and conversations . etiam vultu laeditur sanctitas : haughty and supercilious looks , and insolent comportment , much more such speech and actions misbecome the holiness and humility of our profession . 

There are holy orders , and holy duties , to which we are admitted ; and there is a special ceremony of consecration used for Bishops . Oh let us make good the holiness of our titles and function , by the holiness of our conversation . 

Let not the world reproach us , as some do the vanity and arrogancy of the Popes , who challenge to themselves the title of his holiness ; by way of eminency ( Or emphasis ) when indeed it is ( Say they ) by antiphrasis , or contrariety , being for the most part solecisms and contradictions to their names , as he said of Probus , vir minimè probus . 

Oh let us never vainly imagine , that there is a nearer way to the clergies honour , than by the clergies holiness . though holiness even despised as a jewel under foot , hath its true and internal honour and value still . 

But oh let not our preaching , our writing , our living any way decry , damp , and discountenance holiness , which is God's honour , and the church's honour , and must be our both honour and happiness . 

Oh let us not vainly contend for an imputed and relative holiness in churches , and tables , and vestures , and gestures , and neglect it in our hearts and lives . Our word must be that of saint Paul , be ye followers of me as i am of Christ , that is , of holiness , which was Christ's way . 

This , not only the better world , which are extremely ashamed and grieved for the contrary , but even the worse , dissolute , and debauched sort of persons exact of us , whom we harden extremely against our doctrines by our contrary manners ; and who are glad by the faults and scandals of ministers ( Holy men as they should be ) to justify or excuse their own vicious and unholy lives . 

The higher our calling raiseth us , the nearer should it bring us to God , and the more should the face of our lives like Moses his , shine with the beams of holiness while we daily converse with God . 

Nothing more justifies , and assures the truth of our faith and doctrine , than the suitable holiness of our lives . ( Let not that be verified of us , which Jeremy complained of in his time , from the prophets is profaneness gone into all the land . but rather let us take saint Paul's good advice to Timothy , thou oh man of God fly these things , and follow after righteousness , godliness , faith , love , patience , meekness , &c.  

3 we come now to the third particular , how we must follow holiness . 

1 for the measure how far , to the height , aim at perfection ; anticipate thy heaven as much as May be here on earth ; emulate and strive to equal thy pattern for parts , though not for degrees ; be ye holy as your heavenly father is holy : he hath nothing of true holiness , who thinks he hath enough , or May have too much . nimietates & excessus affectuum deo debentur : all the excess of our vehement and unsatisfied desires should run this way after God and holiness . 

2 for the manner how : i answer , 1 follow it universally in all points ; the same tie lies upon thee in any one action which doth in all : holiness is the salt which must season all , so far as human infirmity can attain . Thou wouldst not have some sparks of hell mixed with thy joys of heaven : oh strive that no sin ( If possible ) May allay thy holiness and integrity , be ye holy in all manner of conversation , and perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord . 

2 follow it earnestly , with vehement affections , not cold , languishing , lukewarm and indifferent ; content not thyself with a few posting and perfunctory prayers ; easy and lazy formalities of duties , obesae animae , like fat and pursy souls that cannot follow either fast , or far : but rise to that intensiveness in following holiness , with which the covetous man follows his gain , the ambitious his honour , the voluptuous his pleasure ; follow it with the same eagerness , wherewith thou hast formerly followed sin , the world , and the devil ; follow holiness with the same flagrancy and contention , as wicked men do persecute and oppose it . They have their {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , so must thou , but sancta & pia persecutio , a sacred and commendable prosecution . 

3 follow it cheerfully , not in a tedious drooping and dejected manner which brings an ill report on God's ways ; no man hath more right to moderate mirth ( Which is the only true ) than he which is in the way of holiness , and indeed of happiness . Oh let not that be a burden to our spirits here , which must be the joy and crown and constant disposition of our souls in heaven . 

The deadness and indispositions from within , which we are subject unto , are not to be imputed to the ways of holiness , but to the weakness of our natures ; as the loathness to use exercise proceedeth from the ill humours , which oppress the spirits in a diseased body , and not from the inconvenience of exercise , which is the way to dispel those ill humours , and to recover health and agility . For the difficulties and discouragements from without , they are not much to be considered by any , but those that know not what is the worth of a soul , the weight of eternity , the comfort of a good conscience , and of the hopes of heaven , in the sight and fruition of God . 

4 follow it exactly & closely , not at large and at distances a far off , as the disciple followed Christ to be crucified , ephes. 5.15 . walk ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) strictly and precisely in a sound and apostolical sense . There will be rimulae , leaks and flanes of infirmities , and daily incursions in all our lives ; but let there not be ( hiatus ) wide breaches and gapings of presumption : keep not willingly any distance or dissimilitude from Christ , be not ashamed or discountenanced to come near to him and to be like to him in all points . 

Follow holiness , not timidè & pudibundè ; it is pudendus pudor , a shame infinitely to be ashamed of , that any Chistian should be ashamed to be , or to be thought too holy ; but that he must now and then dare to swear , and lie , and talk obscenely & profanely , or live riotously , that he May not seem too precise . Canst thou be too fit for heaven , or too far from sin and hell ? 

5 follow holiness speedily , begin betimes : all life is lost that is not spent in a holy course of living ; it is a dead life , nay a damning life without amendment . All our life is too little to live well ; the sun cannot rise too early , except to a sluggard ; nor can holiness be too soon begun in thy heart , except thou love to sleep in thy sin : it were happy if with Jeremy and John Baptist we were sanctified from the womb and font , from the dawning and morning of our lives , but , O jam clarum mane fenestras intrat . 


rom. 13.12 . It is high time to rise from sin and follow holiness , the day of our short life is far spent in following vanity and things that cannot profit : the night of death is at hand , o make haste to live , and to live holily , that thou Mayst not come short of dying happily . Breve sit quod turpiter audes . 




How many hast thou known cut off in their youth and strength , and confidence of living , and it May be in their purposes and essays of amendng . 

Many of us have one foot in the grave , through the course of age , and infirmities that attend it ; nay , even of the strongest of us ; we May say as David said to Jonathan , as the Lord liveth , and as thy soul liveth , there is but a step between thee and death , yea , and hell too ; and yet many of us not yet gone one step of serious resolutions , to follow holiness , and forsake our old sins . 

Oh dally not with thy life , with thy soul , with hell , and eternal death : delays are extreme dangerous where the opportunity is short , and the omission is irreparable : remember on this moment depends eternity . death follows us , and sin follows us , and our own evil consciences , and hell , and the devil too will follow and overtake us , if we fly not from them by following Christ where ever he goes in the ways of holiness . Oh learn of David , psalm 119.60 i made haste and prolonged not the time to turn my feet into thy ways . 

6 follow it sincerely , simulata sanctitas ▪ duplex iniquitas . Hypocrisy is a double and twisted impiety . it 's not only a not serving God , but a mocking of him , and it shall have a double condemnation for the want of holiness which should be , and for the lie and pretention of what was not ; nothing is more contrary to the simplicity of God's nature , and the truth and integrity of his word and intentions to men , than simulation and hypocrisy . Nothing hath more clouded , eclipsed and deformed the beauty of holiness , than the impudent pretensions of some to it ; who like apes and monkeys are the more deformed and ridiculous , because in some things they resemble the shape , and imitate the actions of men , but want their reason , galat. 6.7 . be not deceived , God is not mocked , what a man sows that he shall reap : he that sows only shadows , and shows , and formalities of holiness , shall reap only shadows and shows and dreams of peace , comfort , and happiness . The deceiver will at last be most deceived . Oh be good in good earnest , or not at all ; lose not so much time and pains to act a part of holiness , which will but improve thy misery : what is it to be applauded of men , and abhorred of God ? what is the hope of the hypocrite ( Saith he in Job ) when God shall take away his soul ? 

7 and lastly , follow holiness constantly , not desultoriè , lamely , brokenly , and abruptly , by fits only ; but with a steady and resolute course , as the sun moves , neither going backe , nor standing still . perseverance is the crown of graces , and gets the crown of glory : thou expectest God should make thee incessantly happy in his eternity ; oh be thou holy ( in tua aeternitate as saint Bernard ) in thy limited and short eternity . 

Consider how noble a pattern thou hast in Christ thy saviour , who deferred his own glory , till he had finished thy salvation . Consider how great encouragements thou hast , how sweet comforts for the present , how ample reward and expectation for the future . 

Oh let no difficulties take thee off , nor errors divert thee , let them rather whet and exasperate thy resolutions and endeavours ; let no superstition deceive thee , nor persecution deter thee ; having begun in the spirit , do not end in the flesh . 

Remember thou hast always a viaticum , means of refreshing near thee ; the holy word and promises , and sacraments to relieve thee ; the holy spirit to assist thee , and help thy infirmities . 

Thou hast God's holy day wherein to be specially vacant to holy duties , and the soul's improvement ; by the careful sanctifying whereof , there is no doubt , but the pious soul is better enabled to see God here , in his word and works , and hereafter in his glory and presence : we have also praeclara exempla , of holy men and women , saints in all ages , which have gone before us in the ways of holiness to that state of happiness , through all the oppositions of men and devils . 

Heroic and invincible followers of holiness , now glorious and immortal possessors of happiness . praeclara spectantibus mediocria praestare pudori esse debet : having so noble and inviting examples set before us , it is a shame for us either to follow them not at all , or with weak and slender imitations . 

4 wherefore must we thus follow holiness ? This brings me to the last point , the second general , the motive or inducement , without which no man shall see God . Holiness is that alone which makes us capable of the beatific vision . 

But this is a point of so high speculation , of so serious consideration for the obtaining or losing of it , of so infinite comfort is the vision and fruition of God ; of so infinite honour , the separation from him , that it would far exceed the time , and my speech , to set it forth to you as it deserves . 

Only this short glimpse we May take of it , that there are many intervenient fruits of holiness worth our ambition here , by which we see God , though dimly , & at distance in his word and promises , in his sacraments , in his son our saviour , in his works , in his servants , in the motions of his spirit , in the ways of his providence , mercies and judgements . to all which holiness only clears and enlightens and enables the soul so as to see God , to enjoy and admire him . This makes oculatam animam , an eyed and seeing mind , which otherways is blind and dead , mat. 5.  blessed are the pure in heart , for they and they only do and shall see God . but oh when we come to see not his footsteps , or back parts , or shadow , or hands , but his face , by an immediate intuition of his majesty , how shall we be filled with glory and happiness ? Oh praeclarum & invidendum spectaculum ! 




In this life indeed ( As God told Moses ) no man can see his face and live ; scrutator majestatis opprimetur à gloriâ . but in heaven , we shall live by the sight and light of God . sectator sanctitatis perficietur à gloriâ . if then it be any comfort to see the light of the sun , the beauty of heaven and earth , or the face of an indulgent father , an excellent friend , or a gracious Prince , who is as an angel of God , what is it to see God himself ? 

Oh what a sea and inundation of unspeakable joy and happiness must flow in upon the soul , to behold the brightness of God's presence , the glory of his majesty , the beauty of his goodness , the treasures of his wisdom , the immensity of his power , the amplitude of his mercy , the perfection of his holiness and infinite happiness ! And last of all , the eternal wonder of his free and unchangeable love to us , so much below him , so as nothing in comparison of him ! 

In thy light ( Saith the psalmist ) we shall see light ; the way is by the light of grace , to come to the light of glory ; by the beauty of holiness to come to the perfection of happiness , which is the sight of God : which what it is we shall best tell when we come to it . I must now leave it to the work of God's spirit in your devouter hearts , to consider more largely and sublimely of this point . 

Only give me leave by way of conclusion to appeal to your piety , wisdom , and experience , whether the ways of holiness be not worth the following , which end in such happiness , as is beyond expressing : whether it be not a vanity , folly , and extreme madness for men and women , that are built for eternity , and capable of the highest good , so much to neglect their souls , their God , and their happiness by following their sins , the worldly pleasures , profits , and honours , with the neglect of holiness ? The devil , the evil world , and a man's own corrupt heart , will allow him to be any thing , so he be not holy : let him be rich , and fair , and strong , and great , and honourable , and witty , and eloquent , and civil , and politic , and knowing even in divine mysteries , any thing , so as he be not holy . All these things ( As the devil said to Christ ) will i give thee , if thou wilt be unholy still , and like myself : holiness is that alone the devil wants , and despairs of himself , and that he most envies us the sons of men ; because he knows it sets us in a way of happiness so infinitely above him . 

But what our saviour said , matth. 8.22 . to the young man that desired respite to bury his dead father , let the dead bury the dead , but follow thou me . this give me leave to say to all you that hear me this day ; let dead hearts bury themselves in dead comforts , dead honours , dead pleasures , dead hopes , &c. but follow thou Christ , follow holiness . 

I further appeal to the justice of your piety , and goodness , whether the ways of holiness , and the followers of them deserve to be derided , despised , discountenanced , & discouraged so much as they are by the proud , profane , sensual , and superstitious minds of the world ? whether they which despise holiness do not withal despise their own souls , their god and saviour ? whether they forsake not their own mercies , who follow lying vanities ? whether this be not to glory in our shame , to be ashamed of that which is the glory of God , and the reasonable creature ? 

Lastly , i appeal to your royal wisdom , and the rest of your noble and Christian prudence & piety , whether those that follow peace and holiness , and are fitted to a capacity of seeing the great God and King of heaven in his glory , be not also the worthiest and fittest to see the face and enjoy the favours of Christian Kings on earth ? 

These , these are they that best know the duty , honour , and fidelity , they owe to majesty ; and make a conscience to pay it , because it is a point of holiness so to do . These are the propugnacula & munimenta regni & ecclesiae , as was said of saint Ambrose , the strength , honour , and security of the church and state , under God and his majesty's care and pious providence . These are in some sort , the ( tutelares genii ) protectors of his majesty's person , health , life , crown , Queen , and posterity ; while they daily lift up pure hands and holy hearts to the god of heaven , for his majesty's safety , honour , and happiness . 

These are like Moses and Elias , the horsemen and chariots of Israel ; these have power with God by their prayers , counsels , and good examples ; they stand in the gap , and hinder the inundation of sin and judgements . To these we owe under God the enjoyment of our peace , plenty , safety , and religion , and of the blessing of blessings temporal , a pious and gracious Prince . 

Oh then let not holiness ( I beseech you ) be banished , as i believe it is not , from your hearts , your words , your houses , your lives , from your favour and good opinion , from your service ; nor from your court : let there not be wanting in this place Joseph's , and mordecays , and Nehemiah's , and Daniels , men in whom is the spirit of the holy God , as that heathen Prince said of Daniel . 

There is a book called the holy court , which Might be useful to courtiers , if it were not unsafe , being larded with many false and frivolous opinions , and superstitious practices : it will be your honour and happiness to act what he sought to write . 

Oh follow not sin and vanity , or strife and contention , or lubricity and impurity , or vainglory , &c. these will cast you out from the presence of God , and betray you to utter darkness : and what considerate mind can with patience think of being ever separated from the fountain of its being , life and happiness ? Oh what infinite darkness , necessity , and horror must for ever oppress that soul ! Holiness only is that divine magnetic power , which draws the soul to God , and God to the soul , never quiet till it be united to the fountain , its virtue . 

I know your piety cannot but consider oft and seriously , that the greatest of you will be one day like Samson ( When his fatal hair was cut ) weak , and impotent and like other men ; your eyes blinded , your great strength departed , the chains of darkness will involve you , the worms will be your fetters , and the grave your prison . 

Oh while you live follow holiness , that when you die ( As Samson did ) you May quite destroy those enemies , which living you could not ; that death May be an end of your sin and mortality , but the beginning and consummation of your endless happiness in the sight of God . 

That when the eyes of your bodies shall be shut to this world , and all things desirable here ; the eye of your soul ( that rational and eternal eye ) May be opened to see and enjoy God , and reign with Christ for ever . 

That you and we though in different degrees , May then receive that crown of immortal glory , which is free from cares and crosses , from fears and jealousies , from sleep , and soul-breaking distractions , but full of a divine and constant glory , serenity , joy , and eternal security . amen . 

A sermon preached before the judges at Chelmsford . 

zech. 8.16 . 

These are the things ye shall do ; speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour : execute the judgement of truth and peace in your gates . 



The customary solemnity of public assize , and administration of justice , hath not more of state and policy , than of safety and piety , in this ; that not only the gentry and Commons , but your wisdom and gravity ( Right honourable and reverend ) disdain not to receive advice from the pulpit , before you go to the bench ; and hear God's charge to you , before you give your charge to others : hereby not so much to conciliate a greater reverence and authority to your persons and proceedings , by amusing the minds of the populacy , and awing their consciences , with the pomp and formality of religion ( As those heathen lawgivers ( Solon , Lycurgus , Numa , and others ) are said to have done ) but seriously and in the fear of God to ascend with Moses first to the mount , and talk with God , before you judge and teach the persons . 

to the law and to the testimony ; these will inform you the will of God , which is the highest law and perfectest rule to examine truth , to measure justice , and to maintain peace ; which though they flow from that pure and eternal fountain of essential truth , justice , and peace , most clearly and plentifully in the conduit of his word ; yet are ready to contract much soil and dregs in the vessels of men's hearts , and course of human actions ; so that the best have need often to refine and renew their minds , by a fresh information of their judgements , concerning the will of God , and resolution of their wills to do it . 

His word , no doubt , teacheth the best politics ; his precept and example show the happiest platform of government , whose almighty power is so tempered with wisdom and goodness , that as he made at first the state and frame of all things full of beauty , order , and harmony , by number , weight , and measure ; so he still preserves and governs the great commonwealth of all creatures in heaven and earth , with that just proportion of power and goodness , as keeps the general peace of things ; and keeps off that confusion to which the variety and contrariety of particular natures seem to tend . So that who so will judge and govern aright , shall not need to use those Machiavellian engines , lying , fraud , simulation and injustice ; mysteries indeed not of true policy , but of iniquity , unreasonable reasons of state , which the impotency and folly of wicked men pretend as necessary ; when indeed ••ey tend not to the establishing but undermining of states , and ruin both of governors and governed . 

We need go no further than this text , to see what God requires and teacheth us as best , and necessary for the well ordering of human societies ; both for private and publi , ke or judiciary proceedings . 

1 in private , that every one speak the truth to his neighbour ; this would stop many injuries and complaints with which the public courts are pestered . 

2 in public and judiciary proceedings ; every one promote the execution of truth and peace in the gates . 

1 the persons and governed . by their presence , obedience , assistance , by their testimony and evidence of word and oath for the search and finding out of truth . By their hands and power for the maintaining of peace both in the safety of the person of the magistrate , and execution of that •ust sentence which they give . 

2 the magistrate and persons governing , 1 by Their knowledge of what is judgement and justice . 2.  By their authority and power , to execute what they know is just . 3.  By their integrity in the execution , according to truth and peace . 

For these three things are ( You know ) necessary in magistrates , and those minores dii , inferior mortal gods : 

1.  skill to govern power . 2.  power to arm their skill . 3.  will•• actuate both uprightly : that neither ignorance breed error , and so injustice : nor weakness , contempt and opposition : nor corruptness , injury and oppression . 

What is knowledge of truth and equity , if there be not courage and conscience to speak it ? 

What is skill , courage , and conscience , if destitute of power , to execute what they know , and decree ? 

fundamentum pacis veritas , stabilimentum utriusque potestas ; truth is the foundation of peace , and power the support of both truth , and peace , which without authority grow feeble , and despised : as authority not grounded upon equity , and guided by truth , proves violence , tyranny , and oppression ; and becometh not a file , sive , and schreene to separate the rust from the metal , the bran from the flower , the chaff from the grain , the vile and refuse from the choice and precious ; but mola , & malleus plebis , the maul and mill , that violently and promiscuously grinds and beats to pieces all that comes under its rigour , and weight . 

Your honours and wisdoms i presume are provided with all three . 

power and authority , i am sure , you have the highest and amplest from the King of heaven , by the mediate appointment of our gracious King on earth . 

skill , and knowledge you have through God's blessing by the study and experience in the laws . 

uprightness and integrity , we charitably pray , and hope you have from the grace of God , and the tenderness of your own consciences . 

Indeed you have all from God ; whose word hath ordained your power , and regulated this by just law , and exacts a conscience in executing these laws . 

So that by attending to God's word you May confirm your authority , increase your knowledge , and incite your consciences . 

The judgement in all points is the Lords : as power , justice ▪ and truth in your judgements flow from him ; so will they , as rivers , return back to him in your reckonings and accounts . 

Happy is it when every one of these , as so many rivulets , contribute their strength to the public current of justice ; that so judgement May run down , as a noble and mighty stream , and know no stop or resistance . 

That every one being a lover of truth and peace , the first and severest censurer and judge of himself , and his own actions ; you May with the more patience and cheerfulness attend to what i shall out of God's word with all modesty and due observance , but yet truth and faithfulness endeavour by the discharge of my own conscience , to inform some , to reform others , and at least to confirm yours , by stirring up your prudent minds by way of remembrance of what is just and true , and tends to your own and other's peace . 

Which since you know , and have authority to do , happy are you if you do them . 

these are the things you shall do , &c.  

Two things are considerable in the words . 

1.  The form of the charge or command , these are the things ye shall do . 

2.  The duty or matter . 

1.  Private , personal , and universal to all men , speak every man the truth to his neighbour . 

2.  Public , political , and special to magistrates ; execute the judgement of truth and peace in your gates . 

We will begin with the duties themselves , and reserve the form of the command to the last place , when we shall apply the duties to every one as they concern them . 

1.  The first branch of the duty and command is private , personal , and universal to all men , 

veriloquentia . ] Speak ye the truth every man to his neighbour . 

1.  What we must do , speak the truth . 

2.  Who , every man . 

3.  To whom , to his neighbour . 

1.  Speak the truth : 

Man is , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a sociable creature . 

speech is the means of society and commerce . The common change and coin . the mine of truth is God's , the mint and coinage of it . speech must have his image and superscription , the stamp and impression of truth . it is capital offence of the highest majesty to counterfeit or falsify this by a lie . 

By reason we come near the angels ; by reason and speech both we exceed the beasts ; by truth speaking we come nearest to God , and get farthest from the devil , the father of lies . 

speech is the peculiar glory of men ; and veracity of good men , and Christians : it is the glory of God that his word is truth , agreeing with his eternal mind and intention . The glory of man is to come nearest God . 

speech is the glass and reflection of our souls : words are the characters , ambassadors , and interpreters of our minds , which must give by a true reflection , a true information of our meaning to others . 

The soul of words is truth , separated from that they are {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} cadaverosa verba , rotten , corrupt , and unsavoury words . 

To commend truth in knowing or speaking , is to commend the sun ; sol est lux mundi , veritas mentis . 

As the sun seated in the heaven , from thence derives his beams to all things : so truth is placed in the heaven of man , the understanding , from thence it must shine forth into our words . as light is to our eyes , for guiding our steps ; so is truth to our tongues , for ordering our speech . Solem e mundo tollunt , qui veritatem e verbis . 

veritas caeleste mentis pabulum ; truth is that pure , heavenly , and immortal food of the reasonable soul . A liar feeds on the dust , as the serpent's curse , nay on the ashes of hell . 

He that is in an error , is in an eclipse or mist , through the common imbecility of human understanding : but he that is in a way of lying , is in a night of utter darkness , in the chains of everlasting darkness , with the devil and his angels . He carries his devil and lying spirit about him , as Ahab's false prophets , and his hell within him in his conscience . 

giving the lie is , in point of honour , an offence of the highest nature to ingenuous minds ; because it reproacheth a man either of athiesme , or extreme baseness and cowardice ; that either he owns no god , or which is worse , fears more to offend man than God , not daring to speak the truth . 

Synesius de regno most elegantly , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , truth is the honour and nobleness of words , and it argues a generous mind to speak it : though alone , yet truth , as the sun is fair ; though displeasing ( & odium parit ) though dangerous , & grande praesagium mali ( As lactant. ) though desperate , vitamque impendere vero ; nec propter vitam vivendi perdere causam : it is folly to prefer life before the end of life , which is the knowing , love , and manifesting of truth . 

speak it therefore , and fear not . veritas nihil erubescit , nisi solum abscondi : truth is ashamed of nothing but to be hidden . 

But let it be verum , not verisimile , not probabile , but certum & compertum , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a clear pregnant and well assured truth ; not what is taken upon flying rumours , suspicions , or envious disaffections . For to affirm as certain , what is dubious , and only probable , is out of doubt a lie . 

We must not , like Balaam's ass , speak what we understand not , nor affirm what we know not . 

Therefore our speech must not be rash , precipitant , tumultuary , and passionate ; but calm , and deliberate , issuing from a heart without prejudice , partiality , or injust interests ; as silver streams from a crystal fountain , flowing without any mud or tincture of malice , or oblique and sinister designs . 

Our minds also must be prudent , steady , and reserved , not {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , credulous , like soft wax taking easily any impressions . That of Epicharmus is safe , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Keep always the reins and curb of diffidence and sobriety in thy mind and tongue . 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the way to truth hath many turnings , and needs a capacious mind to find out the right . Speak not what the show and superficies , or skin presents ; but what the inside , substance , and marrow of things discover to our judgements . 

There is veritas entis , quae est mentis quae videtur . the first we must always seek to attain . The second we must not fail to affirm : else it is a lie , which lactant. defines , mendacium est cum linguae animi interpres a sensu & cogitatione discordat . when the tongue agrees not with the thoughts . 

s. Austin tells us : & non vera fideliter , & vera infideliter dici possunt . a man May speak what is truth , yet falsely ; and what is false , yet truly : such a one is not mendax , but temerarius ; nec tam fallit quam fallitur : he is not a liar , but a rash speaker . 

the rule is , cum cogitare secundùm veritatem semper non possumus , at loquamur secundùm cogitata : our first happiness and care is to conform our thoughts to the truth of things ; our second , to conform our words to the truth of our thoughts . 

multi taedio investigandae veritatis ad proximos divertunt errores ; many out of a lazy , or credulous disposition , think it tedious to search out the way of truth , and so turn to the next and easiest path of error and probabilities : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as Thucydides speaks ; what we know uncertainly , speak not as certain : what we know assuredly , speak not as dubious , and with suspense , and by halves . 

For , as we must speak truth only ; so the whole truth , when expected and required . 

quantum supprimitur quaesitae veritatis , supplet mendacium ; as much as we defalk , or smother , of an enquired truth , which we pretend fully to discover , we make up by a tacit lie ; which is an interpretative denial of truth . 

When thou knowest and believest a truth , in ordinary converse , it is enough to speak it ; no more is required of thee . Therefore not swear the truth . Truth hath native strength sufficient , and needs not the volleys or barricadoes of oaths and imprecations . 

swearing is more than God requires , or truth needs , or ingenuous minds will exact ; or will consist with thy peace and a good conscience . 

let your yea , be yea , and your nay , nay ; what is more than these is sin : that is the simplicity and plainness of our saviour's prescripts , and bounds of speaking , even truth itself . 

swear not at all ; no not to the truth , in ordinary and familiar converse , except in weighty matters of great concernment in private , or in public and judiciary attestations , when called to it . ne jurandi facilitate in perjurium prolabamur , praeceptum est , ne juremus omnino ; he is in the confines and next step to false-swearing , and perjury , who accustoms himself to swear , though truly , in trivial matters . 

Bono viro constans vita loco juramenti est ; the credit and faithfulness of an honest man , hath the force of an oath . 

liars only need to swear , and for the most part do ; whose vanity or falsity hath bred them this just unhappiness , that when they speak the truth , they think they shall not be believed , unless they swear it : though he that deserves to be disbelieved in his truth speaking , merits not belief , though he swear ; for , if he fear nor a lie , he will not an oath . 

This customary swearing is not more vain and needless , than a spreading and epidemical evil , such as the land mourns under ; being grown to that which Salvian complains of , in his time ; non criminis , sed sermonis genus per deum , per christum jurare , consuetudine jurandi videtur : swearing seems to most , not a heinous and weighty sin , but a formality and compliment of speech , through the custom and commonness of swearing . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; truth is of itself clear enough , and needs not the vehemence and asseveration of an oath : which renders it more suspected , and the hearer more diffident , when he sees one fears not an oath , nor makes conscience of vain swearing , which is a sin as well as lying . 

As we need but speak it , so speak it plainly and clearly . truth , like the sun , joys most in itself ; it 's own openness , simplicity and clearness : as we ought not to swear it , so we must not with multitude of words clog and cumber it ; studying rather to cloud and involve it , than to clear and explain it , which is the end of speech . The contrary is but the cunning and artifice of many , who , though they dare not ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) flatly , and with open forehead fight against truth , yet with their ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as Socrates speaks ) fetches , dresses , ambages , circles , labarynths , perplexed and purposely intricate terms and discourses , they obliquely fight against the truth with its own arms , eloquence : studying to confound and lose the capacities of simpler minds , by using a sea of words to a drop of truth . 

Such tongues and men , like ignes fatui , intend not to give light to a matter , but only to amuse and lead out of the right way , ignorant and well meaning minds : which is indeed but a more subtle , fine , and sophistical way of lying : an injury of justice and truth with applause and ostentation ; which they hope to steal away , in that mist and obscurity of words , which by their voluble and juggling tongues they cast upon them . 

The practice and fault not so much of private men , as of those Tertullusses , many public orators ; whose profession calls them to the bar , and pleas , to be vindices veritatis , advocates of truth and justice ; whose unhappy tongues , and pernicious eloquence , oft times so darken and entangle truth and a just cause , which they know to be such , that they gain it with as much injustice as eloquence ; whose mercenary and venal souls and tongues , Count their greatest fee and reward to come from the purses of their clients , not from the conscience of asserting a truth , and vindicating a just cause . 

Certainly , it had been a blessing to these men , to have been dumb ; better not speak at all , than not the truth ; or with applause and vain glory , to speak nothing but specious and plausible lies . These are not pleaders , but seducers ; as Bernard , bonorum ingeniorum insignis est indoles in verbis verum amare , non verba : it argues a mind not less ingenuous than pious , to make words subservient to truth ; not to subdue and captivate truth to words : to Count the clearing and prevailing of truth the noblest reward of speaking , not to make truth the booty and prey of speech . veritas saepe offuscatur eloquentia : that power and prevalency of speaking that some men have , should be as bellowss ▪ {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , to blow up , and resuscitate to a flame and splendour , the sparks of an obscured truth ; not to damp and oppress them , by casting the ashes and soot of dry and empty words upon them . 

This then is our common duty , to speak the truth ; a known , at least a believed truth , freely and sully , without fear or partiality : simply and nakedly , without swearing and imprecations : candidly and ingenuously without artifice or studied obscurity . 

2 who ? every man : no man hath a patent or privilege to lie ; or a dispensation for truth speaking in any cause whatsoever . 

Not for himself or any advantage May accrue to him : mendacium semper inutile , a liar is always a loser ; for he sells the truth and his soul into the bargain , when the whole world cannot countervail either of them . 

not for his friend , which is as his own soul : nemo potest esse veraciter amicus hominis , nisi qui fuerit primitus veritatis : he will easily prove a false friend , that will falsify the truth for his friend . magis amica veritas , must be a good man's maxim : he that is false to God , cannot be firm to me ; as Constantine the great said . That friend that will be lost by truth speaking , or not lying , is not worth the keeping . He values his friendship far too dear , that will have me purchase it with the waste of my conscience , and hazard of the love of God and loss of my soul . 

Not for parents or kindred : our nearest alliance and cognation is to God ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , whose essence and will is truth ; his offspring we are ; we must not break our respects to him , to pleasure any relations , which are infinitely below him . 

Not for the magistrate , or his Prince : a good Prince will not require it ; an evil doth not deserve that a man should so far injure his soul , by rebelling against the most high , whose kingdom is over all , even Kings themselves . 

Not for his country : by lying to banish a man's self from heaven , which is a Christian souls true , dearest , and eternal country . 

Not for his religion : a lie cannot advance true religion , no more than water inflame fire , or darkness illustrate light , or hell promote heaven . It is a lame religion , or a halting heart at least , which professeth it so , as to stand in need of the crutches of lying and equivocation . 

Not for God himself , and his glory ; whereof he is so vigilant and powerful a maintainer ; that he needs not the devil's aid . will ye accept the person of the almighty , or lie for him ? do you think to serve him by sinning against him , or please him by offering an abomination ? This is as if one would pretend to secure a Prince by treason ; or defend him by striking at him : for every liar doth strike at the face of God , which is , truth ; by which he appears to us , and is seen by us . 

Nay not for truth itself ; which cannot be strengthened , but enfeebled and hindered by the addition of a lie : as a strong and sound arm or leg , by needless splinters and bands : or wholesome meat , by mixture and infusion of poison . mendaciorum natura est , ut cohaerere non possunt ; lies cannot easily be so glued or soldered together , but their flaws and gapings will be detected : much less truth and lies ; which are more heterogeneal , than iron and clay : old bottles and new wine : a new piece and an old garment . what agreement hath light and darkness , God and Belial ? 

So that it is every man's duty , in all the course and turnings of life , to steer his speech by the compass of truth ; which by a heavenly sympathy , tends itself , and must always carry us to that cynosure , the first and immovable pole of truth , which is in God . 

lying and falsity is the rich and noble man's shame and dishonour : truth and veracity is the meanest man's riches and glory . The greatness of the one will not bear him out in lying ; nor the necessity of the other excuse him . 

veritas animae sponsa : every reasonable creature should be affianced and wedded to truth , by so firm and indissoluble a band , as will suffer no estrangement , much less divorce . It is the adultery of the soul to embrace an error ; and of the lips to speak a lie . 

every man must speak truth : so much as we lie , we are not men , that is , the sons of God and truth ; but devils , the children of him , who is the father of lies and liars . 

3 to whom ? To his neighbour . but who is my neighbour ? Whomsoever the affairs of life , and civil conversation do join us unto . Indeed we are all , proximi naturâ , near neighbours by the proximity of common nature , of the same stock and extraction . More nearly we are neighbours , by the consent and fruition of the same laws , country , government , commonwealth and public good . Many are neighbours by a vicinity of place and cohabitation : many by community of business and employment . As we are Christians , we are all proximi religione , fide , numine , redemptore ; and should be affectu & charitate , we have a nearness , nay sameness of religion , God , saviour , faith , hope , and affection one to another . 

These are obligations enough of nearness and vicinity to tie us each to other , under the relation of neighbours ; when the least of them May not be violated with a lie , without a great sin and unworthiness . We May not lie to a stranger , an enemy , a heathen , a Turk , an infidel , a liar , nor to the devil himself ; we May not pay him in his own coin , no more than the archangel Michael durst give him railing accusation ; though he be {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a railer , and false accuser . 

Certainly , nothing is less neighbourly than lying : for what trust , affiance or security , can one have in another , if one cannot believe what another promises , affirms , or denies . 

commune vinculum indigentia ; the common tie of society is the mutual want of each other ; and , the common interchange of good offices is in the way of truth-speaking . Else every neighbour is insidiator & hostis , an enemy ; and the more dangerous ; because near and treacherous . Better dwell in a wilderness than such a vicinity . 

The knot and sum , that folds up all the second table , is this , to love thy neighbour as thyself : now , nemo libenter dicipitur . Falli nolunt qui fallere amant ; adeo rationalis natura errorem refugit : every man hates a lie in another , so much as he loves himself . No man loves you should lie to him , though himself lies never so frequently ; no more than a thief will like you should steal from himself . 

do then as we would be done to ; that is , well and justly : and , speak as you would be spoken to ; that is , every man the truth to his neighbour . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; the standard of equity and virtue God hath set in every man's own reason and conscience to measure by it to others , so as he would they should meet to him . If but this one branch of it , ( In truth speaking ) were conscientiously observed , we should not have so many contentions , which call for public examination and execution of truth ; for lying breeds injuries . He that fears not to offend God by lying , will not fear to offend man by defrauding : whence spring so many suits and quarrels . Every man , though he cannot judge what is aequum , just , in mine , and thine ; yet he May , of what is verum , in regard of his own thoughts ; which needs no other court , witness or judge , than his own conscience , for the speaking of it . 

Neither private nor public good can flourish , if this commerce of truth-speaking to our neighbour fail and decay . Which if in daily and domestic converse it must be maintained ; how much more in public attestations , when by word or oath , we are called forth as witnesses or jurors to speak the truth , not only to our neighbour , but to the face of our country ; to our Prince ; to the law ; to justice itself ; and in a high degree to the glory of God ? as Joshua persuades Achan to give glory to God , by telling the truth : by which the execution of the judgement of truth and peace May be promoted ; and the common good advanced by a just punishment of the wicked , and absolving of the innocent . 

public lies are impudent and enormous lies : when death and life , justice and injustice are in the power of the tongue : but a lie upon oath , is beyond expression abominable to God and man . in this if in any sin men exceed the devils ; whom we read of , notorious for lying , but not for perjury ; as never having the honour to be called to witness a truth , with the invocation of the name and majesty of God . 

perjurium est mendacium sacrilegum ; that 's the definition of perjury ; it is a sacrilegious lie : which besides the falsity , seeks to rob his neighbour of his right and innocency ; the law and justice of a due debt of punishment , which every malefactor owes : robs the King , country , and commonweal of safety , and God of his glory ; who is justified in his providence , when sin is detected , condemned and punished . 

A sin out of measure sinful : while a man , openly , deliberately , solemnly , upon the word of God , pretends to call God to witness of his truth speaking , when he means nothing less . St. Augustine tells us , it is a less sin to swear by a false God , truly ; than by the true God , falsely : he is nearer piety , who owns and fears a false God ; than he that denies the only true , and so all gods : yet he that denies the true God , is less wicked than he that despiseth and blasphemeth him ; as a perjured person doth , while he endeavours so much as lies in him , to make the true God , his omniscience and power , an abettor and maintainer of his lie and falsity . quantò magis sanctum est per quod juratur , tantò magis poenale perjurium . so that , as truth speaking is required of every man to his neighbour in private ; so much more in public speaking ; and most of all in solemn and public swearing before the magistrate : where one false witness and false swearer May so plunder a truth , and snarl a cause , that it will be hard for the judge to find the true method to unwind it . 

the truth and religion of an oath is then fulfilled , when he that is lawfully called to swear , doth so swear , as is not only agreeable to his own knowledge , without equivocation or reservation , and to the form of words in which the oath is administered ; but also to the meaning and purpose of the magistrate that requires him to swear , so far as he doth conceive it . which is s. Augustine's determination , in his epist. 224.  

But i May not insist on this theme , of swearing . i have done with the first part of the duty , veracity ; so far as concerns all men in a private , or public way , so as May further the execution of truth and peace in the gates ; to which we are in a good forwardness , if the first be learned and practised . 

2.  The magistrates duty in special ; execute the judgement of truth and peace , &c.  

This , although it be for every man's good , yet is not every man's work ; but chosen men , appointed by lawful authority , as Moses at first did . 

No man May arrogate this vice-gerency of God , except he be called by God immediately , or his vicegerent power on earth . That was Lucifer's pride , forwardness and fall , that he would be similis altissimo , exalt himself . Christ refuseth this employment , because he had no commission from human power : who made me a judge ? Absalom's ambition was not grown so violent , and past all bounds of modesty and respect to his parent , Prince and country , as to assume this office to himself ; but wisheth , oh that i were made a judge ! in places of ecclesiastical and civil judicature , the forwardest are seldom the fittest . wise , grave , and conscientious men , who best understand the weight and charge of public execution of justice , are willing enough to wave it , as seeing no less burden than honour in it . But those that are called , must not be wanting to God , the King , their country , their own consciences ; but must execute , &c.  

1 it must be judgement . not what their own or others' passion , will , power , or pleasure suggests ; but what reason sees secundûm normam legis , agreeable to the rule of the law : which is the common vote , and consent of men to reason . 

judex non jus dat , sed docet ; judges do not give laws , but teach , declare , and execute them . Plato saith , that state will flourish , where magistrates serve the laws , not laws the turn of the magisrate ; who May not change licet into libet . the magistrate is but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as he says of Moses , the mouth by which the law doth breath . 

judicium à judicando : judgement must proceed from a serious and deliberate examining of matters , secundùm allegata & probata : it is but the product , or just account which ariseth from the witness of persons , presumption of circumstances , and evidence of things , which must be weighed in the balance of justice : in the one scale whereof , is laid the weight of the law ( pondus legis ; ) in the other ( pondus causae ) the merit of the case , fact , or person . 

Though justice must be coeca in exequendo , impartially blind in executing ; yet it must be oculata in dijudicando , most eagle-eyed , and acute-sighted in searching out a matter . 

The matter i knew not , i searched out . 

As i hear i judge ; and my judgement is just . 

descendam ut videam ; God himself , who is omniscient , and {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , teacheth us by his slowness , not to proceed to execution till we have a manifest cognoisance of things , by a fair , free , and calm hearing of matters on both sides : else ( You know ) though a judge May in his sentence hit on the right , yet he merits the brand of an unrighteous judge : though the decision be just , yet the decider is not ; doth our law condemn any man before it hear him ? there must be {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} before {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; and {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} before {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : a hearing with patience and judgement , before the executing of judgement . 

Judges must be scrutatores , indagatores , viri decretorii , men of piercing , judicious , and discerning spirits ; for , veritas in profundo , dicti , facti , cordis : truth doth seldom swim and float in the surface ; but is hidden and sunk in the bottom of the words , actions , and hearts of men : they had need to be urinatores , men of profound and diving minds , that get this pearl . Judge not according to the appearance , but judge righteous judgement . 

truth indeed , as God , is but one ; yet falsities and pretensions ( Like Penelope's suitors ) are many , and shape themselves into diverse forms and semblances of truth . As , omne malum fundatur in aliquo bono , so all falsity and injustice pretends a show of truth , and pleads for the protection of justice ; and May easily impose upon a careless , drowsy , and oscitant judge , that hath not his understanding and conscience vigilant and intentive . 

a judge ( Saith Basil ) must have {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : needs be a critic , of sharp and exact understanding , to discern between man and man , cause and cause , just and unjust , true and veresimilous , false and specious , between the confidence of accusing or denying , and the truth or falsity of the accusation ; between the modesty or rudeness of the defendant , and the innocency of his cause ; between the weight of the complaint , and the malice or envy of the plaintiff : for if it suffice to accuse boldly , who shall be innocent ? If to deny roundly , who shall be guilty ? — Aspice quantâ 
Voce negat , quanta est ficti constantia vultus . 




Oft times the false confidence of the worse part , and that , ( prostitutae vocis venalis audacia , as Cyprian , ) hired impudence of voluble tongues , which are ( lenones injustitiae ) the bawds and panders to injustice , are ready to carry it with a brazen forehead , and Stentorian voice . 

On the other side , right and innocence is ready to betray itself , through a rudeness , simplicity and diffidence of mind , carriage and expression . quibus honestior conscientia , iis plerumque frons imbecillior : innocence is often timorous , uneloquent , unexpert in terms and formalities to explain itself , when dishonesty , like Tamar , is oft veiled with a mask of fair words ; and a smooth tongue gilds over a rotten cause . 

A judge , here , must be eyes to the blind , and show himself judicious , to have studied men as well as books ; and like Solomon , by his wisdom , repress the impudent guiltiness of the one part , and relieve the diffident innocence of the other . He must not be ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) carried away with a stream of words ; or like Pygmalion prefer an adorned statue , before a naked , yet true and living man . A judge must be , as Christ , with his fan in his hand , thoroughly to purge his floor ; where chaff and wheat , injury and innocence , justice and injustice , truth and falsity , promiscuously lie before him : his just clemency must gather the wheat to a safety ; his just severity must scatter and consume the chaff , with condign punishment . 

judgement thus carried , will have the two qualities in the text ; of truth and peace . 

1 of truth : that is , a true and just judgement ; for truth and justice are equivalent , and inseparably twisted together , in foro , in courts and decisions of right . What is false must needs be unjust ; what is just must be true . truth is the foundation of equity . 

truth in judgement , is , the conformity or agreement of the sentence and decision with the mind of the law , understood by the judge : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . The intent of the law is , suum cuique tribuere ; a judge must faithfully assign to every one that portion which the law doth give them , in the true and literal sense and meaning of it , without warping or straining the words by witty conceits , and curiosity of interpretation , beyond the intent of the law , or analogy of justice , which is , reason : neither girding too strait by rigour , nor slackening too loosely by indulgence , the words , which are but ( vestitus legis ) the clothing of the law . 

pessima tyrannis lex in equuleo : laws by the tyranny of wit , May be so racked and tortured , to such forced constructions , that they May seem to speak that which they never intended . Obscure and ambiguous laws are the snares of a persons ; and the dens or refuge of tyranny ; like ancipites gladii , two-edged swords , that cut on both sides ; having no back whereon innocence May safely rely . Therefore enacters of laws have endeavoured in plain and perspicuous words , to set down their meaning ; according to which , judgement must be executed , if it be true judgement . 

The highest honour and most sovereign employment , and nearest to the supreme glory and majesty of God ( the great King and universal judge of the world ) is this , to give true judgement ; to search , find , declare , vindicate truth ; though darkened , oppressed , prejudiced with injuries and calumnies : though prescribed , and proscribed by power , will , time and custom . nullum tempus satis longum est , quod possit aut debeat errori patrocinari , & injustitiae ; no Might , should be , and no time or usage is sufficient to patronize falsity and injustice against truth and equity ; which out of doubt are most ancient , and should be most prevalent : for falsity and injury presuppose them first , and are but the superstructure , a kind of moss and accrescency to them . for this end ( Saith our blessed saviour ) was i born ; to this end came i into the world , that i should bear witness of the truth . i can do nothing against the truth . to this end , judges have reason , learning , experience , conscience , public authority and trust from the King and country , that their judgement May be true and just ; not false and unjust ; condemning the righteous , or absolving the wicked ; both which are an abomination to God . 

It is the prerogative of divine and omnipotent mercy , to justify an unrighteous person ; yet still with the safety of truth , and integrity of justice : for he doth it not sine interventu mortis & meriti christi . God so loved mercy , that he would magnify it in justifying and saving of sinners ; yet so loves truth and justice , that he would not do it without the death of his son , that just one , to satisfy his justice : that so he Might with infinite mercy and justice apply his righteousness , to justify the unrighteous . 

By this means , righteousness and peace kiss each other : your judgement will be not only just and true ; but a judgement of peace , the second quality required in the text . 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; peace is the daughter of true judgement : truth and justice the mother and nurse of peace . The god of truth and justice is the father of order and peace ; the devil and father of lies is the author and fautor of disorder and confusion . It was not the true mother that required the division of the child ; nor is it true and upright judgement that dissolveth peace . 

1 it must be judgement of private peace , between a man and his neighbour ; which can never be maintained , except each party by the light of the law , clearly sees the truth of the judgement , for , or against them . Endless and interminate suits and dissensions ( Like Hydra's heads ) must needs grow up , where the seeds of falsity and injustice are sown in judgement . 

Of this , great care must be had , that , though men lose their cause , yet they May not lose their peace and charity . a man makes an ill bargain , that gains his process , and loseth the love and goodwil of his neighbour ; which is the greatest damages . proximorum odia sunt acerbissima . wine makes the sourest vinegar : the quarrels of neighbours and brethren , set their hearts at the greatest distance and defiance . 

2 where the coals of private dissensions are scattered in every corner , the whole house will soon be on fire ; and public peace cannot long continue : for where there are great divisions of hearts , and private grievances arise like swellings , and distemper of parts , to affect the whole body with the fever of discontent , what can be expected but public mutinies and combustions ? 

lex est corporis politici nervus : the great bodies of states must needs be paralytic , and vehemently shaken , if not dissolved , when the sinews of justice fail . 

An unjust judge , like a comet , portends wars and commotions ; and scatters so malignant an influence to men's minds , that they had rather venture the injustice of war , than suffer the injustice of peace . 

This principle is in most men's minds , pax est omni bello tristior , quae justitiae & veritatis ruinâ constat ; that peace is more deplorable than war itself , which only maintains power to waste and oppress innocence and truth . 

Isidore Pelusiot tells us truly ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; it is but the name and shadow of a false and lying peace , where is not true justice . 

justitiae debetur , quod homo homini non sit lupus . it is true judgement only that can secure peace , and hinder men from degenerating to wolves and tigers ; which they do , when by injustice some are exasperated , others are animated to sin and injurious insolences . One untrue and unjust judgement , like the wind , scatters and sheds the seeds of ill weeds and manners , about the whole field ; which should , by truth and justice , have been cut up by the root ; and its contagious spreading hindered . 

Besides , nothing more slackens the reins of government , and the stability of peace , which is upheld by the reverent awe and respect which the persons and subjects give to the magistrate , than when by injustice and unworthiness , they bring their persons and authority under contempt and dislike ; that they seem to them not as gods but idols , which have ears but hear not , eyes but see not , mouths but speak not true judgement . Against such magistrates , persons are prone to think it , not only just , but meritorious to rebel . 

the King's strength , or throne loveth judgement , and by righteousness it shall be eshablished with abundance of peace . David , in his prayer and blessing to his son King Solomon , joins these two ; give the King thy judgements , oh Lord , and thy righteousness to the King's son ; and that , he shall rule the persons with equity , and the poor with judgement . Then the mountains ( Subordinate magistrates and judges , ) and the little hills ( Inferior officers , ) shall bring peace to the persons , by righteousness . he must be Melchisedec , King of righteousness , that will be Melchisalem , King of peace . 

3 there is a third peace , that results from the judgement of truth , as the crown and greatest reward of the judge ; that is , the inward peace and serenity of his own conscience , witnessing to him , that , as he is in the stead of God , so he judgeth as God would judge ; according to his will and law , which is the rule of truth and justice , and the way of peace and happiness . 

This peace is so precious to a good man , that he will choose to lose all rather than this , which is the souls immediate , and inward enjoyment of itself and God . 

The fruition of which , as it passeth all understanding ; so the loss of it passeth all the skill and favour of the world to repair or recompense it . 

An unjust judge cannot but condemn himself . — Prima est haec ultio , quod se 
Judice nemo nocens absolvitur ; — 




He becomes his own accuser , witness , judge , and executioner . For , where Astraea ( Justice ) dwells not in the conscience , Nemesis ( Revenge ) will . occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum : his soul must needs be filled with a fearful expectation of vengeance and the judgement to come . 

3 execute it , when you have judiciously considered what is truth , and tending to peace . 

declare it , pronounce it publicly . magistratus est lex loquens . judges are ora & linguae publicae , plebis , regis , legis , dei ; the public oracles to declare the will of the state , the law , the King , and God . 

To what purpose is finding out of true judgement , if you do not , dare not speak out ? or , speak otherwise than you judge in yourselves ? procaciùs peccant , qui maturiùs & quasi ex consilio : knowing , and not declaring and doing justice , is the aggravation of injustice . 

It is a calamitous time , as Hezekiah said , when children are come to the birth , and there is not strength to bring them forth . there must not be only a conception of what is true and just , and then ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) an abortive judgement , smothered and stifled in the breast of the judge , by silencing or suspending the sentence ; nor yet must it be strangled and oppressed unnaturally , ( As the Egyptian tyrant did the Israelites infants ) after it is pronounced , by diverting or perverting the sentence ; but there must be an execution of it : which is the soul and life of justice , and gives a quickening and animation to the laws . 

Law ( As our learned Hooker tells us , ) is a directive rule to the goodness of operation ; both in nature , polity , and religion . What are laws in your books or breasts , if not put in execution ? 

The not executing the penalty of the laws upon offenders , is the execution of the laws themselves ; and renders them cadaverosae leges , dead and breathless carcases . It is the breath of the judge , in a right and powerful sentence , which must blast the wicked and unjust ; and revive and renew the face and force of the laws , of justice , and of good men . 

potentia est legis asylum , law and justice hath its last recourse to power for the executing . Forcibly , as ioh and David , pulling the prey out of the teeth of the lion , and breaking the jaws of the oppressor : restoring the oppressed and molested to his liberty , right , and quiet : commanding and inflicting condign punishment on the purse or person of offenders . 

If need be , and the public good require it , not only pruning and lopping off the branches and arms of luxuriant and spreading wickedness , by restraining the liberty , by withdrawing the sap and nutriment of estate and means ; but cutting off those noxious weeds and thorns from the land of the living ; and utter extirpation of those that are telluris inutile pondus : why cumber they the ground ? and this , ( ne pars sincera trabatur ) not with more justice than mercy and gentleness ; lest connivance , remissness , and impunity spread the contagion to parts , as yet found and untainted . quid enim tam iniquum , quàm ut desertori boni bene sit ? what is more unjust than that it should be well with him , who hath left off to do well ? What more just than that evil of suffering should light on evil doers ? 

But how must it be executed ? 

1 courageously and resolutely : Jethro , in the character of a judge , requires this in the first place , that he be a man of truth and courage ; that fears God and none besides : not the face of man , whose breath is in his nostrils . The fear of man is a snare . 

qui fortis non est facilè ad injustè faciendum vincitur ; qui justus non est facilè ad imbecillitatem cogitur : justice and fortitude as twins grow together . A weak and timorous man will easily be unjust ; and like a kite scared from the prey which the law hath justly seized on . A just & generous minded judge , will no more remit his judgement , and the execution of it , where the law hath laid hold on a malefactor , than the lion which the prophet speaks of , will quit his prey , or abase himself for the multitude of shepherds gathered against him . For this would be as fatal to him , as Ahab's letting Benhadad go in peace : or the prophet not smiting , when he was commanded by the word of the Lord . The blow and judgement , as well as the crime and offence , will light on himself ; for he becomes guilty of what he leaves unpunished . the malefactor escapes , lives , continues to sin , at the charge and hazard of the judges soul . 

2 freely : for love of justice , truth , God , and the public good . parum est justitiam facere nisi & diligas . the motions of justice must be like the heavens , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , by inward principles ; not like mills and mechanic engines , that stir not , but by force of winds , waters , and weight , and hands ; by hopes , promises , or gifts . 

In execution of justice , it must not be as in scenes of masks and pageants , where things seem of themselves gently to slide from heaven , when indeed there are secret devices and inventions of art , that violently , though cunningly , move them . The light of the sun , the liberty of heaven , the day and air should not be more cheap and free than justice . Though an advocate May sell his pleading , and a counsellor his counsel ; yet a judge May not the execution of judgement . justice is a debt they owe to men ; he cannot be just that must be hired to pay his debts . a purchased sentence , though just , is unjustly sold . 

gifts do blind the eyes of the wise . he that accustoms himself to gratuities for a just sentence , will soon grow so dim-sighted , as to receive bribes in an unjust cause . 

These must be kept off by all ways ; directly , indirectly ; nec per se , nec per alium . it will not serve the turn , nor satisfy either god or the integrity of a man's own conscience , to say , as Adam , the woman thou gavest me ; or the son , or servant , he , or she received it ; gave it me , and so i took it . Nor to say as the woman , i saw the offer was fair to the eye ; a present to be desired to make one rich , ( I am sure not wise ) and so i took it : no , that cursed serpent of covetousness in thy own breast , beguiles thee : the devil tempts thee with all these i will give thee , if thou wilt fall from thy integrity in judgement ; which God requires be neither corrupted by indulgence and favour , as David's to Absolom ; nor prejudice , as David's to Mephibosheth ; nor hatred , as the Jews against Christ ; nor fear , as in Pilate ; nor covetousness and popularity , as in Felix , who failing of his money , yet to do the Jews a pleasure , left Paul bound . 

Nay ▪ an upright judge May not feoff that as a favour , which is indeed but justice and a duty : nor challenge and own the thanks for a happy issue , which indeed belongs to the law and equity of the cause . 

he doth not know the price and value of a good conscience , who seeks for a reward beyond that of doing virtuously . 

3 impartially : naz. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . As the beauty and influence of heaven , and light of the sun equally and indifferently false on the poor and rich , the palace and cottage , the great and mean , the learned and idiots ; without preferring one , or disdaining the other ; so should the execution of true judgement . 

judges are married to the law , to justice , and to the commonweal ; and must forsake father , mother , friends , and all relations , and adhere to justice : as Levi in the execution of justice , is commended , that he knew not father , or brethren , or kindred . 

The magistrate must be as an upright bowl , that hath no bias ; as a true dy , falling square , what hand soever casts it . Not warping or propending any way ; but as a straight rule , or plumb-line , indifferently showing the rectitude or obliquity of what body soever it is applied to . 

to have respect of persons is not good : ( i. e. ) it is very bad , and sordid beyond expression ; so much debasing the soul , that for a morsel of bread such a man will transgress . 

with God is no respect of persons : nor should be with those umbratiles dii , shadows and backparts of God : who in judicature should forget they are men , and remember they are in the place of God . 

As favour must not , so nor personal offence May weigh in the balance of executing true judgement . No particular distaste , or desire of revenge , May sour and sharpen the execution or sentence : he that gladly sacrificeth a malefactor to his particular revenge and hatred , under or with the name of public justice , May be a murderer while he is a just judge ; while he satisfies his own revengeful mind together with the law : this destroys the sinner , but he the man and his neighbour . 

4 speedily : qui tardè vult , non vult ut debeat velle . judgement must be executed in benigniore parte , in the way of adjudication and restoring to right , of compensation of wrongs , and of remuneration of merit . demurs and procrastination , beyond what is necessary , is so far an injustice , as it is a hindrance ; and so great , that oftentimes the delay countervailes , if not exceeds the benefit of the judgement . 

St. Bernard's counsel to Eugenius is good , and would be a great ease to subjects , frustratorias & vexatorias praecide dilationes , to circumcise the superfluities of suits and pleas , and cut off all those tedious and expenseful attendances of persons , adjournments of causes , when they are ripe for judgement and execution . 

Which unnecessary detentions are for the most part , but the stratagems and windings of under-officers ; who , like dishonest surgeons , will not cure their patients , till they have cured their purses ; though with the others molestation and torment , no less than charge and expenses . Non missura cutem , nisi plena cruoris hirudo , 




You May know the leeches are full , when they let go their hold . 

But a noble and just judge , that loves justice for itself , and tenders the good and quiet of his poor countrymen , will make a short work of it , and hasten judgement , that he May add charity to equity : that it May appear not evicta , but lata sententia ; a judgement , as true and just ; so not extorted by importunity , but easily obtained by the merit of the cause . 

5 yet leisurely , and full of caution should the execution of judgement be , if punitive ; especially capital ; vltimo supplicio . Nulla unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa est . 




Man is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a creature of greater value than to be rashly and precipitantly cast away . 

And tenderly too : there must be all the grains of allowance , of time , mercy , and clemency , that justice and law will permit . imple Christiane judex pii patris officium ; sic succense iniquitati , ut humanitati consulere memineris : rigour of justice is unjust , where mitigation May be showed . clemency is a debt magistrates owe to our nature , and the common infirmities of mankind . 

6 lastly , compassionately . Execute judgement , though severe , and such as cannot justly or safely admit any further delay or remission , by reason of the heinousness and atrocity of the fact ; yet do it ( As St. Basil speaks ) {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , with all meekness , and demonstration of pity , and sense of humanity . Not with insolence and elation , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; nothing is less human , and more barbarous , and truculent , than for any man , much more the gravity of a judge , to jest upon , and make himself merry with poor men's misery , of the same mould and mettle with himself ; or to triumph in their calamity and sufferings , by scornful and contumelious language : far from that of Joshua to Achan , my son give glory to God , &c.  

A noble and ingenuous heart , dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox , will discover , that what he doth severely , it is of necessity , not propensity ; magis officii compulsus necessitate , quàm judicandi libidine ; as St. Bernard adviseth the Earl of Theobald . 

It is all the solace left to cast and condemned creatures , to see , their sin hath not yet deprived them of the pity and prayers of the judge and court , though it hath of their liberty or life . Peccata interficio , homines amplector , is the magistrates motto : a friend to men , an enemy to their sins . 

In your gates . 

We have seen the manner of the execution ; but where must this be done ? in your gates : that is , those places that are appointed for public execution of justice and judgement ; which were anciently the gates of cities and towns . 

1 for the ease and convenience of the persons ; who Might follow their actions and suits , without going far out of the way of their other affairs . 

2 to show the equality and indifferency of justice , from which none was excluded , tros tyriusve fuat ; but as the gates of cities are open and free to all to go in and out , so was the course of judgement . 

3 to intimate , that the chiefest strength of cities , and safety of states , doth consist in the due execution of the judgement of truth and peace ; which is as the gates and bars : the strongest batteries against sin and wickedness ; the firmest defence for virtue and peace . 

Take away the free execution of justice , and not gates of brass , nor bars of iron will hold out either the dissolution of manners by viciousness , or of the commonwealth by dissensions . 

I have done with the substance and matter of the charge . 

I need no further weight to Christian minds , for the applying of what concerns you jointly or severally , than the authority in the text , which enjoins these duties dominante stylo , in a sovereign and commanding style ; these things ye shall do . 

It is the will and word of God . 

where the word of a King is , there is power ; but this is the King of Kings . higher than the highest . Omne sub regno graviore regnum est . whose majesty is above all to be adored , whose law and will to be observed and done . 

1 because most wise and good ; commanding nothing but what tends to his own glory and our happiness . 

2 most precisely and immutably just , and not to be changed or swerved in his will . 

3 most irresistibly and unavoidably powerful , in executing vengeance on them that obey not his will and laws . 

4 he is most graciously bountiful , in rewarding those that take heed to do them . It is their life , peace and happiness , both here and hereafter . 

On the otherside , the not doing them is a man's undoing . there is no dispensing with the duties , or no avoiding of the punishment . 

these things ye must do ; cheerfully , resolutely , zealously , constantly , necessarily : nihil magis justum , gratum , necessarium . 

The omission of them will be unexcusable to you , since the law and charge is so plain , so short , so just and reasonable ; no man can plead ignorance , mistake , forgetfulness , or rigour and hardness , since every man's reason dictates it to him ; every man's heart desires it in his own particular cause and interest ; and every man's conscience will condemn him , if he do them not to others in his degree and calling . 

1 speak every man the truth to his neighbour , in private converse ; in public , witnessing , swearing and pleading , so far as you are called to it . 

It is indiscretion and folly to let all truth thou knowest flow from thy tongue , when it is not expected or required . But where it is so , and thou pretendest to reveal the truth , it is damnable not to do it , and to lie against the truth . Liars are put among the damned crew . by thy words thou shalt be justified or condemned . Account must be given for idle words ; how much more for impious , lying and pernicious ? 

Let then thy speech be , neither rash and unadvised , nor profuse and overflowing : from inconsiderate speaking we come to much , from much to vain , from vain to false , from false-speaking to false-swearing ; exundans amnis facilè lutum contrahit , the stream that keeps not its banks , contracts soil and trash . 

lingua modicum membrum , ingens malum , in udo & lubrico posita , majori cautelâ servanda ; the tongue hath a natural lubricity , and is set in a moist and slippery place , and needs the greater staidness of mind , and strictness of conscience , to direct and keep it in the ways of truth and peace . 

2 for you ( Honourable and reverend ) whom god and the King command to execute the judgement of truth and peace , i persuade myself , your piety and conscience answers with the psalmist , it is required of us to do thy will oh God : we are content to do it . 

Else what need all this state , solemnity , expense and trouble ? like jezebels fast , to do injustice ? to decree unrighteous decrees ? to pervert judgement , and turn away the cause and right of the poor and innocent ? 

I know your wisdoms and piety consider , and need not to be reminded , that it is a double and crying injustice which is committed under the sacred name and protection of justice . vbi inter ipsas leges delinquitur , & inter jura peccatur , nec illic reservatur innocentia ubi defenditur . 

Injustice in a judge is like a pestilent fever , which seizes the vitals and spirits , and is deadly to the commonweal . 

A lie in judgement , is a loud lie ; hath a report that calls to heaven for vengeance . Besides that , it is publicum perjurii exemplum , contrary to the oath of integrity which is taken by judges , when called to public judicature . 

A judge is , and should be the public physician , to cure the distempers of others . justitia imperii sanitas aequissimo libramine tuenda , peace and tranquillity , which is the health of the body politic , must be preserved by an equal temper and proportion of justice . salus populi suprema lex , is the great and renowned theorem of just and good magistrates . 

A judge , as every magistrate , must be {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . A lover of God , his King , his country , of truth , of justice , industrious , and human , a candid and good man ; that is , a public and diffusive blessing , or universal good . Not {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , not a lover of himself , of his ease , of his honour , of filthy lucre . Far be it from you and us , that the judges circuiting should be like Satan's round , who goes about seeking what and whom he May devour ; but like Samuel's course , or the sun's constancy , which goes from one end of the heaven to the other , and nothing is hide from the benign light , heat and influence of it : looking upon earthly and many sordid things , but contracting nothing of their natures and qualities . 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a judge and magistrate must be higher in his mind and virtues , than his place and office ; above all fear , love , hatred , flattery , passion , gain , preferment : one that esteems his own conscience , and God's spirit there witnessing his integrity , the only reward worthy the discharge of so great and honourable a trust and employment . 

Remember i beseech you , as i know you do , how far peace depends on your integrity . 

1 the private peace between neighbours , one of the greatest sweetners of this present life . 

2 the public peace , wherein you are highly concerned ; which is greatly shaken for our sins , and needs pious , prudent , and faithful minds , as well as valiant hands to re-establish it . 

3 the inward peace of your own consciences with God : one unjust act at an assizes or circuit , or in your life , will torment more than all the profit or honour can content you ; and like an unwholesome and undigested morsel , will corrupt and taint all the comfort of your other good parts and deeds . 

Oh let not that prove true by your means , that he complains of , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the name , and thought , and desire of peace is everywhere , the endeavour for it nowhere . blessed are the peacemakers : oh rob not yourselves and us of so great and precious a blessing . 

Last of all , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , remember that exact , and unavoidable , and unappealeable tribunal of the just judge of the whole world ; for he cometh , for he cometh to judge the earth righteously , and the nations with his truth . He will try all things ( As the refiner ) by fire : which will discover and make legible that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the blind and subtle characters of men's thoughts and actions , which before could not be read or perceived . 

A good and wise judge will not ( sciens volens ) wittingly give any sentence that shall then be reversed , or judge any judgement that need to be rejudged ; much less , deserve to be condemned with him at that day . 

judicandum se diffidit , qui injustè judicat , he believes not he shall be judged , who executes unrighteous judgement : yet his very injustice is a strong and sure argument , against him , of an after judgement , which shall , which must repeal his injurious sentence , and punish his impious practices ; for the goodness and justice of God and his providence do require this . 

veniet , veniet dies qui malè judicata rejudicabit : the day is coming , when not astuta verba but pura corda , not plena marsupia but conscientiae probae valebunt , as St. Bernard , not fair words but honest hearts ; not full purses , but upright consciences shall prevail ; which day shall rejudge all you have judged , and judge both you and me and us all , and all we have done or said . for we must every man give account of himself at the judgement seat of God . 

For which accounts , fit and prepare us oh Lord by thy infinite mercy , as thou wilt raise us by thy infinite power ; that we May appear not in our own unrighteousness , which we abhor , but clothed and accepted in the righteousness of Jesus Christ , in whom we believe ; who is our saviour , and shall be our judge . to whom , &c.  

A sermon preached at the university of Oxford , in s. Mary's , July 11. 1641.  being Act-sunday . 

ephes. 4.23 . 

And be renewed in the spirit of your mind . 



There is in our nature , i know not what {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , an importunate desire after , and delight in whatever is presented to us under the notion of new . whether it be out of the restlessness of our minds , and their infinite capacity ; or out of the emptiness and insufficiency of all things under the sun , which rather satiate than satisfy : which keeps our souls in a continual appetite and longing , still expecting to find that content in what is new and unexperienced , which they have hitherto failed of . 

Thus daily deceiving the tediousness of our life , ( Which for the main is but the cramb , and repetition of yesterday ) by the sweetness of variety , and a taste of novelty , which are the sauce and seasoning of all things we enjoy . — new fashions , new clothes , new houses , new doctrines , new opinions , new country , new teachers : any thing new ; though , as our saviour said of the wines , the elder be the better ; omne enim antiquius & verius & melius . in manners and doctrines , for the most part , it holds , the elder is the better and truer . 

Yea so studious are we of newness , that our whole life is but a repairing and continual renewing of what through age and infirmity is daily decaying in us ; seeking in vain to blot out the footsteps of old age , and with weak endeavours to row against the stream of time , which silently and insensibly carries us , and all things , downward to the gulf of death and destruction : which as it hath involved all , the most renowned men , cities , states , and monuments , ( ut & ipsae periere ruinae ) that the very ruins are now ruined ; so will it shortly swallow up us , and all that we magnify and esteem as ours . 

Yet there is one thing in us , whose ruins , though they oppress us , they grieve us not ; and though they make us miserable they offend not ; these are the impairings and decays of our best and divinest part , our spirits and minds . These , we are patient , as we grow elder , they should grow worse ; and though they are pieces built for eternity , yet we suffer them , as much as in us lies , to lapse and fall to eternal ruins ; not only of their happiness , but of their very being : in quantum enim mali sumus , in tantum minus sumus , the more we have of sin , the less we have of well-being , and deserve to have of simple being ; because we frustrate that end , for which the wise and best maker gave us our being : and by sin we go farther from the fountain of our being , and our happiness , his will ; which is the rule of goodness : and happiness is nothing else but a perfection of goodness . 

Yet the power of God will perpetuate wicked men , by a necessity of being , to all eternity , that since they would not be the objects of his renewing mercies to happiness , they should be the subjects of his revenging justice to everlasting miseries . 

These ruins and decays then , which of all are most considerable , because most dangerous , well merit our survey and care ; especially if we seriously weigh , how vast the decays are , how short the time is allotted for this work , being magnae mentis & molis opus , a great design indeed ; and which falls not under the compass of low , narrow , and smaller spirits ; but requires a raised , enlarged , and ennobled mind , to begin , to persevere , and to perfect it . 

Which that we May do with the more happy success , let us look to this model of the blessed apostle ; who having in the 21. and 22. verses cast away all that trash , and rubbish of the old man , which is not so much ruined , as ruin itself ; in this verse lays the foundation of this stately structure , whose height must reach to heaven , and whose pattern is the beauty and image of that first , perfect , and divinest mind , which we call God . Be renewed in the spirit of your mind . 




In the words are two main things . 1.  The subject of our work : the spirit of our mind . 2.  The nature of the work : renewing . we will seek to comprehend them both under these four heads of discourse . 

1 what is this spirit of our mind , and how worthy renewing . 

2 wherein it is impaired , and needs renewing . 

3 how , and by what means it is to be renewed . 

4 the idea , or character of a renewed mind . 

Lastly , we will conclude so , as by God's grace May make the deepest impressions on your minds ; and at once incite and enable you to so serious , so sacred , so Christian , so divine , so necessary a work . 

The first thing that requires your attention is the subject , the spirit of your mind . what it is . 

Some interpreters understand , that holy spirit which is in the mind : thus Oecumenius , Gorran , a lapide , and others : as if it were , be renewed by that spirit of God which dwells and walks in your minds . But this seems to force the words . 

Therefore s. Augustine and others more pertinently thus . Though the words be two , yet the subject is but one ; non duas res intelligi voluit , quasi aliud sit mens , aliud spiritus mentis ; sed quia omnis mens spiritus est , non autem omnis spiritus mens est , ideo dicere voluit , spiritu mentis , i. e. in spiritu qui mens vocatur . it is no more , but be renewed in that spirit which is your mind . 

This sense agrees with that parallel place : be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds . where the word is but one , the meaning the same . 

The acuteness of some put this difference ; mens est spiritus remissus , spiritus est mens intensa , the spirit is the mind moved , the mind is the spirit composed . spiritus est mentis impetus , that the spirit is the vigour , liveliness and activity of the mind ; by which it is stirred up , applied to , and exercised about its object . That the substance of the soul is as the sun , the mind as the light , the spirit as the heat . 

But these May seem niceties , beyond the apostolical intent , which by the most and best is conceived to aim at that princeps animae facultas , the highest , most excellent and divinest faculty of the human soul ; which Plato calls {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the flower of the soul . S. Augustine , vis animae suprema , extendens se ad dei contemplationem , honesta à turpibus decernens . which we call men's , the mind à metiendo ; because it weighs and measures all things . Hyspulensis , quasi eminens , because it is the most eminent faculty in man , by which we reach the most excellent objects , and excel all other creatures . As the satirist comparing beasts with men , Principio indulsit communis conditor illis 
Tantùm animam , nobis animum quoque — 


and Ovid . Sanctius his animal mentisque capacius altae . 



There is indeed a difference between anima and mens , the soul and the mind . anima est vitae , mens consilii fons , the soul is the principle of life , the mind of reason and wisdom . 

Beasts have souls , men only minds . The mind improves by age and experience , the soul not . Souls are in all men and at all times equal , the minds most different . 

Philosopher's thought they could never sufficiently magnify the excellency of this faculty in man . mente nihil homini praestantius dedit deus , Tully . they styled it partem animae nobilissimam ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the noblest part , the Queen and sovereign in the soul , which is to rule all the inferior faculties . That ignea vis . that divinae particula aurae , which the poets expressed under that fiction of fire , which Prometheus stole from heaven , and framed man withal . 

mens est coelum hominis : the mind is as the heaven and firmament seated above all . Nay it is sol in coelo , as the sun , the most glorious and useful part of the soul . nay it is deus in nobis . as God is the mind of the greater world ; so the mind is as the god of the lesser world . 

Plato in Timaeo affirms the mind and rational excellency in man , to be immediately derived from that divine mind , which is God . By this chiefly it is that we are {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ( As s. Paul canonizeth that hemistich of Aratus ) near a kind to God , and allied to the blessed angels ; which have neither bodies nor souls ; but are pure minds , spirits and intelligences . In this was the image of God first chiefly imprinted ; and there are the best lineaments , which remain since our decay and fall , incorporeal , invisible , eternal in some sort , and infinite , as God ; wise , intelligent , provident and free , as God . By this God hath fitted us to have communion with himself ; and commerce with his holy spirit : by its union to , and conformity with which , it May further partake of the divine nature , perfection , and happiness . 

This faculty then , which the wisest philosophers of old esteemed {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , pure , uncorrupt , and unblemished , which above all things they prized , admired , and sought to improve and advance , by abstracting it à sensuum contagione , from things sensual and corruptible , retiring it to the study of its self , and its author , God ; which retiring Plato in phaedo calls {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a wise man's first death : defining his philosophy {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the divorcing of the soul from the body , so far as the necessities of life will permit . 

This , by which they measured the true dignity of a man ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , ( Socrates ) such a man is to be valued , as his mind is : by which they said truly that wise men exceeded fools , and good men wicked , as much as heaven doth earth , or light darkness , or the herd and common rout of men the beasts . 

Yet in this faculty it is , that the blessed apostle vilifies and depreciates man ; pulling down the high imaginations of those {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , pretenders to wisdom ; of whom he affirms , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , they became darkened and blinded in their understanding , vain and foolish in their imaginations ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , men of perverse and depraved minds . Such as are the best and the ablest men in the state of nature , so as to stand in need of renewing by grace . 

In this the blessed apostle begins the work of repairing ; the mind being that prime-motor , the main spring , the root and fountain of all our actions . As the eye to the body , so is the mind to the man ; if it be darkened , how great is that darkness ? how confused , disorderly and dangerous must our motions be ? 

As that extravagancy and folly which appears in the actions of fools and mad men , proceeding from a flaw and defect in the brain , and the indisposition of those organs , which the soul useth for the exercise of its rational faculties , is not to be mended by all the teaching , advice and example you can use , till you cure the distemper of the brain : so all that we can teach men of graces and virtues , of God and his perfections , of Christ his mercy , love and sufferings ; of their souls , heaven , hell , eternity , &c. all the most weighty and serious matters , will not change the folly , vanity , disorder and wickedness of men's words , actions and converse , until the mind be first renewed , and in some degree restored to its primitive state and integrity . till then all we preach or learn is as new wine put into old bottles , whose strength their weakness cannot contain : or as a new piece into an old garment , it May help a little to patch up our lives and actions ; but at length it aggravates our sins , and makes the ruptures of our consciences the more desperate and wide , by the increase of our knowledge . 

Second part.  

So necessary is it in the second place , that we take a serious survey of the decays , and see wherein they stand in need of renewing : which is the first step to it . He is well onward his work of repairing , who hath fully discovered his defects . 

We are here in no sort to imagine , that our souls , i. e.  that invisible , immortal , and spiritual being , in its substance or essence is any whit corrupted or impaired ; which is made incorruptible . Nor are we to dream of a gross and physical renewing ; but in regard of those divine endowments , and excellent abilities , with which the soul of man was at first chiefly furnished , in its highest faculty , the mind . 

As the life of the body consists in its union with the soul ; and its health in that [ {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ] fit temper and proportion of humours , whereby every part is disposed to discharge the commands of the soul , which by excess or defect becomes disabled , diseased , and indisposed : so the life , health , beauty , and integrity of the mind or spirit consists in that union , harmony , and exact correspondency to the divine mind , and holy spirit of God . And contra , its decays , diseases , deformities and corruptions are from that dissonancy , and estranging from the mind of God , that crossness and opposition against his will , which hath prescribed to us the rule of nature , reason , and of religion , his holy word and gospel ; from which the mind swerves either by excess or defect ; applying itself too much to the creature , or too little to the creator . 

As the defects and darkness of the moon arise from its want of the sun's light , through the earth's interposing : so the minds defects are from the intervening of gross , worldly , and sensual objects , which hinder its aspect of God , and intercept the light both of reason and grace : so that what before was pure , holy , and lightsome , because still looking at God , as its only perfective object ; summum verum , bonum & jucundum : truth to the understanding , good to the will , and pleasure to the affections ; to the whole man unum optimum maximum , that one thing necessary ; the sum and centre of all desires , and delights ; is now become dark , impure , disordered , diverted to other objects , most unbeseeming its own original excellency , and that relation it hath to its maker . 

These decays of the mind of man i will not aggravate , ( As i justly might ) by showing you the ignorance , error , superstition , and unreasonableness of the minds of heathens and infidels , in former , or these ages : either in their religion and esteem of God ; or their manners and converse with men . 

And these not only in the dregs of men , but even those who were Counted the aquilae naturae , the eagles of nature , both Greeks and Romans ; whose minds were much improved above the refuse of men , by philosophy and moral discourses : who notwithstanding the glorious works of the creatures , their vastness , multitude , order , beauty , use and constancy ; which are as loud , daily , and visible heralds to proclaim to man the invisible power , wisdom , and perfection of their maker , which must needs be but one , and the best . Yet as the apostle saith , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , they grew vain in their imaginations , and their foolish minds were darkened . They cared not to know God , so far as they Might , nor to honour him so far as they knew . 

How many gods did they invent ? ludibria numinis , & hominis opprobria , the scorn of the divine , and the shame of human nature ; at the best , but making God like themselves , nay much below themselves , both for nature and manners . adeo ut facinora in homine plectuntur quae in deo adorantur : as s. Augustine , Lactantius , and others have convinced . 

And as in the nature of God , so in his worship they discovered minds so blind , sensual and devilish , ut non tam sacra , quam sacrilegia , their services and sacrifices were not only not divine , but many of them most inhuman . How many things ridiculous , and to be laughed at ? how many impious , and to be pitied ? nihil deo dignum ; multa homine indigna : most of them below the dignity of the human nature ; none of them beseeming the majesty and excellence of that first , best , and infinite being , which we call God . 

But these i May not insist upon . 

The subject to which i must confine myself , with the apostle , is , your minds , Christians ; such as profess true religion , which is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the raising and improving of the mind . The ruins and blemishes of these we are to discover . 

Now although we cannot see the minds of men , by an immediate intuition ; yet as the light through the lantern , so our minds appear through our manners . As he measured the pyramids , by their shadows , so May we , minds : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , our words are the shadows of our actions , and actions , of our minds . 

For our mind is as the womb of all our actions , which conceives , forms , and brings them forth , as its incarnate brood . That as we guess at the parent , by the lines of the issue ; and judge of the inward motion of the wheels , by the hand or index ; or of the height of the sun , by the light or shadow it makes on inferior bodies ; so May we likewise of minds . 

The mind of man , as it is of heavenly extraction , so it is of a restless nature , and in perpetual motion , especially being out of its sphere , and native place ; this inferior world ; as that culinary fire here below it requires some fuel to fasten and feed upon . 

And although , veritas mentis pabulum , the proper sustenance of the mind be truth ; both in the streams of the creatures , and especially in that fountain of eternal truth , God and his will : yet missing of this , it snatcheth at any thing ; and for want of care , or ability to apply to better matter , like jet it draws to itself trash , stubble , straw , leaves , i. e. things of the vilest and most unproportionable natures . And as an ill stomach , at once it pleaseth and corrupteth itself ; till by sanctified reason and religion it be set on higher and better objects , and become more choice and delicate . 

mens est omnia , the mind is all things : as a raw piece of clothe , capable of any dye or tincture ; or as a glass , of any image and reflection : according as it minds any object is applied to it , and delighteth in it , it takes its quality and denomination from it . For the filth and contagion of sin , and sinful objects , doth taint and infect the mind itself : and whilst it doth not , by reason and grace , command the inferior and sensual appetites , it serves them , and by vicious customs is enslaved and conformed to them . 

1 thus we justly esteem and term those minds {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , gross , grovelling , dejected , worldly and earthly ; who so mind earthly things , as if they were {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , only made of earth , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , mixed with blood ; and had no spark of heaven in them : men whose minds are never nearer heaven , than their feet lift their heads : who are so intent on the things of this world , ut divinae particulam aurae humi detrudunt : their souls cleave to the dust ; they rake up that heavenly spark of the mind in ashes ; loading themselves with thick clay , never considering their souls original , end , capacity , necessity , nor that viaticum aeternitatis , the provision to be made for it unto eternity . 

2 in like manner we judge brutish , excessive and intemperate minds to be in those men , who are carried with the same spirit , as the gadarens cattle were ; whose minds are choked and drowned by luxurious eating and drinking : who live tanquam poeniteret non pecudes natos , as repining they were not made beasts ; whose reason is their burden , and the light of mind their offence , by its secret checks and damps , taking off from that full pleasure , they seek to enjoy in their riot and excess . Men of such minds , do they not deserve the fate of that proud King , to have the hearts of beasts given them , and to be driven from the society of all civil men and Christians ? 

3 thus likewise we account sensual and carnal minds , unclean spirits to possess those , whose souls are {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as a jewel in a dunghill , who live {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , to the shame and reproach of the human nature ; so wholly given up to their lusts and sensual desires , as if they were all flesh , and had no diviner part , whose reason should set bounds of honour and moderation to inferior desires . 

veneranda est non erubescenda natura ; we ought not to shame and dishonour our natures , by abusing those inclinations to unlawful pleasures , which are planted in us to a noble , good , and excellent end ; i. e. the preservation of our nature and kind . nihil aequè deprimit mentem ac libido ( aquin. ) nothing doth more debase and brutise the spirit , and cast the mind from its station and dignity , than those sordid and sensual pleasures . Octavius thus vindicates the honour of Christian minds : libidinem aut nullam , aut unicam generandi agnoscimus , either we do wholly deny all lusts and fleshly desires , or we keep them from excess and inordination , by prescribing those bounds and ends , for which nature , and the god of nature hath intended them . 

I Might be infinite by the symptoms of men's lives , and the pulse of their actions , to discover the disorder , distempers and diseases of their minds . If men had fenestrata pectora , a window to see into their souls , should we not discover in many either stramineas mentes , minds full of vanity , levity and inconstancy ; or elatas , full of ignorance and its daughters , pride and ambition ; or pusillas & angustas , weak , small , narrow and impotent minds , neither fitted to do nor suffer like a Christian ? Full of discontent , impatience , unquietude ; of rashness , confusion and distraction ; in a continual hurry and self-vexation , through the tumult and disorder of passions and affections . 

Minds for the most part filled with small , vile , and perishing objects , even when they most please themselves and are applauded by others . Spirits let out to the creature beyond all reason , equity , need , or use . Which measure the goodness of things by the pleasure they take in them , and not take pleasure by the goodness that is in things . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , minds enslaved to things present , and led only by sense and imagination ; which extremely bribe and corrupt our judgements . Saint Paul tells us of men {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , of corrupt minds : corruptio est vilioris naturae mixtura ( S. tho. ) than a thing is corrupted , when it admits a base nature to it . as gold with copper , silver with tin , is allayed , and loseth of its purity , worth and use ; so our minds which are of an higher nature than any thing under the sun , when they are joined to these things of base and inferior kind , are infinitely diminished and debased by them . 

There can be no match so unproportionable as this , for the mind of man to be enamoured of , and wedded to the creature ; if we did but well know its native beauty , vigour , and excellency ; its noble extraction , descent , and capacity . vastum & infinitum aliquid humanus spirat animus , says Tully , the mind of man aspires after an immense and eternal good ; nor can it be satisfied or happy with any thing less . 

On the other side compare the emptiness , vanity , deformity , corruption , uncertainty , and nothingness of all things under the sun ; which perish in the very use of them ; of which a man can have no more certainty , than if he should take a map of this day's clouds , and compare them with to morrow . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . More heterogeneal and undecent is this match of the mind with the creature , than if the rose and flower , of youth and beauty , should be buried with the ashes and wrinkles of old age . 

By this it comes to pass , that the minds of men , by a spiritual adultery , are divorced from that object which is best , in itself and to us , which above all we should seek to enjoy . They become {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , lovers of pleasures , or the the world , or themselves , more than of God . 

At length the coldness of affection grows such , and the distance of men's minds from God so great , the intercourse by meditation and prayer so seldom , that in stead of contemplation of him , and delighting in him , as the only adequate object of the mind , it begins above all things to be estranged from him , and to live , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , without God in the world . willingly shutting its eye that it May not see him ; and so far as light doth break in , and convince of a God , it only , as flashes of lightning , breeds fear in a vile and servile sort ; looking at God , only as a being , armed with irresistible power to hurt and punish . 

et quem timet odit : it becomes {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . What it thus fears it grows to hate , and seeks to oppose ; and in the most high and desperate atheism , non tam credit quam cupit non esse deum , not so much believes there is not , as secretly wisheth there were no god , to take notice of , and revenge its disorders and wickedness . 

And what the mind earnestly desires , and oft seeks to persuade itself is not , it begins at length to think it not indeed ; and by an affectated and resolved atheism , willingly neglects to know , to fear , to love , to serve , to enjoy him , whom to know is life eternal , to fear is security , to love is the divinest comfort , to serve is the truest liberty , to enjoy is the only happiness and content of the mind . 

At last they grow devilish and reprobate minds , such as sin with greediness , mock God , and contemn what ever is sacred ; loving darkness more than light ; despising the blood of the covenant ; and wilfully forsaking their own mercies and happiness . 

Thus you see how the mind of man becomes degraded from the highest pitch and object God ; and miserably decayed , in respect of its noblest capacity and operations ; that as a weak brain it cannot now look to so great an height ; as a blear eye , is offended with so glorious a light : either atheising , ( i. e. ) hath not , or desires no god at all : or idolising , and erects false gods : or its luxuriancy and wantonness runs out to superstitious and vain worshipping of the true God : hardly containing itself in those bounds , which right reason , the word of God , the majesty , purity , and sobriety of true religion doth permit or prescribe . 

And not thus only are our minds decayed in their chiefest excellency , and immediate respects to God , which we call religion ; but farther , in the whole tenor of men's lives and actions , you May discover minds full of baseness , disorder and unreasonableness . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , says chrysost. wicked men are unreasonable men . psal. 14.14 . Are they not without understanding that work wickedness ? adeo omnis inordinatus animus sibi poena , in this is every inordinate mind its own first and severest punisher ; lessening and losing that honour of right reason , whereby we are men and excel the beasts . 

Do but trace men's actions , and in them you shall see the print and idea of their minds . Insani esse animi non sanus juret Orestes , 


no man so mad , but will protest they are the effects of unreasonable minds . 

1 is any thing more unreasonable than so far to fear the face of man , and to be awed by his sight , as not to do any thing shameful and undecent before him ; ( Except there be attrita frons , brazen or no foreheads ? ) and yet neither to reverence ourselves , and the witness of our own consciences , nor the presence and all-seeing eye of God ; who , we think , sees not our secret and shameful actions ; and so upon the point we deny him to be God , because not omniscient ; or if we do , then add we to our sin a most notorious impudence . 

2 is any thing more unreasonable , than of a short , precious , and uncertain life , to expend the prime and morn of our time , the flower of our wit and strength , to serve sin and the devil ? reserving only the dregs and bran of our age , for repentance and devotion ; whereas indeed nothing should be done with more vigour and vivacity , than virtuous and pious actions : besides all this , we run a desperate hazard of our souls , and their eternal salvation ; venturing so great a treasure in so frail a bark ; whereas indeed as David said to Jonathan , as the Lord lives , and as thy soul lives , even the strongest , youngest , and most confident of us all , there is but a step between us and death . 

3 is any thing more unreasonable than in old age , when our sun is almost set , when we have little time to live , and need least , yet then to mind and covet the world most ; so much studying the body , as to neglect the soul's provision ; to value a moment , and slight eternity ? 

4 is any thing more unreasonable , than to receive many , great , and daily blessings from the almost prodigal hand of God ; and yet to be so far from being thankful for them , that we are more offensive to the giver by them ? dishonouring him by his very blessings of peace , health , plenty , beauty , strength , parts , wit , and learning , &c. abusing all to pride , vanity , excess , &c.  Because God is constantly good , we are confidently evil . 

5 is any thing more unreasonable , than for a man to swear gratis ? i. e. tempted neither by profit nor pleasure ; and either out of a proud affectation of gallantry , or out of passion against another's folly , to blaspheme the name of that god and saviour , by which man pretends to hope for salvation . If there be a god above us , how can they be guiltless that take his name in vain ; making that cheap and profanely obvious , which all wise and good men have esteemeed and used , as most sacred and reverend ? If there be no god , how vain then are their violent expressions , their frequent and passionate swearings ? 

6 is any thing more unreasonable , than to disobey his commands , who needs not our service , but we need his commands ; who therefore honours us with his commands , ut habeat causas remunerandi , that he May have occasion to reward our obedience ; by violating whose precepts and laws , we at once , in effect , deny all his attributes , as if he were neither wise nor good , in enacting such laws ; nor powerful nor just in vindicating them . 

7 we cannot endure a man that hath a heart and a heart , that is , none at all ; whose mind and expressions are always two , and at variance . We rather entertain such with jealousy and suspicion , than confidence and affection ; because we know all is but outside , a show , and simulation only for their own ends : and is not that hypocrisy of those s. James calls {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , double-minded men , most impudent and unreasonable ; which they fear not to offer to God ? while they desire only ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) to appear , not to be seriously and solidly religious ; whose affections are but affectations ; whose profession branches beyond the root of their knowledge ; whose religion is but the part they act to please some spectators ; the paint of their actions , and the cloak they assume , to palliate and compass their poor and small designs of favour , or profit , &c.  forgetting that nothing becomes the simplicity of God's being , and his serious intentions of good to man , more than that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , sincerity and soundness of mind to him and his service . nor is a man ever more unfaithful to his own soul , than when he doubles and falsifies with God : what is the hope of the hypocrite , when God shall take away his soul ? Nothing leaves a man more hardened and desperate than hypocrisy . 

8 we are impatient that our words and promises should be disbeleeved , and returned upon us with the reproach of a lie : and is it not most unreasonable , that we should doubt , or not believe at all , or utterly deny the word , the gospel , the promises and truth of God ; making him a liar who is the first , most necessary and eternal truth , who never did , and its impossible he should , either err or deceive ? 

9 we think it just that whoso offends our meanness , and expects to reingratiate himself to our favour , should at least ingenuously acknowledge his fault , and promise amends , upon suit of our pardon : and is it not most unreasonable that when our consciences tell us , we have often and highly offended the god of heaven , yet never to be touched with remorse and sorrow for our sins , but persist with dry eyes to add sin unto sin : abusing that long-suffering of God , which should lead us to repentance : hardening our hearts by what should melt them , the patience and longanimity of God ; which is so great and excessive , being provoked every day , that if we had no other argument to convince there is a God immensly good , this were enough ; for no finite patience could forbear so long . 

We daily pray for , and expect forgiveness from the majesty of God , for our numberless and heinous offences , which if we obtain not , it had been good for us that we had never been born . And is it not most unreasonable , that we should be so sensible of the least injury offered to our vileness ; so short spirited , that like powder we kindle upon the least spark of offence , and instantly flame to revenge . That like Esau , or that evil servant in the gospel , mat. 18.28 . We feed our minds with such black and desperate thoughts , as to Count nothing sufficient to redeem our honours , or repair our wrongs , but the very blood and life of our brother . That being mortal , we should meditate such immortal displeasure ; and to expiate in point of honour some small neglect or affront ( Which a great and noble mind would pass over , quippe minuti semper & exigui est animi minimique voluptas , ultio ; and a Christian mind for Christ's sake would forgive : ) so as to adventure at once the sacrificing two souls to the devil and eternal death : so that what event soever a duel hath , we do our souls a greater injury , than is in any man's power to do us . If God had been thus speedy and implacable to thee , thou hadst not lived to have stood so much upon thy terms , to set a higher value on that idol , thy reputation , than upon thy god , thy saviour , thy brothers and thine own soul's salvation . 

hic animus atque hae sunt generosi principis artes ? are these the expressions of reasonable minds ? of generous and great spirits ? As Lactantius said of Jupiter , whom they styled opt.  Max. maximus sit , certè optimus non est ; so May i say of these , how great minds they are i know not , but i am sure they are not very good ; having little of reason or religion , which are the only raisers and enlargers of the mind . 

Thus true it is , that ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) all wickedness is for want of wisdom ; all sin the defect and sign of an unreasonable mind : and though it be set off with never so many shows of wit , and countenanced by greatness ; yet it draws deep of folly and extreme sottishness ; such as a Christian mind should Count most unworthy of itself , and its author , God ; since it blemisheth its chiefest ornament , reason ; and the beauty of reason , which is religion . 

Thus we May see , and seeing i cannot but stand a while and deplore the miserable ruins and decays of this excellent creature , man , and his excellency , the mind : which the hand of the best and wisest maker , had at first framed to so goodly a frame and beauty , that it seemed a fit type and model to represent its maker's skill and perfections . 

naturae imperio gemimus , we are naturally prone to grieve , and pity to see the ruins of a stately building , whose height Might have shaken hands with heaven ; or to see an elegant piece or statue , where in the art and curiosity of the workman had contended with nature and the life itself , now everywhere flawed and deformed : only such lineaments left as serve to show , how well it deserves our pity , and if it were possible , our repair . 

How much more worthy of our serious consideration and sorrow , are the decays and dilapidations of these goodly structures , ourselves ? not only the basecourt , and outwalls of our bodies , nor that inward of our sensitive appetite and fantasies ; but that sacrarium , that holy of holies , our spirits and minds ; spoilt of all those rich divine ornaments they were once adorned withal . And this not by the injury of time , but our own voluntary sin ; and which is most deplorable , of ourselves we daily sink and moulder to an utter vastation and eternal ruin . For though we had power to impair and waste ourselves , yet have we neither skill nor will of ourselves to renew and repair ; till that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the first , wise , and powerful builder enable us with power from above , to renew that by his grace and spirit , which we have wasted by our own sin and folly . 

Nor did that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the great worker , God , show more power , wisdom , and goodness in our first framing , than he doth grace , mercy , and pity in our reforming . While we ( Alas ) please ourselves in our rubbish , and dance in our ashes and ruins , our sins and follies , his truth discovers our decays and danger ; his spirit stirs us up to consider them , to grieve for them , to be ashamed of them ; and enables us to set to the work of renewing : having set before us a pattern , the express image of himself in our nature , his son our saviour Jesus Christ , to whose beauty and perfections a Christian mind ought daily to aspire ; who as he requires this work of us , so he enables us to it ; and that he May the more encourage us , he doth in some sort Count it ours , and will reward us for it , by crowning his graces in us . 

The third part.  

Thus having seen ( Reverend , honourable , and beloved ) the many great and universal ruins , and decays of our minds , both in reason and religion , and so how great need we have of renewing , it is now time we look to the third particular , the manner of the work , as it is here recommended to us by the spirit of God . be renewed , &c.  

This we will consider in two things answerable to the decays . 

1 in point of reason , which is the natural excellency of the mind , so far as it looks to this present life . 

2 in point of religion and grace , which is the supernatural excellency , as it looks to the life to come . 

1 reason is the manifestation of the divine will in the creature . it is as a right line or thread of wisdom which runs through all things , by which every thing is fitted and tied together , by a suitableness and proportion of their forms and ends ; and all of them as lines in a circle , diverse in their circumference , but meeting in one centre , the glory of God their maker . 

God hath endued the soul of man with an ability which we call the mind or rational faculty , to find out this rule and law both in himself and all creatures by discourse : and having found it , his conscience ties him to follow and observe it , both towards himself and all things without him . 

This tie and relation of reason is most constant and unchangeable in all things which work and are moved by instinct and necessity ad unum ; only the reasonable creatures which have {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a freewill and liberty of working , do often swerve from this rule of reason ; which whoso most observes , we Count a wise and prudent man ; whoso by sensuality and passion violates , we Count him {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , foolish , disorderly , and unreasonable . 

God is the most rational agent , doing all to a right end , and by fitting means ; having wisdom to dispose , and power to effect beyond all possibility of power , or resistance . 

Man's best improvement of reason is , to find out and propound to himself the right end , which is God's , and must be good ; and to use fitting means , which must be honest , in all his actions to himself and others . 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , ( arist. ) reason still informs us best . This rule , juxta rationem vivere , to live by reason , philosophers and wise men of the world thought the highest , best , and sufficient rule to live by , which would bring a man to the best end , in the fruition of which consisted happiness , or that summum bonum . 

By this rule [ reason ] they did and said many things very noble , and commendable , wel-becomming the dignity of the mind of man ; at least for the materiality of their actions , civil and moral : as the enacting of just and wholesome laws , the constituting of forms of government , and well-ordering of commonweals , for administration of justice in both kinds , for moderating the sensual appetites , for composing the passions , &c.  

Though they seem to have failed in the main end , which chiefly forms and qualifies both actions and agents , to wit , the glory of the great creator ; while they did things not out of conscience , and obedience to his will , but out of respect and love they had to their country or themselves , out of an insatiable desire of glory and immortality of fame . Hence their minds grew vain and proud , which blemished both themselves , and the most specious of their doings or sufferings . For although these men went far in renewing their minds by the light of reason , to a restrained and civilised temper , above the most of men ; yet they came far short of that highest and divinest pitch of renovation , which is in respect of true piety and religion , which is the mind's conformity to the will of God , for what concerns a better and eternal life ; which is the special effect of Christian faith ; and this is the grace of God . 

In respect of this last and great end , the glory of God in the saving of our souls , i need not tell you , how blind reason is and ever was , in the wisest of natural men . You know how confused and uncertain all was that they guessed or discoursed of the souls immortality and after-happiness , which so far as they did expect , it was only grounded on a man's own righteousness , and good works , not upon another's , applied by faith , which is only the Christians light . 

For bare reason will never suffice to find out its own defects , the nature of sin , and misery by it , nor the fall of man , which no philosophers dreamt of ; much less of the way of repairing by the free love and mercy of God through Jesus Christ our great redeemer . For this , the mind needs a supernatural light of the word of God and his spirit : which only can raise the soul to see its own misery , and accept of God's mercy . 

So that what the mind is not able , in this great mystery of our salvation , by reason to invent or comprehend , for the uniting of two at so infinite distance , as a most holy and just God and a sinful man ; its narrowness and incapacity is supplied by the grace of faith ; trusting in , adhaering to , and relying upon the truth , mercy , and power of the promiser and revealer of these {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , great things of God ; as also for the effecting of them . 

2 so that Christian faith is the greatest improving and raising of the mind , bringing the soul back to that first and best object , God ; from whom by sin it was alienated and diverted to the creature . And the nearer the mind approaches by faith to God , the more it partakes of his light and grace ; the more is the divine image renewed in the mind and whole man , which we call holiness ; which is a study of conformity to the will of God , arising from the apprehension and belief of his goodness in himself , and his love to us in Christ . 

For until a man believes this truth of God in the gospel , and sees those better things offered to him in Christ , he cannot mind the things of God , with any delight or comfort ; as being either incredible , or impertinent and unprofitable unto him ; the mysteries of God being , as that of regeneration to Nicodemus , hidden and strange paradoxes , rather than saving truths and gracious promises . 

And certainly , till we believe that God hath loved us freely in Christ , our minds cannot be carried with that filial love to him as a father . tantum amamus quantum credimus , as far as we believe we love , as we love we live . 

Till we believe God will save us , as he hath promised , upon our turning from sin to Christ , we cannot serve him with that free and faithful service , as he requires . 

Till we believe in some measure , that God hath chosen us in Christ to be his for ever , we cannot quit our minds of other things , and choose him for our highest good and only happiness . Therefore we see the low and narrow minds of men out of Christ , seek only to supply their wants and please themselves with these small , temporary , and appearing good things which this life affords . their desires and fears , their shadows of content , their dreams of honour , of happiness how mean and poor ! how false and deluding ! how much to be pitied ! having nothing in their aim , which is worthy the mind's dignity , or answerable to the souls infinite capacity and duration . 

Only true Christians , that is , believers , above all sects and professions , have given great proof of the true magnanimity of their noble and generous minds , both in doing and suffering ; having minds by faith renewed , and so raised , that they were able to despise all that the world esteemed , to contemn all they threatened or inflicted , to deny themselves unto death ; their minds being fixed on that life , treasure , and happiness , which God hath offered to mankind in Jesus Christ . 

So then , Jesus Christ , we see , is that first , great , and sovereign object , whom whilst our minds by faith look upon , they are renewed , raised , beautified , ennobled , and transformed : the mind of Christ being that excellent pattern and type by which ours must be renewed , as the apostle prescribes . let the same mind be in you , which was also in Jesus Christ ; so holy , so pure , so heavenly , so composed : whose spirit in and with your spirits effects this great and happy work of renewing . for Christ is not , as other patterns , dead and unactive , but operative , and assimilating those to himself , who strive to imitate his virtues and perfections . Therefore the apostle Paul , a learned and judicious man , determined to know nothing ( As his main ) but Jesus Christ and him crucified . 

Other learning and philosophy May free us from barbarism in manners , and ignorance of the creatures ; but faith in Christ crucified only is able to redeem us from our vain conversation , to mortify our sins , to raise up our souls to consider themselves , their great and last end , and highest eternal good , which is God , considered in the face of Jesus Christ . 

That rhapsody of human knowledge , or rather opinion ( Indeed but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) with which men so stuff and cram their minds , of things that need not be known , or ought not , or cannot fully be known , ( Whose ignorance were safe and commendable ) what doth it but ( As the apostle tells us ) puff up ? as a false conception breeds only ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) a swelling and abortion of pride , and self-conceit ; but brings forth nothing of those ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) noble and generous effects in their lives , which become the divine nature of the soul . 

Certainly , though a man had devoured all the learning of philosophers , historians , poets , divines , and humanists , yet ( As Pharaoh's lean kine ) the mind would be never the fatter or fairer ; but still empty and unsatisfied in itself , and ill-favoured in the sight of God : as that poor man that dreamt he eat and drank and was filled , but when the soul awakes , in that morning of eternity ( Death or the resurrection ) it will find all without the knowledge of Christ to be but vanity of mind , and vexation of spirit . 

In all other learning , the mind doth but pick up a few straws , leaves and feathers , the notions and scatterings of a dark , confused , and defective knowledge , to make itself a small nest of temporary content ; which will be soon cast down , when death , as a whirlwind , overtakes us ; the mind will be left dubious , wand'ring , and distracted , not having been truly wise to get by faith a sure mansion for itself in that rock Christ Jesus . 

Now this renewing of the mind , is not a work of wit and parts , but of grace and devotion ; it is not strength of reason , nor depth of judgement , nor acuteness of invention , nor faithfulness of memory , nor vastness of reading , nor subtlety of dispute , nor height of speculation , that renews the carnal and natural mind : all these abilities do often want most renewing , to take off that pride and vanity of mind , which commonly attends them ; to purge out that leaven , which puffs them up to vainglory and self-seeking ; to bring them , as the wise men of the East , in all humility and devotion to seek Christ , and offer up those treasures of wit and learning , to the honour of God , the giver . 

Believe it , small and moderate minds for wit , capacity , and secular learning , yet if sanctified by faith , are often raised to more eminent expressions of love , joy , zeal , patience , constancy , and all good affections ; for though they cannot formally dispute , yet they can suffer , die for Christ ; and though they be not learned in human arts and sciences , yet they have learned the first and hardest lesson in Christianity , which is , to deny themselves in point of pleasures , profits , honours , and outward contents , more than many of the wise and learned ; whose learning , while they nourish proud , sensual , and atheistical minds , is but their crime and burden ; serving only to die their sins to a deeper tincture of folly ; and is as a millstone about their necks , that sinks their souls to a farther degree of condemnation . 

And do we not often see , men of great wits and noble endowments for nature and industry , who have no cause to disbelieve the word of God , since he never yet failed of his promise ; and hath confirmed the truth of the gospel , by so many infallible witnesses , prophets , apostles , martyrs , confessors , by miracles , by sacraments , and what ever Might induce men ( Morally ) to accept of his mercy in Christ , and live accordingly . Yet these men , not having minds renewed by faith , Count all but , as the Athenians , babbling and foolishness of preaching ; continuing to please themselves with momentary and perishing objects ; mean time , with extreme sin and folly ( Which will be their misery at last ) they neglect that great salvation , which God hath offered to mankind in Jesus Christ ; greater than which neither the soul can desire , nor God can give , since the author , means , and end is God himself . 

We see in the gospel , till the prodigal came to himself ( peregrinatur enim omnis inordinatus animus , chrysol. for wicked and inordinate minds are always from home , busied about all but themselves ; ) till he returned ad saniorem mentem , to consider seriously the necessitous way into which he was fallen , and wherein he maintained himself , only so far as to be sensible of his sordid misery ; and till he thought of the plenty both of his father's affection and provision , he was not resolved to quit his husks and brutish company . 

primum est compositae mentis argumentum secum consistere , it is the first step or sign of a renewed mind , to be composed , to tarry at home , to be with and reflect on itself : which faith alone makes it to do , bringing the mind back from the former vanity and extravagancy , and making it seriously retire to itself and its author , God , its saviour , Christ , what he is , and what he hath done for us , revealed to us , and requireth of us ; all which the mind by faith considering of , assenting to , and relying , upon , is in some degree renewed daily , to its primitive beauty and integrity ; new light in the understanding ; new objects to the will ; new motions to the affections ; new actions in our conversation , which are all but earnest and pledges of that fullness and perfection , which the soul shall at last receive in the vision and fruition of God and Christ in the life to come , when both soul and body shall be renewed to an undecayable perfection . 

The fourth part.  

Thus have we seen the nature , the ruins , and way of renewing the mind . Give me leave now in the fourth place , to present to you the idea or character of a renewed mind ; which ( As he said of virtue ) if we could discern with our bodily eyes , it would strangely win upon and ravish our affections . 

There are three regions of minds , as of air of heavens . 

1 the first is of low , earthly , and debased to senses and the things of this world , which covet much more , and yet nothing more , than this life and the body needs . 

2 the second is a higher and middle region of minds ; which are raised above the vulgar , in desire of knowledge , honour and renown ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . These are {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , rather high-minded than heavenly ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as comets raised up and more lightsome than others , but still of gross and earthly qualities , and will soon vanish . 

3 the third and highest region is of minds , that are as the stars in the firmament ; pure , holy , heavenly ; as heaven full of light , beauty , order , tranquillity , and constancy of motion ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , out of the reach of inferior things ; not subject to mutation or corruption ; of a sweet and happy influence to all inferior faculties , which are as the earth , or lower world of the man . It is mens vicina deo ; as the highest heaven , so the renewed mind is near to God himself ; above all things looking to him , filled with him ; adores , admires , delights , converseth with God . good thoughts as good angels , descending in all humble acknowledgement of its own distance and unworthiness ; yet ascending by faith to the contemplation of the infinite perfections of God himself , and his merciful communicating of himself to us through Jesus Christ . 

This makes a renewed mind never alone ; a good man's solitude more to be envied than all the company in the world : for as God hath made us bodies fit to converse with things corporal ; so minds and spirits for a mental and spiritual communion with himself , by meditation and prayer , which are the fruits of faith . 

The renewed mind alone sees God upon earth , and discerns his ways , which are hidden from the eyes of the world . In wars and tumults , it looks upon the anger of Princes , the injuries of men and their rebellious spirits ; and considers the just judgement of God upon sinful men , corrupted with long peace , whose spirits are stired up to punish each other : and through all times and mutations of human affairs , it still marks and expects God's care and faithfulness , for the preservation of the ark his church , amid the inundation of war and barbarism ; the church being God's great design in this world , to which all states , monarchs , Princes , the great men , and great things of this world are subservient . 

next to God , a renewed mind reflects upon , and reverenceth itself ; studies books , men , creatures , all things , but chiefly itself ; Counts itself as the jewel of the man , precious and portable ; all things without as the lumber , which May be lost , and must be left . It turns the current of affections another way , and improves them by grace , to better objects ; love , joy , desire , delight to God and Christ , and the doing of good ; fear , hatred , grief , anger , &c. against sin , and the doing of evil . It considers sin as the greatest deformity and evil that can befall , and which only can hurt the soul . It had rather have God's grace , than his temporal gifts : it esteems heaven not so much for the impunity as the immunity from sin : the happiness it desires is a perfection of holiness ; and its glory a fullness of grace . 

In itself it is mens tranquilla , full of composedness , tranquillity , and sweet harmony ; which it Counts so divine a happiness , as no occurrence in the world is worthy to disorder it . It keeps a symmetry of actions , and uniformity of life ; making passions and affections subject to reason , reason to faith , and faith to the truth and will of God revealed . 

In respect of men , the renewed mind studies to be {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as public , diffusive and universal a good as May be ; not {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , pragmatic and censorious , out of a pharisaical vanity ; but in a serious , solid and primitive way of piety , discreetly reserved , yet ingenuously communicative ; Counting it a half and defective happiness to save itself only ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

for all other things in the world , it is mens sapiens , i. e. cui res sapiunt ut sunt ; the renewed mind relisheth and judgeth aright of things , and accordingly lets out its affections unto them ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , it loves earthly things , as things of a brittle temper , and when they are broke it is not much troubled . 

It is mens quadrata , square and fitted for all the casts of that the world calls fortune , this Counts providence : ready to entertain any occurrence of life , as becomes one whom God loves ; no condition befalls in which it finds not occasion to improve some grace or virtue by exercising of it . 

It is mens immota ; as a rock so is the renewed mind ▪ in the storms and inquietudes of the sea of this world ; wherein others are tossed and overwhelmed , its firmness and constancy the more appears : ponderibus librata suis : so balanced and settled upon its weighty and serious intentions , and hopes for eternity , ut si fractus illabatur orbis impavidum ferient ruinae . 

it expects the greatest troubles and comforts from within ; for all without the renewed mind , as Noah's ark , when the old world , men of old , gross , and earthly minds sink to despair , and are drowned in a deluge of their own fears , this is then raised higher , and by faith and prayer makes nearer approaches unto heaven . The pulls and stresses of worldly calamities do but fasten the anchor of its hope , that it gets the better hold ; for the worse things it finds in this life , the more confidently it expects better in the life to come . 

It is men's defaecata ; shake and stir it never so much , yet as a clear and living spring it soon recovers its settled purity , and discovers nothing feculent or unsavoury . angry , but not soured to malice ; cheerful , but not vain ; provident , but not distrusting ; industrious , but not covetous , liberal , but not profuse ; abounding , but not proud ; advanced , but not insolent ; learned , but yet humble ; poor , but yet content , & rerum dominus nil cupiendo ; supplies its wants from itself , but cutting off its desires . 

Its joys and comforts are not that ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) superfluity and torrent of sensual and worldly joys , which as a winter-stream soon abate , spending themselves apace , and besides leaves a squallor , and filth after them upon the conscience : but as a modest spring , its joys rise and run in a secret , clear , and silent stream ; but yet fidelibus aquis , constant and perennant , such as the greatest drought of affliction cannot overcome . 

In a word , the renewed mind as a noble stream passeth clear by all those pleasant things which worldly minds admire , and are detained with in the circular eddy of their own fancies : this keeps its desires within the banks of moderation and content ; being impatient of resistance still hastens its course towards its great sire , the ocean . irrequieta est anima nostra , donec ad te redeat , domine ; never quiet till it hath attained to God , the first and great mind : there it diffuseth and loseth itself in the vision and contemplation of his immensity and perfection ; where being united , it enjoys God , Christ , and itself in an eternal fullness and novelty . 

It is now time that we look toward a conclusion . Although the weight and beauty of this subject be such , as Might well save me the labour of stirring up your affections ; presuming that i speak to an audience , for the most part , piously learned , and judiciously devout : who , i hope , hear yourselves rather commended , for what you have already begun to do , than either taught what to do , or taxed for being wanting in a business so well-worthy yourselves , and your best endeavours ; as this is , the renewing of your minds . 

And indeed i think myself happy , ( Reverend and the rest learned auditors ) that , by your favour , i have this opportunity offered me ( Which my own weakness Might not have aspired unto ) that is , to recommend so serious , sublime , and necessary an argument , as this of the renewing our minds , to so noble , so learned , so choice , and considerable an assembly , consisting of minds and spirits more elevated , enlarged and ennobled than ordinary . 

And certainly , this duty of renewing our minds , as it concerns all men , so it challengeth the practice of it , from none more than from you : to whom it will be an extreme shame to be exceeded by others in piety and holiness , as much as you exceed them in learning and knowledge . 

Oh let not that of s. Augustine be verified of us : indocti rapiunt coelum , nos cum doctrinis nostris perimus . poor and simple minded men crowd into heaven , and we with all our learning coldly and scarcely creep thitherward . 

It will be little comfort at last to die with those words , quantus artifex pereo ? the fall of angels , you know , was the most desperate and irreparable : the clearer the light , against which we sin , the straighter and heavier will the chains of everlasting darknessely upon us . 

It is not learning , but renewed , that is , sanctified learning that will comfort us , that will save us , that will secure us , while we preach to others the way of life , ourselves shall not be castaways . The new-fangled and fantastic mind indeed despiseth learning , ; but the renewed mind prizeth it , seeks it , and useth it aright , with humility , with modesty , with industry , with the love of truth , with obedience to it , with a care and tenderness to the souls of poor persons , with conscience to dispense its talents to the glory of God , and good of mankind . 

Never did any times ( Indeed ) require and exact more of learned men and scholars , than these now do , in point of renewing our minds , our lives , our manners , to the pattern in the mount , the example of Christ and his holy apostles . the faults you see of some , are made the reproaches of all , by the rash , unjust , and ignorant censures of many , who offended with some drone or wasp will be revenged by overthrowing the whole hive of bees . Oh let us confute their errors , repress their insolences , disarm their malice , and if it be possible occasion their envy , rather than their contumelious pity , by a serious , speedy , and conscientious following this precept , and the example too ; which is most noble and imitable in this great apostle s. Paul ; whose renewed mind had learned in all estates to be content , to Count godliness great gain , to determine to know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified , to glory in the cross of Christ , to esteem all worldly wisdom vain , and foolishness , without the knowledge of God in Christ , to live with all good conscience before God and men . 

This , this method of renewing our minds and lives to piety , holiness , humility and contentedness , will undoubtedly renew upon us , the love and favour , the honour and integrity of learning . 

It is certain the world cannot want us , except they will be wanting to themselves , in the most sordid , supine and brutish negligence that can be . it defends upon us what opinion and esteem men shall have of us . 

We shall easily overcome all the difficulties and indignities of these times , if we can but overcome our hearts to this sacred renovation , which will render us accepted and honoured both of God , and of all wise , learned and good men ; whose wisdom and justice , no doubt , will as they ought discern between the just punishment of some , and the noble encouragement of others ; nor suffer the displeasure against some men's abuse of things to swallow up the lawful , just , and commendable use of them . 

For the ignorant , brutish and impertinent clamours of others , your only way is to let them weary themselves , with their own oblatrations ; while you , as the clear moon in a sphere above them , neither alter the constancy of your course in learned studies , nor abate aught of the splendour of your manners , in a renewed , that is , a sanctified life and conversation . 

You know {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the mind is the man of the man ; how much more of a Christian , who should far exceed all other men , having relation to a saviour , that is God as well as man ? 

By our bodies we live beasts , by our minds men , by renewed minds Christians , by perfected minds saints . The mind's improvement is the main , which God , Christ , and religion intend in us ; and shall we be incurious ? ut animam serves nonne expergisceris ? 

All other things in the world , God so little considers , that he will one day destroy them , but he will make up his jewels . There is nothing God esteems but man , nor in man but the mind , nor the mind till renewed to holiness . 

the Lord delights not in any man's legs , no nor in any man's strength , beauty , hair or outside , which are the leaven which puffs up vain and small minds ; no , nor in thy wit , learning , acuteness , eloquence , &c. but he looks at the ornaments of a renewed , a holy and humble mind ; this he requires as a gift worthy of his prising and acceptance . S. Ambrose adviseth , quod habes pretiosissimum , mentem deo deputes . the satirist divinely , Demus superis jus fasque animi sanctosque recessus Mentis , & incoctum generoso pectus honesto . 
Hac cedo , &c.  


it matters not how mean thy drop or mite be which thou offerest to God , provided thou present it with an honest , upright and generous mind , whose most secret and retired motions are always digested to so holy and just a temper , as becomes God the receiver . 

The renewed mind is no other but Bethel , the house and temple wherein God will dwell , even the high and holy one that inhabits eternity . s. Chrysostom hence infers , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , what we do to our decayed houses , do we to our minds : vestium & domorum sordes erubescimus , & animorum patiemur ? our minds must be fitted to entertain Christ and his holy spirit ; which pure dove will not dwell with sordid , deformed , and unrenewed minds . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , says Plato . and s. Paul , what fellowship hath light with darkness ? consider , the main comfort of a Christians life is the commerce with pure minds , spirits , and intelligences , as God , the angels , and saints . 

And not only have we to do with good spirits , but also with evil , which we call devils ; which are impure and discontented minds , whose endeavour is to continue our minds and spirits perverse , blind , and depraved : it being their envy , that mankind , which is of an inferior make to them , should have means of renewing , which are denied them . 

As God and Christ's kingdom is chiefly that in the spirits and minds of men , which he secretly , but most sweetly and effectually , governs in those that are his ; so the devil's chief usurpation and tyranny is there ; secret and unseen , but most violently ruling in the minds of the children of disobedience , ephes. 2.2 . seeking by infinite stratagems and methods to corrupt the best and ablest minds to the same desperate state , to which he is irrecoverably fallen . Therefore we pray that God's spirit would be with our spirits ; for there is no such judgement and misery , as to be left to a man's own mind , to be led by his own spirit , which will certainly misled him . 

Men commonly pretend to magnanimity , to generous minds and great spirits . Oh consider it is not a great spirit , in the world's sense , but a good one God esteems . The meek , lowly , and quiet spirit is greatest in God's account , and next to his advancing . That mind is truly great , which is more impatient of a sin in itself , than of an injury from another ; and takes the severest revenge of itself . 

There is a greatness the world applauds , which infinitely lessens a Christian mind : dum magnitudinem animi peccandi licentia metiuntur , while men measure the greatness of their minds , by their boldness and daring to sin . Such minds , as comets ( Which are portenta irae dei ) the higher and greater they are , the more malignant influence they diffuse on the inferior world , by the contagion of their example . 

We esteem breeding , learning , and civility , whereby the natural rudeness of a man's mind and manners is pared off , and he becomes tilled and polished for the best society : certainly those are the best bred and most adorned minds , who know to pay due respects , not to men so much as , to their own souls , and above all to God , to whom we owe the greatest obligations ; wherein to be wanting is extreme rudeness , and not so much incivility , as brutishness ; for nothing is more human than piety . 

incipiat ergo tandem aliqua tui dignatio esse apud te : mentem suspice : oh begin at length to reverence thy sefe , to respect thy mind above all things under heaven . 

We are prone to admire stately buildings , elegant pictures , elaborate pieces of art and human invention ; in these we magnify the skill and ingenuity of the worker ; and here our low and narrow thoughts are stopped and bounded . Oh rise higher ; go beyond all these , to the maker of these makers , that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , God . Consider those unparalleled pieces of heaven , of earth , of the sea , the sun , &c. above all , thyself ; in thee , thy soul ; in thy soul thy mind ; which is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; caput operis ; God's masterpiece ; in respect of which all creatures are inconsiderable to God and the renewed mind . 

In other things we seek to content our senses and appetites , with the best objects they are capable of : curious pictures for the eye ; ravishing music for the ear ; exquisite tastes for the palate ; fragrant scents for the smell . And shall our minds only be found to fasten upon small , vile , and inferior objects , below their original and capacity , which our very outward form and stature pointeth unto ? ad majora nati , immo renati . 

animus excellens omnia tanquam minora transit , diis cognatus , omni mundo & aevo par , ipse sacer & divinus : the most if not all things in this world are impertinent to the mind , and far inferior to it ; and one day , as he brings in Pompey's soul ( ridetque sui ludibria trunci , ) we shall wonder with disdain to think how much our minds stooped to our bodies , and undervalved themselves . 

Not but that a renewed mind May consider of all things below it , as well as the divine mind did when he first made them , and still preserves them ; but yet at a distance and in subordination ; let none be in chief , or rival to God and thy saviour , or thy soul . The more the mind truly knows these sublunary things , the less it will seek or prize them . 

magnus animus , ut solis radii terram contingunt , at interim non amittunt , nec sordes contrahunt : the renewed mind , as the sun , May look at all things below , but not to be affected much with them , less infected by them : as Solomon did , whose wisdom remained with him , sublimitatem suam servans , still keeping its distance , from them ; thinking none adequate or fit company for itself , but God , good angels , and good men , who are or have minds eternal as itself . 

sacer & nobilis animus , naturae suae memor , nihil seipso minus amare potest : a renewed , i. e. a holy , and truly ennobled mind should much forget itself , if it should love any thing that is less than itself . 

O! it were wisdom to begin this work of renewing betimes . They live longest and best whose minds are renewed soonest . vitae perit quantum peccatis vivimus , so much life is lost as is spent before , because it is misspent : while the mind neither knows nor enjoys its self , nor its creator , nor its end and happiness , but lives in a dubious , vain , unquiet , disorderly way . 

It is miserable to think how much of our short and precious time is raveled out in the vanity of our minds , about things that will not profit us in the end , before we consider to what end God hath sent us into this world ; before we resolve to break off our sins by repentance , which is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the change and renewing of the mind . oh brepit non intellecta senectus : grey hairs are here and there and we consider it not . 

S. Chrysostom's advice is good : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : hast thou sinned ? thou hast wasted and impaired thy soul : oh make speed with tears and repentance to renew it : as David prays , psal. 51.  create , oh Lord , a new heart , and renew a right spirit within me . 

delays are dangerous , where the opportunity is short , and the omission irreparable . How many young men are cut off in their proffers and essays to amend their minds and manners ? How many renewed years , and days , and mercies shall upbraid our unrenewed hearts , and minds , and lives ? 

The want of this makes the thoughts of old age and death full of bitterness and terror ; while men are conscious to such minds still in them , as are in no sort fitted for the society of pure spirits , saints and angels , much less for the presence of God and Christ in heaven . 

we should do well to consider , that the sins of our bodies and senses , such as are lust , voluptuousness , intemperance , sensuality , &c. will wither with time , and decay in us of themselves , when the days come in which we shall have no pleasure . But those sinful habits , that spiritual wickedness which vitiates and corrupts the mind , except by grace they be put off in this life , will continue to infect and oppress our souls to eternity : such as are pride and unbelief , profaneness , impenitency , hardness , want of love and fear of God , delight in sin , despising of goodness , and the like ; these follow and increase upon the soul , to age , to death , and after death to hell , where is no possibility of renewing . 

This vestis animae ( As Tertullian calls it , ) our body , the clothing of our souls , is daily veterascent and mouldering away ; notwithstanding all the art we use to patch up our obsolete faces and withered carcases . Oh let our minds , that inward man , as the eagle , be renewed daily : nothing will more disarm death , and welcome old age , than when the mind is such , that the less pleasure the senses have , the more it doth vacare sibi & deo , enjoy God and itself . The more infirm the body , the more lively the mind grows , as looking at its liberty and enlargement , which now approacheth : when it shall be quit of these {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , chains of mortal and sinful flesh , which have a long time detained and depressed it , below its sphere ; and as a mighty eagle got out of its cage or coop , it shall instantly surpass the clouds , soar up to heaven , and make its nest in the sun of righteousness . 

I will add no more to persuade you to this duty , but what the apostle in his pathetical preface to this doth : i beseech you , brethren , by the mercies of God , that you be not conformed to this world , but be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds . 

salus ipsa supplicat ut salvi esse velimus : salvation and our saviour entreat us to be saved by being renewed . quanta pietas , quae quod potuit imperare exorare mallet ! how great condiscending is it for the spirit of God to entreat that which he Might command ! 

generosi animi faciliùs ducuntur quàm trahuntur ; let us give testimony of ennobled and generous minds , that are easier melted by entreaties , than urged by commands . 

It must needs condemn us of obstinate spirits , of base , ungrateful minds , if we refuse , when conjured by those many rich , free , full , preventing and eternal mercies of God . They that refuse to hear and obey when mercy charms and entreats , what voice can they expect , but that of justice , threatening and revenging ? 

but oh thou first , great , and eternal mind , the father of our spirits and souls , enable us to do what thou requirest of us ; thou that best seest our decays renew right spirits in us ; and by thy word and spirit work our minds to a conformity with thy most holy , pure , and perfect mind . Raise up these divine and immortal souls , which thou hast made capable of thyself , above the vanity and emptiness of the things of this world , and settle them on thyself , and those great things which thou hast offered us in Jesus Christ . 

as our bodies daily decay , so let our minds be renewed daily ; that instead of darkened , proud , vain , worldly , carnal , depraved and corrupted minds , we May have enlightened , humble , serious , heavenly pure , holy and sound minds ; that May know thee , and love thee , and delight in thee , and be united unto thee by faith here , and filled with thee by fruition hereafter , of thine own immensity and perfection , in that happy vision of eternity . 

Amen . 

Finis . 

The errors of the press , in words or points , ( As some no doubt there are ) i must leave uncorrected , to try the candour and discretlon of the reader . 





2 ▪ thes. 4.3 . pro.  heb.  eph. 2.14 . pro. 29.11 . iam. 3.18 . isa. 57 , 19  psal. 2 pet. 40  1 sam. 16  phil. 3.17 . ier. 23.15 . 1 tim. 6.11 . 1 pet. 1.15 . 2 cor. 7.1 . 

Esay 5.20 . lactant.  Basil . inst. lib. 6  ep 95.  August . octa.  mat. 5 . 3• . August . ep. 224.  cl. alex.  August . tertul.  August . Job 13.9 . lact.  2 cor. 6.15 . ju•e v. 9  aug. ench. ad lau.  •s . Pel. l. 1. ep. 9  pro. 18.21 . pro. 22.22 . ep c. 34.  August . luk. 12.14  2. sam. 15.4 ▪  cl. alex.  Job 29.16 . ioh. 5.30 . gen. 18.21  iob. 7.51 . ioh. 7.24 . epist. 7 5.  iuven. Jerome . Job 29.15 . mat. 3.  tertul.  ioh. 18 . 3• . cl. alex. strom. 4.  psal 99.4 . psal. 72.  Job 29.17 . August . exod. 18.  pro. 29.25 . isai. 30.  bern. ad eng.  August . exod. 23.8 . deut. 33.9 . pro. 28.21 . 2 sam. 14.14 . iuven. August . per. ep. 37·  rev. 22.15 . mat. 12.36  ambr.  is . P•l . is . Pel.  mat. 5.  Basil . psal. 96.13 . chrysost. bern.  rom. 14.12  

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . aquin.  rom. 12.2 . s. August . coelum . sol.  deus . act. 17.29 . mat. 9.17 . hab. 2.6 . dan 5.25 . Basil . tert.  ne desi•t d•is •u•tores . naz.  1 tim. 6.5 . corruptio . col. 2.22 . 2 tim. 3.4 . ephes. 2.12 . rom. 1.28 . iob. 3.19 . heb. 10.29 . 2 thes 3.2 . ierom.  2 tim. 1.7 . Job 27.8 . 1 ioh. 5.16 . rom.  . 40  act.  . 11 . ioh. 3.  rom. 12.2 . phil. 2.5 . col. 3.10 . 1 cor. 2.2 . 1 pet. 1.18 . 1 tim. 6.20  1 cor. 8.7 . isai. 29.8 . act. 17.13 . sen.  is . Pel.  August . ps. 147 10.  isai. 57.15 . 2 cor. 6.14 . s•n . sen.  sen.  hos. 7 9  rom. 12.  











































































































































































































































