Confidence dismounted . Or a letter to mr Richard Resburie of Oundle in North-hamptonshire , upon occasion , partly of a title page prefixed before a small treatise of his concerning election & reprobation , consisting of six sermons preached by him about three years since , and lately published ; the said title page bearing in front these words , some stop to the gangrene of Arminianism , lately promoted by mr John Goodwin , in his book entitled redemption redeemed ; partly also , of a short preface or epistle prefixed by the said mr Resbury to that his treatise . By the said John Goodwin , minister of the gospel . 

desiring to be teachers of the law , understanding neither what they say , nor whereof they affirm , 

1 tim. 1. 7.  

nonnulli intelligentes citiùs volunt exagitare quod non intelligunt , quàm , quaerere ut intelligant , & non fiunt humiles inquisitores , sed superbi calumniatores . 

aug. de temp.  Serm. 72.  

nusquam lego , quid erras , quid delinquis , pulvis ? sed lego , quid superbis terra & cinis ? 

musculus in esa. 64.  

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

chrisost. . Hom. 7. ad Philip . 

London , printed by John Macock , for Henry Cripps and Lodowick Lloyd , and are to be sold at their shop in Pope's head alley . 1651.  

Confidence dismounted ; or a letter to mr Richard Resbury . 

Sir , 

Meeting lately with a little book published under the name of one mr Richard Resbury ( A gentleman , whose face , to my best remembrance , i never saw , whose name i never heard of , until now , ) in the frontispiece whereof , and more especially in the epistle to the reader prefixed to it , i found many hard and unchristian sayings uttered , not only against me ( Which had been more venial , ) but against those most blessed and important truths of God , for the vindication whereof against the contrary errors ( Being of most pernicious consequence , as i have demonstratively proved , & which is indeed a thing in itself sufficiently manifest , ) he was graciously pleased to stir up and arm my spirit , i judged myself so far a a debtor to the honour of those truths ( Asserted by me ) and to mine own innocency , yea and to the interest of your comfort and peace also , as to declare briefly unto you , and to the world with you , how inconsiderately ( That i say not , unworthily ) you have vented yourself both against a person , who never did you , nor meant you , the least harm , as likewise against those manifest truths of God , which stand ready pressed to bless you , if you reject not their blessing . And first i cannot but with bowels of compassion over you , take knowledge of that sad and most unchristian misdemeanour in you ( Which i find also in the generality of those , whose judgements are entangled and polluted with the same erroneous conceits of God , his counsels and ways , with you . ) As the blind and bloody persecuting heathen of old , were wont to put the Christians into wolves and bears skins , and then to set mastiff dogs and other wild beasts upon them , to tear in pieces and devour them ; so do you clothe with , and present the great truths of God , under reproachful names , as of Arminianism , Pelagianism , and such like clamorous and scandalous imputations ( Of satanical device ) and then encourage yourselves , and embolden your consciences , to storm , and rage , and rail your pleasures against them . But if that be a gangrene of Arminianism , which you charge me to have lately promoted , i marvel under the shadow of what conceit , or notion of hope , you style your piece , some stop to it . if you expect your book should work after the manner of a charm , or spell , ( As i confess many such pieces do upon persons of weak and light apprehensions ) you have the same ground to honour your book with such a title , which you have for such an expectation . But if you look that it should operate upon the judgements and consciences of men only by that evidence and demonstration of the spirit , which shall appear in it , doubtless you had very slender grounds to think , that it should give any stop to the gangrene you speak of . I believe i have far better grounds to judge that it will occasion a further spreading of this gangrene , and give no stop at all to it . They that are armed with will and preoccupation , against the doctrines asserted in my book of redemption , who are the only persons with whom your book is like to find approbation and applause , are far from the happy danger of being infected with the said gangrene : and therefore your book is no ways medicinal unto them . the whole need not the physician . a gangrene cannot be stopped , where it never comes . As for those , who have conscientiously enquired into , and diligently weighed the grounds of those doctrines , which you think to blast with an angry puff of Arminianism , and have thoroughly tasted the spirit and life which reign in the doctrines themselves , they are far enough out of the reach of your unhallowed notions , or from being taken in those snares of your ridiculous pretending to magnify God , and his grace ; which you spread in the way of the simple . And for such persons , who possibly May be at present unsatisfied whether the truth be on your side of the way , or on mine , but withal are seriously engaged ( As becometh those , who are resolved not to lose their souls for want of looking to , in such a posture ) {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , to follow , and , if it be possible , to find out the truth , your sermons are much more like to bring the gangrene you speak of , into their judgements , than any ways to stop or prevent it . For doubtless such monstrous principles , such uncouth , hard , and horrid notions and thoughts concerning God and his grace , which are the pillars of your tenants and discourse , are not like to sway the judgements or consciences of conscientious enquirers , unless it be the contrary way . Nor can i give any account unto myself , why you should ( In your title page ) pretend any thing sovereign in your book against the danger of infection from me , or what hath been written by me , unless it be this ; viz. that this book of yours having for some years ( As you acknowledge , if not complain , in your preface , or epistle to your reader ) lain upon your hands as a drug , or dead commodity , you thought by setting such a face or gloss upon it , to make it vendible . For as Erasmus sometimes said of Luther , that poor Luther made many rich ; meaning , by occasion of his writing against the Pope , and such doctrines , which were the pillars of his throne and kingdom , which whosoever would undertake to oppose or confute , had great matters of preferment cast upon them ; so i perceive that my poor writings are like occasionally to enrich many with credit , approbation , and applause from men : and that as Caleb promised his daughter Achsah to wife , to whosoever should smite kiriath-sepher , and take it ; so doth that spirit that is abroad amongst those that are called ministers of the gospel amongst us ( Though they preach another gospel , in effect , and not that of Christ Jesus ) promise honour , name , and applause unto any man , that shall but offer to smite either my person , or writing with his tongue , or pen , though they speak or write , neither truth , nor any thing to purpose , against either . And mr Resbury ( It seems ) hath hearkened unto the encouragement of this spirit , and by his title-page hath tempted the world to believe , that he hath done some worthy thing against me in my book of redemption , whereas it cannot reasonably be thought by any thing in his book , that ever he looked any argument , or line of mine , in the face . So far is he from answering any thing argued or asserted by me , either {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , or {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Yet not content with the sound of his own trumpet ( In the frontispiece of his book ) by which he would give the world to hope that he was preparing to battle against me , he , or some factor of his about the city , have purchased the louder blasts of two trumpets more to make the same sound , and have bought of two of our common diurnalists their respective out-cries , or Proclamarees , to call the world together to be spectators of his learned valour against me , and my book . Indeed in his preface he supplies in most untrue and unchristian revilings of my person , that which in his discourse is wanting in weight and substance of matter for answer to my book . But the spirit i spoke of , suggested ( It seems ) this unto him ; if thou be'st not able to grapple with his writings , lay on load of reproach upon his person : thou shalt have a good reward for thy labour as well in the one kind , as in the other : they shall prosper both alike in thy hand . But Sir , i beseech you by the love you either bear , or pretend to bear unto the Lord Christ , with what goodness of conscience , or face of ingenuity , can you say , that the main truths of God concerning his electing and redeeming grace ( asserted , as you say , by you , in your sermons ) have been by the daring hand of that unhappy man mr John Goodwin , in his wretched treatise , by him called ( but miscalled ) redemption redeemed , been so highly assaulted ; when as you neither have showed , much less proved , nor ( I have very sufficient ground to believe ) are able to prove , that so much as any one , no not the least of these truths , have been in the lightest manner assaulted by me in this treatise ? Sir , i trust you will suffer this word of Christian admonition from him , who God knoweth , and your own conscience May know , is no enemy unto you , nor to your peace , nor to your honour or reputation ; that such causeless , groundless , and wretched aspersions and reproaches cast upon your Christian brethren , as these , will never make your face to shine with any true or permament lustre , nor abound to your account in the great day . In terming me , an unhappy man , you speak truth enough in one sense , and little enough in another . It is my unhappiness , in point of honour and respects with men , not to be believed , when i speak the truth ; and much more , that my speaking the truth should prove a stumbling stone unto so many , and occasion their falling into the great and dangerous sins of hard speaking , reviling , persecuting with the tongue , hating , opposing , calumniating the truth manifested unto them . In all this i am ( I confess ) an unhappy man . but the Lord Jesus Christ himself was in all such respects as these , an unhappy man also , being set as well for the falling , as for the rising of many in Israel . but that he was a sweet savour unto God , as well in those who perish , as in those that are saved by him , as well in those who fall by occasion of him , as in those who rise , he was a person thrice happy and blessed . and i should deny the signal grace and goodness of God towards me , if i should not judge myself happy in those ( Not a few ) who have been built up by my hand in the knowledge of God , in the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ , in the peace and joy of their souls ; yea and in the reproaches , hard sayings , and evil entreaties which i meet with from mr Resbury and others , in as much as these also work for me so much a better resurrection , and a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory . in what sense you call my treatise of redemption , wretched , i do not well understand . If you mean it , wretched , in respect of the sad doom that hath befallen it , by falling into the hands of such hard-spirited men as you and some others are , who by unjust clamours and reviling , set yourselves to render the condition of it as calamitous and miserable , as you can , i confess your epithet of wretched May stand : i think it is one of the wretchedest treatises in the world ( In this sense . ) But if you call it wretched , in respect of the matter , or native tendency and import of the doctrine contained therein , as if this tended , or had any thing in it likely to make any person under heaven wretched , or miserable , your epithet itself is wretched ( In this sense , ) because it directly tends to make men miserable and wretched , by dividing their judgments and affections from such truths , which would make them happy , were they received and submitted unto by them . 

Whereas you seem desirous to pick a quarrel against my hand , by terming it , during ; i confess my hand , and heart too , are very daring , venturous , and bold in assaulting error , how strongly soever fortified by the judgments , affections , interests , preoccupations , authorities , credits , writings of men . That clear , satisfying , and convincing light of the knowledge of the truth , which God hath graciously shined into my heart , teacheth my hand to war , and my fingers to fight , against all that is lesser and lower than God in the quarrel and cause of the truth . And if you Count it a blemish , or disparagement unto my hand , to be daring ( In this kind , ) it is a sign that your own hand hath little courage for the truth , nor that it dares lift up itself in the defence of it , unless it hath a proud arm of flesh to stand by it , and second it in the engagement . But i perceive that mr Resbury's hand itself is daring enough , whether in the cause of error , or of truth , when he thinks he hath hands enough with him to bring him off with honour , though he be foiled . 

Whether in calling my treatise , redemption redeemed , i miscall it , or no , will in due time be judged by a straighter rule than mr Resbury's sense or notion in the case , and by a far more competent judge , then he.  In the mean time , you will give me leave ( I trust ) to marvel a little , that you , professing yourself so devoted an enemy to that , which you call Arminianism ( Though i have cause in abundance to judge that you little know what Arminianism indeed meaneth , ) should notwithstanding practise that , which you call ( Though you miscall it ) the Arminian mode so frequently , as you do , in spreading a table of imperial dictates , in stead of arguments , before your reader . This is more like to be the mode of those , who deny the lawfulness of the interposure or use of reason in matters of religion , than theirs , who profess to hold nothing , to believe nothing in such things , but only what they see or apprehend sufficient reason to evince the truth in . But i fear mr Resbury was conscious of this nakedness in himself , and fellows , ( I mean , of dictating like Emperors , in stead of arguing like teachers , ) and hoped to cover it , with a covering made of a bold imputation of it to his adversaries . For what argument , or proof , or colour of either , doth he bring , or can he bring , to evince truth in that charge against me , that in calling the treatise he speaks of , redemption redeemed , i miscall it ? 

Your subtle insinuation , to have yourself notioned like unto Michael the archangel , and me unto the devil , in this imprecatory prayer against me , the Lord rebuke him , i perfectly resent . But Sir , you should have done well to have considered , whether in case the archangel had had to do with a man , as you have ( Though as vile and sinful as you apprehend the man of your contest to be ) and not with the devil , whether ( I say ) it be not probable , that he would have prayed for him , the Lord forgive thee , and not , the Lord rebuke thee , until his obstinacy had appeared . However , if i have so deeply sinned , as you deem and doom me to have done , in judging me worthy to drink of the devil's cup after him , i shall join issue with you in the words of your prayer against me , and pray with you , the Lord rebuke me , only with David's addition , not in his anger . mr Resbury ( I fear ) is impatient of all rebuke , for his errors , either from God , or man , though administered with never so much love and sweetness , by the one and the other . The ground of my fear in this kind , is , because i find that the bare pleading of the truth , which contradicteth his error , though without any reflection in the least upon him , as holding any error , becomes matter of very high and heinous provocation to him . 

And Sir , give me leave to doubt whether you had the consent of your conscience , or no , in drawing up this charge against me , that for the present i so seriously despise , and so boldly bid defiance unto the peculiar grace of God . Michael the archangel durst not bring any railing , much less any forged or false , accusation against Satan himself , when he contended with him . If he had done this , he had fought against him with no better weapons , than those which Satan himself useth in his battles : he had plainly diabolized . It is a thing of most deplorable consideration unto me , that those who call themselves ministers of the gospel , and are so reputed by others , should so far harden themselves from the fear of the Lord , as to speak and spread abroad at pleasure , words of an infamous and disparaging import against their brethren , ( Who never gave them the least cause of offence , whatsoever was taken by them , ) and this without so much as any colourable pretence of truth in them . For Sir , i beseech you , what sentence , clause , word , syllable , letter , tittle , can you , or any other for you , find either in my book of redemption , or any other of my writings , wherein i make the least semblance , or give the lightest intimation that can be imagined , that i at all , much less so seriously ( As your charge advanceth ) despise the peculiar grace of God ? And yet the unchristian rage of your pen riseth much higher , and proclaims , that i also boldly bid defiance to it . well Might the apostle James complain , that the tongue is a fire , a world of iniquity . ay , especially in my treatise of redemption , am so far from despising the peculiar grace of God , or from any bold bidding defiance to it , that i magnify it upon all occasions with all my might ; and demonstrate the peculiarity , i. e. the signal excellency and glory of it , to consist in this , that it encompasseth the whole world about , and particularly visiteth and addresseth itself to every creature of mankind ( Until it be rejected , ) and this in order to their salvation . So that i make the grace of God , which is saving in the nature and tendency of it , never the less , but rather the more peculiar , by commending the rich diffusiveness of it to particular men . As for that grace of God , or rather that degree , or that operation of this grace , which is actually and eventually saving unto men , i peculiarize it every whit as much , and ( For aught i yet know to the contrary ) upon the same terms , which mr Resbury himself , and men of his judgement generally do . For my sense and judgement clearly is , that no person is actually saved , but by such an assistance or operation of the grace of God , which no other person whatsoever partaketh of , or which is vouchsafed unto no other person , but only unto those , who are actually saved also . Only herein i May ( I conceive ) possibly dissent from them : they hold , that this peculiar actually-saving grace of God is upon such terms decreed by God , or intended to be given by God , unto those that come to be saved by it , that there was , or is , an absolute necessity for them to embrace it , and so to be saved by it ; whereas my sense is , that such grace is no otherwise decreed by God unto those , who in time come to receive it , and in fine to be actually saved by it , than it is unto others , who never come to receive it ; and that these Might have received it , or come to be partakers of it , in the same way , and by the same means , by which those others , who are in conclusion saved by it , came to have part and fellowship in it . But this difference between mr Resbury and me , about the peculiar grace of God , doth no whit more prove me to be a serious despiser of it , or a bold bidder of defiance to it , than himself . Therefore his charge against me in this point is merely clamorous and aspersive , and such as a tender conscience would have trembled so much as to demur upon ; and how much more to have published ? 

Of a like staring and broad-faced untruth is that charge also , that i challenge an whole university . his ingenuous and modest words are these : neither hath he , for aught i can ( and without partiality ) discern ( I know not how you should , in case you never read my book , whereof i have more grounds than one , to be jealous ) at all repaired their loss , ( Which is none at all , that either i , or you , know of , ) only concealing it from vulgar eyes , ( It seems you honour your own , as super-vulgar , ) he treads with confidence in their steps , ( If all be true , that you say , ) and that nothing May want to set it off bravely , [ it ? what ? what noun shall we find for a match to this pronoun ? my Master's loss , of which you spoke last , is but an untoward one for the relation , ] challengeth an whole university to remove him . Sir , i desire fairly and friendly between you and me , to understand from you , what either word , or carriage of mine , tempted or provoked you to cast this mire in my face , that i challenge an whole university to remove me ? i confess i dedicated my book of redemption , not to an whole university ( Much less challenged an whole university , as you asperse , ) but to the vicechancellor of the university of Cambridg ( My worthy friend and acquaintance , ) together with the rest of the heads of colleges , and students in divinity in that university . and they who shall please to peruse my dedicatory epistle before the said book , will find , that i am so far from challenging those to whom i make the said dedication , that i set myself to put all terms of honour and respect upon them , as far as is Christian , and meet to be done . Nor is there any one line throughout this whole epistle , that , as far as i can imagine , hath so much as the softest air , or gentlest breathing of a challenge in it . And yet you not content to have traduced me , as a challenger of an whole university , add drunkenness to thirst , ironically , and with the open breach of all the laws of ingenuity , ( That i say not of piety itself , ) insult over me ( That i say not over the spirit of truth indeed , ) in these words ( Immediately subjoined , ) doubtless such modesty and ingenuity must needs be the character of the spirit of truth in him . Sir , the worst i wish you ( And there is no harm , i am certain , in the wish ) is , that some better and more pregnant character of the spirit of truth were discernible in you , than appears either in your stop , or in your epistle prefixed to it . Upon this occasion , i shall crave leave to inform you , that other manner of characters of the spirit of truth , and of a far more gracious import , were found ( And this in the judgement , and by the confession of some of his enemies ) in my great Master Arminius ( As you , who , it seems , claim your tongue , and pen , for your own , are pleased to style him , though , as the saying is , you neither know why , nor wherefore , ) than the consciences of your best friends ( I fear ) have found in you ; though far be it from me to disparage you . You have one who disparageth you ( I am unfeignedly sorry to see it ) even yourself . 

Towards the close of your epistle , the remainder of your wrath , instead of refraining , you pour out in words seasoned with no better salt , than this : and here i now thank mr Goodwin , whose darkness , i doubt not , will occasion more light , his boldness ( confident i am ) will excite modesty ; i will not say what an edge his sometimes imperial dictates , in stead of arguments ( as is the Arminian mode , ) sometimes his monstrous conclusions , sometimes his wrested quotations , sometimes his uncouth philosophy , sometimes his consequential blasphemy , will put upon the spirits of some , whom the Lord shall honour to rescue his truth out of his hands , &c.  Sir , i fear that in speaking these things you fall into the condemnation of the English proverb , which saith , that many talk of Robin Hood , who never shot in his bow . i cannot judge you a man of so little , either conscience , or understanding , as to think that such causeless and groundless imputations as these could have been taken up by you into your pen , in case you had read that book , the report whereof ( It seems ) hath put the edge you speak of , not upon your modesty , but your confidence : though ( I confess ) it argueth not much , either of the one , or the other ( Conscience , i mean , or understanding ) in any man , to speak evil of the things , which he knoweth not , ( Jude v. 10. ) For how can i reasonably conceive , that you intending to publish a discourse for the stopping of an erroneous doctrine ( Erroneously so called ) maintained in a printed book , should not so much as draw blood of this evil beast with one pointed argument , in case you had come within the reach or sight of it ; though you had left the other huntsmen you speak of to have followed the chase , and done the plenary execution ? Upon which account likewise i cannot praise your saying , that though your treatise be no answer directed {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} to my book , yet , &c.  for doth not such an expression as this import , that though you have not shaped an answer to every particular argument , or passage , in my book , yet you have grappled with the most , and most material of them ? When as the truth is , you have not in all your discourse done so much as canis ad Nilum , or touched the lightest argument therein with the least of your fingers . Is it fair for you to say , that you never indeed read over all Chrysostom's works , when as you never read so much as one line of them ? 

But whereas you say , i now thank mr Goodwin , whose darkness , &c. it seems you trade much in ironies , and jeers , having a little before informed your reader ( In the same figure ) that my modesty and ingenuity must needs be the character of the spirit of truth in me . mr Resbury , as our saviour admonisheth men not to judge , lest they be judged : so i fear you will first or last meet with those , that will execute legem talionis upon you , that will {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} with you , and pay you home in your own coin . But if my darkness will ( as you doubt not ) occasion more light , it is ( Doubtless ) of a much better genius than yours : for your darkness occasioneth ( Or , which is worse , directly causeth ) more darkness daily in the world , and leadeth poor persons they know not whither . However , i Count the imputation of darkness , no disparagement unto me , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , i. e. but that which every man lieth under , as well as i : and if mr Resbury Counteth it no robbery to make himself equal with him , in whom there is no darkness at all , that consequential blastphemy , which without so much as any colour or pretext of ground he layeth to my charge , will be real and apparent guilt upon his own head . I dare not number myself amongst men of any higher attainments in knowledge , than those , who acknowledge , that at present they know but in part : and if those spots of ignorance , which are upon the face of my understanding , May occasion a further clearness and brightness in the understandings of other men , it will help to balance the sorrow of the inconvenience and loss i sustain by them . Nevertheless as the apostle speaks of science , or knowledge , falsely so called ( By men in his times , ) so i make no question but there is darkness falsely so called by men in our days : and i fear mr Resbury speaketh this dialect too familiarly . 

Whereas you say , my boldness ( confident you are ) will excite modesty ; i am sorry it hath had so little of this happy influence upon you . Your own pen falls upon you with the confession of confidence : and your neighbour's pen should not much wrong you , in stead of confidence , to write , impudence . But your supposed antithesis between boldness , and modesty , is no praise to your learning , or understanding . The apostle Paul was a man of singular modesty , far from all unseemly self-assuming , conversing with fear and trembling amongst men , divesting himself from place to place of the honour and praise of all those worthy accomplishments , that were in him , and of all those great things that had been done and suffered by him , for the gospel : and yet was he {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a man as bold as a lion , not fearing the fiercest countenance of man in the world , nor reproof from any man touching the truth of those things which he held and taught . uprightness ( As the common motto hath it ) hath boldness . 

But amongst all your undue aspersions , you should have befriended your reputation in forbearing that of imperial dictates in stead of arguments . if you had judged it safe to have followed me in my book with your answers {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , you would have met with arguments , in stead of dictates ( Whether consular , or imperial , ) and not dictates , in stead of arguments . they that are acquainted , either with my preaching , or writings , will ( I doubt not ) be my compurgators in the scandal of being wanting , or sparing , in arguments , or of obtruding things without ground or proof , upon the judgments of men . And if to use imperial dictates , in stead of arguments , be the Arminian mode , it seems the Arminians are Presbyterians , these being the men , who in their synods and assemblies are wont to bind what burdens of faith they please upon the necks of men , without giving any why , or wherefore , but their own authority . My frequent and free advice to all my friends and hearers , is known to be this : not to believe any thing , whether from me , or any other man , but what they see sufficient ground and reason why they should believe . He that should satirise the town of Newcastle for want of coals , Might comfort mr Resbury in his indictment against me for want of arguments . 

What you mean by monstrous conolusions , i confess i understand not : i wish you well understand yourself . There are no conclusions i know of , or am able to call to mind , in that book of mine , which so much offends you , but what are the genuine and natural issue of your own principles and tenants : yea and are frequently delivered and asserted by your own prophets , and great founders of your faith in the points of election , reprobation , &c.  Calvin , musculus , Bullinger , Peter Martyr , &c.  so that in calling my conclusions , monstrous , you fall foul upon your own tenants and opinions also , and put these to rebuke . But it May be your maxim is : pereant amici , dummodò & inimici unà pereant : i. e.  Let dearest friends destroyed be , 
So foes May bear them company . 


however , you should have provided for your credit somewhat better at this point , in case you had brought forth ( At least ) one of the monsters you speak of , that so your reader Might the better have understood what you call , monstrous , and likewise have had some ground for his belief of your honesty , in charging me with monstrous conclusions . for ( As the saying is ) si accusâsse sufficiet , quis erit innocens ? If it sufficeth to accuse , 
Who shall be innocent , i muse ? 




Concerning your charge of wrested quotations , i must crave leave to tell you , that wrested quotations are as far beneath me , as i perceive speaking truth to be above you . If you wrested the scriptures no more , than i do authors , your notions about the counsels and dispensations of God would be much straighter than they are . I am all thoughts made that the truth maintained by me is able to stand upon her own proper base , against all opposition , and hath no need at all to be supported by the rotten props of wrested quotations , no nor yet by the credit or repute of any author , or authors whatsoever , though never so pertinently or candidly quoted to her assistance . Nor do i mention or make use of authors upon any such account , as if the doctrine i teach , were not able , without having any thing at all added unto it by men , to commend itself with sufficient evidence and power unto the judgements and consciences of all considering men , and truly desirous of the knowledge of the truth : but partly to remove that stone , or straw rather , of offence , ( At which persons of effeminate and weak apprehensions are so apt to stumble , ) viz. that the said doctrine wanteth an arm of flesh to stand by it , was never held by orthodox or pious men : partly also to demonstrate that the greatest opposers of this doctrine were not so consistent with themselves in their opposition to it , but that ever and anon they fluctuated in their judgements about it , yea and sometimes pulled down with one hand , what they had built up with the other . This is a thing so manifest to those , that with judgement and observation are any thing conversant in their writings , that to deny it , is ( In effect ) to deny that the sun is up at noon day . Therefore for him to wrest quotations , or pervert the sayings of men , who hath no more need either of men , or their sayings , than i , or the doctrine asserted by me have , is to sacrifice both his precious name , and more precious conscience , upon the service a nutshell , or thing of naught . There was more wisdom than so , though not much honesty , in that saying of the heathen : si jus violandum est , regnandi gratia violandum est : i. e.  Justice too sacred is to harm , 
Unless a kingdom be the charm . 




Nor am i at all edified by your reproof for my uncouth philosophy . i make little use of any kind of philosophy in the book you wot of : nor can i imagine unto what passage throughout the whole book this stigm relateth . My whole estate in philosophy is not ( I confess ) very great . That modicum which i have , is generally of the ordinary and best-known stamp : nor have i , to my knowledge , so much as any one uncouth , affectate , or sequestered notion in my whole system . If you were as chaste from the pollutions of uncouth divinity , as i am of uncouth philosophy , the Lord Christ would take more pleasure in you , than now ( I fear ) he doth . But ( It seems ) you wanted two words to make a new slander : and he that stood invisibly at your right hand , and of whom you were not sufficiently aware , bade you put in , uncouth philosophy . 

I perceive you do not think that you have yet laid on a sufficient load of calumny and reproach ; and therefore you resolve to adventure onesheaf more of the same grain upon your cart , heavier than all the rest . You arraign me for a misdemeanour , which you call , consequential blasphemy . i want your heifer to plough with , to find out your riddle of consequential blasphemy . what May we call the opposite species of blasphemy , contradistinguished to that which you term , consequential ? or by charging me with consequential blasphemy , do you mean , that i hold or reach such positions or doctrines , the direct consequences whereof are blasphemous ? this is the fairest and best sense that ( As far as my short understanding is able to reach ) your words will bear . But Sir , if the doctrine or principle itself be not blasphemous , unpossible it is that any legitimate consequ•••e , or position deducible from it , should be such . if the first fruit be holy ( Saith the apostle ) the lump is also holy : and if the root be holy , so are the branches . and your logic maxim is : ex veris possit nil , nisi vera , sequi : i. e.  
From truth , nothing , but truths themselves , will follow . 


therefore if there be any thing blasphemous in my book , you should rather have charged it upon my principles , or fundamental doctrines , then upon any thing consequentially deducible from them . Or if by the consequential blasphemies you speak of , you mean your own spurious consequences begotten rape-wise , either by your ignorance , or passion , or some worse spirit then either , upon my innocent premises , and call these blasphemous , it is a clear case , that the bastards are yours , and only laid by you ( After the manner of those that are loath to own , or keep their own children ) at my door . Only you should have done well to have given your reader a taste of that which you call consequential blasphemy , out of the book itself , that so he Might have understood your meaning in this particular of your charge . But as Potiphar's wife out of a spirit of anger and revenge , accused her chaste and loyal servant Joseph of incontinency unto his Lord , because he rejected and abhorred her unchaste and disloyal motions : so ( I fear ) you accuse me of blasphemy ( Whether consequential , or by what name or title soever called or distinguished ) unto the world , out of a spirit of indignation , because i will not say a confederacy , where you , and men of your principles , say a confederacy , against the honour , mercy , goodness , justice , truth , and other the glorious attributes of God , but have set myself , and endeavoured with all loyalty and faithfulness unto my god ( Whom with my whole heart and soul i love , reverence , and honour ) to detect those doctrines and tenants of blasphemy , wherewith the judgements and consciences of so many thousands have been bewitched and abused ; as the ••ghter sort of the Jews were with those garnished or painted sepulchers of the prophets and righteous men ( Thus garnished and painted by the scribes and Pharisees , matt. 23. 29.  ) which within were full of nothing but rottenness and dead men's bones . i had a full taste of this spirit in a man of your , judgement ( A minister in this city ) at a public disputation about these controversion ( Now above a year since ) who when i argued , and clearly evinced that doctrine of reprobation maintained by him , and his party ( Which is the same with yours ) to contain this blasphemy in it , viz. that God should reprobate himself , he replied unto me ( In the hearing of thousands there present ) Sir , i pray speak more reverently of God . by which words he sought to insinuate into the auditory , that i had spoke irreverently or blasphemously of God , when as i only detected and brought to light before the persons that horrid blasphemy , which was bound up in a bundle at the heart of his and your opinion , against which i then disputed . 

Sir , you say ( Though untruly , as is before proved ) i challenge an whole university to remove me : i will not challenge you , but modestly and humbly entreat and desire you ( And if you please , you May take ten universities to your assistance ) that you will please to show me ( Only i desire withal that you will not show me darkness in stead of a vision , or that which is not , under the name of that which is ) but that you will please to show me , any one spot of my darkness , any one strain , either of any unseemly boldness , or of any uncouth philosophy , or of any blasphemy ( Whether consequential , or of what kind soever ) any one instance , either of my imperial dictating in stead of arguing , or of any monstrous conclusion , or of a wrested quotation , throughout my whole book . If you be able , and shall please christianly and friendly to show me any of these , it will be an excellent oil , that shall not break my head ; you shall find me {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , easy to be entreated , tractable both to matter of acknowledgement , and amendment of what is amiss . But if you be not able to make good , upon a fair and reasonable account , all , or any the particulars , wherein you have rendered me to the world a man of guilt , and much unworthiness , i trust you will make haste to the golden altar of repentance , and lay hold upon the horns hereof for the safety both of your conscience and reputation : and will not Count it any great thing to repair , what you have demolished and pulled down . 

One thing ( Before i close ) i desire calmly to know of you : why , or upon what account , you term the doctrine , maintained by me in my treatise of redemption , by the name of Arminianism . if it be simply because the said doctrine was ( As you suppose ) held and maintained by Arminius , 1.  I must crave leave to inform you , that unless the good figure synecdoche makes peace between such your supposition , and the truth , they will never agree : for the doctrine here taught by me was only in part held by Arminius : the main foundations on which i build , you will not find laid by him . 2.  Were it granted , that what i teach in that book , was ( For substance of matter ) nothing but what is to be found in his writings ; yet what reason is there why that which i teach in common with Arminius , should be termed , Arminianism , when you teach twenty times more upon the same , terms ( I mean , in common with Arminius ) and yet would be judged the freest man in the world from Arminianism ? 

If you charge me with Arminianism , because the doctrine which i maintain , was held by Arminius with opposition or contrariety to the truth ; 1.  Whether this be a truth , or no , adhuc sub judice lis est , is a case yet depending in the court of equity : and i believe before many years shall have passed over the head of the world , all competent judges will pass sentence against you in the point . 2.  In case it were true , that Arminius did indeed maintain that doctrine in opposition to the truth , about which i make one in judgement with him , yet why should my doctrine be rather termed Arminianism , than either Calvinism , Musculism , martyrism , or the like , considering that Calvin , musculus , and others ( Reputed orthodox ) did assert over and over , and this in terms every whit as significant and express , as any found in Arminius , the very selfsame doctrine , as i fully , and above all controversy and contradiction , prove by many testimonies cited from the writings of these men , in my said treatise of redemption . If you here plead , that these authors elsewhere in their writings , declare their judgements in opposition to this doctrine ; 1.  I make little question but that this May with as much truth be said concerning Arminius himself . 2.  If those other authors declare sometimes for the said doctrine , and otherwhile against it , why should he , who teacheth contrary to what they deliver in one place , be traduced as an opposer of their doctrine , rather than he , who teacheth contrary to what they teach and deliver in another ? Sir , i fear that when the Lord Jesus Christ ( Both yours , and mine ) shall come to umpire between you , and me , your aspersing his truth with infamous and ignominious terms will turn to no good account unto you . 

Concerning your treatise , or sermons , if there be any thing in them more material or weighty , than what your great makers at the synod of Dort have upon the same account , which you stand up to justify , afforded us in their synodical writings , it shall ( God willing ) be taken into consideration in due time . But i believe that when the oaks of Bashan shall be hewn down and fall , the shrubs and under-wood will be broken and beaten down to the ground under them : and that when the horsemen are put to rout , the infantry will throw down their arms , and quit the field . As for your decree of absolute reprobation , when you seek for it in the nineth to the Romans , you dig in a wrong field to find any such treasure : and the truth is , that you will , or May , as soon discover the element of fire at the bottom of the sea , as such a reprobation as you dream of , in that chapter , or indeed in any other quarter or passage of the scriptures . Yea yourself in this very epistle , making your elect ones , through weakness of judgement , and unskilfulness in the mystery of Christ , liable to be seduced by a spirit of error , do little less ( If not every whit as much ) then shake the foundations of your absolute reprobation . if you speak of such a liableness to seduction , which endangereth not the salvation of the seduced , your zealous solicitousness for the suppression of error , is to little purpose , at least in reference to such persons . For men , whether elect ( In your notion ) or not elect , will be always liable to be thus far ( At least ) seduced , were all the errors at present on foot in the world , never so thoroughly suppressed . Besides , according to your principles , all the sins which your elect shall at any time commit , or fall into , shall work for good unto them , and not only be forgiven immediately upon the commission . Therefore your care of preventing their seducement , being truly interpreted , is only a care to keep them from that , which would turn to a certain benefit or advantage unto them , in case they were not kept from it . If you speak of a liableness to such a seduction , which May possibly end in the destruction of the seduced , than you clearly suppose a possibility of the perishing of your elect ones : and if your election staggers , or waves , how can your reprobation stand fast ? How impertinently you cite , and apply to your purpose , those words of the apostle , the foundation of God stands sure , but that i am unworthy to teach , you Might have learned from the 359. and 360.  Pages of my book of redemption . But i shall ( I trust ) ere long , interruptory occasions not too numerously or importunely thronging me , vindicate the innocency of that nineth chapter to the Romans , from the scandalous imputation of holding correspondency with so monstrous and horrid a doctrine , as that which mr Resbury , with many others , ( Led aside out of the way of truth by the same spirit of error and delusion , ) teach under the notion and name of , absolute reprobation . in the mean time , hoping that for the future you will be more christianly tender of the names and reputations of your brethren , at least until you know more evil by them , and this upon better terms , than ( I am certain ) you yet know , or can know , any by me , or ( I trust ) ever shall know , i take my leave , beseeching the god of all grace , with all fervency and effectualness of prayer and supplication , that he will vouchsafe to make both your anointing and mine , with the spirit of revelation , much more rich and full , then hitherto it hath been , that we May be more able to give the light of the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ , unto men . 

Your assured friend in Christ , above , and against , all unkindnesses , or evil entreaties , John Goodwin . from my study . octob. 15. 1651.  

Finis . 





































