Some of the principles of the Quakers ( Scornfully so called by men ) vindicated , and proved sound , and true , and according to the scriptures : in opposition to the false charges , and lying reports given forth against the truth , in two printed books , put forth by one Philip Taverner , a supposed minister of the gospel , in Middlesex near Uxbridge . and hereby truth is manifest , and discovered , and the controversy determined by the judgement of truth , between Philip Taverner aforesaid , the accuser , and edw. Burrough , defendant of the truth , who contends for the faith of the gospel , and for the word of God in the heart , against all such gainsayers as have the form of godliness , but denies the power , and many such are in this age . 

And this is given forth for the satisfaction of all that desires to know the truth of the controversy between them aforesaid , by edw. Burrough . 

London , printed in the year . 1658.  

Some of the principles of the Quakers , ( Scornfully so called by men ) vindicated , and proved sound and true , and according to the scriptures . In opposition to the false charges , and lying reports given forth against the truth , in two printed books put forth by one Philip Taverner , a supposed minister of the gospel , in Middlesex near Uxbridge . 

Whereas Philip Taverner one of truth's opposers ( Whether through ignorance , or subtlety i now determine not ) hath again appeared against me , and truth in print , as in vindication of himself and his former work , who about four months ago gave a false relation of a dispute , but instead of mending the matter , he hath made his own cause the more vile , as May appear to such who takes a perfect view of the proceedings , from the beginning to the end thereof ; row the intent of this my reply is to clear the truth further , and to take off h•s false aspersions which he hath cast upon my innocent words in my former book , in answer to his first . And as for the rest of his book , which hath no relation to mine , nor to the dispute , i shall pass it by . The title of my first book was , something of truth made manifest , &c.  To which sayst thou , a plausible title to cover a railing and bitter spirit under , that it May walk in the world less suspected , &c.  

reply . my words are truth , for in that book truth was made manifest to many in relation to the former dispute , to the satisfaction of many , and as for railing and bitterness of spirit , i do deny , only i am zealous for the Lord's truth , to speak plainly by reproving them that gainsay it , and to that of God in every man's conscience , do i desire to be manifest and seeks , not by flattering words to cover evil , that i May not be suspected , though thou seem falsely to say it , but let all my enemies suspect what they will , for of the Lord do i seek to stand approved , and not of man , for the Jew inward , hath no praise of man , but of God , and as for railing language and bitter words against thee i have used none , but speaks the truth in plainness . 

The next thing thou seems to stumble at is , whereas i said , i supposed thou hadst ambitiously styled thyself , Mr. Philip Taverner , and thou now seeks to hide thyself from the force of my words , to the sight of the world , which appears a little to strike upon thee , with some shame ; and thou sayst , thou did not prefix Mr. before thy name , but the stationer did it , who ( sayst thou ) was pleased to honour the man with that title , &c.  

reply . now instead of clearing himself , he hath showed more guilt of ambition then before , and my words were , i supposed , and not an absolute charge as he saith , and had not i good reason to suppose it , that it was his ambition , being also contrary to the express command of Christ , mat ▪ 23.  And indeed i hardly ever read any subscription like to it , by the greatest , and noblest of men , as men account , and it is a thing far above humility , and not beseeming any man , much less one that professes himself to be a minister of Christ •o subscribe himself , or be with his consent , Mr. such an one , but he seems to cover himself from ambition , because saith he , he did it not himself but another , i say , i shall not charge him here with falsehood , but i am sure it is very unusual for any man to add any thing to another man's book , without his knowledge ; i never knew it done by any stationer , who hath had some knowledge of their ways : but yet he acknowledges it was done in honour to him , to subscribe him Master , and here he hath justified the thing , and showed that he is indeed guilty of ambition , who confesseth that it is an honour to him , to be subscribed Mr. by another ; for he saith , the man that did it honoured him with that title ; and here men May take notice what honour this my adversary looks after , even the honour that Christ forbids , who saith to his ministers , be not ye called of men Masters ; but the man hath honoured phil. Taverner with titling him Mr. as he saith . 

The next thing treated ; proves also that he is ambitious , for he pleads much the lawfulness of titles , of civil respects , as he calls it ; and this is all to justify the title of Master to himself , and thereupon hath wrested divers scr•ptureses ; what though the unbelieving Greeks , used the word Master , or Sir ; John . 12. which he hath quoted ▪ is this an example sufficient for Christians to break the command of Christ ? mat. 23.10 . neither are any other scriptures a warrant for any man so to do , though for a whole page he treats only as for the lawfulness of such titles , yet in the end would shut guilt from his own door , that he affects not titles . 

For he saith , this he speaks not that he would have it so done to him ; and this his seeming justifying himself proves himself guilty , knowing that he had given truly occasion for persons to judge he would have it so , and in the end would blind the minds of the simple with words of seeming humility , that he would not have it so done to him , as if he cared not for it . 

And whereas i said in my first , that i am without any prejudice towards the man ( viz. ) P. t. he saith i must give him leave to question it ; first , from my railing words against him ; secondly from my scornful pity expressed , &c. saith he . 

reply . i have no prejudice against him , God is my witness , and he May question what he will , who is in the unb•lief ; for its manifest by his former , that he quest•onss where he hath no just occasion , showing much prejudice in himself , for he said in his first relation , commenting upon some of my words , if by such words , i meant so ▪ then it was truth ; but if i meant so , than it was false ; and was not this a perfect sign of prejudice in him , who had not just occasion to except against the words as they lay ; nor could not condemn them but upon giving his own interpretation of them first ; whereupon i said , in my first answer , page 14.  alas poor man ▪ must i be judged upon thy own meaning , &c. and yet in these words i showed no scornful pity to him , though he fa•sly suppose it , and say it , and so while he cannot believe that i am without prejudice against him , he hath showed himself guilty of prejudice towards me , and my words , to be seen , and justly believed by many . 

And whereas he saith , it is doubtful how far i own the authority of the scriptures , because i say in my first , we through patience and comfort of the scriptures have had hope : have had hope saith he , now it seems because i place my words , we have had hope , his unbelieving doubtful heart questions whether i own the authority of scriptures , and would falsely conclude , that through the comfort of scripture we have no hope now , and saith he , are you now flown so high that you need not ? &c. page 3. and therefore i May now answer further ; yea through the promise of the Lord , declared in scripture , we have hope at this present , that God will bring down , and overthrow all such that deceives the persons , who are made ministers by man , and of man , at schools and colleges , and all this set maintenance by tithes , and casting persons into prison , and spoiling their goods to maintain ministers , as this day in the nation , many hundred have been cast into prison , and many hundred pounds worth of cattle , of bedding , and all kind of goods have been distrained for to maintain the ministry , i say we have hope according to the scriptures , that God will bring down all this , and your preaching for money , and bargaining with persons for so much the year , and your preaching what you have studied for , from the scriptures , by a glass in a steeplehouse , where the mass use to be said , God will confound all this , and poor persons shall be delivered from the mouths of those deceivers that makes a prey upon them , and preaches for hire , and seeks for their gain from their quarter ; and these things with many other ▪ we hope at this present , wherefore think not in thyself , we now do not hope ; for we both do and have had hope , through patience , and comfort of the scriptures . 

Whereas i charged p. t. in my last , that he had wronged both me , and the truth in his relation , &c. which he saith in his answer is false , and he saith he doth not apprehend me and the truth , so well agreed , that it is possible to wrong us both ot once ▪ &c. page the 4.  

reply . that he wronged me it appears , in his not relating all that i said at the dispute ( The ground of this quarrel ) not by half and more i know , and in relating more than himself spoke by far ; and let sober men judge , whether he did not here worng me , in relating a thing that passed between us , and relating much more than ever he spoke , and much less than i spoke , if the truth of that matter ( Were it wrong or right matter ) and myself also be not by this kind of dealing wronged , i appeal to all honest persons whilst both he and i am silent ; so the false dealing and wrong in his first book , is upon him still according to my charge unremoved , and the lie in this his last book , in that he saith , i say falsely , when i have spoken the truth , which is a lie in the highest degree , in saying when i spoke the truth , that i spoke falsely ; and his proof in that ; the truth and i doth not agree , is ; because i said in my first , the saints have no need of scriptures to teach them , but the spirit of the father leadeth , and teacheth into all truth . 

reply . my words are justifiable , for it is the spirit that leadeth into all truth , John . 16. and the saints need no man to teach them , but they have the anointing within them , and they know all things by the unction , 1 John . and the spirit of the father is given them , by which the scriptures were given forth , and the Lord is the teacher of his persons , and they need not any to say to them , know the Lord , jer. 31. yet they that witness this , do not make the scripture of none effect , but owns it in its place , yet not as their teacher , for than they should deny the new covenant , jer. 31. and then something besides the spirit leads into truth , and they have something to teach them besides the anointing , but if this be all the proof that can be given against me , that i and the truth doth not agree , i doubt not but all spiritual men , will see the emptiness and weakness , of the witness against me ; and will be more confirmed , rather than shaken , that i and the truth doth fully agree , though p , t. speaks otherwise falsely against me . And as if i had contradicted the apostles words which he quotes against me , who saith , whatsoever things were written aforetime , were written for our learning , which scripture i do own , and no way contradict ; it 's the error of his judgement , which so judgeth , for even they for whom the things that were written , were for their learning ; yet they were led into all truth by the teachings of the spirit , and they were taught of the fathet , and what was written to them was not written , because they knew not truth , or to teach them truth , 1 John 2.21 . let him learn what this means . 

The next thing he notes whereas i said , i then proved ( at the dispute meaning ) by many scriptures that some were perfect in this life , 1 cor. 2.5 . even perfect without sin , John . 1.47 . 1 joh. 3.7 . and to gain say this , he hath brought ,  1.8 . If we say we have no sin , we deceive ourselves , and the truth is not in us ; and saith he , who speaks truth in this ▪ e. b. or the apostle ? as if i had spoken contrary to the apostle ▪ Solomon also ( Saith he ) te•s us , there is not a just man upon earth that doth good , and sinneth not , which also he brings as a witness against what i have affirmed . 

reply . it 's true i held forth a state of perfection to be waited for , and attained unto , upon earth , and i am not ashamed of my principle , neither is it found too light , for that scripture . 1 cor. 2.5 . doth testify that some were perfect upon earth in the days of the apostles , and if they were so , the same is to be waited for , and witnessed in this age , for the hand of the Lord is not shortened , and that scripture , 1 John . 3. whosoever abideth in him sinneth not , and whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin , ver. 6.9 . doth clearly manifest there is a state upon earth free from sin ▪ wherein power is received , and felt over all temptations , and over the devil , even such an estate , that the wicked one cannot touch such that are born of God , and this was the thing i held forth , and do vindicate against all opposers ; that the saints May wait for , and witness upon earth to have power over sin , and over its temptations and free from the commiting of sin , by the power of the second Adam living , and dwelling in them , and thus must thou believe , p. t. or else thou believes not scripture , nor that any are born of God , or abides in Christ ; if thou believe not that , then confess thou errs in judgement , who art unbelieving of what the scripture bears witness of ; therefore tell me plainly if thou believe that there are any that are born of God , and abides in Christ , then must thou believe such doth not commit sin ; else thou denies the scripture , and what i held forth herein i do not contradict the apostles , nor Solomon's words ; for its true the apostle said , if we say we have no sin we deceive ourselves ; but art thou so blind that thou dost not see , he speaks there of a state before confession of sins , and the next words , saith the apostle , if we confess our sins he is faithful , and just to forgive us our sins , and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness , so i do agree with the apostles words , and do not contradict them ; for i do say if any say they have no sin , before they do confess their sin , and forsake their sin , and be cleansed from it , i say , they are liars , and the truth not in them ; and i also say , if that after a man have confessed his sin , and be cleansed from it , and have his sin forgiven him , and witnesseth that he is born of God and does not commit sin ; i say he speaks the truth also , and the truth is in him , and though Solomon did say there is not a just man upon earth that doth good , and sins not ; yet is my affirmation true notwithstanding ; for Solomon forgot the Lord , and his heart went after many strange women , and became a transgressor , and in that state did not know the birth born of God , which doth not commit sin , for he was but under the administration of the law , which doth not make perfect as pertaining to the conscience , and paradventure in that state he being erred from God , he did not see any that did not sin ; these things will be plain to some , though perhaps thou May shut thine eye against them , and Solomon was not our example in conversation , i am sure , nor hardly in doctrine ; and thus i have weighed thy text , which thou seems to say before , i have not weighed , and my principles are proved sound , and thou and thine too light , and the wind of the Lord will scatter them . 

And p. t. confesses , every real hearted Christian May be , and is in scripture called perfect . 

reply . then wherefore doth he oppose me , who testifies the same thing , and he now confesses even that every real hearted Christian May be , and is called perfect in scripture , and is not he here guilty in that he charged me falsely , pag. the 21. of his last , with going rounds like unto a horse in a mill , who sometimes denies perfection , and sometimes confesseth it , to be attained in this life , but he is forced in the end to confess to the truth , and to justify me . 

And also the scripture doth testify the saints were already perfect and complete in Christ , while they were in the life upon earth , col. 1. though there be a time , wherein all the saints do complain of the body of sin , in their warfare , and travel , yet there is a state also , wherein they have put off the body of sin , and are the servants of righteousness , and free from sin , rom 6.22 . But p. t. shows little experience in those states , as of the travel under the body of death , and also the victory over it , and so what he speaks , is but by guess from other men's words , and then it is no marvel , if he err in judgement •nd bring one scripture to contradict another , not having the infallible spirit that gave it forth , nor feeling the states , nor the passing thorrow these conditions declared therein , for there is a time of travelling , and complaining under the body of sin , and its burden , and a time of freedom from it , and victory over it , yea , even in this life upon earth . 

And whereas i said in my last , many of the saints daily receive more and more of God's wisdom , and of his power and life , revealed in them , wherein they grow up to gods from strength , to strength : now saith he , but whether he doth not own some to have attained so high , that there can be no addition , is a query , my soul , ( Saith he ) has not been able to enter into his secrets , in this thing , because my words were , many of the saints , &c.  

reply ▪ my first words , it seems he cannot contradict , but owns them to be true , so i need not defend them , only he supposeth a question , in which there is not much edification to be answered , and i have no secrets , in what i spoke , for to the children of light , my words are plain , though to p. t. and such they May be parables , and secrets ; but as for my own particular , i now here answer the question , and further reply , i do grow up in wisdom , and knowledge daily , and never knew so much of p. t. deceit , as now i do , since , and at that dispute , ( The ground of this our debate ) so i thought good to let him know , that i do grow in truth , which doth daily discover more and more , deceit in him , and them that opposes truth , and so also grows in the knowledge of his error of judgement , and ignorance , that i May condemn it , and judge it . 

And whereas , i said the light , which every man is lightened withal by Christ , is sufficient , to bring up every man to believe in Christ , that loves the light and walks in it , and unto such is grace added , and increased daily , &c. as in the 16 pag. of my first , more appears . 

In opposition to this , to over throw it , as he supposes , he hath nominated that scripture , 1 cor. 2.14 . the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God , for they are foolishness to him , neither can he know them , because they are spiritually discrened , &c.  

reply . now my words are true , and no contradiction to the apostles words , except to such as are blind , that cannot discern between light and darkness , and such will judge falsely , and out of an evil mind make an appearance of seeming difference , where there is none , for the light , that lighteth every man that comes into the world , is Christ , John 1.9 . and that Christ the light that lighteth every man that comes into the word , is sufficient to bring every man , that loves the light , and walks in it , to believe in Christ ; these are my words , and the intent of my mind , and would any man , that were not stark blind , make any opposition against this doctrine , or bring a scripture to prove the contrary ? which scripture i own , and doth no way contradict , for the natural man doth not perceive the things of God , nor know them ; yet this is not contrary to what i say , that Christ Jesus lighteth every man that comes in the world , which light , ( Christ ) is sufficient , and he changeth men from natural to spiritual , as they are brought to believe in Christ that hath lightened them ; and he opposes me , as if i should say , or hold forth that the natural man perceives , and knows the things of God , and that the natural man hath faith ; which i never spoke , nor entered into my mind to say ; so he hath drawn his evil consequence from my words , and then confounded his own conception ; but my words remains untouched , for my saying and intent is , that Christ lighteth every man that comes into the world , and his light is sufficient , to give faith , and to change a man , from natural to spiritural , and to give him the perceiving and knowledge of the things of God , and of his spirit ; and my words , nor intent is no contradiction to the apostles words , though p. t. falsely judged so , for want of better understanding , i suppose rather than through subtlety at this turn ; and thus my principle is proved sound , and the title of his book a lie . 

And whereas i said , that Christ wrought righteousness perfectly without us , and also fulfils righteousness in all that believes , and no man is justified by one of these , without the other , or that hath not the other , pag. 12. of my first . 

He saith , whether i do not confound justification , and sanctification , he leaves all rational men to judge , &c.  

reply . that Christ wrought righteousness without us , is not denied by him , nor that he fulfils the righteousness of the law in the saints , he cannot well deny , let him read rom 8.4 . and that no man is justified by the righteousness that Christ wrought without , who believes not , nor is converted to God , but in the power of Satan ; this all the children of God believes , and knows , that none are justified , by Christ's righteousness without , but who are converted to God and hath received Christ , and he is in them , for else they are reprobates , and not justified ; and so i am not ashamed of my principle , though he would slander it , to be too light , for he that hath not Christ , God's righteousness within him , is a reprobate , and not justified , by any righteousness without ; neither do i confound justification , and sanctification , which he falsely charges me with , for they are one in Christ , for he is made unto us sanctification and justification , and the man , that is in the pollutions of the world , unsanctified , is not justified , but condemned , so none are justisted by a righteousness without them , but them that are sanctified by him within ; this i own , and do not deny , and men that are in the save corrupt reason , with him must not i be judged by , and also i do justify , if any work be wrought by us , in the strength and power of grace , and not in our own strength , than it is the work of Christ in us , the work of God's own righteousness , and that no work or word is justified , but what the spirit of Christ , leads unto ; and though p. t. ignorantly commenteth upon these words , yet are they words of truth and righteousness , and all that he says against them , proves not the contrary . 

And whereas , i did ask him , which he had ignorantly affirmed in his relation ; whether that righteousness which Christ works in us , in his strength and power , and not in our own , is called our righteousness ? which he seems to answer , but he hath misunderstood my words , for i meant not ours by enjoyment , but ours in the sense the prophet speaks , when he said our righteousness is as filthy rags ; i know the righteousness that Christ works in us , by his spirit , and the power of his grace , is ours by enjoyment in the second Adam , as the gift of God to us , but not ours in the first Adam , in the righteousness of the law , in the state not converted , and that was the strength of my query , where that righteousness wrought in us , by the spirit and strength of Christ , and not in our own , is called our righteousness , ours as in the first Adam ; but i see thou hast not understood the meaning of my query , for weakness of understanding , and then how should thou rightly answer it . 

Also i queried , how Christ working righteousness in us , by the power of grace , not by our own strength , can be called the righteousness of the law , which he had affirmed ; now i meant the righteousness of the law in the flesh , and not in the spirit , i know the working of Christ , both in us , to will , and to do , by his spirit , and strength , and power of grace , is the fulfilling the righteousness of the law by Christ in us ; but it is not the righteousness of the law in the flesh wrought by us , as unborn again ; but to this thou hast not answered , but hast answered thy own conceiving , and not the innocency of my queries . 

And whereas he stumbles , and is offended , because i said , no man is justified in any word , or work , but what they are lead unto by the spirit , and those words and works the spirit leads unto , are justified , and no other words or works , and from this he would falsely conjecture , i hold a justification by works ; and by something without , or besides that which Christ wrought without . I say no , by the deeds of the law , shall no flesh living be justified , but yet he that moveth and leadeth into words and works of truth , and righteousness , the same doth justify the creature in the words and works which he is lead unto , and this is not in opposition to the apostles words , which he seems to bring against me , rom. 5.8 , 9  while we were sinners , Christ died for us , much more being justified by his blood , we shall be saved from the wrath ; this is not contrary to what i say , for we do own the blood of Jesus to justify , but yet not such who are not cleansed by it , and lead by the spirit into all truth , but it is they that are justified only who are led into all truth by the spirit , such are justified by his blood in the spirit , and saved from wrath , who are born of the immortal word , but they that remain in sin are not justified , nor saved from wrath . 

Then he queries , whether i shut pardon of sin out of doors ? i answer no , for they that are lead into all truth by the spirit , their sins are pardoned and forgiven , and remembered no more , but blotted out , and cannot be read , for they are cleansed from it , and commits not sin ; then he asks , whether i grant two formal causes of justification , the one forgiveness of sin , the other inherent righteousness ; i say , both the cause and the work of righteousness is in God , his free love and mercy , which is over all his works , and they receive the work of it , and the gift of it that are lead by the spirit , as the effect thereof , and none else , though he ask , whether forgiveness of sin hath its rice from what Christ works in us ▪ or from what Christ hath done and suffered for us ? I say , whatsoever Christ hath done , and suffered without man , while man hath not received Christ , nor the work of Christ in him , but remains in the first Adam , in transgression , the true work and ground of justification , he knows not , nor hath not , neither knows the mediatorship between God and him ; then in the conclusion of this matter , p.t. saith , thus far to sh•w , e. b. and the truth are not so well agreed , but he that cleaves to one must forsake the other , &c.  

reply . hold friend , come back again , what hast thou proved yet any thing against me , save that i hold the truth : thou hast drawn a conclusion too soon , without sound evidence , and thou must not be judge in thy own cause ; neither hast thou proved me and the truth to disagree ever a whit , as just men May judge ; it appears thou art the man that seems to be righteousness in thy own eye , and justifies thyself , and would condemn the righteous ; and though thou say , we do not agree , viz. e. b. and the truth , yet thou hast not , nor never is able to prove it , for all that are sanctified are justified , and none are justified , but them that are sanctified , though not as a cause , yet as the fruit and effect , which will appear in that man that is justified . 

The next thing he observes , whereas i said , it is true , a public dispute i had , the time and place mentioned , with a company of priests , and this same ph. Taverner was one of them , &c.  

First , p. t. in answer to this hath pleaded for the honourable name of priests . Reply . yea , the name is honourable ; who are come to the priesthood that was made after the power of an endless life , to which p.t. and the generation of priests are not yet come as they make manifest ; but that priesthood was not my meaning , neither did i speak scornfully and reproachfully against any that labour in the ministry of the word , as he falsely charges me , line 34 , 35. but the persons Might know who i meant by that word priest , for ministers of the gospel , i could not call them that are not so , without offence to my conscience , because i am taught to speak the truth in all things ; but priests i May call them , such i mean as disputed against Christ , and spoke against him , the priests that were subverted from God's law , and that are persecutors of the innocent , such priests i mean , and lawfully and truly such priests i May call them ; and as for labouring in the ministry of the word , which he signifies as if they did ; do not they labour to get people's money , and tithes , the tenth of corn and hay , and eggs , and pigs , and stipends so much a year , or so much a sermon ; if it be not thus with some at least , let the country thereabouts judge ; and what was the meaning that p. t. himself was about removing from one parish to another , a little while since , except for money and hire ; tell not of the ministry of the word , till ye repent and reform yourselves by denying your hire , and tithes , and old papish ways , and houses called your churches , and all your practices of popish priests , for your garments yet smell hereof , and your wages give evidence that you are of the stock of the papish priests , priests that persecuted Christ to death , & not of the stock of the priests truly called & ordained under the law , keeping the covenant , nor yet priests in the gospel administration , for i know you deserve not the title of priests , upon neither of these accounts ; and as for scorning , with which thou chargest me ; thy charge is false , yet am i brought to glory in the Lord over all the false prophets , and deceivers , rejoicing with a holy derision , even as the virgin , the daughter of Zion despised and laughed to scorn , Sennacherib , isai. 37.22 . and in no other sense . 

And whereas i said to the persons about Draton , concerning their teachers , cease , oh cease from your teachers without you , and hearken to the voice of the Lord , from them who are dumb shepherds , and preach for hire , that take gifts and rewards for preaching , &c. as in the 17 , and 18 pages of my first ; to this he saith , and queries , why am i a teacher of them called Quakers , and saith my charge is high , but do not i charge it salsely upon some who are as far from the guilt of it as myself , and thus he goes on , page 19  

reply . good reason i have to bid you cease from all their teachers without , even as the prophet , isa. 55.1 , 2.  I answer i am no such kind a teacher as preaches for hire , and divines for money , and for great gifts and rewards , and that doth make merchandise of souls , yet am i one that turns persons from darkness to light , and from Satan's power to God , and to the anointing , that it May dwell in them , that they May need no man to teach them ; and such were the apostles , and them that are sent of Christ ; but such teachers i would have them to cease from , where persons are always learning , and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth , 2 tim. 3. and such teachers are you about Draton , as well doth appear , and between these two kind of teachers there is a great difference ; and though my charge is high , yet is it just , and i charge none falsely herein , for who can clear themselves from the guilt of it , of that generation , if any , i condemn them not ; but can p.t. do it ? ask his neighbours , hath not he sums of money by the year , tithes , or other wages for preaching ? try him , give him nothing for a year or two , and then if he preach to you , and never complain for want of wages , and money , than i will believe he is clear , and then he May better boast than he can now ; and as for divers of that function in that county , they have cast men into prison where they yet lie , and taken suit of them at law , and taken their goods , because some could not for conscience sake give you hire , and tithes , and money ; and are these free , or guilty of my charge ? let the Lord judge , and all his saints . He saith , he doth not plead for all who go under the name of ministers in England , he fears there is many of them no better than wolves in sheep's clothing , &c.  then why doth he not come out and cry against them , but remain amongst them , in their practice , for wherein can he clear himself of any one thing which they are guilty of , which he confesses are wolves in sheep's clothing ; was not his call the same with theirs ? and is not his practice in ministry and maintenance generally the same with theirs ? if he have aught to say to clear himself , we will answer further , otherwise all men shall judge , that while he accuseth some of England's ministers to be wolves in sheep's clothing , himself is found also guilty , except i say he can make appear a perfect difference between his call , practice , and maintenance , and theirs , which he is never able to do , or to justify , that he is not of the same nature , and by the same spirit , but contrary to theirs that he accuses , and fears to be wolves in sheep's clothing , and i have as much ground to suspect him to be one of the wolves in sheep's clothing , as he hath ground to suspect his own companions , and generation to be such ; and in that he saith some of the Quakers have been found guilty of blasphemy , and that some of them are found vain , light persons , or heady , and high minded ; he doth here secretly charge and prove nothing , for blasphemy we are come out of , and have denied all lightness after the flesh , and high-mindedness , and if any such come among us , they are denied , and are not of us till they be converted to God , and turned from all evil ; but this his secret charge against others , is but that himself May seem clear ; then he asks , are all guilty of preaching for hire , and divining for money , &c. and he bids me not condemn the generation of the righteous , and then confesses , they take that which the state allows , or that which they have given by persons , and justifies it , and saith he , it is not a preaching for hire , &c. page 19 of his last . 

reply . all that i charge to be guilty are so , for i charge not the guiltless , but ask the country persons ; ask them how many of their teachers are clear , and hath not money , tithes , or other things for preaching ; and i have taken heed of condemning the righteous ; and yet dare not let the guilty go unjudged and unreproved ; and therefore them i do reprove ; and now in the end he hath justified preaching for hire , though he in the same page seemed to deny it ; but whether is that a maintenance according to gospel ministry ; as practised in the days of Christ and his apostles ; or whether that comes not under the account of preaching for hire , in taking gifts of the state , and gifts of persons , which thou justifies ; no such maintenance did Christ allow to his ministers as to take sums of money yearly for preaching , nor such things never were justified by Christ : but into whatsoever house you enter , eat such things as are set before you , saith Christ : and that is Balaam's practices , to take gifts of the state ; or of great men , for he would have taken the gift of Balaac ; so by their own account the best sort of England's teachers , ( For some of them thou pleads not for ) goes for gifts and rewards , as the false brethren did in the days of the apostle ; for though you would seem to clear them of preaching for hire ; yet hast thou proved them guilty , of preaching for gifts and rewards ; and is not their taking gifts from the state , and persons , which thou justifies , a perfect preaching for gifts and rewards , as ever the false brethren , which the true apostls declared against ; and so out of thy own mouth , they are proved such , ( Even the best of them which thou vindicates ) as goes in Balaam's way , preaching for gifts and rewards ; and is it not time now for persons to cease from you , who are found by thy own confession , in Balaam's way , and the way of the false apostles ; preaching for gifts and rewards from persons , and from the state ; and so out of thy own mouth i am justified ; and yourselves condemned . 

Then whereas i said , who are dumb shepherds , which do not gather you to God , &c.  and he saith , there are many who lift up their voice as a trumpet to tell persons of their sins , &c.  

reply . it appears true through all the nation , that persons are not gathered to God , for doth not wickedness a bound , and persons show forth an unconverted state , and what though many May out of hypocrisy , and for ends to themselves , cry against sin in others , and live themselves in the same , persons hereby is not profi•ed at all ; for such as have run , and not been sent , doth not profit the persons , for while themselves live in that which they cry against in others , the power of the Lord is not with them , to convert sinners ; but for a better discovery of the teachers of this generation , i refer the reader to a book , called , a just and lawful trial of the teachers , &c. wherein they are set forth what they are at large . 

The next thing he hath observed ; is where i charged him in my last , to have given a relation of much more than he spoke , said i ; i believe four times as much ; and much less than i spoke at that dispute ; & at this he seems to be offended , yet confesseth himself guilty , but not guilty so much as four times ; well , but many that were there present who have not forgotten the matter , May truly seal to my charge in this particular ; & he seems not to clear himself at all , but is forced to confess himself guilty by silence , that he related not so much by far as i spoke ; and yet called his relation a faithful account ; but was thereby proved unfaithful , though now he would seem to cover himself and blame me , for charging him too deeply ; but my words remains true upon him ; that his former work , was neither perfect nor altogether honest ; and in this he hath no whit amended it , but the rather made his weakness more manifest , as the honest reader May judge . 

Then whereas i charged him , with a vain , light scornful spirit , because his first book he called , the Quakers rounds , and he would excuse himself from my charge , & says , that it was a name according to the nature , &c.  

reply . my charge on him was true , for his title did savour of a scornful spirit , for the name Quakers , was given in scorn and derision , and he to that end do use it ; and as for going rounds , of which he speaks , himself is the most guilty ; as before i have showed ; in denying a thing and then confessing it . 

And whereas i charged , that his former was not a faithful account , though he called it so ; & i proved my charge which he is not able to remove , that it was an unequal and false account , by relating much more than himself spoke , and much less than i spoke ; and this he confesses still , and that i am sure made it a false account and untrue , and he clears not himself of it ; though he say , Christ spoke many things at several times which are not particularly related ; yet Luke's relation , and John's relation was true , &c.  

Riply . their relation was true , in that wherein they took in hand to relate , they did relate truly ; but he hath t•ken in hand to relate , that which he hath not done truly , as in my first , i did make appear , as May be seen , it 's called , something of truth made manifest ▪ &c. to which i refer the reader , to understand more of p. t. his folly ; and the manifestation of truth . 

And wheeras he again charged the Quakers , with a spirit of jeering , and scorns and jeers are not a fruit of the spirit , saith he , &c.  

reply . he here again charges falsely ; for we know that scorning and jeers after the flesh are not works of the spirit , nor fruits of it ; but that we have denied and it 's cast out ; neither do we scorn , or jeer any , saving as in isa. 37.22 . Then he no less than confesses his wrong dealing , who in his last , changed r. g. word , from called , to owned ; which word is of much consequence in that place ; but would cover r. g. by saying , that r. g. did not undertake to prove the scriptures considered as mere writings ; but the thing contained in the scriptures , to be the word of God , &c.  

reply . here p. t. hath endeavoured to mend the matter , by his conception and meaning , given to r. g. words ; now the words of r. goodgroom was , he said , he would prove the letter , the word ; and upon that brought his argument ; and is not the letter mere writings , and nothing else ; but when they see they cannot make good their own words , than they turn of , the strength of reproof , by , they meant so , or they meant so , and no man ever yet could , or can prove in all the scriptures , that the letter ( The writings ) are called the word ; but as i still confessed , that which is written of , is the word , and the writings are the words that declares of the word , which was in the beginning ; but p. t. would fain reconcile this difference between us ; say they , the writings , the letter are the word ; say i , that which is written of , is the word , now betwixt these are great difference , as spiritual men May judge ; as much as between a dead trumpet , and a living breath sounded through it ; nay , its hard to reconcile that which is contrary in nature , they must leave preaching for money , and cease to take tithes and gifts for preaching , before i can be at unity , and another birth must speak and live in them , and that which now lives in them must be slain , and their crown laid down , before reconciled i can be to them or they to me , though i have no envy against persons , more than the saints had with them that opposed the truth , nor no weapon shall i use against them ; saving that that is spiritual , and the sword that goes out of the lamb's mouth , and all the many scriptures which he quotes p• . 23. doth neither say nor signify , that the letter ( The writings ) are the word ; or so called , though Moses , deut. 5.5 . said , he would show them the word of the Lord ; did he then show them the letter , the writings , the scripture ; i say no , therefore he did not call the writings and the letter , the word of God as you affirmed , and seeks now to prove ; but thou perverts scripture , and proves nothing to purpose , and though many times the word of the Lord came to such a prophet , and such a prophet , as thou hast proved , in Hosea , Joel , and others ; yet did the writings , and the letter come to them ; or that which the letter and writings declares of ; let wise men judge , that nor all thou canst say , doth prove that the writings , the letter , is the word of God , or that ever any of the holy men of God called them so ; so that till better proof be given which i never expect ; i need not revoke any thing that i have said contrary , viz. that the letter and writings are the word , or by the holy men of God so called , but still i say the writings , and letter are not the word ; but the thing written of , is the word of God , that lives for ever . Then in that i charged r. goodgroom with saying , when i had my bible in my hand at the dispute , i had the thing signified in my hand , said he ; which thing p. t. in his first relation had much falcified , but now he seems to acknowledge the thing , and excuses it , by supposing it was a slip of his tongue , the highest matter of offence in it ; as for the words , not only myself but divers others do well remember them spoken by r. g. thy fellow disputant , and had he or you then confessed a slip of the tongue , it had gone no further , but in that thou in thy first relation , gave a wrong account thereof , and had laid down the thing quite otherwise then he spoke it , this made the matter more a transgression , and thy account to be false ; neither am i ready to catch words from the mouth of my apponent , as thou charges me , but that charge is justified against me and the truth , i must needs make use of it , to show the folly of such men , that will so do , even out of their own mouths often , and by their own words , to confound them , and would thou have me to give away a just cause through n•glect of hearing and taking notice of such foul words , as to say , i had the thing in my hand that was signified of in the bible , when i had the bible in my hand ; and so set deceit a top on me , for want of repoving evil ; i am otherwise taught , do thou judge what thou wil• ; and herein my principles are found to agree with the scriptures , for it saith , a man shall be justified by his words , and by his words shall he be condemned . 

And as for my answers to his queries , raised from some words of mine written in a book , called , the standard , &c. my answer sayst thou , is little else then asserting the same thing over again , &c. now i say its needless here , to transcribe the queries and answers over again , but let them be looked in my first book iled , something of truth made manifest , etc where it May be seen that my answers are sufficient , and laid down to the satisfaction of all reasonable men that desires to be resolved ; though thou say , there is as little evidence of truth in the last , as in the first ; but doth not at all discover the falseness of them in any particular , which had been right for thee to have done , and not to have charged evil in general upon my answers , and prove nothing ; but who will believe him except such as takes his words for an oracle , for them that have received the good understanding cannot believe him . 

Then in the conclusion , he charges me with harsh kind of censoriousness ; because i said , what can be in the heart of such a man that can draw so bad consequence from such upright words ; when in his former he had concluded , that i held forth giddy doctrine , and weakened the authority of scriptures to beget undervaluing thoughts of them , and such like , because i had affirmed the truth , in saying , the devil and Pharaoh spoke something that 's written in scripture , and had i not reason to question what is in his heart , who had the boldness , without fear to conclude so evil against me as he did , not proving the contrary to what i said ; and in that i did charge darkness and blindness upon him , so i do and May still till he repent , for doth he not accuse me falsely in many things , as in saying my principles are too light , &c. but proves not particularly his charge ; and in his first book accused us , as if we had a Pope in our bellies , which words are both lies , and scornful ; and are not these things true signs that he is in darkness and blindness ; and so my charge is not false upon him . 

Then he saith he will not judge e. b. hastily , &c.  Answer , hath not thou falsely judged me already in many things , as i have showed , yea and the Lord in time May let thee see , thy judgement is false , and awaken thy conscience to repentance ; and then shalt thou confess i have done thee no wrong , but the wrong dealing lies at thy door ; so that by what is said , the title of thy book is a lie and utterly false ; which is , some principles of edw Burroughs , called a Quaker , examined and sound too light . 

reply . now in this i shall not be judge altogeh•er in my own cause , but leave this to the view of sober men , and require their judgement when they have read this soberly over , what one particular instanced by him , is proved to be unsound or too light , for according to the testimony of the holy men of God in scripture , thereby May i confirm the truth of what i have , and do hold forth ; and to every man's conscience do commend myself to be approved in the sight of God ; and good report or bad report of men i regard not , but treads over them both ; and wherein the truth is wronged i am bound to give my evidence for it , and against its opposers ; and that is the very end of this my present work , to contend for the truth and not for mastery ; though truth doth give me mastery over deceit ; and to hold forth the same faith , light , and truth , which the apostles witnessed before the apostasy , which hath been clouded in all this dark night of apostasy , which hath been over the world , for many ages since the man child was caught up to God , and the woman fled into the wilderness , spoken of in the revelations , but now the light is made manifest , and the glory of the Lord is revealing , and the day is dawned , and the night is over to many ; and the subversion of this ministry now in England , is clearly seen from what the ministry of Christ was in the days of the apostles . And now as concerning this controversy , between phill. Taverner , and myself , who ever is not satisfied herewith , but desires a full and true account of the matter , May peruse his first book , called , the Quakers rounds , &c. with my first answer , called , something of truth made manifest , in opposition to a false account , &c.  and then his second book , called , some principles of edw. Burroughs , &c. and then this my last , let them be all read in order and soberly , by such as are not satisfied about the matter , and i doubt not but thereby you May be resolved , who is in the truth and who is in the error , and they May see that my last book he hath not faithfully answered , but passed by many material particulars , and in something hath no way seemed to clear himself of what i have truly charged upon him , but he remains under the guilt of my charge , and to the sight of Christ in every man's conscience , and to all whose judgements are thereby guided , i do refer myself to be judged , and what i have written , i leave to be judged . 

And divers other things there are held forth high phill. Taverner , which i have said little to ; but they are recorded as his principles among a great number of the priests and professors , in a book answered , to go a broad , called , the priests and professors principles , and the Quakers answer to them ; whereby all that desires further to be satisfied May , in reading many hundred of particulars , sayings , and affirmations of doctrine , held forth by preaching and print , by the priests , which are answered , and the error of them shown ; to which i refer my reader to know more , if what i have here written be not enough , for the manifestation of truth is my crown , and life , over all the world . 

London , 20 , of the seventh month 1658.  

Finis . 












































