LIVING WORDS THROUGH A DYING MAN ; BEING A Melodious Song of the Mercies and Judgements of the Lord , sung by a Disciple of Christ on his dying bed , when the Pangs of Death were upon his outward man With an Arrow shot against Babylon , being a direct Prophecy of the Downfall of her Merchants , the Hirelings and False Prophets . With sweet Exhortations and Prophecies also of the spreading of the Glorious Truth of God , until it shall have covered the Face of the whole Earth . 

By one who died a Prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus , FRANCIS PATCHET . 

rev. 2. 10.  

Fear none of these things that thou shalt suffer : Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison , that ye may be tried ; and ye shall have Tribulation Ten Days ; but be thou faithful unto death , & I will give thee a Crown of Life . 



Cor. 4. 16.  

Though our Outward man perish , yet the Inward man is renewed Day by Day . 



Cor. 4. 17.  

For our light Affliction , which is but for a Moment , worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory . 



Several Testimonies concerning the faithful Servant of God Francis Patchet of Scotforth , in the County of Lancaster , who died a Sufferer for the Testimony of Jesus ; which he held against the Antichristian Oppression of Tithes inflicted upon him by one — Garthwaite the Priest of Lancaster : And because for Good Conscience sake he could not satisfy the Unlawful and Unreasonable Demands of the said Priest , in giving , or paying him Tithes , he cast him into prison in Lancaster ; But this not being sufficient to satisfy his Envy and Cruelty ( as afterwards will further appear ) would not let him be so near home , but removed him to London , about 180 Miles from his abode , where he was committed to the Fleet Prison until the time of Sickness , which was unto death ; and died a Prisoner the 2d . of the 10th Moreth , 1677.  

The Testimony of Christopher and Elizabeth Cheesman concerning him . 

I Have a Living Testimony to bear concerning Francis Patchet that faithful Sufferer in the Cause of God , who held forth his Testimony unto the end of his days against the Oppression of Tithes , for which he died a Prisoner at London , about one hundred and eighty Miles from his Habitation , being sent thither by a persecuting hireling Priest , because for good Conscience sake he could not satsfie his greedy Appetite , in paying or giving him Tithes ; which being in direct Opposition to the Government of our Lord jesus Christ our High Priest , who was sent by the Father , and offered up himself once for all , to put an end to the first Priesthood , with Tithes and Offerings appertaining to the first Covenant : And therefore doth every one that believeth in Christ jesus the second Covenant , and in Faithfulness obey him , deny to pay Tithes , and to maintain such Ministers , who abide not in Christ's Doctrine , who said , Freely ye have received freely give ; which command , the Apostles and Ministers of Christ , in days past , did keep , as do his Ministers in this our Age , Glory to the Lord God forever . 

Christ and his Apostles and Ministers took no Tithes , nor persecuted any , either for Maintenance , or because they differed from them in Worship or Religion . And those Ministers who obey Christ , and abide in his Doctrine , and follow his Example , and the Example of his Holy Apostles ; those are true Ministers , and profit the People : But those who Preach for filthy Lucre ; and persecute those ( who are taught of God ) For Wages , for whom they do no Work ; such are they the Prophet speaks of , That run and God never sent them , and therefore they Profit not the People at all . 

And this faithful Sufferer loved not his Life unto death , but laid it down in Testimony for the Truth of God , & a Witness against the persecuting Hireling Priest ; and is now crowned with Glory Immortal among the Redeemed of the Lord for ever and evermore . 

And I ( being a frequent Visitor of him for diverse days before his Death , yea , many times in a Day , and in that Night also ; when Pangs of Death took hold onf his outward man , under which he lay with much Patience , even as a Lamb with out complaint , and as one not alrighted or disturbed at the appearance of Death ) can give a further and ciearer Testimony of his Faithfulness to the pure Truth of God , which he spoke and declared of , some few hours before his departure , being very weak , insomuch that according to outward appearance his sudden departure was much expected ; and all about him did conclude , that his Breath was almost gone ; but after he had lain still a little while , being a little after the 12. hour of the night , at which time he began to speak & continued speaking till about the 3. hour , in Praising and magnifying the name of the Lord ; but his Voice at first was so weak ; that we could not clearly hear what he said , only we understood that he prayed & said OH Lord God of mercy , preserve thy People , & immediately his speech was strengthened , & he spoke with an audible voice ; so that he was heard over all the Chamber where he lay , and he began to sing forth of the mercy & goodness of the Lord , and said , OH Lord God Everlasting praises everlasting , Glory and Honour for ever be given to thy Name ; thou hast made way for thy Redeemed as in ancient days , when thou madest the Sea dry land for thy People Israel to go through ; O Glory and Honour for ever be unto thy Name , who art Unchangeable in all thy ways ; thou madest man in thy own Image , in thy Likeness madest thou him ; but he lost it through Disobedience : But OH Lord , in thy Unexpressible Love thou sent thy only Son jesus Christ the New man ( not Old Adam ) to redeem again ; O everlasting Praises to thy name for ever saith my soul ; O the Seed ; the little Seed must spring and grow , till it comes to reign , whose right it is , and all that stands in Opposition against it must be brought under ; all that is contrary to it , must bow to its Appearance : O our God there is no God like to our God : He hath given his Son a Light into the world and his Salvation to the ends of the Earth , Glory and Honour to the Lord for ever : OH this blessed day ! wherein Truth has appeared : O England's Glory ! Truth , Truth , against all Untruth . O Friends , obey the Truth , love the Truth , Buy the Truth and sell it not . Ah Christ jesus The Way , the Truth and the Life ! O my dear Friends , brethren and Sisters , that are here with me , I know you not ( that is , after the flesh ) love the Truth , obey the Truth ; Truth , Truth , Truth ; God's Truth is pure , it is holy , it admits of no Impurity , of no mixture ; it leads out of the Fall , out of the Old Adam : O the little Seed that grows in God's Garden ! Ah dear friends , work in the Garden of God , mind the little Penny , work in the Garden of God : O how Love spring's up in my Heart ! O Praises , Praises , Thanksgiving and Halelujahs unto our God for ever , saith my soul . O the Unutterableness , the Unspeakable Love to my soul this Night ! O Praises , Pràises unto the Lord , and all that is within me give thanks and magnify his Name for ever , and ever more . 



And speaking of the House of the Lord and Temple of the Lord , he said , 

Glorious is the House of God ; Oh! a House of Holiness , a pure House , a House of love , and her gates praise : O our God is a consuming God ; he consumes all that is bad , all Impurity , all Uncleanness : our God consumeth all that is Unholy , all that is Wrong : And our God is light , and in him is no darkness at all . O dear Friends , brethren and Sisters , dwell in the light ; he that dwelleth in the light , dwelleth in God ; but he that dwelleth not in the light dwelleth not in God , but in darkness , and so in Wickedness , in Sin and Transgression , in the pride of life , and the vanities of the world . So my dear Friends , brethren and Sisters , love the Truth , believe in the Truth , and the Truth will make you free : And so all that abide in the Truth they spring forth and grow like as the Willows by the Water Courses , and shall never be Barren or Unfruitful . O Friends , the Day , the promised Seed is come ? O the Glory of England ! A blessed Day is broken forth that shall never end ; he is come to reign whose Right it is . O the Lamb shall have the Victory against all Opposition whatsoever : Christ Jesus is come the promised Seed , which shall grow and prospero till it hath covered the Face of the whole Earth . And in Prayer he said , OH Lord preserve all Friends , my dear brethren and Sisters , in the Truth to the end and for ever . 



This is part of what this faithful Sufferer did declare , when Pangs of Death were upon his outward man , witnessed by Christopher and Elizabeth Cheesman . 

And so he went forward , Praising and magnifying the Lord , declaring of his great and wondrous works from the Creation to this day ; and of the great Love of God in sending his Son for the Redemption of man , and bringing of man back out of the Fall : And he spoke much of the lord 's making way for his People in this Nation of England , as in ancient days he made way through the red Sea for his chosen Israel to pass forth of Egypt on dry land : And he declared very much concerning the Temple of God , and House of God , and Garden of God , beyond what we have retained in memory , or can commit to Writing ; And that God is Light , and in him is no Darkness at all ; and they that love God are in the Light , and they that love not God , are in Darkness , and they that hate the Light walk in Darkness , and in the Vanities and Delights , and the Abominations of the World : And further magnifying the Name of the Lord said , O the Light and Everlasting day that is now broken forth , it is the Glory of England ; and the Work of the Lord shall prospero against all Opposition whatsoever . 

And he often repeated it over , — O the Appearance of Truth , the Glory of England ; 

And concerning the House of God , The House of God ( said he ) is a House of Holiness , a House of Purity , a House built without Hands , of living Stones , precious and chosen , that need no Hammer , nor fitting with Tool . 

And further he declared concerning the Word of God , and the Power of God , and that his Word and Power is one ; and that his Power is an unlimited Power , and his Mercies unspeakable towards man , and that man's Destruction is of himself , and not of God ; Not of God ( said he ) and said , that The world 's Breaden Christ , and Water will stand them in no stead . 

Christopher Cheesman . 

Something is in my Heart to signify to concerning the Innocent , Lamblike life of our dear Friend , and patient Sufferer for the Truth of our God , Francis Patchet . 

The Lord our God hath pronounced Woe against all that are covered , and not with the Spirit of the Lord ; But I am satisfied and well assured , that that Dovelike Spirit descended upon him , and was his Covering , which made him to abide in the Doctrine , and follow the Example of his Captain Christ Jesus , whom he followed , whose faithful Soldier he was , against Sin , the Flesh and the Devil , triumphing in the Lord over them all , I am a living witness for him , being constantly with him in the time of his Sickness ; I asked him if he had a Wife ? he answered , Yes , a very honest loving Woman ; saying at another time , He came as freely from her as he was to go to her : He being so freely given up to suffer for Truth's sake , that he had nothing laid to his Charge . After he had lain still some Hours , he said , My strength faileth me ; and I said , I hope the Lord doth not fail thee , to which he answered , Through Mercy he never did fail me : He continuing weak , and lay speechless for some time ; the Spirit of the Lord wherewith he was covered , revived him ; whereby he had a new Strength given to him , to magnify the pure , powerful Name of God in Prayer and Praises saying , The Lord hath laid the Foundation in Zion ; the Lord is building up Zion with chosen Stones , with precious Stones that need no Hammer nor Tool to come upon them ; the Lord is building a glorious House ; and the Works of the Lord are glorious ; O Praises to the powerful pure Name of God which is above every Name ; his Name hath done valantly ; he hath stretched forth his Shepherd's Crook , he hath drawna little Remnant to himself , and hath led them through the red Sea , he hath put a new Song in their Mouths , he hath caused them to sing praises upon the Banks of Salvation ; pure praises unto his Pure , Holy , Powerful Name . 

And in Exhortation said , O love the Truth , buy the Truth and sell it not ? O the Truth , Truth , Truth its more than all , Truth is stronger than all ; the Truth shall prospero notwithstanding all Opposition that shall rise up against it ; The Truth ( said he ) will make you free . 

And further he said , Resist the Devil that subtle Serpent , and he will flee from you . My Soul rejoiceth ( said he ) to see this glorious day of the Lord  



Here followeth something of the Expressions of Dear Francis Patchet given forth upon his deathbed , in Testimony for God , his Truth and People ; who departed this Life the 22d day of the tenth Month , 1677. about the nineth Hour of the Day . 

After he had lain sometime in great Weakness ; insomuch that his Speech was sometime taken from him , and sometimes he could speak a few broken words , by which we could understand that he told us , That his Strength Failed him , and that he was almost spent ; and after this he lay about an hour silent , in great Weakness , insomuch that we looked every Moment when he should depart this Life ; but it pleased the Lord ( whose servant he was and is ) inwardly to renew his Strength , and raised him up in his power , insomuch that a little after the twelfth Hour of the Night , he began to break forth into Praying and Praising the Lord in a most sweet and precious manner , and declared much of the goodness of the Lord ; and how bountiful he had been unto his Soul ; and so he lay a pretty while admiring the precious love of God , which he said , did plentifully flow unto his soul through Jesus Christ : And he often said unto the Lord , Praised ; Praised be thy pure holy Name : And then he earnestly exhorted Friends to be faithful in their places unto the Truth , saying in an overcoming Sense thereof , Oh! precious , precious Truth which first broke forth in this Nation : it 's the Glory of England . 

And this Expression he servently and frequently used , That the despised Truth of God was England's Glory : And he spoke much of God's Israel , saying , The Lord who divided the red Sea of old , to make way for his Redeemed , would surely once more appear for Zion sake . then he spoke unto the Lord saying , O thy precious Light ! in which I see thy Glory ; Lord , what will become of them that despise thy Light ? And though these are but some of the many sweet and heavenly Expressions , yet they are what the Lord brought fresh into my Remembrance , of which , I am a living Witness , 

Moses West . 

Here are some of the Words spoken by our dear Feiend Francis Patchet a little before his Death , 

O the love of the Lord ! How good hath the Lord been unto my soul this day and this Evening ? O the Unexpressible love of God how hath it flowed forth unto my soul this day ? Praises , pure holy Praises , my Heart and Soul and all that is within me praises the Lord : O the wonderful love of the Lord ! And then in Exhortation he said , Friends , be faithful to the Lord , press forward , be faithful to the Lord to the end of your days ; never look back , but press forward ; it matters not what Trials or Reproaches you meet withal here , it is nothing , be you Faithful to the Lord ; He will carry you through all ; He hath a little Remnant which he hath regard unto . Press forward Friends , in the Truth ; for it is the Truth , the Blessed Truth which is declared of . The Lord hath raised up many able Ministers of the Gospel , of the Gospel here in England , The Lord is come to teach his People himself in Spirit and in Truth ; the False Prophet and the Hireling Priest the Lord will cut down , and all that resist his Blessed , powerful Work , which he hath begun in this Nation of England : For he hath begun a good Work , and he will carry it on against all Opposition of Evil Spirits that resist it . O how is the Spirit of the Lord upon me at this time ! pure , Holy praises be given unto his pure Holy powerful Name , which hath opened my Mouth at this time to speak of his wonderful Works , How the Lord appeared for Israel of old , by a Mighty and Out stretched Arm of power , when their Enemies were behind them , ready to overtake them , and the red Sea before them ; that in Appearance there was no way to escape , yet how did the Lord appear wonderfully for their Deliverance , and brought them through . Speaking much more of what the Lord would do for his Faithful Israel in this day , Blessing and praising the Lord for all his Mercies and Lovingkindnesses , which he was made largely a Partaker of , to the Praise of the great Name of the Lord  

Ann Edmundson . 

Postscript . 

Reader , 

Having come much short of what was spoken and declared at large by this Faithful man , concerning the things of God , & his Kingdom , as they were plentifully opened unto him , upon his dying bed ; and because we could not omit to mention what we certainly retained in Memory , we have here collected a short Account of the the Heads of those things he declared of , with some Words expressly , as he spoke them . 

As First , He spoke much concerning The living Bread that came down from Heaven , the Heavenly Manna , the Souls Food , Saying , Buy it without Money , and without Price , eat and live for ever , drink and live for ever , Exhorting to know this Bread In our own Houses , etc.  

If you know the Truth ( said he ) the Truth shall set you free ; Truth , Truth , Truth , O the precious Truth , it is all , and more than all . 

And at another time said , Oh! thy Pure Everlasting Light , which is so much despised amongst men ; thy precious light by which I see thy Glory . 

And at another time , two Friends standing by his Bed side , he turned his Face to them and said , I know you both , pray for me . And some time after another Friend R. T. came in , and ask him how he did ? His Answer was , I have had a great Skirmish , but through Mercy I have overcome ; and said also , Avoid Satan ; I defy thee , get thee behind me Satan . I have got the Victory : And then in Exhortation said , Resist the Devil and he will flee from you , that subtle Serpent , that goes about like a Roaring Lion , seeking whom he may devour . And spoke much that the Devil would have Christ To fall down and worship him , and how the Devil carried Christ up to show him the Glory of the World , saying , All this will I give thee , if thou wilt fall down and worship me . 

And again exhorted Friends saying , Press forward to the End of your Days , my dear brethren and Sisters that are here present with me , I know ye not ( that is , after the outward man ) but be ye all Faithful . 

He also spoke very much concerning David ( as well he might ) being made a large Partaker of David's Experiences of the Goodness and Mercies of the Lord unto his Soul , as David did . O David , said he , A man after God's own heart ; and how David praised the Lord , and to show the Goodness of God to David , he spoke very much . 

And often times in great Admiration of the Truth , and its Glorious Appearance , he uttered these and the like Words , O the Glory of England , the Appearance of Truth England is Glory . And that The Lord hath begun a Good Work in England , and he will carry it on notwithstanding all Opposition . 

He exhorted much to Faithfulness , and to obey the Truth , and walk in the Truth , The Truth of God , said he , is precious . He did often express an Indignation against Idolatry , False Prophets , and Hirelings , and said , The False Prophet , and Hireling Priest the Lord will cut down , and he will teach his People himself . And he declàred much concerning Israel of old , and of their being brought into the good Land ; the promised Land ; And after God had delivered Israel , said he , then Israel sang Praises unto the Lord ; out of Egypt's Bondage they were delivered , and brought into the Good Land , the same it is this day , where none can make afraid , which he often said ; and spoke how the Lord brought all his through Trials , Reproaches , and Troubles , saying , It is no matter what Trials , Reproaches , Troubles and Afflictions we meet withal here ; the Lord will bring and carry us through them all . And likewise about the Newman , Not the Old-man , said he , but the Newman Christ Jesus that is revealed , doth bring back again out of the Fall.  

Thomas Farnbury ( the man of the house where he died ) who not counted one of the People called Quakers , yet a friendly and honest man , gave this Testimony concerning him , That it was the Divine Nature and Power of God that spoke in him , more than at other times . 

This is the Substance of what we kept in Memory , being but a small part of those sweet and living Expressions given forth by this patient Sufferer , and Servant of the Lord , who by the Power of the Lord ( after looked upon as a dead , or dying man ) was raised up to declare of the wondrous works of God in a most sweet and heavenly manner , who began to speak , a little after the twelfth hour of the Night , & spoke till about the the third Hour , and afterwards continued ( making sweet Melody in his Heart to God ) till between the ninth and tenth Hour in the Morning , and then departed out of this earthly House , like a patient Lamb : 2 Cor. 5. 1.  For we know , that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were disolved , we have a Building of God , an House not made with Hands , Eternal in the Heavens . 

Henry Toul●son and Andrew Lund 〈◊〉 Countrymen and Fellow prisoners fo● the same Testimony ) Thomas and Marabella Farnbury , Christopher Cheesman and Elizabeth his Wife , Moses West , Ann Edmundson , Rebecca Veal , and Marabella Farnbury the younger , who were Eye and Ear-witnesses . 

THE END . 

