A true alarm in weakness , unto Babel , from God , by his spi-right mind in the soul which liveth in God . 

thus saith the Lord , thou art well come pen to paper ; the effects of this truth shall make them tremble that now do vapour , in religions , riches , and gay clothing . which vapour is the smoke of the bottomless pit , nothing but lies do ascend out of it , which have no bottom in truth , or in themselves . 

Reader , at the end of my paper called , a voice from heaven , i do speak of the spi-right knowing what the 24 letters do afford , either in the single letter , or in the compacted word . It is true ; for the spi-right hath discovered in me , that there be many words that are not of truth spelling , or of truth compacting , as they are compacted . The word is spi-right , and not spirit ; spi-right to-all , and not spiritual ; and of , and not of . 

The Lord the confounder cometh swiftly to confound all men's talk , because when they talk they do not understand name or nature which ouf they talk . The spi-right of truth is the confounder . Whosoever hath the spi-right mind , that shall not be confounded . There is a great deal of talk of taking God his name in vain : all do take his name in vain , but the spi-right mind in men , which seeth all vanity in them . 

The unfallen angels , that never did deceive , nor ever was deceived , will have the government of the veiled soul from the deceit which they are veiled with , by subjecting ouf the deceiver , to do according as the truth doth rule them , which is never to have any freewill to deceive or destroy , but to become the true power his footstool . Then God is all in all , and the wicked one hath the fall . 

God doth not speak to the self-mind of man , or in it , but doth cleanse it away ; then he speaks into his own mind in man , and his own mind receiveth him . God will have all cleansed before him , as he is clean . The body of man is a figure ; the soul in it is a subject or essence , carrying or bearing the body about . This subject is to be no subject to that that gives it any self carnal mind , or subject to any other affliction ; it is to be a sun to life , and not subject to death . When the unfallen power hath raised it by his spi-right mind up into himself , than man is not himself , he is in the eternal nature itself . There is the unfallen undeceiver , and the fallen deceiver , and the fallen deceived ; these are distinct beings one from another . The undeceiver is a minister of his spi-right to the soul that lieth under the altar or carnal mind ; which spi-right in it being set up , doth see or spy all that is perishing , and that which is everlasting . I the Lord will have no•hing to worship me , but my spi-right in the soul , which doth worship me discerning what it doth . The man Christ so called received the spi-right without measure into his soul , which did spi-right-to-all truth and lies ; therefore it was said , the godhead in him dwelled bodily . there is but one minister of the spi-right into men , which doth by its ministry discover all Babel in them to its self , within its self in them . 

Men have a great many words falsely compacted , or spelled , or understood , which they call gospel . the vain mind never shall know any other gospel but his own babel-gospel , which he hath stolen from other men's experiences to his own advantage , to deceive , so far as he hath his own inclination in them to be deceived . Nothing in man can receive the spirit , but the soul , it being cleansed of all that is contrary to it , it receiveth faith in God , or spirit of God , which is the single eye , everlasting truth . The power or father of the spiright and soul will purge out the carnal mind out of the soul , and let nothing inhabit in his kingdom but spi-right . 

Thus saith the spi-right that doth spy all truth and all lies in men , or in that power that is in combination to deceive his own whole creation , that liveth within his own inclination ; he cannot deceive the spy , for in it there must live no lie , or inclination to lie , for it doth a lie defy , saying , depart from me , i know you to do wickedly ; thou shalt be reprobated for ever , never to live in union with God the true spi-right-to-all false no spi-right or seer of truth : this is the son of perdition , that would be prying into all that the spi-right saith , that he May be the nearest likeness as he can be to truth , calling himself spi-right , when that he doth abominate the true spi-right that doth behold him in all his actions , feing them : he is in rage and madness , he would not lose his cloak . The spirit mind saith , all in the soul but me is a reprobate : i do see with my single eye into thee , whosoever thou be ; this is no mystery to the true spy ; but it is unto the lie , that doth wonder and perish eternally . All that ever did wonder , was and is the reprobate at his self , and at the everlasting truth . The spi-right seeth all things , and there is no new thing to it , that is in God . sun , moon , and stars . Here is a great deceit in the interpretation of this saying , no new thing under the sun . 

Some say , all things ever were as they are , and that is the fool that doth expect any change in the world ; one generation goeth , and another cometh , and so it will be forever , as it is now with men , living now as they do , in all manner of wickedness . There is a truth in that saying , but for this interpretation , it is not of the spi-right of truth ; for the spi-right saith , that as darkness doth abound in men , so the light is not to be seen in them , or is in them . Thus saith the spi-right , light shall so abound in men , that darkness shall not be seen in them , or be in them . The spi-right is true , all men are liars . 

There are two sowers , two seeds , one ground . The true sower is the sour of the spi-right mind into the soul , which soul is the ground in the body of flesh . The false sower is the cumberer of the soul or ground with a false conception of a carnal mind , having in it the false sowers inclination to all manner of his evils . The word woman is taken for the carnal mind , it is the bondwoman that must be cast out from oppressing of the soul ; which soul is to be the freewoman , when she hath received the spi-right , without any darkness in her . Then the soul doth not groan in the strange wilderness of sin , but is set free into eternity , where nothing but spi-right shall inhabit : there she is caught up into the heaven of heavens out of sin his sight , which once with her did fight ; there is God spi-right . 

And after the soul hath received the spi-right mind into it , and the carnal mind done away , then there is soul spi-right that seeth God , it being the life of faith that it liveth , which is one with God in all things , seeing him face to face , without any shame or disgrace ; all deceivers and their deceit must not look him in the face , but with shame blush with disgrace . There is a savour of death unto death , which must now be ashamed of his savouring or relishing of death , because the Lord will reign over them , and will discover all that hath been hide , on the house top , to all that is of the selfsame wicked nature , as well as unto the righteous nature . The wicked nature never did savour truth , nor never shall ; the righteous nature never did savour the wicked nature , nor never will : it is a clean soul that God doth savour with his true mind , which is spi-right , or discern right , or see right with the single eye which hath in it all light : it is God the father of life and light , which doth spi-right of all things , for there is nothing out of his sight . 

By John Cole-venman , a messenger of the God of truth . 

Reader , if thou be willing , stick this paper on the wall or post , where it May be read , in the house , or anywhere else . 








