REASON . A POEM . 

REASON . A POEM . 

Written by the Author of the Choice . 

LONDON : Printed , and are to be sold by I Nutt , near Stationers-hall , MDCC . 

REASON . A POEM . 

UNHAPPY Man ! Who through successive Years 
From early Youth to Life's last Childhood Errs ; 
no sooner Born , but proves a Foe to Truth ; 
For Infant Reason is over powered in Youth : 
The Cheats of Sense will half our Learning share ; 
And Pre-conceptions all our Knowledge are . 
Reason , 't is true , should over Sense Preside , 
Correct our Notions , and our Judgement Guide ; 
But false Opinions , rooted in the Mind , 
Hoodwink the Soul , and keep our Reason Blind . 
Reason's a Taper , which but faintly burns , 
A languid Flame that glows and dies by Turns ; 
We see 't a while , and but a little Way , 
We Travel by its Light as Men by Day . 
But quickly Dying , it forsakes us soon , 
Like Morning Stars , that never stay till Noon . 
The Soul can scarce above the Body rise , 
And all we see is with Corporeal Eyes ; 
Life now does scarce one Glimpse of Light display . 
We Mourn in Darkness , and despair of Day ; 
That Natural Light , once dressed with Orient Beams , 
Is now diminished , and a Twilight seems , 
A Miscellaneous Composition made 
Of Night , and Day , of Sunshine , and of Shade . 
Through an Uncertain Medium now we look , 
And find That Falsehood which for Truth we took . 
So Rays Projected from the Eastern Skies 
Show the false Day before the Sun can Rise . 
That little Knowledge now which Man Obtains , 
From outward Objects and from Sense he Gains ; 
He , like a wretched Slave , must Plod and Sweated , 
By Day must Toil , by Night that Toil Repeat ; 
And yet at last what little Fruit he Gains ? 
A beggar 's Harvest Gleaned with mighty Pains . 
The Passions still Predominant will Rule , 
Ungoverned , Rude , not bred in Reason's School ; 
Our Understanding They with Darkness fill , 
cause strong Corruptions , and pervert the Will ; 
On These the Soul , as on some Flowing Tide , 
Must sit , and on the raging Billows Ride , 
Hurried away , for how can be withstood 
th' Impetuous Torrent of the boiling Blood ? 
Begun false Hopes , for all our learning 's Vain , 
Can we be free , where These the Rule Maintain ? 
These are the Tools of Knowledge which we use ; 
The Spirits heated will strange Things produce ; 
Tell me who ever the Passions could Control , 
Or from the Body disengage the Soul ; 
Till this is done , our best Pursuits are vain 
To conquer Truth and unmixed Knowledge Gain . 
Through all the bulky Volumes of the Dead , 
And through those Books that Modern Times have Bred. 
With pain we Travel , as through moorish Ground , 
Where scarce one useful Plant is ever found ; 
O'errun with Errors which so thick appear , 
Our Search proves vain , no spark of Truth is there . 
what 's all the noisy Jargon of the Schools , 
But Idle Nonsense of laborious Fools , 
Who fetter Reason with perplexing Rules . 
What in Aquinas bulky Works are found 
Does not enlighten Reason but confound . 
Who Travels Scotus swelling Tomes shall find 
A Cloud of Darkness rising on the Mind . 
In controverted Points can Reason sway ; 
When Passion or Conceit still hurries us away : 
Thus his new Notions Should — k would Instill , 
And clear the greatest Mysteries at William 
But by unlucky Wit perplexed them more , 
And made them darker than they were before . 
S — th' soon opposed him out of Christian Zeal , 
Showing how well he could Dispute and Rail : 
How shall we ever discover which is Right , 
When Both so eagerly maintain the Fight ? 
Each does the other's Arguments deride , 
Each has the Church and Scripture on his side . 
The sharp ill-natured Combats but a Jest , 
Both may be Wrong , One perhaps Errs the least : 
How shall we know which Articles are True , 
The Old ones of the Church or B —  'tis New. 
In Paths Uncertain , and Unsafe he Treads , 
Who blindly follows other's fertile Heads . 
What sure , what certain Mark have We to know , 
The Right or Wrong betwixt B — ss , W — ke and H — w.  
Should untuned Nature crave the Medic Art , 
What Health can That contentious Tribe Impart ? 
Every Physician writes a different Bill , 
And Gives no other Reason but his William 
no longer Boast your Art ye Impious Race , 
Let Wars betwixt Alcalies and Acids Cease ; 
And Proud G — ll with C — changed be at Peace . 
Gibbons and Ratcliff do but barely Guests , 
To Day   Good , to Morrow no Success . 
Even G — th' and Maurus sometimes shall prevail , 
When Gibson , Learned Hannes , and Tyson fail : 
And more than once   seen the Blundring s — ne 
Missing the Gout by Chance has hit the Stone ; 
The Patient does the lucky Error find , 
A Cure he Works , though not the Cure Designed . 
Custom , the World's great Idol we Adore , 
And knowing This , we seek to know no more ; 
What Education did at first receive , 
Our Ripened Age confirms us to Believe ; 
The Careful Nurse , and Priest is all we Need 
To Learn Opinions and our Country's Creed ; 
The Parent's Precepts early are Instilled , 
And spoil the Man while they Instruct the Child . 
To what hard Fate is Human Kind betrayed ? 
When thus Implicit Faith's a Virtue made , 
When Education more than Truth prevails , 
And naught is Current but what Custom Seals ; 
Thus from the Time we first begin to know , 
We live and Learn , but not the wiser Grow : 
We seldom use our Liberty aright , 
Nor Judge of Things by Universal Light ; 
Our Prepossessions and Affections bind 
The Soul in Chains , and Lord it o'er the Mind ; 
And if Self-interest be but in the Case , 
Our unexamined Principles may Pass . 
Good Heavens ! That Man should thus himself deceive , 
To Learn on Credit , and on Trust believe ; 
Better the Mind no Notions had retained , 
But still a fair Unwritten Blank remained ; 
For now , who Truth from Falsehood would discern ; 
must first disrobe the Mind , and all Unlearn : 
Errors contracted in unmindful Youth 
When once Removed , will smooth the Way to Truth ; 
To dispossess the Child the Mortal Lives , 
But Death approaches ever the Man Arrives . 
Those who would learning 's glorious Kingdom find , 
The dear bought Purchase of the Trading Mind ; 
From many Dangers must themselves acquit , 
And more than Scylla and Charybdis meet ; 
Oh! What an Ocean must be Voyaged o'er , 
To Gain a Prospect of the shining Shore ; 
Resisting Rocks oppose th' Enquiring Soul , 
And adverse Waves retard it as they Rowl . 
Does not that Foolish deference we Pay 
To Men that lived long since our Passage stay ? 
What odd preposterous Paths at first we Tread ? 
And Learn to Walk by stumbling on the Dead . 
First We a Blessing from the Grave Implore , 
Worship Old Urns and Monuments Adore . 
The Reverend Sage with vast Esteem We Prise , 
He lived long since , and must be wondrous Wise ; 
Thus are we Debtors to the famous Dead 
For all those Errors which their fancies bred ; 
Errors Indeed ! for Real Knowledge stayed 
With those first Times , nor farther was Conveyed : 
While light Opinions are much Lower brought , 
For on the Waves of Ignorance they Float ; 
But solid Truth scarce ever Gains the Shore , 
So soon it sinks and never Emerges more . 
Suppose those many dreadful Dangers passed , 
Will Knowledge dawn , and bless the Mind at last ? 
Ah! no , 't is now Environed from our Eyes , 
Hides all its Charms and Undiscovered Lies . 
Truth like a single Point escapes the Sight , 
And Claims Intention to perceive it right ; 
But what resembles Truth is soon descried , 
Spread like a Surface and expanded Wide . 
The first Man rarely , very rarely finds 
The tedious Search of long enquiring Minds ; 
But yet what 's Worse we know not when we Err ? 
What Mark does Truth , what bright distinction bear ? 
How do we know that what we know it True , 
How shall we Falsehood fly , and Truth pursue ; 
Let none then here his certain Knowledge Boast , 
't is all but Probability at Most ; 
This is the easy Purchase of the Mind , 
The Vulgar's Treasure , which we soon may find , 
But Truth lies hid , and and ever we can Explore 
The glitt'ring Gem , our Fleeting Life is o'er . 
FINIS . 

