THE COMPLAINT OF TIME Against the tumultuous and Rebellious Scots . 

Sharply inveighing against them ( as most justly they deserve ) this year , 1639.  

By W. S.  

LONDON Printed by B. A. and T. F. for Richard Harper in Smithfield , at the Bible and Harp . 1639.  

The Grounds and Reasons of Time's Complaint against the Rebellious Scots . 

This Land ( God be thanked ) is blessed in the happy Government of a most gracious King , against whom in despite of Mercy diverse affronts have lately been offered by the Rebellions Scots , who under pretence of Religion would overthrow the Hierarchy of the Church , pulling down the house of God , and building Babel's of their own invention , and maned with this furious zeal , they have raised great forces , and stand ready armed in the Field to resist the head of the Church in his Dominions our most gracious King CHARLES ; Time therefore hearing how these bold Attempts under the Title of Covenanters bade acted many outrages , entrenched upon the King's Sovereign power , and have hitherto neglected and slighted his Royal authority ; therefore in this complaint of Time some reasons are laid down . For the Chronicles of this Land due witness that Rebels have been always overthrown in their designs , and at last met with a deserved Death . Thus Mortimer who rebelled against King Edward the second , and violently took away his Queen , was afterwards himself taken and beheaded . Also those rude mechannicke Rebels that were led under the conduct of Watt Tiler , Tom Miller , and jack Strae made a great tumultuous uproar in Kent and Essex , until Sir William Walworth than Lord Mayor of London did with his Dagger stab jack Straw in Smithfield , whereupon the Dagger was set in the Arms of London . The rebellion for Perkin Warbeck was soon disanimated , and the Imposture discovered , and so likewise jack Cade and his associates were soon confounded and overthrown , and punished according to their Deserts . And thus Rebellion is like that Ignis fatuus or that fantastic apparition of fire , which running under hedges doth affright Countrypeople , but having blazed a while , it is soon dissipated and extinguished . The Scots therefore cannot promise to themselves any better fortune than their rebellious Predecessors , who were soon scattered and confounded , and their leaders received condign punishment . If therefore any precise Humorist that accounts himself a transcendent Protestant , and a Goliath in Religion ▪ when indeed he is an Hypocritical Puritan , if any such do think the complaint of Time against the Scots is too Satirical ▪ I would have him know , that the Rebellion of the Scots as it is heinous in its own nature , and deserves a sharp vindication and revenge , so it also hath cast an aspersion upon Time , for both the City and Country do find fault , that it is a very hard , dangerous and doubtful Time. And some in regard of this unnatural Rebellion say , Time declines and grows worse , and that many dissensions , Divisions and Rebellions shall happen in the old Age of Time , unto all which accusations Time doth make answer with one old ancient Verse ▪ 

Conscia mens recti famae mendacia ridat . 


The Conscience that is clear from spot or stain , 
Laughs at the false reports of flying Fame . 
Time did not cause the Scots rebellious factions , 
Which breaking forth in Time , Time blames their Actions . 


THE COMPLAINT OF Time against the tumultuous and rebellious SCOTS . Anno Dom. 1639.  

Age now hath silvered o'er the hairs of Time , 
And as I am grown old , so I decline 
In native goodness , else what frantic mood 
could make the Scots so prodigal of their blood 
To stain their honour by the Imputation 
Of tempting their King to high Indignation 
By being Sons of tumult and of thunder ? 
Time grieves for them , and shook with holy wonder 
Admires what Genius leads them on to be 
Revolters against sacred Majesty , 
Why they had best attempt if they think good 
To prove themselves of the Gygantick brood 
Pelion on Ossa hurling up again , 
So to invade the high Olympian name 
Of love ; for whether wont their boldness press ? 
Unless the just Revenger send redress . 
Time needs not here from his own height descend 
As to make answer to what they pretend 
In frivolous objections , for what pretence 
Can heaven allow them for their bold offence ? 
What have they made such a strange Scrutiny 
That none but they have found Divinity ? 
Or have they fancied to themselves abstractions 
Of Angel's zeal set forth in devilish actions ? 
Will they allow unto the King of Heaven 
no Ceremonies which are duly given 
Unto his Majesty , but will bluntly fall 
Without Ceremony to rebellion all , 
Must they needs tear the Mitre from the head 
Of Bishops ; what Antipathy is bred 
Within that Land which doth on England border 
That they should seek equality of disorder ? 
Which always tends to ruin , Nature makes 
In all her works a resemblance of Estates , 
The peaceful Bees have Kings , the Wasps have none , 
They only buzz , and sting , and so are gone ; 
Most perfect Creatures have the truest sense 
Of Sovereignty and true obedience ; 
The Hierarchy of Angels still do cry 
All praise and honour be to God on high 
Whom they obey , and government on Earth 
From Heaven had original and birth . 
And would the Scots think by their furious rage . 
To turn the world into a golden Age 
As in the Infancy of Time ? Yet than 
Saturn did reign , and was obeyed by men , 
then jupiter the ancient world swayed 
Whose Sovereignty was generally obeyed ; 
And Time that measures out the works of nature 
From the first being of a form Creature 
To thee not being , was at first created 
By the King of Heaven , and my power is dated 
And whatsoever is his great Decree 
I must therein obey his Majesty . 
But since the Giants wars I was not taken 
With greater fear , nor with more horror struck 
then when loud Fame did bring unto my Ears 
The Scots attempt ; I drowned my cheeks with tears 
And wished that I my Patent might resign 
Before the world should say that aged Time 
Had thus produced by the seeds of dissension 
An armed brood of men sprung from contention 
That in despite of mercy will proceed 
To court their ruin , and desire to bleed . 
Is there a Pleurisy , and an excess 
In Spiritual matters that must find redress 
By such a cruel salve ? or doth the Sword 
more mercy than is usual now afford ? 
And not cut off ill members , will it spare 
Those who in deep affronts engaged are 
Against their Sovereign ? who did woo them long 
By mercy which was powerful and strong 
To conquer good minds , but when his Grace found 
That Balm of mercy could not cure the wound , 
then our dread Sovereign mindful of his cause , 
Went down against those that did flight his laws 
Armed with his justice full of powerful dread 
For Kings have Iron hands , though feet of Lead . 
Now heaven protect him , Time on aged knees 
Prays that these wasps which scorn the obedient Bees 
Though they are gathered into mighty swarms 
Yet may be all compelled by force of Arm●ss 
To yield their stubborn necks , let Angels drive 
These wasps away out of the Church's Hive . 
Who bring no honey , but have often stung 
Their Mother with contentions from them sprung . 
Time hath spoken liberally , but now he 'll stay 
no correct himself , for some perhaps will say 
That the Scots bear an earnest great affection 
Unto my Daughter Truth , by whose direction 
In her defence this furious course they take 
For Love of Truth through danger way doth make , 
But they do err herein , for my dear child 
And Daughter truth 's by nature soft and mild . 
CHRIST was all Truth , yet when he came to woo 
The world to Goodness , and the way to show 
Unto all Truth the holy Angels than 
Sang Peace on Earth , and Goodwill unto men . 
Can therefore tumult , and the thundering Drum 
Speak in a language that may well become 
The wooers of fair Truth ? Or else transported 
Do they imagine Truth can thus be courted ? 
Me thinks I see the Angels hide their faces 
And blush in angry zeal , for their disgraces 
no think the Scots should think fair Truth to win 
From her most just Defendor , and her King. 
Mendoza thinks I see sad Truth kneel down and speak 
Her wrongs against them who her Laws do break , 
She pleads for Mercy and doth pled again 
And with her Oratory doth inflame 
The Kings most Royal breast , then having got 
His Gracious favour , she tells him the Scot 
With many shows of holiness doth woo her , 
Pretends much inward zealous love unto her 
But yet doth mock her with a smooth pretence 
Of Love to colour over his offence ; 
And then she wishes' she may never know 
Heaven if Truth did bid them thus to go 
In huddle into Arms , for Truth says she 
Love's and obeys your Sacred Majesty ; 
And all my Precepts say that Kings appear 
Like Gods on Earth and his viceregents here ; 
then why should they the Truth and you abuse 
And fasten upon Truth a false excuse ? 
no 't is their Policy that doth extend 
To use my Name to a prodigious end , 
And with the veil of Truth to hide and shroud 
Their proud Ambition which walks in a cloud 
And like a Pillar of fire guide's them on 
Into a Wilderness of Rebellion . 
Thus would my Daughter Truth make her complaint 
Against the tumultuous Scots that do so vaunt 
In crying up her name , when heaven knows 
That Truth was never taken with feigned shows . 
Be dumb night-ravens then , and do not croak 
To piece up the allegiance you have broke 
With fair pretences , for old Time doth know 
You have entrenched on Sovereignty , and do grow 
Giants in your opinion , being so given 
To furious zeal that you would invade Heaven , 
Pluck jupiter out of his Seat , and all 
Of you would then be Gods in general . 
And yet they are but shadows you pretend 
While in substantial matters you offend 
By fallacy joining God and King together , 
And yet will show obedience unto neither ; 
There you divide the cause by your affection 
And distinguish of a limited subjection . 
Even Nature doth instruct that you should be 
Subject unto the power of Majesty , 
And all the works of nature seem to speak 
He is a Rebel doth allegiance break . 
then trust not to yourselves , though you are strong , 
For Heaven will vindicate all Rebellion , 
And Truth doth say of old , no wars can be 
Happy attempted against Sovereignty . 
How dare you still persist ; Time bids pull down 
Your baffling Flags , and on your knees fall down , 
And for your Colours let your blushing cheek 
Display them , while you do for mercy seek ; 
If not , than Time doth bid you know bold Scots , 
Your Urn is turned , and Fate hath shaken your lots , 
You have betrayed yourselves , up English then 
And show your courage against those contemn 
Heaven in their King , OH let not his great cause 
Suffer while they 〈◊〉 his power and Laws . 
FINIS . 

