An answer to ( Vindicate the cause of the nicknamed Quakers of such scandals and untruths as is falsely cast upon them in a lying pamphlet , otherwise called ) a discourse concerning the Quakers ; set out by t. l. or as i understand the signification of the letters tho : Ledger . 

by geo : Baiteman . 

A word to the reader of this book . 

It is common among the sons of men , every one to vindicate his own cause , whether he be in the right or wrong ; for Solomon saith , every man seems to be just in his own cause : and the truth is , every one will speak the best he can in his own behalf . But Christian friend , whatever thou art that readeth these ensuing lines , i would have thee to understand , that i have not written these lines in my own defence , or to vindicate myself of any aspersions that any can cast upon me in any kind whatsoever ; for though i am a man who have undergone , and at this day do undergo the heavy burden of false aspersions , cast upon me by the fools of the times , who neither know me nor themselves , yet to me they are no more than the barking of curs , the which May affright children , for my back is broad enough to bear all the weight of these burdens , and am possessed with a spirit , that maketh me easily pass by all the censures of men ; and had the cause been my own , which is included in these lines , i think they had never come to the beholding ▪ but my spirit is such , that it leadeth me out rather to justify others than myself ; for i would have thee to know , that my sect or profession , tenets or religion , call it what thou wilt , is neither of that sort of persons called Quakers , neither am i Papist , Prelacyan , Presbyterian , independent , Anabaptist , famelist , Brownist , Arryan , atheist , free-willer , free gracian , raunter , saduccy , or lihertine , &c. then make of me what thou pleaseth ; yet such a one i am as knoweth my right hand from my left , and that is enough for any man to know ; and by that light in me , i am made in some measure to see what is of God , and what is of man , and what is of the spirit of darkness : i profess unto thee , i am not the enemy of any man , neither doth any man's form , or religion trouble me , but wish all men well in their way : yet i must tell thee , that i am not unacquainted with the wiles of Satan , in forms , and out of forms , and likewise of God's working , both in forms , and out of forms ; and what i have found by experience , i wish that all men had found the same , and a• hundred times more . And i must tell thee , i am led out to own the truth of God , where ever i see it , in a form , or out of a form ; but the purest truths is not manifested in forms , though forms May have their time , and in their time is tolerable , if not idolised . And to give thee a true reason why i was led out to draw these lines , it is to vindicate the truth in its appearing in some persons in these days , the which is disposed to the scandal and reproach of most persons in these times , some by wrong imprisonment , some by beating , some by threatening , some by false accusations and scandals , some by petitions , and some by writing lying pamphlets , all of these arising from the very malice and instigation of the devil , who would have these poor persons destroyed ; for he well knoweth , that if these go on , his kingdom will fall . Amongst those whom the devil moveth to act and speak against these persons , one t. l. or Tho : Ledger , hath written a lying pamphlet , the which i have here answered in some of his false accusations therein ; and if time would but have permitted , i would have answered them more fully : but what is here spoken , i hope May serve to give thee satisfaction of the truth in these persons ; and if thou have but any light of God in thee , thou wilt see , and Mayest easily judge , that these persons are no other , than such as God hath marvailously called to himself , to make the riches of his goodness known in their souls ; and what ever , either formalists , or other say against these persons take thou heed thou be not as one of them , for better were it for thee to have a millstone hung about thy neck , and thrown into the midst of the sea , then that thou shouldst offend one of these that believe in God , in whom Christ liveth , and they in him . And for thy better information in the truth , i have drawn these lines , the which i freely commit to thy Christian consideration ; and the Lord give thee a good understanding , that thou Mayest learn to have a good opinion of any persons in whom the truth of God doth appear . And my desire is , that the god of truth May make his truth known to thee , whereby thou Mayst be made to know what evil is in thyself , and the emptiness of all things acted and create , let thy form be what it will . This is the worst i wish thee , 

Geo : Baiteman . 

An answer to ( Vindicate the cause of the nicknamed Quakers , &c.  

There is two great monstrous evils in the world , and they are common among the sons of men ; and from these two evils , ariseth all other sins and wickedness whatsoever , acted , spoken , or thought , either against God himself , or against any appearance of God in his creature man ; and by the venom which ariseth from these two evils , one man is set against another in bitter envyings , evil wishings , evil speeches , evil actings , &c.  Now these two great evils , is the very ground and original rice of all other evil , as is before-said ; the one of these hath its proper being in one of the chief faculties of the soul , viz. the reason , and by the operations from thence proceeding the sons of men becometh much deprived of the pure understanding of the truth as it is in Jesus . And the other great evil hath its proper being in another chief faculty of the soul , viz. the will ; from the operations of which evil , ariseth all disobedience and rebellion against the truth , as it is in Jesus ; yet the difference between the sins arising from these grounds is great , though nothing that ariseth from either be good ; the evil effect proceeding from the ground , or cause , in the reasonable part , will be found inferior to these which ariseth out of the will ; yet wise Solomon saith , without knowledge , the soul is not good , prov. 19 2.  And God complaineth by the prophet , that his persons perished for want of knowledge , hos. 4. 6.  And Solomon , who knew how wicked the sons of men were without knowledge ( And how dark and blind they were in the understanding the dictates of God , without knowledge ) how oft doth he counsel men to seek w. sedome , and prize her above gold ? but who is that wise man that can truly distinguish between the wisdom of God , and the light which is in reason ( Which May be much increased by man's own industry ) which seemingly May be of God , the light which is in reason ▪ though never so much augmented by man's industry , in reading , hearing , studying , or examination , cannot find out the darkness of itself : yet man in that light May walk very zealously , and yet therein be the greatest enemy that God hath in the world , and do more mischief against Christ and the truth ▪ then those who have no illumination at all , neither act any thing in obedience to such light . Witness the apostle Paul , who from the obedience to such light , persecuted the saints . and many of the scribes and Pharisees , who upon the same account , put Christ to death . yea , from the time that God hath been pleased to come near the sons of men ( By the 〈◊〉 of his son in flesh ) hath this ignorant zeal manifested itself ; and the prophecy of Christ hath been in fulfilling till now , and as yet is not out of date , nor shall be , so long as men is hidebound under forms , which is the creatures own actings ; nor so long as men is heart ▪ bound to any create thing whatsoever ; so long as these have residence in men , the men who is inveigled in them , shall always be enemies of the truth , when , or wheresoever the same becometh truly to be manifest ; and yet none shall be greater pretenders of truth , no• greater contenders for truth , than those , who be the greatest opposites thereof : and he that was the truth it ▪ self , beareth witness hereof in his prophecy , where he saith , the time shall come , that those that kill you , shall think they do God service ▪ John ▪ 6. 2.  But some May say at this day , there is no persecuting of men for their judgement in matter of worship , seeing that liberty of conscience is countenanced by the present authority ; to which i say , there is a persecution , and killing in a twofold manner ; the one being acted by the ignorant zeal of Papists , Prelacians , and Presbyterians , and that persecution was acted upon the bodies and states of men , who would not worship God in their way ; but that i confess , is much abated . But the second persecution , or killing , is yet untaken away , but is in as full force and vigour , as ever ; and that is the persecution of the tongue , and hand , both being set on work by the ignorant zeal of the hellish fire , that is in the heart , from which burning flame , the tongue is made to utter scandelizings , and calumnious speeches , against such persons as God doth marvailously make his truth to appear in their souls , because such souls is not made partakers of the truth under their good thinking rules , and fair seeming forms : and from the zeal of that fire , their hands is set on work to write ridiculous pamphlets , in villifying the names , and actions , and intentions , and manifestations of such persons as have had a clearer sight of the truth , ( And fuller possession of the same , yea and live more in the power thereof ) than any person who is so glued and hind-bound to any form , though never so seeming holy in the same . 

And i wish that the author of that pamphlet , called , the discourse concerning the Quakers , be not one of these good thinking proselytes , who thinketh they have God hard tied to them in the chains of a fair-seeming form , and through that great light he May imagine himself to have , May become captived under a judgement , whose gates May prove as narrow as the eye of a needle ; and than it is no marvel to me , to see , or hear such persons throw dirt in the face of God , or in the face of any in whom God doth more abundantly manifest himself to , than he hath done to them . 

Yet however , i will understand the author of that discourse in the better sense , and will not say that he hath put out that pamphlet by the power of the ground of the evil that is in his will , but rather say ( And make it good to ) that he hath put it out from or by the power of the evil in his reason ; and these sins May happily be pardoned , before these which ariseth out of the evil ground in the will ; for the apostle Paul himself was received to mercy , in as much as what he had done , he did it in ignorance . But now i proceed to what is intended . 

The author beginneth his discourse with interpreting the words of such scriptures , as show what great deceivers shall be in the last days , and doth make his applications according as his good thinking inspireth him ( In the understanding of th•se scriptures quoted by him ) but that spirit that is his guide herein , i believe will not let him make the application of these scriptures to himself , nor any of his order ; but if judgement were but laid to the line , and righteousness to the plummet , and that the tempest of hail had but swept away the lying refuge ; and if he would but weigh his own heart in the balance of the sanctuary , i make no doubt but he Might have made a truer application nearer home , for who is the greatest deceivers in the world , but such as have a fair seeming form of godliness , and yet live not in the power of God himself ; and these are the greatest hypocrites amongst men , for amongst such the white-devil hath his habitation , and the well-favoured harlot hath her bed of whoredom most daintily decked , whereon her lovers and she take their fill of pleasure ; oh how well and subtly doth she work , when once she getteth herself covered over with the habit of saintlike walkings , in the outward form of a literal religion , which seems to be the worship of God , because of its newness , and well regulated , according as good-thinking hath invented , carrying men into scripture without them , and yet unacquainted with the scripture of truth which is within them . And from hence it is , that the mother of harlots becometh well decked , and bravely mounted upon her searlet-coloured beast , and drunk with the blood of the saints ; let all formalists in England ( Of what form soever , brotherhood or kirk-fellowship , though their form May be the best in all the world , and come to the very point of example and command of scripture in its outward requirings ) take heed ▪ for though they May bless themselves in a fool's paradise , and think because they have got at a great distance from the Pope , and his fictions , therefore they be sure that they have nothing to do with the mother of harlots , nor she with them ; yet they are but cheated , for she cannot delight herself , nor be more secure , than where forms is in fashion : for where there is not a form , this harlot May be entertained , but yet not with such sumptuousness as in a fair seeming form ▪ for where there is no form , she is forced to go on foot : but in a form she becometh well-mounted . Our saviour knew the truth of this , which made him pronounce so many woes against the formalists in his days , and told them it should be more tolerable for Sodom then for them ▪ for the truth is , those be the greatest enemies of God and his truth that possible can be , and the greatest deceivers in the world ; and an hypocrite is not to be found anywhere , but in a fair seeming form . 

And where the author ( Of the discourse concerning the Quakers ) is speaking of atheists and apostates ; it will be found that the greatest atheists in the world , is where there is a God most confessed with the tongue , and yet the heart walks contrary to the tongue : it is not the confessing ( And acknowledging ) of a god with the mouth , that frees men from atheism ; no , no , the greatest atheism is in the heart , and there it is ; and it mattereth not what any talk of God , or of religion ( Or of fantastic in comes of Christ into the soul ) so long as men have not found out an atheism in his own heart , and out of that be brought to have the true knowledge of a God : that God which men come to know no other way but by scripture relation , will but prove a phanta stick god ; for the fancy of formalists shapeth him out in so many several fashions , that ost-times they fall out amongst themselves , about the fashion of their relative god ; but when they can agree about the fashion of their god found out in scripture , then do they busy themselves to patch up a fair seeming form , and therein they worship their God , with hand and foot , tongue and eye , and all the rest of the members , at sometime . But yet i would know where the heart is , and what is the god thereof , i much fear that its god , is a creature , not much unlike the gods of the heathen ( In the time of the Jews ) who was made of gold silver , wood and stone ; let but the saint likest formalist in England mind the truth of this , and i believe he shall find , that such god are the gods of his heart ; let him or them , but well consider , and ponder , but one day to mind seriously the ways and outgoings of their heart ▪ and they will find , that a creature of some kind is the god thereof ▪ and whatsoever they shall find the heart to be led out to , take it for granted that its god : for our saviour saith , where your treasure is , there is your heart ; and no man can any way know his own heart , but by its thoughts , inelinations , desires , and intents , &c. which be the effects thereof : and if the creature have the thoughts , cares , fears , loves , and desires , that is its god for sure ; and look what god the heart confesseth , and worshippeth , and liveth in , that God shall be the help of man , or else his destroyer . It is no hard matter for men to conform to any kind of kirkefellowship , and in the same to talk of God , and walk in the literal obedience of that form , (  what scripture requireth ) and yet for all that , deny the god of truth with their heart ; let but the author of that discourse look well about him , or rather to within himself , and he need not go far to find atheism and athests to purpose . 

But where he is speaking os apostates , i would have him to know , that none can justly be so called , except they have been first made partakers of the truth , and love of God , and from that have turned away , to love the world ; but man cannot be an apostate , in turning from one form to another ; neither if a man turn himself out of all forms , for it is not the falling from forms , that make an apostate , but a falling from the truth and love of God , that maketh man an apostate ; and a man cannot fall from , or turn from that he never was possessed of : and if any have been made partakers of the love of God , and yet have turned therefrom , and so become an apostate ; yet such a one must be saved , or else that author must raze out many scriptures , or else learn to understand them otherwise , than they be understood amongst formalists . For they say , whom God once loveth , he loveth him to the end ; and if the author do not befool his own judgement , and the judgements of his fellows , he cannot gainsay it , but that apostates must go to heaven . But i believe the author must go to some other than himself ( And to others than those amongst whom he hath his fellowship ) to seek out apostates , for i assure him he is none himself , and i believe they are very scarce where he liveth . I much doubt , that neither himself , nor his fellow-worshippers as yet have been true partakers of truth , and then it is impossible for him or them , to fall from ▪ or turn from the thing they never had ▪ so i will clear both the author and his fellows of the sin of apostasy . But what better are they that believe a lie in stead of truth , than those who have known the truth , and yet turned from it . 

Seeing the author hath taken pains to quote scriptures , and time to apply these scriptures , for the aspercing of a persons more simple than himself , ( Or any of his fellowship ) i would wish him to have a care , that he be not like those , that as yet have the beam in their eye , whereby they be blinded in beholding of themselves , and so can quickly condemn others , and yet justify themselves . But i say , happy is he that is not condemned in the things he alloweth . 

it 's true , the scripture speaketh of such deceivers as should come , and in the time of the apostles ( Began such deceivers to arise ) but after their death , they much more increased , till at last , the truth itself was over-shaddowed ; and in all generations since that time , until these days , the truth , as May be said , hath laid under clods of earth ; but now , when it beginneth to shut up itself , ( And begin to spring ) how wonderful mad is the foxes , ( Bears and lions , wolves and owls , dogs and swine ) at the very appearance of it ; but it mattereth not for all their madness , for a stone cut out of the mountain , without hands , shall dash in pieces all the fair images of human worship ; and a North wind with a tempest shall arise , and rent asunder the harlot's robes , for the Lord himself will bring the same to pass ; for he hath said , that in the last days , he will pour out his spirit upon all flesh , &c.  And in the last days , the mountain of the Lord shall be established upon the top of the mountains , &c.  When this cometh to pass , as sure it will , then let all blind priests ▪ and good-thinking formalists look to themselves , for the day of their visitation is at hand . 

But to proceed , i come to the author's words in his discourse , where he singleth out two sorts of persons ▪ to be the objects of his applied scriptures , and especially the one of these be the very subject of his discourse ; and these he calleth : Quakers , which , says he , is either counterfeit , or comes from the power of the devil , &c.  If this author himself , have not undergone the pouring out of the justice of God upon his soul , in such a measute , as hath made all his bones to quake , let him not judge those who have been so dealt withal ; for before any soul be truly brought to live in the power of the life of God , he shall undoubtedly pass through the justice of God in such a measure , as shall make both his bones , and all his fair procession quake ; and though the author have not known this by experience ; yet i marvel that such a one as he , who cryeth up scripture so high , as to make it no less than God himseife ( As shall be showed afterwards ) should be so unacquainted with God's dealing with some of his persons in former time ; for sure if he had lived in those days , he would have called Moses a Quaker , and that his trembling proceeded from the devil , when the appearance of the majesty of God ( In the terrible giving out of the law ) was manifested to him , heb. 12. 21.  And sure he would have said that Ezekiel was a Quaker , and his trembling was of the devil ▪ when he eat his bread with quaking , ezek. 12. 18.  And of Daniel , and those with him , would he have said the same , when the majesty of God was manifested to to them , dan. 10. 7.  And if this author had been beside the camp of the Israelites , before the giving out of the law , he Might have seen Quakers great store , exod. 19 16.  And if he had lived in Ezra's time , he Might have seen Quakers enough , Ezra 9 4.  What would this author have said , if he had seen Habakkuk tremble at the appearance of the majesty of God , hab. 3. 16.  

What doth this author think of Mary , James , and Salome , who trembled at the rising of Jesus , Mark 16. 8.  Or of David , when his flesh trembled for the fear of God , psal. 119. 120.  And of Foelix , who trembled at the words of Paul , a & s 24. 25.  And of Job , who trembled at God's dealing with him , Job . 4. 14.  & 21. 6.  And is not trembling an evident symptom of the soul's undergoing the wrath of God for sin , as May be seen in Esay 51. 17. 22.  Was not Ephraim exalted , when he spoke trembling , hos. 13. 1.  What was Paul , when he was converted to the truth , acts 9 6.  From what spirit came the jailer's trembling , when he fell at the feet of the apostles ? is quaking such a strange thing , and of such an evil nature , when the apostle commanded the persons , to work out their salvation with fear and trembling , phil. 2. 12.  It were too tedious to rehearse all precedents in scripture which is of like nature , which beareth witness of the truth of quaking : but this author layeth not to heart what persons the scripture saith should arise in the last time , such as should be false accusers and mockers at the workings of God . but i would have this author , and all other of his fellow formalists , to consider the word of the Lord spoken by Esay , in the 66.  Chapter , for there are you all pictured out , and spoken to . And so are the poor despised persons also , whom you call Quakers ; i will not rehearse the words , but wi•• you , and all other accusers and mockers , to read the same , and the Lord give you the true understanding of it ; and i wish , that that author , May be better informed in his judgement concerning the workings of God in his creatures ; and i wish him to pray , that his lies , and the evil thought of his heart May be pardoned . 

Further , this author saith , that these persons are possessed with an aussere devil , because they take no more of the creatures than will serve necessity . And in opposition to them , he is speaking of a persons called raunters , who exceedeth in these things ; but as for such , i have nothing to say for what they do , cxcept God let such a persons rise , to be a• signs of the pride and rich deckings of the harlot , in those , and by those ▪ who have a form of godliness , and yet live not in the power of God . But as for these whom he calleth Quakers , my spirit is led out to justify them in what they do , as concerning the bringing down their pride of heart , and mortifying the senses ; but such work as this , is not tolerable amongst formalists , who can have the liberty to feed their senses , and uphold their pride , and keep reputation amongst men , and run after profit as greedily as any in the world ; nay , is not almost all knavery in the world , masked with a form of religion in these days . Forms of religion is the fashion of the times ; and now adays priests , and witty men , and tailors is all hard put to it ; the one to invent the finest form , and the other to invent new fashion of apparel for these formalists to wear . And when God is pleased to raise up a persons of his own accord , to forsake the folly of these things , and to cry out against the evil in these things , oh how doth the harlot in the formalist , begin to stir herself , and by all means possible , seek to scandalize , or root out such persons , as would have her skirts turned over her face , that her nakedness ▪ and naughtiness Might appear . But this is no strange thing to me , for it hath always been the fashion of the sons of the bondwoman , to persecute the freeborn sons ; and i make no doubt but if Christ and John Baptist were both in person among us ▪ but that the one would be called a friend of the publicans , and the other that he had to do with a devil . For wheresoever there is a form of godliness , and the power awanting , these persons cannot choose but be the enemies of God , and the greatest opposers of his work , when he worketh or bringeth any thing to pass , contrary to the order they have limited fo• him . 

the author in his proceeding , takes it for a strange delution , that these persons live above ordinances , and that they should have a light in them equal to scripture , and that that light should be the holy ghost , and that they need not scripture to be taught by , because the same is fulfilled in them , and what they speak or write , is equal to scripture : and then bringeth in a saying of Christ's , to admonish persons to take heed of such light ; the which he applieth as truly , as quaking and trembling comes by the devil : the which is clearly confuted before : 

As to the first of these , viz. that persons should be led to live above ordinances ; i would know of the author what ordinances he meaneth of ; whether the ordinance of God , or the ordinances of men ; and i would have him to know what an ordinance is , and for what end ordinances was ordained ; and i would have him to know a difference between an ordinance of God , and that which is but the ordinance of men ; but i fear he cannot as yet see a difference between them , and therefore maketh a humble jumble of both together . But for the clearing of the same ▪ i would have both this author , and all other of his order , to understand what shall be said concerning ordinances . As for that which is an ordinance of God , we have commands for the observing of the same . And one of his chief and greatest ordinances , is his son Christ , one with himself , acts 10. 42. and in as much at he would have us obedient to that ordinance , he hath given out his command , to love the Lord our god with all our heart , &c. and believe in his son Jesus Christ whom he hath sent . now the fulfilling of these commands in being obedient to that ordinance , it is out of the compass of the power of every man ; and therefore God in stooping to the weakness of men ▪ hath given out other inferior ordinances , as rules for men while they are in their weakness ; and those ordinances are within the power of the creature man , to be observed ; as reading , hearing , praying , baptising , breaking of bread , &c.  Yet in these inferior ordinances , i would have men to be so wise , as to understand the ground , and intent ; or the cause , and effect of these ordinances . It will be found , that sin is the cause or ground of all laws , or ordinances ; for the law was added because of transgression , gal. 3. 19  And the law is made for the ungodly . 1. tim. 1. 9  And God's intent in giving out laws and ordinances , is , to be as a line or rule , until the effect be brought to pass , viz. that a man be brought into that condition ( By walking by these rules ) of the knowledge of himself , and his own weakness , and the weakness of all those laws and ordinances , that so the soul May be made •it to close with that which is the chief ordinance of all ; and the soul once being truly brought to live under obedience of the chief ordinance , all those inferior ordinances is of little use : for there is a time for every thing ; a time to plant , and a time to pluck up that which was planted for the law was added because of transgressions ; so is all ordinances : but the law maketh nothing perfect , heb. 7. 29. no more doth the inferior ordinances . But when the promised seed is come , the law hath no more jurisdiction over man ; and when that which is perfect is come , then that which is imperfect is done away ; the law and ordinances are not perfect , but imperfect ; and yet not imperfect , but perfect : but mark well what i say in defining myself , for the law , or any of God's ordinances , hath a perfection in them ; but their perfection tends to death , by reason of the sin that is in us ; and the greatest perfection that is in any law or ordinance , is but to bring man to be perfectly made senceable of the sin and selfness that is in him . And when man is brought thus far , laws and ordinances is but of little use , for further man cannot be brought by them , and so their perfection is at an end ; and what soul soever findeth not this to be true in observing of ordinances , May take it for granted , that he hath not been faithful in walking close by the rule of the ordinances ; or otherwise , the angel of darkness hath played that soul a trick of which it is little capable , and so raiseth some certain sweetness in the soul out of the walking in these ordinances ; and the false fiend maketh the soul to believe that to be in comes of Christ , when it is nothing else but a life raised out of that whose nature is always to produce death ; and when the false fiend hath got power to work this work , no marvel if such souls cry up ordinances so fast , and cry down any appearance of God in others who are let see , and led out , from such delusions : but i let such pass with the saying of the prophet , thou hast wearied thyself in the greatness of thy ways , yet saidst thou not , there is no hope ; thou hast found the life of thine hands , and therefore thou art not grieved , Isay 57 10.  

In every soul ( Which is rightly carried on into that which is the chief good ) it will be truly made appear , that the perfection of laws and ordinances is fulfilled in bringing it into a perfect death : and the imperfection of laws and ordinances will appear , in that they cannot restore the pure life to the soul ; but that proceedeth from another fountain , viz. the chief ordinance ; and when that which is chief and supreme , is come , that which is inferior is out of date with that soul , and so it is made to live in that which is chief , above that which is inferior ; for these inferior ordinances are but children's tutors in their minority , until the time appointed of the father ; though children May sometimes , for want of knowledge , be led out to love their tutors better than their father ; yea , and think both their fathers , and all other enemies that would seem to separate them , and their tutors ▪ though it were to carry them to live in the bosom of thei• natural fathers ; but these are but the foolish thoughts of children , and the apostle was such a one at sometime himself ; but when he grew up to be a man , he put away childish things ; meaning , whatsoever was inferior to the living , in that which was the chief ordinance , even the love of God in Christ , or Christ made truly known to his soul ; and was the apostle condemned for saying so , or dare any judge , or question his light that led him into that condition , or who dare say that he was in an error , when he Counted all his religious walking by the rules as dung and dross ? phil. 3. or who dare say that he was guided by a false light , when he Counted ordinances , but as shadows , and reproved the persons for being subject to such things ? col. 2. 20.  But you May say , that these was ordinances instituted in the time of the law , but now we live under gospel-ordinances , and therefore none May live above them . To which i say , the ordinances under the law had their time , and pointed out that which was the end , viz. Christ appearing in the flesh , and there they ended : and the ordinances under the gospel hath their time , and their end also ; and that is , when Christ appeareth in the spirits of men , for he is the end of all ordinances whatsoever , to them who live in him , and he in them . 

But you May say , that believers in the primitive time , made use of gospel-ordinances , whose example it behooveth all men to follow . To which i say , it was meet they should do so , at sometime especially , when they were in their minority in believing ▪ and so for all young Christians : for as i said before , there is a time for every thing ; but even in the primitive time there was degrees of Christians ; some children , some youngmen , some old-men , or fathers ; and it was the wisdom of the apostle , to frame his discourse and behaviour to every ones condition , and to feed children with children's meat , and to give to the stronger such as was suitable for them . And while the persons was so contending about orders and ordinances , the apostle judged them but as carnal , and was but to be fed with children's meat ▪ 1 cor. 3. 1. 2. 3. and while they were to be fed with such food , they were not in a capacity of living of any other thing ; and such were these , who could not see beyond the ordinances ; which was but the first principals of religion , heb. 5. 12.  And who dare say that the apostle was led with a false light , when he seemed to slight gospel-ordinances , and leave them , as low things ( Being but as the alphabet of Christians ) and so reach out to higher , even to that which is the substance of all things , wherein perfection was to be attained ? phil. 3. 13. 15. for though the apostle had to do with children in his time ; yet he had to do with men , who was more excellent , and was not in bondage to weak and beggarly rudyments , nor lived upon shadows , nor was fed with children's meat of ordinances , or busying themselves with the principles of religion ; but was men of full age , who through the great mortification and self-denial , was brought to understand what was good , and what was evil , and would not take things for good because they seemed to be so , heb. 5. 13.  And amongst such , the apostle could be understood , when he spoke of the mystery of the wisdom of God , 1 Corinthians 2. 6. and these were of like spirit with him , led out , and beyond , or above ordinances , laws , and inferior rules , and aimed at nothing , but the price of the high calling , and the attaining to the resurrection of the dead ; and to him there was but one rule to walk by , and that was the rule of the cross of Christ , by which the world became crucified to him , and he to it ; and those that were perfect , and aimed at perfection , was to walk by the same rule , phil. 3. 15.  But now perfection is cried down , and a man May almost as well speak blasphemy , as speak of perfection , and any rule or ordinance is highly esteemed , bu• the chief ordinance , and the rule and imitation of that ordinance , viz. the cross of Christ : nay , the very appearance of this , scareth all men in a form , or out of a form ; for this rule of the cross is that which will try all hypocrites in the world , for they are not able to abide it , for it destroyeth all fair seeming holiness , and all worldly mindedness , and all pleasure , praise and reputation ; and therefore no marvel if there be so few who dare take up that cross , and walk by that rule ; and that those who have closed with it , should be the reproach of all men . The apostle himself was not a little troubled with professors , who was the very enemies of the cross of Christ , and with weeping tears told his beloved hearers that sad story ; but if he were alive in these days , he Might have weeping enough , for such professors , as are the enemies of the cross of Christ , whose god is their belly , who glory in that which should be their shame . who mind earthly things , phil. 3. 17.  And i make no doubt if the apostle Paul , and those to whom he spoke the mystery of the wisdom of God unto , were amongst us , but that these professors who pretend ordinances so much ( And yet in these ordinances the very enemies of the cross ) would call them deluded men , and carried away by a false light . But i hope the author will know hereafter , what it is to live under ordinances , and what life that is that is led above ordinances . 

But i am somewhat afraid , that the author is somewhat mistaken about the ordinances of God ; and that he taketh the ordinances of men , for the ordinances of God : but at present i will not stand upon defining every ordinance , whether it be of God or man , but one only , and by that let him and all other judge the rest : i doubt he takes the priests of these times for God's ministers ▪ and so May call them an ordinance of God ; nay , and amongst fools , they are accounted one of the chief ordinances , and so they call themselves ; but if the author thinks so , he is mistaken , and so are all other that take them so , for they are none of the ordinances of God , for he never sent them neither have they any commission from him ; but they are an ordinance of men , and by men were they sent out , and of men have they learned their ministry , and of men they have their commission , and for gain it is they seek , and for prosit it is they preach , and run as greedily after it , as the hungry dog doth after his prey ; and if hire were but taken away from them , all the world Might see who ordained them ; and these have been the greatest enemies of the cross of Christ in all the world , and by them hath the eyes of men been blinded from the true beholding of the truth ; but let but the free born sons have patience a while , and they shall see that brought to pass , which all the preaching , praying consultations and petitions of all the priests in England shall not be able to turn away ; their fear is upon them already , and their fall is not far off , for God hath born fourteen hundred years with them , but his patience is well-nigh at a period ▪ their guilt beginneth to stir , and their fear is such that they think every bush is a boggle , this is truly apparent amongst them , •or the very name of these simple despised persons , called Quakers , doth scare them , and make them run together as so many wolves , which is scared by the bark of a dog ; and all their consultations is , how to get these poor persons destroyed for their heart tells them ▪ if these increase , their kingdom will be destroyed : but of that no more at present . 

The author of that discourse , taketh it in high disdain , that these persons should say , they have a light in them equal to scripture , and that that light should be the holy ghost , and so need not scripture , because the same is fulfilled in them , &c.  If this author had but taken good notice of the scripture , he need not have slighted these sayings ; for in saying so , they do not vary from the truth of God declared in scripture , nor from the promise of Christ made out to those that are his followers ▪ as May plainly appear in these sayings , when the spirit of truth is come , he will guide you into all truth , &c. John 16. 13. and further , his promise was , that when he was departed , he would send the comforter ▪ even the spirit of truth , which proceeded from the father , which should testify of him , John 15. 26.  And moreover , our saviour saith again , when the comforter ▪ which is the holy ghost is come , whom the father will send in my name ; he shall teach you all truth , and bring all things to your remembrance , &c. John 14. 26.  I hope the author will not deny the truth of these scriptures ; and if these promises be fulfilled in any man ▪ what need hath such of scripture reaching without them , when they have received the same spirit within them , by which all true scripture was written : and how much is the words , proceeding from that spirit , inferior to scripture , except the holy ghost have changed its nature , and be not what it was formerly ; for it is not time and persons that make men's words differ , or not be in equality to the word in scripture , but the spirit from whence they flow ? And doth not all ordinances point out , or lead to that very end , that God and man should be united in one spirit , that he that sanctifieth , and they who are sanctified , May be one ? And if any soul be so made one with God , who dare deny but all true scripture is fulfilled in them , and that such souls have no need of any to teach them , because that anointing which they have received ▪ is able to teach them all things , 1 John 2. 27.  But i say no more to that , because the truth of what they say herein is so largely amplified in scripture , except it be to poor blind iddeots , whose envy against others , have shut their eyes from seeing , and their hearts from understanding the truth of scripture . 

The author of that discourse , proceedeth still in questioning the light which is in these persons ; and amongst the rest of his scandals East upon them , would make persons believe , that these persons deny the scriptures , the which is a most false aspersion ; for there is not a persons in England that is more conformable to the very outward requiring of scripture , than these persons , and that light within them doth lead them , and causeth them to act according to what the scripture requireth in the practical part thereof in their obedience , to which their very outward practice doth condemn all men in the land , both religious and irreligious ; for they follow the words of our saviour , where he saith , take no thought for to morrow : and having food and raiment , therewith be content , &c.  Mat. 6. 26. 27.  And in mortifying their senses and members , they follow the command of the apostle , to divers of the persons he taught , which rule he followed himself , 1 cor. 9 27. and yet this author saith , they are possessed with an austere devil , and denies scripture for so doing ; but let but a wise man judge , whether those who pretend scripture , and talk of scripture ; or those that practice scripture , deny it most ; for every one that cryeth up scripture with their tongue , are not those that confess scripture ; but those are they that truly confess it , that in their practice is conformable to it : for every one shall not enter into heaven for talking of scripture , and making discourses of God out of scripture . nor that sayeth Lord , Lord ; but they that do the will of the father . 

But it is no marvel to me if these persons be so cried out against with all persons , for their very outward life is a witness against all sorts , both formalists , and others ; for there is no difference between the formalists , and men who are not conformed , for both are alike for pride and sensuality , and for the love of the world , and for reputation amongst men , all of them having hearts alike , in the worship of the god of the world ; only the formalists differ from the other in their head , by which they are carried beyond the other into a fair seeming form , in which they worship God according to their good-thinking ; but yet their form will admit their hearts to worship the gods of the heathen ; i May speak it with sadness of heart , seeing the truth hereof so clearly , and cannot deny , but all formalists and unconformed ▪ are but horns springing out of the same head of the beast which John saw in his revelation . 

Further , the light that is in these persons , is not at all contrary to what the scripture holdeth out in the mystery , but the same being truly fulfilled in them they are made able to witness the truth in the scripture , and no other way can any soul be a true witness of the truth of scripture , but by having the same truly fulfilled in them ; for all other are but false witnesses , and speaketh but of it from what they have heard or received from others ; and these persons is made able by the light which is in them , to witness the truth of the love of God made known to their souls , and of other of God's dealing with them , and will not vary from scripture , but own it , and take it to witness the truth of what they do declare to others . And i am sure , that many of the priests in England can witness the truth of what i say , if their malice would but let them ; for the time hath been ( And not long since ) that some of the priests made trial of them , thinking to confute them , and make them appear as erroneous ; but it proved the contrary way : for not long had they dissoursed with them , but the priests was strucken dumb before them , and had not a word to say , but was forced to fly , like beaten cocks ; in so much that the very vulgar persons , shouted at the beaten priests ; and some did aver , that they conceived , that no fewer than an hundred souls was convinced of the truth at that time : and yet these beaten priests deviseth all ways possible , to root out these persons ; but they are but like the persons , with whom Steven conversed , who was not able to resist the spirit he spoke from , yet they stoned him to death , acts 7. •7 . &c.  

The author of that discourse , proceedeth about the exaltation of scripture , and says , whatsoever is essential to God , the same is appropriated to scripture : the which saying , if well considered , is no less than blasphemy ; whether was it God , or the scripture , that create the world , and all other things ? Or whether was it scripture , or Christ , that suffered for the sin of man ? or whether is it scripture , or Christ , that reconcileth God to man ? or whether is it scripture , or God , that maketh the wind blow where it listeth , and the rain to fall in its appointed season ? &c. if that be true which he saith , why is not every one sanctified , and made holy , that heareth or readeth scripture ? Alas , when men have no other light , but the light of reason , to bear witness to the truth of scripture , what soul mistakes do they light on in meddling with scripture ; for as some being led by their wild wandering wit , make less of the scripture than it is ; so this author is carried by that light , to make more of the scripture than it is ; and to make good what he affirmeth , he quoteth gal. 3. 8. where the apostle is speaking of things in the days of Abraham , which was before any scripture was written ; and because the apostle says , the scripture foreseei•g such things ; therefore it is like God , who forseeth all things . But i would have the author , and all others , to understand themselves better , and then they shall understand scripture better . I would know of the author , what scripture it was that the apostle meaneth of , when the scripture which we have at this day , was not written many a year after the time of Abraham : but if the author cannot tell , i will declare to him what scripture that was ; the word scripture is twofold , and to be understood in a twofold sense ; the one essencyall , the other declarative : now the scripture declarative , is written in paper by men , and had a time for its beginning , and so there is a time for it to end ; but the scripture essential , hath its being in itself , and is eternal , and shall have no end ; and this scripture is the true essential word of God , or his son Christ , by whom all things were create ; and this word was in the beginning , and this word was God , and nothing was made or brought to pass , but by this word , John 1. 1. 2. and this word was the wisdom of God by which he spoke , and acted , and forseeth things to come : and it was this word , or scripture that foresaw , by which God foretold Abraham things to come ; and this word , or scripture , and God , is all one . And the apostle who knew the truth hereof ▪ divers times useth the word scripture ; for the word God , when he is speaking of God's foreseeing , speaking , or acting , as May plainly appear , where he saith , the scripture hath concluded all under unbelief , gal. 3. 22. the which act , the scripture declarative never could do ; but the scripture or word essential , which is God : the truth of which is cleared by the same apostle , speaking of the same subject , where he saith , that God had concluded all under unbelief , &c.  Rom. 11. 32.  And further , in speaking of what the scripture said to Pharaoh , even for this purpose have i raised thee up , etc , rom. 9 17. which saying was not spoken to Pharaoh , nor which work was wrought upon him , by the scripture declarative ; but by the scripture , or word essential , which was God himself , as May be seen in exodus , 9 16. where it was plainly held out , that it was God that spoke these words , and wrought that work ▪ upon Pharaoh . 

Now i would have that author , and all other , to understand the true distinction between the scripture , or word essential , and the scripture or word declarative ; for if they do not , it is possible they will add to the one , and diminish the other ; and than let them take heed of the curse that John speaketh of , at the end of the revelation . 

But the author goeth on in his discourse in his blindness ▪ and all along attributeth that to the word declarative , which is the proper work of the word essential ; and so brings to prove , what he •aies the saying of the apostle , in heb. 4. 12. where it is said , the word of God is quick and powerful , and sharper than any two edged sword , &c. the which he falsely applieth to the scripture declarative , which in itself is as dead as a stone , except the essential word first move in the heart of man ; otherwise how is it , that all men's thoughts and intents is not discovered by hearing , or reading it ? but what the apostle speaketh there , is the very work of the essential word , or God himself , as the following verse of the same chapter will truly witness , where the apostle doth more illustrate and lay open the property of the essential word , and saith , neither is there any creature that is not manifested in his sight , but all things are naked , and laid open before the eyes of him with whom we have to do . and doth not God plainly declare by the prophet , that it is he himself that searcheth the heart , and trieth the reins , jer. 17. 9 10.  Oh what blindness is amongst men ( Yea amongst professors also ) that they cannot see , nor be made believe what is the word of God , but in their blindness , taketh the scripture declarative , for the word of God ▪ for which they have neither example , nor command in that scripture they do so much idolise , but only as they have received that word by tradition from their forefathers , who was blinded in their understanding , and could not know any other word of God , and so gave that name to the scriptures , because they were not acquainted with the essential word within them , therefore their wit carried them to scripture without them ; and finding some saying in it which suited with their reason as such sayings as these ▪ they spoke the word of God with boldness , acts 4 31.  but the word of God grew and multiplied , acts 12. 24.  not handling the word of God deceitfully , rom. 4. 2.  take the word of God , which is the sword of the spirit , ephes. 6. 17.  it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer , 1 tim. 4. 5. and divers other speaking in scripture to that purpose , which all of them is the proper effects of the eternal word the son of God , the which but few of our wise , learned rabbis have known ; and therefore have they understood , that these sayings which held out the property of the eternal , with its effects , to be the property of the scripture and its effects . But when our saviour ( Who was the word itself ) had occasion to use scripture , he gave no such title to scripture , but said , it is written in such a book ; or is it not written in your law , John 10. 34.  And when the apostles had occasion to speak out of the scripture , did they not follow the same rules . And when the apostle Peter would pronounce the scripture by another name , he calleth it , a sure word of prophecy . but this epithet , the word of God , was not at all given to it , until the eternal word was hide , and man wanted the life , and power thereof , within him ; and than his wit found the word of God without him ; and to these days our wise rabbis understand it so ▪ and makes fools believe that what they say is true ; and under this pretence , they take to themselves the name of the ministers of God , and that which they preach is the word of God ; when as they know not what the word of God is , but what they gather out of the scriptures , which is nothing else but a declaration of the word of God without a man ; but as for that which is the word itself ( The which should live in them , and they in it , and what that word spoke in them , to declare to others ) alas , they know not what it meaneth , but busyeth themselves to persecute and scandalize these , in whom the essential word liveth , and they in it : and that author being of the disciple of thief rabbis , doth play his part on their side , and in his discourse runs himself stone blind about advancing ordinances , and scripture , to that end , for which they were never intended ; but if the blind lead the blind , they had best take heed of ditches . It would be too tedious , and draw out too long a volume to answer that author in every particular of his blind discourse , therefore i will pass by many things , the which if time would have permitted , i would have answered in order ; but what i have said already , though in brief , will satisfy the wise ; and for the foolish , there is too much said already , for beat him in a mortar , and his folly will not depart from him : but before i conclude , i cannot choose but take notice of somewhat more he says concerning these persons called Quakers ; where he telling of coming to these persons in the power and evidence of God's word , and tells them of admiring Christ , holy walking with God ▪ subjection to ordinances , baptism , kirkefellowship ▪ &c. and they will tell you , ( Or as he saith ) that unclean spirit in them , will cry out , and witness against you , that you be but yet in the spirit of the world , and under the power of carnal reason , &c.  it 's true , they will do so to some persons , and wise men cannot but admire to see such a spirit of discerning in many of these persons , for an hypocrite can hardly beguile them , though he May come with never so fair pretences to try them ; and let an hyhocrite arm himself as strongly with the scripture ( And his worship of God in ordinances ) as possibly he can , and that light , or eternal word in them , will find them out , and discover these to the very bottom : and i know for a truth , that no hypocrite is able to stand before them ; and i believe an hypocrite that once hath had discourse with them , dare not appear before them the second time ; and indeed , they May the easilier discern an hypocrite , when they themselves are delivered from that great evil , the which no doubt but many of them had in them , while they were in their pretended close walking with God , and in their admirings of a Christ without them , and hidebound under a fair seeming form ; and the truth is , while men live in such a condition , they are not able to see how the harlot is decked in them . 

And this author seemeth to take it for a strange ( And delusive ) saying , that the persons should say , that they pray always ; and that they have the baptism of fire ▪ and that they eat the flesh and blood of Christ continually , &c.  Indeed i do not marvel at the author for thinking so for i believe he little knoweth , or is acquainted with the mystery of these things , for i doubt he is too busy about these things without him , so that he is but little acquainted with the mystery of these things within him : but at one thing i marvel in the author , that he worshipping and idolising the scripture so much , and yet should be unacquainted with what is written in it ; or otherwise why is it , that the scripture that he maketh no less than God should not reveal the truth of these sayings to him ; for if he do but remember the scripture , it commands us to pray always ; but no command in it for set times , and set forms of prayer . And for the baptism with fire , it was the promise of Christ , and was foretold by John Baptist , mat. 3. 11.  And for eating and drinking the body and blood of Christ continually , that soul that doth not so , is in the captivity of death , and hath no life in it ; and there is no abiding or living in the word of God or Christ , but by eating his flesh and drinking his blood after that manner ; for he that eateth his flesh , and drinketh his blood in this manner , abideth in Christ , and Christ in him , John 6. 56.  It is not the outward act of baptism , or the bread and wine , eating and drinking , that makes a Christian , or bringeth the soul to live in Christ , and Christ in it : no , no , these are typpicall things under this dispensation in which we live ; and they hold it out in the mystery , the dying with Christ , and the living with Christ : for as in the time of the law , there was several ceremonies which pointed at the appearing of Christ in the flesh ; so when he was in the flesh , he left types of another nature , and these pointed at Christ's appearing in spirit ; and as the types under the law ended when Christ appeared in the flesh ; so the types under the gospel end , when Christ appeareth in the spirit . But none will believe the great mystery herein , but such as have found the same truly fulfilled in them ; and yet those who have attained this mystery , and speaketh thereof to the world , or to the out ▪ side religious , shall be accounted no less than blasphemers because this crosseth their human wisdom , by which they understand God and his way ; and many of those persons is able to make good the truth of this mystery in them , and witness the same by scripture to ; yea ▪ and some of them will witness the same by signs and wonders to , if they be put to it : and yet this author doth falsely accuse these persons , saying . that they can give no scripture account for what they hold out ; and doth falsely say , that they deny scripture , when no persons in the world doth answer the scripture ( In its requiring ) more than they . Other false accusations i omit , because time will not give way to answer them ; for as he saith , the marry absurd , ridiculous practices of these fantastics ( As he calls them ) would be too much to relate ; so i say , to answer all his false accusations , would be too tedious . 

But as he goes on in his discourse , he lighteth on a great hole in their coat , as he thinketh , viz. that they will not put off their hats to any , no not to a magistrate ; and where doth this author find in scripture any command for so doing ; but if he mind scripture well , he shall find something to the contrary ▪ and that was a command of our saviours ; who bade his disciple , that they should salute no man by the way , Luke 10. 4. and for a magistrate , or other men in authority , what are they more than other men ; for if they would but well consider the original root of authority , they shall find , that they have no just cause to look for more respect than other men ; for if sin had not been brought out in the world , one man had not ruled over another : and the scripture saith , the devil brought sin into the world , and sin brought out laws , and laws brought out authority ; but as for magistrates , and men in authority that are good men , these look but for little honour of men , though there be an honour that is due to such ; but that honour consisteth not in putting off hats to them , for if it had , the scripture would have commanded such honour in some place of it . 

Likewise that author findeth other great defects amongst these persons , because they will not call men rabbis and Sirs , and because they speak and write men thou and thee . 

I would know of the author if he find any command in scripture for such names , or to give such epithets to men ; nay , is not the command of scripture quite contrary ; for when our saviour said , call no man father upon earth , how can a man justly call another Master or Sir ? what man , but heathen or fools ; dare take that name to him , seeing Christ gave in charge to his disciple , that they should not take the name Master upon them , mat. 23. 8.  And what grounds or reasons can that author show , that men should be called ye and you , seeing all examples in scripture , new and old , calleth men by the name thou and thee ; yea , if he were never so great a one ; and if the word you or ye be any honour , or respect , why will not that author , and others , let God have that honour and respect also ? Nay , are not all these traditional compliments crept in amongst men in the time of darkness ? and how is the hearts of fools glued to these traditions ? yea , the very examples and commands in scripture , is made void by vain traditions ; and yet these men who leave traditions , and follow the example and command in scripture , how are they mocked and scandalised for it ▪ and as this author doth falsely accuse them , that they walk not according to scripture ; but May not even a very idiot be judge , whether they , or the author and his fellows be the greater deniers of scriptures : nay , it is too plainly apparent , that the author and his fellows are the deniers of scripture , though they pretend or ▪ cry scripture , scripture , scripture , but they will own no more in scripture , then will suit and serve to please their good-thinking , to patch up a form of worship to their God , under which they May hide all their pride , and hypocrisy , and covetous practices ; but where the example and command in scripture is against these things , how little do they heed it : oh how well is scripture liked , and how swiftly is the worship carried on , when it suits with sense and reason ! but , oh how harsh is scripture , and the worship of spirit in the way of bearing the cross , of self-denial : nay , away with that scripture and worship , that will part a man and his self , for that , for sure , shall have the name of madness , and delusion , 

The author is judging these persons , that they think the observing of these things , is a great badge of their profession ; but let 〈◊〉 thoughts be what they will of these things ▪ yet i will plainly tell that author , or any other of his fellows , that to be brought to the profession of such things , will be found an hundred times more harder work , then to be brought into brother ▪ hood , or kirkefellowship , or to perform all holy duties ( So called ) in the same fellowship ; for in brother ▪ hood and kirkefellowship , and in the performing of all holy duties ( So called ) included therein , a man May keep his honour , praise , pride , and reputation amongst men ; but the profession of the other will kill these ; and therefore no marvel if forms have so many favorites , and the other so few friends . 

Another thing i observe in the author's discourse is , where he is saying , that some of these persons , through God's mercy , have been reduced , and turned again into church-communion , who have confessed , while they were in that way , they had no sense of God , &c.  I would have the author , and others , to know the truth of that , viz ▪ that those that joineth with these persons , with an hypocrites heart , cannot long continue in their way ; for there they find but little to please their pride , or sensuality , or their wit and reason ; and God doth justly answer those , in not showing his countenance to an hypocritical heart ; and when such hypocrites can find nothing amongst them that will please pride , and sensuality , then do they start backe from them , for they know well enough where to be entertained , and get liberty for their senses , and keep up their pride , &c.  And where they May warm themselves at the fire of their own kindling , and walk in the light of these sparks , and have these to be called in ▪ comes of Christ into the soul , and where they May be canonised with the name saint , &c. May not the author hereby see the great blindness of himself , and the rest of his formal fellows , that an hypocrite falling from these persons , should amongst them be accounted a saint ; for the truth is , forms and church-fellowship , is the very refuge of hypocrites ; but amongst the other , an hypocrite cannot long continue . It cannot be denied , but at this day there is hypocrites amongst them ; but time will discover them , and they will fall off from amongst them ; but it maketh no matter , for those that fall off will help to make church-fellowship up well enough . 

That author proceedeth on in his discourse , with an advertisement to his fellows to bless God for their fair form and holy performances ; i make no doubt , but it would have pleased him well , if his fellows had met together upon his advertisement , for two hours , and praised God for the goodness of their fair form , much like the persons , who cried for two hours together , great art thou oh Diana of the Ephesians . the author containing still his spirit of scandal and railing , calleth these persons owls , and says , they dare not appear where church-fellowship is ; the which the very priests and persons in their naturals will confute ; for they have appeared in open congregations , and have confuted , and confounded the priests in preaching untruths to the persons ; for which doing , it is not unknown , that they have undergone long and tedious imprisonments . Yea , these persons dare appear , and hath appeared in public market places , to declare against the sins of the persons in these times ; for which doing , some of them have put their life in danger . And for other church-fellowship , viz. the congregaeed way , i i know not how one should device to come to have the opportunity to appear amongst them , they keep so secret ; except a man have got on the hypocrites habit , and make a friend of some of their order to be admitted to appear amongst them . 

He likewise says , they are bred in dark places ; what these dark places is he meaneth of , i cannot tell , except he meaneth in some place of the land which is hills or dales , remote from the body of the land , where oft times the worst of the priests of Baal hath their habitations , and where church-fellowship is not in fashion ; if these be the dark places he meaneth of , i would have him to know , it is no hard thing for God to raise up light in darkness , and to make more of his goodness and truth appear to some in such places , than to those who live in cities , great towns , and corporations , where ofttimes , the great , or chief priests of Baal , have their places , because of fat benefits , and have the good-thinking policy of making congregations : but i would have the author to remember , that when Christ appeared in the flesh , that his natural parents , and the most upright persons , lived the farthest off the priests , and the temple , and lived not in cities and corporations , or in the body of the country , but in the mountains and hilly part of the country , and in little by-places and villages . 

The author runs on still in his censorious scandals , and says , these persons have been either slighters of ordinances , or slight under them ; great duty-mungers , yet wanted the spirit of their duties , &c.  it 's true , a man May live under ordinances and be slight , and too loose under them ; but i warrant that soul for leaving the ordinances , and such slight duties , for taking up that which is an hundred times of more weight in the performing : and for slighting of ordinances , i know , when the spirit of judgement is come , which reproveth man of sin , righteousness and judgement ( Under which man is made truly to know himself ) it will make that soul truly to know the weakness of ordinances , and outward forms , and what knavery lay in his heart hide under these ; and of how little help there is for him in these Ordinanee and duties ; and when man is truly brought to know this , i believe he will but stay himself a little upon ordinances and duties , for there is no other work for him to go about ; and little will that soul care for the reproachful speeches of formalists . 

This author is speaking of wanting the spirit of duty , i would he were so wise as to know what spirit it is that is most frequent in duty , and i believe he should perceive it to be a devil , hiding himself under the habit of an angel , who can cunningly bring promises to remembrance , and hath power to raise false joy in the soul , out of these promises ; and he can make fools believe , these be the in ▪ comes of Christ into the soul , and the souls leading out to Christ in the promises ; and if any under Ordinanee and duty once , be possessed with this spirit , it is hard for any to make them believe otherwise ; and these i believe will not be slothful in duty , or slight ordinances , because of such good feeding , as they imagine they get thereby ; for their urim and their thummim ▪ answers them as they would have it . I will meddle no more at present with answering the rest of his scandals , but leave the thing to God , who i hope in his time will clear his own truth , and make it to flourish in despite of all opposers . Yet one thing i commend in that author , viz. that he wishes his fellows , to work out their salvation with fear and trembling ; if he have understood the truth of that saying , i know he cannot but confess , that he hath wished all his fellows to become Quakers , for no persons in the land hath had that saying more fully fulfilled in them , than these persons , whom all formalists , and almost all persons else , despise : but let the author , and all others , take it for granted , that they shall see the time , that they shall be made to tremble and quake , and that they shall not evade it , though at present they bless themselves from such a thing ; and then fair forms , and fine apparel , and holy duty ( So called ) riches , praise , and reputation , sensuality , pleasures , &c. shall but little prevail , but be dashed in pieces , and the men who is found alive in these things ; but happy is that soul that is made truly acquainted with the evil that is in himself , and who hath taken up the cross of Christ , and followeth after him in the daily denying and forsaking himself ; and who ever thou art that doth that , i wish the God , even the god of gods , to be with thee in thy work , that thou Mayest be strengthened both inward and outward , until thyself be crucified , and made dead upon that cro se , so that thy soul May attain to the perfection of the resurrection of the dead . 

July the 16. 1653.  Geo : Baiteman . 

Finis . 














































