By i. g. a faithful lover and obeyer of the truth . 

Now i beseech you , brethren , mark them which cause divisions and offences , contrary to the doctrine which you have learned , and avoid them , 

rom. 16. 17.  



imprimatur , John Downame . 

To the right worshipful , Sir Benjamin Rudyard , knight , one of the honourable house of Commons . 

Sir ; 

As formerly i have acquainted you with two small treatises , which were dedicated to his majesty and the right honourable the high court of parliament , so now i have presumed on Christian affection , to dedicated this victory of truth to your religious view and meditation . The odds in the conflict was much ten to one , and every one of them being roots of a thousand branches , even so many in number , and so gross in nature , that if i should speak all i know of them , it Might seem incredulous to your exercised and experienced judgement , and prejudicious unto many that want the like knowledge and discernment , so that for this time i thought thus briefly to disarm the leaders , that so the following multitude of the army May have premonition before the time come that all the enemies of Christ shall be slain before him , and the secrets of all manner of hearts discovered . And for my own particular , Sir , finding the boldness and impudence of error , as well as the multiplicity , whereby the whole city is in every part and place infected , and from thence , as from a fountain , the countries also , i could rest no longer silent , for as much as God of his own goodness and infinite mercy , hath been pleased to communicate and impart the knowledge of the mystery of his word unto me in some measure , notwithstanding my own unworthiness and weakness : this truth received in my heart , hath been as a fire which i could no ways hinder from burning into a flame , through the light whereof , by the means of your grave and prudent countenance , he that reads it May have information of the evil and error without prefigured , and within this treatise manifestly revealed ; as also the good and happiness of truth , the old path and straight way of the Lord , in some measure opened and declared ; to which all that are not of the household of faith are strangers , and most of them perverters . And Sir , i pray of one thing take notice in the figure , that he that is most obscure in his person , is most dangerously subtle and mysterious in his doctrine ; and at this very time , in which you sit in parliament , with the whole counsel of the kingdom , he doth more hurt in one hour then in ten heretofore ; his badge is f. wherefore right wor : be pleased to take notice of the churches enemies , and let the despised and persecuted wife of Christ , and her little children , have your love , help , and assistance . These are all that are entreated for to be granted by you , most virtuous and noble senator , to him that is your faithful and humble servant , 

John Grant . 

Truth's victory against heresy . 

Truth .  Now all you heresies , new and old , that have mustered up your powers and forces against me that am the truth of God , and have drawn out your companies into regiments , and your brigades into an army of strong armed fighting cruel men , whom all this world long have plotted , devised , and waged battle against me and my generation ; and by your subtle discipline in the artillery of error , iniquity and deceit , have made yourselves so skilful and artificial , that you have always boldly and scornfully given me many alarms , summons , onsets , skirmishes , underminings , stormings , killings , firings , poisonings , murdering of my children and witnesses , denying us quarter , or any mercy , although we have cried out for pity and compassion , above these four thousand years . I pray you take notice therefore , that i do now , in these last days of the world , even now in this little time to come , that makes an end of sins , and finisheth transgressions : and which also accomplisheth my injuries and sufferings , my tears and sorrows , my lamentation and weeping : now , i say , even in this day , in which you are so much increased , and grown so innumerable ; i challenge you all , even all your multitudes and gatherings , of what degree and condition , sect or religion , sex , age , tongue or nation soever you are of ; for that you have usurped my names and titles , my house and children , my birth , my birthright and inheritance , my privileges and my dignities , my honour and authority , my kingdom and throne itself : and that you all have robbed , oppressed , spoilt , reproached , belied , persecuted , beaten , wounded and killed me in my truth and innocency , at all times , and in all places with despite and scorn ; contemptuously have cast me out from amongst you , and defamed my sincerity with heresy , my purity with iniquity , my fruitfulness you have called barrenness , and my faithful fervency you call hypocrisy . 



Heresy .  What strange voice is this that we hear , ( truth saith she ) what is that ▪ were you made to reprove our thoughts ? we tell you , you are grievous unto us to behold , let us therefore examine her with despitefulness and torture , and let us condemn her with a shameful death . 



Truth .  Thus hath ever been your dealing with me and mine from the beginning ; for your Cain killed my child Abel , and so your Ishmael mocked and persecuted Isaac , my son of promise , and my Lord of life was slain by your children of death , and as always you have been at enmity and sworn adversaries : so from the beginning of this world , to this very day , you have had power and authority in your own hands , to work your will and pleasure against us , even the greatness of the pomp and glory of temporal dignity & majesty , in and by whom you have wrought your malice and implacable anger and wrath upon us ▪ 

The great image , consisting of the four metals , which the prophet Daniel described to be the four great powerful monarchs which should rule and govern in this world : the golden head ; the silver breasts and arms ; the brazen belly and thighs ; the iron legs ▪ and the feet and toes , they consisted part of iron ; and part of clay , dan. 2. 31  ▪ 32 , 33 , 42.  And all you my old sworn enemies , have , in and by them all , even in all and every part of this terrible and great images power and strength ; you i say again , have wrought and effected under ▪ and in a seeming bright and excellent way your own wicked spleen and indignation against me ; your father the devil exercising his false accusation and lies , his enmity and cruelty in the monarchy of the Babylonians , which was the head of gold ; and after him he stirred up the Assyrian monarchy to the selfsame purpose , deciphered by the breasts and arms of silver ; and when that power grew old , weak , and so failed him , than he stirred up the Grecian monarchy , who exceeded for strength , though not for wealth , whereby my children were cruelly oppressed to their great destruction ; for as their nature , so is their operation , declared by the prophet to be a belly and thighs of brass . And lastly , for the space of this long season ▪ near unto the time of seventeen hundred years , that great and huge monarchy of the Romans , our universal and mighty oppressors , have dealt very cruelly with us , even worse than all that were before them ; for their sword hath had a double edge , called force and deceit , cunning and cruelty ; and for power , worse than all that were before them : as iron is the basest for value , and hardest for strength , for it breaketh in pieces , and subdueth all things , as one of my dear sons affirmeth , dan. 2. 40. which i and mine have found by doleful experience , all their tedious , woeful and odious reign of the iron legs , and dirty toes , how doleful was it in the days of our blessed saviour ; that , that holy prophet John the Baptist , that takes his name from his office , the harbinger , the forerunner , and preparer of the Lord's own way , that he should be killed , and our innocent Lord grievously abuseded , wounded & crucified also ; and how was i and my children havocked , and cruelly destroyed and wasted presently after the resurrection and ascension of our Lord in those numerous and unparalleled ten persecutions , and all wrought and prosecuted against us by those legs of iron ? all which power and authority of the legs are now gone and past , as a storm that 's over , and a tale that 's told , and as a great fire that 's quenched , excepting only the feet and toes , consisting of iron and clay , matter of two contrary natures , in them the solidness and strength of iron , and the weakness or brickleness of clay ; and yet such a powerful enemy , whose cunning craftiness is managed by deceit and policy , in which time iniquity hath , and doth abound under the pretence of verity ; this fourth monarchy , from the first to the last , in all the parts of it , is deciphered by a strange beast , diverse from all the beasts that were before it , dreadful , terrible , and exceeding in the greatness of power and strength : it had iron teeth , saith the prophet , and they were great ones , to tear and kill by , and it devoured , saith the text , and broke in pieces , and stamped the residue with the feet of it , and it had ten horns , dan. 7. 7.  



Heres .  But let us prove if his words be true ; for what is the Babylonian , Assyrian , Grecian , or Roman monarch to us ? for we have been , and are , the spiritual seed of Abraham by faith , we are Christians , who have believed , are baptised , and communicate in all the ordinances of God ; we are warranted in the scriptures for our church-discipline and government , and we walk in a church state , and church way , in constituting our congregations , in ordaining our ministers , our pastors , our deacons and elders , widows , eunuchs , and divers holy orders ; as that of Jesus , and John the Baptist , Mary Magdalene , and abundance more orders , of men , women ▪ and angels , and all these by authority of scriptures , and yet will you rank us amongst the heathens , and compare us to the four ethnic monarchs long ago past ? we doubt not , but upon further discovery , to prove yourself to be untruth . 



Truth .  What ever you are , whether Papists , Familists , Arians , Arminians , Anabaptiss , Brownists , Antinomians , millinarists , or Monarchists of all sorts ; and although all and every one of you , of each sort , gird and bind yourselves with the new found common with of independency , yet myself and my little children , are able to prove against you all , even against the oldest and strongest of you , ( And therefore observe and take notice of it , even of the charge itself ) that so many of you that are not born of sorrow and comfort , and have not your parts in mourning , and rejoicing of water and the holy ghost , as the scripture speaketh , i tell you plainly , notwithstanding all your outward names and distinctions , your affirmed Christianity , your churchway and state , your participation in the word and sacraments , your ordinations and orders , and what discipline you are of , or any kind or manner however , except , i say , you be separated or dissevered from natural men by the vail of regeneration : as the temple of God , the altar , and them that worship therein , were separated by a vail from the outward and common court , erected for the multitude of the house of Israel , to offer and sacrifice ; yea , again , because the matter i speak of , is of such great concernment , i speak it the third time , except you are by true repentance and assurance of mercy ▪ made capable spiritually to eat Christ's flesh , and to drink his blood , thereby to have eternal life in you , except you be thus gracious , and made spiritually living by regeneration , God's word , i say , and the spirit of truth denominates you , reckons and accounts you all among the heathens and gentiles , rev. 11. 1 , 2. and notwithstanding all your outside and overcast Christianity , the whole , wicked ; cursed , defiled and unregenerate world and you , make but one castaway part , one flock of goats for ever to be excluded from the sheep of Christ , their sweet and pleasant pastor , that flock and fold also . 



Heres .  This fellow condemns us all ; we are esteemed of him as counterfeits , or false coin , he abstaineth from our ways as from filthiness , yet we marvel how he can prove that we that are Christians , are a part of those monarchs , whose several times and powers are wholly expired ▪ consummated and gone ▪ 



Truth .  As i have in general proved it already , in showing that all the wicked party in the world make but one fort , one cursed side on the left hand : so also i prove it further by our saviour Christ's words to the Pharisees , in his days , matth. 23. 35  ▪ that upon you , saith he , May come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth , from the blood of righteous Abel , unto the blood of Zacharias , son of Barachias , whom ye slew between the temple and the altar . here our Lord lays the murder of Abel and Zacharias to the scribes and Pharisees charge ▪ although the personal actors were dead many years before , saying to them present , whom ye slew ; and the reason is , because all murderers from the beginning of the world to the end thereof , make but one generation all of them , even one generation of vipers , persecutors and destroyers . 

Secondly , as yet the whole monarch of the Romans is not expired and past , but still in being ; the feet that were partly iron , and partly clay , are not wholly consumed ▪ nor the mixed matter is not yet abolished : for yet craft & policy doth prosper in wicked practices , to destroy the mighty , the persons of the holy one , by standing up and opposing the Prince of Princes , who notwithstanding shortly shall be destroyed without hands , dan. 8. 24 , 25 , even that man of sin , that son of perdition , even that opposer and exalter of himself above all that is called God , and as God sitteth in the temple of God , whom the Lord that he opposeth , shall consume with the spirit of his mouth , and destroy with the brightness of his coming , notwithstanding all his serpentine working , his power , his signs and lying wonders with all deceivableness and unrighteousness of them that perish , not yet ended , 2 tehs 2.  And although this part of the image have already continue from the 406 ▪ years' of salvation , 1238 ▪ years , and shall remain and live yet 22. years more to fill up and accomplish his determined complete number of 1666 , rev. 13. 18. then , even then , a stone saith the truth , that was cut out without hands , smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay , and broke them to pieces together , saith the text ; and they became like chaff of the summer threshing floors , and the wind carried them away , that no place was found for them : and the stone that smote the image , became a greet mountain , and filled the whole earth ; of which great mountain we shall speak further in its due place , according to the prophet's understanding it , dan. 2. 34 , 35. 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45.  

And all the false Christ's , and false prophets , false apostles , and false teachers , who shall privily bring in damnable heresies , deceitful workers , matth. 24. 29.  Mark . 13. 22. 2 pet. 2. 1. 2 cor. 11. 13. 1  ▪ joh. 4. 1 ▪ are all denominated by the name of antichrists , as the apostle saith , 1 joh. 2. 18.  Little children , it is the last time ; and as you have heard that Antichrist shall come ; even so now are there many antichrists , whereby we know it is the last time : and this apostle was well acquainted with these antichrists , these teachers of errors , and calls the Antichrist himself the false prophet , rev. 16. 13. and with him all his wicked clergy , and lying priests , rev. 19 20. and as the false teachers of the synagogue of Rome ; and by their cunning corrupt doctrine , have deceived multitudes , and if it were possible , would deceive even the very elect : so all false teachers , before popery was , and such as are now , and shall be after it , are of the same company , the same church , the same synagogue with them , of what sect , order , or name soever they be , as before is touched : for as Rome is spiritually called Babylon , which by interpretation is confusion ; so are all the congregations and churches amongst us , that are gathered , built , and covenanted by men , and according to their own invention , and the vision of their own hearts ; and so are not purchased by the same blood , gathered by the spirit's power , and built by God's own hand , they are all , even all of them spiritually , as Rome is , even Sodom and Egypt , rev. 11. 8. where also our Lord was crucified , rev. 18. 24.  



Heres .  You are very plain , and exceeding round with us , take heed you be not too wise , nor over bold . 



Truth .  Plainness and roundness is truth's badge , or note of distinction from others ; so Jacob my son , my chosen one , is said to be a a plain man , gen. 25. 27. and all my works are perfect round , that is , without any error , as David saith , he hath made the round world , psal. 89. 11. which shows the globe of the earth to be round ; and so saith the prophet , isa. chap. 40. 22. it is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth , that is , the round of the earth . prov. 8. 27.  



Heres .  But why do you rank us of the church of Rome amongst the heresies , and new doctrines of late devised and nominated ? for we can reckon our antiquity from the apostles , and that we are descended from them , we have , and continue still the very form of the church of Christ and his apostles ; for we have the Pope , Peter's successor , Christ's vicegerent here on earth , and answerable to the twelve apostles , we have twelve Cardinals , we continue the imposition of hands , the washing the saints feet , the holy unction , auricular confession , and spiritual absolution ; we have the word and sacraments , discipline and execration , and therefore we are the church of Christ , and not an Antichristian church . 



Truth .  You speak like a Papist , and for the maintenance of the Romish church ; for the church of God , or kingdom of heaven stands not in outward observation , Luke 17. 20. there's as much difference between the church of Christ and the church of Rome , as there is between outward show and inward truth , and as St. Paul in rom. 14. 17. showeth us , what the church is not , so he showeth us what it is ; namely , righteousness and peace , and joy in the holy ghost , and as it follows , for he that in these things serveth Christ , is acceptable to God , and approved of men ; that is , spiritual men . A man May be in the outward place and office of the church , an apostle , as Judas , an evangelist , as Demas , a disciple , as Simon Magus , and yet not of the true church ; such men May be amongst them , and yet not of them ; as St. John speaks : and the outward form and manner of true Christian churches are not always the same ; for the primitive church was as true a church before they had deacons , and ordained elders in every city or church , as it was afterwards ; and for your great ones , chief of Cardinals , except they be least in humility , the most vile in their own eyes ; for this is a paradox , a mystery , a riddle to the world , that the lowest is the highest , the least the greatest , the humblest the most honourable ; and this is quite contrary to the fashion of your Cardinals , which our Lord lays down for an eternal truth , Luke 22. 25 , 26 ▪ chap. 9 49. he that is least among you all , the same shall be great ▪ chief , or a Cardinal , as the word signifieth ▪ your Pope , you say , is Peter's successor , in what respect , i pray , in lordship and supreme authority ? when you prove that Peter ever had such jurisdiction , than you say something ▪ but till than you say nothing . The truth is , Peter succeeded our Lord Christ in the love of the truth , and faithful obedience of his gracious word , and in denying himself , and taking up his cross , and suffering for the gospel , the joyful voice ; and so all faithful and true Christians do succeed Peter , and the rest of the faithful apostles : and this law is unrepealable , it cannot be altered , but shall stand firm to all the saints for ever ; for unto you it is given , saith the apostle , in the behalf of Christ , not only to believe on him ▪ but also to suffer for his sake ▪ phil. 1. 29. and he makes it a full resolution to Timothy ; yea , saith he , and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus , shall suffer persecution , 2 tim. 3. 12. so than those that truly succeed Peter , are those , and such as succeed him in spiritual things ; as in his repentance and faith , his love to Christ and his truth , and his faithful suffering for it , even till death , 2 pet. 1. 14.  

And this was it , when our Lord saith thus unto him , mat. 16 ▪ 17 , 18. and thou art Peter , that is , thou are a living stone of my spiritual temple , blessed of my father from above to this purpose , and upon this rock will i build my church , &c. that is , the truth revealed , and given from heaven by God , assuredly received and believed by the elect , acknowledged and obeyed by the believer to salvation ; this is the spiritual house or church ▪ consisting all of living spiritual stones , Christ Jesus being the foundation or chief corner stone ; and the great Master , workman and builder of it himself , as the scriptures testify , 1 pet. 2. 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7.  Heb. 8. 2. of this assembly and congregation , doth our Lord say , ye are the salt of the earth , ye are the light of the world , mat. 5. 13. 14.  and i say unto you , that if two of you shall agree on earth , as touching any thing they shall ask , it shall be done , &c.  Matth. 18. 19 and to these only is the promise made , to receive the spirit of God to lead and guide them into all truth , joh. 16. 13.  And again , i will pray the father , and he shall give you another comforter , that he May abide with you for ever , joh. 14. 16. which spirit of truth , is the great substitute and advocate that Christ hath left with his church all the while of his personal absence , through whose grace and wisdom , they are they only that make use of the keys of the kingdom of heaven , according to matth. 18. 18.  Joh. 20. 13.  

Therefore Pope , i say unto thee , thy vicardome is blasphemy , thy keys arrogancy , thy chair heresy , thy succession vanity , thy Cardinals and chief priests Pharisees , thy imposition impurity , thy washings uncleanness , thy holy unction extreme pollution , thy crossings idolizings , thy confessions & absolutions abominations ; you say you are the church of Christ , and that your succession is from the apostles , where hath Christ and his apostles prescribed to you that trash and trumpery which you call pure & holy divinity , your breaden god , your unbloody sacrifices , your golden pardons of all rates and prizes , your pilgrimages , your purgatories , your baptizings , to convey grace , and wash away all manner of original sin , your idols , your altars , your masses , your dirges , your execrations by bell book and candle , your Avie maries , and your babbling prayers by numbers in an unknown tongue , your silken copes , your shaved crowns , your vowed chastity and poverty , and a thousand more such fables and heathenish imitations of the heathens and wicked men's inventions , which now God's word by the testimony of his faithful regenerated children of truth have for ever discovered you and your religion , to be but a filthy heap or wall of mud and dirt , whited over : a painted sepulchre , though outward to the show and appearance of men , beautified , trimed and adorned with silver , gold ▪ and all manner of rich and precious things , under the mask of the spirits ornaments , yet within , nothing but stinking noisome carrion , rottenness , filthiness and uncleanness , and all your abominable worship of the heathens , that you were to maintain for a day , a month , a year , the whole amounting to two and forty months , that is , so many years of days , even an 1260. years which is the antiquity you so much brag of , & yet do not consider the older you are , the nearer your dissolution , notwithstanding your religion be made and woven of all the glorious matter of the gods of the heathenish monarchs that were before you , which were worshipped with such vain pomp , varieties of voices , and musical instruments , as Rimmon and Baal , Ashtaroth and Milcom , and the rest of abominations , that had priests and altars , hesaints and she-saints of their own makings , like unto you ; as also your devilish doctrines , just after the manner & matter of the heathens idols , oracles ; which vain worldly glory hath so lifted thee up with pride , that thou hast advanced thyself above the stars of God ; yet let us wait now but a few days , and we shall see thy glory shame , thy greatness contemptuousnes , thy gorgeous apparel nakedness , thy life death , thy habitation destruction ; and as you have done cruelly to others , so shall others deal cruelly with you , your name and generation shall be utterly forgotten , and your judgement shall seize on you , so that your place shall be no more found , rev. 17. 46.  

And you May as easily keep the sun from shining , the wind from blowing , the sea from motion , and the earth from springing , as to divert this judgement of God determined against thee ; therefore , all you that will escape her judgements , come out of her , and separate yourselves from her , lest you partake of her sins , and be made partakers of her plagues , 2 cor. 6. 16.  And what i say unto you , the head of sects , i say unto all the rest , come out of Babylon , and submit to Zion , of which universal mother , gal. 4. 26. we shall often have occasion to describe and discover . 



Heres .  This man is not for our turn , he is clear contrary to our doings , he upbraideth us with our offending the law , and objecteth to our infamy the transgressings of our education . What will you call the holy church of Rome to question , the Pope the holy father ? who , i am sure , is not Antichrist ; for the Antichrist is sin , and not a man : but the Pope of Rome is the father of the church , holy ▪ and good , and teacheth the world the gospel of Jesus Christ now by images , as the prophet Moses taught the Jews in God's holy law by ceremonies heretofore . 



Truth .  This man that speaketh now , is a Familist , who , as he saith sin is Antichrist , so he believeth , and teacheth that righteousness is Christ , and so turns both Christ and Antichrist from persons to qualities , and the whole scripture into allegories , who by cunning and crafty expressions exceeds all others in fulfilling that saying of our Lord , matth. 24. 24.  And there shall arise false Christ's , and false prophets , and this is such a false Christ , and false prophet , as there is not the like in the world ; making Christ a fantasy , a mere fiction , a righteousness of their own invention , and so they conceive of Antichrist to be sin , which things of themselves are not persons , and yet they confess and preach , that Christ is the seed of the woman , and sin the seed of the serpent ; and to deceive men's understandings , sometimes they will call Christ the new man , and sin the old man , or human nature of Christ ; and so in their preachings , writings , and conferences use the scripture terms and phrases ; yea , their creed , or confession of their faith runs word for word with ours , only differing thus : for they make all their articles to express the present time , in those things we believe to be past , and to come ; they do acknowledge Jesus of Nazareth , but he to be no more Christ the saviour of the world , than they are that have taken in the light , as they use to speak ; and upon this ground confess , that every one of their illuminated ones are conceived of the holy ghost , and born of the virgin Mary , suffered under Pontius Pilate , are crucified , dead and buried , risen from the dead the third day , and ascend into heaven , and there sit on the right hand of God the father , descend from thence , and now judge the world ; and all these things in a mystery , a metaphor and allegory . You read , say they , of these things in the letter , 1600 years ago , but now they are in the newness of the spirit , and according to these principles expound all the scriptures , both of the old and new testament . Now say they , is the wedding of Cana of Galilee fulfilled in the spirit , where righteousness is the Jesus , the union between God the father and the son , the bride and the bridegroom ; the mother of Jesus , they say , is the word of truth that brings to pass this holy marriage , and the turning of water into wine , is the oldness turned to newness , flesh into spirit ; so that thereby the new man becomes codeified with God , and God again cohominified with man ; and that now Christ whips out the buyers and sellers out of the temple , meaning by Christ , righteousness , and by the buyers and sellers , sins and corruptions ; and by the temple men's bodies , expounding that text , hebr. 1. 13.  Sit on my right hand , till i make thine enemies thy footstool , to be meant of their holy anointed ones ; and when Christ , which is righteousness , is risen in them by regeneration , then that saying is brought to pass that is written , hos. 13. 14. 1 cor. 15. 54.  Death is swallowed up in victory : they say they are Moses , and the children of Israel , and all natural men are Egyptians , which by conversion become Israelites ; and that now Moses is contending with Pharaoh the devil , to bring the chosen of God through the red sea , and barren , hard and desolate wilderness into Canaan the land of rest , the peace of conscience , and favour of God ; and that now God calls Abraham out of vr of the Chaldees , making it the land of devils , as the Hebrew word signifies , to set forth to us , every unregenerate man's dark and sinful estate naturally , and God's calling of Abraham out of it , to go to a land he would give him , to signify unto us the conversion of a sinner to God , and David's killing Uriah , to signify the quenching the spirit the apostle dehorts from , and Reubens' going up to his father's bed , the weaknesses of such as are babes in Christ , as St. John speaks of , calling them little children , and young men , 1 joh. 2. 12 , 13.  And that in this nonage , this youth of theirs , it is with their anointed ones , as it was with Christ , which signifies anointed , mat. 3.  & 4. who as soon as God testified to him from heaven , saying , this is my beloved son , in whom i am well pleased ; and when he had fasted and separated himself from his natural ways and sinful affections , forty days and forty nights , as Moses was forty days and forty nights in the holy mount , where he received the covenant of perfection in a figure . And the text saith , afterwards he was an hungered , that is , this new man hungered and thirsted after righteousness ; and as the text saith , the tempter came to him , the meaning is , say they , the sinful flesh , the enemy to the spirit said to him , if thou be the son of God , command that these stones be made bread , but the new man answereth , it is written , the man Christ shall live by the truth , the word of God ; then the tempter uses other means , to have him to be a self-justifier , and account of himself as the holy city of God , & makes him to be advanced in his own thoughts , as the highest of all , as a pinnacle is above the rest of the building ; and then to presume in his infancy , as if he had the experience of old age , and perfection itself , and so the holy child answers , thou oughtst not to tempt , but to wait patiently on thy Lord thy god . His third and last temptation , is the proffer of the whole world unto this young man in Christ , but being now grown in strength , in righteousness , makes a speedy answer , get thee behind me Satan , God is only to be worshipped and served , so the tempter left him , and the angels ministered unto him in all passages of service , till they brought the holy one from one degree to another to sit down at the right hand of the father , and to come to judge the world . And of this spiritual estate do they understand all the scriptures that speak of the resurrection of the body , understanding it this spiritual body , and this spiritual resurrection , and that Christ is dead or alive in every man in the world , dead in the natural or sinful estate , and made alive , and raised in the illuminated estate ; and the terms in scripture of this present world , to be the sinful estate , and the world to come the regenerated estate , which they call perfection , eternal life and the glory of the father , the world without end , affirming there shall be no end of the heavens , and of the earth , the whole creation , but that it shall continue for ever successively , one generation after another ; and as man comes from God , so he goes to God , in matter and time infinitely . These and a thousand gross and blasphemous doctrines are the tenants of the Familists , which are the very depths of Satan , from which i wish thee to repent , if it May be by any means obtained , and learn to leave off your scorn and contempt of scripture-learning , and labour to be taught by the spirit of truth in the true meaning of God's word . 



Heres .  These doctrines which you call Familists are the tenants of n. h. that is , Henry Nichols , who lived in Germany , and writ divers small books , as the gospel of the kingdom , the prophecy of the spirit of love , the glass of righteousness , and divers others ; but although he be a seducer and grossly deceived , to the overthrow of the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ , in affirming holiness and righteousness to be Christ the Lord ; now i am so far from his opinion , that i think Jesus the prophet of Nazareth , to be only man , that is , mere man , and not God and man , and to partake of the deity no more than any other natural man doth . 



Truth .  You express yourself to be an Arian ; for Arrius that proud Bishop , whose time was above 200. years after the apostles , and did then fall from the truth of the scriptures , as they clearly set forth our blessed saviour in his divine nature as well as in his human , and invented and broached , divulged and published this heresy , that Jesus Christ was only man , and not God , which heresy backed with his authority , proved a great and cruel persecution against the faithful and true Christians , 150. years together , as ecclesiastical histories , according with the plain and holy word of God , do declare , as it appears in the first of John , compared with genesis 1. and prov. 8. 22 , 23 , 24. and John , that beloved of the Lord , revelations the 9th . chapter , makes a full and plain description of the person of Arrius his power , authority , and the complete time of his persecution and false doctrine , where he deciphers his person , by the appellation and name of a star , vers. 1. thereby ▪ signifying he was a high and great light in the church , even in the rank and course of the apostles , for so are they compared and called , rev. 12. and that this star was great in the outward office of the church , is farther intimated in these words , in saying , he fell from heaven , that was , from the purity of the doctrine of the saints , preached and planted by Christ's faithful apostles and evangelists ; and in that it is said , he fell unto the earth , it showeth , that as he fell from the light of the truth , so he fell into gross corrupt heretical darkness , apostatising ; and as opposite to the sincerity of the truth he formerly professed , as the cursed polluted earth is to the pure undefiled heavens ; and as it is said , to him was given the key of the bottomless pit , it shows the permissive power that should be granted and given to him ; that as he loved lies more than truth , so he that is the god of truth should give him up to strong delusions to believe lies ; and having in himself an adulterous evil heart , a fit receptacle for an error so abominable , doth with as great a longing desire , preach and publish it to corrupt others like himself , by all ways ▪ and means whatsoever : as first his own thirsty deceit was not satisfied , proved in these words , vers. 2.  And he opened the bottomless pit , and there arose a smoke out of the pit , as the smoke of a great furnace , declaring hereby , the nature of their corrupt doctrines , even such as smoak , soot and filth , compared to the pure air , and woeful darkness to the glorious sun-light ▪ 

The truth of God , whose shining purity was obscured and darkened , as it follows in the next words , by reason of the smoke of the pit ; and the text saith , vers. 3.  And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth , which shows the great success and large increase of false doctrines , which are no sooner conceived and born , but presently it brings forth abundantly a viperous and wicked brood , good for nothing but destruction itself , and their great power is to hurt as a scorpion , which is the most cruel and venomous of all creeping things , vers. 5.  And as they are cruel , so they are cunning , crafty , and unavoidable , by which being once bit or stung , it is incurable ; of such dangerous nature was this heresy of Arrius , see the cruelty , vers. 6. their power , cunning , and deceit , vers. 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11.  

The apostle also by divine inspiration , sets down the full and complete time of this Arian persecution , saying , it shall be five months , that is , months of years , accounting as before , in the audit of Antichrist , thirty days to a month , which multiplied by five , amounts in the total , to one hundred and fifty years , prophetically reckoning a day for a year , as ezek. 4. 6. which heresy was grown to such a height of esteem and applause , that the than Christian Emperor called a general council of all the Bishops in Christendom , to confirm and establish this abominable false doctrine by a canon , or ecclesiastical decree , to be an unquestionable verity : from which conclusion , not any one of the learned doctors did dissent , but only godly Athanasius , who by his alone wisdom and great knowledge in the scriptures , did protest and declare against this dark and smoky error ; and he managed and maintained the truth so clearly by the authority of holy writ , that as Christ was perfect man , so he was truly God , God and man , our alone saviour , through which his grave and solid arguments raised from the beginning of the evangelists , of St. John , and other holy scriptures , he gained the most of the general council to be of his side and judgement , whereupon they prevailed with him to make and write that famous and excellent creed , called after his own name , even the creed of Athanasius , which then , and ever since , hath been embraced , approved , honoured , & confessed of all Christian churches , although it is now neglected , as gold in the dust , and pearls by the ignorant cock in the dunghill , and fables in comparison , even husks , preferred before the verity thereof , through the blindness of this present generation . 



Heres .  Although the Pope's universal supremacy in and over all persons and causes ecclesiastical and civil , be an error , and also heresy , to deny the human nature of Christ , as doth the Familists , and as bad in Arrius , to deny the divine nature of our Lord and saviour , for i am of Athanasius his mind , that he was God of the substance of the father , begotten before the world were made , and man of the substance of the mother , born in the world , perfect God and perfect man ; for as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man , so God and man is one Christ . 

And also i believe and maintain , that every man naturally , hath free will to do good , as well as free will to do evil ; and that a Christian man's standing in the grace and favour with God , depends upon his obedience in keeping the commandments , and that there is no more , or other certainty of salvation , than that man by his own free good will continues obedient to God's word ; so that a man May be the child of God to day , and the child of the devil to morrow . 



Truth .  You that did last speak , show yourself to be an Arminian ; for although you confess many truths , yet indeed you differ no more from a Papist than Arminius , that wicked heretic did , and in your false doctrines of free will , and falling from grace , you agree with the ancient Anabaptists also ; for you all three are but one in these two errors . 

And , first , for your tenant of freewill , that all men naturally have as great freedom and power of will to do good , as to do evil , this is a gross error , and directly opposite to the clear and plain scriptures , for the apostle saith , it is God that worketh in you , both to will and to do of his good pleasure , phil. 2. 13.  And the truth speaks thus , 2 cor. 3. 5.  Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as of ourselves , but our sufficiency is of God ; and this is the faith and confession of the whole church of God : isa. 26. 12.  Lord , thou wilt ordain peace for us , for thou also hast wrought all our works in us and for us . 

The error of free will , is a carnal opinion , and naturally men are inclined to it , and the holy apostle St. James , reproves it in his days , who writing to the scattered tribes , saith , you ought to say , if the Lord will , and not to say as you have affirmed your faith to be , we will go , &c. James 2. 13. 15.  So that it is plain , no man of himself hath freedom of will to do good ; but there is no question but every man hath freedom of will to do evil , as saith the prophet , jerem. 4. 22.  

Secondly , your doctrine of the uncertainty of the elects called and sanctified estate in Christ by regeneration , shows plainly you do not know what it is to be a Christian indeed and truly , for if you did , you would know this truth undoubtedly , that they that trust in the Lord , are as mount Zion , which cannot be removed , but abideth for ever ; as testifieth the prophet , psal. 135. 1. and the apostle gives the reason of it , because the chief corner stone thereof is Christ , that holy , chosen and precious one ; and whosoever he be that believeth on him , shall not be confounded , 1 pet. 2. 6.  And this doctrine is that which our Lord himself hath taught us , upon this rock , saith he , i will build my church , and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it , mat. 16. 18.  Mark what greater contrary power can there be , than the gates of hell , and yet that , even the strength of all the powers of the devil shall not be able to do that which you affirm they shall , and the reason thereof our Lord himself gives , joh. 10. 27 , 28 , 29.  My sheep hear my voice , and i know them , and they follow me , and i give unto them eternal life , and they shall never perish , neither shall any pluck them out of my hand ; my father which gave them me , is greater than all , and no man is able to pluck them out of my father's hand : i and my father are one . 

And that great experienced man of the love of God , even above the rest of his fellows , speaking of the blessed estate of the regenerated elect , 1 pet. 1. 2 , 3 , 4 , 5. saith , they were elected according to the foreknowledge of God , begotten again to a lively hope , by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead , to a glorious undefiled inheritance , of which it is impossible we should fail of , who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ; and those sweet words of our Lord are of efficacy to gain the most contrary heart to the belief of this truth , joh. 17. 11.  Holy father , keep through thy holy name those that thou hast given me , that they May be one as we are one . 

Now Arminius see the sure and certain estate of a regenerated Christian so sure as God is sure , and unchangeable , as Christ , the same yesterday , to day and for ever , eternal as the holy ghost ; even so are they that are made one with God , who truly have fellowship with the father , and with the son , Jesus Christ , 1 joh. 1. 3.  For he that sanctifieth and they that are sanctified , are all of one ; as brethren are one , heb. 2. 11. and as the tree and the branches are one , joh. 15. 5. even so is Christ and the regenerated man , oh happy are the persons that are in such a case ! 



Heres .  At the first i thought what we should find of you , but now i have ready a multitude of scriptures to show to you , that which i maintain to be truth , and by them i shall discover you , i hope , to be untruth : the first place is , ezek. 18. 24.  When the righteous man turneth away from his righteousness , and committeth iniquity , and dyeth in them , he shall die for the iniquity he hath done ; again , our Lord himself saith , every branch in me that beareth not fruit , he ( That is , God ) taketh away , that is , cutteth off from the vine , joh. 15. 2.  And many of Christ's disciple were offended at the truth of his doctrine , and turned away , or went backe , that is , left him for ever , joh. 6. 66. others received the word gladly , and endured for a while believers , but when tribulation and persecution did arise , because of the word , they were offended , and fell away , mat. 13. 21.  lake 8. 13. yea , the apostle is more particular , hebr. 6. 4 , 5 , 6. for he speaks of such as were made partakers of the holy ghost , and had tasted of the good word of God , and the powers of the world to come ; and yet notwithstanding all this , to fall away , as not to be renewed again by repentance ; yea , the same apostle showeth farther , heb. 10. 29. that a man May be sanctified by the blood of the testament , and afterwards tread under foot the son of God , and Count the same blood as an unholy thing , and despite the spirit of grace . and St. Peter , 2 pet. 18. 19 , 20. speaks of some that were clean escaped from the corruptions of the world , through the knowledge of the Lord and saviour Jesus Christ , and yet after this to be entangled and overcome again , whose latter end is worse than their beginning ; these , and many more are the ground of my doctrine . 



Truth .  And secondly , i answer , these scriptures rightly understood , make nothing at all for the maintenance of your error , but in truth it teacheth us , that we ought heedfully to observe the distinction in one and the same term , which must be generally and really observed throughout the scriptures , which hereafter i shall more fully discover , when any of the Anabaptists shall speak ; and in the mean while , i pray consider of the terms in those scriptures you have alleged , as the term faith to believe the word , the affection of joy and gladness in the knowledge of it , a relish and taste of the sweetness and goodness in it for the present , with some apprehension of the glorious things of the world to come , and through the operations of its working in those that received it , as that it is said , they were washed and sanctified , and yet afterwards never the better for all this , nay , worse at last then at first ; for it shall aggravate their condemnation : this shows plainly , that the new and living way of life is set open unto all , by the general and particular administration of the gospel , and that men by the common gifts of the spirit , May attain to many excellent graces , even beginnings to the peculiar and special gifts , to which whosoever attaineth , shall never fall and perish , which differing effect of the gospel is clearly set forth unto us in the four grounds mentioned by our Lord ; the seedsman was one and the same , and the seed itself was so also , and yet took not the same effect in all , although it was sown and cast into them all . 

The highway side were hard hearted , ignorant men , whose hearts had not earth to cover the seed , and the wicked one came and stole it away ; in the thorny and stony ground it sprung up into a blade , in the one it failed , because it could not take root for stones ; in the other , because the thorns choked it ; the good ground never failed , because the seed took deep root , the hard way was broken up and ploughed , so that the seed was covered , that the fowls of the air could not find it , to steel it , the stones could not hinder the taking root downward , for they were cast out by repentance : nor the thorns choke it in springing upwards , for the pleasures of this world , and the cares of unrighteous riches are both forsaken , so that the happy success and prosperity of it was not hindered nor prevented , but the broken penitent heart understands , retains and keeps the word , and bringeth forth fruit with patience , Luke . 8. 15. when as the other three sorts of grounds brought nothing to perfection , vers. 14.  Now these several grounds , briefly show us how all your mentioned scriptures are to be understood , even as the parable sets forth unto us the differing estate of men under the means of the gospel ; and so also doth the branch in Christ that is fruitful , which God purgeth , that it May bring forth more fruit , and the fruitless branch in the vine Christ , which God cutteth off to be burned ; in this distinction doth the prophet Ezekiel speak , calling that man righteous in the scripture you first mentioned , who was so made righteous by the common gifts of the spirit , as the three bad grounds ; and in this distinction we are to understand , that a man May become sanctified by the blood of Christ , and yet afterwards tread it under foot , as Judas , when he was a preacher , and yet afterwards fell to be a traitor , to kill the Lord , that formerly in some respect he served , and differenced from other men by his holy employment of his apostolical office , as he was that took the plough by the hand , and afterwards looked back , thereby making himself uncapable of that estate in which before he stood in , Luke 9 62. and the apostle makes this clear to the Corinthians , speaking , that the gospel to some is the savour of life unto life , and to others , the savour of death unto death , 2 cor. 2. 15 , 16. not that it is so of itself , but occasionally : as the sun in the firmament , that is one and the same in itself , yet through accidents in the subject , it softens ice , and hardens clay ; so likewise is the administration of the gospel salvation to them that receive and obey it , and damnation to those that neglect and contemn it , as in profane Esau's case , and the blessedness of Jacob , both sons of Isaac , the one selling his birthright for a mess of pottage , the other seeking and striving for it with prayers and tears : so that it appears plainly , that the scriptures rightly understood are against your erroneous opinion , and all of them affirm , that truth of God which before i have proved to you , that whosoever believeth , and is baptised shall be saved , as hereafter i shall open more at large ; for he is the wise Christian that heareth , and doth build on a rock of a deep foundation ; so that it stood still , notwithstanding the great billows of the floods , the huge storms of the winds and showers , when the foolish Christian , the fine built house was overthrown thereby , having no foundation , and great was the fall of it , mat. 7. 25 , 27.  



Heres .  Of late , through the knowledge of the scriptures , men have come to see and understand the superstition of popery , the blasphemy of Familists , the gross errors and absurdities of Arrius and Arminius , and that they are all seduced and deceived . 

But we have found a rule of truth in God's word , plainly directing us to the making matter of the church of Christ , and none but such as are qualified by faith , are fit subjects for baptism , which faith is wrought by teaching , and then baptism or dipping admits and gives entrance unto such believers , to have communion in church-fellowship with us in all the other holy ordinances of God , which church and ordinances are not understood , but neglected and contemned of all the heretics you have named and conferred with before , therefore we are the true church , for we profess but one Lord , one faith , and one baptism , ephes. 4. 5.  



Truth .  Sir , i perceive you are an Anabaptist , and therefore i shall speedily make good my late promise , and indeed , some thirty years since , Mr. Morton , a teacher of a church of the Anabaptists in Newgate , than his confession comprehended all the errors of the Arminians which now of late , many that go under your name , in and about London dissent from , as it seems you do . 

And therefore in answer to you i say , that the term baptism in scriptures ( As well as faith and Lord ) hath divers significations , sometimes to signify sufferings , as matth. 22. at other times outward baptism , as John baptising our saviour , a holy subject , mat. 3. 16. and Simon also believed , and was baptised , acts 8. 13. which was an evil unregenerate man , and yet admitted , and continue in the common fellowship of the church with Philip ; so also by baptism we are to understand inward baptism ; sometimes repentance , and sometimes remission of sins , for so faith the Baptist himself , matth. 3. 11.  I baptize you with water unto repentance , by which indeed he wrought repentance in them , but he that comes after me , &c. he shall baptize you with the holy ghost , and with fire , that is , he should pardon the penitent ; which two special administrations are the two parts of regeneration , according to that in Luke 24. 47.  That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in the name of Christ ; so likewise by baptism we are to understand both the parts of regeneration together , where the apostle saith , as many of you as have been baptised into Christ , have put on Christ , gal. 3. 27. and in this sense it is called the laver of regeneration , or the washing of regeneration , tit. 2. 5.  These differing significations , being plain , i marvelled to find some of your company to maintain the contrary , of purpose , i suppose , to avoid the distinction , that so clearly discovers your error . 

You affirm you have found a rule in the scriptures , plainly directing how the matter of the church is made , and that is , say you , by teaching and baptising , and yet you , not distinguishing of either , say nothing truly in neither or both ; for a man May be taught and baptised , and thereby be made a disciple in the outward profession of the truth , as the highway , stony and thorny ground , as Simon Magus , Demas , Hymineus , Philetus , Ananias and Saphira , the incestuous person in the church of Corinth , and such , whose belly was their god , in the church of Philippi , who notwithstanding , they were all taught and baptised , yet not any one of them any part or portion of the church of Christ , against which the gates of hell shall not prevail , therefore the ground and foundation of your church is sand , and that will fail you , and it is very false and contrary to the matter of the true church : for the scripture saith , though Israel be as numerous as the sand of the sea , yet but a remnant shall repent and be saved , rom. 9 27. and yet they are called the persons of God , isa. 10. 22 , 23. and so all taught , and all circumcised ; and the same distinction the scriptures make of baptism , the very same is said of circumcision , for the selfsame operation that circumcision had in the church of the Jews , outward carnally in the flesh , and inward spiritually in the heart , of the same distinction and operation is baptism in the Christian church , the washing with water , or dipping in water , is the doing away the filth of the flesh , which saveth not ; for this a man May have and perish , as those disciple that fell away from Christ , and walked no more with him , joh. 6. 66. but the washing or baptism that saveth , 1 pet. 3. 21. is the answer of a good conscience unto God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ , not the washing of the flesh , but the purifying of the heart by faith ; and this spiritual baptism or washing it is that works that full assurance of faith ; having our hearts strinkled from an evil conscience by the blood of Christ , and our bodies washed with pure water , heb. 10. 22. that water that Christ giveth his disciple , joh. 4. 14. and washeth his apostles with , John 13. and this is that which maketh the truly faithful Jew by virtue of the circumcision of the heart , and the truly faithful Christian by virtue of the baptism of the heart all one , as the holy apostle saith , and that God did bear witness with him also to the truth of it , that there is no difference between us and them , that is , us Jew's , and them gentiles , purifying their hearts by faith , acts 15. 8 , 9 and the scriptures show , that the Jews did well know , that when the Messiah should come , that then baptism or washing should be the distinction of Christians from others ; as circumcision by God's own ordinance was the distinction the Jews had from all the persons of the whole world : and therefore it is written , that when the Jews sent priests and Levites of the Pharisees from Jerusalem to John the Baptist , to Bethabara beyond Jordan , where John was baptising , the messengers asked him whether he were the Christ , or Elias , or the prophet , and upon his answer , no , that he was not , they then asked him why he did baptize then , hereby clearly showing , that they understood by the scriptures , that when Elias , Messiah , and the prophet foretold of should come , that then baptism should be in use in the church , and accordingly it was so practised by John the Baptist , Christ and his apostles , and ever since continue , and of the very same use to Christians , both outwardly and inwardly , as circumcision was to the Jews . and the apostle to the church of coloss , useth both the terms , baptism and circumcision , to set forth and teach unto us , one and the same thing in Jesus Christ , col. 2. 10 , 11 , 12.  You are complete , saith he , in Christ , which is the head of all principalities and power , in whom also you are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands , in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh , by the circumcision of Christ , buried with him in baptism , wherein also you are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God , &c.  

Mark now friend , Anabaptist , the truth of this doctrine of the clear distinction the holy ghost makes of baptism and circumcision , and in both double and twofold ; as in circumcision , the one outward , the other inward ; so in baptism , both in the flesh , and both in the heart , both made by hands , and both without hands ; a man May partake of both in one distinction , and perish , but whosoever doth receive one or both , in the special sense , he shall be saved : and as the terms in the meaning do agree , so they do both agree in their administration ; for as Abraham received the sign of circumcision , a seal or sign of the righteousness of the faith which he had before be was circumcised in the flesh , rom. 4. 11. so the regenerate and faithful servants of God , Nathaniel , in whom was no guile , the eunuch , Lydia , and Cornelius , of whom the holy ghost bears witness that they were true worshippers of God , these all , as Abraham , had the inward baptism of the blood of Christ through faith , in the promise , before they received the outward baptism , the washing their bodies with water , a lively representation of the washing their hearts by the blood of the lamb Christ . 

And for the general use of baptism , as in the Jews church , all that believed the law of God were to be circumcised , and so admitted into the congregation and communion of all the holy ordinances of God's worship and service : so now , who ever believes that Christ is come in the flesh , and acknowledgeth the glad tidings of the gospel , the ministry and doctrine of Christ and his apostles to be the truth , they upon this general or historical faith , aught to be baptised , and to be admitted to communion in the word and sacraments , as Simon Magus , Demas , the faulty Christians in the church of Corinth , and a thousand more had , as the scriptures show ; so that now you see God's word forces you to distinguish of baptism , and so also of the term faith , and the name Lord , and yet but one baptism , one faith , and one Lord to salvation . 

Now the scriptures plainly set forth unto us a threefold faith , which May be truly distinguished by these terms , historical , miraculous , or justifying faith , and all these a full assurance , and are to be believed with all the heart ; of the two first sorts , wicked men , devils , May partake of them as well as the saints , yea , sometimes exceed therein : for Judas wrought miracles among the twelve , but John the Baptist did no miracle , saith the text ; so many are called to believe the truth , to work in the vineyard , but few are chosen unto salvation and rewarded with eternal life , that is the special peculiar faith , joh. 7. 38. that whosoever believeth shall not perish , but have eternal life . And there is a great deal of difference between him that by faith eateth Christ's flesh , and drinketh his blood to eternal life , joh. 6. 54. and their faith by which they are baptised , preach and communicate in the other ordinances , and boldly pray and call upon the name of Christ , and yet notwithstanding are not acknowledged by him , but shut out and excluded from eternal life , and assigned and sentenced to everlasting destruction , and to be rewarded as the workers of iniquity , mat. 7. 22 , 23.  

Now , considering how clear the scriptures are in distinguishing between faith and faith , i did admire ( When i was in company with you ) to see you all so earnest , as in baptism , so in faith , to maintain but one sort under either term , wherefore i would here make the several definitions of faith , thereby to make the distinctions the more clear , but that i shall do hereafter , when i come to speak of the Antinomians mistakes in these things also ; and i much marvel at your ignorance in scripture distinctions , for as much as you all profess you read them much , in which , except you distinguish rightly , you can understand no truth clearly nor fully ; for the letter of the scriptures are but the body or corpse , but it is the intention and meaning of the holy ghost , by the words of the text , which is the spirit and life of them , therefore it doth behoove us , and stands us in hand to take heed we do not mistake the meaning of God's word , nor to give any other sense or exposition then that which is its own , lest we be found such as fight against the scriptures , and by false and lying interpretations , violate God's law , and wage war to kill and slay the two witnesses , the old and new testaments , the lamps and light of truth , rev. 11. 7 , 8. let us take heed of this , brethren , for the judgement against this sin is written and revealed already ( To add or diminish from the word of God ) to be a heavy , inevitable , dismal , cursed sentence , deut. 4. 2. prov. 30. 6.  Rev. 22. 18.  

And if you had considered the scriptures concerning the name of God , and Lord , you should have found even the apostle himself to expound to the church of Corinth , what he meant by his speaking or writing to the church of Ephesus , one Lord , &c. for he saith , there be many Lords and many gods , so called , both in heaven and earth , but to us , saith he , there is but one God the father , of whom are all things , and we in him , and one Lord Jesus Christ , by whom are all things , and we by him , 1 cor. 8. 5 , 6. there is but one such a father , and Lord , and holy spirit , who is the giver , the purchaser and worker of the grace by which we are called , in the same one hope of our holy calling , eph. 4. 4. but in other respects , the heathens idols , and the gentiles gracious Lords are called God and Lord , for so did the gentiles speak of Herod , deifying him with a shout , saying , the voice of God , and not of man ; and Christian Emperors , Kings , states , and potentates , in regard of authority and jurisdiction , are called Lords , and gods , in which they do represent God ; i have said you are gods , saith the scripture , but you shall die like men . 



Heres .  But we have a plain word for our teaching and baptising , matth. 28. 19 but you baptize infants , for which you have no word for , and therefore it will be said at last , who hath required these things at your hands ? for indeed you do but continue the mark of the beast in all your babies baptizings . 



Truth .  Whereas you say Christ's words in the last of Matthew , proves your preaching and baptising , you say more than you can make good , or that i can believe from that scripture ; and although there be no express words in the scripture for the baptising of infants , yet there is as sufficient warrant for it as for most things you practise yourselves ; for what plain word have you for the time of public assembling , or general meetings ? what word have you for your persons to ordain their minister ? what command doth authorise you yourself to baptize ? what word have you when to receive the Lord's supper , when to administer it , and where ▪ who to provide the bread and wine , and what bread , and of what grain ; and the wine of what grape ? you have not a word for women to receive the sacrament , and abundance other particulars practised by you ? 

Will you therefore say , you do that which you sin in doing ; so as you say we do , i think not . The truth is , we need not a word , for there are general rules in the scriptures , that include particular practices , and divers things under the gospel , being of the same nature under the law , the rules given under the law , serve under the gospel ; so the apostle proves to the church of Corinth from the law of Moses , deut. 25. 4.  That ministers of the gospel should have maintenance , that as they which minister about holy things , live of the things of the temple , and they which wait at the altar , are partakers of the altar , even so hath the Lord ordained , that they that preach the gospel , should live of the gospel , 1 cor. 9 13 , 14. compared with deut. 18. 1.  So we May truly say , it is ordained , that as the children of believers before Christ , both Jews and proselytes , were to be circumcised , gen. 17. 11 , 12.  Exod. 12. 48 , 49. so believers and their children , since Christ , are to be baptised , as St. Peter speaketh , the promise is to you and to your children , and to all that are a far of , even as many as the Lord our god shall call . 

I beseech you observe this place , St. Peter here spoke to the Jews , the men of Judah and Jerusalem , vers. 14.  ye men of Israel , hear these words , saith he , vers. 22. so preacheth to them , that Jesus was the saviour of the world , whom ye have taken by wicked hands , and have killed , and being dead , was buried , who was raised again , and now sits at the right hand of the father , and is made the Lord and Christ , the alone saviour of the world , and they that gladly receive this doctrine of salvation by Christ were baptised , vers. 41. who before had been circumcised . Now , as the promise did only belong to Abraham , and his spiritual seed , and yet all his natural children , and the children of believing strangers , were to communicate of circumcision , which was the outward sign of the covenant of the righteousness by faith , as before is proved : so likewise under the gospel , the same covenant of life and salvation is made only to God's chosen faithful regenerated servants , and their spiritual seed ; yet the natural children of these faithful Christians , May partake of the outward baptism , which is the outward signification of the baptism of the heart , as circumcision in the flesh was a sign of the circumcision of the heart , and according to this rule , the place before mentioned , and divers other scriptures speak , as acts 16. 15. that Lydia and her household was baptised ; so the jailor was baptised , and all his , that is , his household ; and the apostle Paul baptised the household of Stephanus , 1 cor. 1. 16.  And our Lord Jesus laid his hands on little children , and blessed them , and rebuked his disciple for forbidding them to come , Luke 18. 16. and the apostle is clear in the resolution of this question to the church of Corinth , 1 cor. 7. 14. saith he , the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the believing wife , and the unbelieving wife by the believing husband , else were your children unclean , but now are they holy , that is , in respect they have right unto the outward covenant , being born of one that believeth . But some of you Anabaptists would have these words , holy and unclean , to mean bastards , or unlawfully born , which is such an exposition , as was never heard nor read of before ; and this exposition admits of much absurdity , for it nullifies the law of marriage amongst the heathens , who have as certain rules for marriage , according to their manner and custom , as Christians have , for the scripture prescribes no form . Secondly , this exposition makes Abraham himself , and most of the patriarchs wives to be bastards ; for they were the children of heathens by father and mother , as holy Sarah , Rebecca , Rachel , and Joseph's wife the mother of Ephraim and Manasses a bastard , and that holy and great prophet , Moses , took a bastard to his wife ; for Zipporah was an idolaters daughter , her father being a priest of Midian , exod. 2. 16. but this conceit is so ridiculous , that it strangles itself in the birth . 

And to return to our argument , the apostle doth understand these terms not of bastardy , but of fellowship and communion in the ordinances of God's worship , act. 10. 28.  Wherefore i demand upon these premises , what ground you have to deny believers children baptism under the gospel , seeing it is proved to be the same thing , that by God's command believers children were to partake of under the law . Take heed you do not deny them that which God's word allows . And for the mark of the beast , when you can show me by scripture what it is , than i will prove to you , that it is not the baptising of the infants of believing parents . And for you to make outward baptism and common or historical faith to be the matter of your church , you do no less than tell me plainly , you do not know what the church of Christ is ; wherefore repent and turn from your errors . 



Heres .  All these that you have made answer to already , are either idolatrous , blasphemous , superstitious , ridiculous , or erroneous , but we are such as have separated ourselves from the wicked in the world , and we have joined ourselves in church-covenant , and church-fellowship , and have set up the ordinances of Christ , in the purity of them , we have cast off all the abominations of Antichrist , in his superstitious ordinations , ceremonies and false doctrines of all sorts ; our congregations call and ordain our pastors & elders , and so we walk according to the rule that Christ hath left in his church , until his coming ; and we admit none to have communion with us , but such as are visible saints , and can give an account of their conversion . 



Truth .  Your position is framed like theirs that are commonly known by the name of Brownists , or separatists ; and it consists of two parts : first , that you are in church-covenant , and walk in church-fellowship , in the enjoyment of Christ's ordinances , as you say ; and secondly , that you separate yourselves from all other congregations : this is the sum of your speech , by which you do manifest to me such a strange voice , as doth not agree with the expression of God's word ; for your words are in terms of your own acts and doings , favouring carnally of humanity , whereas holy writ speaks of the church of Christ in a spiritual sense , that is , a spiritual building , a house , a temple not gathered , joined and builded by men , but by God himself , the whole matter of his church , every stone thereof being made living stones by regeneration ; as St. Peter speaks , 1 pet. 2. 2 , 4.  Which are built up together , saith he , a spiritual house , a holy priesthood , to offer up spiritual sacrifices ; so that as themselves are spiritual , so is their worship and sacrifice , offered up unto God ; and this was the matter of God's church always : for when the prophets came to build and plant God's church , they call to the persons , to repent and turn to God , jer. 1. to chap. 4. 1. which is the first part of our regeneration ; and thus they cry for it , break up the fallow ground of your hearts , circumcise yourselves to the Lord , wash you , make you clean , &c. isa. 1. 16.  Jer. 4. 4.  the place of God's rest and habitation , is a poor and contrite spirit ; in vain are all the houses that are built for God , but this that he builds himself , isa. 66. 1 , 2.  And as this was the prophet's way to build God's church , so even after the same manner did John the Baptist , he came in the power and spirit of Elias , to turn men to God , the disobedient to the wisdom of the just , luk. 1. 17. so prepared he the Lord's way by the ministry of water or repentance , the preparation or first principle humbling the lofty , bending the crooked straight , and breaking the hard hearted ; and our Lord himself , he works and builds his church after the same manner , and with the same matter , repent , saith he , for the kingdom of heaven is at hand , mat. 4. 17.  and except a man be born again , he cannot see the kingdom of God , joh. 3. 3. and except ye repent , ye shall all perish ; and accordingly is his command to all that he sends into this work , that they should preach in his name , repentance , and remission of sins , Luke 24. 47. the one ministration bruises & breaks , the other binds up and heals ; the one baptism prepares , the other sanctifies ; the one makes poor , the other enriches ; the one makes naked , the other clothes ; the one discovers our folly , the other endues us with wisdom ; through the one we are made mourners , through the other we are comforted and made to rejoice with joy unspeakable , and full of glory ; and by this laver of regeneration and renewing of the holy ghost , tit. 3. 5. we are washed clean , and made of sinners saints ; of natural dead men , living men ; and this is God's building , whose matter is gold , and silver , and precious stones . 

Now as the true builders build God's church , so there are false builders likewise , which build too , and they call their workmanship a church also , but the materials of their building is but hay , wood and stubble , the mortar they daub withal is untempered mortar , they seduce my persons , saith the Lord , ezek. 13 , 10 , 11 , &c. the false prophet's matter with which they build , is compounded of vanity , and lying visions , chap. 22. 28. they have brick made of earth and straw in stead of stone , and slime in stead of mortar , and so they build the tower of Babel , the synagogue of confusion , gen. 11. 3.  These builders take upon them to heal the wounds and breaches like God's builders , but it is to no purpose ; for they heal the bruise or breach of my persons , saith the Lord , slightly , saying , peace when there is no peace , jer. 6. 14. and yet such a high esteem and opinion have they of their spiritual building , as they call it , that they contemn the truly spiritual matter , that Christ and the apostles build with ; and therefore it is said , the builders refused Jesus Christ , which is the very foundation that the true builders work with , and build upon , yea , the false builders reject him , psal. 118. 22. they set him at naught , and disallow of him , mat. 21. 24  ▪ Acts 4. 11. 1 pet. 2. 7. and if they do thus despise and so basely account of Jesus Christ , which is the chief corner stone of his own church , what a kind or manner of church is that which these builders build of themselves , as they say ? And notwithstanding my Lord and foundation , my rock and preservation be not regarded of such carnal builders , yet he is chosen of God and precious ; and he himself makes all his faithful apostles , prophets , and evangelists , pastors and teachers , wise master-workmen , or builders for the gathering and perfecting his saints for the work of the ministry , for the building or edifying the body of Christ , ephes. 4. 11 , 12. 1 cor. 3. 10. for as the spirit of God by the ministry of his servants prepares and sanctifies them , so he unites and cements them to have communion one with another in spiritual fellowship : and this workmanship in the Lord , is called in God's word , the church of Christ , his house , his tabernacle , his body , his spouse , his temple , the pillar and ground of truth , the place of his dwelling , purchased , cleansed , purified and sanctified by his own precious blood , called and gathered by the power of his word , made to live by the spirit of his mouth , having communion and fellowship by the holy ghost , growing up together in holiness , as branches in one stock or root , being members of one and the same body , of which Christ is head , as truly and really in a spiritual sense , as the head of a man is naturally the head of the whole body , consisting of many members . 

Now notwithstanding all this that hath been said of the true church , and ten times more that Might be spoke , yet these false-ignorant , carnal and fleshly builders , those dirt-daubers , have at all times taken upon them with all boldness , without any blushing , to affirm their wooden , dirty , filthy building , to be God's house , and their rotten straw and stubble to be the work and building of Christ , boasting and crying out of themselves , by way of self-justifying , the temple of the Lord , the temple of the Lord , jer. 7. 4. where , to their eternal reproof , the prophet to their very faces , saith plainly , notwithstanding all their vain confidence , the temple of the Lord , are these such as truly amend their ways and their doings ; such as truly and thoroughly execute judgement between man and his neighbour ; such as oppress not strangers , nor the fatherless , nor widow , nor shed innocent blood , nor walk after other gods ? vers. 5.  & 6.  And as these false Christians , robbers and oppressors take upon them my names and titles ; so also , they assume my authority and peculiar privileges , to excommunicate me , and cast me out with these holy words in their mouths , let the Lord be glorified , isa. 56. 5. but he shall appear to my joy , and then they shall be ashamed , this hath been always the bitter cup they have made me and mine to drink in anger and great cruelty , but patience hath ever assisted us , and enabled us to endure a thousand such injuries : they say i am a widow , desolate and forsaken , and lay the contempt of barrenness upon me , but that word of life supports us , in patience possess your souls ; and again , rejoice thou barren that bearest not , break forth into singing thou that travelest not , for the desolate hath many more children than she that hath an husband , gal. 4. 27.  Isa. 54. 1.  

Now what have you said more for your church and members thereof , than the Papists can say for themselves , or any other Antichristian congregation , you call your members to an account of their conversion , as you call it ; so much the scribes and Pharisees can say , which compassed sea and land to make a proselyte , and in so doing , made him more the child of the devil than he was before , mat. 23. 15. even worse by two degrees , a woeful act to return , and not to return to me , saith the Lord , hos. 7. 16.  Jer. 4. 1.  

Again , you say of yourselves , you have joined yourselves in church-covenant and you have set up Christ's ordinances , and you have cast away all superstition and abomination , whereas the saints and church of God ascribe all to him , thou hast washed us , thou hast called us , thou hast sanctified us , thou hast made us unto our God Kings and priests , &c.  And for your covenant it is a mere human invention , and your persons ordaining their ministers both of the same nature of popish unwritten verities , which as they are not to be found in the scriptures , so labour to forget to practise , preach , or think of them any more for ever . 



Heres .  You esteem too meanly of us and our doctrine ; what ? will you dare to speak against the church of Christ ? take heed what you do ; for we walk in a churchway , and communicate in the purity of all God's ordinances , as preaching , praying , fasting , baptism , breaking bread , and the like ; and we have separated ourselves from all men's inventions , and unlawful Antichristian assemblies . 



Truth .  You know there are such as say , and do not ; the whore of Rome doth make greater brags , than the virgin spouse , and so did their predecessors before them , the Pharisees , yet all of both their boastings are but false and counterfeit , compared with the prayers , tears , fastings , communicatings , sacrifices , oblations , and worships of the saints . 

And for your separation from other Christians , look to it , for except it be with such caution , which i perceive you know not of , it May prove as Achan's forbidden wedge of gold and Babylonish garment , destruction to yourselves ; for the Pharisees who justified themselves , and condemned others , were your fore-teachers in this manner of separation ; for they separated from Christ , and John the Baptist , calling our Lord a sinner , and his servant a devil , accounting them , nor any one of those penitent humble little ones , whom they had converted to the truth , worthy their company : witness the Pharises exception against that holy woman , whose tears and love testifies to the truth , where , and in what nation the gospel is preached to the world's end , for a memorial of her , Mark . 14. 9 compared with Luke 7. 39 and this way of separation , the prophet from God's own mouth , calls an evil and wicked way to walk in , isa. 65. 25. which persons say , stand by thyself , come not near to me , for i am holier than thou , these , saith the Lord , are a smoke in my nose , a fire that burneth all the day ; for the truth is , in no case are trut believers to separate from other Christians in communion , but in such cases that they cannot communicate with them but they must sin with them , as it was with that apostate and idolatrous church of Rome , who made such wicked and opposite laws to the truth , that a true Christian could not partake with them in any of the ordinances of God , but he must be defiled with their abominations , one way or other ; for , they caused the earth , and them that dwell therein , to worship the beast , rev. 13. 12. whom whosoever doth worship , shall never have rest , but shall be tormented with the wrath of God day and night for evermore , rev. 14. 10. 11. in such cases as these the scripture is clear , come out of her my persons , lest you partake of her sins , and be made partakers of her plagues , 2 cor. 6. 17.  Rev. 18. 4.  And in this case did the church of England separate from the church of Rome , in which church of England you now are in , whose laws , decrees , and ordinances are all against the abominations , errors and superstitions of Babylon , and all ordered and directed according to the rule of God's word , by express words , or necessary consequence ; and therefore your separation from us is groundless , and not warranted in the scriptures : for consider how the rule of truth would direct you , and observe how it was with those that were effectually called by the ministry of John Baptist , and our Lord himself , and truly converted unto God from amongst the Jews , in such times , when those in the outward state of the church were most corrupt ; for , they preached for doctrine the commandments of men , nor would not receive the truth themselves , nor suffer such as would receive it , against which doctrine our Lord exhorts his hearers to take heed , and beware of the leven of the Pharisees , but never taught the disciple to separate from the church of the Jews , nor to enter into a form covenant among themselves , as you do , but on the contrarary , he commanded them to continue hearers and doers ; the scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair or seat , whatsoever they bid you observe , that observe and do , &c.  mat. 23. 2 , 3.  And himself , as his disciple , continue still repairing to the temple and synagogue , and participated in the service and public worship of God , making no separation ; for when our Lord gave his account to the high priest of his disciple and doctrine , joh. 18. 19 , 20. he saith , i ever taught in the synagogue , and in the temple , whither the Jews always resort , and in secret have i said nothing . and for the apostles practice in many churches mentioned in the acts , both in Judea , and among the gentiles , therein is no separation in your sense spoken of , although many things were reprovable , and admonished against , both in doctrine and practice ; the truth is , the good seed in the field , are the saints , the church of Christ , the tares the wicked , but both must grow together in the same field , till the harvest , matth. 13. 30.  As the lily grows amongst the thorns , so the chaff lies in the same floor with the wheat , the goats feed in the same pasture with the sheep , and the crafty wolves among the harmless lambs , and cannot be separated till our Lord comes to judge and part them , never again to participate afterwards together . 



Heres .  I pray hear me , all those that have already spoke are old , like their doctrine ; and it is high time their errors should be thus discovered : but i pray take notice of me , for i have received a new clear light of heavenly doctrine , a light of free grace and justification in and by Christ from all eternity ; so that the elect cannot properly be said at any time to be unrighteous , ungodly , or unholy : for they are justified before they believe , even before the foundations of the world , even than when God elected them . 



Truth .  Free grace rightly understood , as the scriptures declare it , is a heavenly and comfortable doctrine ; but me thinks by your confession you should be an Antinomian , who speak very much of free grace , but do not at all understand it : for they say , the free grace of God towards his elect that are justified before the world was , is like unto the sunbeams in the morning when she rises , that enlightens the dark earth , in which there is no preparation to the enlightening ; so the Lord shines into the hearts of his elected justified ones in the very time of their wickedest works of darkness : and then in the midst of their sins , as in the very acts of adultery and murder , even than God lists up the light of his countenance upon them , and gives them peace , the effect of their justification with God from all eternity : these slight and contemn repentance , and call it a work of the law ; and the preparation to justifying faith , they call a munkish popish doctrine : and their own fancy , or presumptuous conceit they call that justifying faith , or free grace , by which , say they , the justified before God , come to understand and know their justification from all eternity . 

Oh what a gross seducement and delusion is this , even a general mistake of the whole gospel in every part of it ! Therefore now i will first show you what free grace is , which the scripture sets forth to us ; and then show you how clearly and fully God's word declares the justifying the elect by faith in Jesus Christ . 

Now this is a written and a certain truth , that God loves his Israel , his chosen , freely , Hosea 14. 4 , 5 , 6.  I will heal their backslidings , saith the Lord , i will love them freely , for mine anger is turned away from him . I will be as the dew unto Israel , he shall grow as the lily , and cast forth his root as Lebanon . also it is written , ezek. 16. 6.  When i saw thee polluted in thy own blood , i said unto thee , live ; when thou wast in thy blood , live : yea , i said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood , live , and have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the field . observe how abundantly the free grace of God is manifested to his elect , that of themselves are quite contrary to deserving : for they are polluted with the most abominable pollution , and that is with blood , and not a little , but extremely in the third degree , blood three times repeated by the holy ghost . And that this threefold uncleanness should be washed and made pure , and that this exceeding deadness should be made to live , and so to live as the bud of the field , to multiply and increase , and bring forth fruit unto God and man , even holy grapes to refresh the hearts of both ; this shows the wonderful freeness of God's grace , so to love as there is none like it , nor to be compared to it . 

Now because you have spoken of this free grace in a fancy , i shall endeavour to show it you in reality . And that we May know the things that are freely given us of God , 1 cor. 2. 12. that is , of his own will , free grace , and goodness , and eternal love ; let us consider it in these four particulars , which only and alone are peculiar to the saints and church of God , that is , their election and predestination before all times , their effectual calling and justification in time , and their eternal glorification for ever in the world to come ; which world shall be endless , deathless , and sinless for evermore . And all these in all the causes , the free grace of God : and therefore it is said by s. Peter , that the saints and church of God , are elect according to the foreknowledge of God the father , 1 pet. 1. 2.  And s. Paul saith , according as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world , ephes. 1. 4.  And the apostle to the church of Thessalonica testifies , that God had from the beginning chosen them to salvation , 2 thess. 2. 13. so than it is clear , that the electare chosen in Christ to salvation : which secret purpose and foreknowledge of God towards his elect before all time , is made good and effected in and upon his elect in all times , being called thereunto by the gospel , vers. 15.  Now the gospel , as i touched before , consists of two parts , repentance and remission of sins , Luke 24. 47. which comprehends the two next particulars , our effectual calling by the work of repentance , and whose sins whosoever is remitted , that soul is justified in the apostles meaning , and both these effected by the gospel and covenant of life , and therefore called in scripture , the grace of God , the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ , the gospel of the grace of God , Acts 20. 24. the word of his grace , verse 32. the word speaking peace by Jesus Christ , Acts 1. the word of the gospel , acts 15. 7.  And these two effects which the spirit of God works by his word in his elect to life and salvation , are called in scripture , regeneration , conversion , a renewing , a birth from above , a new making , and such like , not in a natural but a spiritual sense ; not as the first birth of our parents , which procreated and produced us out of their bowels , but by way of similitude and likeness , that as by nature we are born carnal , unclean , and children of wrath ; so by this spiritual birth we are born of God from above , holy , spiritual , free , even the sons of God , as the scripture saith ; for , as that which is of the flesh is flesh , so that which is of the spirit is spirit . 

Now , as by Adam came the offence , and by Moses came the law , through which the offence abounded , rom. 5. 19 , 20. to man's greater misery ; so grace and truth came by Jesus Christ , joh. 1. 17.  Adam was the author of sin to his posterity ; Moses was the minister of the law that condemned that sin ; but the grace and mercy of God , the means of salvation , both from sin and death , that is only by Jesus Christ , blessed for ever . Now the manner and order the holy ghost taketh in working this grace in the hearts of God's elect , is plainly laid down in scripture , for him , that is , Christ , saith St. Peter , with the rest of the apostles , hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince , and a saviour , to give repentance to Israel , and forgiveness of sins , act. 5. 31.  And these two parts of the gospel , which is the free grace of God to mankind , are plainly and generally observed and preached by all the prophets and apostles , and our Lord himself ; i will take from you , saith the Lord , your stony heart , and give you a heart of flesh ; there 's the first part , and in that new heart that i shall give you , saith the Lord , i will write my law , that is , his statute , and love , mercy , and forgiveness , even a new and holy spirit , and that 's the second part of the gospel , ezek. 11. 19 chap. 26. 36.  The baptism of John , that 's the first , and the baptism of Christ , that 's the second part , and both parts our Lord joins together , joh. 3. 3.  Except a man be born again of water and the spirit , he cannot see the kingdom of God , neither to mourn with the bridegroom's friends , nor rejoice with the bridegroom himself ; and for as much as these making parts of a Christian are not of ourselves , but both the gifts of God , it doth abundantly set forth unto us this excellent doctrine of God's free grace , as the apostle St. James saith , who of his own will begat us with the word of trub , jam. 1. 18.  and the grace of God , saith holy Titus , that bringeth salvation , hath appeared unto all men , and teacheth us to deny ungodliness and worldly lnsts , &c.  tit. 2. 11 , 12.  Yea , it is God's free grace and abundant compassionate goodness , to find out this new and living way to happiness through Christ Jesus ; for he himself is the way , the truth and the life , and God so loved the world , that he gave his son , that whosoever believeth in him should not perish , but have eternal life , joh. 3. 16. and none can so believe , but he that is regenerate , John 1. 12 , 13.  And the Lord is the spiritual bread , that every one must eat of that shall be saved , but none can so eat his flesh , and drink his blood , but by faith ; and none can believe , but to whom it is given , and it is given to comfort none , but to the broken hearted , and none are made penitent and humble , thirsting and desiring Christians , but to such as God gives repentance ; for this is the nature and method of this free grace of God , which the scriptures set forth to us , even that free grace that Christ gives to him that is athirst , freely to drink of , rev. 21. 7. he gives the thirst , and he freely gives the water of life , that so quenches , that whosoever drinketh , shall never thirst again , joh. 7. 37 , 38.  And the Lord saith , come and drink ; but this coming is by repentance , and this drinking is by faith , whosoever ( Saith the Lord ) believeth in me , as the scripture saith , out of his belly shall flow rivers of the water of life ; yea , to set forth the excellency of this doctrine of free grace , the spirit of God takes upon him the office of a crier in a court of records , ho , every one that thirsteth , come ye to the waters , come ye , buy and eat , yea , the third time he cries , come , buy wine and milk without money , and without price , isa. 55. 1.  Hear now you Antinomians , if any of you have an ear to hear the wisdom of God in the truth of the free grace purchased and preached by Jesus Christ , that it is not fantastical , as you have expressed it , but that real and substantial grace that gives being to the new and spiritual man , the very regeneration of the elect of God ; and as they are born of the spirit , so they are taught , led and guided , anointed and sanctified by the holy ghost , who dwelleth in none of the bodies of the elected ones , but where he hath wrought this heavenly work of grace there he dwells , there he witnesseth ; there is but three that bear witness for God to the truth in the whole world ; and the apostle tells us , 1 joh. 5. 8. it is the spirit , that 's the spirit of God ; water , that 's his first work and beginning of regeneration ; and blood , that 's the finishing and accomplishing the new birth ; the sanctifying , the binding up the broken heart by faith : wherefore blush and be ashamed of your blasphemy against the truth , in calling repentance a work of the law , and the preparation to faith a popish doctrine , and for ever hereafter take notice , that the way of Christ's free grace is by water and blood , 1 joh. 5. 6.  And that repentance is the beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ , Mark . 1. 1 , 2.  

Now i should have spoke of the fourth particular of free grace which is glorification , but of that hereafter . 



Heresy .  I bear you witness you have a zeal , but it is not according to knowledge : for if you did understand that excellent doctrine of justification before believing , you would not speak so much of any preparation to justifying faith : for by Christ's stripes we are healed from the beginning of the world : and to prove this truth , i argue thus : 

First , all the elect of God are justified before God : but some of the elect of God do not yet believe : therefore some that do not believe , are justified before God . 

Secondly , he that is in Christ , is justified : but we must be in Christ before we can believe , therefore we must be justified before we can believe . 



Truth .  I answer , the due observation of terms is the true preservation of proprieties ; and except you justly distinguish of the terms before God himself , and God's grace by which he doth justify his elect , you cannot understand truly , but you must confound heaven and earth together , and make God man , and man God , concluding such blasphemies as the Familists do , to whom hundred of you are fallen within this two years ; who affirm of the trinity , that God the father is the mind , the son is the word , and the spirit is the word made known : and under these terms , mistaking the verity of the mystery of the trinity , conclude such gross blasphemies as these conclusions hereafter specified , making God the father the mind , God the son the word of that mind , God the holy spirit the effect or revelation of the word . And as these are three , so they are one , as you say , so it is and was at first in the creation , God the father was the mind of God , God the son was the word of that mind , and God the spirit was the working , meaning , or manifestation of that word ; so that in that which God said , let us make man ; and , he spoke and the heavens and the earth was made , the firmament , the sun , moon , and stars , the sea and the fish therein , the air and the fowls therein , the earth and the beasts , herbs , and trees therein , as God spoke the word , and all these were create ; so that as they were made by the word , so they are the word , and as the word and the father are one , and as the father , the word , and the revelation of it are one , so whatsoever the word made , is one with the father , the son , and the spirit . And then the conclusion must be this , the whole creation is God himself . Now to avoid such blasphemous consequences , we will distinguish of the terms , and therein show the fallacy of your arguments , and then i will discover and establish the truth against your doctrine , which by this means will easily appear to be false . First , for the term that concerns God , ( Justified before God , you say ) which if you mean as it concerns God in his infiniteness , it is so far above our line , or the capacity of the elect in point of reconciliation with God , as the highest heavens are above the centre of the earth : for with God himself there is nothing before nor after : for the scripture speaks thus of God in this respect , that he calleth those things that be not , as though they were , rom. 4. 17.  And again , one day is with the Lord as a thousand years , and a thousand years as one day , 2 pet. 3. 8.  Thus you see , God's thoughts are not our thoughts , nor his ways as our ways , saith the Lord ; but as the heavens are higher than the earth , so are his ways and his thoughts higher than ours , isai. 55. 8 , 9  But when the prophet comes to speak of God's work in the creature to salvation , than he speaks in the creatures language and capacity ; so that except man obey the voice of God , he is left without excuse in these words : seek the Lord while he May be found , call ye upon him while he is near , let the wicked forsake his was , and the unrighteous man his thoughts , and let him return to the Lord God , and he will have mercy upon him , and abundantly pardon , verse 6 , 7.  Thus as the prophet , we must distinguish between God's eternal purpose and decree , which is a secret , & known to himself only towards his elect before all times , and his calling and justifying of them in time , which is the effect of his foreknowledge and predestination , and that which makes known to the elect , God's secret purpose . And although it be said , who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect ? the apostle there doth not understand the justification of the elect before time , as you do , but the justification of his elect in time called and justified . And although there can be nothing laid ( To such an elect justified ) to his condemnation , yet many things May be laid to his charge in regard of his weakness and frailty , if any brother be fallen through weakness , you that are spiritual , restore such a one by the spirit of meekness . thus Nathan charged David , and David chargeth himself , against thee only have i sinned . so our Lord chargeth his faithful servant Peter ; and Paul withstood him to his face , and saith , he was to be blamed . and so that holy apostle blameth himself also : oh wretched man that i am , saith he . And the scripture saith , there is not a righteous man that liveth , and doth good , and sinneth not . and again ▪ if any man say he hath no sin , he deceiveth himself , and the truth is not in him . and the elect of God are renewed again ( After sinning ) by repentance , as the church of Ephesus is admonished by Christ to repent and do her first works , rev. 2. 5.  

And however the saints do daily sin after justification , yet through God's grace they are recovered again daily by repentance , and maugre the malice and temptation of Satan , the snares of the world , and the concupiscence of their own natures ; yet the Lord that loved them once , doth still love them for ever , and doth wash off their filthiness , and owns them so for his own , that neither their sins , nor any power , or any creature whatsoever , shall , or can condemn them . 

Secondly , you say , some of the elect of God do not believe , and therefore they are justified before they believe . I pray where did you find or learn this logic , which is so contrary to the wisdom of God , which teacheth thus , by Christ all that believe are justified from all things , act. 13. 39  And again , those that he calleth he justifieth ; but your doctrine saith they are justified before they are called ; see in a word , how directly your preaching is against truth's doctrine . And of the same nature with your former is your second argument , which runs thus : he that is in Christ is justified , but we must be in Christ before we can believe , therefore we must be justified before we believe : which in the very terms is another doctrine than St. Paul teacheth us , who saith plainly , we are justified by faith , rom. 3. 28.  And he justifieth the ungodly ; but i question your knowledge of justifying faith , which if you did truly know , you durst not teach , that men are justified before they believe ; it is true , he that is ingraffed into Christ , is justified , but it doth not follow therefore a man is justified before he believes : i will assuage the hardness of the question by the mildness of a comparison ; that which acquits and frees a malefactor , is the sealed pardon of the King ; so likewise that which comforts and assures the penitent heart of mercy and forgiveness , is the sealing witness which God's spirit beareth to , or assureth the humble heart of the free grace and love of God through Jesus Christ ; so that justifying faith to the sorrowful sinner , is as the sealed pardon to the malefactor : and to this agrees the scriptures , acts 10. 43.  To him ( That is , to Jesus Christ ) give all the prophet's witness , that through his name , whosoever believeth in him , shall receive remission of sins ; thus speaks God's word , and not as you speak ; so that it cannot truly be said , neither ought any dare so to preach that a man is justified before he believes , nor that he believes before he be justified , but that it is the same gift of God's spirit at one and the same time , even then to believe our justification when he accepts us just in him that justifieth the ungodly ; and as it is given by the holy ghost to believe , so it is continue , maintained and increased by the same spirit as the other spiritual gifts , as hope , love , joy and patience are ; and whosoever doth receive the spirit of adoption , he hath with it the testimony of it , which is justifying faith ; let us take heed we do not separate that which God hath joined together , for that is directly against the commandment , matth. 9 6.  Let no man put asunder that which God hath joined together : and in vain doth that man argue to prove which is first in the sun , the heat or the light , so vain it is in you to argue , whether justification or faith be first ; for when , or to whomsover God gives one , he gives them both , rom. 3. 26. wherefore i retort your arguments thus : 

If God give remission of sins to the penitent elect , than the impenitent elect are not justified ; but he gives remission of sins to the penitent elect , acts 2. 38. therefore none of God's elect are justified before they are called , and their sins remitted ; wherefore never hereafter teach your disciple that the elect of God are justified before they believe , but learn to teach them to repent , that their sins May be done away , as the apostle teacheth , to life and salvation , act. 3. 19 and so St. John saith of the Jews , they did not repent that they Might believe ; and consider our Lord's doctrine to Nicodemus , he tells him not of his election , although our Lord knew well that secret , but he preaches to him conversion ; except a man be born again , he cannot see the kingdom of God , joh. 3.  Regeneration must be sought for by the elect , and by these effects and operations of the holy ghost , to make sure to themselves their election ; this is God's way prescribed in his word : and lest i fall into your error , as i have briefly disproved your doctrine , and discovered the falsehood and misty sophistry of your arguments ; so now , by the help of God , i will lay down and confirm the truth itself , how the scriptures do speak of justifying and believing , that so you May come to know that which hitherto i perceive you are very ignorant of . Wherefore thus saith the scriptures concerning justification , we are justified freely by his grace , saith the apostle , rom. 3 ▪ 24.  Titus 3. 11. likewise , that we are justified by his blood , that is , by the blood of Christ , rom. 5. 9 and also , that we are justified by saith , rom. 3. 28. so than these three terms are to be considered in our justification , the blood of Christ purchasing the grace and favour of God , and an assurance of it given to the lost , the dead , the broken , penitent , mourning heart , whereby , though it be dead , yet it is made to live , the broken is healed , the emptiness is filled , the thirstiness is quenched , comforted and refreshed with the favour and love of God , in and through Jesus Christ ; justification then is the imputed righteousness of Christ , assured and made known to the elect by faith ; and this doctrine is cleared by the apostle beyond the least exception , speaking of holy Abraham's justification , and being fully assured , saith he , rom. 4. 21 , 24. that what God had promised , he was able to perform , therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness ; now it was not imputed for his sake alone , that it was imputed to him , but for us also , to whom it shall be imputed , if we believe . observe , first , that the apostle affirmeth justifying faith a full assurance , for we shall have occasion by and by to make use of this : and secondly , that the righteousness of Christ , which is our justification , is not given to us but by faith , in these words , to whom it shall be imputed , if we believe , so that justification and justifying faith , can no more be severed , parted or divided , than the light and the heat from the fire ; and to this purpose St. Paul calls Christ the just one , and the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus , rom. 3. 26. so that it is proved against all the Antinomians in the world , that then , and not before , when God justifies his elect , then , and at that time he gives justifying faith , act. 13. 38 , 39  And as i promised before , so i will here briefly show the divers acceptations and distinctions of faith , and three particulars do comprehend all other sorts and distinctions whatsoever ; historical faith , to believe God's word ; the faith of miracles , by which it is given to a saint , or a sinner to work this or that miracle ; so also in the third place , the scriptures speak of justifying faith , of which it is said we live by , we are comforted by , through which we are purified and justified , and this sort of faith is called in scriptures , the faith of God , the faith of Jesus , the faith of Abraham , the faith of God's elect , the faith that worketh by love , the faith in the blood of Christ , the faith accounted for righteousness , the faith of the operation of God the most holy faith , and May be thus defined , that it is a full , firm , and certain trust or confidence , written by the power and spirit of God in the low , humble , penitent , and broken-heart , whereby it is given assuredly to believe , that all his sins are forgiven ; and thus he is made one with God by reconciliation and atonement in and through the eternal and everlasting love of Jesus Christ ; the material cause of this justifying faith thus defined is a full , sure , and undoubted trust or confidence ; the formal cause is the free grace and favour of God the father , and of his son Jesus Christ ; the efficient cause is the alone work of the holy ghost ; thereby imprinting in and assuring of the hearts of the elect of this confidence of this grace and mercy ; the principal and final cause is the glory of God , and our Lord Jesus Christ ; and the end subordinate is the salvation of the saints , the chosen ones of God from the beginning of the world : and this is the faith that justifieth , that comforteth , that overcometh , that excelleth , whose dignity and excellency everywhere shineth throughout the scriptures ; the ignorance of which this very age , yea , i say it again , this very age of ours deserves all these present judgements , and more also then lie upon us at this time ; we having had from God afforded us so great means to come to the knowledge of it : which sort of faith whosoever hath , shall never perish , but men May partake of both the other sorts to their condemnation . 

Other acceptations the term faith hath in the scriptures also , having reference sometimes to God himself , and therein importing the steadfastness and unchangeable truth of his decree and promise . And in other places it is to be understood of the doctrine of the gospel ; and so also of their faithful discharge of their office that are gifted to declare and preach the glad tidings of peace and salvation : of which office it is hard for an Antinomian , holding such principles as he doth , to come to understand ; wherefore repent in time , lest at last you turn all Familists , which you cannot avoid , if you continue in your principles . 



Her.   We have had the experience of this new found conceited light , that such as have been dazzled with it , have been staggered in the truth , and some have been so blinded therewithal , that they have fallen from the faith . 

But what say you to us ? We have the doctrine of the gospel pure and clear , we hold faith and repentance to be the first works to life and salvation ; and that the church of God are a company of holy believers , and that now the time is come , that the church shall be delivered from all her sufferings , according to the testimony of the prophets and apostles ; the purity of Christ's ordinances shall be established , Christ shall be set up upon his throne , and his church shall have the rule and pre-eminence in the world in greater power , dignity , and external authority , than all the monarchs that ever have been in the world before . And in this outward glory shall she continue till her Lord come to translate her . 



Truth .  You speak like those that maintain that the church of Christ shall now so flourish and prosper , as that it shall extend its bounds and borders all Christendom over , and most part of the world besides , into a monarchy ; and as formerly the temporal power in Christianity hath had the rule and greatness , so now the ecclesiastical power shall take place , and the sceptre of Christ in the censure of the church , shall be advanced and bear rule above all other government . And that now already it is begun that God makes the kingdoms of this world our Lords , and his Christ's , and that now it is come to pass , that the godly shall rule over the wicked : for now they are given to be captives to God's persons , whose captives God's persons were before this time . Wherefore i answer , great are the privileges and prerogatives that the scriptures speak of God's church and persons in the world to come after the resurrection , is plain and evident in holy writ ; but to apply those prophecies and promises to the church in this present evil world , it is not well considered of you : for the Lord by his servants , speaks of his church in a double consideration , as oppressed , afflected , and suffering here in this life , and as delivered , perfected and saved in the life to come ; then to rule , but here to suffer ; then to be advanced into Christ's throne , but now , and here , to submit to the cross ; now his house is a house of mourning , but than it shall be a palace of glory , Jerusalem the city of the great King shall be set up the praise of the whole earth . And in regard of his churches present suffering , her Lord himself thus speaketh to her , fear not little flock ; and comforts her with the grace and favour of God for the time to come in these words : for it is your father's pleasure to give you a kingdom . and it is a truth concluded of by all , if we follow Christ in the estate of regeneration , we shall be made partakers of his glorification ; if we suffer with him , we shall reign with him ; the one condition is here , the other hereafter ; the one in this world , the other in the world to come . This is the testimony of our Lord and all his servants , matth. 19 28. 2 tim. 2. 12.  And that short time , or while of suffering saint Peter speaks of , is this present life ; and the time of making such sufferers perfect , is the life to come , 1 pet. 5. 10. agreeing with his brother Paul , who according to the wisdom of God given to him , had cast up his accounts in these words , i reckon , saith he , that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us . even then , saith s. John , when Christ which is our life shall appear , then shall we appear with him ; then shall we be like him in his dignity , as in this life we are like him in his ignominy , 1 John 3. 2.  And ( Friend ) look into the scriptures , and you shall find the church , the blessed assembly described now to suffer , to mourn , to be hated , to weep , to be persecuted for righteousness sake , and the contrary estate to be none of God's church or inheritance ; woe be to ye that laugh and rejoice , that are full , and enjoy greatness and prosperity ; those that are rich here , have received their consolation ; those that are full in this life , shall hunger in the life to come ; those that are merry , laugh and want not here , shall weep and wail when the day of redemption comes : then shall be fulfilled to him that suffers not here , these words , thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things : and to him that suffered here , these words , he his evil things ; therefore thou that suffered'st not , art tormented : but thou that didst suffer , thou art comforted , matth. 5.  Luke 6. and Luke 16.  When gods suffering persons shall be rewarded , than such as have enjoyed their prosperity here , shall be condemned . I beseech you , as you love the truth , decline this doctrine of yours : for by it you do revive again that old tenant of popery . For what ever you affirm in your confession , they have maintained it with fire and sword , execration and excommunication : for they would prove , that their church by Christ's appointment , was to have supreme authority , power , and jurisdiction over all , they place themselves above the stars of God . And as in power , so in title , he must be called and styled , the Lord God the Pope . And so he challenged worship also , that Kings and Emperors must kiss his stinking feet and toes , in token of their slavish subjection in honouring him with the power of heaven and earth , to kill & make alive , to pardon and retain sins , falsely proving this his abomination and whorish power , from God's divine oracles in these words , to execute vengeance upon the heathen , and punishment upon the persons , to bind their Kings with chains , and their nobles with fetters of iron . This honour have all the saints , psa. 149 , 8 , 9 avouching this scripture to be fulfilled in the holy church of Rome , and that they were the saints which by this prophecy were foretold of to depose and disthrone Kings : and to cloak & colour their covetousness , which set all their tricks a-work , as bulls and pardons , at all rates and prices , whereby their coffers were filled with gold and silver from all countries and persons . And this he affirmed was prophesied for his filthy holiness , maintenance and ungodly revenue in these words , the Kings of Tarshish and of the isles , shall bring presents , the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts , yea all Kings shall fall down before him , all nations shall serve him , psal. 72. 10.  And notwithstanding their gross abusing the scriptures , and false claims to titles , as holy father , and holy mother the church , time hath now proved him to be Antichrist , the man of sin , and capital enemy to the truth of God . And indeed this conceit that the church of God should enjoy temporal peace , and outward glory and authority , hath been always the opinion of carnal Christians , and the Jews to this day cannot see otherwise then when their still looked-for Messiah should come , that then they shall be gathered to be a great persons again , and made a worldly monarchy to rule over all nations , as now all nations rule over them : but their groundless hope will prove but as the spider's web , and so it will be with all others of their mind : for see how the scripture resolves the question , that the saints ▪ the church of God , shall still suffer to the world's end , the question is made with a loud voice , saying , how long , oh Lord , holy and true , dost thou not avenge our blood on them that dwell upon the earth ? and the answer from heaven saith , that they should rest yet a little season , until their fellow servants also , and their brethren that should be killed as they were , should be fulfilled , rev. 6. 10.  And the clad and washed with the righteousness of Christ , and the blood of the lamb , are those that go through great tribulations , rev. 7. 13 , 14.  Finally , of this doctrine we have a double witness , two brethren and apostles , whose praise is in all the churches , acts 14. 22. who both as one man conclude this truth as a decree for ever , that such as continue in the faith , must through many tribulations enter into the kingdom of God : which kingdom is that which all the prophets and apostles in all times have spoken of , which in its due place i shall briefly unfold . 



Heresy .  I pray you give us leave to speak : have we not clear scripture for the glorious reign of Christ upon the earth ; and that all the martyrs and holy prophets shall rise from the dead , and reign with Christ a thousand years in all prosperity , peace , riches , plenty , wealth , and glory , with such supreme power and majesty , as never any monarch in this world had before , nor ever shall have after ? for when the thousand years are expired , than comes the general resurrection , rev. 20.  



Truth .  Your confession shows you to be a Millenarian , which error as it hath been ancient , so of late , as of many other errors , there is a reviving of this amongst the rest . And as you say , the sum of it is , that now , or they know not when , Christ shall descend personally from heaven , and then cause all the bodies of the saints that have suffered martyrdom from the beginning of the world , to be raised , and Christ and his saints to live in this cursed earth , and corruptible world , in the enjoyment of riches , wealth , power and authority , majesty and emporality , as no heathen nor Christian monarchy ever had in this world before ; and you ground your mistake on rev. 20. 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6.  

Now i answer , that the whole position is directly against the scripture you allege , rightly understood : for the apostle Peter affirmeth it plainly , that the heavens must contain and receive Christ personally , until the time of the restitution of all things , which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began , acts 2. 21.  Here are such witnesses as cannot be excepted against , even all his holy prophets , and then , and not sooner , shall the Lord Jesus come , which before was preached unto you , verse 20.  

And the place you instance , rev. 20. proves no more the Millenary fancy , as you describe it , than it proves a new world in the moon ; or that men May plow the floods of the sea to sow and plant on them . And because the true understanding of that scripture will overthrow this error at once , we will show you that the resurrection there spoken of , is the spiritual and first resurrection which our saviour Christ clearly lays down both in nature and order , John 5. 25.  And because it is a mystery , therefore his expression is more than ordinary , verily , verily , ( Twice affirming it ) i say unto you , the hour is coming , and now is , when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God , and they that hear it shall live . this is the spiritual resurrection from sin , through the grace of regeneration : and these are they only that live and reign with Christ , having sought and gained the kingdom of heaven , and the righteousness thereof , matth. 6. 33.  And those only that are risen with Christ through regeneration , are born of God , and those that are born of God through faith , are victors , and overcome all opposition , even the whole world , and the Prince and King thereof , 1 John 5. 4. and in this sense they reign with Christ in their estate of temptation and regeneration , who in their tears and sorrow are happy in the enjoyment of their comforter , who anointeth them with the unction of truth , and teacheth and instructeth them so sufficiently , that all the powers and thrones of Antichrist , the subtleties , crafts and deceits of him and all his learned clerks , who have endeavoured and used all means possible to cozen and cheat the persons of God , for almost the space of this thousand two hundred and forty years here expressed by the Millenary number only , because it shall not exceed more thousands then one ; in which cloudy and dark day the holy ghost hath so led and guided the sons of truth , that all the jugglers at Rome and Babylon , could not make them to mistake the mark of the beast for the mark of the lamb , nor to worship the beast and his image in stead of the Lord and his Christ ; yea , rather than they would defile themselves with the adultery of the whore , they would die a thousand deaths : for so saith the text , they lost their lives and their heads for the witness of Jesus , & for the pure worship of God contained in his word , rev. 20. 4. and in this spiritual sense they lived and reigned with Christ the whole time meant by the thousand years . 

And lest the inconsiderate reader should mistake this spiritual resurrection for a corporal , as the Millenarians do , the holy ghost gives marks and bounds to his disciple , as evident distinctions between the one and the other , in these words , marvel not at this , John 5. 28. for the hour is coming , ( He doth not say as before , and now is ) in which all that are in the graves , shall hear his voice ; which all contains every one good and bad at the general resurrection : and therefore your doctrine is contrary to the truth the scriptures hold out to us : for the thrones , and they that sat upon them , which you expound to be Christ and his saints , the holy ghost discovers the quite contrary , even to be the power and authority of Antichrist himself , who had a charter granted him of God , and under his own hand , for the whole time limited to desolate and consume the saints , who for their sin's sake the Lord doth often give them up to the pleasure and rage of such heathenish murderers and persecutors for a season , to enter into the sanctuary , and spoil the heritage of the Lord , jerem. 9 16.  Lam. 1. 10.  And if you had but looked upon the text with clean eyes , washed •ith the water of repentance , and had learnt the song of sorrow of the mourner , you would not have been so blear-eyed as to have taken the abomination forespoken of by Daniel the prophet , to be the kingdom of Christ , that all God's servants witness to , and give testimony of : and that if it May be possible for you to apprehend the meaning of this scripture , wash your eyes with tears , and wipe them with the love of the truth , and look upon the text once again , and compare the 20 ▪ chapter verse 2. with the 12. chapter verse 3. and you shall see the same dragon in the one place in the ethnic heathenish power of the Roman Emperor , with all fierceness and unbridled cruelty , to havoc , destroy , and kill the saints and children of God exercised in a tenfold persecution , to obliterate & wipe out of the earth the name of Christ , the woman his spouse , and her first and primitive fruit , which was born to reign with Christ for ever ; which power and authority the devil instigated , and stirred up with all their malice and hatred , as with a flood , caused as it were by the breach of the sea , so that the wife of the Lord had no way to escape drowning and devouring , but to fly into the wilderness , there to preserve herself , and so many of her children as she had preserved from death , where she was assigned to stay an hour , a month , a day , and a year , rev. 9 15.  

The same dragon in the 20.  Chapter you find to be bound ; and yet in all and every day of his religation , to kill and destroy the saints just as he did before , only differing in the manner : for now it is with a restraint , secretly and cunningly , by guile and craft , pretending Christianity , and taking on him the name of a Christian , and never the less devil than he was before , only a pretence makes the difference : for ever since the great battle that he fought , and lost the field ; for Michael and his angels prevailed then against the drágon and his angels ; so that ever since all along popery , the devil hath turned Christian ; and herein by a bounded and restrained way , effected his enmity to the full , as he did before in the heathens , in an open professed opposition to Christ and Christianity . And it is to be observed , that when the devil turned to be a Christian , than he put on Jupiter's coat upon Christ's back , and made the model and platform of Christian religion , just after the fashion of the idol gods of the heathen ; and like a juggler and deceiver , plays the same game divers and several ways , sometimes amongst men , sometimes amongst the angels of light , sometimes on horseback , sometimes on foot ; he rides on a red horse with a great sword among the heathens in the imperial persecution , and took outward peace from the primitive Christians , as well as from the earth itself . In the time of papacy , among carnal Christians , he rides on a pale horse ; where the devilish dragon his rider , is called death itself , and hell followed with him , rev. 6. 4. 8.  So then , let him have liberty & freedom , or bind and Restrain him , in all conditions he effecteth his work of envy , hatred and malice against the church of God . Now there is one thing more in the text , and when i have spoke a word or two of the meaning thereof , i hope than you will see this scripture proves not your error . And thus it follows , after that he must be loosed a little season . and in the seventh verse , and when the thousand years are expired , Satan shall be loosed out of his prison ; which words sound as if the devil should become the great red dragon again after the reign of Antichrist , and fall to act his first part the second time , to deny the Lord Jesus whom all this while he hath confessed , and to set himself to do the utmost he can to oppose the very name of Christ and Christians ; and in this sense doth the holy ghost clearly expound these words in other scriptures , as our Lord himself , matth. 24. doth clearly describe and discover the whole time of antichrists abomination and persecution , as Daniel did prophesy of it , which is the whole and every part and season of the bound and restrained condition of the dragon before mentioned . and immediately , saith our Lord , after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened , the moon shall not give her light , and the stars shall fall from heaven , and the powers of heaven shall be shaken , vers. 29 ▪ in all which terms our Lord speaks figuratively , and that another power after the end of antichrists tyranny , shall arise and fulfil these sayings of his , which things were prophesied of before , by the prophet Ezekiel , chap. 38. 2.  & 39 1. and afterwards so understood by the apostle John , rev. 20. 8 , 9 , 10. which Gog and Magog saint John understands to be the Kings of the East , and the whole world . rev. 16. 12 , 13 , 14. where in a vision he saw the devil come out of the mouth of the dragon , that is , he left the ethnic imperial power , and also the power of the beast , and beastly clergy , he will deceive by that false prophet no longer ; but as he left all his old instruments , so he goes on to make use of a new one , these spirits of devils go forth unto the Kings of the earth , that is , they go unto them that are of the greatest power at this time , even the Kings of the whole world , to gather them to the battle of the great day of God almighty ; which Kings of the East , and of the earth , and of the whole world , cannot be understood of any but of him that writes himself god of gods , and King of Kings , and Emperor of the universe , the whole world , who giveth for his ensign the moon , the very emblem of the world . Observe how the holy ghost hath deciphered him for his reign and residence , the East ; for his religion , the earth earthly and sensual , even the idle fancy and corrupt deceit of Mahomet himself , mingled and composed of the parings , outside and offal of the profession of Christians , Jews and heathens ; and lastly , his unparalleled power and jurisdiction to be no less than the force and strength of the whole world . Now methinks the meaning of our Lord's words , doth agree with his servant John's ; for by the term sun , our Lord doth mean himself , the sun of righteousness , the truth of the gospel ; and it must be a great power that must so oppose the doctrine of the gospel in Christendom , as to turn our light , that is , the light of men into the darkness of Mahometism , and that that Egyptian darkness that hath overspread the greatest part of the world where the Turk hath dominion , should darken Christendom also , that is , the land of Goshen , if the true light should thus be made dark , than the moon that hath no light but from the sun , shall not give her light in our saviour's words ; and in his meaning also , men that are enlightened by him , as the moon is by the sun , shall not give their light ; for how can they possibly , when Christ which is their light is darkened ? and when the sun and moon thus fail , then must needs the stars , whether ministers or professors , all such as are not the faithful indeed , shall fall from heaven to the earth , that is , from the truth to Mahometism ; and in this great storm , the powers of heaven , elect and faithful , from which condition it is impossible they should fall ; yet saith the text , these shall be shaken with the terrible storm , which compared with rev. 6. 12. makes it more clear ; for the sun became as sackcloth of hair , saith the apostle , and the moon became as blood , and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth ; even as a figtree casteth her untimely figs when she is shaken with a mighty wind ; here the apostle is clear in understanding the stars to be not true born Christians , but untimely : and as St. Jude speaks and calls them , wandering stars , to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever , vers. 13.  But blessed be God for ever , that hath bounded and limited this last and great storm ( That shall fall upon his church , so as the very powers thereof shall be shaken ) with these comfortable words , immediately , quickly , it shall be over , it shall continue but a little season . 



Heres .  For the opinion of the millenaries , the truth is , there is no show of ground for it in the scriptures , but we have of late gathered ourselves into a church communion and fellowship , and walk together in that order that Christ's word holds out to us , finding in our practice the scriptures true , that as Moses was faithful in all his house as a servant , so Christ as a son is faithful in his house , so that we order all things according to the word , and advance Christ's kingdom , his sceptre and law in the purity , as the scriptures do declare ; believing also , that every congregation is independent , and that none but Christ hath power to command each congregation ; and that none ought to be constrained , or in the least measure opposed or punished , as touching their consciences , but every man ought , and should live as the light of his conscience leads him . 



Truth .  By what you express , you should be an independent , as some call you , and as some of your judgement call or term themselves , wherefore i demand of you all , that would have general liberty for every man's opinion , whom i mean by independent , where you find it written in God's word , that you should gather ▪ or congregate yourselves in that manner as you do ; you that have been ministers , to leave your pastoral charges , and others , to forsake their fellow-member-ship in each congregation , for as much as the law of this Christian church , as touching matters for public worship and meeting doth incorporate every congregation or parish , and of many members makes them but one body , and yet you from this body , schism and rent yourselves , and so of divers torn pieces , remnants and broken members , to patch up a body or congregation of your own invention , contrary to the public order , the statute laws and ordinances of this Christian church , and against the meaning of the holy scriptures also ; and when you yourselves have made a body of your own making , then to have peculiar privileges to do what you please with the consent of your members ; and whatsoever you ▪ shall do , to be beyond all power or magistracy whatsoever , to either question you or punish you , although by the rule of God's word there be cause , and all that all of you have done yet , is but outward and external . 

Now , i demand if there be precept or precedent for any or all these things you do , if there be , then show it ; if you can show none , for so i am sure you cannot , then how can you clear yourselves , but that your practice is of your own inventions ? For , this is your doctrine , that those rules and orders which are prescribed by men , for the public worship and service of God , being not plainly expressed in God's word , such laws and directions are idolatry ; and yet will you device rules and order 〈◊〉 practise them yourselves of your own ordaining , for which you can bring no express word , nor true consequence . I pray see the conclusion ; therefore your way of religion is a will-worship , and therefore idolatrous , and aggravated , because it is against the lawful demands of Christian authority . Here i would not be mistaken , by what i have said , to oppose the private spiritual communion of the saints , according to the apostles practice , and the holy ghosts direction , hebr. 10. 25.  But you say , this text proves your churchway , Hebrews chap. 3.  Verse . 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6. the substance of which scripture is this , that as Moses was faithful in all his house , as a servant , so Christ as a son , is faithful over his house ; you making Moses his faithfulness to consist in those prescripts and rules he gave for the temple ▪ or tabernacle in the form and structure , for priests and their habits , for the time of incense , sacrifices , divine services in the oracles and ordinances of God , even all the external form and manner of God's public worship : and you say , that Christ's faithfulness in his house under the gospel is not inferior to Moses under the law in all external laws , rules and directions in every particular , for as much as Christ is the son of his own house , and as Moses had a word for every thing , so Christ hath left a word for every thing . 

It is true , Moses is said to be faithful to make and do every thing according to the platform and pattern which he saw that was showed him in the mount , and his work was to make a temporal resemblance of the eternal tabernacle , which in a vision was showed him , and therefore he made the tabernacle or moving temple , and every particular that concerned the material things , both for substance and circumstance , which were all figures and shadows of that to come ; and will you make that to come the apostle speaks of outward material external things and circumstances , and the church of Christ under the gospel , answerable in outward material external things and circumstances prescribed to the Jews by the law of Moses ? then you must have a word for the form and matter of churches or houses of meeting , a word to direct us , who , and how shall be ministers , who for what sort of men , and how they shall  be ordained , and a word for the bells for calling the congregation together ; a word for the ministers actions in the administration of all holy services ; a rule for dismissing the assembly with a blessing ; a word for children's baptism , as for circumcision ; a word for the time & matter of the Lord's supper , as which of all grapes for wine , and which of all grains for bread ; and for the manner and gesture for communication , as for the Passeover , and the several other circumstances about God's public worship , which Moses by a plain word prescribed to the persons . Now , if Christ by himself , or his apostles , have left no such particular word or direction for the external manner of his churches , public services and order , as before are expressed , then by your argument , Christ the Lord is not so faithful as Moses the servant , which is blasphemy in any one so to speak . Wherefore it appears plainly you do not understand the apostles meaning ; and that you May consider the text , look again , and it will teach you , which saith , this man was Counted worthy of more glory than Moses , in as much as he who hath builded the house , hath more honour than the house ; and again , Christ is faithful , as a son over his own house , to purchase and redeem , to call , to make , to bless , to sanctify and save it eternally ; and this spiritual house , this heavenly tabernacle is that which the apostle proves Christ to exceed Moses in even in the substance itself , which all Moses work did but witness to , and figure forth , and therefore the apostle makes the son's house to be the saints , the called and justified of God , whose house are we , &c. that is , all gods elect regenerated ones ; wherefore , as the holy ghost saith , to day , saith he , if you will hear his voice , harden not your hearts , that is , repent , that your sins May be done away , this is Christ's way and method to build his house , his church , to make them spiritual by regeneration , and of these spiritual sons to build his everlasting tabernacle ; and thus Christ the Lord , the son , the great master-builder , is the high priest and minister of the holy sanctuary , the true tabernacle which God doth build or pitch , and not man , heb. 8. 2. and in this sense everywhere doth the holy ghost understand the son's house , or church of Christ ; the temple of God is holy , saith the apostle , which temple ye are , 1 cor. 3. 17. and again , ye are the temple of the holy ghost , which is in you , which you have of God and not of man , 1 cor. 6. 19 and in the 20th verse , that it is the purchase of Christ's blood , and the faithfulness of the son of the house ; and again , saith he , Christ loveth the church , and gave himself for it , that he Might wash it and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word , ephes. 5. 25 , 26. this is the body , that is of Christ , which the whole ceremonial law of Moses were but shadows of ; and the faithfulness of Christ in his house consisting of such spiritual substances , as hath been before described , take heed how you affect outward external forms , rules and order ; for we find in scripture , that such as have been of your mind , to promote and advance , resting and glorying in the outward observation and common things of the church , that they have been the worst of Christians and the persecutors of the saints ▪ wherefore take heed of popularity and external dignity , for the outward state of the church of the Jews killed the prophets , and stoned them that were sent unto them , and yet their outward state was of God's ordinance , and yours of your own inventions , like the case of the scribes and Pharisees in our saviour Christ's time , whose fair speeches , pretences and colourable shows , were high in esteem amongst men , yet an abomination before the Lord , Luke 16. 15.  And the prophet Jeremiah saith , the pastors that should have gathered and fed Christ's sheep , did destroy and scatter the sheep of God's pasture , and tread down the faithful like the dirt of the street , isa. 51. 23.  prophecy against the shepherds , saith the Lord to the prophet , son of man , prophesy against the shepherds of Israel , and say unto them , woe be to the shepherds of Israel , who feed themselves , and not the flock , &c. the diseased have they not strengthened , neither have they healed that which was sick , neither have they bound up that which was broken , nor brought that which was driven away , nor sought that which was lost , but with force and with cruelty have you ruled them , ezek. 34. 2 , 3 , 4.  How many of you independents is there , that deny the food of life to the lambs of Christ ? and will neither preach to them the word , nor deliver to them the sacraments , except they submit to your devised fancied covenant , and yield to such a confession of your own devising , or else to be excluded your church and communion in God's ordinances , which God himself freely offers to all that receive the common faith ? this new independency is but old popery , who laid as fair claims to the name riches and treasury of Christ's church as you can do , by what ever i have found published by any of your leaders , and your human church constitution , no better than that of Babylon : wherefore omit not to procure oil for your lamps while the market lasteth , lest your endeavour be too late , when you cannot purchase it . 

You that talk so much of God's word , and understand so little of it , i pray you tell me where the name that most of you call yourselves by is to be found in the scriptures ; i am sure the term independency is not once mentioned in all the churches of the saints ; yea , of and by them the quite contrary is affirmed : for , saith the apostle , the eye cannot say to the hand , i have no need of thee , nor again , the head to the feet , i have no need of you : for as the body is one , and hath in my members , and all the members of that one body , being many , are one body ▪ so is Christ , 1 cor. 12. 21. and again , by one spirit we are baptised into one body , vers. 12 , 13. that is , the whole church , whether we be Jews or gentiles ; so then to follow the apostles argument , if there can be no independency of the members of , or in one body , than no particular congregation or church can be independent from the rest ; and the reason is beyond answering , because all particular churches make but one , which is the body of Christ ; and this is the apostles inference , and so also is Christ , vers. 5. so we being many are one body in Christ , and every one members one of another ; so then see the membership and churchway of God's church in a spiritual and supernatural respect , and not in a human voluntary covenant , of which the scripture saith , they confederate , but not by me , saith the Lord , therefore acknowledge not a confederacy to all them , to whom this persons ( Saith the Lord ) shall say a confederacy , isa. 8. 12.  For the confederacy or persons convenanted together by God , the apostle calls all the suffering saints , these are the body of Christ ( In these words ) for his body sake which is his church , col. 1 24.  Wherefore now see in a word , how by mistaking God's word , you mistake the scriptures , and the meaning of Christ's faithfulness in his house as a son , in comparison of Moses faithfulness as a servant . 



Heresy .  In this his saying , he reproaches us all , for his speech against the external and outward gathering of churches , whether authority allow of it or no , is against us all in particular ; for we all agree in that , and in the freedom and liberty of our consciences without question , or any control of any power , authority or magistracy whatsoever . 



Truth .  Indeed this is the doctrine you all teach and cry out for with one voice or consent , for which cause i termed you all at first , all one enemy bound together which the new-found common with of independency , which under a fair pretence , as under the pleasant object of green grass lies the snake or serpent , to destroy the very truth of God ; and how ever you endeavour to bind Samson , the holy child of God , as Dalilah the harlot did , yet the with of your own invention , which you call independency , can the child and mother of truth break in sunder like a straw of rye , and grass of the field , to be burned with fire , never again to be reckoned amongst the matter of God's building ; and that we May discover this straw and stubble more clearly , let us consider what you say , in that you all agree in the freedom and liberty of conscience , &c. whereby the term conscience without due distinction , you put upon us most gross and absurd conclusions : for what do you say ? in the general you all say as much for popery , familism , Arianism , Arminianism , and all the rest of the heresies in particular as for yourselves ; wherefore to clear the question by the rule of truth , note and observe , that the scripture speaks of the term conscience in a manifold distinction : first , generally of two sorts , good and bad : secondly , apart , and of both particularly ; and 

First , for the good , which is to be considered in a double respect ; a strong conscience and a weak conscience , so distinguished , because some are strong through experience of the truth , and a great measure of knowledge , others through want thereof are weak , which weak conscience ought not to be forced , but born withal and supported , as 1 thes. 5. 14. 1 cor. 8. 7 , 9 , 10. 11. and chap. 9 22. both which consciences the scripture calls good , pure , washed and purged , 1 tim. 1. 5. 1 pet. 3. 21. 2 tim. 1. 3. heb. 9 14. and 13. 18.  Again , in the general sense , the bad or evil conscience , that ought not to be born with and supported , in no respect whatsoever , which conscience hath a twofold distinction also : for every man by nature , the elect as well as the reprobate , hath an evil conscience ; and therefore the apostle speaking in the person of the regenerate elect , heb. 10. 22. saith thus ; having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience , and our bodies washed with pure water , clearly showing hereby , that the consciences of the elect themselves are wicked and evil by nature , before regeneration . 

And in the second place , the apostle to Timothy , and to the church of Thessalonica , speaks of a higher degree of an evil conscience , even of such as had known the truth , and yet had not received the love of the truth ; for which cause God sends such strong delusions , that they should believe lies , 2 thes. 2.  And as such do not love the truth , so they depart from the true faith , and in stead thereof , give heed to seducing spirits , and doctrines of devils , speaking and preaching lies in hypocrisy ; having their consciences seared with a hot iron , 1 tim. 4. 1 , 2.  And the spirit of God speaks expressly of the latter times , in which last days of the world we now live in , which days and times we by experience find to be perilous and dangerous , and by reason of the crafty , cunning , devilish doctrines that are invented and sown amongst us , that we find our Lord's words true , if it were possible they should deceive the very elect ; for under fair speeches and religious pretences , they broach and sow dangerous doctrines : one cries out for popery , and all the abominations thereof ; another with his pretended new light , doth even darken the true light of men ; others say the spirit of adoption is in all men , a shining and burning light in the regenerate , and in the natural obscured and covered over with corruptions , as the fire is raked up in ashes ; others say , a man hath no more soul than a horse , and that the resurrection shall be alike between men and beasts ; others say there is neither angel nor spirit , neither heaven nor hell , neither resurrection nor perfection ; others say they are Christ , the prophesied Messiah ; others affirm of themselves they are the two witnesses , the two olive-trees , the two prophets , and the two candlesticks ; others blasphemously say , that our Lord Jesus Christ was a deceiver , and so was the apostles ; they also speak sleighly of the scriptures , and say of themselves , that they can write as good scripture as any of those we have ; others are mere atheists , and say all things come by nature , and that they know not , nor hope for any better condition than the present , and will say these words , and such like ; let us eat and drink , and be merry , for to morrow we shall die : these , and a thousand such blasphemies are maintained amongst us , and will every one of them plead , it is their conscience so to believe , which by your doctrine , should all be suffered without opposition and punishment ; for shame never plead any longer for Baal , but search the scriptures , the word of God , and it will teach you , that the mouths of such heretics and blasphemers must be stopped , 1 tim. 1. 11. and St. Paul is as express in this point , i would they were cut off that trouble you , gal. 5. 12.  I pray do not the forenamed false and lying spirits preach another gospel , another God , another Christ , and so fall within that rule of Moses , deut. 13. 5. that prophet and that dreamer of dreams , that persuadeth from our true god to a false , shall be put to death , according to that holy prophet's commission , Ezra 7. 26. that whosoever would not do the law of God , and the King , execution shall be made upon them , whether unto death , or unto banishment , or confiscation of goods , or imprisonment . oh remember God's own hand against such blasphemous gainsayers , and withstanders of God and man , numb 6. the earth opened its mouth and buried them alive , their tents , wives , children , cattle , and all that pertained to them , wherefore give unto God the things that are God's , and to Cesar the things that are Caesar's , do not build Babel again , under pretence of conscience ; and learn this truth , that you must needs be subject to all lawful rules , laws and orders , not only for wrath , but also for conscience sake , rom. 13. 5.  

Now for as much as upon true trial all of you of all sorts that are not born of God , are plainly proved to be none of God's house , none of Christ's church , nor the temple of the holy ghost ; therefore , that she May more apparently appear to your understanding , i shall endeavour to make a brief description of her & her children . The scripture speaks of her sometimes by the name of a man , and sometimes under the name and appellation of a woman : and at other times , in the neuter gender , either he or she , in these words , they overcame him with the blood of the lamb , &c.  they loved not their lives unto the death ; he said unto them on his right hand , come ye blessed of my father , &c. and abundance the like scriptures , by which terms , either sex is to be understood : now where the scriptures set forth unto us the saints and church of Christ in the feminine gender , under the name and title of a woman , than it notes unto us her fruitfulness , in bringing forth unto God , as well as unto men . Jerusalem from above is the mother of us all , gal. 4. 26.  of us all , that is , of all those that are born of God , which birth is spiritual and heavenly , as before hath been showed ; and in this sense she brings forth fruit unto God also , rom. 7. 4.  And to men , God's elected servants , she is a nursing mother , with bowels of compassion , she hath two breasts full of sincere milk for her little ones that are young ; and for her strong and elder children , she hath stronger meat , she killeth for them her beasts ; she hath wine and bread , she furnishes her table , prov. 9 with a feast of fat things , a feast of wines on the lees , of fat things full of marrow , isa. 25. 6.  the fruit of the righteous is a tree of life , and they that turn souls unto God are wise , prov. 11. 30.  The children of this woman are the children of wisdom our Lord speaks of , who only are they that can testify to the truth , these are the wise that shall shine as the brightness of the firmament ; and these are they that turn many unto righteousness , who shall be hereafter as glorious as the stars for ever and ever ; this is she whom God calls Zion and Jerusalem , that bringeth glad tidings , even the joyful voice , the persons in whose heart is God's law , and covenant of life for ever , in and by them preserved ; for they are the keepers of his truth , and as they know the truth , so they preach it and declare it ; it is a fountain in them , out of their bellies do flow rivers of water of life : so also it is a store-house , a magazine of the Lord's provision , abundance , a plenty of things , old and new ; this good man , out of the treasury of his good heart , bringeth forth that which is good ; this householder is the scribe instructed unto the kingdom of heaven , who bringeth forth of his treasury things new and old ; their fountain is their own and not another's ; it is only this spiritual and heavenly woman , the church of Christ , who unfoldeth and maketh known to the world the manifold wisdom of God , eph. 3. 10. which woman sometimes , according to the grace given her , is called a holy woman , a pure , undefiled , chaste virgin ; behold , these are my mother , saith the Lord himself : and sometimes gloriously described ; there appeared in heaven , saith St. John , a great wonder , a woman clothed with the sun , and the moon under her feet , and upon her head a crown of twelve stars , great with child , travelling in birth with pain ready to be delivered , rev. 12. 1 , 2.  Observe , this woman is continually fruitful , still increasing , still big , travelling and bringing forth unto God ; and as she is thus glorious in regard of her graces , so in regard of her sorrows and sufferings , she is called a barren woman , by such harlots as call themselves the wife of Christ , who not knowing the low , the spiritual , the humble penitent poor condition of the true spouse , despise her , hate and contemn her , as Hagar the bond-manid did her Mistress Sarah , the freewoman , and report of her that is the Lord's love and delight , as desolate and forsaken of her husband , even a despicable and forlorn widow , and shall so be accounted of all that are filthy , till her sufferings are ended , even as the offscouring of the earth . This holy church of Christ , is also described unto us in the scripture , under the masculine appellation , a man , the first-born , a manchild ; Israel , saith the Lord by the prophet , is my first-born , deut. 4. 23.  let my son go , saith the Lord ; for Israel is my son , my first-born , vers. 22.  i am a father to Israel , saith the Lord , and Ephraim is my first-born , jer. 31. 9 where by Israel and Ephraim , God means his faithful chosen persons , his church : so the first and primitive fruit of the church , under the gospel , is called a manchild , rev. 12. 5.  and she brought forth a manchild , who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron . now this name or appellation of the church , notes out unto us two things : first , the honour and dignity of the church , that although now in this life they suffer , and go by the worst of all carnal and outward Christians , yet in the time to come , they shall receive the selfsame honour which to their Lord alone , and in chief belongeth : and as they shall have the same honour with their Lord , mat. 19  Rev. 2. so the Lord is pleased to be called by their title also , psal. 89. 27.  I will make him my first-born , higher than the Kings of the earth ; and then he speaks of his church , vers. 29.  His seed also will i make to endure for ever , and his throne as the days of heaven , where he will place his church with himself for evermore , mat. 9 28.  Rev. 2. 27. with him in his throne ; yea , in his own throne . In the second place , this masculine title notes out unto us the birthright and inheritance that by right belongs unto the church of God ; that as the first-born manchild is the heir apparent , both by scripture and nature , so the Lord's first-born is the apparent heir of the purchased inheritance : and to this truth doth the apostle witness in these words , rom. 8. 17.  If children , than heirs , heirs with God , and joint heirs with Christ , heirs of salvation , heb. 1. 14.  heirs according to the promise , gal. 3. 29.  heirs according to the hope of eternal life , tit. 3. 7.  heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that love him , James 2. 5.  Oh how sweet and comfortable are the words ! I could always be mindful of them ; yea , of this word , heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised , &c. which now calls me to mind of my promise at first , to describe in its due place , the stone that was cut out without hands , which smote the image upon his feet , which became a great mountain , and filled the whole earth , &c.  

This term mountain , in the scriptures , sets forth unto us , often literally , the hills , or highest parts of the earth , but figuratively the greatest powers that are in this world , or that to come ; and sometimes by mountain we are to understand , such carnal and natural men as have high thoughts , and great esteem of themselves ; and therefore as it is prophesied of John the Baptist , isa. 40. 3 , 4. so it was fulfilled by him , Luke 3. 4. who by the great gifts given him of God to work repentance , whereby he prepared the Lord's way , and turned the disobedient to the wisdom of the just ; and of the operation of his ministry , it is said , every mountain and hill was brought low , &c. meaning , that the hearts of disobedient natural men were made penitent , and their high thoughts humbled . Also by the term mountain we are to understand , all those great powers , dignities and authorities that have risen up , and born sway in this world , ever since the creation thereof , and amongst the rest , those monarchies , especially at the beginning of our discourse , particularly named , and with them , all nations and religions , Papists , and others , as well Christians as pagans' , that have at all times hated , persecuted and destroyed the saints , the church of Christ ; and with this truth , the prophet Jeremiah was well acquainted , in saying , in the name of the Lord , that he would render unto Babylon , and all the inhabitants of Chaldea , all their evil that they had done to Zion ; behold , i am against thee , oh destroying mountain , saith the Lord , which destroyedst all the earth , &c.  Jer. 51. 24 , 25. and again , who art thou , oh great mountain , thou shalt be made a plain , zac. 4 ▪ 7.  And for this cause , even for the great oppression of his servants and persons , will the Lord shortly go forth as a mighty man , he shall stir up jealousy like a man of war , he shall cry , yea roar ; he shall prevail against his enemies mightily ; and although he have been long silent and held his peace , and restrained himself all this world long , and hath suffered his own wife and little children to be afflicted with judgement from all the powers and authorities that have ruled in the earth , yet now it is near at hand , that he that shall come will come , and will not tarry , but will destroy and devour at once all the mountains and hills that have desolated his own little holy hill of Zion , isa. 42. 13 , 14 , 15.  Psal. 2. 6.  And this holy hill of Zion , which David speaks of , is the small stone , cut out of the mountain without hands , that Daniel so long before saw in a vision , which became so great a mountain , that it broke to pieces the gold , the silver , the brass , the iron , the clay , that no place was found for them for ever hereafter . Now the holy scribe Ezra , is showed what the mountain cut out without hands is , 2 ezr. 13. 35. that it is Zion , the church of God , and her King , the son of God , standing on the top of this mount Zion ( A posture of majesty , belonging only to a King , ) and that this King should without sword , or lifting up his hand , or any instrument of war , destroy the multitudes that came out to fight against him with a blast of fire , sent out of his mouth , and out of his lips a flaming breath and sparkles , and tempest cast out with his tongue , vers. 10. and the torments are like to a flame , and their destruction shall be with the law , that is , like unto fire , v. 38.  And the peaceable multitude are the ten tribes , carried away by Salmaneser , King of Assyria ; now both their carrying into captivity past long ago , and their return , which is not yet brought to pass , are a lively type of the saints captivity , both of Jews and gentiles , in the church's pressures and sufferings , and of their deliverance and salvation also ; as likewise the set-time to be in the day of the Lord Jesus his coming and revealing , v. 28. to the 50. compared with 2 king. 17.  And farther , it filled the whole earth , saith the text , dan. 2. 34.  Observe the prophet's expression , that the holy mountain of the Lord at the first was seen to be a stone cut out without hands , which clearly deciphereth unto us , the true nature of the church of Christ in her first and suffering condition , the ten tribes captivity in their estate of regeneration , by which she is made a holy , living , spiritual stone-house , and so made or fashioned , not by man's hands , or any human power , as all the fleshly synagogues of this world are , but cut out and made without hands , as that tabernacle which God doth build , and not man , which is the true church or tabernacle , heb. 8. 2.  And as i have often touched before , continually all this life long suffers under those that are evil and malignant , truly so called : wherefore the Lord by the prophet comforts this holy church and mother of truth ; for a moment have i forsaken thee , but with great mercies will i gather thee ; in a little wrath have i hide my face from thee , for a moment , but with everlasting kindness will i have mercy on thee , saith the Lord thy redeemer ; and again , oh thou afflicted and tossed with tempest ; i will speak it again , •ossed with tempest ; here 's a word that sets out the suffering of truth with her children to the full , even so tossed with the storm and tempest of affliction , as a ship is tossed with the roaring and raging waves of the seas ; or as a ball is tossed and beaten up and down , both by hand and foot , isa. 54.  Now as the prophet Daniel by the dream of the King did understand the day of small things concerning the church's condition in her estate of regeneration ; so also he saw the great and glorious power and sovereignty , its dominion and magnitude , in its deliverance and perfection : and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain , and filled the whole earth ; this is the mountain of God's holiness , even the greatest power and sovereign authority that ever was in the world before it . And the text notes out unto us three things , the time when it shall be , the place where it shall be , and the manner how it shall be ; the manner hath a double consideration , first , the beginning and weakness of this powerful kingdom , expressed as before i have declared in her spiritual estate of renovation or regeneration , in these words , a stone was cut out without hands ; and in this first estate and condition of the church , it is said to live and reign , to attain victory , and overcome , rev. chap. 20.  & 12. but this victory is by faith , this overcoming is by suffering , they overcame him , that is , the dragon's pagancy , by the blood of the lamb , and by the word of their testimony , and they loved not their lives unto death , and at this battle the armies were great on both sides , and the victory glorious on the saints side , rev. 12. 7. 11.  In the second consideration , we are to understand the church in her glory and perfection , and to as far exceed all the monarchies , kingdoms and powers that were before it , as the body exceeds the shadow , the person the picture , the circumference the centre . The Babylonian monarchy , the head of gold , was a great power , thou , oh King , saith the prophet , art a King of Kings , for the god of heaven hath given thee a kingdom , strength , power and glory , and wheresoever the children of men dwell , beasts of the field , and fowls of the heaven hath he given into thy hand , and hath made thee ruler over them all , yet all these bounds and dominations are but by way of comparison , to the universe , the heavens , earth and sea , which are the bounds of Christ's and his church , rule and lordship : secondly , the nature and condition of the kingdoms of this world , and the power and greatness of majesty that Christ's kingdom shall have in the world to come , differs beyond all comparison : for the kingdoms of this world are sinful kingdoms , powers and authorities ; yea , this present evil world is corrupted , and lies under the cursed condition by reason of sin , and as long as this face of the covering is cast over all persons , and this evil is spread over all nations , isa. 25. 7. even so long death the King of fears the wages of that sin shall reign in it , according to the scriptures , gen. 3. 17.  Rom. 5. 17 , 21. 1 cor. 15. but when the Lord shall set up his kingdom , he will create new heavens , and a new earth : behold , saith he , i will do it , and the former shall not be remembered , nor come into mind : but be you glad and rejoice for ever in that which i create ; for , behold , i create Jerusalem a rejoicing , and her persons a joy , isa. 65. 17 , 18.  And the apostle by the same spirit of prophecy , saith , that the heavens and the earth that are now , with all these things , shall be dissolved : and according to God's promise , we look ( That is , all God's saints ) for new heavens , and a new earth , wherein dwelleth righteousness , 2 pet. 3.  And the apostle John tells us , rev. 21. what this new heaven , and new earth is , even the holy church of God , the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven , prepared as a bride adorned for her husband ; and a voice out of heaven expounds it to him , behold , the tabernacle of God is with men , and he will dwell with them , and they shall be his persons , and God himself shall be with them , and be their God , and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes , and there shall be no more death , neither sorrow nor crying , neither shall there be any more pain ; for the former things are passed away : and again , saith the Lord , behold , i make all things new , write , for these things are true and faithful . 

Once again observe the prophet Daniel , in these words , and it became a great mountain , of which our saviour gives the meaning in these words , the kingdom of heaven is like unto a grain of mustard seed , which is the least of all seeds , but when it is grown ( Just as the prophet [ it became ] so our Lord ) it is the greatest among herbs , and became a tree , &c. both which places as one shows , that although the church be now so little , that no man heeds or regards her , yet her increase shall be from the least of all seeds to a tree with branches , and from a small stone to a huge great mountain , even so big , as to fill the whole earth . 

Which magnitude , excellent glory , greatness , and sovereignty of the church and kingdom of God , i shall in part discover , by considering these eight particulars : the King , the kingdom , the throne , the sceptre , the laws , the privileges , the officers , and the subjects : and for the King thereof , thus saith the prophet , notwithstanding all the rage and opposition of the heathens , and the vain imaginations of the persons , yet have i set my King upon my holy hill of Zion , saith the Lord , psal. 2. 1. 5. and the title of his crown is the title of his cross , this is the King of the Jews , Luke 23. 38. and himself testifying a good confession before Pilate , saith , thou sayst i am a King : to this end was i born , and for this cause came i into the world , joh. 18. 37.  Secondly , the scriptures speak of the kingdom of Christ above all comparison , and calls it , the kingdom of the son of God , and , that there was given him dominion , and glory , and a kingdom , &c. dan. 7. 13 , 14.  Now the consideration of these four things will briefly discover to us , how this church and kingdom of Christ exceeds all other powers or kingdoms whatsoever : first , in the majesty of it : secondly , in its excellency : thirdly , in its universality ; and fourthly , in its eternity : the majesty sets forth the magnitude and greatness of this kingdom , the King is great , and the kingdom is great , behold , saith the angel to the virgin , he shall be great , and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever , Luke 1. 32. 33.  And the prophet Daniel describes this greatness , and what this house of Jacob is , in these words , and the kingdom , and dominion , and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven , shall be given to the persons of the saints of the most high , whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom , and all dominions , rulers and powers , shall serve and obey him , dan. 7. 27.  The excellency is set forth by the glory , splendour and purity of it ; and in this respect it is in scripture called the kingdom of God , the kingdom of Christ , a kingdom of priests , a kingdom of saints , the kingdom of our God , the kingdom of glory , heavenly country , city , inheritance , possession , reward , all heavenly , all glorious , all holy , there shall be nothing to hurt nor destroy in my holy mountain , saith the Lord : the glory is expressed beyond the light of sun and moon in the firmament , or gold or precious jewels in the earth , there shall in no wise be any thing there that defileth , rev. 21. 27.  Thirdly , its universality sets forth the largeness of the dominion and unbounded limits of it ; the prophet David saith , its dominion is from sea to sea , from the river to the ends of the earth , i will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance , and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession , there 's the dominion ; and in the next words , see the greatness of the power and authority , thou shalt break them with a rod of iron , and dash them to pieces like a potter's vessel , psal. 2. 8 , 9  they that dwell in the wilderness shall how before him , and his enemies shall lick the dust ; yea , all Kings shall fall down before him , all nations shall serve him , psal. 72. 8 , 9 , 10.  And therefore he is called the King of nations , for his universal jurisdiction ; who would not fear thee , oh King of nations ? for greatness and power pertain to thee , jer. 10. 6 , 7.  And Daniels witness is , that all persons , nations and languages shall fear him , his dominion is an everlasting dominion , which shall not pass away , and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed , dan. 7. 14. which in the last place shows the eternity or perpetuity of the kingdom ; and therefore the apostle calls it , the everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ , 2 pet. 1. 11.  he shall reign , saith the angel , over the house of Jacob for ever , and of his kingdom there shall be no end , Luke 1. 33.  And this glorious kingdom of Christ is often in scripture termed a world without end : under these terms , everlasting life , everlasting kingdom , &c.  the persons of God , that formerly were , and now are refused , contemned , and cast off from the thoughts and estimations of others , shall then in that day be made a strong nation , and the Lord himself shall reign over them in mount Zion , from henceforth even for ever , saith the prophet , mic. 4. 7.  

The next and third particular to be considered , is the throne of the kingdom of Christ ; and for that we have the angel's testimony also ; and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David , luk. 1. 32.  And again , thy throne , oh God , is a throne of righteousness , established for ever and ever , psal. 45. 6.  And again , thy seed will i establish for ever , and build up thy throne to all generations . and again , his seed will i make to endure for ever , and his throne as the days of heaven , psal. 89. 4. ver. 29.  And again the third time , his seed shall endure for ever , and his throne as the sun before me , ver. 36.  

What moves the holy prophet thus three times to make mention of the King , the throne , and thy seed , that is , God's children by regeneration , thus to sing and rejoice in the remembrance of them together , but for to show us this holy truth , that the saints shall reign with their King , that the saints shall judge the world ? for this blessed comfort the Lord preaches to his children himself by his own mouth , rev. 2. 26 , 27.  He that evercometh and keepeth my words unto the end , to him will i give power over the nations , and he shall rule them with a rod of iron , &c.  And i will grant to him to sit with me in my throne , even as i also overcame , and am set down with my father in his throne , chap. 3. 21.  And thus taught he his blessed apostles that followed him , in the regeneration , as St. Matthew saith , and had participated and continue with him in his sufferings and temptations , as Luke hath it , i appoint unto you a kingdom , saith our Lord , as my father hath appointed unto me , that ye May eat and drink at my table , in my kingdom , and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel , mat. 19 28.  Luke 22. 29 , 30. yea , this honour have all the saints , with the King in the King's throne ; oh ye saints , praise ye the Lord , psal. 149. 9  

The fourth particular is the sceptre of this kingdom , and that the holy ghost calls a sceptre of righteousness , heb. 1. 8.  a sceptre of righteousness , or righteousnesses , that is , righteous in the purity and excellency of it , is the sceptre of thy kingdom ; this is properly Shiloh's , the saviour's sceptre , gen. 49. 10.  Yet such is the King's grace to his servants , his seed , church and persons , that of this which in particular belongs to himself alone , even of this also doth he communicate to his little ones , his first-born , the heirs of salvation , not only to sit with him in his throne , but also to rule with his sceptre : the woman's child which are the saints , saith the text , are to rule even as their Lord himself doth , all nations with a rod of iron , that is , with the sceptre of righteousness , rev. 12. 5.  And the Lord hath decreed for ever , that it shall be so , whosoever he be that overcometh , he will give him power and authority to sit with him in his throne , to rule over all nations , with a rod of iron , and to break them as an earthen vessel is dashed to pieces with a bar of iron , rev. 2. 26 , 27.  And as the King of glory doth place the saints in his own throne , and gives them in particular the sway and rule of his own sceptre , so he honours them with his own crown also , called a crown of life , a crown of glory , a crown of righteousness , and the like , they are all crowned , rev. 4. 10.  The crown is laid up for all that love the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ the King of saints , 2 tim. 4. 8.  

The fifth particular in discovering the greatness of Christ's glorious kingdom , are the laws and rules of this kingdom , for as the kingdom itself is new , and all things new in it , so are the laws also , a new commandment give i unto you , saith the King himself , that you love one another , as i have loved you , that you love one another , joh. 13. 34.  here 's both the precept and the precedent ; this holy commandment was given unto them in their estate of regeneration , 2 pet. 2. 21. and continues in them world without end , in glory and perfection , it is the law of the endless life ; this law of love , it abideth for ever , charity never faileth , 1 cor. 13. 8. most or all things else shall fail , prophecy shall fail , tongues shall cease , knowledge it shall vanish away ; all imperfect things shall terminate and come to an end , but this new commandment love , endures for ever ; death is strong , for it hath and will kill all men made and create ; and the grave , the issue of death is mighty , but love surmounts them all in the better sense , cant. 8. 6.  The sea of waters cannot quench it , nor all the floods , or overflowings of the ocean cannot drown it ; for the coals thereof are coals of fire , which hath a most vehement flame , and it contemns all manner of substance to purchase it , it is no way to be attained , but by the gift of God . i will put my laws in their inward parts , and write them in their hearts , saith the Lord , jer. 31. 33.  This glorious kingdom are all such as are made of God Kings and priests ; these are the Levites to whom God hath given the law and covenant of life to , this commandment of peace and salvation , mal. 2. 4 , 5 , 6. which hath comforted his persons here , and for ever doth guide and regulate them in the perfection , the glorious and everlasting kingdom of Christ hereafter . Which law of God's kingdom is called in scriptures , a holy law , a royal law , a law of life , a law of liberty , a perfect law , and such like , James 1. 25. chap. 2. 8. 12.  

The sixt thing considerable , is the privileges of this kingdom of glory , which are so great and many , that i shall rather obscure then discover them , their privilege of power and authority is exceeding much , and abundantly set forth in the scriptures ; for when the Lord shall exalt Jerusalem , this his own kingdom , then shall the Lord break the staff of the wicked , and the sceptre of the rulers , isa. 14. 5.  behold , saith the Lord , i will make them of the synagogue of Satan , which say they are Jews and are not , but do lie . Behold , ( Saith he the second time again to his church ) i will make them come to worship before thy feet , and to know that i have loved thee , rev. 3. 9  This is such a dignity and privilege as the Lord himself with a twofold word of audience affirmeth to take them captives , whose captives they were , and to rule over their oppressors , isa. 14. 2. with the praises of God in their mouths , and a two-edged sword in their hands , to execute vengeance & punishment upon heathenish persons , to bind their Kings with chains , & their nobles with fetters of iron ; this honour or privilege have all the saints , psal. 149.  And so saith the prophet , the sons of them that afflicted thee , shall come bending unto thee , and all that despised thee , shall how themselves down at the soles of thy feet , and they shall call thee the city of the Lord , the Zion of the holy one of Israel ; whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated , so that no man went through thee , or delighted in thy company ; i will make thee an eternal excellency , a joy of many generations , isa. 60. 14 , 15.  So also their privilege of freedom and liberty , doth set forth their glory ; Jerusalem which is above , is free , which is the mother of us all , gal. 4. 26.  They are all freeborn , so begotten and born by the word itself ; for all the whole kingdom are children of the truth , and the truth it was that which made them free , joh. 8. 32.  Now the word and the truth are the son , and those that the son makes free , are free indeed , ver. 36. and from all manner of bondage ; free from sin , free from death , free from sorrow , free from the grave , free from corruption , free from oppression , free from suffering , enlarged and set at liberty for ever to enjoy immortality , these are the persons that possess and enjoy the glorious liberty or freedom of the sons or children of God , rom. 8. 21.  

Also the company and associates that are in this heavenly kingdom do exceedingly declare the glory of it , to have and enjoy the presence of God , of Christ , and the holy ghost , the company of all the holy angels , the company and society of all the holy patriarchs , prophets , and saints , with the comfortable delight and excellency of the restitution and perfection of all creatures , both in the heavens , the earth , and the sea , and all that is within them , as shall be showed hereafter , in the point of universal subjection . in God's presence , saith the prophet , is fullness of joy , and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore , psal. 16. 11.  you , saith the Lord , speaking to his saints , i appoint unto you a kingdom , and ye shall eat and drink with me at my table in my kingdom , luk. 22. 30.  And as the angels are ministering spirits here in the saints sufferings , heb. 1. 7. so in the world to come with the presence of God we shall have the company & presence of the angels about the throne , saith the text , rev. 7. 11.  And there shall we see Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , and all the holy prophets in the kingdom of God , and have heavenly sweet society and company with them , luk. 13. 28.  Now as the privileges of the kingdom excel , so also its officers exceed all others ; i will , saith the Lord , make thy officers peace , and thine exactors righteousness ; violence shall no more be heard in thy land , wasting and destruction within thy borders ; but thou shalt call thy walls salvation , and thy gates praise , isa. 60. 18 , 19  Then shall mercy and truth meet together , righteousness and peace shall kiss each other , psal. 85. 10.  And this is the seventh consideration ; the eight followeth , which are the subjects of this great King and kingdom . 

And the apostle is so general and universal in these , that he excepts none , neither in heaven , nor in earth , not sea , nor under the earth , even none that can be named , but God the father only , that subdued all under his sons feet , which is the King of this kingdom ; for so saith the apostle , 1 cor. 15. 27.  For he hath put all things under his feet ; for when he saith , all things are put under him , it is manifest that he is excepted who did put all things under him : so than it is clear , that angels and men , and all other creatures , are the subjects of this great kingdom ; he hath put all things in subjection under his feet , saith the apostle , heb. 2. 8.  And this is the prophet's witness ; i have sworn by myself , saith the Lord , the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness , and shall not return , that unto me every knee shall how , every tongue shall swear , isa. 45. 23.  And again , the nations and kingdoms that will not serve thee shall perish , yea those nations shall be utterly wasted , chap. 60. 12.  And of the angels saith the apostle , let all the angels of God worship him , heb. 1. 6.  And the apostle expounds the oath of the Lord for this universal subjection , and saith , it is written , as i live saith the Lord , every knee shall how to me , and every tongue shall confess to God , rom. 14. 11.  And again he saith , at the name of Jesus every knee shall how , of things in heaven and things in earth , and things under the earth , and every tongue shall confess that Jesus is Lord and King , to the glory of God the father , phil. 2. 10 , 11.  And yet the holy ghost is more particular , to prove that all things in all places are subject to Christ , rev. 5. 13.  And every creature , saith he , which is in heaven , and on the earth , and under the earth , and such as are in the sea , and all that are in them , saith John , heard i saying , blessing , honour , glory and power , be unto him that sitteth upon the throne , and unto the lamb for ever and ever . and the prophet David , he foretold of this universal subjection of all creatures in the kingdom of Christ in the world to come , saith the author to the Hebrews , and understood it in these words , admiring at it , what is man that thou art so mindful of him , or the son of man that thou visitest him ? thou hast made him a little lower than angels ; and the apostle gives the reason of that , thou hast crowned him with glory and honour , thou hast made him to have dominion over the work of thy hands , thou hast put all things under his feet , all sheep and oxen , yea and the beasts of the field ; the fowls of the air , and the fishes of the sea : which makes the prophet fall into a wonderment ; oh God our Lord , how excellent is thy name in all the earth ! psal. 8. 4. heb. 2. 6.  

Now i am come to the two last particulars , the time when this glorious kingdom of Christ shall be set up , and the place where it shall be continue for ever : the time was thus foreshowed to the prophet David , that the time of Christ's churches persecution , should not be till his second appearing , in these words , when the Lord shall build up Zion , he shall appear in his glory , psal. 102. 16.  And this time our Lord himself plainly teacheth us to be at the end of this world , and not before ; which truth the saints and persons of God do fully and certainly believe , although a thousand false prophets should arise and preach the contrary , under what show or pretence of learning and religion soever they make . 

The clear and plain doctrine of our Lord is this , mat. 13. 39 , 40 , 41.  The harvest is the end of the world , and the reapers are the angels , as therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire , so shall it be in the end of this world , the son of man shall send forth his angels , and they shall gather out of his kingdom , all scandalous things , and all such as do offend them , or which do or work iniquity . and when the question is made by the servants to the householder , whether the tares the envious man sowed among the good seed should be plucked up ? the Master answers , nay , let them both grow together till the harvest ; and also giveth the reason , and showeth farther what shall be done then , and not before , both with the tares & wheat also , although many unwarily do affirm at this time amongst us the contrary , yet thus saith the Lord , ( And therefore i would wish all the contrary minded to take notice of it ) that at his glorious coming shall be the kingdom's deliverance , reign , and perfection , and not before ; therefore saith her Lord and King , when the son of man shall come in his glory , and all the holy angels with him , then shall be sit upon the throne of his glory , and before him shall be gathered all nations , and he shall separate them one from another , is a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats , and then he shall set the sheep on his right hand , but the goats on the left , and assign and put in possession the one to eternal bliss , but the other to a perditious eternal woeful cursed condition , even binding them into bundles to be burned ; but the blessed to possess the Lord's own house and habitation for ever , mat. 25. 31 , 32. chap. 13. 30.  

And because this truth hath exceedingly suffered of late , by the literal learned of this generation , who have befouled the beauty and purity of it , with their dark smoky & misty mistakes , under pretence of pleading for the lamb and his wife ; i shall therefore briefly discover the spiritual learning of the apostles and prophets mysterious expressions of this holy truth : the holy apostle John in the revelations speaks with the same wisdom , aid and guidance of the spirit , as the angel taught Daniel in the same mysteries , and their very expressions in many things are alike , but more opened and revealed by the apostle , then by the prophet ; they both agree in the computation of the time , though one writ long before the other , and each differing in the rule of reckoning , as the manners of the countries in which they lived ; the one living among the Chaldeans , the other among the Hebrews ; the one computing their times and years according to the course of the sun , the other by the course of the moon : the Hebrews , their reckoning is certain thirty days to a month , and twelve months to a year ; the Chaldeans they reckon and compute according to the course and rule of the moon , which causes this seeming difference : for John's whole time for antichrists reign is twelve hundred and sixty years , in which the two witnesses shall prophesy in sackcloth , which as it notes out unto us their spiritual low and humble condition , so also their persecuted and suffering estate and condition , rev : 11. 3.  Now Daniel makes the same very time of the abomination of desolation , to be twelve hundred and ninety years , dan. 12. 11. reckoning both of them days for years , according as the prophets did reckon and account , as i have proved before : now i shall make it appear unto you , that these two holy men of God , that were moved and led by the same spirit , both spoke one and the same thing , both for the power and mystery of iniquity , and for the full and complete time of one and the selfsame number of years , for the continuance of it . And i prove it thus : as thirteen moons are thirteen months , and these thirteen months make but one year of twelve months , reckoning thirty days to a month , and twelve months to a year , by the same rule , one thousand two hundred and ninety years by the Chaldee reckoning , amount but to one thousand two hundred and threescore years , according to the reckoning of the Hebrews . and as they agree in this seeming difference , so they do most sweetly consent and agree in the point in hand , concerning the time of the beginning of the glorious kingdom of Jesus Christ , one and the same angel teacheth them one and the same truth ; and although there were near 500 years' distance between the times of their prophesying , yet the angel's majesty both of doctrine and gesture is one and the same to both , all which shows this doctrine of the time of the Lord's coming to restore all things , to exalt his church and saints , to be a most admirable and singular secret and mystery , for the continual comfort and supportation of all his suffering members in all their afflictions ; and this made the apostle , speaking to the saints of Thessalonica , of the day of the Lord's coming , his descending from heaven at the last trump , and the resurrection of such as are dead in Christ ; wherefore saith he , comfort one another with these words , 1 thes. 4. 18.  Blessed and holy is he , saith St. John , that hath part in the first resurrection , for he alone is the man that looks for his coming , and hath comfort in his appearing ; the very same saith Daniel , blessed is he that waiteth and cometh to the 1335. days , but go thou thy way till the end be , for thou shalt rest and stand in the lot at the end of the days , dan. 12. 12 , 13. which number exceeds the former , which comprehended the whole time of antichrists reign and persecution , 45. years , thereby discovering a deep mystery of high understanding , which none but the wise can possibly apprehend , as the prophet declareth , vers. 10. which additional number notes out unto us , that little season that shall be between the total destruction of Antichrist and the final consummation of this world , which our Lord himself signifieth by the word immediately , thereby to set forth all the time between the days of tribulation , and his own glorious appearing ; and St. John uses the word quickly , to set forth all the time likewise between the woeful reign of Antichrist , and the woeful ruin of all ungodly men in these words , rev. 11.  The second woe is past , and behold the third woe cometh quickly ; and as it is showed to John , that after the thousand years should be finished , expired , and fulfilled , which is the whole time of poperies cruelty and mystery of iniquity ; and the dragon , the devil's liberty , which is expressed for the time to be a little season , in which Satan shall move and stir up the nations of the four quarters of the earth , even Gog and Magog , those great and innumerable multitudes to desolate the saints , the church , even the beloved city of God , as before i have touched , till the very instant of time of the son of man's coming in his white and glorious throne to judgement , before whose face the earth and the heavens fled away , and there was found no place for them , rev. 20. 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11. and likewise the 45. additional years of Daniels Chaldee reckoning , to be the whole time in which God will accomplish the scattering of the powers of his holy persons , and between the ending of the time , times and half a time , and the general resurrection to have all these things fulfilled ; and this is clearly , though briefly intimated , wherefore i demand of all you learned Monarchists , judaists and millenarists , where in God's word you will find any time for the glory of the church's prosperity in this world ? Well , let a word be enough to the wise , and therefore never preach nor print such doctrines hereafter . 

The last thing is the place , where the scriptures speak that Christ and his kingdom shall be in for evermore , and that is the earth , saith the truth , blessed are the meek , for they shall inherit the earth , mat. 5. 5.  the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ , and he shall reign for ever and ever , rev. 11. 15. even then , when the Lord himself shall descend f•rom heaven with a shout , with the voice of the archangel , with the trump of God , and the dead in Christ shall rise first , and the saints living changed , before the kingdom be established , 2 thes. 4. 16. which St. John makes to be the voice of the seventh and last angel , rev. 10. 7. saying , when he shall begin to sound , the mystery of God shall be finished ; and that the earth at that time shall be made the place of Christ and his church's habitation eternally glorified ; observe the clear and unanimous consent of all scriptures ; this is the new song of the 24.  Elders , rev. 5. 9 , 10. which sung to the praise of the lamb of God , thou wast slain , and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood , out of every tongue , and persons , and nation , and hast made us unto our God Kings and priests , and we shall reign on the earth : and David makes it the song of his delight , in the often repetition of it , psal. 37. 9  Evil doers , saith he , shall be cut off , but those that wait upon the Lord shall inherit the earth . For yet a little while , and the wicked shall not be . But the meek shall inherit the earth , v. 10. 11.  And again , such as are blessed of God shall inherit the earth , and they that be cursed of him shall be cut off , v. 22. yea , the earth hath the Lord given to the children of men , psal. 115. 16.  And again , the spiritual sons of him that feareth the Lord shall inheritthe earth , psal. 25. 13.  wherefore great is the Lord , and greatly to be praised in the city of our God , in the mountain of his holiness , beautiful for situation , the joy of the whole earth is mount Zion , psal. 48. 1 , 2. than shall it be that the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of God , as the waters cover the sea , isa. 11. 9 which cannot be understood here in this world , but of the world to come , not in this old corruptible heaven and earth , but when the whole creation , even every creature , shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption , rom. 8. 19 , 20 , 21 , 22. in that time , when none shall hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain , saith the Lord , even then , when these heavens and earth that now are corruptible , shall be dissolved , and new heavens and new earth create , in which dwelleth righteousness , then , even in the day of the Lord's coming , 2 pet. 3. 11 , 12 , 13.  Isa. 65. 17. and as the glorious church of Christ shall remain for ever , so shall the restitution of all things also , isa. 66. 22.  Finally , John was showed the new heavens , and the new earth , and the renovation of all things , rev. 21. 1. when he saw new Jerusalem , the church of God , even the lamb's wife , come down from heaven to the earth ; so that the tabernacle of God was with men , with whom he will dwell for ever . And this is the heavenly country , church and city with foundations , which Abraham , Isaac , Jacob , and all the faithful persons of God , have ever expected and looked after , that better resurrection , which as yet they possess not ; for all these died in the faith , and received not the promise , meaning the hope that was set before them , God providing some better things for us , that they without us Might not be perfect , heb. 11. 13 , 14. yet seeing the perfection afar off , and embraced it through faith , and confessed they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth ; for they that say such things , declare plainly , that they seek a country , a heavenly Canaan , and paradise of rest : and as God's children have chosen God and his promises for their portion and inheritance , so the Lord himself hath chosen Zion for his habitation ; this is my rest for ever , saith he , here will i dwell , for i have desired it , psal. 132. 13 , 14.  

great and marvellous are thy works , Lord God almighty ; just and true are thy ways , thou King of saints , rev. 15. 3.  

the Lord loveth the gates of Zion ; glorious things are spoken of thee , oh thou city of God , psal. 87. 3.  

the Lord himself shall arise , and have mercy upon Zion ; for the time to favour her , yea , the set time is come , psal. 102. 13.  



Errata . 

page 6. line 17. for same blood , read sons blood . p. 9 l. 7. for a year , r. and a year , p. 12. l. 25. for n. h. 1. h. n. p. 49. l. 22. for elect . r. the elect . 

Finis . 
























