A brief discovery of the dangerous principles of John horn ( A priest in Lin ) and Thomas Moor junior , both teachers of the persons called mooreians or Manifestarians , ( And called by some freewillers or independents . ) in answer to their book called a brief discovery of the persons called Quakers , and a warning to all persons to beware of them and of their dangerous principles , &c.  which book is a false narrative of two disputes , the one which they had with John Whitehead at Gedney in Lincolnshire , and the other with geo. Whitehead and geo.  Fox the younger , at Lin in Norfolk , both in the seventh month , 1659.  Also priest horns testimony against his brethren the priests . This is to go amongst the professors in England in discovery of the truth ; for in this answer the truth is cleared , and John horn and tho.  Moor's ignorance discovered concerning perfection , and the resurrection , and the body and blood of Christ , and his light , and other things of concernment , and their abusing the truth ( Which is set over them and their deceits ) made manifest . 

By the truth ▪ which is in George Whitehead . 
John Whitehead . 
George Fox the younger . 


jer 10. 21.  

for the pastors are become brutish and have not sought the Lord , therefore they shall not prosper , and all their flocks shall be scattered . 

Printed for Thomas Simmons at the bull and mouth near Aldersgate , 1659.  

To the reader . 

That all persons who reads this treatise May see the confusion and ignorance of John Horn and Thomas Moor , who long have been owned as eminent teachers by many that are deceived by them , it is seen sit that they seriously here take a view of some of the principles affirmed by the said John horn and Thomas Moor at the dispute that we had with them ( As ordered of the Lord , ) at Lin in Norfolk , the fifteenth day of the seventh month , 1659. for their book which is hereafter confuted , hath some relation to their principles , which are laid down as followeth . 

Thomas Moor affirmed , that sin is a natural heritage in the believers while they are here . 

that their nature is restored in Christ , ( speaking of their own nature ) and that their nature is a filthy nature , and Christ took upon him their nature . 

John horn , that they that had no guile in them had sin in them ; that every sin is not guile . 

T. m. that the blood of Christ shed is not in his person in heaven , but the virtue of it . 

T. m. that the blood of Christ shed is the foundation of their faith , ( but where it is they answered not , nor could they tell . ) 

To m. that the life of Christ is not in the blood of Christ , ( So from this then the foundation of their faith hath not the life of Christ in it . ) 

T. m. that the light with which Christ lighteth every man is both natural and spiritual . 

T. m. that the person of Christ ( Viz. of flesh and bone ) is a quickening spirit and dwells in the believers by faith ; and to prove it , he said that the Corinthians dwelled in the heart of Paul . 

J. h. to that of 1 cor. 15. 45.  The last Adam was made a quickening spirit , John Horn said that he was distinct from the eternal spirit . 

To , m. to prove sin a natural heritage in believers so long as they are here , he brought that of rom. 7. 17.  

These doctrines ( With many such like ) were taken notice of by many as they were asserted by the said John horn and Thomas Moor , and contradicted by the truth at the dispute aforesaid , wherein it is so easy to see their darkness and confusion , that we need say little about them at present , but proceed to answer their book which in effect hath the very same doctrines in it , with many such like ; so that we desire that our following answer May be seriously read without prejudice or envy against us , and let the light of Christ judge between us and our accusers ; whereby the readers hereof May see the errors and confusions of these men aforesaid confuted by the truth , and us who love it cleared from their slanders and revilings . 

And now John horn and Thomas Moor , you have charged us called Quakers , with being guilty of great errors . 1.  In that you say we plead for , and maintain a perfection of sinlessness in ourselves in this life ; and to prove this a great error , you say that the apostles never said of themselves , or any other man or woman besides Christ . Jesus , that they had no sin in in them . 

answ. here you are found in the great error yourselves , who deny the perfection of sinlessness in the believers in this life ; the apostle said , he that believeth hath the witness in himself , 1 John 5. 10. which witness is perfect and sinless , so not without the perfection of sinlessness , and he that believeth , hath obtained witness that he is righteous , and having this perfect witness in himself , he is not without the perfection and purity of it in himself , for the witness of God cannot be divided from the nature of it , and John said ( Speaking of Christ ) as he is , so are we in this world , 1 John 4. 17. so you have manifestly wronged both us and the apostles , and we do not say that there is any perfection in ourselves without Christ who is our righteousness , and we the righteousness of God in him . 

Again to prove our maintaining perfection in this life an error , you say Christ was manifested to take away sin , and in him is no sin . 1 John 3. but never is it said so of any other , and that it is nowhere said by any one of the saints of themselves , or of any of their brethren , that they had no sin in them , or were not sinners . 

answ. here you would accuse the saints or brethren with having sin in them , and with being sinners while in this life ; but mark how fairly you have contradicted your own doctrine , you tell us , it is said indeed , that he that abideth in him sinneth not , and he that is born of God , doth not commit or worksin , because the seed of God abides in him ; neither can he sin , that is , commit , work , or yield up to sin , because he is born of God , you say : so you May here see what j. horn , and t. Moor have confessed , that he that abideth in Christ sinneth not , and that he that is born of God cannot sin , nor yield up to sin , because his seed remains in him ; whereas before they have Counted our maintaining a perfection of sinlesness in this life a great error , and would accuse the saints and brethren with being sinners ; so any that are not wholly blind May see their confusion , and how they have broken themselves upon the stone which they have been making war against ; for if Christ be made manifest to take away sin , than they in whom he is made manifest are not to have sin remaining in them so long as they are in this life ; and if he that is born of God cannot sin , nor yield up to sin ; then he is not a sinner , but clear and perfect from sin , and whosoever sinneth hath neither seen Christ nor known him . Now they that affirm that the saints or they that be born of God are sinners , they Might as well say that the saints have neither seen Christ nor known him ; and where it is said , he that is born of God cannot sin , John horn and Thomas Moor have given their meaning to it , which is , it 's no more than a man acted and led of God cannot therein sin they say ; which is no more than to say , that a man that is acted of God cannot sin in being acted of God , or he that doth righteousness doth not sin in so doing ; so that still they reserve an accusation against him that is born of God for being a sinner ; whereas John saith , be not deceived , he that doth righteousness is righteous even as Christ is righteous in whom is no sin , 1 John 3. 7 , 8.  And now further see how they have accused the apostle Paul . 

j. horn and t. Moor's words are these ; yea in 1 tim. 1. 16. he saith he was then , when an apostle , the chief of sinners . 

answ. so here they have accused Paul to be the chief of sinners when an apostle , when as the same apostle saith in that 1 tim. 1. 12.  That Christ Counted him faithful , putting him into the mi•istry ; but these accusing Paul then to be the chief of sinners , when an apostle , they Might as well say , that he that is faithful to Christ is the chief of sinners , when as it is said that Christ came to save sinners , of whom i am chief , and saith , he had obtained mercy ; now it doth not follow that Paul was then one of the chief or greatest sinners when faithful , but he was one of the chief of sinners that were saved by Christ , who saveth his persons from their sins , and doth not suffer them to remain the greatest sinners when they are saved from sin , as they here have accused Paul . and as for these scriptures you bring , 1 John 1. 8 , 9 , 10. and James 3. 1 , 2. these prove not what you would have them , that the saints were not perfectly freed from sin in this life ; they did not preach up sin , and imperfection to remain in them while in this life as you do , for both James and John exhorteth them otherwise for said James , let patience have her perfect work , that you May be perfect and entire , wanting nothing , James 1. 4 ▪ and John said , if we walk in the light as he is in the light , we have fellowship one with another , and the blood of Christ cleanseth us from all sin , 1 John 1. 7. and chap. 2. 1.  my little children , these things write i unto you that ye sin not , and if any man sin we have an advacate with the father . so he did not include them all as to remain sinners , for they were all sinners while they were not cleansed by the blood of Christ . Now we ask these men aforesaid , seeing Paul was Counted faithful , and James a servant of Jesus Christ , and John the beloved of Christ , what one sin or sins can they lay to their charge , or to any of them which they were not freed from before their decease ? let them prove some sin which was not destroyed in any of these before their decease , ( And who can lay any thing to the charge of God's elect ? ) let them speak out and answer directly , or for ever be silent from pleading for sin and accusing the righteous as they have done ; John did not say , if we say we are not all sinners , we deceive ourselves , but if we say we have no sin , and if we say we have not sinned , which if the little children whom John wrote unto that they Might not sin , had sin , than John Might say we have sin , for he numbered himself with them as friends , or those whose sins were forgiven , and yet the young men and fathers he wrote to had overcome the wicked one , and had the word of God abiding in them , 1 John 2. and as for that of prov. 20. 9 who can say i have made my heart clean ? this is not against us , for we do not say that we ourselves have made our hearts clean , it being Christ's work to cleanse , and for ever to have perfected them that are sanctified , heb. 10. 14. and Solomon saith , the just man walketh in his integrity , and the righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way , prov. 11. 5. and 20. 7.  And as for that of eccle• . 7. he saith , all things have i seen in the days of my vanity ; there is a just man that perisheth in his righteousness , and a wicked man that prolongeth his life in wickedness , but he that feareth the Lord shall come out of them all , forthere is not a just man upon earth : mark for there among them that were in the changeable state , not among them that are born of God , for they cannot sin , because the seed of God abides in them , and they in it , neither can the wicked one touch them , 1 John 5. 18.  

J. horn and t. Moor say , there is no man that sinneth not ; it is true indeed that Christ said of Nathaniel , that he was an Israelite in whom was no guile , John 1. 47.  

answ. here you May see how they are confounded , in what they themselves bring , there was some in whom was no guile , contrary to what they affirmed before against perfection ; and as for that 1 king. 8. 6. it is said , if they sin against thee , for there is no man that sinneth not ; mark the words ( For there ) again , among them that sinned against God , and this was in the time of the old covenant Solomon spoke these words , which covenant they broke ; but now the Lord makes a new covenant with his persons , when he takes away their sins , not according to the old covenant which the Israelites broke , heb. 8. and Solomon also said , let your heart be perfect with the Lord your God , and walk in his statutes , and to keep his commandments , as at this day , 1 King 8. 61.  

J. horn saith , it is not said that there was no sin in Nathaniel , and though i pleaded that all sin is guile , yet the contrary was testified from 1 pet. 2. 1 , 2. where hypocrisy , and envy , and malice , and evil speakings are distinguished from guile , guile being a deceitful hiding a man's sin or deceit . 

answ. here John horn would accuse Nathaniel to have sin in him , when as Christ said there was no guile in him , John 1. 47. and so here he hath affirmed as much as that all sin is not guile , and so would distinguish hypocrisy and envy from being guile , and yet confesseth guile to be a deceitful hiding a man's sin or deceit ; now let any that have understanding see these men's ignorance ; what is not hypocrisy a deceitful hiding a man's sin ? and is not every sin deceit , and deceit guile ? see their confusion ; and this being John Horne's reason to prove all sin not guile , because it is said in 1 pet. 2. 1 , 2. laying aside all malice , and all guile ( Mark all guile ) and hypocrisy , the word ( And being his distinction , he Might as well say that envy is not malice , because there is ( And ) between them , but in that thing many saw his folly at the dispute , in his affirming that all sin is not guile , when as all guile doth only include one sin as he would have it ; but all sin , and any one sin makes a man guilty , and so he hath guile in him , so that he that had no guile in him , had no sin in him , and also John horn hath turned George whiteheads words about this thing , in saying that be said guile is a transgression of the law , therefore guile is all sin , which is falsely framed , for the words were to this effect , every trangression of the law is guile or sin , and all guile includes all transgression of the law , therefore every sin is guile , and what sin can they prove had Nathaniel in him when he had no guile in him ? they must either prove some sin that was then in him , or else see themselves confuted . 

j. Horn and t. Moor in the 3. and 4. pages of their book , say : that in the declaration by Edward Burrough page 4. that we believe the saints upon earth May be perfectly freed from the body of sin and death , herein we are concluded to be preachers of lies and errors ( This they charge the Quakers with ) and yet they say , we are complete in Christ , and by the grace of Christ received , shall be and May be here made perfect hearted with Christ , but that some are sinless here , neither Christ , nor any apostle or prophet ever preached of any , therefore the Quakers are deceivers . 

ans. here they Might as well have accused the true prophets and apostles with being preachers of lies , and deceivers , for they witnessed to the same the Quakers witness to , as said the prophet , blessed are the undefiled in the way ( Mark undefiled in the way ) they also do no iniquity , psal. 119. 1 , 2 , 3. and saith the Lord , ye shall be clean from all your filthiness , ezek. 36. 25. and Christ exhorted his to be perfect , as their heavenly father is perfect , matt. 5. 48. and every one that is perfect shall be as his Lord , and the same apostle who said , ye are complete in Christ , said in whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands , in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh , col. 2. 10 , 1.  

Now the same spirit in j. Horn and t. Moor , that hath accused the Quakers with being deceivers , for bearing witness to these truths , would have accused the true prophets , Christ and his apostles for being deceivers ; but their confusion and railing against the innocent is here made manifest , who notwithstanding have confessed a completeness and perfect heartedness with Christ here , and so in pleading for sin in this life , are sighting against their own words , for they who are complete in Christ , are perfectly freed from sin , being complete in Christ in whom there is no sin ; and know this , that sinners are out of the completeness which the saints have in Christ , and the hear that hath sin dwelling in it is not perfect ; much more Might be said to this . 

John horn and Thomas Moor p. 3. to prove , that they who have believed in Christ , comes not to prove the first Adam's state before the fall ; say , that Adam before his fall had neither sin in him , nor death upon , but surely the Quakers must die as well as other men's Adam also before his fall was under a covenant of works , do this and live , and Might possibly sin and die , but not so the believers . 

answ. mark their heap of confusion here , they own that the believers in Christ are come to a further state or covenant than Adam was in before the fall , who then had no sin in him , and yet have accused the believers with having the body of sin , or not being perfect while they are here ; and Adam Might possibly sin and die , but not so the believers they say ; and as for the Quakers dying , because of which they would accuse them with being sinners , here their darkness appears , for believers dying the natural death , doth not prove them sinners while they are here , for through death they gain more of the peace and glory of God which they partake of in their life time , and what doth John horn believe that Adam Might not have died the natural death if he had not sinned ? for Christ died who had no sin , that he Might destroy the death which came by sin , and him that hath the power of it , and they who die in the Lord are blessed , and to die is gain unto them , phil. 1. 2• . so that righteous men's dying was not charged upon them as a reward for their sin , but witnessed to be gain unto them , before whose decease their sins are done away , and he that believeth hath everlasting life , yet the wages of sin is death to them who are not freed from it by the gift of God which is life ; and God said to Adam in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die ; but Adam lost not his natural life in the day he eat of the tree of knowledge , for after that he lived in the body ; and as for the covenant that Adam was under before the full , it was a covenant of life ; for he was in the image of God , and a living soul , having the breath of life in him , and had dominion in it while he stood in his habitation , and this state have the true believers proved and witnessed that life , and nature , & image that was in man before the fall , though they be come further in the second Adam , who is greater than the first Adam ; and as for Adam before the fall , being under a covenant of works do this and live ( As if he had not lived when he was in innocency , till he did something to merit life ) you have here spoken ignorantly , for that covenant of works was established by the law after the fall , and the law entered because of transgression till the seed came , which seed destroys sin and redeems the creature out of the fall , and out of the death which came by sin . 

P. 4.  And in their second charge against us called Quakers , j. Horn and t. Moor have accused us to be reprobates concerning faith , as touching he person of Christ ; for they say , we did not , nor could be brought to acknowledge that Christ is glorified in the heavens , without all men , the heavens above the clouds , and distinct from the visible earth in the same body which suffered , was crucified , dead and buried , &c.  And this have they questioned several times altering their own words , and then in page 5. asking whether Christ hath any of flesh and bones , distinct from all other bodies and spirits of men , to which they say , we would by no means be drawn to give a direct answer . But then mark how they have again contradicted themselves ; they say , that we said the same body that suffered was glorified at God's right hand in heaven ; yet still ( They say ) we meant but his church either by his body or by the heavens , and then they charge it upon us as a fundamental error . 

answ. now they that discern the body of Christ , May see how these wise men of Babylon have confounded and stifled themselves in their own confusion , one while saying that we would not be drawn to answer their question , another while confessing that we said the same body that suffered , was glorified at God's right hand in heaven , and now when they can get naught against our words , they charge us ignorantly with what we meant , and here it appears they hold that Christ hath two bodies , in telling of a mystical body , and not receiving that as an answer that his body is the church , the fullness of him that filleth all in all , so that from their words they would have Christ to have a body besides ( Or distinct from ) the fullness of God , when as the scripture doth not say that Christ hath two bodies , nor that his body is a body of flesh and bones without the blood in it in the heavens , as John Horn and Thomas Moor have told us , for its not proper to say that a body of flesh and bones is in the heavens , as if it were in many places at once , for heavens are more than one , and the body is one and hath many members , 1 cor. 12. 12. and this body is not carnal but spiritual , which they who were carnal as these men are , could not discern , though the outward bodies of believers they Might discern , and yet this body of Christ is discerned by the believers who are led by the spirit of God , and its in the heavens above the clouds , which they who are gazing abroad and looking carnally to see Christ they discern not the Lord's body , for they see not thorough the clouds into the heavens , so Christ is taken out of their sight ; but Stephen who was full of the holy ghost saw the heavens opened , and the son of man on the right hand of his father , and John in the spirit saw into heaven , and a door opened in heaven ; and Christ's body is not distinct from the spirits of all men , as it is distinct from carnal bodies , as you imagine by your question ; for the just men who are come unto mount Zion where the lamb reigneth in his glory , i say their spirits rejoice in him , and the true church in Christ which discerneth his body in his fullness , is but one complete body in the fullness of God which filleth all in all ( Both in heaven and earth ) though you imagine two bodies of Christ . And this know , that what the scriptures do declare of Christ and his body we own ; and the same that descended into the lower parts of the earth is he that ascended far above all heavens that he Might fill all things ; the same Christ that suffered in the body at Jerusalem who appeared in divers forms after his resurrection , and in the transfiguration before , the same rose again , and was taken in his ascending out of the sight of them that gazed after him , and is glorified in the same glory which he had with the father before the world was , John 17 and as he who is the word became flesh , so when the days of his flesh were finished he was translated into his own glory which he had with his father from eternity , and so the second Adam is a quickening spirit and his body is spiritual , not discerned by you whose minds are out from his spirit , neither can his glory by which he was transfigured and is glorified , be seen , but by them who pass thorough death , and follow him into the mount . And now you who so much contend about the body of Christ , we ask you this question ; whether do you believe that the body of Christ which the saints upon earth do discern , and which the world cannot discern , is a body of flesh and bones in the heavens yea or nay ? seeing you own the believers or the church to be a body of Christ , and plead for another body of Christ distinct from them . 

John horn and Thomas Moor , p. 5.  Say that believers are members of his body ( namely his mystical body ) of his flesh and of his bones , not flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone . 

answ. this is gross confusion to say that believers are members of Christ's flesh and bones , and then to say they are not flesh of his flesh , and bone of his bone , as if Christ had two bodies of flesh and bones , one of which the saints are not members , when the apostle saith as much as they were flesh of his flesh , and bone of his bone , in his saying no man ever hated his own flesh but nourisheth it , and cherisheth it even as the Lord the church , for we are members of his body , of his flesh & of his bones , eph. 5. 30.  j. horn , & tho. Moor bring 1 thes. 4. 15. 16. and phil. 3. 20. 21. where it is said Christ shall descend from heaven ; not from but to his church ( Say they ) yea this of the Quakers denying that body glorified doth at once turn up by the roots all the faith of Christ's appearing in the presence of God to mediate for us . 

ans was there ever the like confusion and falsehood uttereed , as these men do appear in ? A little before they say of the Quakers , that they said the same body that suffered was glorified at God's right hand in heaven ; and now charge us with denying that body glorified , it were well they would be ashamed of their lies and confusion ; and as for that , 1 thes. 4. 15.  Concerning the coming of the Lord from heaven , which these men aforesaid would blindly put afar of , as to a coming of Christ with flesh and bones , the apostle saith we which are alive & remain unto the coming of the Lord , shall not prevent them which are a sleep ; so that coming of Christ , the saints who then were alive remained unto it : and in that of phil. 3. 20. 21. there it is said our conversation is in heaven from whence also we look for the saviour the Lord Jesus Christ ; so their conversation was in heaven , and there they looked for the saviour , they did not say their conversation was at a distance off above the clouds , from whence you look for a Christ like yourselves ( But that he hath no blood in his body as you imagine ) whom we desire not the knowledge of , and that your faith which is not grounded in Christ's appearing in you , is to be turned up by the roots . 

Again , j. horn and t. Moor do accuse us to be reprobate concerning the faith touching the resurrection of the dead , as chiefly they accuse us for affirming that the same body that dies shall not be raised again , and that George Fox would not be brought to say , whether the spiritual body was ever dead , but answered in general equivocal terms . 

answ. they have changed g. fox's words ; for he said , that which is raised is a spiritual body , and that which is raised was dead ; and we answered them plainly to these things according to the scriptures , but like fools whom the apostle reproved , they would not be satisfied when we told them it is sown a natural body it is raised a spiritual body , and receives life and spirit by the power of God ; there is a natural body and there is a spiritual body , howbeit that was not first which is spiritual but that which is natural , and afterward that which is spiritual ; so the apostle distinguisheth between the natural body and the spiritual body , between the earthly bodies and the heavenly bodies , and the glories of each , and doth not say , that which dies or is sown which is earthly shall rise , as we told these said accusers according to the apostles comparison , thou fool , that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die , and that which thou sowest thou sowest not that body that shall be , ( Mark , thou sowest not that body that shall be ) but bear grain it May chance of wheat or of some other grain , 1 cor. 15. 36 , 37. contrary to which they have affirmed , that the same body that dies or is sown in the earth shall raise again , when the apostle saith , thou sowest not that body that shall be , and his comparison is of the grain of wheat and the like , to which Thomas Moor answered , that the same kernel of wheat rose up again in the blade , when it is known that the same kernel doth not rise , but another body or ear of corn grows forth in the nature of that which is sown , & yet we say that God giveth a body as it pleaseth him , & to every seed his own body , which seeds being known , & & the nature and kind of each seed discerned , the body of each May be discerned in the resurrection by the light which crosseth men's carnal imaginations , by which they must never know the mystery of the resurrection of the bodies nor the seeds , which the Lord knoweth how to reserve every one in its own centre and habitation till the sounding of the last trumpet at the last day , and there shall be a resurrection both of the just and the unjust , and many that sleep in the dust of the earth shall rise , some shall come forth to the resurrection of life , and others to the resurrection of condemnation , every one to be rewarded according to their works ; and John said , the sea gave up the dead which were in it , and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them , & they were judged every man according to their works , & death and hell were cast into the lake of fire , & whosoever was not found written in the book of life , rev. 2.  And now this being an answer to their question about the resurrection , note , that when Thomas Moor was asked what was the seed of which the apostle said God giveth it a body as it pleaseth him ? tho. Moor answered , that the seed was the body that dies or is laid in the ground , which he pleaded for the rising of , to which it was replied then , that every man must rise with two bodies , if that body that is terrestrial must rise and have another body given it , but herein his ignorance was seen ; and again , he and John horn have confuted themselves , for in their postscript they say , that the apostle implying plainly , that the raised body in the resurrection shall not be flesh and blood ; then how is it that they have pleaded so much for the same earthly body that dyes to rise again , which is a body of flesh and blood , when the raised body in the resurrection is not a body of flesh and blood they say ? these men are much shut up in Babylon , as their confusion manifests . 

An accusation of John horn and tho. Moor against John Whitehead to prove him a reprobate , p. 6.  is that John argued against the redemption of the body to be waited for or expected after death , and said , the apostle had it before the death of the body ; and in p. 10.  they tell of the nature or being of man , that in the resurrection it is discharged of sin , and law , and death . 

answ. so here they expect not the redemption of the body nor their discharge from sin till after death , wherein they have discovered themselves to be reprobates and not John Whitehead , and their expecting the redemption of the body to be waited for after death , is contrary to the saints expectations , for they waited and groaned for the redemption of the body from under corruption when they were upon earth , and the creature itself was to be brought into the glorious liberty of the sons of God , which state was witnessed by as many as were led by the spirit of God who were sanctified throughout , in body , in soul and spirit , and put not redemption afar off till after death , as these men aforementioned have done . 

Again , they have accused us for Antichristian , from a passage in Edward Burroughs book , where it is said , that Christ is to be known after the spirit as he was before the world was , and that is the knowledge of him which is to eternal salvation . On the contrary they have affirmed in page 7.  that the knowledge of Christ after the spirit as he was before the world was , is not the knowledge of him to eternal salvation , but on the contrary ( they say . ) 

answ. in this they have showed themselves to be both abusers of the truth and Antichristian ; for to know Christ as he is the power of God , is to know him after the spirit as he was before the world was , and this is the knowledge of him to eternal salvation , it is the power of God that saveth , and we trust in the living god who is the saviour of all men , specially of them that believe , 1 tim. 4. 10.  Now as Christ is the living God , he was before the world was , and we are in him that is true , even in his son Jesus Christ , this is the true God and eternal life , 1 John 5. 20.  And now i say , they that receive this knowledge of Christ , do not deny his knowledge in his flesh , but witness to the same eternal power that was manifest in his flesh , and thorough his sufferings , which power was before the world was , and hath the same glory that it had then , and is the same for ever . 

And in page 7. it is said against the Quakers , that they can and May in their canting language say , he is manifest in England , and is persecuted , and dies , and rises as well as in Judea and Jerusalem , however they make nothing of his being born , suffering and dying in the flesh . 

answ. now when j. horn and t. Moor can truly prove nothing against us called Quakers , they have invented these wicked lies against us , which we utterly deny , and here charge them for forgers of lies ; Job 13. 4. for we never used any such canting language , as they call it , against Christ , but own his sufferings in Judea and Jerusalem , as he was a true offering and propitiation for the sins of the whole world , whose sufferings were effectual both for the pacifying of his father's wrath and for the reconciling of the whole world , as is witnessed by them who receive the power of his life , which was manifest thorough death to them that truly believed thorough Christ's sufferings ; and in page 9 the said j. Horn and t. Moor have belied George Whitehead , in saying that he alleging 2 cor. 5. 16. to prove that the apostles did not know Christ as one that suffered in the flesh , or to be in the flesh ; which is exceeding false , for that scripture henceforth we know no man after the flesh , and though we had known Christ after the flesh , yet henceforth know we him so no more , it was brought against your knowledge which is but carnal , and stands in imaginations , who neither truly know Christ as he was in the flesh , nor after the spirit , but contend against the knowing of him as he was before the world was , ( And as you say you neglect Christ ) and so against the knowledge of the glory of God , as a knowledge to salvation ; when as they neither knew Christ , nor any man after the flesh , but after the spirit , they knew Christ and one another in that spirit and power in them which was before the world was , but this knowledge you are out of , who know but naturally . 

In page 9 , 10.  J. horn and t. Moor again affirm , that the nature of man as in Christ , is perfectly freed from sin and curse , and without spot of sin , and the same nature of man , even in believers , having sin in it as a natural heritage from the first Adam fallen . 

answ. see their gross error and confusion , which is as much as to affirm that as the nature of man is in the believers , it 's separate from Christ , and so believers in Christ having sin in them originally from Adam as a natural heritage , so they would make believers have two heritages , a natural , and a spiritual ; an old delusion of the priests ; for the true believers are in Christ , and by his power do witness their nature purified , by that which brings out of Adam's fallen state , to witness a better heritage than sin in their nature ; for they that are in Christ , have escaped the corruptions of the world , and witness an incorruptible heritage in the divine nature , and this is known as there is an biding in Christ , the power of God . 

And in page 1• . they charge us with denying the humanity of Christ , and say we judge him only a spirit . 

answ. we never denied the man Christ , for his flesh is our food ; & for our owning Christ to be a spirit , the apostles owned him to be the same , the Lord is that spirit , and the last Adam was made a quickening spirit , 2 cor. 3. 1• . 1 cor. 15. 45.  

Again they have affirmed that Christ is personally in heaven , and yet by faith in the believing heart ; and that he is not really and personally in believers , as in heaven , but by faith ; and yet Moor before said , that Christ's person of flesh and bone is a quickening spirit . 

answ. if Christ is not really in the believers , and if his being in them by faith is not real , than it is but imaginary , herein j. horn and t. Moor , have manifested their faith to be no better than the Papists faith , as i told them , wherein i did not belie them as they accuse me , for the faith of the elect doth really evidence to them Christ in them the mystery , and the power of God , and this faith is not divided from Christ the object or foundation of it . 

And now concerning the blood of Christ shed , which t. Moor at the dispute owned to be the foundation of your faith , and yet affirmed that the body of Christ is in heaven , with flesh and bones , but not the blood in it , and so knew not where the blood is ; now they tell us in page 11. that his blood was shed or poured out for the remission of our sins , and in the virtues of it is with the father , and so in and with Christ . 

answ. herein they have plainly confuted themselves ; for they also confess that they could not assert where the material blood ( As they call it ) or blood of Christ shed is , and yet now say , that in the virtues of it is with the father , and in and with Christ ; so j. horn and t. moons hearers May now see how they have confuted their former doctrine , who before would not own that the blood of Christ shed is in the body of Christ , yet now say it is with the father , and in Christ in the virtues of it ; and now to clear themselves from our telling them that they preached a foundation of faith which they knew not where it is , and which according to their own confession before , they knew not whether it is in being or not . 

They tell us , that the dying of Christ or his death is the foundation of their faith , and yet this dying as to the act of it is not always in being , nor is the blood simply the foundation of their faith . 

answ. here again they have preached that to be the foundation of their faith which is not in being , when as the foundation of the true faith is Christ , who is in being , and another foundation can no man lay , then that which is laid , which is Christ ; and as for what he acted in sufferings , that was done that thorough his sufferings and works men Might believe in him who worketh faith in them , and know him to be the foundation of faith who is in being , and not that which is not in being , as they imagine and have declared , and they now owning the blood of Christ shed not simply to be the foundation of their faith , than if they own it as part of the foundation of their faith , then are they still at a loss , for they know not where it is ; and so according to their own words they want part of the foundation of their faith , we blame them not , neither did we blame them for not asserting that the blood shed is in the body of Christ , but for calling it the foundation of their faith ( Whether they own it so simply or compoundedly seeing they know not where the blood is , nor whether it is in being ; and so we blamed them for their confusion , and establishing a blind and dead faith . 

T. m. his instance for Christ's being in heaven with a body of flesh and bones without blood in it , was , that we do not read that there was any blood in Adam's body in paradise ; for which he Might as well have said , that then Adam's body in paradise had no life in it ( And such a body they imagine Christ's to be ) when as the blood is the life , and all nations are made of one blood , acts 17. 26.  Now we ask them if they believe that there was no blood left in Christ's body when he was crucified ? And when to m. had pleaded for a body of flesh and bones in the heavens , he did not own that Christ's body there is a carnal body ; see how flatly therein he contradicted his own words and the priest's doctrine , for priest Higginson and others affirmed , that Christ is in heaven with a carnal body ; but his body i• a mystery which these men of Babylon can never know , who are thus in confusion ; for Christ's body is only known with that by which God is seen and known , who is not the author of their confusion , but of peace . 

And in page 12.  To m. and j. h. speak as that Job said , behold , God is great , we know him not , and to prove it , bring Job 36 26. which is a sad mistake against Job . for it was Elihu that spoke these words who was one of them that spoke against joh , joh 35. 2 and 26. 1. for Job knew God when they that came against him did not ; but this their accusation against Job is even like John horns pleading for sin in a letter to eliz. Underwood , for which he brought Eliphaz his words , ( Who was one of them that came against Job , and forsook not the thing of God that was right ) where he said in Job 4. 1• , and 15. 14 , 15.  Behold , he put no trust in his servants , and his angels he charged with folly , which were none of jobs words , but his against whom the wrath of God was kindled , Job 42. 7. and in like manner hath John horn often belied the servants of the Lord , both in his book and •a•se letters which he sent abroad in the country to several that were brought to see his deceit , and therefore are turned from him , and many more of his lies in several of his letters against us i could produce i. occasioned to it . 

In page 12.  j. horn and t. Moor say , that it is rather a virtue to which we are advised not to be wise , or think or guess above what is written ; but presently they begin to guess that which is not written , and so confound themselves in their saying , that there are indeed very probable arguments used to prove that that precious blood was reunited again with the body of Christ in the resurrection . 

But how shall any that are ignorant believe them , or be instructed with their confusion ? For again they have ( To mend this their matter ) confuted these they call very probable arguments , to prove that Christ's blood was reunited again with the body of Christ , for in contradiction to this , in their postscript they say , but these being but probabilities at most , and on the other side the scriptures speaking of Christ's resurrection , mentioning only that which was buried , without any mention of his blood reunited ; so from hence we clearly see that j. horn and some of his company have had much reasoning about the blood of Christ , and are in themselves confounded about it , one while saying that there are very probable arguments to prove that it was reunited again with the body of Christ , another while not owning that it was reunited again , and with that they conclude ; see what blind guides these men are , we Might have received as good an answer from schoolboys about the blood of Christ , as they Might have guessed at it , as j. horn and t. Moor hath done , and have told us , that it is either in the body of Christ , or not in it ; but mark how again they have guessed about it , they say in page 12.  again that which was blood before May be in the changed state turned into pure life and spirit , the thing or substance remaining . 

answ. here again they have guessed , and thought above that which is written , and how can blood be turned into spirits and the substance of it remaining ? this is a mere dream and one of John Horne's divinations , and it contradicts Moor's words , for he said that the life of Christ is not in his blood ; again if the blood that Christ shed be turned into pure spirits and life , what is his body of flesh and bones turned into ? or what reason is there that his blood should be altered more than his flesh and bones ? but all this confusion and dirty stuff of John horns and Thomas More's is seen thorough and made manifest with the true light , in which they that walk shall feel the blood of Christ , which cleanseth from all sin , and know that the spirit the water and blood , which bear record in the earth agree in one , and the blood is the life , which is in Christ , whose body is not a body without the blood in it , as these dreamars aforesaid imagines ; and as the prophet said , we witness , that by the blood of the covenant the prisoners are sent out of the pit which can hold no water . 

Again in pag. 14.  We are falsely accused with denying what the scripture asserts about the body of Christ , and the resurrection of men's bodies , and about the knowledge of Christ . 

answ. here we see plainly that this John horn , and Thomas Moor , do love lying rather then to speak righteousness , for we own what the scripture asserts about the body of Christ , and the resurrection , but deny their imaginations ; and here again i shall bring their own words to confute them , in pag. 5. they have confessed that we said ( Of Christ's body ) that the same body that suffered was glorified at God's right hand in heaven , which Might have stopped their mouths from accusing us as they did ; and as for our not asserting that the same earthly bodies of men shall rise again , they have in their postscript confessed , that the raised body in the resurrection shall not be flesh and blood ; to which i say , than not that body which is sown or buried , for that is a body of flesh and blood ; again touching Christ's appearance after his resurrection , when he showed his disciple his hands and his feet , we do not believe that his body then had no blood in it , for he then did eat before them of the broiled fish and honey comb which they gave him , which is nourishment to both flesh and blood , Luke 24. 41. 42. and the blood is the life of that which hath need of such outward nourishment , yea the life of all flesh is the blood , gen. 9 4. 5.  Levit. 17. 14. but as Christ is ascended into his father's glory in heaven , he is in a further state , for he hath not need now of such outward nourishment as broiled fish , or a honey comb , for he is in the same glory which he had with the father before the world began ; and as for the saints also , their bodies in the resurrection shall as far exceed these our earthen bodies in glory , as the glory of the sun , moon and stars do exceed the glory of birds , beasts , and fish , but the mystery of these things is for ever sealed as in parables from such blind guides as these aforesaid , who have long abused the truth of Christ . 

In p. 14.  John horn and Moor have affirmed , the scriptures to be the medium of faith , from John 17. 20. where it 's said , neither pray i for these alone , but for them also which shall believe on me through their word , and acts 17. 11. 12. of the Bereans searching the scriptures , &c.  

answ. there is no such scripture as saith , that the scriptures are the medium of faith , for they through whose word many believed were not ministers of the letter , but of the spirit , and their word was before the letter or writing was , and it came in spirit and in power , and this word which they preached was nigh persons , even in their hearts , rom. 10.  And as for the Bereans they first received the word with all readiness of mind , and then searched the scriptures , whether these things were so ; so it was the word which brought them to believe and to search the scriptures , and so we say the scriptures are truly to be believed and fulfilled , but that which brings any truly to believe and fulfil them , is Christ the word , the author and finisher of faith , unto whom they would not come for life , who thought they had eternal life in the scriptures , joh. 5. 39 40.  

In pag. 15 John Horn , and Thomas Moor have accused John Whitehead with saying that the apostles did not bring light to men , but only pointed to what they had before . 

answ. John Whitehead doth witness against them for perverting his words , as it hath been examined ; the words are not so affirmed by him , but this we say , that the apostles did not bring another light to persons then that which had enlightened them before they preached to them , and though the light was more in the apostles then in them they preached to , yet it was the same in nature in both , though known in several measures , and they who will not own the light in the least measure of it in them , they must not know the greater , nor the glory , which the light of Christ shining in the heart gives the knowledge of in them that receive it . 

Again , horn and Moor say , indeed this is a main piece of corrupt doctrine ( That we preach ) that all have the light of Christ in them , and that that is , whatsoever reproves any sin in men . 

ans. here they Might as well have accused Christ and the apostles for using corrupt doctrine ; for Christ saith , i am the light of the world , and John said of him , that was the true light which enlighteneth every man that comes into the world , and that which May be known of God is manifest in them who are in unrighteousness , and like not to retain God in their knowledge , rom. 1. and the grace of God which bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men , and this is the free gift of God , which if it were not given to all men , then wherefore shall the wicked be condemned ? and what is it in them that must leave them without excuse , and who can you show us that have not a light of Christ in them to reprove them when they have done evil ? And you have again here wickedly wronged us , for we do not affirm that whatsoever reproves any sin is the light of Christ ; but whatsoever makes manifest things that are reproved is light , and the light reproves every sin ; but such as you that are in deceit and out of the light , do sometimes reprove sin when you live in it yourselves , but the light of Christ in you will reprove you for it . 

Again in p. 16.  You John horn and Thomas Moor say , that this way of ours exposes men to follow their own spirits , which we represent as a candle in every man . 

answ. this is false , for our way exposes men not to follow their own spirits , nor sparks of their own kindling as you say , but to follow the light of Christ , which lighteth the spirit of a man , and makes it become the candle of the Lord , that it enlightens the inward parts . Another of your lies against us , is , where in pag. 17. you accuse George Whitehead with deriding at men's faith in the death and bloodshed of Christ beyond the sea , for they who truly have faith and hope through Christ's sufferings which reacheth within the vail , that is to say Christ's flesh , that faith we own , as knowing the word of it to be in the heart , that we have it not to fetch beyond the sea , nor from above , nor from beneath , but it 's nigh in the heart and in the mouth . And to our question which was , whether the light that lighteth every man , be a natural light , or a spiritual light ? 

You John horn and t. Moor answers ( pag. 17. 18. ) that that light is Christ , and the light with which he lighteth men is both natural and spiritual . 

reply , here again you are taken in your own snare , for in your saying the light is both natural and spiritual ( Mark , it is not the lights are both natural and spiritual , but the light is so ) here you could not prove one light that is both natural and spiritual , and contrary to the scriptures have you spoken , for in Christ was life , and the life was the light of men , which is not natural but spiritual , therefore this your error May lie upon you . 

In pag. 18.  You say , that for so much as all men receive not Christ and his light , therefore all have not his light in them . 

answ. this is a poor argument ; the spirit of the Lord , and the grace of God hath appeared in many who have resisted it and not received it , and a measure of it is in such to condemn them , as the kingdom of God was in the scribes and pharisces , and yet they received it not nor Christ , when they hated him ; and to that of isai. 8. 20. where it is said there is no light in them , John horn saith the word in the Hebrew is sometimes used to signify the morning ( And we have read it , no morning in stead of no light ) but than saith he , Christ is called the morning star , so that if there be no morning light in man , there is none of his light who is the morning light . 

answ. here his ignorance appears again , for the light of Christ shines in darkness in some before the morning , and that led some to the arising of the daystar in their hearts , and so the light of Christ , who is the morning light to some , appears as a candle in the darkness to others , and is not the morning light to them , until they by it see the morning in them , and the light which hath shined in darkness arising out of darkness , so that the light of Christ is both the evening light and the morning light . 

page 19  Again John horn , and Thomas Moor have accused us , with telling Mr. Townsend , ( As they call him ) that the light was wholly departed from him . 

answ. herein have you impudently belied us ; for the words against Townsend are not so spoken , but that from the light of God in his conscience he is departed ; so blush , and be ashamed of your lies ; for in like manner did a false priest in Cambridge belie us , ( In a lying pamphlet ) with the very same thing . 

In page 20. you John horn , and Thomas Moor , have accused James Nayler with his discovering more fully the mystery of deceit , ( In his book called , love to the lost ) in saying , that the seed to which the promise was made , and which few know , is a certain seed or principle in man , desiring to follow after God , and to be free from sin . 

reply . here you are seen to be ignorant of the seed of God , and enemies to it in his persons , which seed is Christ , and wherever he is known in such a low measure , as a seed that suffers , and is burdened in man by corruption , there he desires to be free from the burden of sin , and always to do his father's will , and this seed the power reaches to , where it is begotten , and in the power it arises in them that believe in the light for their redemption ; and the apostle traveled again for the Galatians until Christ was form in them , who first is known as one without form or comeliness ; and so the seed of God suffers in some , and in others it reigns , and is known to be Prince of peace ; and this is no mystery of deceit ( As you say ) but a mystery that hath discovered your deceit , who know not the seed of the kingdom , nor the power wherein it rises ; and have you never known what Christ is without the camp ? But before you ( Who are neglecters of Christ , and abusers of his truth ) can know the seed of God , and what it is in you , you must come to the light which will condemn you for your deceits and lies with which you have abused the truth , and then learn to know what and where the grave is which Christ hath made with the wicked . 

j. horn , and t. Moor , in page 20. saith , but i shall add no more , but only desire persons to beware of them as a heavy judgement of God , that he hath ordered to us , to punish us for our neglect of Christ , the salvation of God , and the truth of him so long abused by us . 

answ. here you have made manifest yourselves indeed , ye hypocrites ; what have ye been crying out of the Quakers calling them deceivers , and warning the persons to beware of them , and writing against them , and judging them to be in delusion and error , when ye yourselves neglect Christ the salvation of God , and have long abused his truth ? ( As ye are made to confess ) consider your own conditions , ye are in great delusion and error yourselves who neglect Christ the salvation of God , and have long abused his truth , and ye are not like , neither can ye bring persons to Christ the salvation of God and his truth , who are neglectors of Christ God's salvation and his truth yourselves ; therefore persons had need take heed and beware of following you , lest ye lead them to neglect Christ the salvation of God , and to abuse his truth more and more ; you are the hypocrites that are not to judge , whose beam is yet in your own eyes , for wherein ye judge others for error and delusion , ye condemn yourselves , ye being such ( As ye confess ) that neglect Christ the salvation of God , and abuse his truth , and if we be ( As ye say ) a judgement ordered of God to punish you for your neglect of Christ the salvation of God , and the truth of him so long abused by you , why do you not then bear the judgement of God more patiently , seeing ye have sinned so against him in abusing his truth , and in neglecting Christ the salvation of God ? Why do you rage so against God's judgement ? Here all persons May see , that ye are not satisfied nor content with what God hath ordered unto you for your neglect of Christ the salvation of God , and the truth of him so long abused by you ; but we shall yet be a heavier judgement upon you , for we are a burdensome-stone to all the ungodly , and the more ye strive against us , the greater will be your torment ; therefore give over your teaching of others , and be ashamed of your blindness and wickedness and repent , and cease striving and raging against the truth of God , and us his persons ; for the more ye strive against us ( And the truth which we live in , and are witnesses of , which truth is Christ , who also is in us , which is the riches of the mystery which hath been hide from ages and generations , but is now revealed in the saints by the light ) mark , the greater will be your judgement and burden ; and this ye shall witness to be true : so abuse God's truth no longer , neither neglect Christ the salvation of God as ye have done , but submit to God's judgement , and learn to prize Christ the salvation of God and his truth , and believe therein , and fight no longer against the Lord and his truth and servants , lest he shorten your days and cut you off : so remember you are warned , whether you will hear or forbear . 

John horn and Thomas Moor , and indeed the cause of then prevalency is , partly in the teachers , and partly in the persons . 

answ. the cause of our prevailing is not in man , but in God , even the mighty powerful presence of the Lord which doth accompany us , whereby we reach the faithful witness of God in persons , which answereth to the truth of God declared by us , and thereby many are turned from darkness to light , and from Satan's power unto God , and we must prevail more and more , for the Lord is opening people's eyes , and he will teach them himself , and many persons begins to see the deceit and wickedness of such teachers as ye are who abuse God's truth , and neglect Christ the salvation of God ; and although you have a form of godliness ( And have stolen many true words ) yet many persons sees you to be out of the power , ( And fighters against it , and them that be in it ) and so they will turn away from you ; and all that sets themselves against us shall fall before us , for the Lord is with us and takes our part . 

See j. horn's testimony against his brethren the priests . 

John horn , Thomas Moor , pag. 20 , 21.  too many of the teachers are such as Isaiah speaks of , isa. 56. 1• , 11 , 12. his watchmen ( which should watch for the good of men ) are too generally blind , the vision of all the preaching of the cross of Christ is a sealed book to them , they are ignorant , they are dumb dogs that cannot bark , ( to give warning of these beasts , or to set themselves to discover and detect them ) sleeping in their security , and lying down loving to slumber , to take their ease and peace , and to content themselves with dreams instead of searching out truth , and giving it forth to the persons ; yea , they are dogs strong to appetite , greedy dogs , hunting after livings and maintenances , more means , and so never have enough , too many of them shepherds that cannot understand , they all look to their own way , every one for his gain from his quarters ; that is , are more mindful of the fleece than the flock , and many of them given to voluptuousness ; come , and i will fetch wine , &c.  

answ. many true words have you here uttered against ( Your brethren ) the teachers , but if ye be thus divided against yourselves , surely ye are not like to stand ; the hand of the Lord is turned against you who would stir up your brethren , the dogs , to bark against us , and to bite and devour the lambs of Christ , and now ye lay open one another's nakedness ; but as for your railing and calling of us beasts , that will come upon your own heads , and your words shall become your burden . And as for thee John horn especially , thou canst not clear thyself from being one of those dogs , ( Which ye say look for their gain from their quarter ) for thou lookest for thy gain from thy quarter , and art an hireling , who pleads for ( And takes ) tithes ; and it is true , that ye ( Who pretend yourselves to be watchmen ) are too generally blind and ignorant , and ye have no true vision , for night is come upon all the hireling teachers , yea the sun is set upon you all , and so the blind leads the blind , and both falls into the ditch ; so poor persons May see , how they have given their money ( For that which is not bread , and their labour for that which could not satisfy ) even to uphold a company of ignorant blind watchmen that could not understand ; for the preaching of the cross of Christ ( Which is the power of God ) hath been a sealed book to them , even to uphold such as have contented themselves with dreams , and have been given to voluptuousness , and have long abused God's truth , and neglected Christ the salvation of God , as ye confess of yourselves and others ; so ye are witnesses against yourselves : ye idol shepherds ( Who have not profited the persons ) the Lord is stretching out his hand , to gather and deliver his sheep out of your mouths , that ye May no longer make a prey upon them , who through your covetousness and feigned words have long made merchandise of persons . 

J. horn , t. Moor , the Lord help us to search and try our ways , and to see how much ( any of us ) have contributed to the overflowing flood of this ungodliness . 

answ. the Lord hath searched and tried your hearts and ways , and he hath found you guilty of much ungodliness , and his light hath often made you sensible of it , and judged you for it ; and the Lord hath oft called unto you to forsake your ungodliness , though ye have long slighted the call of the Lord , and hardened your hearts against his reproof ; therefore repent and dread the Lord , and take heed lest that come upon you , that when ye call upon the Lord he will not answer you . 

John horn , Thomas Moor , surely some men's principles that would be Counted orthodox , give , and have given them great advantage . 

answ. many corrupt principles do you and your fellow-teachers hold , which we are made to witness against , ( That so the persons May see your deceits , and not be led into your imaginations any longer ) several of yours are made manifest in this book , as about Christ's body , and blood , and resurrection of the body , &c.  and after ye have reckoned up many things which ye say those that would be Counted orthodox hold , whereby ye say we get great advantage , ye than proceed as followeth . 

John horn , Thomas Moor ; but besides this , too general ignorance , sloth , covetousness , pride found in too many ministers , gives advantage to them ; even like foxes and wolves , to •••laim against the vigilant shepherds too , as if all were but hirelings , and so that the flock ought rather to betrust themselves with them . 

answ. great is the ignorance , sloth , covetousness , and pride which is generally found indeed in you who are called ministers , which in the power of the Lord we are oft moved to declare against ; but we do not take advantage thereby , ( As ye lyingly and railingly accuse us ) to declaim against the vigilant shepherds , as if all were but hirelings ; for we put a great difference betwixt the proud , covetous , slothful hirelings , and the vigilant shepherds ; for we own the vigilant shepherds , whom the holy spirit hath made overseers over the flock of God , and have true unity with them , and we know that they are not hirelings , for they have freely received , and they freely give ; and covet no man's silver , gold nor apparel , but seeks the persons , and not theirs ; for having food and raiment , they are therewithal content , and receives it of them also that do receive them and embrace the truth ; and we labour to bring persons unto Christ the power of God , that persons May betrust themselves with him , who is the good shepherd , and Bishop of the soul . 

John horn , Thomas Moor ; but it is good for persons to mind first , that all are not hirelings that take hire , witness zach. 11. 12. 2 cor. 11. 8.  secondly , that it is safer for the sheep to a•ide with their hirelings , if their shepherds be such , then to l•ave them , and go to foxes and wolves ; Christ faults the hir•lingss for leaving the sheep to the wolves , but never wills his sheep to leave hirelings if they will feed them in the pa••ureses of Israel . 

answ. here the persons May see your exceeding ignorance and blindness in your pleading for taking hire , who say that all are not hirelings that take hire , and for your witness and proof , you have brought that scripture in zach. which although the prophet spoke those words , yet it is evident that he spoke them by way of prophecy concerning Judas ( Who afterwards should ask a price for Christ and fell him , which prophecy came to pass ; for Judas said to the Jews who sought to take Christ , what will you give me , and i will deliver him unto you ? and they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver ; so it appears by your words that you would persuade the persons that Judas was no hireling ; for it is evident that that which ye bring for your witness , was spoken concerning Judas , who asked for the price or hire , and received it ; so Judas is your witness and example for asking and taking of hire ( And not Christ ) mat. •6 . 15. so the persons May mind this , ( Mark ) that it was Judas the betrayer of Christ , that asked for the hire and covenanted for it , and those that rejected Christ and were chief actors in the murdering of him , they gave the hire ; and then was fulfilled that which was spoken by the prophet , read mat. 27. and what the apostle took of the churches ( For his relief ) which received the truth , amongst whom he sometimes laboured , that will not prove that it is lawful for the priests to take tithes and hire of all sorts of persons that have land in parishes whither the persons own them or not , as it is evident that the priests do ; and the hirelings and all devouring beasts are in one nature , and it is not safer for the sheep ( As ye have falsely said ) to abide with the one than the other , for neither of them cares for the sheep no further than to make a prey upon them , and all such we bear a testimony against , being redeemed out of their nature ; and it is the will of Christ that his sheep should leave the hirelings ( For they care not for the sheep ) and that they should follow him and hear his voice , and Christ's sheep do so , they hear Christ's voice who have called them from the hirelings and strangers , and their voices they will not regard ; and such as Christ sends to feed his sheep in the pastors of Israel , they are no hirelings ( As ye foolishly imagine ) but they have freely received , and they freely give , and such are not greedy of filthy lucre , neither do they rèceive tithes by a corrupt unjust law made by apostates ( As thou John horn dost ) but they do what they do of a willing and a ready mind , and are not hired to it for a certain sum , but such if they have not of their own , May and do receive food and raiment of such as receive them and their testimony ; and this is according to the apostles doctrine , and is owned and practised amongst us the servants of the Lord ( Called Quakers ) whom ye in your railing , lying accusations liken unto foxes and wolves , but your words shall become your own burden , and with the spirit of the Lord we see you in the devouring beastly nature which the Lord is against , and will rent . 

J. horn t. Moor , the persons are too generally guilty too , and lay themselves open to these delusions and deluders , because too generally they neglect Christ and his truth , take no pleasure therein , but rather in slothfulness , formality , covetousness pride and vanity in apparel , and in many other things , by which means they are in danger to perish , whether they keep out of these men's snares or falls into them ; howbeit they are exposed to their snares thereby , because they afford the deceivers matter to work upon , can find many faults in them , many things to accuse them of , though some things that God never charged them with before these men came & set themselves Masters ; but in many things really evil , they have too great advantage , and men's consciences by the effect of the law in them ( which is not Christ ) bearing witness that they say true in those things that they fault them in . 

answ. here it is manifest by your own words , that ye are the false prophets that have not profited the persons , that notwithstanding all your preachings , the persons still neglect Christ and his truth , and take no pleasure therein , but rather in slothfulness , formality , covetousness , pride and vanity in apparel , and in many other things , and are in danger to perish whether they come after us or not as ye confess ; so it is clear to all that have any understanding , that ye have not stood in the counsel of God , for if you had , than you should have turned the persons ( That had received your doctrine ) from the evil of their way , and from the evil of their doings , ier. 23. but persons have long received you and your doctrine , and yet live in their evil ways : therefore be ashamed and stop your mouths ye hypocrites , who also speaks against covetousness , pride and vanity in apparel in the persons , and of their neglect of Christ and his truth , when many of you their teachers are found in covetousness , pride and vanity in apparel , wearing your cuffs and ribbons , ( And white boot-hose-tops ) and teaching for tithes , and gifts , and rewards , and most of these in particular thou John horn art guilty of , and in the twentieth page of your book , ye confess yourselves to be guilty of the neglect of Christ the salvation of God , and the abuse of his truth ; so here it is plain , that wherein ye have judged others , ye have condemned yourselves , rom. 2. 1. and made it appear that you are like priests like persons , hos. 4. 9 and we whom the Lord have redeemed out of the vanity and wickedness of this world , do judge you for your wickedness , and bear our testimony against it in that which hath redeemed us from it ; and although we are Counted by you to be deceivers when we judge you for your wickedness , yet the Lord owns our judging of you , because it is in that which answereth the effect of his righteous law in men's consciences , which beareth witness that we speak true , as you our enemies are made to confess ; and it was the ministers of Christ that were manifested to people's consciences in the sight of God , and not the deceivers , for the effect of the law in persons where it was witnessed or was , did not nor do not cause their consciences to bear witness to the deceivers doctrine but against it ; so it is manifest that you judge contrary to the effect of the law who have judged them to be deceivers , whom men's consciences by the effect of the law in them beareth witness unto ; and the law in men ( Which witnesseth unto the truth and against sin ) is light , and it is the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus , which freeth ( Those that believe and walk in it ) from the power of sin and death , but those that believe not in it , but hate it , it beareth witness against them and their evil deeds , and remains their condemnation ; and it is you that have set yourselves Masters ( And not we ) who exercise lordship one over another , and have men's persons in admiration , and respect men's persons , and calls ( And are called of ) men Masters , contrary to Christ's doctrine ; but we , although we be the Lords free men , yet we are become servants unto many in the truth , ministering , and labouring for the gathering of the scattered seed . 

John horn , Thomas Moor , they to get a party ( as the Jesuits do ) exposing themselves to some abuses and sufferings from the rude persons , make themselves more like chri•is ministers to the simple persons . 

answ. we indeed suffer much for righteousness sake , and for bearing our testimony against unrighteousness , and you who are teachers oft causeth our sufferings to be the greater , by your lying and railing against us , thereby stirring up the rude persons to abuse us , even as your forefathers the priests and Pharisees did , who stirred up the rude persons against our Master Christ and his servants in former days , for which the Lord will assuredly reward you in righteousness ; but we will in all things approve ourselves as the ministers of God , in much patience , in affliction , in necessity , in distresses , in stripes , in imprisonments , in tumults , &c.  2 cor. 6 and our lives are not dear unto us , but are freely given up to serve the living God , in spreading his living truth , and it is for no other end , God is our witness , though ye wickedly judge otherwise . And then John horn , and Thomas Moor goes about to show the cause why , and how the persons are overcome , and led captive by the Quakers , and say , 

John horn , Thomas Moor , it 's through their own carelessness and formality , or also through their teachers , they are not so instructed , as to be able to examine and discern them ; through their carelessness , and weakness therethrough in their understanding of the things of God , and conceiting themselves to know and be able to judge and discern of spirits , they neglect the helpfulness , and gifts of brethren , as also the advice of their teachers and instructors that have the oversight of them , and spoken to them the word of the Lord . 

answ. oh be ashamed to see what a bad crop is brought forth ; what have you been teachers so long , and taking people's money for this , that notwithstanding they have owned you and your doctrine , and followed you so long that yet they should bring forth no better fruits than these , as carelessness , and formality , and conceitedness , and neglect , and weakness in understanding the things of God ? ye have sown but to the fleshly part , and that 's the cause you have such a corrupt crop ; and now we see your kingdom is near falling , who are accusing your fellow teachers for not instructing the persons , so as to be able to examine and discern us , and the persons are led captive already who brings forth such bad fruits as these , and had you spoken the word of the Lord to them , and they had believed it , surely they would have brought forth better fruits ; but because you have but stolen from your neighbours much of what you have spoke , and added your own imaginations thereto , and hath run but the Lord hath not sent you , that is the cause you have not profited the persons , though you have believed what you have spoke , and have contended much for your doctrine , yet ye receiving it not from the Lord , it was without life and power , and so was not effectual to the persons . 

John horn , Thomas Moor , oh that all both ministers and persons would yet be awakened to search and try our ways , and to make straight steps to our goings . 

answ. yes , ye had need to be awakened indeed ; for it is manifest that ye both teachers and persons have been asleep in the night of thick darkness , and you have brought forth night works , neglecting Christ the salvation of God , and abusing his tru•h , taking no pleasure therein , but rather in slothfulness , formality , covetousness , pride and vanity in apparel , and many other things , and teachers not instructing persons , so as they Might be able to examine and discern such as come unto them ; ye sluggish shepherds , who are yet to be awakened , what have you taken peoples money and goods for all this time , was it for your sleeping and dreaming ? awake , awake ye sluggards , and own the light of Christ which he hath enlightened you withal , and that will show you your dreaming , and the deeds of the night , and that will teach you to make straight steps to your goings , and to search and try your ways . 

John horn , Thomas Moor , look to yourselves , whosoever transgresseth and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ hath not God , he that abideth in the doctrine of Christ , hath both the father and the son . 

answ. then it is manifest that you Thomas Moor , and John horn , have not God , and out of your own mouths ye shall be judged ; for in the 20. pag. of your book , you speak of the heavy judgement of God that he hath ordered to you , to punish you for your neglect of Christ the salvation of God , and the truth of him so long abused by you , now it is plain to any that have any true understanding , that such as neglect Christ the salvation of God , and abuse his truth , that they transgress and abide not in the doctrine of Christ ; and this you have confessed yourselves to be guilty of , and now your blindness and folly , and confusion , and wickedness is discovered by the spirit and wisdom of God , which abideth in us who abide in the doctrine of Christ , and have both the father and the son . 

Many more of your lies and slanders and confusion we could show you in your book , but that they are not worth the mentioning ; and think not with yourselves , that because we reckon not up the rest of your accusations and railing against us , that therefore we consent to them as truth , for we know that the Lord God will judge and punish you for your perverting the truth , and your railing against us , and slandering and belying us called Quakers as you have done , both in your book and in many papers of John horns that were posted up against us in Lin ; and this know that the Lord God of power hath by his mighty power and wisdom armed us to make war against you and to manifest your deceits , who are found to be forgers of lies and deceivers , and in enmity against the living truth of God ; and the longer you proceed therein against us and the truth witnessed by us , the more will you be confounded , and your folly made manifest , that so the honest hearted will begin to loath you , and you had better have put your mouths in the dust and been silent then to have blasphemed against the truth of God and against his persons , as you have done ; leave your hypocrisy and deceit wherewith you blind the persons , and feed them no longer with your dreams , lies , and ( Stolen ) dead words , least the Lord cut you off in your iniquity , for a time of withering is already come upon you . 

And as for you who are the hearers of the said John horn and Thomas Moor , our souls pity you , knowing you are under a vail of thick darkness and bondage , as we can no otherwise conclude , seeing your leaders are tried , and found so much in ignorance and confusion , and we wish rather than you would remain under their darkness and deceits , that you would come back to the witness of God , which hath in many of you been often moving , but often hath been quenched through yielding to the sleights and deceits of men , and striving to get more into knowledge then into the life and power ; and now you are but feeding death , and seeking the living among the dead , while ye go to them for help , who are out of the power of God , in their own imaginations , wherein they are confounded , and if ever you come to the father's house , and there to find the spiritual nourishment , you must first return to the light of the Lord in you , which you have transgressed and grieved , when often it hath appeared against your ungodliness . 

And we would not have you think much against us , because we have here dealt plainly by your teachers , in discovering them , for we were first occasioned to give forth this , because of their false railing book against us , or else we had not thus appeared in public against them ; and compare this and their book together , and you May soon see ( If you read them sincerely ) how deservedly we have dealt by them , more than they have by us , for we sent queries to John horn and Thomas Moor in manuscript for them to answer , not expecting they would have wronged us , as they have done in print ; and therefore if they in like manner do again proceed against us in print , we purpose in the Lord further to have their deceits discovered publicly , that the truth which is professed and dearly owned by us , May be cleared , and its enemies have the fruits of their own doings . 

Postscript . 

And seeing that ye ( Called Moorians ) hold forth , that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God , yet flesh and bones May ; we ask you these questions ; 

If Elijah's flesh and bones could enter into God's kingdom ( When he was taken up ) and if his blood could not , then when , and where , and how , and by whom was his blood taken and separated from his flesh and bones ? And what is become of his blood ? 

And what is it that hinders the blood , that it May not enter into God's kingdom as well as the flesh and bones , which ye say May ? Is the transgression of the blood greater than the transgression of the flesh and bones ? And shall the flesh and bones be redeemed and delivered from corruption , and shall not the blood ? What is the cause ? For although the Lord doth what he please , yet , doth he do any thing without a cause ? 

And whether do you own that doctrine , that when Christ appeared amongst the disciple after his resurrection ( When the doors were shut , John 20. 19  ) that then his body being spiritualised , it glided in at the keyhole of the door ? Which doctrine Thomas Moor sen . hath formerly preached , as some hath affirmed who heard him . 

And where do the scriptures say , that flesh and bones May in herit the kingdom of God ? 

And where you John horn and Thomas Moor in page 16. say , that Satan doubtless May reprove of some sins , and press to some duties ; now have you not here shown yourselves to be ministers of Satan , and not of Christ ? And we ask you what duties ( Or any things that are duties ) doth Satan press men to ? Answer directly , or let shame cover you , which at length will come upon you for your deceits . 

The end . 















































