Something of truth made manifest ( In relation to a dispute at Draton in the county of Middlesex in the first month last ) in opposition to the false account given of it by one Philip Taverner , in his book styled the qvakers-rounds ; or a faithful account , &c.  

And this is written for the truth's sake by e. b.  

London , printed for Thomas Simmons at the bull and mouth near Aldersgate , 1658.  

Forasmuch as one ( Who hath ( I suppose ) ambitiously styled himself Mr. Philip Taverner ) hath taken in hand to set forth to the view of the world , an account & relation of a dispute happening in the 11. month last , at Draton near Colebrook , to which relation i am a little engaged to write something by way of answer thereunto , that all persons May know the truth ; and being the truth is somewhat concerned herein , that is the reason wherefore i have taken in hand to write a little by way of answer to his relation , being without any prejudice towards the man , as concerning any wrong he hath done to me , though me as well as the truth he hath wronged , as May appear to such who desire to know the truth . 

it 's true , a public dispute i had , the time and place mentioned , with a company of priests , and this same Philip ▪ Taverner was one of them ; and the occasion of the dispute was thus ; i being a few weeks before at a meeting with some friends in the said town , one Richard goodgroom in his relation mentioned was present at the hearing of what was spoken , but at that time did not object any thing , though afterwards in London and other places he went up and down in a backbiting manner , and gave forth that i had held forth blasphemous doctrine , or the like ; whereupon i much desired a dispute for the trial of those things , and it was accomplished , and that day the truth was much made manifest , and deceit consounded ; and as to all the things objected agavist me by r. g. which he would have seemed to have taken great occasion thereby , as if some great matter of heresy and error had been uttered by me . I say , the very truth of all these things was demonstrated according as i had laid them down , and his arguments against them made of none effect ; and though such as hardened their hearts Might go unfatisfied , and in greater unbelief than they came , yet i am sure the upright-hearted , and such as desired the knowledge of the truth , were wholly satisfied , and this many can give testimony of with me : and though by his relation it May appear otherwise to some , yet wherein he hath related falsely , it shall fall upon his own head ; and his folly shall truly more appear in the end than he would have , or seem to cause any in me to appear at this present , and so he Might with more credit to himself been silent , then to have meddled in that wherein he hath showed himself so imperfect . For i believe that this same Philip Taverner hath given a relation of four times as much as he did speak at that meeting ; and have related , as though he spoke that which he never uttered , by so miny times so much as i have said , and have not related so much by many times , as was spoken by me , and by them of my part , as many May witness ; which work of his seems not to be perfect , neither yet altogether honest , as sober men May judge ; but such a thing must redound more to his own dishonour , then to the truth's disadvantage . And first , as to the title of his false relation , which is styled , the Quakers rounds , or a faithful account , &c.  

To this i answer , that the very frontispiece and title of his book savours of a vain light scornful spirit ; and so every spiritual man May judge of it to be so ; but why dost thou p. t. say a faithful account , but that to confirm falsehood with audacious words , having a show of confidence upon it , thereby the more easily to enter into the hearts of the persons , as if it were irreprovable , coming also from the hand , and under the hand of a Mr. Philip , &c. having so styled thyself , to make thy fame great , and to publish thy work under a seeming authority ; but hadst thou had more humility , less pride would have appeared : and hadst thou had a better heart , less of unfaithful dealing would have proceeded from thee ; but as i have said , evil shall fall upon himself that hatcheth it for another ; but why dost thou say faithful account in the title page ? signifying to the world , that all in it is true , and nothing of truth wanting in relation to that dispute ; and yet in thy epistle saith , thou dost not undertake to set down the multitude of words that that day was filled withal , and page 29. saith , that a third man of the company made a large discourse concerning the person justified , but relates not one word what was said by him ; and here thou hast not dealt faithfully , nor given a faithful account : and page 31. thou saith , e. b. at such a time did multiply many words , but doth not relate his particular words , and so hath not in this dealt faithfully , nor given a faithful account ; and also in many other things thou hast not related what was spoken at all ; and thus thou hast contradicted thyself , in saying a faithful account , and yet confessing in effect unfaithfulness : and thy own words being compared together , proves a contradiction in thy own mind and pen ; for to give a faithful account , as thou sayst thou hast , is to relate the whole truth , and not to keep any back , neither to speak more than the truth , by adding thereto any thing . But again thou sayst , thou undertak'st not to relate the multitude , or every particular of words , neither doth relate what particular words such a one and such a one spoke , but saith he said so , and multiplied many words , not saying what his words were ; and therefore thou hast heaped a contradiction upon thy own head , and it shall remain till it have made thee ashamed . 

And now as to the particulars , upon which the dispute depended , so far as they are truly laid down in my words ; and in my intent and meaning i am ready to justify them at any place or time convenient , or before any auditory whatsoever upon lawful occasion , but as thou hast laid them down , or some of them , thou hast wronged me and the truth , and either not understood my meaning , or subverted and perverted my words to thy own advantage . 

And whereas in the epistle thou sayst , i would not own them , viz ▪ the particulars laid down to be mine at first , and yet owned every one of them in the discourse , &c.  

answ. i did not own them ; but how ? and how did i own them but thus ? the objector had laid down some of the particulars , not in my words , which made them vary from the intent of my meaning ; and others of the particulars he had laid down utterly false , and so i did deny them as coming from him ; but as to the substance of some of the particulars , i did own , having laid them down according to my own honest meaning , in my own found expression of words ; and thereupon i engaged a dispute upon the particulars , having first denied them as laid down by him , and in his corrupt expressions , and then owned them in the simplicity in the words as by me uttered ; i mean some of them , but some i altogether denied . And as to speak of that text , ioh. 5. 39 by which sayest thou , i endeavoured to skin over what i spoke , but to no punpose . i do deny thy words ; for that same verse shall stand a witness for me , and against thee in all the world ; and that verse shall prove that some of the scriptures were spoken to the world , and not to the saints , and the truth itself is my covering , and i need no other thing to skin over , as thou scornfully spak'st . 

And whereas thou sayest , there was just matter of reproof in the dispute , in both parties , &c.  

answ. while thou hast condemned others , thou hast judged thyself , who was of the one party , a strong contender for the priest's party ; and having now accused both parties , would clear thyself to be of neither , but cannot ; for it is known that thou didst take their part , and in the title thou sayest , the discourse was betwixt a party of them called Quakers , with Mr. Philip t. &c. where thou dost own thyself to be one , ( And reckons thyself the foremost Master ) of the disputants ; and now upon better consideration i think , when thou hast searched into their folly with whom thou wast joined , thou wouldst absent thyself to be none of them , but a third party ; but let me tell thee , what disorder , prejudice and passion as thou speaks of , as was amongst the priests , thou hast a part in , and must own their sin and their condemnation , for thou art also guilty ; and that there was any passion ( Except pure zeal for God and his truth , which thou Mightest falsely so call ) or prejudice , or such like amongst us , i db deny it , and knows thee to have born a false testimony ; and all thy covers , as if thou wert a moderator or the like , in thy speaking , will not hide thee , nor cover thee from what i have said of thee . 

But as to the things in particular i now come , and May show what my words are , and the ground of them , and how i laid them down , and upon what occasion in the first meeting whereupon the dispute did arise ; and i do not here go about to give a perfect relation of that dispute , for my memory hath not contained what passed ; but as to the intent and meaning of my words , i would give all the true knowledge thereof , and how far i do own the particulars charged against me . 

First , as to that , the scriptures are not the word of God , because the devil spoke something , and Pharaoh something , which is there written . 

answ. there is some truth in this ; but my words were drawn up by him at the shortest , and the most for his own advantage laid down by him ; for i do remember , that in the first meeting i was a speaking concerning the word of God , and concerning the scriptures , which are a declaration thereof , and showing the difference betwixt the word and the letter , and scriptures ; for the word of God was in the beginning , and the world was made by it , and it endures for ever ; but the scriptures were not in the beginning , for Moses was the first that wrote any thing of the scripture , who was long after the beginning ; neither was the world made by them , neither can they endure for ever ; and therefore the letter , the scriptures are not the word of God which the scriptures call ▪ the word ; for also in the scriptures are written what the devil spoke , and what Pharaoh and other wicked men spoke , and therefore they are not the word of God , but as i have said , a declaration of the word , and what is written of , is the word ; but the scriptures , ( The writings ) are not , but a testimony and declaration of the word : much more as to this Might be said , and was spoken by me at the meeting , which is not particularly related ; and this is sufficient to any honest man that is spiritual , who hath an understanding to judge hereof . 

Now i suppose themselves , none of them are so ignorant , as they will say the scriptures are that word which was in the beginning , and which shall endure for ever ; but say they , the scriptures are another word , a declarative word , or such like terms ; now when we dispute or contend with any about the word of God , we dispute what that word is which the scripture saith is the word , and doth deny that word to be the scriptures ( Writings ) though still we do own the scriptures a declaration of that very word of God , and that the scriptures in any place doth call themselves the word , or signify so much , i do deny it , and it is left for any of our opposers to prove it that can ; if they do , i will confess it to be the word , and revoke all that i have spoken to the contrary . 

And as for thy deductions and consequences drawn from my words , i do deny them , for they are not to me , but will turn upon thyself ; for thou sayest , a strange kind of assertion , as if nothing of the mind , will , and council of God were declared in scripture , and whitherto can be the tendency of such giddy doctrines , then to a weakening the authority of the scriptures , and begetting slightings and undervaluing thoughts and that the effects May be lightly esteeming the scriptures : these and such deductions hast thou drawn through thy ignorance , from my words , from all which i am clear , as having no intent to any such things , nor any intent but to testify the pure innocent truth ; and thy deductions are far more ignorant and impudent than my assertion is strange ; and let thy consequences be what they will from my words , the truth of my words will justify me , in the sight of God and his saints ; for i do honour the scriptures above other writings , and gives them the authority , and esteem , and respect due unto them , and more i dare not . 

And some of thy pages i pass over , as not worth taking notice of , only doth say , thou hast wronged me , in not relating so much as was spoken by us , by far ; and in relating more than was spoken by thee , or thy party . And the next thing i note is this , where r G. said he would , and went about to prove , that the letter is the word of God , but was not , nor is never able to prove ; and thou hast changed the words of his argument in thy relation , from what they were as he laid them down in the dispute , from called , to owned ; for thus his words were laid down at that time ; said he , that which Christ and the apostles called the word of God , is indeed the word of God , but Christ and the apostles called the scriptures the word of God , ergo . now i denied , and do yet , that it can be proved , that ever Christ and the apostles called the scriptures the word of God , and neither doth thy proofs now , nor his then , of the minor proposition , prove that the scriptures , viz. the writings were ever called the word ; although it be true the Pharisees made the word of God of no authority by their traditions ▪ but that scripture doth not say that the letter is the word , which thing he was to prove , or else he said nothing to the purpose , and as to the other scripture , 1 thes. 1. 13. that will not prove that the apostle called the letter the word , for it was the gospel which they received as the word of God , and not the letter ; the gospel is the word of God , not denied by me but sealed unto : but the gospel is not the letter , and writings , but the gospel is the thing written of ; and that is it which the apostle means to be the word of God , for that is the word which he preached to the Thessalonians , and which they received , and so thy arguments and proof of thy minor position is denied , and so the major position falls to the ground ; and by this nor any other argument can all you priests of England prove the letter of the scriptures to be the word of God , which thing r. g. took in hand to prove , but could not , and would have cried against it in me , as a great deal of heresy for denying it ; but error is fallen upon his own head . The next thing i note , is in page 13. where thou would seem to cover over r. g. thou sayest his words were not , that i had the thing signified in my hand , when i had the bible ; but that i had that which declares of it . Now to justify him in evil , thou hast wronged me and the truth ; for he did say when i held up my bible , i had in my hand the thing therein signified upon this very occasion ; i holding up my bible in my hand , and saying to this very effect , that that in my hand , i had the thing which did signify in words of such and such things ; but i had not the thing signified ; and r. g. made answer and said , but i had the thing signified , and this some can witness , whereupon i made answer and said , if it be so that i have the thing signified in my hand , than i have God , and Christ , and the saints , and heaven , and hell , men and beasts , and all things that here in is written of , and then he saw the folly of his own argument , i perceive . 

And much more as upon this subject was said on both parties , which i desire not much to recollect , only what i have said i can certainly remember , and can justify it ; and i must confess , that p. t. in some things hath done pretty fairly , though in other things he hath not done so . 

And now as to the next thing charged against me in the relation , being placed the second , though it is the third . 

that evil motions not consented to were not sin ▪ in the first private meeting i remember my words was laid down thus ▪ and so i owned them in the dispute , that temptations or motions unto evil are not sin to any man who doth not consent and obey to serve temptations or evil motions , and they are not sin to the man , except they be consented to by the man , and this was proved in the example of Christ , who was tempted of the devil , and had motions to do evil , yet did not consent nor commit sin , for he resisted and overcome the tempter , and so the devils motions and temptations which were sin in themselves , yet they were not sin to him ; and this proof than they could not deny , neither can any sober or upright man , and so in the dispute the thing was put to a farther question ; thus , but are not those motions which arise out of a man's own heart sin , except they be consented to ? to which i was willing to speak something , and to own the very truth , and to justify that there is a state wherein evil motions May arise out of a man's own heart , which are sin in themselves , and sin in the man , yet not sin to the man , if he doth not consent to them , obey them , and fulfil them , and the scripture doth prove it , rom. 7. where he saith it is no more i that 〈◊〉 but sin that dwelleth in me , for in his mind he served the da• of God , and with his mind did not consent to the motions of evil and sin , and the sin was not his , nor reckoned against him by the Lord , because with his mind he consented not and this no upright man can deny ; and also i applied myself at that time for witness to the experience of sober persons and Christians , whether many times there had not been evil motions in their hearts presenting themselves , to which they had not consented ; but the Lord had given them power over them , to resist them , and deny them , and they were not overcome of them ; and whether ever they were accused and condemned for such motions , which the Lord gave them power against ? or whether the rather they had not peace and joy in the Lord , who had discovered to them , and given them power over the evil which had presented itself ? And i also gave them that which i had witnessed concerning the thing , as a testimony agreeing with the scriptures to that particular ; and though the relation saith , as if i spoke of my present state to be so ; but here in the hearers were mistaken , if so they understood me ; for my present state is another then what it once was ; i bless the Lord i speak without boasting , and my present state i did not then , nor now shall declare ; for i am not known to the world , nor desires to be , as what my state is ; but this was my intent , and is in these things ; my state was say i , yea i believe from ten years old , till many years after , that many times i had evil motions arising in my own heart , which sometime overcame me , and sometime the Lord gave me to overcome them ; so that i consented not to them , nor obeyed , nor followed them ; and when they did overcome me and lead me aside , then was i troubled and condemned of the Lord , for they were reckoned to be my sins when i consented , and many times the Lord gave me power over them , and i consented not , but resisted them and denied them , and then had i great peace and joy in the Lord , and no condemnation ; and this was my experience for some years together , though my present state be mother condition , of which i shall not speak , as not being needful at this time ; and this is the truth which no sober Christian can deny . 

it 's true , we spent a little time in disputing upon those things , but to little purpose as on their part ; for what i then said , many of the persons saw to be the very truth , and all was well satisfied , except such as Might harden their hearts ; and much more passed betwixt us . 

As to this thing which i cannot relate , only p. t. as he began so he goes on , giving a report in his relation of much more than himself spoke , and a great deal less than we spoke ▪ which thing in him is not very fair nor honest ; for i then proved by many scriptures , that some were perfect in this life , 1 cor. 2. 5. even perfect without sin , John 1. 47. 1  John 3. 7. and yet i did declare at that time that many of the saints and children of God were not come to the state of perfection , which admits of no addition , for many of the saints daily receives more and more of God's wisdom , and of his power and life revealed in them , wherein they grow up to God from strength to strength : and though they did so much contend against it , yet in the end was forced to confess to the substance of what we speak , as to the particular of perfection . 

The next thing is concerning perfection , and i am charged with holding that perfection is attainable in this life , which thing i did hold forth and contend for it , and am not now ashamed of it , and my very proofs , which then i used , some of which are related by p. t. is sufficient enough to prove the particular , if i should say nothing more ; and even as the thing is related , though what i spoke , the whole is not related by much as about this particular of perfection ; but what is related shall stand as a witness for me , and against them that doth so much plead against perfection , even of such perfection to be without sin in this life : and to this i shall say little more , but leave his own relation unto the consideration of sober persons , only must say that p. t. hath belied his own memory , in saying his relation is a faithful account , and yet hath related much more than he spoke also about this particular . 

As to the next thing which is objected against me , that the scriptures were given to the world , and not to the saints , this is utterly false , & was neither thus spoken by me , nor yet my meaning . And at the dispute i did deny that i spoke the words , neither had i any such intent as they have deducted , though still i do confidently affirm , that that scripture , John 5. 39 ▪ was spoken to the unbelieving Jews that went about to kill Christ , who had never heard God's voice , nor seen his shape , nor had not Christ's words abiding in them , and to them ▪ he spoke that scripture mentioned ; neither had i any such meaning , but that the saints and all sober persons , and all persons Might search the scriptures , though such a bad consequence they have drawn upon my words , and saith , it is a giddy assertion that hath dropped from me , and yet himself is forced to confess what i spoke is true , to wit , that that scripture in the fifth of John was spoken to the unbelieving Jews , and not to the saints , and yet p. t. to confound himself , confesses that i said the epistles were given to the saints , and this is a contradiction from his own pen : first , to say , that i asserted , the scriptures were given to the world , and not to the saints , and yet saith , i confess the epistles were given to the saints , which are some part of the scriptures . 

And whereas p. t. farther speaks , questioning in himself , how far i own the authority of the scripuures , and such like , which shows his ignorance or his unbelief ; for i have , and do here again speak plainly that we do own the authority of the scriptures , and we through patience and comfort of the scriptures have had hope : and they are able to make the man of God perfect through faith , and what Christ and the apostles owned the scriptures to be , the same we do , and neither more nor less : and in this we are approved of God , and let men judge what they will . 

And whereas p. t. speaks something of Jesuits , and saith he does not apprehend me to be of that measure of subtlety , which is found among men of that brotherhood , unless saith he , i have more than an ordinary art of hiding myself ▪ &c.  

To which i answer , Jesuits i deny , and all of that fraternity , and whatsoever savours of popery , yet am i hidden from persons ; and what i am he knows not , neither the world ▪ for from that wisdom am i hide , neither can i manifest myself to that wisdom which is devilish , & knows not God ▪ nor the least of his sons and servants ; for in all those things of which we then discoursed , the depth thereof could hardly be spoken of , because of the darkness of people's understandings . And especially concerning justification i was very sparing , and could hardly freely declare myself ; yet what i spoke was a great satisfaction to many then present , though the one half that i spoke is not truly related , though so much as is related shall stand a sufficient witness for me , and against them that oppose me , and that my words and meaning w•• honest . 

This was the thing charged upon me , that no man was further justified than he was sanctified . now my intent and meaning in this was honest ; and as about this particular much was spoken , which now i do not recollect to repeat ; only p. t. hath hinted in short at things how they passed , and my words shall be for ever witnessed , that sanctification is a witness of justification , & no man can further know himself to be justified than he is sanctified , nor justified than he is restored . and had p. t. but laid down my full answers as i spoke them at that dispute , there would have been no need to have written any thing in answer ; only i do remember i did stand to manifest , that the new birth , sanctification , and justification was all agreeing in one , and not one without another , and that Christ wrought righteousness perfectly without us , and also fulfilled rightness in all that believe , and no man is justified by the one of these without the other , and that hath not the other ; and they held the contrary , and r. g. did publicly affirm that a man was justified by Christ , excluding the new birth , and the work of sanctification which i denied , and must always deny , that any man who is not born again , but is in the old nature , and not sanctified , but is in the pollutions of the world , is justified by Christ's righteousness ; neither can he in that state till he be born again and sanctified , have any benefit or manifestation of justification by Christ ; and this all men shall witness , though because of this i now May be falsely judged : and though r. g. did openly testify that Christ justified sinners as sinners ; yet say i , all that are justified , are justified through faith , and faith doth purify the heart , as was largely spoken by divers of us at that meeting , which is not particularly related ; which definition of our justification , they could not except against ; for we never were , nor are ashamed to declare what we hold concerning justification , which is through faith in the blood of Christ the seed of the covenant , and though at that time they made much jangling , yet to no purpose as to convince us of any error , or any sober men there present of any error in us as concerning that thing . 

And whereas it is related , as if i should say , we are men brought up at plow-tail , and understand not scholar like terms ▪ my words were not thus spoken ; but upon the occasion of their speaking words which is not in scripture-language as inherent righteousness , for such like . Whereupon i desired them to keep to the form of sound words , and of scripture-language , that persons Might understand what they spoke ; for said i , ye are scholars as ye profess , and some of us were brought up at plow or cart , and May be doth not understand scholarlike terms , though i did not mean all of us ▪ and what some of us do understand ▪ as to that , i shall not now speak ; yet this i say , the least of us doth understand betwixt truth and error , and between that which is righteous , and that which is unrighteous , and in that is more peace then in the knowledge of arts or tongues ; and our knowledge in that is dung and loss in comparison of the other . 

And as to justification , upon which subject we contended a long time , though they foolishly charged us with it , we do deny utterly the works of man , and the works of man's righteousness , as in relation to our justification , and that it is only and wholly by grace and gift of God , and the righteousness of Christ who is revealed in all that believe in him ▪ by which justification comes ; yet say we , that faith without works is dead , and will not justify a man ; but by that faith which brings forth works , even the works of God in us and through us , by that faith are we justified ▪ and according to the apostles words so we believe ; not by works of righteousness which we have done , nor by a dead faith without works , but by a living faith which worketh in us , are we justified ; let vain men deduct what they May , this is truth in the sight of the Lord , and all men . 

These indeed are the particulars upon which the controversy depended ; and having been some hours together , they were willing to depart , and r. g. would give little hearing to me when i charged him with something uttered by him at divers times in my hearing , which i should have proved to be unsound doctrine and error had he had that patience to have stayed ; and whereas p. t. doth speak of having a Pope in our bellies , with such like scornful words , which a discreet man would not have defiled his mouth withal , but that he must show himself to be of the generation of priests , who persecuted the innocent in every age , and for his telling of our error , and recovering of our feet out of the snare , and delivering us from the delusion ; its true , his words stands but upon a supposition , and that supposition stands upon the report of others , as he seems to intimate , which is but a thing far off true credit ; for what error , and snares , and delusion , did p. t. convince us of in five hour's discourse ? not any at all , but the rather was forced to confess , to the most part of what we delivered ; then what need was there to utter these his words in writing , as if he had heard some great matter of delusion or error ; but all these his words i do bear , and if he hath harboured such thoughts of us , as it appears too much by his words , let him cleanse his heart by repentance , lest his intended evil bruise his own head . 

And whereas he hath commented upon a book , called a standard lifted up , which book i own , and that which is therein written , and himself is forced to own what himself objects against , and comments upon : if ▪ saith he , e. b. mean so and so , than his words are truth , but if so and so , than it is Pope ▪ like , or such like . 

Alas poor man ! must i be judged upon thy own meaning ▪ nay , or must thy interpretation be the judge upon my words ? We have no such law , my words stands true , as i have laid them down , to be received by such as are spiritual ; and such as loves to raise constructions falsely , where there is no just ground , their judgement i do deny ; and charity will teach p. t. to judge upon the best sense , and so let him own my words as truth , and judge himself for his false construction of true and upright words ; only this i take notice of , saith p. t. a perfect conformity to the law of God in our own persons , though not wrought in our own strength , but in the strength and power of grace ▪ the spirit working all in us , and for us , is no other than the righteousness of the law . 

I need not much strive to confound this black doctrine by many arguments or multitude of words , for the thing as laid down in his own words , is vile and abominable to the understanding of any spiritual man ; for say i , if it be the spirit working in us , and for us , not in our own strength , than is it God that worketh in us , both to will and to do , and the fulfilling of the righteousness of the law in us , and not the righteousness of the law wrought by us ; and if it be in the strength and power of grace , & not in our own strength , than it is the work of Christ in us , and the work of God's own righteousness in us ; and any man that knows the least of God in truth , will witness to this , and against his imagined doctrine held forth by p. t. i Might demand a proof of him from scripture , where it is said or signified , that the working of the spirit , all in us , and for us , and the working of the power of grace in the creature , is reckoned to be our own righteousness , the righteousness of the law ; and my words stands true from which he draws his false consequences , and lays down his dark assertions , and my own words i do own , which are , such as are taught by Christ , and guided by him in all the ways of righteousness , are justified by him , and none else , not in any word or work whatsoever , but in what they are led to fulfil by him ; and in these words there is neither contradiction nor unsoundness , though he hath ignorantly charged them with both ; but the words shall stand for a testimony against him , and all his false deductions , and he and all shall know , that God justifies the righteous , and condemns the wicked , and that it is the new man that is justified , and not the old , and let righteous men judge what can be in such a man's heart , who can draw so bad consequences from such upright words . 

But farther , he goes on , and hath transcribed more of my words , as Christ Jesus the son of God is the light and life of the world , and hath enlightened all mankind that comes into the world , with the true light , &c.  Now saith he , how doth these agree with man's state in the first Adam , in transgression is a state of perfect enmity , and death reigns in every man , & he is possessed with blindness and unbelief , &c.  I say these do very well agree , and they are both true , for death reigns in every man , and he is in unbelief and ignorance , and in a state of perfect enmity against God ; as he is in the first Adam , yet Christ hath lightened him , and the light of Christ shines in darkness in him , and the darkness comprehends it not , & he is enlightened , that he May be changed from death to life , and from ignorance to knowledge ▪ and though he walk in darkness , and be in blindness , and in a state of enmity , it is because he doth not walk and believe in the light which Christ hath lightened him withal , and in my words there is no disagreement nor contradiction , the darkness is in his own mind , who cannot comprehend the light , nor the words that proceed from it . 

Further , he questions upon my words , of having the witness in themselves of being restored again . first , whether none are restored again , but such as have the witness in themselves ? I answer , all that are restored again , and doth believe , hath the witness in themselves ; and none doth believe , nor are restored , but they have the witness of it . Secondly , he queries , whether all are restored , but some want the witness in themselves ? I answer , all are not restored , nor doth believe , and such wants the witness in themselves , that are not restored to God , but them that are restored wants it not . And again ▪ he queries , whether the light which is in all , is sufficient , without any thing further of grace superadded , to bring up every man to believe in Christ , & c ? I answer , the light which every man is lightened withal by Christ , is sufficient to bring up every man to believe in Christ , that loves the light and walks in it , and unto such is grace added and increased daily ; for as every man improves the measure of the gift of God , so it is increased , the light is increased , grace is increased , faith is increased , but still the light of Christ in itself is sufficient . 

Again , from my words , to wit , the spirit is given to be the guide and rule of life to the children of God ; from whence he queries , whether the spirit is so given to be the guide and rule of life to the saints , that they have no more need to attend upon the scriptures ? I answer , it is promised , that the spirit shall lead into all truth ; and such doth own the scriptures , but not as their teacher ; for the anointing dwells in them , and they need no man to teach them , but as that anointing teacheth all things , and they have no need of the scripture to teach them , for all the children of God are taught of God , and needs not any other teacher , nor needs not to say one to another , know the Lord ; and yet all such doth own the scriptures to be the testimony of that which they believe , and have received . Again , from my words , to wit , the light of Christ in every one shall give testimony to the truth of what i spoke , unto which i do commend myself ; from this he queries , can these be witnesses to me , and of the truth in me , who are ignorant of the life and power of the creator , &c. who are following the counsel of their own hearts which are evil , & c ? I answer , yes , the light of Christ in such shall judge ▪ one day , and to it i commend myself , and by it one day shall be approved , though now the wicked hate the light , yet doth it witness against them , and for us , that we are of God , though its true they cannot judge between light and darkness , between truth and error , yet the light in them which shines in their darkness , doth judge and put a difference ; and when the book of conscience is opened , it shall justify us , and condemn our enemies . 

Again , he queries , whether i make the holy ghost and the eternal spirit two ? I answer no , they are one , neither do i seem to make them two , it is want of knowledge in him , who cannot understand , but raiseth objections where there is no cause . 

Again , from my words , this is acceptable and well-pleasing to God , above all words and outward conformity , &c. from this he questions , whether the doing the greater things of the law is acceptable , where the less are neglected ? I answer , no ; for every tittle of the law , less and greater , must be fulfilled by Christ in us , in whom we are accepted ; and thus i have returned a few words to the consideration of persons , and particularly the persons of Draton , and the country thereabouts , to whom i direct my speech , thus , 

All ye persons who are scattered , as sheep without a shepherd , and knows not Christ the everlasting shepherd , to lead you & to rule you ; cease , oh cease from all your teachers without you , who are dumb shepherds , which doth not gather you to God ; such are they that preach for hire , and divine for money , and that takes gifts and rewards for preaching , who through covetousness , by feigned words doth make merchandise of souls ; such do keep you always learning , and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth under their teachings ; your souls are starved under them , and you perish for want of true knowledge , and death reigns amongst you , and many are in the broad way that leads to destruction , but few in the strait way that leads to life ; and iniquity , and wickedness abounds amongst you , and like teachers , like persons ; for from the least of them , even unto the greatest of them , every one is given to covetousness , jer. 6. 13. great ignorance hath blinded your minds , and great darkness is over your hearts , and your teachers doth deceive you , and they cause you to err , and you give your money for that which is not bread , and your labour for that which doth not profit , even as the persons of Israel did , so do you , and in their transgressions do you walk , and your teachers are in the steps of the Pharisees , they are called of men Master , as the Pharisees were ; they stand praying in the synagogues and temples , as the Pharisees did ; and they have the chief seats in the assemblies , as the Pharisees had , and they even shut the kingdom of heaven against men as the Pharisees did , and will not enter in themselves , nor suffer them that would ; cease from all your outward priests , and hearken to the voice of the Lord , which breaks down that nature which is contrary to God , and raiseth up the seed which is heir of God's kingdom , & turns your minds to the light in you which Christ hath lightened you withal , which light shines in your consciences , and convinces you of your evil deeds , it reproves you for vain words and ungodly speeches , it will let you see what your hearts goes after , and what your love goes out unto , and if you love that , it will lead you to Christ , and he will be revealed in you to teach you , and to give you the witness of peace and reconciliation with God , the light is your eye by which you May see God , it will lead you out of all idolatrous worships and works , and from your false worships , which is abomination to the Lord ; and you must be converted and changed into a new nature , and you must put off the old man & his works , before you can worship God aright , for he is worshipped in spirit and in truth only ; and such the Lord is now seeking to worship him ; therefore cease from your steeple-house-worship , which is in the traditions of men , and not in the spirit of the Lord ; and that worship must be confounded , for its root is corrupted , and its branches will wither , and the breath of the Lord is kindled against it ; if you love the light of Christ and walk in it , there is your teacher ; and if you hate it , there is your condemnation . 

The next day after the dispute , this was written , and sent in a little time after to Draton , and up and down that ways . 

Richard goodgrom , 

Friend , hath not thy ignorance , folly , and wickedness towards me now appeared , and is it not made manifest in the sight of many persons ? And now thou Mayst cease to boast , and also to backbite for the time to come , and no more secretly to surmise behind my back , to the raising of unruly spirits against me , so much as in thee was possible : and hadst thou been more crafty , and more subtle , more mischief thou Mightst have done ; but the innocent is delivered , and thou art taken in the snare which thou laidst for another , and false doctrine is proved to proceed forth of thy mouth ; and thou and thy company May be ashamed , when you consider the managing of your work against me , who many times appeared immoderate , in speaking many at once consusedly , and also were unreasonable in not being satisfied with just answers ; but it shows your blindness and unbelief , who cannot understand the truths of the gospel of Christ ▪ but commends against them , though in the end you are forced to confess to them as was sufficiently witnessed that day of the dispute ; and thou in particular who reproachedst me behind my back in divers places where i have heard of it by my friends , whom thou judgedst had not been so , jet they have discovered the naughtiness of thy heart both in the country and in the city : thou hast given forth that i had preached false doctrine , and such like wicked reproachful backbiting language behind my back , not like a man faithful to God and thy neighbour , but one that hath surmised evil against the harmless : and thou Mayest remember , all these things which thou objectest against , who would have made a great matter of them against me , yet are they sufficiently proved to the understanding of many honest persons . And if thou and thy company will be blind , it is because you harden your hearts against the truth , and i am clear in the sight of the Lord ; and all shall know that have an ear to hear that what i profess , preach , and practice , is the saving truths of Jesus Christ ; though they May be branded to be heresy by such as thee , who May call light darkness , and darkness light , and put good for evil , and evil or good ; & at a convenient opportunity i May take in hand to prove that thou thyself hast held forth that which cannot be justified by the scriptures , but are condemned thereby . Many things fell from thee in my hearing , which i May object against , and prove the contrary , and i shall not go behind thy back , as thou hast done , to slander thee ; but i shall rest contented , and wait the opportunity to lay open thy nakedness and weakness in the sight of all persons : and whatsoever thou judgest , the scriptures , ( The writings ) and the things written of , is two things . The one is the word of God , but the other is not , and this all sober men confesseth too . Though thou jangle , and twist about it with thy lame arguments , to no purpose at all , except to show thy weakness and folly : and also no man is justified by Christ's righteousness , until he receive it , and as he receives it , and this thou shalt one day witness ; for though righteousness be in him , sufficient to justify , yet by it art thou nor any man justified , but in the receiving of it , and dwelling in it , and this shalt thou confess to be truth in the day of the Lord : and in the mean time let me bear thy false censure in calling this heresy . And also a man May be tempted to sin , and there May be evil motions to him ; yet he not being overcome of the temptation , not consenting to the motion of sin , it is no sin unto him , neither shall sin be imputed to him , if he commit it not ; but he that commits sin , though he profess never so much of justification , yet for his sin shall he be condemned , and this shalt thou witness in the day of judgement . Also that there is a perfection attainable in this life , even to be perfect and without sin in Christ Jesus : and this i affirm to be the truth of the gospel , and that wherein the faith of God's persons standeth ▪ and though thou madest a twisting & a wrangling against it , yet it is too strong for thee , and in thy wisdom and thy arguments , is thy folly and thy weakness seen , and truth stands over thee , and thou canst not it nor me reprehend ; and also that some of the scriptures was spoken to the world , and not to the saints , this i also have sufficiently proved , and thou art not able to detect it , and all thy snarling in opposition to these things is confounded , and thy arguments made without effect ; and all whose eyes are opened , sees thee to be of too short a measure , and of too weak a capacity to understand the deep things of God which is hidden from thine eye , and them thou savourest not in that wisdom ; though thou hast the words ▪ yet thou art ignorant of the life , and the life is in dominion over thee ▪ and to it must thou submit , and lay down thy crown ; and from thee am i hidden in that life and truth which i do possess : and though i be as a deceiver , yet am i true : and though i be slandered and reproached , and back-bited by thee , yet it is for Christ Jesus sake , and for his truth's sake , and not as an evil doer . But friend , learn more wisdom then to judge a man before thou hear him , or to condemn the matter before thou hear the proof of it ; for by these things thou hast not gained a good report , but God condemns thee for it , & men sees thy shame in it , and the burden of it one day shalt thou bear , even then and all that own thee in these things . 

And now thy spirit is tried , and it is found too light , and cannot stand in judgement , for it is unfavoury : and though separate from the world in appearance , yet is thy spirit of the world , and reacheth not the knowledge of the things that are eternal ; but art imagining in thy mind , not being guided by that spirit which gave forth the scriptures , and so thy konwledge is natural , and cannot contain spiritual things : therefore friend , come down to God's witness in thee , the light which shows thee sin , and convinces thee of evil , that light is thy teacher if thou love it , and thy condemnation if thou hate it . I have divers particulars against thee at a convenient season , to manifest thy folly and weakness by them ; and what ever thou judge me , i am a friend to thy soul . 

E : Burrough . 

Richard goodgroom held forth at the dispute at Draton the 18. day of the 11. month , 1657.  

He said the letter was the word ; and by letter he said he meant the thing contained in the scriptures : and when i said i had the letter in my hand , meaning my bible , but not the thing signified ; he said , but i had the thing signified : and he said , persons were justified by Christ , excluding the new birth and the work of sanctification ; and Christ justified sinners as sinners ( That is ) while sinners remaining in sin . 

At justice fortescues house , in the year 1656. he did deny that any was converted to God by a light within ▪ and then asked if it was not that same light which converted , which gave the knowledge of God , and they confessed yea : and yet did deny that the light within converted to God , though i showed them that scripture , 2 cor. 4. 6. which did confound the deceit . 

At Uxbridge one time he said , Christ needed not to have come to have judged the world , for there was sin enough in the world to judge it before he came . Then i asked if sin judged the world , and he answered yea ; and he said they were in the covenant of God , spoken of nehem. 9 which turned the law of God behind their backs . 



The end . 














