An admonition to all lying brethren , or a cure for the times . showing the beginning , folly , unworthiness and danger of lying . 

psal. v.vi.  

thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing : the Lord well abhor both the bloodthirsty and deceitful man . 

Micah vi . Xi.xii.xiii . 

Shall i Count them pure with the wicked balances , and with the bag of deceitful weights ? 

For the rich men thereof are full of violence , and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies , and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth . 

Therefore also will i make thee sick in smiting thee , in making thee desolate because of thy sins . 



London , printed for j. p. 1642.  

The best cure of the times . 

Amongst other signs and predictions of the last days , that of St. Paul is remarkable , 2 tim. 3.  this know also , that in the last deyes perilous times shall come . 

for men shall be lovers of their own selves , covetous , boasters , proud , blasphemers , disobedient to parents , unthankful , unholy , without natural affection , truce-breakers , false accusers , incontinent , fierce , despisers of those that are good , 

traitors , heady , high-minded , lovers of pleasure , more than lovers of God , 

having a form of godliness ; but denying the power thereof , from such turn away , &c.  how well the rest of those qualities agree with these times , let others judge and consider . I shall only speak of that general and horrible sin of lying and false accusation . 

Lying was the first occasion of all evil in the world , when the devil persuaded the woman that they should not die . And as to mankind , so it is a sore judgement upon a nation , when God suffers them to be carried away with the spirit of delusion , with the making and loving of lies . It hath been the opinion of some , that if lying were laid aside but for one month , this kingdom's peace ( With God's mercy ) Might be renewed , and if truth were once set forward , peace would presently meet and kiss it . And truly they do not speak impertinently , for if dissension be compared to a fire , then lying is that which blows the coals , and makes up the blaze , and is the only practice of those that thrive and grow fat by the ruin of others ; that instead of quenching the fire , warm their hands at it , and say , a ha , i am warm , i have seen the desired fire ! Some divines have distinguished them into three kinds , a merry lie , an officious lie , a pernicious lie . 

A merry lie , is when we lie for our own or others' pastime , without any other intention or harm ; i can rebuke this in no better words than those of the apostle , abstain from all appearance of evil ; and with that of the wiseman , we must not offend , and say it was in sport : and since God ( With•ut any distinction ) hath threatened the destruction of all lies , we must not allow ourselves liberty in any . 

An officious lie , is when a man for the excuse or advantage or commendation of his friends , shall exceed the bounds of truth . St. Austin was so curious in this point , that when he had spoken some words of his deceased friend , which Might seem to be but an high expression or rhetorical compliment ; he had said , that his soul and his friend's soul were but one soul , that his life was tedious to him after the death of his friend , because he would not live by halves ; and yet for the same reason he feared to die , least in him his friend should totally perish . yet afterwards in his book of retractations , he recanted this speech as too lavish and affected . By this you see , what a lively and deligate feeling good men have of the least over-lashing in this kind . 

A pernicious lie , is when a man out of malice and injurious intent , shall maintain a lie to the damage of an other man's honour , life , or fortune , and that sometimes seconded with an oath . And as there is no sin that strikes so dangerously at God and men , and a man's own soul as a false oath in trial of truth ; so of all sins , it should be least supposed among men , no man being properly guilty of it , that did not forthwith turn into a devil ; for how can he otherwise choose that adds perjury to lying , and like Judas kisses the holy gospel and betrays it . Let all good men take advise by this , to set a door of strength and closeness before their lips , and let nothing but truth open them , and to be wary and circumspect where they speak every truth ; for goodness lies too open to treachery , because as they intend no harm , so they suspect none , he that loves truth , May fear falsehood , there May be false brethren that counterfeit religion and discredit it . Amongst many other properties of a Puritan , King James makes lying to be one , in his second book called basilicon doron , or the kingly gift presented and dedicated to his son , as his last will and testament , in these words , 

take heed therefore my son of these Puritans , the very pests of the church and commonwealth , whom no deserts can oblige , neither oaths nor promises bind , breathing nothing but sedition and calumnies , aspiring without measure , railing without reason , and making their own imaginations without warrant of the word , the square of their conscience . I protest before the great God ( and since i am here as upon my last will and testament , it is no place for me to lie in ) that you shall never find among the highlanders or border thieves greater ingratitude and more lies and viler perjuries , than among these phanaticke spirits ; and suffer not the principals of them to brook your land , if you list to sit at rest , except you would keep them for trying your patience , as Socrates did an evil wife . and in the page immediately before , i was often calumniated in their popular sermons , not for any vice or evil that was in me , but because i was a King , which to them is the highest evil . 

Therefore if men would not have their religion suspected , and the way of truth to be evil spoken of , if they would be pure in heart , not pure by art ; if they would be those that make godliness their greatest gain , not that make a gain of godliness ; then let them refrain lying as well as swearing . 

But if this lying shall reflict upon sacred majesty , if they shall calumniate it in popular sermons ( As King James ) speaks , and found it by experience ) if they be so presumptuous as to speak evil of dignities , than they May very well own the other part of St.  Judes' description , and i farther refer them to the 2 sam. 16. chap. 12 verse , although evil can have no good reason , yet it is to be considered , whether lying be not the greatest friend , and afford the best countenance and apology to swearing . If frequent lying had not begot a just incredulity , i see no reason , but the word of an honest man Might have passed for an oath . I speak not this to the least excuse of swearing , but to the greater aggravation and damnation of lying , which yields to swearing even so much shelter and defence . 

To prove the malignity of this sin to be the higher , you shall perceive that to promote any cause with lies , argues want of faith , and confidence in God , want of civil faith and trust in men , want of policy , and leaves a suspicion of guiltiness , and want of goodness in the cause . 

First , want of faith in God , if they had any true affiance in the power and protection of God , if they did at all consider that God hath wisdom to instruct , and strength and readiness to assist them , that he can turn round the counsels of men , and make Achitophel politic against himself : if they did seriously believe , that God can overrule the erterprises , and dissipate the affections , and melt and amate the spirits of the strongest opposers of the truth , they cannot so much as pretend to it , that go to promote it by lies and forgeries . 

Secondly , next it betrays a want of civil faith and trust in men , if they did not suspect men to be flagging from them , to be wavering and uncertain , if they were not afraid of their friends , they would never use such unworthy means to comfort and keep them up , fides fidem obligat , the way to make a man trusty , is to trust him , and many men have taught others to deceive them , by being afraid to be deceived . Pavor aurilia formidat , fear is affrighted with her own supplies , and suspects the very company that comes to help it : and they want the true strength , that are fain to fortify with lies . 

Thirdly , it betrays want of policy , for though lying for a while ( Like false ware ) be better slee'kt , and glister more , yet truth wears it out . 

Although a lie May get ground at the first going out , yet truth will overtake it , even the dullest at last will find himself to be deceived , and then men will think them most odious and detestable that have beguiled them . 

Though it May seem a trick of worldly policy to fetch in prosolites , yet at length they gain this gift amongst men to be mistrusted when they deal plainly , and not to be believed when they speak truth , and so truth and honesty prove the best policy . there is a great deal of slavery in a bad cause ; it is a miserable and wretched thing to lie and flatter , and thank , and crouch , and fawn upon every one , not to dare to offend any , and yet to suspect all , that they will not be faithful to them , that are themselves unfaithful : they fear men are falling off , and therofore they fly to this poor refuge to keep them together . 

Lastly , lying leaves a suspicion and guiltiness and weakness in the cause : i like the fancy of the poet well , where he s•yes , that lying and spreading of false alarms and rumours amongst the vulgar , is a sign of guiltiness . Criminibus terrere novis hinc spargere voces , 
In vulgum ambiguas , & quaerere conscius arma . 


They make new treasons , and spread false alarms , 
And when themselves are guilty , take up arms . 


lying argues weakness in the cause , and in the person , and therefore every true soldier abhors it . Some give these two reasons why the lie should be so hateful to a soldier . First , because it argues his cause to be such as he ought not to dare to die in , and therefore he is fain to maintain it with lies . Secondly , because it shows him to be a coward , that he is afraid of men , and dares be only valiant and presumptuous with God . Therefore let men think of lying as meanly as they will , let them invent it as readily , and set it out as plausibly , and disperse it as licentiously as they please , yet there is a fearful doom upon it , they shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven , they shall be reckoned amongst dogs , and murderers , and idolaters , rev. 22.15 . For without are dogs , and sorcerers , whoremongers , and murderers , and idolaters , and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie . but if they shall plainly declare themselves to have no fear of God before their eyes , and that wotldly respects only move them , then let them consider that they shall not be believed when they speak truth : that time is the wisest of all and will discover them , and then they will be odious to them whom they have deluded , that falsehood May get strength enough to ruin itself and others , but never long to flourish and establish itself . 

That although lying May hold up the flag and display false colours for a while , yet truth will have the victory . 

Magna est veritas & praevalebit . 


The cause that 's propped with lies must surely fail , 
Strong is the truth , at length it will prevail . 


Finis . 














