Witchcraft cast out from the religious seed and Israel of God . And the black art , or , nicromancery enchantments , sorcerers , wizards , lying divination , conjuration , and witchcraft , discovered , with the ground , fruits , and effects thereof : as it is proved to be acted in the mystery of iniquity , by the power of darkness , and witnessed against by scripture , and declared against also , from , and by them that the world scornfully calleth Quakers . 

Showing , the danger thereof , that it May be avoided , by all that fear God , as they will answer it in the great and terrible day of the Lord , for he is utterly against those abominations and wicked practices , and those that hold them up , are upholders of the devil's kingdom , therefore a warning to you all for going to wizards for counsel , for you go from God , to the devil , that go to take counsel of a wizard . 

therefore thus saith the Lord , see that there be no witchcrafts amongst you , there shall not he found amongst you any that useth divinations , nor any observer of times , or an enchanter , nor a witch , nor a charmer , nor a consulter with familiar spirits , nor a wizard , nor a necromancer , for all that do those things are an abomination unto me saith the Lord : 

deut. 18. 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14. ver. 

regard not them that have familiar spirits , neither seek after wizards , to he defiled by them , for that which defileth or worketh abomination shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven : 

read levit. 19 31.  Rev. 21. 27. v.  

Also , some things to clear the truth from reproaches , lies and slanders , and false accusations , occasioned by Daniel Bott and his slander-carriers , which Daniel is a member to the water baptised persons , of which accusations cast upon the truth by him and his slander-carriers , truth hath cleared itself and cast out the slanders and false accusations , amongst them from whence they came , there they do remain , one truth stands clear as by this farther do appear : read and understand . 

Written in Warwickshire , the ninth month , 1654.  As a judgement upon witchcraft , and a denial , testimony and declaration against witchcraft , from those that the world reproachfully calleth Quakers . 

London , printed for Giles . Calvert at the black spread-eagle at the West end of Paul's . 1655 

To the readers and hearers of this . 

All persons everywhere , take head of going to wizards for counsel , now that you are forewarned , and the mystery of it is to you in brief laid open and discovered , as you May read in this ensuing treatise : and all you that have gone to any wizards , in your life time past , go to the market crosses , and declare there openly against them , and their craft , that you May cast off the gild of the heinous sin , least it remain upon you for ever , and you perish and die in that wickedness , unrepented of , and so be cast into the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone , prepared for sorcerers and wicked ones , isai. 30. 33.  Mat. 25. 41.  Rev. 21. 8.  Rev. 20. 9 , 10 , 15.  

And all you that have been to inquire at wizards , you are gone out of the counsel of God , and the way to turn in again is to declare against that craft openly , to be of the devil , which wizards live in , and utterly to abhor it for ever ; and if you do so : you cast off the gild , which otherways you May be cast off from God , that do not repent of it , and turn from it , and declare against it , that other , May hear and fear , and take warning also , least you and they perish , and go down into the pit : to the light of God in all your consciences , i speak that which checks and reproves you in secret for the evil of your doings , that with it your memories May be quickened , and see if it did not question you secretly in your conscience , before you went to inquire at a wizard , and would not have had you to have gone , and after any of you had been , for counsel at a wizard , the light of God in your consciences would check and reprove you in your consciences afterwards for it , and tell you that you had been from God , to take counsel of the devil in a wizard , and the light in your consciences will still accuse you for it , except you go , and declare against it , and cast it off , you will be in danger to perish . And all now that you are warned , take heed of sinning wilfully against light or grace received , if you do read your reward . heb. 10. 26 , 27.  

R. f.  

The black art , or , nicromancery enchantments , sorcerers , lying divinations , wizards , and conjurations , magicians , and witchcrafts discovered , to be of the devil , and to be acted out of the power of darkness , in the mystery of iniquity , according to the workings of the Prince of darkness , the Prince of the power of the air , the spirit that ruleth in the children of disobedience , the familiar spirit , that acteth in the devil's instruments according as it is written , and proved by scripture , &c.  

The witchcrafts is acted in that nature which is accursed from God , and in the seat of darkness , is wickedness and mischief invented : and the witches and sorcerers , enchanters , and devisors of lies , and wizards were in that seed , that was cast out and accursed from God , and they were of the power of darkness , and were acted by the spirit of the devil , according to the working of the Prince of darkness , and King of the bottomless pit , in the working of the mystery of iniquity , with signs and lying wonders , and all deceiveableness of unrighteousness , in the sorcery , witchcraft , and the abominations which God was and is against , and all those that act in those sorceries and abominations shall not enter into the kingdom of God , but be cast into the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone , which is the second death : gal. 5. 19 , 20 , 21.  Rev. 22. 15.  Rev. 20. 10 , 15.  Rev. 21. 8 , 27.  

At the meeting at Tamworth , upon the 2. day of the ninth month . 1654. one Nicholas Greaton , which came to resist the truth , with much violence that day , and once before , who taketh upon him to be a teacher of a company of persons towards Lichfeild side , was proved to be one that telleth destinies , and useth lying divinations for money , and took their money for telling them lies , about goods that were gone , and thy divinations were false , they came not to pass , according to the enchantments Greaton , and several witnessed against thee openly that day for it , when the power of darkness was discovered , with thy lying wonders , also , at which discovery , the devil in thee was in great rage , who set thee in wilful opposition against the truth at two several meetings , to oppose the truth that discovered deceits , and thy deeds of darkness , and deceiveableness of unrighteousness , with thy lying wonders , and false prophecies , that were acted and declared , and devived for money , and were false , in that thou said , as it were proved against thee , and thy sorceries , and lying divinations , by several that day , wherein thou wast discovered , and the power of darkness , by which thou art acted : and thou labouredst by the power of darkness , to have cast out the truth , that opposed thy deceits : but truth being raised up in the power of the holy ghost , thou couldst not , but wert further laid open , and discovered by it , that the scriptures thereby Might be fulfilled , for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness , or what union hath light with darkness , 2. cor. 6. 14 , 15. which darkness acted thee forth in violence against the truth to resist it , as sorcerers , diviners , magicians , astrologers , and stargazers aforetime in all ages , because truth declares against the deeds of darkness , and lying divinations , as it did that day at Tamworth , against thine Greaton , who like Jannes and Jambres , and also the enchanters and sorcerers , and diviners , and conjurers , wizards and magicians of Pharaoh withstood Moses , when he went by the true power of the Lord into Egypt for the accomplishing the work that God was about ; then the devil's instruments , sorcerers , enchanters and wizards , that were acted by the power of darkness , and used witchcraft and lying wonders , they withstood Moses , and Pharaoh's heart was hardened against him , because he harkened not to the messengers of God , that were in the light , and endued with the power of God , but he took counsel of the wizards , black artists , and magicians of Egypt , that wrought signs and lying wonders , by the power of darkness , to deceive withal , as it is written , and when Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded them by his power , the magicians and wizards by their sorceries , cast a mist to blind the eyes of persons withal , that were in darkness , as they were , and by their witchcrafts wrought their lying wonders , to deceive withal , and resisted the truth of God , and the power of God acted , by his servants . exod. 7. 19 , 20 , 21 , 22.  

And that wicked spirit in thee Nicholas Greaton , sought to harden the people's heart against the truth , at Tamworth , who was there discovered to be a fortune teller , or an enchanter , a wizard that tells persons lies for money , when their goods are wanting , and other things in thy enchantments and lying divinations , which did not prove true , as several did witness against thee , and thy lying divinations that day , after that thou stoodst up a while to have maintained thy craft , sorcery , or lying divination by scripture , till truth cut thee out of them , and thy folly was laid open , and that scripture was fulfilled by thee , that day , who came of set purpose , to resist the truth : and withstood it , as janne , and Jambres withstood Moses , but thy folly was made manifest to men , as theirs was , that withstood the truth that day at Tamworth , till thy folly was made manifest , as theirs was made manifest , as it is written , and witnessed also . Read 2. tim. 3. 8 , 9  

And when thy sotcery , and lying divinations , and witchcrafts were discovered that day , thou wouldst have justified it by scripture , but couldst not , for they that spoke forth the scriptures , were not sorcerers nor enchanters , ( Nor diviners of lies like thee , ) but declared and witnessed against such practices , and the plagues is due to all witches and wizards , and diviners of lies , and those that join with them , as it was with them that joined to Baal Peor , to serve other gods , numb 15. 1. to the 10.  And the Lord drove out the nations , that did use such enchantments , sorceries , and witchcrafts , and it was and is an abomination to the Lord , and they that do such things , shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of God , but be cast into the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone , as it is written and witnessed . gal. 5. 19 , 20. 21  Rev. 22. 15.  Rev. 20. 10 , 15.  Rev. 21. 8 , 27.  

Thou broughrst in a place of scripture to have proved thy sorceries and lying divinations , which was this : and God said , let there be lights in the firmament of heaven , to divide the night from the day , and let them be for signs and for seasons , and for days and years . gen. 1. 24.  

That was nothing at all to prove sorcery and enchantments ( Thou beast ) God did never say that by them they should use enchantments , and lying divinations , and cast figures , and tell fortunes , as sorcerers and witches , and black artists , necromancers , wizards , that do divine lies , which thing God abhors ; and all liars and diviners for money , like thee . Read deut. 18. 10 , 11.  But God set the stars in the firmament of heaven , to praise him , and to be for lights upon the earth , and God made two great lights , the greater light to rule the day , and the lesser light to rule the night , he made the stars also , and God set them in the firmament of heaven , to give light upon the earth , and not for witches to cast figures , and jyars to divine for money by them , but he set them to rule over the day , and over the night , and to divide the light from the darkness , and God saw that it was good , as it is written and witnessed . gen. 1. 15 , 16 , 17 , 18.  

Secondly , the sun , moon and stars were set in the firmament of heaven , to know the regiment or government thereof , and to hold forth the wisdom of God , to praise him in the host of heaven , in his wondrous works , above the earth , and not for fortune-tellers and enchanters to divine for money by them , as wizards , ( And thou diviner of lies , ) wouldst have them : let the scriptures be witness against thee , and the stargazers , wizards , and all that divine for money thereby : who would have the scriptures to bear thee out in that which they witness against thee , for acting contrary to them . 

Thirdly , the stars were not set in the firmament for such as thou art , to tell destinies or fortunes by , nor to divine lies for money by , nor to cast figures by , to cast a mist before people's eyes , to deceive them by witchcrafts as wizards do , that take people's money for false dreams , and lying divinations : and as thou sorcerer and perverter of the scripture wouldst have them , but the stars were set , to give light , and to know the noble works of God in them , and by them in their covenant , as they stand and keep their course , and to hold forth the wisdom of God in the firmament of heaven , and also that man Might praise him for his noble acts , and as it is written in the book of psalms , oh , give thanks unto the Lord of Lords , for his mercy endureth forever , ( To his own host ) oh , give thanks to him that by wisdom made the heavens , for his mercy endureth for ever ; oh , give thanks to him that made the great lights , for his mercy ( To his ) endureth for ever , the sun to rule the day , and the moon and the stars to rule the night , for his mercy endureth for ever , and they were not set to divine lies by , and cast figures , to tell fortunes , so called , and speak lying divinations by , as thou ( Sorcerer and diviner of lies ) wouldst have them ; the scriptures witness against thee and all wizards , and all that truly fears God will witness with me and the scriptures , against thee and all diviners of lies , such as thou art , that perverts the scriptures . psal. 136. 1 , 2 , 3. to the 10. 2. pet. 3.  

Again , the stars were not set in the firmament to enchant and divine lies to get money by , to make a trade of them , by using divinations as thou ( Star gazer and wizard ) wouldst have them , who thyself art a perverter of scripture to thy own destruction , 2. pet. 3 , 16.  But they were set there for the praise of God , and to hold forth his wisdom in the firmament of heaven , to cause men to praise the Lord , as it is written , praise the Lord , praise ye the Lord from the heavens , praise him in the highest , praise ye him all his angels , and praise ye him all his hosts , praise him sun and moon , praise him all ye stars of light . psal. 147. 1 , 2 , 3.  

It is not said enchant , by the stars , cast figures by the stars , nor tell destinies or fortunes by the stars , neither is it said , when goods are stolen or strayed , go to wizards , they shall tell you of them by the stars , as thou wouldst have it , that art an enchanter , that usest lying wonders , and divine lies for money , and tell persons of those things which never come to pass , and taketh their money for thy lying divinations , as it was proved against thee that day at Tamworth , thou enchanter , stargazer , and diviner of lies , whose rage was great after thy deceit was discovered , and thy evil practice declared against , which the devil in thee would have alleged for by scripture , when the scriptures turn edge against thee , and cut the off thereby , as David cut off Goliah's head with his own sword , that defied the armies of the living God , as thou wert in enmity against the truth , and cried fie upon the servant of the only true God . Therefore thus saith the Lord my God , and the redeemer of Israel his chosen , he that form him from the womb , i , saith he , am the Lord , that maketh all things , that stretcheth forth the heavens alone , that spreadeth abroad the earth by my power , that frustrateth the tokens of liars & maketh diviners mad , ( Like thee Greaton ) read isai. 44. 24 , 25. also to be witness against thee , and such as thou art , and see what shall come upon all enchanters and sorcerers like thee , read isai. 47. 9  For enchanters and sorcerers trust in their wickednesses as thou dost ; and says , none seeth them , thy wisdom which is earthly , sensual and devilish . It hath perverted thee , as it did those that turned after sorceries , that went from the Lord , and turned into the power of darkness , as thou hast done , that professest god in words , and serves the devil in thy actions , and art ready to say in thy heart , i am , and none else , besides me , as such in thy nature did : read , isai. 47. 11.  

Stand now with thy enchantments , and with the multitude of thy sorceries , wherein thou hast laboured and all that are deceived by thee , or any such . Let now the astrologers , the stargazers , ( Like thee ) stand up , and see if they can save them from those things that shall come upon them ; i lament for those that are turned to wizards , astrologers , stargazers , and to a diviner of lies , like thee for counsel ; thus saith the Lord by Isaiah the prophet , and i witness with him , where he saith , you shall be as stubble enchanters , sorcerers , and stargazers , and all that trust in you , and take counsel of you ; the fire shall burn you , and you shall not deliver yourselves from the power of the flame , read isai. 47. 10. 11 , 12 , 13 , 14.  

Pharaoh , he had his magicians ( Or the devil 's wise men or wizards ) that were in familiarity with the devil , and black artists to inquire of , when he was troubled in spirit , but they could not tell him of the things that God was about to do , as it is in gen. the 41.  And it came to pass , that in the morning after Pharaoh had dreamt , that his spirit was troubled , and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt , ( And all the devil 's wise men ) or wizards thereof , black artists or necromancers , that were in the witchcrafts , enchantments or sorceries , and Pharaoh told them ▪ his dream , but there was none of the black artists , magicians , or wizards that could interpret it , because it was concerning the things of God and stood in the counsel of the only true God . Take notice of this ; therefore all that are black artists , the devil 's wise men , witches or wizards , you are but in nicromancery , or the devil's counsel and familiarity only , and knoweth not the counsel of God , nor the things that stands in his counsel , no more than Pharaoh's magicians , witches , necromancers or black artists , enchanters , charmers , consulters with familiar spirits , sorcerers or wizards did , that were ( And all such are ) in the devil's familiarity and counsel only , and not in the counsel of the living God , and woe to them that ( Are in the light , and ) go out to take counsel of the Prince of darkness , and woe , wo , wo to all that go to wizards , to take counsel , and woe to the rebellious children , that take counsel , but not of me saith the Lord : vengeance is the reward of such that do it knowingly , such are rebellious children , and in unity with the Prince of darkness , and the King of the bottomless pit , and guided by the devil's spirit , that go to take counsel of the black artists ▪ necromancers , or the devil 's wise men , enchanters , wizards , sorcerers , and witches , that are in the lying divinations , and in the mystery of iniquity , and know the devil's counsel only , as Pharaoh's magicians and wizards did , ( And not the counsel of God , ) and woe to all that go to wizards , or the devil for counsel , for the things of God that stands in his counsel are hide from them , and all witches and wizards as they were hide from Pharaoh's magicians , who knew the devil's counsel only , and not the counsel of God . gen , 41. from the 1. to the 9 read isai 30. 1. &c. rev. 9 1. 2 , to the 13 rev. 9 20 , 21.  Rev. 21. 8 , 27.  Rev. 10. 1 , 2 , 3. and 7. 8 , 9 , 10. &c. jud. 6 , 7. 2. pet. 2.  , 2 , &c. rev. 22. 14 , 15.  

And Joseph's interpretations of Pharaoh's dreams is no ground for sorcerers , enchanters , and black artists or necromancers , and wizards to divine for money by ; Joseph was not in the power of darkness , but in the power of God , and he did not enchant nor cast figures as wizards do but Joseph he knew the counsel of God by revelation , and nor by divination , for God is against that , and against those that divine for money , and cause the persons to err by their lies , and lying divinations , as thou Greaton didst , and were openly witnessed against for it , woe to thee and all such , for the Lord will frustrate the tokens of liars like thee , and make diviners mad , such as thou art , read jer. 23. 19 , 20.  Mic. 3. 11.  Mic. 5. 12 , 15.  Isai. 44 24 , 25.  

Joseph said that it was God that should give Pharaoh his answer , and he did not cast a figure , nor enter into the enchantments as ( Stargazers , and ) wizards , that divine lies for money , but Joseph he spoke by revelation of God in him , to him , and by him , and not by lying divination or witchcraft , God doth utterly abhor that , and he is against it , and against all diviners or conjurers , and will make them mad , as he hath said . Therefore Joseph's interpretation of Pharaoh's dream by revelation without enchantment , or casting figures , is no ground for stargazers to cast figures , nor for necromancers to conjure and use witchcraft , and raise up the forms of living things by witchcraft , as Pharaoh's magicians , sorcerers , wizards did , to deceive by their lying wonders , as the devil's instruments do , neither was Joseph's interpretation of Pharaoh's dreams any ground for the devil 's wise men or wizards , to tell destinies or fortunes by , as they call it in darkness : for the magicians , sorcerers and wizards could not tell Pharaoh what God was about to do by all their enchantments which was revealed by the Lord to Joseph , without casting figures , and without enchantments that are acted by the power of darkness , in the mystery of iniquity . Therefore silent wizards , consulters with familiar spirits , charmers , black artists or necromancers , that are in the devil's counsel , and all diviners of lies , silent witchcraft , the Lord is against it , and you that act in the mystery of iniquity , ( By the power of darkness ) God will be avenged of you ; take not the scriptures for your cloak or cover , that acteth in such wickedness , you wizards and diviner of lies , God is against you , and all that take counsel of you : woe , woe , woe to you all , and your partakers : gen. 41.  Exod. 7. 12 , 22.  Rev. 9  Isai. 44. 24 , 25.  Isai. 30.  Deut. 18. 10 , 11 , 12. &c. rev. 20. 10 , 15.  

Samuel's telling of Saul of the asses that were gone astray , for which thing God caused Saul to come to Samuel , for the fulfilling of his word that he had spoken to Samuel , concerning the kingdom which was true , and fulfilled according to the word of the Lord , is no ground for that wicked spirit in thee nich. Greaton , to use enchantment and sorcery , to divine lies , and tell persons of goods that are stolen by the devil's servants , for theft is of the devil and witchcraft , and sorcery , and whoredom and lying divinations , and they that do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God ▪ gal. 5. 19 , 20 , 21.  Rev. 20.  And thou ( Sorcerer ) tookst peoples money for thy lying divinations , and thy sayings proved false , as it was witnessed against thee at that meeting at Tamworth that day , and thou wouldst have made this of Saul's coming to Samuel thy cloak or cover for thy sorcery and lying divinations , which will be witness against thee ( And all wizards , enchanters , ) and diviners of lies , as thou art , woe , plagues and vengeance from the Lord is your reward . Thus saith the Lord , ah , i will ease me of mine enemies , and avenge me of mine adversaries . isai. 1. 24.  

The Lord had told Samuel all the things concerning Saul , and it came to pass , and was fulfilled according to the word of the Lord . ( But Samuel did not cast figures , and enchant , and divine lies for money as wizards do ) but it was revealed to Samuel by the word of the Lord , that which he told Saul , and was fulfilled according to the word of the Lord : and no ground ( For you wizards ) to divine lies by for money , as thou Greaton wouldst have it , but thou art discovered , and found to be out of the counsel of God , and in the counsel of the devil , and the mystery of iniquity ( As all wizards ) and diviners of lies and liars are . joh. 8. 44. 2. thes. 2. 9 , 10 , 11 , 12.  And art for the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone , and all sorcerers . rev. 21. 8. that divine lies for money , and are in their enchantments , and lying divinations , and wouldst have had that of Samuel for thy cloak , which doth uncover thee , and leaves the bare , and witnesseth against thee , and such as thou art , and against all wizards , and diviners of lies for money . Now the Lord had told Samuel a day before Saul came , saying , to morrow i will send thee a man , and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my persons : and the Lord told Samuel those thing that he told Saul , and he did not cast figures , nor enchant to know them , as wizards do cast figures , and enchant to divine lies for money ( And all things came to pass ) as Samuel told Saul , according to the word of the Lord . 1. sam. 9 15. to the end 1. sam. 10 chap.  

Therefore silence witches , sorcerers , enchanters , black artists or necromancers , charmers , and consulters with familiar spirits , and wizards that are acted and guided by the spirit of the devil , and are in the power of darkness , mystery of iniquity , and witchcrafts . Let the scriptures alone , and pervert them not with your mucky , dirty , fill thy minds : plagues upon you all that are in witchcrafts , the burning lake is prepared for you , who are under the King of the bottomless pit , vengeance upon you all ; you shall curse your King and your God , and look upward and be driven to darkness , and be fuel for the fire , rev. 9  Rev. 20.  Mal. 4. 1. isa. 8. 19 , 20 , 21.  Rev. 16.  You shall gnaw your tongues for pain , as the vials of wrath are poured forth , vengeance is your reward , read rev. 16. 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14.  Rev. 20. 10.  And thou Greaton that art in the sorceries and lying divinations , as it was proved against thee at Tamworth , who art also a teacher to a company of seduced persons about Lichfield , or in those parts ; let the scriptures alone , i warn thee and charge thee in the presence of the Lord , and make not them thy cloak for thy enchantments , sorceries , and lying divinations , plagues upon the wicked in flames of fire , that trust in lying vanities also , as well as thee : ( Silence all wizards , let the scriptures alone , and make not them your covers for sorcery ) you have no part in any thing spoken of in them , but the plagues and the burning lake . reu. 21. 8.  Let the scriptures alone , wizards and enchanters , i warn you and charge you in the presence of the Lord , vengeance is your reward in flames of fire , and woe to all that are seduced ( By you ) and that go to take counsel of a wizard , and an enchanter , or a witch , or a charmer , or a consulter with familiar spirits , or a black artist , or nicromancer : the living , dreadful , powerful , mighty God of heaven and earth , he is utterly against that necromancy , or black art , plagues upon it all , woe and vengeance upon all that hold it up , and that go to take counsel of it , and wizards , the law of the dreadful God forbids it , and the almighty God doth utterly abhor it , and it is commanded to be avoided by the Israel of God , for such witchcrafts were practised amongst those nations that knew not God , and it was and is an abomination unto the Lord : therefore the Lord spoke to Moses to speak to the children of Israel , to command them to avoid it ; and saith he , when thou art come into the land which the Lord thy god giveth thee , thou shalt not learn to do after those abominations of those nations : there shall not be found amongst you any that useth divinations , which thou Greaton dost , that divinest lies for money ( As wizards do ) plagues upon thee , thou art to be holden accursed , that art in the abominations , and out of the doctrine of God and of Christ . gal. 1. 8 , 9 1. cor. 16. 22.  And again saith the Lord by Moses to Israel , in the command to avoid necromancy , or black art , or witchcraft , saith he there shall not be found amongst you an enchanter nor witch , plagues in flames of fire upon such . 2. thes. 2. 12.  Rev. 16. 9 , 10 , &c. neither shall there be amongst you saith the Lord a charmer , nor a consulter with familiar spirits , nor a wizard , nor a nicromancer , for all that do these things are an abomination unto me saith the Lord , and because of those abominations the Lord drove out the nations that used those things : for saith the Lord unto Israel , those nations which thou shalt possess , harkened unto observers of times , and unto diviners , and wizards , and such like , but as for thee , the Lord thy god hath not suffered thee so to do , and thou shalt not suffer a witch to live , but thou shalt walk before me , and be perfect ( Speaking to his own persons , that were in covenant with him ) for saith he i am the Lord thy God , as May be read . deut. 18. 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14.  Also read , exod. 22. 18  Mic. 5. 12. &c.  

Nabuchadnezzar , Pharaoh , and the heathen , that knew not the only true God , had their magicians , sorceries , enchanters , or wizards , to inquire at , and plagues was the portion of such : woe unto all you that go to wizards or charmers , or consulters with familiar spirits , or diviners , and enchanters , or sorcerers , or conjurers , or witches , or ( The devil's wise men ) wizards to take counsel , you are one with them , in the upholding of them , you ought to have no fellowship with unfruitful works of darkness , but rather to reprove them , and declare against them : for it is light that discovers darkness : and the children of light are commanded to declare against the works of darkness : read ephes. 5. 11 , 12 , 13.  You that go to wizards , you hold them up , and so are upholders of the devil's kingdom ( And except you come out from them , and declare against them , you shall partake of the plagues with them ) you that go to take counsel of wizards , you go from God to the devil , and the light of God in your consciences will tell you the same , and reprove you for it in secret , and woe to all that do so , read , isa. 30. &c. Pharaoh he had his magicians , sorcerers , enchanters , or wizards , to take counsel of and by their black art , or the power of darkness , and necromancy , or witchcraft , they could by their enchantments or conjurations raise up the forms of living things , and they were in the enchantments and in the witchcrafts , of whom Pharaoh took counsel , and so of the devil , and plagues was his portion , and vengeance from God and utter destruction . exod ▪ 7. 11 , 22.  Exod. 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , and 12 chap.  

And Nabuchadnezzar dreamt dreams wherewith his spirit was troubled , and his sleep broke from him , and he commanded to call the magicians , and the astrologers , and the sorcerers ( And wizards ) which he had to take counsel of , dan. 2. 1 , 2.  

But because the thing stood in the counsel of God , they could not tell him of it , that were but in the devil's counsel only , as sorcerers ( And wizards ) are , for which he was wrath with them . dan. 2. 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12.  

And Daniels interpretations of the dreams , and reading and interpreting the writing by the spirit of the Lord . dan. 2. 19 , 20. to the 24.  dan. 4. which was hide from the black artists and astrologers , stargazers , and wizards , sorcerers , and enchanters , and diviners of lies ( Like thee ) that tells persons of things which are wanting , and destinies , and such like , and take their money for it , and were lying divinations , woe to such ( Wizards and diviners of lies as thou art ) that would have the scriptures for thy cloak , silent deceit , Daniels interpretations by revelation is no ground for necromancy , plagues upon all necromancers , black artists , witches , sorcerers , enchanters and wizards , and diviners of lies ; the devil and his angels are for the lake ; go ye cursed into hell , and all that forget God , to take counsel of you , psal. 9 17.  Isai. 30 , 33.  Math. 25. 41.  Rev. 20. 10.  

Then thou Greaton and diviner of lies , thou seemedst to have had that prophecy of Christ for thy cover , and to prove thy art , till i cut thee out of that , where he prophesied and said , imediately after those days , the sun shall be darkened , and the moon shall not give her light , and the stars of heaven shall fall , and the powers of heaven shall be shaken , which is as i said , a prophecy of the coming of Christ to gather his elect from the four winds , mat. 24. 29 , 30 , 31. which thou knowest nothing of , by thy sorceries and lying divinations , that art in the reprobation , professing , God in words , but to every good work abominable and reprobate , who art an inventor of evil things , and filled with wickedness in the reprobation . tit. 1. 16.  Rom. 1. 28. to the end , and that of Joel , the 2. 30 , 31 , 32. is also no cover for thee , but a witness against thee , which is a prophecy of the great day of the Lord , wherein thou and all such shall cry bitterly . zeph. 1. 14. &c. and shalt be rewarded with flames of fire . 2. thes. 1. 8 , 9  Thou sorcerer and perverter of scripture , and as Elimas the sorcerer was , thou full of all subtlety , and child of the devil , and enemy of all righteousness , that perverts the right ways of the Lord , as he did . act 13. 6. 7 , 8 , 9 , 10. 2. thes. 1. 12.  

Woe to thee thou sorcerer and perverter of the right ways of the Lord , thou false prophet , that divines ( Or conjures ) for money , and art found amongst the enchanters ( Or wizards and stargazers ) that tells destinies and fortunes , ( And casts figures , ) and thou tellest of things that are gone , and such like practices , by a spirit of divination , that brings thee in gain , and thou wast witnessed against for it , at thee meeting at Tamworth , and proved to be a diviner of lies for money , and those things came not to pass according to thy enchantments neither , but proved lying divinations , and when thou couldst not maintain by scripture , which thou labouredst to have done , thou saidst thou wouldst give him his money , again ( Thou beast and wizard ) thou art naked and bare , thy covers will not hide thee , woe to thee , and woe to all wizards , and ( Such as thou art ) plagues is your portion , truth clears itself of you ) and of thee , who saidst thou wouldst follow the servants of the Lord , and weary them out , &c.  But thy lying divinations fails thee , who art of thy father the devil , as those were , spoken of in John , 8. 44.  And the lake is prepared for such . Read , rev. 21. 8.  and all liars and sorcerers are for the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone , which is the second death : with the light which changeth not art thou seen and discovered , and comprehended , and from God and from Christ condemned , and all witches , sorcerers , enchanters , charmers , black artists , or necromancers , evil inventors , conjurers , and wizards , that are in the power of witchcrafts , and in the mystery of iniquity , the beast and the false prophet also , and the devil that deceived them are all for the lake ; howl , howl witches , wizards , that peep and mutter plagues upon all such in flames of fire for ever and ever , and the devil that deceived them , where the beast and the false prophet are , thither must they go , into the lake of fire and brimstone , and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever : woe , woe , woe to all such , read rev. 20. 9 , 10.  

All persons everywhere , that desires to fear the living God , and serve him , take heed of that wicked spirit in Nicholas Greaton , ( And all wizards ) i warn you and charge you in the presence of the Lord , as you will answer it before the judgement seat of Christ , in the terrible day of the Lord , read Joel , 2. 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17. and zeph. 1. 14 , 15. read also levit. 20 26 , 27. and take heed of going to those that have familiar spirits , or to those that are wizards , as you will answer it before the Lord : now you are warned also , read 18. 10 , 11 , 12.  Thus saith the Lord , regard not them that have familiar spirit , neither seek after wizards , to be defiled by them , i am the Lord , read levit. 19 31.  You that seek after wizards disobey the Lord , and turn from him , to enter into fellowship with the devil , and take counsel of him in a wizard , and are defiled thereby , and the woe is to such that regard not the counsel of God , where he forbids going to wizards . 

Therefore a warning to you all from the Lord , for harkening to wizards , least you be slain , and die not the common death of men , and least the plagues come upon you , for joining with them , as they came upon those that joined to Baal Peor , ( And the wizards were amongst those cursed persons , whom thy Lord drove out ) deut. 18. 11 , 12.  And those that went out of the counsel of God , joined to Baal Peor , and the anger of the Lord was kindled against them for it , and the Lord said unto Moses , take all the heads of the persons that joined to Baal Peor , that serve other gods , and hang them up before the Lord against the sun , that the fie•ce anger of the Lord May be turned away from Israel , than Moses gave a command to the judges of Israel to slay the men that joined to Baal Peor , and they that went out of the counsel of God , that joined to Baal Peor , were cut off from amongst the Israel of God , and those that died in the plague before it was stayed , for joining unto Baal Peor , were twenty and four thousand , as May be read in numb the 15. from the 1. to the 10.  And those that rebelled , and took not counsel of the Lord , the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up quick , and their houses , and all their goods , they and all that appertained unto them went down alive into the pit , and the earth closed upon them , and they perished from amongst the congregation , and their cry was great when they went down quick into the pit , for their rebellion against the Lord , and there came a fire from the Lord , and consumed 200. and 50. men , for offering incense , that were disobedient to rhe word of the Lord , and there was 14. thousand and 700 died of the plague for their rebellion , numb 16. which were sinners against the Lord , and also against their own souls . Now that you are warned , if you go to wizards , take what followeth , for you sin wilfully against the Lord , and also against your own souls , and the light of God in all your consciences will witness with me , and the scriptures , if you go any more to witches or wizards you are in danger of losing soul and body goods , and all , by the righteous judgements and plagues that May follow you for your rebellion , as those examples that are instanced before you ; read also Jude . 5 , 6 , 7. 2. pet. 2. 4 , 5 , 6.  And when any shall counsel you contrary to the counsel of God that saith regard not them that have familiar spirits , neither seek after wizards , least ye be defiled by them . levit. 19 31.  If any say unto you , seek unto them that have familiar spirits , and unto wizads that peep and mutter , take not their counsel that would have you to do so , as you will answer it , for should not a persons seek unto their god ; and woe to them that take counsel , but not of me saith the Lord , therefore a warning to all that go from God to the devil , by seeking after wizards for counsel , also read , isa. 8. 19  Isa. 30. 1.  

When God was departed from Saul , he went to the devil ( In the witch of Endor ) for counsel , and then was conjuration used to raise the dead , sam. 28.  And Saul died not the common death of men , for he slew himself upon his own sword . 1. sam. 31.  Woe , woe , woe to the wizards , and all that go to take counsel at them , for they go from God to take counsel of the devil , and of sorcerers , witches , that are in the power of darkness and witchcraft , and in the mystery of iniquity , and those who are under the command of the Prince of the power of the air , and the King of the bottomless pit , read rev. 9 even of him whose coming is after the workings of Satan , ( With all the power of darkness ) and with signs and lying wonders , and with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them that perish , that they all Might be damned , who believed not the truth , but had pleasure in unrighteousness . 2. thes. 29. 10 , 11 , 12.  

All you that turn from the light of Christ Jesus in your consciences , which showeth you sin and evil , you turn from the counsel of God , and from the holy command , as Cain did , and erred from the spirit of truth , and turned into the seat of darkness , where witchcraft is hatched , and all evil is invented , and so you entering into union with the Prince of darkness , the spirit that ruleth in the children of disobedience , that turn from the light , into the fear of darkness , you become inventors of evil things , and follow that which is evil , and are filled with wickedness , some with enchantments and sorceries and theft , and some with whoredom and drunkenness , and some with witchcraft and lying divinations ( And lies and sorceries arise ) and witchcraft is of the devil , acted by the seed of the serpent that is in union with the devil , and is given over to work wickednesses , and those creatures also , that are in familiarity with the seed of the serpent , and so captivated by the devil , ( That old sorcerer and witch ) at his will , and see the cause how it enters , and you into the mystery of iniquity , whereby you become inventors of evil things , by disobeying the light of God in your consciences , is the cause of entering into wickedness and witchcraft , and because they did not like to retain God in their knowledge , therefore he gave them over to a reprobate mind , whereby they become evil inventors , and are filled with deceiveableness of unrighteousness and wickedness , working uncleanness with greediness . Romans , 1. 28 , 29 , 30. &c.  

For this cause the wrath of God is revealed from heaven , for disobedience , and against all unrighteousness , and the unrighteous ones , who hold the truth in unrighteousness , and against all ungodliness of men , because that which May be known of God is manifest in them ; for God hath showed it unto them . rom. 1. 18 , 19  And they received not the counsel of it , after manifestation therefore followeth their condemnation , & the condemnation of the world , joh. 3. 19 , 20 , 21.  And the condemnation of all that love the deeds of darkness , rather than the light , which light is the condemnation of all that hate it , and act contrary to it , and the condemnation of all the wicked , and all that are seated in the power of darkness , and in the mystery of iniquity , and it is also the condemnation of all sorcerers , and enchanters , and conjurers , witches , wizards , black artists , and necromancers , false prophets , seducers , and antechrists , that are in the witchcrafts , and in the abominations , howl all witches , the fire and the lake is prepared for you , and all in your craft , howl , vengeance upon you all that are wizards , the fire and the lake is for you all , and woe to all that take counsel at you , and at wizards , with the light that changeth not are you all seen , to be in the power of darkness , witchcrafts , mystery of iniquity , with the light that comprehends all the world are you comprehended , and from God , and from Christ are you condemned , the sword is drawn , the fire burns , you are all compassed , and the chain is upon your necks , reserved for the judgement of the great day : and for the burning fire , that burneth for ever and ever , rev. 9 1 , 2. to the 13.  rev , 22. 15.  Rev. 21. 8.  Gal. 5. 19 , 20 , 21.  Rev. 20. 9 , 10.  

Some of thy lying divinations that proved false , which thou tookst money for , thou diviner of lies . and perverter of the right ways of the Lord , as is proved by scripture , and now follows more proof against thee by witness , against thy wicked practice . 

First , that William newway of Tamworth went to Nicholas Greaton , to know where he Might buy some wood for his trade , and he told him he Might have some southward , in Warwickshire , about Hounby , and the said William newway sent John Greenwood to the place where Greaton told newway he Might have some , but when Greenwood came at the place he was sent to for that purpose , there was none to be had , and this proved a lying divination , for which the said Greaton took newways money : this John Greenwood of Tamworth witness against thee , thou enchanter and diviner of lies ; John Greenwood 

The second lying divination witnessed against is this : Thomas Tailor of Austrey went to the said Nicholas Greaton , abont a mare that was stolen from his father , and Greaton said it was impossible for him to have her again , and one of tho.  Tailors of Austrey neighbours had a mare stolen the same night , and Greaton said , it was impossible for them to have them again , for he said they were gone notthward , but that proved false , for they were gone westward , and they had them both again , and when Taylor went to Greaton about them , he demanded 12 a piece , because they were 2 several things : but afterwards he would have taken 18 but he would not given him so much , therefore Greaton was very angry with him , because the said tho-tailor that went to him to inquire about the mares that were stolen , would give him no more , and Greaton flung it away , and the man took it up , and ( The man , ) told him he should get it before he had it , and this John Greenwood can witness from Thomas Tailor's mouth : and also rice Healey of Tamworth , he can witness this business of Thomas Tailor's , for he was by at that time : John Greenwood 
Rice Healey Witnesses . 



The third lying divination is this ; Robert Healey of Grindon , did send rice Healey to the said Greaton , to know whether he should have some goods again that were stolen , or no ; and he said he should and withal , Greaton told him that the thieves house stood southward from the man's house that did send to inquire , and the doors opened not into a lane , but into a backside , northward : and he took money for that , and 〈◊〉 he should have his goods again ; but he had not , and that proved a lying divination also . This is witnessed against by Rice Healey and Robert Healey . 


More lying divinations witnessed against , for which the said Nicholas Greaton took money for his deceiveableness of unrighteousness ; John Farmer having great use for money , and having kindred in the North-wales , that had much spare money ; he went to Nicholas Greaton , to know whether he should borrow any of them , and he told him that he Might , upon which account he went : it was above one hundred miles and he spent above twenty shillings , and could borrow none . 

Also two maids , sisters to the said John Farmer declared , that Nicholas Greaton had told them several things , for which he took money of them , and they complained of him to John Farmer , that they were all lies : and the said John Farmer asked him several other questions , for which he demanded four shillings , and railed against him because he had not so much to give him ; saying , that he was so badly paid by those that professed themselves friends , that he thought he should be undone , unless that he left that art : but John Farmer gave him two shillings . These lying wonders , and false practices , and lying divinations , are witnessed against , by John Farmer . 


Written from the spirit of the Lord , by a servant of the Lord ; known and beloved of the Lord , yet hated of the world as unknown , yet well known ; as dying , and yet behold i live ; as chastened , and not killed ; as sorrowful , yet always rejoicing ; as poot , yet making many rich ; 〈◊〉 as having nothing , and yet possessing all things , 2 cor.  chap.  

The new man , the new name ; yet known to the world by one , whom they in scorn call Quaker , but of the divine nature made partaker . Behold , what manner of love is this , that the father hath bestowed on us , that we should be called the sons of God , and now we are the sons of God , therefore the world knoweth us not , because it knew him not : as it is written , 1 John 3. 1.  [ according as his divine power hath given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness , through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and virtue , whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises . ] Therefore can we have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness , but openly declare against them , as it is required and done in obedience to the command of the spirit of truth , 2 pet. 1. 3 , 4. ephes. 5. 11 , 12 , 13. verses . 

Witchcraft , declared , against ( Jndged ) and utterly denied , by those whom the world scornfnlly calleth Quakers , and by this let all that accuse ( Any of ) them of the same , stop their mouth , and be ashamed , for that thing is utterly abhorred ( By the Lord ) and by us who are the Lords , whom the world scornfnlly and reproachfully calleth Quakers , 

Truth clearing itself of reproaches , lies and slanders , and casteth out some false accusations , turning them both from whence they came , into the reproachful and lying generation again , that ( In it , and ) amougst them , the reproachers , liars , slanderers , truce-breakers , slander-carriers , ( And upon the heads of false accusers ) they May remain , which were occasioned by Daniel Bott of armitadge near Polsworth in Warwickshire , one of the water baptised members , that belonged to that company which used to meet at Shittington , in the said Warwickshire . &c.  

Whereas that Daniel bot as abovesaid , came to a meeting ( Of the Lord's persons ) at Troycrosse in Licestershire , and other of the water baptised persons with him to the said meeting as aforesaid ( Some of them received the truth in much love ) and at that time the said Daniel was much tendered ( And several of the baptised persons ) who desired and with his consent also : entreated and earnestly desired those men that the world reproachfully calleth Quakers , whom the Lord sent into these parts , that they would on the first day of the week , next after that : meet with them ( The water baptised persons ) at Shittington , which was then agreed and concluded of , provided that the meeting ( For the men called Quakers as abovesaid ) Might be appointed at another house in Shittington ( And not where it used to be ) that those of that meeting of the water baptised persons that ( Met there as many of them as ) would come to hear them might , and those that were not free to hear them , Might keep their own meeting , because they were tender of them . &c. it was so concluded of at Troycrosse that time , and after that , notice being given of it , there was a pretty company came together , and all met together at that house where the meeting was appointed for the men by the world called Quakers to be at , which were at the meeting that first day at Shittington according to promise , and appointment according to the ordering and disposing of by the spirit and wisdom of the Lord , who stood in his counsel , and to be acted forth and ordered according to his divine power , and the good pleasure of his will , and at the said meeting at Shittington the truth was declared that day ( In much power , to the praise of the Lord , and to the glory of his grace ) and it wrought upon the spirits of many as they then witnessed , and one came from Burton upon treat as it was said , an elder also of the baptised persons ( Of purpose ) to oppose the truth that day , whose folly was made manifest according to that saying in scripture . 2. tim. 3. 8 , 9 but the persons received the truth in so much love ( Some of them , that they and the man of the house spoke unto him , and withal to depart out of the house , which he did ( Though he was an elder of the baptised persons ) and at that time the said Daniel Bott , stood up for to plead for the truth , and against the opposer , to wit the elder of the water baptised persons that came from Burton as aforesaid , and Daniel confessed that day , that he never saw so much into himself ( And his own heart ) as he had and then did since he met with those men ( Whom the world calleth Quakers ) & there was another meeting the next day at Troycrosse again , at which meeting Daniel Bott was much broken into tenderness and wept that tears run down his cheeks , as several can witness , therefore Daniel , that which gave thee a sight of thy sins , and convinced thee of thy evil deeds , and caused thee to confess with tenderness that thou never sawest so much into thyself , as thou didst since thou sawest us , and heardst the truth declared by us , ( Whom the world calls Quakers ) and that which at that present let thee see thy stubborn will , and bridled that rash wild heady nature in thee , and did eternally convince thee , that i own and it shall against thee answer for me and the truth ) which is thy condemnation , the light which thou hast erred from , and an enemy unto the light in thy conscience is my answer , and a witness still against thee and thy deceit , go where thou wilt , and God almighty is judge , to which that in thy conscience shall witness , and in thy condemnation , answer ( Upon thee ) his judgements to be just . also read mal. 3. 5.  Mal. 4. 1.  The same week that the meeting was at Troycrosse as aforesaid , there was a meeting ( Of the Lord's persons ) at Harliston in ( The county ) Staffordshire , and Daniel Bott came thither also , and said to one of the men ( Called Quakers ) that he was his spiritual father in Christ ( And had begotten him again in the gospel ) and said there was many instructors , but there was but few fathers , and said the spirits of the prophets were subject to the prophets , and after the friend by the spirit of the Lord had spoken something to him in exhostation , and his spirit was much subjected , and tender he was then also , as many can witness , and the servant of the Lord ing the danger that Daniel Might fall into if he gave way to the tempter , being convinced and having some opening in his mind , therefore the servant of the Lord did exhort Daniel to watchfulness , ( As Ch•ist Jesus exhorted to watch and pray , least there should be an entering into temptation . math. 26 , 41. but afterwards Daniel not abiding in that which did convince him of the evil of his heart he gave way to his will and the deceit , and so run out into extremes rashly and unadvisedly ( Without the true wisdom ) and entering into the temptation , did evil , and also opened the mouths of evil doers , to speak evil of the truth , and though he did so , and fell of into delusions , error , treachery and deceit , so did Judas when he turned from the light , but destruction was his end , and all who turn from the light which comes from the Lord Jesus , Judas is the way to perdition and destruction , Daniel Bott , the light of Christ in thy conscience , which did convince thee of the evil of thy heart , and did cause thee to confess the same , that light is my witness for the truth against thy deceit , and in thy condemnation remember that in thy life time thou wast warned , who received not the truth with the love of it , as to continue therein , but taketh plagues in thy unrighteousness , as such did which were enemies to the truth as thou art , therefore great is thy condemnation as theirs was ▪ 2. thes. 2. 12. offences must come as it is written in scripture , but woe to thee and them , by whom ye do come , it were better that a millstone were hanged about the necks and be cast into the sea , then to offend one that believes in the Lord Jesus , as thou and such May read . math. 18. 6 , 7. to the truth of this against the deceit that in the conscience shall witness , in the terrible day of the Lord's fierce wrath , revealed from heaven in flames of fire , upon the children of disobedience , who are enemies to the truth of the Lord Jesus , as thou hast read thy condition , 2. thes. 1. 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 answered with that in thy conscience which thou hast backslided from , and disobedient to , but the light is the same that it was , and though thou be'st backslided from it , yet it stands a witness against thee , who hast erred from the truth , and wouldst have overthrown the faith of some , as Hymeneus and Philetus did , but the spirit of truth witnesseth against thee , as it did against them by such as live in the faith of the son of God , as he did which said , none the least he foreknoweth them that are his , and let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity . gal. 2. 20. 2. tim. 2. 17 , 18 , 19 but thou and all such as depart from the light , turns into the iniquity , who art found in that mystery the workers of iniquity , and saith Christ , though ye have prophesied in my name , and be found in the work of iniquity , i will say , i know you not , depart from me you that be workers of iniquity , 2 thess. 2. 1 , 2. to the 13. verse . matth. 7. 12. 23.  Therefore , go ye cursed into hell , prepared for the devil and his angels : for the wicked and ye that forget God , shall be turned into hell : therefore woe to thee , and all such , esa. 3. 11.  Psalm 9 17.  Matthew 25. 41. to the end . 

Therefore , all whose minds are turned with the light towards the Lord Jesus , from whence the light comes ; upon it wait , and in it abide , that ye May be preserved in the grace , and be kept for turning into error and deceit : and as Daniel hath done , who hath turned from the light as Judas did , and so is an enemy to the truth as he was : but though he have so done , who now turns the grace of God into wantonness and lasciviousness : woe from God is his reward and the reward of all such : and though truth have many enemies now , as it ever had , yet truth is the same that it ever was . And though the said Daniel , by turning from the light , maketh shipwreck of faith and a good conscience , as Himeneus and Alexander did that were given over to Satan , ( As he is ) yet some held fast , and doth hold fast faith and a good conscience , in which the mystery of faith is held , praised be the Lord , and truth is the same still , 1 tim. 1. 19 20. 1 colos. 1. 27.  & 1 tim. 3. 9  And though many that had for a time walked with Christ , and because ye though it hard to eat his flesh and drink his blood : and ( Whereupon ) ye forsook him , ( To wit Christ ) and walked no more with him , John 6. to the 6-7 . yet the truth was the same , though ye did back-slide , and ye that knew the word of eternal life , abode then , and so do ye now , John 6. 6. 7. to the end . 

And whereas many slanders hath been cast upon the truth occasioned by Daniel Bott , upon him and his slander-cariers , they are cast , and with them doth remains ( Truth is cleared , and hath cleared itself of them all ) and Daniel the light in thy conscience , which did convince thee , and tend thee for a time , and let thee see the evil that thou hadst done thee ; i desire but the light i own , which thou art backslided from , and an enemy unto ; yet the light changeth not , but is the same ; ( And in thy condemnation , remember thee it will of what against the truth thou hast done , and as was said in that epistle which after was red at thy house amongst them then met , appeareth upon record to witness further for the truth , and against thee and thy deceit . 

Written from and witnessed by and with the spirit of the Lord in his children and servants that are guided thereby ; though unknown , yet well known , and as it was , it is , in the life which the scripture witnesseth to ; and against all ungodliness , and unrighteousness of men , which hold the truth in unrighteousness as thou dost , who by us art witnessed against , Romans 1. 18. 19 28. 29.  Romans 8. 14. 15 , 16.  Gal. 4. 6. 7. 1  John 3 1. 2. 2 cor. 6. 1. 2. to the 15.  John 1. 12. 13. 1 pet. 1. 22. 23.  Ephes. 5. 11.  Romans 2. 5. and 6.  

And the several passages and particulars by several witnesses , some in one particular and some in another , for the truth , and against the deceit of Daniel Bott , and also here witnessed by several friends and known neighbours near about where he livethin the outward . 

i John Farmer , and Anthony Bickley , and William Stowrey , and Thomas Teler , and John Smith , and Hugh Read , Thomas do , and Thomas Orton , and others , can witness to ( the truth ) and against the deceit as aforesaid , concerning Daniel Bott . 

Finis . 




















