THE NATURE and USEFULNESS OF Solemn Judicial SWEARING , WITH THE IMPIETY and MISCHIEF OF Vain and False-swearing : IN A SERMON Preached July 14 th' , 1681.  IN THE Cathedral Church of S. PETER IN YORK , At the ASSIZES for that County . 

By THO. COMBER , D. D. Prebendary of YORK . 

And thou shalt Swear the Lord liveth , in Truth , in Judgement , and in Righteousness , 

Jerem. IU. 2.  





LONDON , Printed by S. Roycroft , for Robert Clavell , and are to be Sold by Richard Lambert Bookseller in York , 1682.  

HEBREWS VI 16.  

For Men verily swear by the Greater , and an Oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife . 

AS Almighty God is the Creator , so he is also the Governor of all the World , and hath an unquestionable right to rule over every Creature ; He was the Maker , and is the Judge of all the Earth . And though he doth not exercise this Power immediately , because mortal Men cannot suffer the glories of his dazzling and illustrious presence , yet he ordains the Rulers of the World to be his Vicegerents : There is no Power but of God , the Powers that be are ordained of God ; and he expects we should be subject to them for his and for Conscience sake ; since their Authority is of Divine Original , which the Scripture intimates , in calling Judges by the name of Gods ( a Title commonly given them by the Jews ) as also in declaring , They judge not for Man , but for the Lord ; whence one of the Ancient Fathers brings in Almighty God thus speaking to the Judges , I have given you my Honour , my Commission , and my Name , therefore do you Judge as I myself would do . Yea it was Law , and Custom , both of old in this Nation ( as our own best Authors inform us ) To place the venerable Book of the holy Gospels before the Tribunal of Justice : as an Emblem , that they judged by his Authority . But there is no clearer evidence of the Divine Original of Human Judicatures , than the solemn use of Oaths , there : Which are a plain recognising God as the Supreme Judge of all , and an Appeal to the High Court of Heaven ; For though the Sovereign of the World do communicate his Authority to our Magistrates , yet his Attribute of Omniscience is incommunicable ; they are capable of representing his Person , but not able to discern the hearts and thoughts of others . wherefore since there is one part of God's Judicial Perfections that no mortal Judge can receive , viz. the knowledge of men's Thoughts , a point so necessary , that no infallible and certain Judgement can be given without it : Therefore in all Controversies , where the Parties make contrary affirmations , there lies an Appeal to the greater and higher Judge , that is , to God , the greatest of all ; which Appeal being in order to end the strife , and to find out which of the contradicting Parties speaks true , is called an Oath , and here described by the Apostle , when he saith , For men verily swear by the greater , etc.  

And certainly this use of Oaths is very sacred and most necessary , being a clear manifestation of God's glory , an evident testimony of the Divine Original of the Magistrates Power , and the great support of the administration of that Justice which is the Bond of all Societies . But yet there are some so ignorant and absurd as to deny they are lawful , others so stupid and inconsiderate to take them without reverence , and swallow them as Common things ; yea , too many so Impious to use them to gain credit to what they know to be false . For the redress of which dangerous Errors and Impieties , I suppose it will be a very seasonable and useful undertaking upon this Occasion to explain this piece of holy Scripture , For men verily swear , etc.  



Wherein we will first consider the Apostles general design in this place , which will prove the lawfulness of Taking Oaths in Judicial cases . Secondly , we will observe the several particulars contained in the words ; which represent to us , 1.  The nature of an Oath , For men verily swear by the greater . 2.  The reason of an Oath , viz. for Confirmation . 3.  The end and use of it in Judgement , to be an end of all strife . And since a Religious Oath is the foundation of all our Administrations of Justice , the main hinge upon which all these Controversies turn , the only security that the Reverend Judges , the Jurors , and the Witnesses do give , that they will speak and act uprightly : doubtless no Subject can be more suitable or advantageous for this time and place ; which therefore we will prosecute in our proposed Method . 

First , We consider the Apostles general design , and the occasion of bringing in these words here : And we may observe , He is here persuading the Hebrews to imitate their Pious Ancestors , in relying on the Truth of God , exhorting them to be followers of them , who by Faith and Patience inherited the Promises , v. 12. adding , that the promise itself was worthy to be trusted , because it had the highest and most solemn confirmation imaginable , being secured by the Oath of God , and that no common Oath neither . Not such as the Poets feign the Heathen gods took , whom Lactantius derides for their swearing by the Stygian Lake , a thing meaner than themselves . But as Sovereign Princes having no equal in their Kingdom whose witness can add any Authority to their solemn Acts , conclude them with a Teste meipso , and are witnesses to themselves : so the King of Kings , when he made the Promise to Abraham , because he could swear by no greater , swore by himself , Ver. 13 , 14 , 15.  Confirming his promise ( saith Philo ) by an Oath worthy of God , — and therefore he did not swear by any other , because there was none greater nor better than he . And lest any should object , What need was there for the God of Truth to swear , who is so far from being made more credible by an Oath ( as the same Philo notes ) that he only makes an Oath to be firm ; and ( as S. Ambrose speaks ) He alone is the Judge of them that Swear , and the Avenger of them that Swear falsely . Therefore the Apostle prevents that scruple , in the words of the Text , by declaring that an Oath was not necessary with respect to God , who made the Promise , but in compliance to Men who were to receive it ; in condescension to their infirmity , He was content to imitate human Customs , and to give the same security for his own truth , which men are wont to give for theirs ; For men verily swear by the greater , etc. that is , This is the way ( saith our Apostle ) by which men confirm things uncertain , this is the method they use to conclude , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , all doubtful Controversies where one affirms what the other denies , the highest and best Means they have to end this strife ( which otherwise would not cease ) is to make the Parties swear by the Name of God. And the Divine Majesty was pleased to take our measures in transacting his Covenant with us , for he swear to confirm it , not by a greater indeed ( as we do ) because there was no greater , but by himself . Gen. xxii . 16.  By myself have I sworn , saith the Lord , etc. and upon this Abraham did believe the Promise , and so ought we also . 

Now from the words thus explained we infer , That it is lawful for Christians to use an Oath for confirmation in solemn Cases . We see that God did take an Oath , and if Oaths were evil in themselves , 't is certain God would not swear , since he can neither do nor be tempted to do evil , James I 13. yea his Swearing certainly proves , it is good in its own nature : and His Oath being designed to comply with human custom , as a confirmation of the Truth of his Word on a great and just occasion ; by this Imitation and design , God hath ratified and approved our solemn use of Oaths in deciding differences . This one Act of his declaring it lawful to swear in all such cases . Besides , the Apostle here relates the use of Oaths in Judgement , supposing it universally practised by Gentiles , Jews , and Christians at that time ; for he saith ( not ye Hebrews swear , or ye ( before your Conversion ) did swear ; but ) Men verily swear , etc. that is , all Men do it now . Nor doth he on this occasion give any intimation either of his dislike of this general custom , or that it was not to be allowed to the Christians so to do : wherefore we may conclude from his recording this usage without making any exception to it , and his justifying it from the example of God himself , that the Apostle did allow and approve this use of Oaths . 

But our obstinate Adversaries , without considering how to answer these Arguments , will presently object , That Christ saith , Swear not at all , Math. v. 34. and S. James adds , Above all things , my brethren , Swear not , Jam. v. 12. as also that some of the Ancients , as well Heathens as Christians , seem by some picked Sentences to forbid all use of Oaths . 

To which I shall reply , That since 't is impious to suppose those Scriptures can contradict this Text , it is reasonable to believe , that some other kind of Swearing is there forbidden , and not that which is commended here ; and it is very plain to unprejudiced Men , that our Saviour is speaking of no other Oaths , but those used in common discourse , for the next words are , but let your communication be yea , yea , nay , nay , ver . 37. which shows , he was treating only of Oaths in our ordinary Communication , which might be wholly prevented , if in our common talk we barely affirmed things by a plain yea , or yes , or barely denied them by a plain nay , or no : and the instances he gives of swearing by Heaven , by Earth , by Jerusalem , and by their Head , ver . 34 , 35 , 36. were all of that sort of Oaths which the Jews used in their usual discourse , and not one of them was ever used in Judgement , where they only swear by the living God , Math. xxvi . 63.  Indeed the Pharisees , to take the Jews off from the wicked custom of ordinary Swearing by God's Name , did allow them in their common-talk to swear by these lesser things , persuading them there was little danger in them , and no great obligation by them , Math. xxiii . 16 , etc. But Jesus reproves this false gloss of the Third Commandment , declaring , that in our Communication one with another we must not swear at all , neither by God nor the Creatures ; for in our usual discourse a bare Yes or no is enough , and whatever is more , comes from either the evil custom of the Speaker , or the evil and jealous temper of the Hearer . And S. James only repeats and applies his Master's words , warning the Christians to take great heed they did not use that liberty given them by the Jewish false Teachers , to swear in their usual talk by Heaven , or by Earth , or any other Oath ; but to be sure always to affirm what was to be affirmed by a plain , Yea , and deny what was to be denied by a single , Nay ; lest they fell under God's condemnation for profaning his Name ; or ( as some of the best Copies read ) lest by a common careless use of Oaths , they fall into that accursed Hypocrisy of binding rash and false words with Oaths , as customary Swearers use to do . This is all can be fairly inferred from these two places , and therefore we conclude , they forbid only Common Swearing , and not that Religious and Solemn Swearing in Judgement , which this Apostle here approves and commends . 

And the Practice of the best Christians abundantly assures us , it was never believed that solemn Oaths on great Occasions were forbidden in the Gospel . This Apostle S. Paul , who certainly knew his Master's mind ( saith S. Augustine ) did Swear ; for his saying in weighty cases , God is my witness , Rom. I 9 and , Behold , before God I lie not , Galat. I 20. are as plain Oaths ( in that Father's Opinion ) as can be spoken . And though the Primitive Christians refused to Swear by the Emperor's Genius , or by any of the Daemons , since thereby they had acknowledged them to be gods ; yet Tertullian saith expressly , But we also swear , By the Emperor's Safety , that is , by God , who is the Author of it . 't is certain the Christians were Soldiers under Heathen Emperors , and yet they could not be listed without taking an Oath , which was given to the Soldiers still , even when the Emperors were become Christian , only with some alteration in the form ; For than they swore , By God , and Christ , and by the Holy Ghost ; By the Majesty of the Emperor , which next to God is to be loved and honoured of all . And Optatus , who lived at the same time , saith , God is wont to be named by Men in swearing to consirm the Truth . An ancient and genuine Synodical Epistle , written from the Orthodox Bishops about Alexandria , An. 339. declares , That the Christian People there bound these Bishops by Oath , to choose Athanasius for their Pastor , and mentions Eusebius of Nicomedia , accusing the said Athanasius , and swearing to the Accusation . And the same Holy Confessor , Athanasius , in his Apology to the Emperor , clears himself by an Oath from those Slanders . Theophronius , a Christian Bishop , begins his Confession of Faith in the Council of Antioch , An. 341. with a solemn Oath . Synesius likewise , a Primitive Bishop , being chosen Arbitrator in a certain Controversy , makes one of the Parties who was of the Episcopal Order , bind his Promise by an Oath . S. Hierom relates the solemn Oaths , wherewith John Patriarch of Jerusalem , and Ruffinus , did confirm their Assertions ; and though both these were his Adversaries , and he bitterly inveighs against them for small Crimes , yet he blames them not for Swearing : and he also observes , that S. Augustine swears to confirm an Assertion , yet never cheques him for it , though he was then angry with him . A whole Council of Bishops judging Sabatius unworthy of the Episcopal dignity , made him swear , never to accept it . And the Moderator of the Conference at Carthage , between the Orthodox and the Donatists , solemnly swears , by the Holy Trinity , he will judge impartially . Yea , the Civil Laws of Arcadius and Honorius , decree severe penalties to them who would not stand to those Agreements which they had confirmed by an Oath , either by the Name of God , or by the safety of the Emperor . And in the Council of Toledo the Prince adjures his Bishop's most solemnly to determine uprightly . By these , and innumerable more Instances ( which we have omitted , either as more common , or of later date ) it clearly appears , that the Primitive Christians did think solemn Oaths lawful , and frequently used them : Nor were any Oaths forbidden by the ancient Canons , but only Pagan Oaths ; they indeed who used them , were to be Ex communicated . But none ever pretended , that Christian Oaths by the Name of the True God were forbidden by the Gospel , till the gross Times of Popery ; and than Turgot and Aldwin , two Fanatic Monks of S. Cuthberts , being in Scotland , refused to swear Allegiance to King Malcolm , on pretence , Swearing was forbid in the Gospel ; though these Hypocrites had Sworn to the Rules of their Orders before . And a little after the Monks of Castellion had some scruples , whether it were lawful for them to Swear , alleging the same Texts and Reasons that our modern Sectaries urge , as may appear by Innocents' Answer to them . wherefore it is from Popish Enthusiasts , and not Primitive Christians , that our deluded Quakers learn to refuse all Swearing . 

But this short and clear account of the Sense of Holy Scripture , and the Opinion and Practice of the best Christians may abundantly satisfy all that are unprejudiced , That Solemn Oaths in Judgement , are not only very lawful , but useful and necessary , and have been used by all Men of all Religions as most Sacred things : For Men verily swear , etc. that is , all Men do so , and God imitates the use , and S. Paul records it with approbation . Yet , that men's irreverent taking , and impious breaking of Oaths , may not prejudice this useful Institution , nor be an offence to such as are really tender ; I shall pass from this proof of the Lawfulness of Swearing in general , to consider the Particulars of the Text : wherein , 

First , the nature of an Oath is implied in these words , — 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . For Men verily swear by the greater . Whence it appears , that an Oath is an Appeal to a Higher Power , to One Greater in knowledge , who sees if we deceive , and cannot be deceived ; to one Greater in Integrity and Truth , who will not connive at Falsehood , nor respect persons ; to one Greater in Power , who can as easily punish as find out Perjury , and cast the Perjured wretch into Hell Fire : wherefore every Oath ought to be made by the Supreme Being , and all that define it , say , it is , The calling God to witness . The giving God for the security of our Fidelity ; and is not to be used , but only when our words cannot be made certain without calling in the Divine Majesty . And hence it is made a Duty , and reckoned a part of Religious Worship , to Swear by the True God , Deut. vi . 13. and because Oaths in Judicature were always made by God's Name , therefore such an Oath is called , An Oath of the Lord , Exod. xxii . 11. and some think Solomon gives the Oath of Allegiance that Name , when he bids us obey the King , because of the Oath of God , Eccles . viij . 2.  Indeed all Nations are wont to swear by their proper gods ; so that there is the same variety in men's Oaths , that is , in their Religion . In the League between Hannibal and the King of Macedon , they swear by above Twenty several gods of Afric and Greece . And in an older general League among all the Graecian Cities , every place was to take their Country Oath , and swear by the greatest Deity of their own City . So the Heathen Poet requires the Jew to swear to him by Anchialus , that is , as the Romans falsely pronounced , by the living God , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 And the Christians made the Jews swear by the Hebrew Names of God , Adonai , Sebaoth , Elohim , etc. . And from this belief , That in an Oath a man appealed to the God he worshipped , sprang the custom of Sacrificing , when Men did solemnly Swear . And the use of going into the Temples and touching the Altars , when they took a Religious Oath , to put them in mind they were in the immediate presence of that God by whom they swore . To which end also the Gentiles sometimes in solemn swearing touched the Images of their gods . . Whence the Papists ( the gross Imitators of Pagan Superstition ) have derived their Swearing upon the Relics and Images of their Saints , to whom they do by this Act give the honour due to God only . As for us , We swear by no other Name , but only by the Name of GOD , laying our hands upon the Holy Bible , because all the Promises made to Truth , and the Curses against Perjury , are written there , devoting ourselves to want all the good therein promised , and to suffer all the evil therein threatened , if we swear falsely : And we make God himself the sole Judge of that , to whose Omniscience , Truth , and Omnipotence , we appeal , as knowing our heart , and call on him as the Witness of our Truth . So that this kind of Swearing is an Act of Religion , a part of Divine Worship , and was anciently called by the name of Religion itself , and had the Title of Sacramentum : For there is no way in the World by which we do more honour the Wisdom and Power , the Justice and Truth of God , than by this highest Appeal ; and therefore it is a part of his Honour , which he will not give to any other , nor can we swear by any Creature without being guilty of Idolatry ; the Creatures are our Fellow-servants , and not enough above us to be the objects of our solemn Oaths : For Men verily swear by the Greater , etc.  

Now from this account of the nature of an Oath we infer two things : First , That Oaths are a part of that Religious Worship due only to God , and so it is not lawful to swear by the Creatures . The Pharisees of old permitted it , out of a pretended Reverence to the Name of God ; but Christ and S. James both forbid it . As for the Heathens that worshipped the Creatures , no wonder if they swore by them ; but it was a silly Superstition in Socrates , to swear by any thing he saw , as a Dog , or a Goose , etc. that so he might avoid swearing by those he esteemed gods , as Apollonius makes the excuse for him : and the Ignorance of the Mahometans may make some Apology for their Swearing by ordinary Being's , since their great Prophet swears in his Alcoran , By the Wind and Clouds , by the Stars , and by Mount Sinai : But who can excuse Christians for this wicked Custom of swearing by the Creatures in ordinary discourse , contrary to Christ's express Precept ? I am sure Tertullian reckons these kind of Oaths to be one sort of Idolatry ; and the Custom is both foolish and impious , Foolish , because they swear by that which is lesle , or not greater than themselves , which neither knows if they Forswear , nor can punish their Perjury ; Impious , because it gives Divine honour to a Creature : a Sin so gross that the later Rabbins do condemn it , and one of them says , He that swears by any thing besides the Name of God , shall be rooted out of the World . So that we may well suppose these vain and wicked Oaths among Christians , are Relics of Pagan Idolatry , that have continued ever since the Creatures were worshipped as gods ; as the swearing by Saints and Angels is a remnant of Popish Superstition , introduced by those who first gave them Divine honour , and therefore to be utterly rejected by us , together with those Evil Principles upon which they began . 

Secondly , we infer from the former description of an Oath , That when we do Swear by the Holy Name of GOD , we should do it with all the solemnity of a Grave and Religious Reverence , remembering it is an Address to one infinitely Greater than ourselves , even to the God we daily worship . We ought to think upon his Allseeing Eye , his Almighty Arm , and his utter detestation of all Falsehood ; we should consider well the Glory of his Majesty , the Infiniteness of his Wisdom , the Exactness of his Truth , the Severity of his Justice , and the Terror of his Wrath ; and this would make us call him to Witness even the most certain Truth with holy Fear and Reverence ; This would instruct us , not to be rash with our Mouths , nor hasty to utter anything before God , who is in Heaven , and we upon the Earth , Eccles . v. 2.  't is evident , that all Nations have so fully believed the Sacredness of an Oath , that they have endeavoured to make it as Solemn and Venerable as they could . Orpheus' imposed an Oath upon his Scholars ( not to reveal the Secrets of his Art to Profane Ears ) with all the Authority which Religious Terror could give it : 

It would be too tedious to reckon up all the Religious Ceremonies by which the Gentiles made their Oaths Sacred : their use of Priests and Temples , Altars and Sacrifices , on this Occasion , were all intended to teach Men that Golden Precept of Pythagoras , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 To Reverence an Oath , and to mind them , that they did Swear by a Greater than themselves . It may suffice to remark that among the Jews ( who had nothing in higher esteem than the Book of the Law ) He that took an Oath was to stand up , and take the Book of the Law in his hand , and to Swear by the most Holy Name , or some other Name of God in the form of Invocation , or Execration , out of his own Mouth , or out of the Mouth of the Judge . And they say , this is as much as if they swore by all that is written in that most holy Book . In like manner the Christians in solemn Swearing were wont to lay their Hands upon the Holy Gospels , a Custom at least as ancient as the Emperor Justinians Time , who mentions it in his Laws ; and he himself is recorded to have held the Gospels in his hand while he made a Public Oath , An. 535 ; and that this was a Custom universally observed in those days , may be seen by diverse Instances in Procopius . And this Rite hath been used ever since , the Person who Swears being to say , As God shall help me , and the Contents of this Book : which is so great and dreadful a Wish , that none who understand and consider it can speak it without trembling ; for since all our hopes of Heaven depend upon God's help and the Promise of the Holy Gospel , We thus devote our Souls to Damnation if our Assertions be not true . And for this cause due Care should be taken in all Courts of Judicature , that Oaths should be administered with all Gravity and Religious Reverence , and , if possible , by those of the greatest Authority present . Since the outward Solemnities in all Religious Acts have a mighty influence on the Mind , and do tend to make Men perform them more seriously and devoutly . Yea , it ought to be considered , Whether the slight and irreverent giving of Oaths ( too common in our Courts of Justice ) do not give Ignorant and Evil men too much occasion , to think the breaking of them to be a light matter : it would be an infinite Scandal , if we should say our Prayers , or receive the Sacrament in so hasty and slight a Manner ; yet an Oath is a part of God's immediate Worship , as well as Prayer and Sacraments , and this is as direct an Address to God as either of those ; yea , we may reckon this the more dreadful , since there we only make Applications to his Mercy , here we devote ourselves to his Justice ; so that our Oaths should be made as solemnly as our Prayers . And here I can but observe the Piety of the Ancients , who Ordained , Oaths should be taken Fasting . A Rite of equal Piety and Antiquity , for Abimelech and Isaac had their Federal Feast over Night ( saith the Text ) They rose early in the Morning and swore one to another , Gen. xxvi . 31. as being then Fasting , and fit for this great Act of Religion . And it is probable , the frequent use of Oaths in Judgement , was the cause why of Old all Judicial Inquiries were made in the Morning : Execute Judgement in the Morning , saith Jeremy ; and , Woe be to that Land ( saith Solomon , ) whose Princes Eat in the Morning , that is , before they have sat in Judgement . Socrates also was wont to say , The Evening is for Feasts , the Morning for doing Justice . Yea , there is an Ancient Gallican Law of Charles the Great , which commands , That Court's of Justice shall be holden Fasting , that so both the Givers and Takers of Oaths might be serious , and fit for this so Solemn piece of Religion . And , because Matrimony itself is a Religious Oath , therefore our Old Canons fixed the celebration of it to be between the Hours of Eight and Twelve ; that so the Parties might make that Oath in their Fasting-spittle , as the words of the Canon are . All which ought to instruct and admonish those in Power , to Reform as much as in them lies , the scandalous and mischievous Corruption of slight giving Oaths in Judgement , and to reduce this piece of Religion to its due Esteem amongst us . 

Secondly , The Text informs us of the Reason of an Oath , or the Cause which moves a Man to take it ; which is , that it may be ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) For Confirmation . The Heart of Man is deep and deceitful , so that none but only God knows whether men's Words and Hearts agree : And Evil men ( being assured no Mortal can discover their Thoughts ) hence presume , for Gain , or to favour a Friend , yea to hurt a Foe sometimes , to speak what they know to be false . But though no Man can disprove them , the God of Truth sees their Hearts ; And therefore All Nations have used to enjoin Men , to call upon the Allseeing God to attest the Truth of what they say , with a wish of destruction to Themselves , if the Divine Majesty , who knows their Thoughts , do not allow their Words for Truth . And because it may well be supposed , none will dare to do this open Affront to the God of Heaven , nor expose themselves to his Vengeance , who will discover , and can destroy them if they speak falsely : Therefore an Oath is the most solemn Confirmation of what we affirm in doubtful Cases , the readiest way to gain credit to our Words , and the most Sacred security we can give for our Truth and Veracity . Hence Philo calls it , The firmest Pledge of our Fidelity : and Diodorus Siculus , The greatest assurance of Faith among Men. Our Ancestors ( saith Cicero ) esteemed no Bond so sure to bind us to be Faithful , as an Oath ; the Law of the Twelve Tables shows this , the Sacrifices , and the Leagues by which we bind ourselves to be true to our very Enemies , show it . And this is the Reason why all the World hath used Oaths in Judicature , to be as a Pledge and Security for the Truth of that Evidence given there , upon which all Causes usually depend . And though some might speak the Truth there without an Oath , as many good Men would perform their Promise without a Bond ; yet the difficulty of discerning honest Men from Hypocrites , makes this Caution necessary : And all Witnesses in Judgement are required to use an Oath for Confirmation of what they say , unless their peculiar Character give them such credibility as to exempt them ; on which ground Jupiter's Priests of Old , and the Christian Clergy in the Middle times , as also the Nobility in Our days , have been excused from Formal Oaths , as I could easily prove . But generally , Oaths are thought so necessary in Judgement , that in the Old Canons , it is the same thing to set down the Days in which no Oaths shall be taken , and to fix the Times when no Causes shall be Tried : So that the first Original of our Non-term and Vacation in Law proceedings are derived from the Canons which prohibit the Use of Oaths at those Times . But to proceed ; Since an Oath is so Solemn a Confirmation of our Truth , by calling God to Witness , the Pythagoreans allowed none to Swear in Light matters , especially not in a trifling Action for a small Debt ; and Clinias , a Philosopher of that Sect , choose rather to pay three Talents unjustly , than to free himself by an Oath . Which Example may justly shame many Christians , who trouble our Courts , and engage many to Swear on far lesle occasion . Again , the same Pythagoreans permitted none to Swear concerning Things contingent , future and uncertain ; affirming , it was neither fit nor safe to Swear in such Cases . The Graecian Laws also admitted none to Swear what they heard by Hearsay only : And the Ancient germans suffered not an Oath to be taken , but when there was no other way of finding out the Truth . For since every Man that Swears , pawns his Soul in Security for his Integrity , this ought not to be required but in weighty Causes , nor to be taken but on Sure grounds . This is a Man's last Security for his Truth , and if he once falsify this , none can ever Trust him after , no Bond can hold him : Which our Noble King Henry the First well knew , when he generously refused the Pope's base Offer to Absolve him from his Oath , saying , Who will ever trust another hereafter , when they see by my Example , an Absolution can make void the highest Bond of Faith . Now , from this account of the Reason of Taking an Oath , to be for Confirmation , we shall draw this Inference : 

That it is a huge Folly , and a great Impiety , to use Oaths upon a slight occasion , or in Common discourse , where there can be no need of this high and Sacred confirmation of our Words by God's Name , unless we have so ill behaved ourselves that none can Trust us , without Pawning our Souls for every thing we say ; yet by using this Religious and Sacred Confirmation to every Trifle , we make our very Oaths so cheap and contemptible , that we are Trusted the lesle , and not the more , for our Vain-swearing . But , besides the Folly of this vile Custom , it is a grievous Sin , being the most express breach of the Third Commandment , and the most profane way of Taking the Name of God in Vain ; and though Men may accounted this a small Fault in themselves , or their Friend , God ( who is to be our Judge ) will not hold them guiltless who commit it : He will not clear them , nor let it go unpunished , He will certainly condemn them in the Last Judgement . As the other Translation reads that dreadful place . And as this Sin is condemned in the Old Law , so this Swearing in our Communication , is strictly forbidden above all things ( James v. 12. ) in the New Testament . Yea , the very Heathens condemn the Common using God's Name ; and Hierocles very expressly saith , We must not use an Oath frequently , nor on ordinary Occasions , nor for shilling up our Discourse , nor to confirm every Story we relate ; — for by the Custom of Swearing often , Men soon fall to Swear falsely : which is the same with that of S. James , — lest we fall into Hypocrisy . It is no doubt a horrid Impiety , to make the Dreadful Name of GOD , and his Terrible Attributes so cheap and vile , as to bring them to Attest the most foolish , false , or filthy things , which we vent in the Vainest Company ; and argues a Mind that either denies the Being of God , or at least forgets his Power ; and besides , that it is the most daring Abuse to Heaven , it is also a high Affront to all the Public Judicatories in the World , since the highest Security that can be given for our Truth there , the most Sacred Bond of Human Society , the most Religious Pledge of a Man's Fidelity , on which all our Lives and Fortunes may depend ; is by this bold Impiety rendered Mean and Contemptible , prostituted to the Scorn of the Atheistical and Profane , yea , and made as Weak and unsecure , as it is Common and despised . A Sin without any Temptation to invite to it , or any Excuse to be made for it ; having neither Honour , Pleasure , nor Profit in it , unless we count it Reputation to Dishonour God , Pleasure to play with Thunder , or Profit to destroy those Immortal Souls of ours , that are of more Value than a Thousand Worlds : A Wickedness taken up only by Imitation , and got by the cursed Society of the Debauched and Prosane ; and the continuance in it is the more unpardonable , because it may easily and certainly be amended , by a few serious Thoughts of God's Majesty , by using the Company of Grave and Pious Men , and either giving them the freedom to admonish us , or imposing a small Penance on ourselves for every Offence , till the wretched Custom be overcome . Surely , none but a Professed Atheist doth ever commit this Crime , but merely by Inconsideration ; and therefore all others ( I hope ) may easily be reduced by those Methods , from the Profaning Gods holy Name , and exposing this Venerable part of Religion : to which , if this Discourse may be subservient , I shall rejoice that I have rescued the Sacredness of Oaths from any degrees of Contempt . 

Thirdly , I shall proceed to the last Particular in the Text , viz. The end of an Oath , or the Cause moving Magistrates to require it , that it may be an End of all strife : for the Accuser impeaches , and the Accused pleads Not Guilty , the Plaintiff demands , and the Defendant denies ; this is literally , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Controversy , or Strife ; and lest these contrary Speeches should produce perpetual Wrangling , the Witnesses Oaths are required , that by the Truth they speak , for which they bring in Almighty God for their Voucher , the Cause may be determined , and the Strife ended . And from this use of an Oath , by the Name of God , the Divine Majesty himself doth , as it were , Judge between the Parties ; and so I understand that Common Phrase of being tried , By God and our Country , to signify , By the Witnesses Oath , and the Jurers' Verdict : for Justinian saith by this use of Oaths , Men seem to enter a Holy Temple when they come before a Tribunal — and God , rather than Man , appears to decide the Cause . Truth ( as the Ancients speak ) lies in a deep Pit , and if any thing will draw it out , it must be the Fear of God , who is thus set before the Witnesses Eyes , to engage them by all their hopes of Mercy , to speak the Truth , the whole Truth , and nothing but the Truth : And therefore , not only the Apostle , but the Civil Law , calls it , The best Means to determine Causes . And the common Consent of Mankind , hath made all our Lives , Liberties , and Estates , to depend upon an Oath whensoever they are in question , supposing this to be the surest and most Sacred guard unto them . Nor is it without great reason that so much stress is laid upon Religious Oaths , since though another Man seem thereby to have our Lives and Estates in his Power ; yet by this solemn Swearing He stakes his own Body and Soul , his Temporal and Eternal Welfare , against them : and since he can only bring us by a False Oath under some Temporal Penalty , while he firmly devotee's himself to Eternal Vengeance , he runs the greater Risque , and loses most of the two , who Swears falsely , if he do but rightly consider it . For , as Plutarch notes , Every Oath contains , either expressly or implicitly , a Curse on the Taker , if it be false . And though these Curses are variously expressed , and sometimes only supposed , yet they are very dreadful : so that the Jews , who might not use Ominous words , choose rather to Swear Elliptically , than to express what was so horrid : So Moses Swears — if you have not the Land , and there stops ; but we are to understand , Let me suffer all the Plagues due to Perjury : yea , God himself imitates this form , I swear in my Wrath , if they shall enter into my rest , Hebr. four . 3. where again the Curse is understood . And the Scholiast upon Aristophanes Observes , It was an Ancient Custom thus to Swear Elliptically to avoid all Ominous words . Yet some times these words were expressed in most terrible forms against the Gentiles , Let the gods destroy me ; Let the Divine Vengeance fall upon my own head , and my whole Family . And to make this more Solemn , they used diverse Ceremonies , as that of casting away a Stone , and wishing , The gods might so cast them out of all the City and Capitol being safe ) if they did wittingly Swear falsely . So also the kill of some Beast in Sacrifice , and wishing , They might be so slain , if they did not speak Truth : And the quenching a Flaming Torch suddenly , and praying , Their Life and Light might be so put out , if they deceived ; Which last Ceremony was sometimes used amongst Christians , and was solemnly performed in this Nation , when the Oaths were taken to confirm Magna Charta . And though in our Modern Courts we now abstain from Ominous Words , contenting ourselves with that very Ancient Form , So help me God , yet the Sense duly considered , is as high , as full , and as terrible as any of the former ; for if we Swear falsely , we wish , That God's Grace and Favour , his Mercy and Providence , may forsake us ; that he may never help us here nor hereafter , but leave us to perish in this World , and in the World to come . And o , how dreadful an Imprecation is this , He that after his Pledge given for his Truth , dares tell a Lie for favour or Malice , neither fears God , nor love's himself ; he is a desperate Wretch , unfit for Human Society , and really doth far more mischief to himself than to his Adversary . And since an Oath is thus guarded , we may well be content it should end all Strife among us , for no greater Security under Heaven can be given or devised . Now from this description of the End of an Oath , we will observe , 

That Perjury , especially in Courts of Justice , is a heinous and horrid Impiety : the very End of these Courts is to find out Truth , and But to speak falsely there , though by such as are not upon their Oath , is to affronted the Vicegerents of God , and wickedly to design to pervert Judgement , as well as to make that holy Institution useless , which is the great Security of all Societies . But when Men come to Swear , God himself is directly appealed to , the Searcher of all Hearts is set upon the Tribunal , and the Perjured Wretch Lies not unto Men , but unto God , Acts v. 4.  He defies the King of Heaven to his face , and affronts him openly in some of his tenderest Attributes , disbelieving his Truth , tràmpling on his Justice , and despising his Power ; yea , he makes ( as much as in him lies ) the Righteous God a Party to that Falsehood , by which he murders or Robs his Neighbour ; saying , as Philo hath elegantly expressed it , OH God , I should not be believed but for thy Name , and therefore I use thee for the Cloak of my Injustice ; I would not be discovered in my sin , do thou help me , and take the blame on thyself ; for though I am a Transgressor by thy Name , I shall pass for an Honest man ; thou neither lovest Truth , nor punishest Falsehood . This horrid Blasphemy is the import of all Perjury , the very Image of the False-swearers Thoughts , and can any thing be more wicked ? This accursed Sin , not only fly's in the Face of God , but by gilding fatal Lies with his Name , misleads that Sacred Authority he hath set over us for securing our Rights , and endeavours to make that the Instrument of their Revenge and Cruelty ; it imposes upon the most upright Juries , with design to make them Partners in the Crime ; it robs an Innocent man of his good Name , his Estate , his Liberty , nay , his very Life , if their false Witness be believed : Or if the Jurors be the Perjured Men , in spite of all Evidence , it rescues the greatest and most dangerous Malefactors ( by a Partiality that defies Heaven ) from the Justice of the Law , and encourages not only them , but others to commit the like Crimes . And whosoever they be , Jurors or Witnesses , who regard not their Oaths , They do what in them lies , to subvert the Laws , to take away the Administration of Justice , and to ruin the Community they live in , by baffling this Great and Sacred Instrument of our Peace and Safety . If they do this for Fear or Favour , it shows they value Men more than God , and dare purchase Their Love with his utmost Displeasure : If they are Perjured for Hire , they sell their Souls for a Vile Price , and purchase a Reversion in Hell , which they shall inherit for ever : If they do it in Malice , it is like the Crime of Witches , who give their Souls to the Devil for ever , to be enabled to do a transient harm to their Neighbours . And whatever be the Principle it spring's from , yea , and whatever event it have as to the Party Accused , the Perjured Man devotee's himself to all the Curses in God's Book , and cuts himself off from all hope of the Divine Help for ever ; and therefore the Old Romans allotted no Human Punishment for this Sin , but left the Criminal to the more terrible Vengeance of the gods , who were most directly affronted by it ; the Greeks believed , it brought ruin and destruction to the Man , and all his Posterity . Yet , lest these who fear none but Human Penalties should be hardened by Impunity from Men , ( for if they dreaded the Vengeance of God they durst not commit this Crime ) therefore it was Ordained , that if any were convict of Perjury , who had sworn on the Holy Gospels , his Tongue should be cut out , as of no use for ever after . And all Laws deprive these Wretches of the Privilege of giving Testimony in any other Cause , and their Credit is Eternally blasted . The Indians cut off their Fingers and Toes , to reduce them to Beggary and Shame ; the Egyptians put them to Death , as unworthy to Live among Mankind after so inexcusable a Wickedness . But whatever they suffer here , Damnation doth await them in the next World , unless they do Repent sincerely , and make Satisfaction also . But I hope , we need aggravate this Crime no further , but having surveyed all the Particulars of the Text , may now pass to the Application . And that which naturally follows from the Premises , is , 

First , That all persons concerned be very Cautious in taking Oaths , and that when they come to Swear , they do it with all Religious Fear and Reverence ; not only as being immediately in God's Presence , but as making a direct Appeal to him , and offering their Souls as a Pledge for the Truth of what they shall speak ; and though the thing they Swear be never so True , yet this Application is so venerable , and so high a piece of Religion , that it ought to be done with all Gravity and humble Reverence ; and if they be so taken , to confirm a known and certain Truth , they do exceedingly tend to the Honour of God , and to the Benefit of Mankind , and are so very lawful , that we may as well scruple to make Application to God's Mercy in Prayer , as to his Truth in Solemn Swearing , on a Just Occasion ; especially , since it is evident by Reason and Universal Practice , that the World cannot well be Governed , nor Justice Dispensed without them ; and it is the Abuse of them , not the Serious and Just use of Oaths , that aught to be avoided . 

Secondly , When we have taken them , let us be very fearful of breaking them , and make Conscience of answering and acting in every Point agreeable to what we have Sworn ; let us fear no Anger , but that of Heaven , nor seek no Favour , but that of God , nor wish for any Gain , but the Peace of a good Conscience . We see , that the Laws of God and Men have put the End of all Strife upon our Fidelity , supposing we are Christians and Hónest men , who Fear the Lord of Hosts , and value our own Souls , and we have given the greatest Security under Heaven , that we will be Impartial . Now , how vile and infamous a Crime will it be in us , to betray his Trust , to abuse the Judge of all the World , and his Vicegerents , to wrong the Innocent , and destroyour own Souls ? One would imagine , nothing could tempt a Rational Man to such an Act ; if the too frequent and sad Experience of Opposite , yea of Contradictory Oaths ( in this Impious Age of ours ) did not convince us , that nothing is too monstrous or unreasonable for an Ill Man to do . If Popish Zealots , by Assurances of Dispensation , were the only persons , who assumed the Impudence to commit this Crime , it would not be so very strange : But for Us , who say , no Power on Earth can Cancel this Sacred Bond of an Oath , for Us to Perjure ourselves , is at once our Shame , and the World's Wonder ; doubtless such Men deserve not only the bare Punishments of the Law , but to suffer an Universal Detestation , that as they are the Bane of our Government , the Scandal of our Religion , and the Enemies of God , so they may be esteemed and treated as the Foes of all Mankind , until by Sorrow and Repentance they shall own their Faults , and return to a better Mind . 

Finally , Let us Bless the Holy Name of God for our Good Laws , and the Security we enjoy by them , since no Man can hurt us in Body , in Goods , or Good Name , without venturing the Damnation of his own Soul ; we have excellent Methods to find out the Guilty , and clear the Innocent . And though Evil Men will claim unjustly , accuse falsely , or deny their Gild impudently , yet while we have so Just and so Prudent Magistrates on Earth , and so Righteous and Powerful GOD in Heaven , we may rationally hope , that all Perjury , Falsehood , and Injustice , shall be discovered either Here , or Hereafter . Cicero mentions a False-witness at Rome , who was struck Dumb just as He was pronouncing that part of his Oath , — If I willingly speak falsely . But if such Vengeance be not Now presently executed , let us not despair ; for there is a Great Assize coming , where all Errors in Judgement shall be rectified , and all False-swearers discovered and condemned . But it would prevent many a sad Sentence at that Dreadful Day , and hinder all Public Injustice here , if all that are called to this Duty would very seriously remember , That They Swear by the Greater ; and so their Oath for Confirmation , would ever be a Just End of all Strife : Which God of His Mercy grant , for Jesus Christ's sake ; to whom , with the Father and the Holy Spirit , be all Honour and Glory , now , and for evermore , 

Amen . 

FINIS . 





 Gen. 18. 25.   Rom. 13. 1.   Ibid v. 5. 1  Pet. 2. 13.   Exod. 23. 28.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Orig. in Cells . l. 4.   2 Chron. 19 6.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Resp . ad Orthod . Quest . 142.   Sarisburiens . Polyor . lib. 5. c. 12.   Chron. Wil Thorn. col . 2048.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 in the Text , Hellenisticè Comparativum pro Superlativo , i e. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 .  Lactant. Instit . l. 1. c. 11.   Philo legis Allegor . l. 2. pag. 98.   Philo the sacr . Cain & Abel , p. 146.   Ambros . de eod . T. 1. p. 147.   Si enim per se malum esset jurare profectò Dominus non jurasset . Decret . l 2.  Tit. 24. c. 6. p. 895.   Jam. 5. 12.  Graec. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 at alii libr. leg . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Vid. Erasm . Verse .  Apostolus utique noverat praeceptum Domini , juravit tamen . Aug. in Ep. Galat. cap. 1.   Tertul. Apol. cap. 32. p. 28.   Vegetius de re Militari , l. 2. c. 5. circle . An. Christi 370.   Optat. Milev . lib. 2. pag. 58.   Epist . Synodal . ap . Bin. Tom. I p. 1. pag. 403.   Ibid. p. 404.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Apolog. and Constant . Tom. I pag. 674.   Binius , Tom. I par . 1. pag. 416.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Synes . Epist . 67. pag. 213.   Hieron . advers . Joh. Hierosol . Tom. II pag. 259.   Idem adv . Ruffin . Apol . Tom. 2. p. 323.   Hieron . Epist. 90.  Tom. 2. pag. 538.  & Ep. 92. pag. 541.   Socrates' histor . lib. 5. cap. 2c . pag. 694.   Collat. Carthag . I Cap. 5 apud Bin. Tom. 1. pag. 648.   Invocato Dei Omnipotontis nomine — & PP . — salutem Principum , confirmationem initarum juraverint esse pactionum . Cod. Justin . l. 2. tit . 4.  Pl. 41.  Si quis , etc.   Council . 8.  Toletan . An. 653.  Bin. Tom. 2. par . 2. p. 484.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Basil . Mag. Can. 81. ap . Bevereg . Tom. 2. p. 13.  & Council . in Trul. Can. 94.  Bever . T. 1. p. 270.   Evangelicum praeceptum servantes . Simeon Dunelm . l. 1. cap. 22.   Decretal . lib. 2. tit . 24. cap. Etsi Christus , al. 894.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Philo l egg . alleg .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Nazianz.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Aristot . Rhet. c. 18.   Polybii , histor . lib. 7.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 — & p. p. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Thucyd. hist . l. 5.   — jura per Anchialum . Martial . l. 11. ep . 60.   Digest . lib. 5.  Tit. De juram . Jus Graeco-rom . T. 1. pag 119.   Gen. 31. 54.   1 Kings 8. 31.  Si aram tenens juraret . Cicero pro Flacco .  Contingens ipsa simulachra & pulvinaria Deorum . Justin . hist . l. 24.   Jusjurandum est affirmatio religiosa . Cicero de Off. l. 3.  Primum militiae vinculum est religio . Senec. Ep. 95.   Apollon . ap . Philostr . l. 6. cap. 9   Consuetudinis vitium , diccre mehercule , aut medius fulius , accedente ignorantiâ quorundam qui ignorant jusjurandum esse per Herculem . Tertul. Idd. c. 21. pag. 98.   Moses Mikotzi . Praecep . affer . 113.   Julius' Firmic . praef . ad 7. lib. Math.   Maimon . tract . Sheb . cap. 11.  Moses Mikotz . praecep . off . 123.   Idem praecep . Negat . 241.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Just . Authent . collat . 9  Tit. 7.  Nou. 124.  Cap. 1. p. 176.   Chronic. Alex. An. 535. p. 91.   Procop. in Vandal , l. 2. p. 121 , & p. 131.   Jer. 21. 12.   Eccles . 10. 16.   Vespere convivium mane judicium . Dict. Socrat .  Placitum tenere Comes nisi jejunus non debet . Capit. l. 3. c. 38.  & 3  Cap. An. 803. c. 15.   Synod . Winton . An. 1308. apudspelm . Council . T. 2. pag. 448.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Philo , de Sacr. Cain & Abel , p. 146.   Cicer. Offic. lib. 3.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Plut. de . Audit . pag. 46.   Vide Selden , Synedr . l. 2. c. 11. p. 303.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ●socr .  D. Basil . home . 24.  Nec deus intersit , nisi dignus vindice nodus .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Hierocles .  In his , vero causis Sacramenta praestentur , in quibus nullam probationem discussio judicantis invenerit . Leges Bajoar . apudcapitular . T. 1. p. 119.  Tit. 8 c. 16.  An. 630.   Eadmeri histor . l. 5. pag. 126.   LXX . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Non impuninum dimittit . Vatab. Neque enim non reum habebit cum Dominus in die Judicii magni . Chal. Par.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Plato .  Pro judiciis put abant homines se in Sacrarus sisti — & pro hominibus Deum in omnibus causis jud●cem esse . Cod. l. 2.  Tit. 59 l. 3. § 8 p. 83.   Maximum dirimendaram causarum remedium . Cod. ibid. p. 83.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Plut. quest . Rom.   Josh . 14. 9   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Ariltoph . Ran. 5. 2.  Scholiast . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Ibid.   Sueton. Tiber. c. 21.   Plin. Panegyr .  Festus de verb. signif . verb. Lapis , p. 82.   Liu. hist . Rom. lib. 21.   Polybii , histor . lib. 3.   It a me dii ament . Plaut . Bacchid . 4. 8.  It a Deos mihi velim propitios . Cicero do Divin .  Philo de legibus in Specie differ .  Tertul. Apol. c. 28.  Item Rescript . Alex. Aug. Imp.   Hesiod . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 .  Eclog. Leonis & Constant . Tit. 28.  §. 2.   Cicero , Epist . l. 7. ep . 1.  