The root of popery struck at , and the true ancient Apostolic foundation discovered , in some propositions to the Papists , concerning fallibility and infallibility , which cut down the uncertain , and manifest the certain way of receiving and growing up into the truth . 

Also , some considerations concerning the true and false church and ministry , with the state of each since the days of the apostles . 

Held forth in true love and pity to the souls of the Papists , that they May hear and consider , and not mistake and stumble at the rock of ages , whereupon the prophets , apostles , and whole flock of God throughout all generations have been built . 

There is likewise somewhat added concerning the ground of error , and the way to truth and unity , for the sake of such as are more spiritual , and have been more inwardly exercised in searching after truth . 

By Isaac Penington the younger . 

In vain do they wo•ship me , teaching for doctrines the commandments of men , 

matt. 15 9  



London , printed for Robert Wilson , and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the black-spread-eagle and windmill , in Martin's L'grand , 1660.  

Preface . 

The mystery of iniquity ( Which overspread the earth under a shape and appearance of holy church , and holy worship ) did begin to work in the apostles days , 2 thes. 2.7 . and this was the way whereby the god of this world did deceive , he endeavoured to blind men's minds , to put out their right eye , ( 2 cor. 4.4 . ) to draw from the spirit , from the anointing ( 1 joh. 2.26 . ) to rob of the eyesalve wherewith the eye must be anointed to see the things of God ; rev. 3.18 . and now when he hath done this , how easily May his false ware pass for true ; his synagogue ( Built in the likeness of the true church , rev. 3.9 . ) for the true church ; Antichrist his son ( Sitting in the temple like Christ , 2 thes. 2 4. ) for the true Christ ; his doctrines for the true teaching , ( matth. 15.9 . ) his feigned , formal , dead , earthly traditions , for the true everlasting gospel ; ( rev. 14.6 . ) his gentiles , or heathens , ( Who are so in nature , and Christians only in name ) for the true Christians , rev. 11.2 . ? 

the light of the body is the eye ( Saith Christ by way of parable , mat. 6.22 , 23. ) Now if the eye be dark , if the light which is in thee , be darkness , how great is that darkness ? how shalt thou see the gospel , the church , the spirit , the things of God ? But if that eye be clear , who shall be able to blind thee ? The devil May come with his deceits , his false church , his false gospel , his false power ▪ &c.  yea though his spirit creep into the very true form of godliness , thou wilt be able to discern him there . But if thou see with another's eye , thou Mayest easily see amiss , mistake Christ , mistake the church , and so believe as the false church believes , and fare as the false church fares . 

Oh who shall redeem the deceived nations back to the spirit ! Who shall preach to all nations , kindreds , tongues and persons , the everlasting gospel ! Who shall open the eye in them which hath been so long blinded ! Who shall take the golden cup of fornication from their lips , and loosen their hearts from the sorceries , flatteries , and enchantments of the false woman ! 

The everlasting bowels of the Lord roll toward his poor captivated seed , and towards the poor deceived nations , and he is now preparing to build the ruins of many generations ; he is bringing forth that power of truth , that demonstration of his spirit in the spirits of his persons , as no paint shall be able to stand before . He will rend the veil of the covering from off all nations , and the desire of all nations shall be seen by the eye which he opens and anoints ; & that which hath , deceived , and destroyed , and led from the truth , building up a mystery of unrighteousness in the stead of it , even the beast and false prophet ( Which wrought miracles , with which he deceived them that had the mark of the beast , & them that worshipped his image ) shall be taken & cast alive into the lake , rev. 19.20 . then captivity shall be led captive , and those which have been led captive , shall creep out of their dens , and out of their holes , into the light of the living , and worship the true and everlasting King , when this King Abaddon is destroyed , rev. 15.2 , 3 , 4.  

Oh who shall be accounted worthy to be taught by the Lord where to wait for this ! To whom will the Lord discover the place of wisdom ( The place where wisdom is learned , her voice heard , and her instructions to life received ) which is hide from the eyes of all living ! Job 28.21 . whom shall he teach knowledge ? And whom shall he make to understand doctrine ? They are them that are weaned from the milk , and drawn from the breasts of the false woman , isa. 28.9 . & chap. 52.15 . they that are turned from man , from the fleshly wisdom in themselves , towards the spring of life , they May hear the voice of this wisdom which begins in the living fear and power , which effectually turns the heart from death and darkness , towards the living God , to worship him in spirit and truth , according to the pure living teachings thereof , and not after the inventions , imaginations , and traditions of men : and he that is once come hither , as he is true and faithful to the light of life , doing the will as it is made manifest to him , shall know more and more of the doctrine , ( joh. 7.17 . ) and have his feet infallibly guided into , and preserved in the way of peace . 

The root of popery struck at ; and the true ancient Apostolic foundation discovered , in some propositions to the Papists concerning fallibility and infallibility , &c.  

Propos. 1.  that councils May err ▪ ( If i should add , and have erred , it Might not be impossible to prove . ) 

first , in that they are men not perfected in the knowledge , faith , and obedience of the truth , it necessarily implies a capacity of error , both in relation to the knowledge , to the faith , and to the obedience . 

2dly . their doubtful disputation of things , and long canvasing , implies an uncertainty and possibility or erring . 

3dly . their way of determining things at last , which is by a vote of the major part , is an uncertain way of determination ; for it is not impossible but the major part May be overswayed by by-ends , & relation to their own advantage & interests , against the righteousness and equity of the reason of the lesser part ; so that the way of determining things by a council , is not a certain way in itself , but because men know not well how to find out a better and more probable way of deciding controversies , they judge it necessary to acquiesce therein : but the votes and determinations of men concerning a thing , do not conclude a thing to be true or false in itself ; they only signify their opinion , judgement , and testimony concerning the thing , the validity whereof depends upon their knowledge of the thing , which if it be not clear , full , and certain , their testimony , opinion , or judgement , is of little value ; truth remains the same in itself , though all the wise men in the world should testify against it , calling it error , or heresy ; and falsehood can never become truth , though never so many wise men should testify for it , putting the fairest habit and appearance of truth upon it that they can . 

Prop. 2.  that the Pope himself May err . 

The Pope hath not greater freedom from fallibility in judgement or doctrine , than Peter himself had . Now Peter had not only a capacity of error in him , but he did err in that doctrine which he taught the gentiles , of living after the manner of the Jews ; for he did not only do the thing himself , gal. 2.12 . but he compelled the gentiles to do the same thing , holding it forth as a practice which ought to be observed by the gentiles , ver. 14. for which carriage of his Paul withstood him to the face , and said he was to be blamed , v. 11.  And the council of Constance deposing Pope John , & advancing the authority of councils above the Pope , did plainly imply that the Pope Might err ; which Might further be confirmed by what the council of Basil determined concerning Pope Eugenius . 

Prop. 3.  that every man May err in his interpretation of scriptures , further than he hath a certain and infallible opening of them to his spirit , by that spirit which gave them forth . The spirit knoweth his own mind in every word which he hath spoken ; but no man knoweth his mind , nor the meaning of his words , but as he reveals them , 1 cor. 2.11 . So that God is true in all his sayings in the scriptures ; but man is a liar in all the meanings he gives of his sayings , according to his own guessings , reasonings and imaginings , without the spirits infallible opening of his own words to him . So that the spirit itself is the ground and foundation of all true light and knowledge of the things of God . 

Prop. 4.  that if there be any light to be found anywhere shining immediately from God , that light cannot err ; for God is pure , and that which comes immediately from him , cannot but be pure . All the knowledge which man gathers , or can gather , into his vessel , he May pollute : but what issueth from the spring is pure , and of a perfect nature , James 1.17 . 

Prop. 5.  that there must necessarily be such a light communicated to all men since the fall , that they May believe thereby , come to the knowledge of the truth , and be saved : which i prove thus . 

1.  From the will of God . The apostle saith expressly , that God would have all men to be saved , and to come unto the knowledge of the truth , 1 tim. 2.4 . Why then there must necessarily be somewhat dispensed from God to all men , sufficient to bring them to the knowledge of the truth , that they May be saved . 

2.  From what is found in man . There is found in man a light shining in his darkness , ( joh. 1.5 . ) a light discovering the darkness , and drawing from it , somewhat which checks and reproves the sinner , but never consented to the evil of his heart and ways : this is of God , this is from God , this is pure , this is spiritual , not of the fleshly , not of the natural ; for than it Might be drawn some time or other to consent to some of the corrupt desires of the natural : but though the conscience be never so much defiled , yet the light in it can never be defiled . Indeed a man May set up that for light in his conscience , which May be darkness ; but God's light , God's witness there , can never be bribed , but will speak truly ( When God at any time awakeneth , or raiseth it up ) witnessing for him both against the evil of the man , & against the •earedness , hardness & unfaithfulness of his conscience towards God . 

Prop. 6.  that this light being let in , believed in , and obeyed , shineth more and more unto the perfect day , even until it hath wholly brought out of the error , into the truth . every way of it is infallible , and every step of the creature after it is infallible . Indeed the creatures reasonings and consultations about it May be fallible ; but the light is infallible in itself : and so far as there is a pure , simple , naked thing begotten by it , ( For it is of a begetting nature , jam. 1.17 , 18. ) so far there is an acknowledgement of its certainty in the creature . There are some things that all the men of the earth certainly know to be evil by means of its shining , & some things also that they certainly know to be good ; and at some times there is a will begotten in them towards the good , & against the evil : now if they did honestly wait in the singleness of this will , breathing to the god of power to have it brought to victory in them , the light would shine more and more from his presence , and in the light , the power and saving arm would arise , which would effectually lead out of the death and captivity , into the fellowship and freedom of the life . 

Prop. 7.  that nothing less can lead to eternal life , than an eternal light in man's spirit , where the darkness is , which is to be discovered there , subdued there , and to be led from . This was the apostle's message , ( Who received and came with the message of the gospel ) that God is light , and in him is no darkness at all , 1 joh. 1.5 . And this they preached to bring men into fellowship with this light , ver. 3. that they Might walk with God in it , & there be cleansed by the blood of Jesus through it , ver. 7 ▪ which that they Might obtain , they must first be turned from darkness to it , act. 26.18 . and from the power and kingdom of Satan , to the seed of the kingdom of God , mat. 13.31 ▪ which Christ told the Pharisees was within them , luk. 17.21 . And the apostle Paul told the Hebrews , that the laws of the covenant , whereof Christ was the minister and mediator , were by the tenor of the new-covenant , to be written in the heart and mind by the spirit , & not to be written outwardly , as that covenant was which God made with the Jews by Moses , ( heb. 8.6 . &c. ) which was not the eternal covenant itself , but a shadow of it , which made nothing perfect , but only made way for the hope of a better covenant , by which believers draw nigh to God , heb. 7.19 . Yea Moses himself tells the Jews , that the commandment of life , the word eternal ( According to faith wherein , and obedience whereto , they were to live or die eternally ) was within them , deut. 30.14 , 15.  And Paul tells the church at Rome , that this was the word of faith which they preached , that it was also the covenant of life and death under the gospel , rom 10.8 . Christ is the light of the world , joh. 8.12 . or the eternal word , joh. 1.1 . which light or word speaks within in every man's conscience ; he that believes in it , brings his deeds to it , and obeys it , is justified by it ; but he that hates its reproof , is condemned by it , joh. 3.20 , 21. and not only shut out of life , but out of the very way to it ; for the reproofs of the instruction of this wisdom , are the sole way or path of life to the sinner , prov. 6 23.  

Now behold the true certainty of the everlasting foundation , and behold your own uncertainty . See the rock of ages whereupon the prophets , apostles , & all the saints have been built . See that which indeed is infallible , and cease from man , who is vain , and subject to vanity & error . The church of the Jews did err , the churches of the gentiles also did err even in the apostles days , insomuch as their candlestick uva threatened to be removed , and was soon removed ; yea the apostle particularly foretold the saints at Rome concerning the gentiles , that their standing was by faith , and that if they continue not in God's goodness , they also should be cut off , as the Jews were , rom. 11.20 , 22.  Now there was not a standing in the faith , but a general backsliding and falling away from the faith ; and than the man of sin was revealed , and Christ and his truth withdrawn , strong delusion , deceit and false appearances of truth starting up instead thereof , 2 thes. 2.3.11 . For the Lord God upon the great defection and apostasy of the gentiles , separates the outward court from his temple , altar and spiritual worshippers , which temple was his true church , which he reserved for himself , giving the outward court to the gentiles , rev. 11.1.2 . And then the true church fled into the wilderness , where she had a place prepared of God for her ; and so the Gentile-christians could build up their false churches in the cities or places where the true church had been built by God , and had appeared before . And these false churches May easily become much larger than the true church ever was ; for while the Lord built the church by his spirit , he built it only of spiritual stones , 1 pet. 2.5 . adding to it such as he first converted , act. 2 47.  For such alone are fit to worship him in spirit and truth , and such alone he seeks out to make up his church of , instead of the Jews whom he had cast off from being a church and persons to him , John 4.23 . But when man comes to build he takes in more largely than God allows , he May gather in , or force a whole city or nation to become a church , by persuading or compelling them to receive the doctrine and traditions which he prescribes , and by setting up an outward knowledge , policy , and government according to man , & in the wisdom of man , which the human part will answer to , & be satisfied with . To make this a little more manifest to such as in simplicity of heart desire to know the mind of God ( In this respect ) and the true state of the church since the days of the apostles , consider these things following . 

First , God in those days sent his true apostles and ministers with the everlasting gospel , which was the word of faith which they preached , to gather men out of Jerusalem , Judea , and all nations , into the obedience of the faith , ( rom. 1.5 . ) that he Might have a spiritual house , a spiritual persons to worship him , instead of those outward worshippers whom he then cast off , John 4.23 . 

2.  That this gathered persons in Judea , at Jerusalem , at Corinth , at Ephesus , at Coloss , at Philippi , at Rome , &c. were his several churches or congregations , and not the city of Jerusalem not the city of Corinth , Ephesus , Room , &c.  none of these were churches , but only a select remnant gathered out o• these . 

3.  That the devil after he had stirred up the Jews everywhere , and the heathen as much as he could , to cry out against the truth , and such as God had converted to the faith , for heresy and a sect , and to persecute them and it , yet could not prevail that way ; then he tried another way , sending his messengers abroad , clothing them as angels of light , teaching them also to preach Christ , and the doctrine of the gospel , and so transforming themselves under this colour , secretly to sow the seeds of division , error , and heresy in the church , 2 cor. 11.13 

4.  When this would not do , but these were discovered and judged ( By the power and presence of the light of the spirit in the church ) for false Jews , false apostles , deceitful workers , ministers of Satan , &c. rev. 3.9 & chap. 2.3 . than they separate themselves from the church , Jude 19 make up a body of the•r own , go out into the world , preach there , gather a company there , get the greater number , and then set upon the church , fight with her , overcome her and her ministry , and then get up their own false church and ministry : thus the synagogue of Satan and his ministry , get footing in the world , even in the very same cities and places where the church had newly had dominion before . And now , whereas before there was a church at Jerusalem , a church at Rome , a church at Ephesus , &c. when the synagogue of Satan is set up , and hath got the dominion there , the whole city Jerusalem , or the whole city Rome , &c. can then become a church . To make this yet more manifest , observe and weigh these things following in the balance of the true sanctuary . 

First , the false prophets , the false apostles , which had crept into the church , Jude 4. which strove to seduce the church , 1 John 2 26. these went out from the church , ver. 19 and went into the world , 1 ioh. 4.1 . 

2dly . when they went out into the world , their intent was to leaven the world with their doctrine , and to gather a persons after them . They preached to gather persons to them , and their doctrine and form of godliness , as the apostles preached to gather persons to God , and his living truth . 

3dly . the world heard them , they harkened to their doctrine , were willing to be gathered by them , owning their false ministry , and their false church or synagogue , even as those that were of God harkened to the apostles , and owned the truth , 1 ioh. 4.6 . So that here was now two distinct bodies in cities and places where the gospel had come : a body of the true saints and true apostles ; a body of the false apostles and ministers , of the deceitful workers , who showed miracles and wonders , and had all manner of deceivableness , of unrighteousness on their side , 2 thes. 2.9 , 10.  Thus there was a great division and breach in the places where the gospel had been preached , and had reigned in power ; for he that was of God , heard the true apostles , and kept to the true church ; but those that were not of God , but of the worldly spirit , heard the false apostles and false ministers , and so joined to the synagogue of Satan , ( 1 John 4.6 . ) where Satan had his seat and dwelling , rev. 2.13 . even as Christ dwelleth & sitteth in his temple the true church . 

4thly . these false apostles and ministers , with the help of the world , which they had gathered in unto them , joined together against the true church and her seed , ( As wherever the two contrary spirits and principles appear , they cannot but contend and fight against each other , the one for the faith and truth of the gospel , the other against that which is true , and for a counterfeit of it ) so rev. 12. there is Michael and his angels , fighting on the side of the true church ; there 's the dragon and his angels fighting for the false church . Now mark who prevails . The true church , Michael and his angels prevail one way ; the the false church , the synagogue of Satan , the dragon and his angels prevail another way . 

Quest . how doth the true church prevail ? 

answ. thus : she keeps all the spiritual , the invisible , the holy things of God from the paw of the dragon , and of all those false worshippers . The invisible Jew , the invisible life and power , that whereof God had built up his church , is preserved by him ; and against his life and spirit , and his church ( Which he builds by his spirit , and preserves in it ) all the powers of darkness cannot prevail ; but do they all what they can , the manchild is caught up to God , and the church by God's help flies from the face of the dragon into the wilderness , where she is fed 42.  Months , or 1260. days , which is the time of the dragons prevailing outwardly by his false church and ministry , rev. 12.  

Quest . how doth the dragon and false church prevail ? 

answ. by putting the manchild and true church to flight , by gaining the church's ground , setting up his synagogue ( Or false representation of the true church ) where the true church had stood before . For the church being fled into the wilderness , the field was left to him , and there he sets up his false synagogue in the sight of the world , calling her the true church , and her seed the true Catholics , but casting a flood of reproach after the woman , reviling her ( Who indeed was the true church ) for a strumpet , and all her seed for seducers , schismatics , heretics , deceivers , &c. even such as were not fit to be suffered in the earth , but to be made war with both by the the spiritual and civil sword , rev. 12 15 , 17.  

Thus then was the victory on each hand : the true church and temple ( With the inward power and virtue of life ) was preserved by God , who caused it by the wings of his spirit to fly out of the sight of all false worshippers and imitators , as far as that is from the sight of men in a city , which flieth out of the city into a wilderness : and to the other is left the outward court to worship in , the profession , the attire , the garments , the visible observations and practices wherein the church before had appeared , and in which she did once truly and spiritually worship : for the church did acceptably worship in the outward court , before it was measured and divided from the inward temple , and given to the gentiles , rev. 11 2.  

Quest . now how long was this false church to stand ? 

answ. till the church its coming out of the wilderness in the same spirit and power wherewith she fled into the wilderness . When Christ comes with the fiery breath of his mouth , and with the brightness of his eternal light , than this false image of the church melts and dissolves away , 2 thes 2.8 . But till than she keeps her seat on the beast , on whom she rides , and by virtue of whom she sits upon the waters , even upon peoples , multitudes , nations and tongues , rev. 17.15 . 

Obj. but did not Christ say the gates of hell should not prevail against his church ? 

answ. no more they did not : for she had wings of an eagle given her to fly into the wilderness , into the place prepared of God for her ; into which she did fly , and was there fed and preserved , do all the powers of darkness what they could : so that the dragon and his angels prevailed not against the woman , but she was hide from the face of the serpent , and from all his spite and power , who could not come within the bounds of her heaven in the wilderness , but was cast out into the earth , and his angels with him , rev. 12.8 , 9  But Christ did not say that the gates of hell should not prevail against her outward estate , but the contrary in this very prophecy of John is here declared , to wit , that she was so far prevailed against : the true woman who was clothed with the sun , and had the moon under her feet , and was crowned with a crown of twelve stars , was to fly away and give place , and a false woman to start up in her stead , who with her golden cup of her fornications , was to deceive and bewitch all nations , kindreds , tongues and languages 42.  Months , or 1260. days , which was the full time the church was to remain in the wilderness : but after that time , the false church with Antichrist her husband ( Who all this while sat in the temple ) were to be revealed , judged and destroyed , and the true church return again out of the wilderness into her own place . 

Quest . why would God suffer his church thus to be prevailed against , thus to be banished and driven out of the building which his spirit had reared for her , into a wilderness , and a mystery of deceit and falsehood to be set up in her name and stead ? 

answ. first , as a just judgement upon the world ( Who slighted the day of their visitation , and would not come into the vineyard to work ) God brings the night upon them , wherein they could not enter into the vineyard , nor work if they would never so fain , John 9 4.  

2dly . as a just judgement upon such , who though they could not but own and acknowledge the truth , yet did not love it in their hearts , but loved their unrighteousness , their darkness still ; therefore God removes the power of his truth from their eyes , into the wilderness , and lets out a power of darkness and deceit upon them , wherewith they were deluded instead of the truth itself , 2 thes. 2.10 , 11.  

3dly . that such as were approved , Might be made manifest in the spirit to be pure gold indeed . They that held the living truth , and could not be drawn aside with all the pleasures of this world on the one hand , nor with all the dangers from it on the other hand , no nor yet with all the deceivableness of unrighteousness , these did shine indeed in the light and power of the spirit , and were a great honour and crown upon the head of their Master . 

4thly . that darkness Might have its day , or hour , or season of manifestation to the full . There hath been no day of any dispensation hitherto , but it hath had a night coming after it . There was an Antichrist to be revealed in the power of darkness , as well as Christ ( The eternal light of life ) in the living power . Now as long as the true church stood , and as long as the the manchild was found dwelling here with her , in the habitation which God had built up for them , the man of sin could not be revealed , but the pure power of life would soon discover him . Therefore at length , when the full time and season of his discovery came , God removed that into the wilderness which stood in the way , and then he and his spouse , the false church , make a fair show in the world , 2 thes. 2.7 . 

5thly . that the Lord Might make the name of his son , with the glory of his truth and power to shine , by overcoming the dragon and this false church after so long a time of thick darkness , and after such an universal prevalency of the powers and deceits thereof . Was it not a great glory and honour to the Lord , to overcome the heathenish world , and Jewish church & worship , by the power of his truth shining through a poor despicable company of fishermen and mechanics ? And will it not be as great ( If not a greater ) glory to him to overcome the Antichristian world ( After it hath taken so long and so deep root , and is become so strongly founded ) by as poor contemptible instruments as they were ? 

Quest . but how was it possible that so great a deceit should get up in the world so near the apostles days , or rather in the very days of the apostles , as this seemeth to be ? 

answ. the false apostles and ministers came with all deceivavableness of unrighteousness , and with all power , and signs , and lying wonders , 2 thes. 2.9 , 10.  And the power of miracles in the true apostles Might well cease : for the end of miracles was but to testify to the world , to be a sign to the unbelievers , 1 cor. 14.22 but now their work towards the world , was well nigh finished , & judgement was to come upon them for neglecting and despising the day of their visitation . So that the power of deceit was let up in the false apostles , & the power of truth did draw innards in the true apostles , which made it very easy for deceit to prevail . Besides , the false apostles appeared in an higher appearance than the true apostles did , with more glorious discoveries , so that they could hold forth all that the apostles did ( As to the form & outward doctrine ) & more too , & could show wonders to confirm what they held forth further : and now how could they choose but prevail over all that kept not close to the anointing , which distinguisheth & discerneth not by any outward manifestation or appearance , but by the savour of the ointment ? Yea so great was the power of deceit in them , that they drew the third part of the stars of heaven from their place , into this earthly building , so that they fell from the true ministry , and the true church , unto this false church and ministry , rev. 12.4 . How many then of the inferior and common sort were then drawn aside ? 

Quest hath there then been no visible true church-state in the world since that time ? 

answ. it is impossible for any to build a true church for God , but his own spirit : and if God removed the church which he built into the wilderness , it is impossible for all the men of the earth to build up another true one , all that season that God appoints his church to abide in the wilderness . Several sorts of men May attempt it , and each May build up their different images of the thing , but none can recover the thing itself , till the Lord by his spirit ( Who first built , and then pulled down ) pity the dust of Zion , and raise up the tabernacle of David again , psal. 102.13 . isa. 2.2 . rev. 21.2 , 3.  

Qu. what is the wilderness , tell us , that the simple hearted , who long after the truth May know where to look for , & how to find the true church ? 

answ. it is not an outward place , into which the bodies of persons Might flee , but a parable to express somewhat inwardly : and it is under the feet of all the false worshippers , who are worshipping in their several buildings in the outward court . That which they trample upon , keep down , and despise , is the holy city , rev. 11.2 . And the place where the true church all this while hath been , ( And yet in a great part is ) is there . 

Quest . but if God's church hath not been in a built state , but lain desolate in the wilderness ever since Antichrist and the false church got up , what hath the estate of his persons been ever since ? 

answ. a state of witnesses , rev. 11.3 . In every age God hath hath had two witnesses ( Which was a sufficient number to confirm his truth by ) to witness to the power of his truth , against the emptiness and corruptions of the forms which Antichrist had brought in , instead of the living power : which witnesses were clothed with sackcloth , giving forth their testimony with tears , while they of the Antichristian party were rejoicing in the glory , riches and beauty of their false church , as they could slay , suppress and keep down the witnesses , rev. 11.10 . and chap. 18.7 , 9  

Quest . what did the dragon do after this victory , after he had got his building up in the outward court , ( For after he had prevailed to corrupt it , the Lord gave it to his worshippers the gentiles , rev. 11.2 . those that made a profession of his truth , but were not true Jews , rev. 3.9 . not of the inward circumcision , phil. 3.3 . ) and had got the holy city under the feet of his worshippers ? 

answ. he pursued his victory against the woman , and the remnant of her seed . As for the woman , he cast a flood of infamy , of reproach after her , that she Might never be able to lift up her head again in the power of truth , but what she causeth to spring up , Might still be reviled for falsehood and heresy , & that nothing Might henceforth go for truth , but what this false woman should determine to be so . And as touching the remnant of her seed which still remained true to God , keeping his commandments , and having the testimony of Jesus , he applies himself now to wage the war against them , rev. 12.15.17 . 

Quest . how doth he wage the war against them ? 

answ. he raiseth up a beast out of this sea of cofnusion and wickedness , ( Which ensued upon this great battle and victory on his side ) to whom he gave his power , his seat , and great authority , rev. 13.2 . He had hitherto kept his seat in his synagogue ▪ where he had been slaying the faithful martyrs of Jesus , rev. 2.13 . and had put to death such as loved not their lives unto death , rev. 12.11 . Now he finds it more for his advantage to raise up this beast , and to give his power , seat and authority to him . This was the Roman power , which till it was thus depraved and enslaved by Satan , was not a beast , but more noble and just in government than the corrupted Jews were , but now it becomes a beast : and this beast he stirs up against the very name and form of godliness , that he Might root out the very appearance of Israel from off the earth : for he got but into the form , to eat out the power ; and now , seeing the power is removed , it is for his advantage also to corrupt and destroy the memorial of the true form . 

Quest . doth he effect this , and prevail likewise against the witnesses ? 

answ. yea , as he effected the other . He overcomes the witnesses after the manner that he had overcome the church , ( To wit , by captiving the outward man , and killing with the sword ; but they overcome him by patience and faith , in their testimony and sufferings , rev. 13.10 . ) and this in all kindreds , tongues and nations ; and so all the public worship of the earth is given to him , ver. 7 , 8.  

Quest . why would God suffer him to do thus , seeing he hath all power in his hands , and could have restrained him if he had pleased ? 

answ. this was greatly needful to the present estate of his persons : for by this God raised up that which was good and pure in any , and kept life in it , which otherwise Might have perished in the estate of that corrupt form , which then had prevailed , and had gotten dominion outwardly over the true power . 

Quest . but did not this tend to destroy Satan's kingdom also ? For this stroke going against the very name of Christianity , and profession of godliness , Might light upon his carnal gospelers likewise . 

answ. they could easily save themselves , turning about to avoid sufferings , and crying , who is like unto the beast ? Who is able to make war with him ? Rev. 13.4 . Being already one with him in spirit and principle , they would not easily differ from him , and suffer about a form , especially seeing their Master's interest and service run now another way . 

Quest . what became of this beast ? 

answ. the Lord did rend and tear him outwardly by his plagues , famines , pestilences , wars , &c. insomuch as one of his heads was wounded as it were to death , and inwardly by the innocency and power of his truth appearing in his witnesses , which scorched and tormented the adversary , so that this engine of the dragon grew faint , and weary , and unfit for this service , as he stood in this capacity . 

Quest . what doth the dragon do then , to carry on his war against the witnesses ? 

answ. after this tempestuous sea was over , he raiseth up another beast out of the earth , with another kind of power , even with horns like a lamb , rev. 13.11 . but he spoke as a dragon , exercising all the power of the first beast , ver. 12. so that he is the man in power henceforward ; yet he setteth up the first beast also , causing the earth and them that dwell therein , to worship the first beast , whose deadly wound was healed . and thus these two join together , to set up an image to be worshipped : and all that will not worship this image ( But the living God alone in his pure life and spirit ) this latter beast hath power to cause to be killed , ver. 15. and such must not so much as buy or sell , who will not receive the mark of the beast , or his name , or at least the number of his name ; to which number the highest growth and perfection in religion and worship after the wisdom of the flesh , ( Or man's wisdom ) is to be reckoned , ver. 17.18 . 

Observe now diligently the place of the true church , and her estate , and the estate of her children all the 42.  Months . Her place of habitation is a wilderness , her estate an estate of widowhood , ( A city unbuilt , trodden under the feet of the gentiles ) her seed witnesses , reproached , persecuted , and slain by the false woman and her seed . Observe likewise the place and estate of the false church and her children ; she rears up a glorious building as to the outward , she is a city built and richly adorned , she hath a golden cup of doctrine and discipline , of ordinances and worship to hold forth to the Kings and inhabiters of the earth in all nations , peoples , kindreds and tongues ; she is arrayed in purple and scarlet-colour , and decked with gold and precious stone , and pearls , rev. 17 4. and all her daughters , who though they May deny her , yet partake of her spirit , and learn to rear up buildings of churches like her ) they also flourish in their degree and measure . None is poor but Zion , none is desolate but God's Jerusalem , but his church which fled into the wilderness , to abide there all the time of his appointment : and her witnesses are clothed with sackcloth , testifying to God's despised and reproached truth , with mourning and grief of spirit , and not with that fleshly joy , wisdom , and confidence , wherewith Babylon and her merchants vent their wares , but only in the evidence , demonstration , and assurance of the spirit in their hearts , which all the wise and confident builders and inhabitants of Babylon trample upon , and despise . 

Now it behooveth all to consider what this Babylon , what this woman is , spoken of rev. 17. which came in the place of the other woman spoken of rev. 12. what this built city is , which the wrath of the Lord will make desolate , what this beast or false prophet is which appears like a lamb , ( And showeth such miracles to deceive the earth ) and yet is fierce and cruel to such as witness for God , rev. 13 13 , 14 , 15 for dreadful are the plagues , woes , vials of wrath , thunders , &c. which God hath prepared for her , even the cup of the Lord's indignation without mixture , torment with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels , and in the presence of the lamb , rev. 14.10 , 11. and chap. 18.8 . And who would not fear thee , oh thou King of saints , when thou comest with thy cup of fury and indignation , to empty into the bowels of this woman , which hath been so long drunk with the blood of thy saints and martyrs ▪ rev. 17 6.  Consider these things , oh ye Papists , wait on the Lord in his fear and dread , that he May vouchsafe to make known to you what , and where this city Babylon is , and that such of you as belong to him May hear his voice calling you out of her , that ye May escape this bitter cup , rev 18.4 . 

The great judgement is already begun ( This we know , who have tasted of it . ) It hath begun at God's house , and is spreading further , yea even over the nations which have disowned you , & yet have learned of you to build up a church and worship , after the manner of your whoredoms . These the Lord will judge first : he will plead with the daughters who have disowned their mother , and yet have gone on in the spirit of whoredoms , worshipping the works of their own hands , and admiring and magnifying the beauty of the churches which themselves have form . Now is your time to consider , now is the time for the simple-hearted among you to flee from Babylon , before the wrath of the Lord besiege her . There are three things in general ( Besides many particulars ) which the Protestant nations and churches have learned of you , which will cost them dear , ere they be made willing to part with them . 

First , their taking upon them authority over men's consciences , commanding them what they should believe , which the apostles never did , but said expressly , they had not dominion over the faith of others , but were helpers of their joy , 2 cor. 1.24 . They could not command any to believe their doctrine , but spoke in the demonstration of the spirit , waiting till God opened the heart , 2 cor 4.2 . and would not have men profess , believe , or practice from their words , but by a feeling of the power , 1 cor. 2.5 . And when men did believe some things , and came into the unity & fellowship of the faith , they did not require them to believe all the that church taught or held forth as true , but waited till God pleased to reveal further , phil. 3.15 . Indeed they could command obedience to the faith ; what truths the spirit of the Lord revealed and taught any man , they could charge him in the name of the Lord to be faithful to , rom. 1.5 . but they knew it was God alone who could engraft the truth into the heart and conscience , and also give the increase of it : and so from him alone they expected it , waiting in patience on the stubborn and perverse , till God should please to work upon them , 2 tim. 2.24 , 25. and likewise on those that were convinced , and had subjected themselves to the faith , for his increase of it , 1 cor. 3.6 , 7.  

2dly . their abridging men's liberty in things wherein God hath left them free , and pressing an uniformity in things which they themselves confess to be indifferent . Now the apostle ( Who had the care of all the churches , 2 cor. 11 : 28 ) though he knew certainly how to determine about meats and days , as himself confesseth , rom. 14.14 . yet he telleth the church at Rome expressly , that Christ was the Lord and Master of every disciple , to whom he must stand or fall herein , ver. 4. and that every man ought to do is he is fully persuaded in his own mind , ver. 5.  Nay he is so far from pressing a necessity of uniformity in such cases , that he presseth a necessity of bearing on each hand , ver. 3.  So that in the apostles judgement , the church hath not power to lay commands on the conscience , but must receive the weakest in the faith , ver. 1. leaving him to the liberty of his conscience and to his subjection to his own Lord and Master , to whom every believer must give an account of what he receives , and of what he obeys and performs , ver. 10. and 12.  

3dly . their setting up a church-building , government and discipline by the magistrates power . this the apostles nowhere taught nor practised . They converted men by the power of the spirit , they cut down errors , heresies , seducers and heretics by the same word , and they found the weapons of their warfare sufficient , 2 cor. 10.4 . they had no need of running to the magistrate . But that church , those doctrines , that government and discipline which is set up by the magistrates sword without and against the spirit , that hath need of a carnal sword to defend it against the spirit , and to cut down God's witnesses ( Whom he raiseth up to testify against it ) for schismatics and heretics , or its nakedness will soon be made manifest , & its ruin approach . 

Now when the Lord hath judged all the daughters of Babylon for these things , then will he at length begin to plead with their mother , Babylon the great , who hath gone a-whoring from the spirit , and built up a gaudy church without the spirit , which she hath defended by violence and blood , drinking the blood of the saints who have been inspired by the spirit to testify against her , rev. 11.7 , 8. and hath taught all her daughters to do the same , to wit , to drink the blood of the witnesses against them , even as she hath drunk the blood of the witnesses that have testified against her . And though because she hath had an half day more given her , after her time seemed to be even expiring , and after judgement and desolation was beginning to enter upon her ; though because of this , she thinks the bitterness of death is past , and she shall now sit as a Queen , a Lady , a glorious church for ever , rev. 18.7 . yet for all this is she come again into God's remembrance , rev. 16.19 . and she shall see widowhood , and be cast into a bed of torment , and all her children into great tribulation with her , and she shall be desolate , and naked , and drink of the cup , and not repent that she Might escape it , rev. 16.11 . and 9.20 , 21.  This is her portion from the hand of the Lord : oh happy is he whose eyes the Lord shall open to flee out of her for his life ! For the lamb is arisen to make war , and his spouse is making herself ready for his pure bed of life , & his anger is kindled against all the Kings & powers of the earth that stand in his way : and though they fight never so resolutely against him and his meek ones , they shall not prevail , but the lamb will overcome all , for he is King of Kings , and Lord of Lords , and they that are with him in this battle of his spirit , are called , and chosen , and faithful , rev. 17.14 . And though this woman ( The false church , in her various dresses ) is so strong everywhere ( Getting the earthly powers and authorities on her side ) that now it May be said concerning this beast in the several appearances of it , as was concerning the former , who is able to make war with her ? Yet there is an invisible power stronger than she , who will call her to judgement , rev. 18.8 . and make her give an account of all the saints blood which she hath drunk herself , and which she hath taught her daughters to drink : and salvation , glory , honour and power shall be ascribed to the Lord for his righteous and powerful judging of her , rev. 19.1 , 2.  And he that hath any glimmering of this in the eternal light of the Lord's pure everliving spirit , let him even now say , Alleluja to him who is arisen out of his holy habitation , and hath already begun this work , who will not fail to perfect it . amen ▪ 

Somewhat concerning the ground of error , and the way to truth and unity , for the sake of such as are more spiritual , &c.  

There is no way to become an heir of the kingdom of God , but by being begotten and born of his spirit , which blows upon the spirit of a man , breathes life into him , and forms him in the eternal image , John 3.8 . gal. 4.19 . 

There is no way of having this work of God preserved , but by turning to the spirit , which begets , standing and keeping upright in that which is begotten , and taking heed of the fleshly wisdom , which stands near to corrupt and destroy the work of God , tempting , and leading aside from the truth itself , into some image and resemblance of it : and if this prevail , there is suddenly a departing from the living God , and a running a-whoring after the inventions of the fleshly wisdom , which appears in the likeness of the true wisdom , that it Might the better deceive : 

Now when man is first breathed upon , and begotten towards God , there 's but a little life , a little simplicity , a little light , a little power , a little of the wisdom of the true babe ; but a great body of death , deceit , darkness , power and wisdom of the flesh standing : and all these apply themselves to overturn & destroy the truework of God , by raising up a false image of it , which is easily done ; but abiding and preservation in the truth is difficult , and alone maintained by that power , which at first begat . 

Now the power preserves through keeping out of the sensual and reasoning part ( Where the corrupt one hath his lodging ) in that poor , low , little , childish sensibility of the life , which the father hath begotten . Here is the entrance unto the truth , here is the growth , here is the preservation and safety : which makes it so hard for those that are wise and strong in the reasoning and comprehending part , either to enter in , or to abide and grow in the nakedness , simplicity , and seeming folly of the truth of the gospel . Oh what a deal is to be brought down , before they can be truly reached and convinced by the foolish & weak things which God chooseth to effect his great works by , 1 cor. 1.27 , 28 ! What a work hath God with them to batter their wisdom , and bring down their understanding , which the larger it is , the more it stands in the way of his light , 1 cor. 1.19 . And if they be convinced at any time , what an easy and natural return unto them doth their own wisdom find , by some subtle device or other , to draw them back from the plainness and singleness of the truth , into an holding it in the wisdom and subtlety of the understanding part , where the simplicity is soon lost , 2 cor. 11.3 . 

In the spirit which begets and in the truth which is begotten by it , is the true unity . Feeling that in one another , is that which unites us to one another . Every one keeping to that in his own particular , is kept to that which unites ; and that is kept alive in him which is to be united : but departing from that , there is a departing from the true unity into the error and ground of division . And then that which hath erred and departed from the true unity , strives to set up a false image of unity , and blames that which abides in the truth , because it cannot thus unite : for that which abides in the spirit , and in that which the spirit hath begotten and form , cannot unite according to the flesh ; as that which is run a-whoring from the spirit , into an image of the fleshly wisdom's forming , cannot unite according to the spirit . Consider this , oh ye professors of this age , ye blame us for departing from you , for withdrawing from unity with you ; we blame you for departing from the living principle , wherein our unity with you formerly stood , and wherein alone we can again unite with you , and not in such things as uphold a fleshly and false image of the true unity . 

Oh that ye could hear the Lord's voice , who cryeth aloud to the professors of this age to cease from man ! Cease from man in thyself , oh thou who hast ever had any taste of the pure grace and power of God . Cease from thine own understanding , thine own affections , thine own zeal , thine own gathered knowledge and wisdom from the scriptures , with all the sparks of thine own kindling , that God May be all in thee , and his eternal habitation be raised up in thee , and perfected , & thou swallowed up and comprehended in it for ever . Oh what a work hath God to do to drive man's reason and wisdom out of his temple , out of his scriptures , out of all his holy things ! He that hath an ear , let him hear , for the sake of his souls eternal peace . Alas , alas how many stumble at , and blaspheme that , which alone can save the soul . There have been many dispensations of , but there is but one living truth , but one substance , but one arm of salvation : and he that stumbles at the thing itself , how can he be saved by it ? It is easy misunderstanding a former dispensation , reading it in the letter , and so to miss of the salvation hoped for by it . The Jews owned the Messiah ( According to the scriptures , as they thought ) but rejected him in the way he came to save them in . Now if Christians have gathered such a kind of knowledge from the letter of the scriptures , as they did , how can they avoid the same error , namely , of owning Christ according to the scriptures , as they think , but rejecting him as he comes to save them , rebelling against his living ministry , and the pure power and demonstration of his spirit , because it appears weak & low , because it doth not appear the same thing to them which they expect to be saved by , according to their apprehensions of the scriptures ? Thus reading the scriptures in another spirit & wisdom then that which wrote them , they must needs conclude and gather another thing from them , than what is written in them , and so make that a means to them of erring from the life , which was written to testify of , and point to the living principle from whence life and salvation springs , and where alone it is to be had . 

The end . 


















