The Triumphs of Truth . 

A Solemnity unparallelled for Cost , Art , and Magnificence , at the Confirmation and Establishment of that Worthy and true Nobly . Minded Gentleman , Sir THOMAS MIDDLETON , Knight , in the Honourable Office of his Majesty's Lieutenant , the Lord Mayor of the thrice Famous City of LONDON . 

Taking Beginning 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Lordships going and proceeding 〈…〉 e from receiving the Oath of Ma 〈…〉 Westminster , on the Morrow o● 〈…〉 and judes' day , 〈◊〉 19 1613.  

All the Shows , Pate 〈…〉 , Chariots ; Morning , Noon , and Night-triumphs . 

Directed , written , underdeemed into Form from the Ignorance of some former times and their Common Writer . 

By Thomas Middleton . 

LONDON . Printed by N 〈…〉 dwelling at the sign of the Hand , oh 〈…〉 ●●●●●rne-bridge . 1613.  

TO THE GREAT Expectation of Virtue and Goodness , and most worthy of all those Costs and Honours , which the Noble Fellowship and Society and Grocers , and general Love of the whole City , in full heaped bounties bestow upon him , the truly . Generous and judicious , Sir Thomas Middleton , Knight , Lord Mayor of the Honourable City of London . 

AS often as we shall fix our thoughts upon the Almighty Providence , sooften they return to our capacities laden with Admiration , either from the Divine works of his Mercy , or those incomprehensible of his justice : but here to instance only his Omnipotent Mercy , it being the Health and Preservation of all his works : and first not only in raising , but also in preserving your L. from many great and incident dangers , especially in foreign Countries in the time of your Youth and Travels : and now with Safety , Love and Triumph , to establish You in this years' Honour : crowning the Perfection of your Days , & the Gravity of your Life , with Power , Respect & Reverence . Next , in that myself ( though unworthy ) being of one Name with your Lordship , notwithstanding all Oppositions of Malice , Ignorance and Envy , should thus happily live , protected by part of that Mercy ( as if one Fate did prosperously cleave to one Name ) now to do Service to your Fame and Worthiness , and my Pen , only to be employed in these Bounteous and Honourable Triumphs , being but shadows to those Eternal Glories that stand ready for Deservers , to which I commend the Deserts of your justice , remaining ever 

To your Lordship , in the best of my observance , Thomas Middleton . 

THE TRIUMPHS Of Truth . 

Search all Chronicles , Histories , Records , in what language or letter soever ; let the inquisitive man waste the dear Treasures of his Time and Eyesight , he shall conclude his life only in this certainty , that there is no subject upon earth received into the place of his government with the like State & Magnificence as is the Lord Mayor of the City of London . This being then infallible ( like the Mistress of our Triumphs ) and not to be denied of any , how careful ought those Gentlemen to be , to whose discretion and judgement the weight and charge of such a business is entirely referred and committed by the whole Society , to have all things correspondent to that Generous and Noble freeness of cost and liberality , the streams of Art , to equal those of Bounty ; a Knowledge that may take the true height of such an Honourable Solemnity ; the miserable want of both which in the impudent common Writer , hath often forced from me much pity and sorrow ; and it would heartily grieve any understanding spirit to behold many times so glorious a fire in bounty and goodness offering to match in self with freezing Art , sitting in darkness , with the candle out , looking like the picture of Black Monday . 

But to speak truth , which many beside myself can affirm upon knowledge , a care that hath been seldom equalled , and not easily imitated , hath been faithfully shown in the whole course of this business , both by the Wardens and Committees , men of much understanding , industry , and carefulness , little weighing the greatness of expense , so the cost might purchase perfection , so fervent hath been their desire to excel in that ( which is a learned and virtuous Ambition ) and so unfeignedly pure the loves and affections of the whole Company to his Lordship ; If any shall imagine that I set fairer colours upon their Deserts , than they upon themselves , let them but read and conceive , and their own understandings will light them to the acknowledgement of their errors . First , they may here behold love and bounty opening with the morning , earlier than some of former years , ready at the first appearing of his Lordship , to give his ear a taste of the day's succeeding glory , and thus the form of it presents itself . 

At Soper-lane end a Senate-house erected , upon which Musicians sit playing ; and more a quicken time , a sweet voice married to these words : 

THE SONG . 

Mother of many honourable 'Zounds , 
Think not the Glass too slowly runs 
That in Time's hand is set , 
Because thy worthy Son appears not yet : 
Lady be pleased , the hour grows on , 
Thy joy will be complete anon ; 
thou shalt behold 
The man enrolled 
In Honour's books , whom Virtue raises , 
Love-circled round , 
His triumphs crowned 
With all good wishes , prayers , and praises . 


After this sweet air hath liberally spent itself , at the first appearing of the Lord Mayor from Guildhall in the morning , a Trumpet placed upon that Scaffold , sounds forth his welcome ; then after a strain or two of Music , a Grave Feminine Shape presents itself , from behind a silk curtain , representing London , attired like a reverend Mother , a long white hair naturally flowing on either side of her : on her head a model of Steeples and Turrets , her habit Crimson silk , near to the Honourable garment of the City : her left hand holding a Key of gold , who after a comely grace , equally mixed with Comfort and Reverence , sends from her lips this Motherly salutation . 

The speech of London .  Honour and joy salute thee , I am raised 
In comfort and in love to see thee , glad 
And happy in thy blessings , nor esteem 
My words the less , cause I a woman speak , 
A woman's counsel is not always weak . 
I am thy Mother , at that name I know 
Thy heart does reverence to me , as becomes 
A Son of Honour , in whose soul burns clear 
The sacred lights of divine fear and knowledge , 
I know , that at this instant , all the works 
Of Motherly love in me , shown to thy Youth 
When it was soft and helpless , are summed up 
In thy most grateful mind , thou well remember'st 
All my dear pains and care , with what affection 
I cherish thee in my bosom , watchful still 
Over thy ways , 
Set wholesome and Religious Laws before 
The footsteps of thy youth , showed Thee the way 
That lead thee to the Glory of this Day . 
To which ( with tears of the most fruitful joy 
that cuer Mother shed ) I welcome Thee . 
O I could be content to take my part 
Out of Felicity only in weeping , 
Thy Presence and this Day is so dear to me . 
Look on my age ( my Honourable Son ) 
And then begin to think upon thy Office : 
See how on each side of me hang the cares 
Which I bestowed on Thee , in silver hairs . 
And now the Faith , the Love , the zealous Fires 
With which I cheered thy Youth , my Age requires , 
The duty of a Mother I have shown , 
Through all the Rites of pure affection , 
In Care , in Government , in Wealth , in Honour , 
Brought Thee to what thou art , thow'st all from me , 
Than what thou shouldst be I expect from Thee . 
Now to Thy Charge , Thy Government , Thy Cares , 
Thy Mother in her age submits her years . 
And though ( to my abundant grief I speak it , 
Which now o'erflows my joy ) some Sons I have 
Thankless , unkind , and disobedient , 
Rewarding all my Bounties with Neglect , 
And will of purpose wilfully retire 
Themselves , from doing grace and service to me , 
When they have got all they can , or hope for , from me , 
The thankfulness in which Thy Life doth move , 
Did ever promise fairer fruits of Love , 
And now they show themselves , yet they have all 
My blessing with them , so the world shall see 
't is their unkindness , no defect in me ; 
But go thou forward ( my thrice Honoured Son ) 
In ways of goodness , Glory is best won 
When Merit brings it home , disdain all Titles 
Purchased with Coin , of Honour take thou hold , 
By thy Desert let others buy 't with Gold ; 
Fix thy most serious Thought upon the Weight 
thou goest to undergo , 't is the just Government 
Of this Famed City , ( Me ) whom Nations call 
Their brightest Eye , then with great care & fear 
Aught I to be o'erseen to be kept clear . 
Spots in deformed Faces are scarce Noted , 
Fair cheeks are stained if never so little blotted . 
Seest thou this Key of Gold ? it shows thy charge , 
This place is the King's Chamber , all pollution , 
Sin and Uncleanness must be locked out here , 
And be kept sweet , with Sanctity , Faith & Fear , 
I see Grace take effect , Heaven's joy upon her , 
't is rare , when Virtue opens the Gate to Honour , 
My blessing be upon thee , Son , and Lord , 
And on my Sons all , that obey my word . 


then making her Honour , as before , the Waitss of the City there in service , his Lordship and the Worthy Company , are lead forward toward the water side , where you shall find the River decked in the richest glory to receive him ; upon whose Crystal Bosom stands five Islands artfully garnished with all manner of Indian Fruit-trees , Drugs , Spiceries ; and the like , the middle Island with a fair Castle especially beautified . 

But making haste to return to the City again , where Triumph waits in more Splendour and Magnificence , the first than that attends to receive his Lordship off the water at Bainard's Castle , is Truth's Angel on Horseback , his Raiment of white Silk powdered with Stars of Gold : on his head a Crown of Gold , a Trumpeter before him on Horseback , and Zeal the Champion of Truth , in a Garment of Flame-coloured Silk , with a bright hair on his head , from which shoot Fire-beams , following close after him , mounted alike , his Right hand holding a flaming Scourge , intimating thereby that as he is the manifester of Truth , he is likewise the chastiser of Ignorance and Error . 

The Salutation of the Angel .  I have within mine Eye my blessed Charge , 
Hail Friend of Truth , Safety and jay attends thee ; 
I am Truth's Angel , by my Mistress sent 
To guard and guide thee , when thou tookest thy Oath 
I stood on thy Right hand , though to thy eye 
In visible form I did not then appear , 
Ask but thy Soul 't will tell thee I stood near ; 
And 't was a Time to take care of Thee then 
At such a Marriage before Heaven and Men , 
( Thy Faith being wed to Honour ) close behind thee 
Stood Errors Minister , that still sought to blind thee , 
And wrap his subtle mists about thy Oath , 
To hide it from the nakedness of Troth , 
Which is Truth's purest glory , but my light 
Still as it shone , Expelled her blackest spite ; 
His Mists fled by , yet all I could devose , 
could hardly keep them from some People's eyes , 
But thine they flew from , thy care 's but begun 
Wake on , the Victory is not half yet won , 
thou wilt be still assaulted , thou shalt meet 
With many dangers , that in voice seem sweet , 
And ways most pleasant to a worldlings eye , 
My Mistress has but One , but that leads hie 
To yon triumphant City follow me , 
Keep thou to Truth , Eternity keeps to thee . 


ZEAL .  On boldly Man of Honour , thou shalt win , 
I am Truth's Champion , Zeal , the Scourge of Sin.  


The Trumpet then sounding , the Angel and Zeal rank themselves just before his Lordship , & conduct him to Paul's-chain , where in the South-yard Error in a Chariot with his infernal Ministers attends to assault him , his Garment of Ash-colour Silk , his head rolled in a cloud , over which stands , an Owl , a Mole on one shoulder , a Bat on the other , all Symbols of blind Ignorance and Darkness , Mists hanging at his Eyes : close before him rides Envy his Champion , eating of a human heart , mounted on a Rhinoceros , attired in red Silk , suitable to the bloodiness of her manners her left Pap bare , where a Snake fastens , her Arms half Naked , holding in her right hand a Dart tincted in blood . 

The greeting of Error .  Art come ? OH Welcome my triumphant Lord , 
My Glories Sweetheart ! how many million 
Of happy wishes hath my love told out 
For this desired minute , I was dead 
Till I enjoyed the Presence , I saw nothing , 
A Blindness thicker than Idolatry , 
Clove to my Eyeballs , now I am all of Light , 
Of Fire , of joy , Pleasure runs nimbly through me , 
le 's join together both in State and Triumph , 
And down with beggarly and friendless Virtue , 
That hath so long impoverished this fair City , 
My Beasts shall trample on her naked breast , 
Under my Chariot-wheels her Bones lie pressed , 
She never shall rise again , great Power this day , 
Is given into thy hand , make use on 't Lord , 
And let thy Will and Appetite sway the Sword , 
Down with them all now , whom thy heart envies , 
Let not thy Conscience come into thine Eyes 
This twelvemonth , if thou lov'st revenge or gain , 
I 'll teach thee to cast mists , to blind the plain 
And simple eye of Man , he shall not know 't , 
Nor see thy Wrath when 't is upon his throat , 
All shall be carried with such Art and Wit , 
That what thy Lust Acts , shall be counted fit , 
then for Attendants that may best observe thee , 
I 'll pick out Sergeants of my band to serve thee , 
here 's Gluttony and Sloth , two precious Slaves , 
Will tell thee more than a whole heard of Knaves , 
The worth of every Office to a Hair , 
And who bids most , and bow the Markets are , 
Let them alone to smell , and for a need , 
they 'll bring thee in Bribes for Measure and light Bread , 
Keep thy eye winking , and thy hand wide open , 
then thou shalt know what Wealth is , and the scope 
Of rich Authority , Ho 't is sweet and dear , 
Make use of Time then , thou 'st but one poor Year , 
And that will quickly slide , then be not nice , 
Both Power and Profit cleaves to my Advice , 
And what 's he locks his Ear from those sweet Charms , 
Or runs not to meet Gain with wide-stretched Arms , 
There is a poor thin threadbare thing , called Truth , 
I give thee warning of her , if she speak 
Stop both thine ears close , most Professions break 
That ever dealt with her , an Unlucky thing , 
she 's almost sworn to nothing , I can bring 
A thousand of our Parish , besides Queans , 
That ne'er knew what Truth meant , nor ever means . 
Some I could cull out here , even in this Throng , 
If I would show my Children , and how strong 
I were in faction ; ' ldsse poor simple Stray , 
she 's all her life time finding out one way : 
She ' as but one foolish way , straight on , right forward , 
And yet she makes a toil on 't , and goes on 
With Care and Fear forsooth , when I can run 
Over a hundred with delight and pleasure , 
Backways , and byways , and fetch in my Treasure 
After the wishes of my heart , by shifts , 
Deceits , and slights , and I 'll give thee those gifts ; 
I 'll show thee all my corners yet untold , 
The very nooks where Beldames hide their gold , 
In hollow walls and chimneys , where the Sun 
Never yet shone , nor Truth came ever near , 
This of thy Life I 'll make the golden year : follow me then . 
Enuy. Learn now to scorn thy Inferiors , those must love thee , 
And wish to eat their Hearts , that sit above thee . 


Zeal stirred up with Divine Indignation , at the Impudence of these Hellhounds , both forces their retirement , and makes way for the Chariot wherein Truth his Mistress sits , in a close garment of white Satin , which makes her appear thin and naked , figuring thereby her simplicity and nearness of heart to those that embrace her ; a robe of white silk cast over it , filled with the eyes of Eagles , showing her deep insight , and height of wisdom , over her thrice sanctified head a milk-white Dove , and on each shoulder one , the sacred Emblems of Purity , Meekness , and Innocency , under her Feet , Serpents , in that she treads down all Subtlety and Fraud , her Forehead impaled with a Diadem of Stars , the Witness of her Eternal descent ; on her Breast a pure round Crystal , showing the brightness of her thoughts and actions ; a Sun in her Right-hand , than which , nothing is truer , a fan filled all with Stars in her left , with which she parts Darkness , and strikes away the vapours of Ignorance ; if you harken to Zeal her Champion after his holy anger is passed against Error , and his crew , he will give it you in better terms , or at least more smoothly and pleasingly . 

The speech of Zeal .  Bold Furies , back , or with this scourge of Fire 
Whence sparkles out Religious chaste-desire 
I 'll whip you down to darkness ; this a place 
Worthy my Mistress , her Eternal Grace 
Be the full object to feast all these eyes 
But thine the first , he that feeds here is wise ; 
Nor by the naked plainness of her weeds 
judge thou her worth , no burnished gloss Truth needs ; 
That Crown of Stars shows her descent from heaven ; 
That Robe of white filled all with eagle eyes , 
Her piercing sight through hidden mysteries ; 
Those milk-white Doves her spotless Innocence ; 
Those Serpents at her feet her victory shows 
Over deceit and guile , her rankest foes , 
And by that Crystal Mirror at her Breast , 
The clearness of her Conscience is expressed ; 
And showing that her deeds all darkness eat , 
Her Right-hand holds Truth's Symbol , the bright Sun ; 
A Fan of Stars she in the other twists , 
With which she chaseth away Errors mists : 
And now she makes to thee , her so even Grace , 
For to her Rich and Poor look with one Face . 


The Words of Truth .  Man raised by Faith and Love , upon whose Head 
Honour sits fresh , let not thy Heart be led 
In ignorant ways of insolence and pride 
From Her , that to this day hath been thy guide ; 
I never showed thee yet more Paths than one , 
And thou hast found sufficient That alone 
To bring Thee hither , then go forward still , 
And having most power , first subject thy Will , 
Give the first Fruits of justice to thyself , 
then dost thou wisely Govern , though that Elf 
Of Sin and Darkness still opposing me , 
Counsels thy Appetite to Master Thee . 
But call to mind what brought thee to this Day , 
Was Falsehood , Cruelty , or Revenge the way ? 
Thy lust or pleasures ? people's curse or hate ? 
These were no ways could raise Thee to this State 
The ignorant must acknowledge , if then from Me , 
Which no Ill dare deny , or Sin control , 
Forsake me not , that can advance thy soul : 
I see a blessed yielding in thy Eye , 
thou 'rt mine , lead on , thy Name shall never die . 


These words ended , they all set forward , this Chariot of Truth and her celestial handmaids the Graces & Virtues , taking place next before his Lord ship , Zeal and the Angel before that , the Chariot of Error following as near as it can get , all passing on , till they come into Paul's Churchyard , where stand ready the five Lands , those dumb Glories that I spoke of before upon the water , upon the height of these five Lands sit five persons representing the five Senses , Visus , Auditus , Tactus , Gustus , Olfactus , ( or ) Seeing , Hearing , Touching , Tasting , Smelling ; at their feet their proper Emblems , Aquila , Ceruus , Araneus , Simia , Canis , an Eagle , a Hart , a Spider , an Ape , a Dog . 

no sooner can your eyes take leave of these , but they may suddenly espy a strange Ship making toward , and that which may raise greater astonishment , it having neither Sailor nor Pilot , only upon a white silk streamer these two words set in letters of Gold , Veritate Governor , I am Steered by Truth ; the persons that are contained within this little Vessel are only four ; a King of the Moors , his Queen , and two Attendants of their own colour , the rest of their followers , people the Castle that stands in the middle Island , of which company two or three on the top appears to sight , this King seeming much astonished at the many eyes of such a multitude , utters his thoughts in these words . 

The Speech of that King.   I see amazement set upon the faces 
Of these white people , wonder , and strange gazes , 
Is it at me ? does my Complexion draw 
So many Christian Eyes , that never saw 
A King so black before ? no , now I see 
Their entire object , they 're all meant to thee 
( Grave City Governor ) my Queen and I 
Well honoured with the Glanee that by , 
I must confess many wild thoughts may rise , 
Opinions , Common murmurs , and fixed Eyes 
At my so strange arrival , in a Land 
Where true Religion and her Temple stand : 
I being a Moor , ethen in Opinions lightness 
As far from Sanctity as my Face from whiteness ; 
But I forgive the judge of th' unwise , 
Whose Censures ever quicken in their Eyes , 
Only begot of outward form and show , 
And I think meet to let such Censurers Know , 
How ever Darkness dwells upon my Face , 
Truth in my soul sets up the Light of Grace ; 
And though in days of Error I did run 
To give all Adoration to the Sun , 
The Moon & Stars ; nay Creatures base and poor , 
Now only their Creator I adore : 
My Queen and People all , at one time won , 
By the Religious Conversation 
Of English Merchants , Factors , Travellers , 
Whose Truth did with our Spirits hold Commerce 
As their affairs with us , following their path 
We all were brought to the true Christian Faith : 
Such benefit in good Example dwells , 
It oft hath power to convert Infidels ; 
Nor could our Desire's rest , till we were led 
Unto this place , where those good Spirits were bred ; 
And see how we arrived , in Blessed Time , 
To do that Mihresse Service , in the Prime 
Of these her Spotless Triumphs , and t' attend 
That Honourable Man , her Late sworn Frend. 
If any wonder at the safe Arrive 
Of this small Vessel , which all Weathers drive 
According to their Rages , where appears 
Nor Mariner nor Pilot ( armed ' 'gainst fears ) 
Know this came hither from man's guidance free , 
Only by Truth Steered ; as our Souls must be ; 
And see where one of her fair Temples stands , 
Do Reverence , Moors , bow low , and Kiss your hands , 
Behold our Queen . 


Queen .  Her Goodnesses are such 
We cannot Honour Her , and Her House too much . 


All in the Ship and those in the Castle bowing their bodies to the Temple of Saint Paul , but Error smiling betwixt Scorn and Anger to see such a devout humility take hold of that complexion , breaks into these , 

Error .  What , have my Sweet-facest Devils forsook me too , 
Nay , than my charms will have enough to do ? 


But Time , sitting by the Frame of Truth his Daughter's Chariot , attired agreeable to his Condition , with his Hourglass , Wings , and Scythe , Knowing best himself when it is fittest to speak , goes forward in this manner : 

This Time hath brought t' effect , for on thy Day 
Nothing but Truth and Virtue shall display : 
Their Virgin Ensigns , Infidelity , 
Barbarism and Guile shall in deep Darkness lie . 
OH I could ever stand still thus , and gaze , 
Never turn Glass again ; wish no more days 
So this might ever last , pity the Light 
Of this rich Glory must be cased in Night ; 
But Time must on , I go , 't is so decreed , 
To bless my Daughter Truth , and all her seed 
With joys Immortal , Triumphs never ending : 
And as her Hand lists me , to thy Ascending 
May it be always ready ( worthy Son ) 
To hasten which , my Hours shall quickly run , 
Seest thou you place , thither I 'll weekly bring thee , 
Where Truths celestial Harmony thou shalt hear , 
To which I charge Thee bend a serious Ear : 
Lead on , Times swift Attendants . 


then the five Lands pass along into Cheapside , the Ship next after them ; the Chariot of Truth still before his Lordship , and that of Prror still chased before it , where their Eyes meet with another more subtle Object , planting itself close by the little Conduit , which may bear this Character , the True Form and Fashion of a Mount Triumphant , but the Beauty and Glory thereof overspread with a thick Sulphurous Darkness , it being a Fog or Mist raised from Error , enviously to blemish that Place which bears the Title of London's Triumphant Mount ( the chief Grace and Luster of the whole Triumph ) at the four corners sit four Monsters Errors Disciples , on whom hangs part of the Mist for their clothing , holding in their hands little thick Clubs , coloured like their Garments ; the Names of these four Monsters , Barbarism , Ignorance , Impudence , Falsehood , who at the near approaching of Truth's Chariot , are seen a little to tremble , whilst her Deity gives life to these words . 

Truth .  what 's here ? the Mist of Error ? dare his Spite 
Stain this Triumphant Mount ? where our delight 
Hath been Divinely fixed so many Ages , 
Dare darkness now breathe forth her Insolent Rages , 
And hang in poisonous Vapours o'er the Place 
From whence we received Love and returned Grace ? 
I see if Truth a while but turn her Eyes , 
Thick are the Mists that o'er fair Cities rise : 
We did expect to receive welcome here , 
From no deformed Shape's but Divine and Clear , 
In steed of Monsters that this place attends ; 
To meet with Goodness and her Glorious Friends , 
Nor can they so forget me to be far , 
I Know there stands no other envious Bar : 
But that foul Cloud to Darken this Bright Day , 
Which with this Fan of Stars I 'll Chase away . 
Vanish Infectious Fog that I may see 
This City's Grace , that takes her Light from Me . 


At this her powerful command , the Vanish , give Way , Cloud suddenly rises , and changes into a bright spreading Canopy , stuck thick with Stars , and beams of Gold , shooting forth round about it , the Mount appearing then most rich in Beauty and Glory , the four Monsters falling flat at the Foot of the Hill ; that grave Feminine Shape , figuring London , sitting in greatest Honour ; next above her in the most eminent place , sits Religion , the Model of a fair Temple on her Head , and a burning Lamp in her Hand , the proper Emblems of her Sanctity , Watchfulness , and Zeal ; on her right Hand sits Liberality , her head circled with a Wreath of Gold , in her hand a Cornucopia , or Horn of Abundance , out of which rusheth a seeming Flood of Gold , but no way flowing to Prodigality ; for as the Sea is governed by the Moon , so is that wealth River by her Eye , ( for Bounty must be led by judgement ) and hence is Artfully derived the only difference between Prodigality and Bounty , the one deals her Gifts with open eyes , the other blindfold ; on her left side sits Perfect Love , his proper Seat being nearest the Heart , wearing upon his Head a wreath of white and red Roses mingled together , the Ancient Witness of Peace , Love and Union , wherein consists the Happiness of this Land , his Right hand holding a Sphere , where in a Circle of Gold , is contained all the 12 Companies Arms ; and therefore called the Spear of true Brotherhood , or Annulus Amoris , the Ring of Love : upon his left hand stand two Billing Turtles , expressing thereby the happy Condition of mutual Love and Society : on either side of this Mount are displayed the Charitable and Religious works of London ( especially the worthy Company of Grocers ) in giving maintenance to Scholars , Soldiers , Widows , Orphans , and the like , where are placed one of each number : & on the two Heights sit Knowledge & Modesty ; Knowledge wearing a Crown of Stars , in her Hand a Perspective Glass , betokening both her High judgement , and Deep Insight , the Brow of Modesty circled with a Wreath all of red Roses , expressing her Bashfulness and Blush , in her hand a Crimson Banner , filled with Silver Stars , figuring the white Purity of her Shamefastness , her cheeks not red with Shame or Gild , but with Virgin-fear , and Honor. At the Back of this Triumphant Mount , Chastity , Fame , Simplicity , Meekness , have their Seats , Chastity wearing on her Head a Garland of white Roses , in her Hand a white Silk Banner , filled with Stars of Gold , expressing the eternity of her un-spotted Pureness : Fame next under her , on her a Head a Crown of Silver , and a Silver Trumpet in her hand , showing both her Brightness and Shrillness : Simplicity with a Milk-white Dove upon her Head , and Meekness with a Garland of mingled Flowers , in her hand a white Silk Banner with a red Cross , a Lamb at her Feet , by which both their Conditions are sufficiently expressed ; The Mount thus made glorious by the Power of Truth , and the Mist expelled , London thus speaks . 

London .  Thick Scales of Darkness in a Moment's space 
Are fell from both mine Eyes , I see the Face 
Of all my Friends about me ( now ) most clearly , 
Religions Sisters , whom I Honour dear ; 
O I behold the work , it comes from Thee 
Illustrious Patroness , thou that mad'st me see 
In Days of blindest Ignorance , when this Light 
Was e'en extinguished , thou Redeemest my sight ; 
then to Thy Charge ( with Reverence ) I commend 
That worthy Son of mine , thy virtuous Friend , 
Whom on my Love and Blessing I require , 
To observe Thee Faithfully , and his Desire 
To imitate Thy will , and there lie bounded , 
For power 's a Dangerous Sea , which must be sounded 
With Truth and justice , or Man soon runs on 
' 'Gainst Rocks and Shelves to Dissolution ; 
then that thou mayst the Difference ever know , 
'twixt Truth and Error , a few words shall show ; 
The many Ways that to blind Error slide 
Are in the entrance broad , Hell-mouth is wide , 
But when Man enters far , he finds it then 
Close , Dark and Straight , for Hell returns no Men ; 
But the One sacred Way which Truth directs , 
Only at Entrance Man's Affection Cheques , 
And is there strict alone , to which place throngs 
All World's Afflictions , Calumnies and wrongs . 
But having past those , than thou findest a way 
In breadth , whole Heaven , in length , eternal Day , 
then following Truth , she brings Thee to that way ; 
But first observe what works she here requires , 
Religion , Knowledge , Sanctity , chaste Desires , 
then Charity , which Bounty must express , 
To Scholars , Soldiers , Widows , Fatherless ; 
These have been still my Works , they must be thine , 
Honour and Action must together shine , 
Or the best part 's Eclipsed , behold but this , 
Thy very Crest shows Bounty , here 't is put , 
thou giv'st the open Hand , keep it not shut ; 
But to the Needy , or Deserving Spirit , 
Let it spread wide , and Heaven enrolls that Merit ; 
Do these , and prove my Hopeful Worthy Son , 
Yet nothing's spoken , but needfully must be done . 
And so lead forward . 


At which Words the whole Triumph moves in his richest glory toward the Cross in Cheap , at which place Error full of Wrath and Malice to see his Mist so chased away , falls into this Fury . 

Error .  Heart of all the Fiends in Hell ! 
could her Beggarly Power expel 
Such a Thick and Poisonous Mist 
Which set Envy's Snakes to twist ; 
Up Monsters , was her Feeble Frown 
Of Force to strike my Officers down ? 
Barbarism , Impudence , Lies , Ignorance , 
All your Hellbred Heads advance , 
And once again with Rotten Darkness shrowded 
This Mount Triumphant , drop down sulphurous Cloud . 


At which the Mist falls again , and hangs over all the Beauty of the Mount , not a Person of Glory seen , only the four Monsters gather courage again , and take their Seats , advancing their Clubs above their Heads , which no sooner perceived , but Truth in her Chariot making near to the place , willing still to rescue her Friends and Servants , from the Powers of Ignorance and Darkness , makes use of these Words , 

Truth .  Dare yet the works of Ugliness appear 
'Gainst this Day's Brightness , and see Us so near ? 
How bold is Sin and Hell , that yet it dare 
Rise against Us ? but know ( Perditions Heir ) 
't is Idle to contend against our Power , 
Vanish again Fowl Mist from Honour's Bower . 


then the Cloud dispersing itself again , and all the Mount appearing Glorious , it passeth so on to the Standard , about which place , by Elaborate action from Error it falls again , and goes so darkened , till it comes to S. Laurence lane end , where by the former words by Truth uttered , being again chased away , London thus gratefully requites her Goodness . 

London .  Eternity's bright Sister , by whose Light , 
Errors infectious Works still fly my Sight . 
Receive thy Servants Thanks ; Now perfect Love 
Whose Right hand holds a Sphere , wherein do move 
Twelve blessed Societies , whose beloved increase , 
Styles it the Ring of Brotherhood , Faith and Peace , 
From thy Harmonious Lips let them all taste , 
The Golden Counsel that makes Health long last . 


Perfect Love then standing up , holding in his right hand a Sphere , on the other , two Billing Turtles , gives these words . 

Perfect Love.   First then I banish from this Feast of joy , 
All Excess , Epicurism , both which destroy 
The Healths of Soul and Body , no such Guest 
Aught to be welcome to this Reverend Feast 
Where Truth is Mistress , who 's admitted here , 
Must come for Virtues love more than for Cheer , 
These two white Turtles may example give 
How Perfect joy and Brotherhood should live , 
And they from whom Grave Order is expected , 
Of rude Excess must never be detected ; 
This is the Council which that Lady calls 
Golden Advice , for by it no man falls 
He that desire's Days healthful , sound and blessed , 
Let moderate judgement serve him at his Feast , 
And so lead on , may Perfect Brotherhood shine , 
Still in Sphere , and Honour still in thine . 


This Speech so ended , his Lordship and the Companies pass on to Guildhall ; and at their Returning back , these Triumphs attend to bring his Lordship toward Saint Paul's Church , there to perform those yearly Ceremonial Rites , which Ancient and Grave Order hath determined , Error by the way still busy and in Action to draw Darkness often upon that Mount of Triumph , which by Truth is as often dispersed : then all returning homewards full of Beauty and Brightness , this Mount and the Chariot of Truth , both placed near to the Entrance of his Lordship's Gate , near Leaden-hall ; London , the Lady of that Mount ; first gives utterance to these words , 

London .  Before the Day sprang from the Morning's Womb 
I rose , my Care was earlier than the Light , 
Nor would it rest till I now brought Thee Home , 
Marrying to one joy both thy Day and Night ; 
Nor can we call this Night , if our Eyes count 
The Glorious beams that dance about this Mount , 
Sure did not Custom guide 'em , Men would say 
Two Noons were seen together in one day , 
The Splendour is so piercing , Triumph seems 
As if it sparkled , and to Mens esteems 
Threw forth his Thanks , wrapped up in Golden Flames , 
As if he would give Light to read their Names 
That were at Cost this Day to make him shine , 
And be as free in Thanks , as they in Coin , 
But see Time checks me , and his Scythe stands ready 
To cut all off , no State on Earth is steady , 
Therefore Grave Son the Time that is to come , 
Bestow on Truth , and so thou 'rt welcome Home . 


Time standing up in Truth's Chariot , seeming to make an offer with his Scythe to cut off the Glories of the Day , growing near now to the Season of Rest and Sleep , his Daughter Truth thus meekly stays his Hand . 

Truth .  Father desist a while till I send forth 
A few Words to our Friend , that Man of Worth : 
The Power that Heaven , Love , and the City's choice , 
Have all conferred on Thee with Mutual voice , 
As it is Great , Reverend , and Honourable , 
Meet it with equal Goodness , strive t' excel 
Thy former Self , as thy Command exceeds 
Thy last-years State , so let new Acts , old Deeds ; 
And as great men in riches and in Birth 
( Heightening their Bloods , and joining Earth to Earth , ) 
Bestow their best hours and most serious cares 
In choosing out fit Matches for their Heirs : 
So never give thou over day or hour 
Till with a Virtue thou hast matched this Power : 
For what is Greatness if not joined with Grace ? 
Like one of High-blood that hath married Base . 
Who seeks Authority with an Ignorant Eye , 
Is like a man seeks out his Enemy : 
For where before his Follies were not spread 
Or his corruptions , than their clearly read 
E'en by the eyes of all men ; 't is so pure 
A Crystal of itself , it will endure 
no poison of Oppression , Bribes , Hired Law , 
But 't will appear soon in some crack or flaw , 
How ever men soothe their hopes with Popular breath , 
If not in Life , she 'll find that crack in Death : 
I was not made to fawn or stroke fin smooth 
Bee wise and hear me then that cannot soothe : 
I have set Thee High now , be so in Example , 
Made thee a Pinnacle in Honour's Temple , 
Fixing ten thousand Eyes upon thy Brow 
There is no hiding of thy Actions now , 
They must abide the Light , and imitate Me , 
Or be thrown down to Fire where Errors be . 
Nor only with these words thy ear I feed , 
But give those part that shall in Time succeed , 
To thee in present , and to them to come 
That Truth may bring you all with Honour home 
To these your Gates , and to those , after these 
Of which your own good Actions Keep the Keys ; 
then as the Loves of thy Society 
Hath flowed in Bounties on this Day and Thee , 
Counting all Cost too little for true Art , 
Doubling rewards there where they found Desert , 
In Thankfulness , justice , and Virtuous care 
Perfect their hopes , those thy Requitals are ; 
With Fatherly Respect embrace 'em all , 
Faith in thy Heart , and Plenty in thy Hall , 
Love in thy Walks , but justice in thy State , 
Zeal in thy Chamber , Bounty at thy Gate : 
And so to Thee and these a Blessed Night , 
To thee Fair City , Peace , my Grace and Light.  


Trumpets sounding Triumphantly , Zeal , the Champion of Truth on Horseback , his head circled with strange Fires , appears to his Mistress , and thus speaks : 

See yonder , Lady , Errors Chariot stands , 
Braving the Power of your incensed commands , 
Emboldened by the privilege of Night 
And her black Faction , yet to crown his Spite 
Which I 'll confound , I burn in Divine wrath . 


Truth .  Strike then , I give thee leave to shoot it forth . 


Zeal .  then here 's to the destruction of that Seat , 
there 's nothing seen of Thee but Fire shall eat . 


At which , a Flame shoots from the Head of Zeal , which fastening upon that Chariot of Error sets it on Fire , and all the Beasts that are joinde to it . 

The Firework being made by Master Humphrey Nichols , a Man excellent in his Art : and the whole Work and Body of the Triumph , with all the proper Beauties of the Workmanship most Artfully and Faithfully performed by john Grinkin : and those furnished with Apparel and Porters by Anthony Monday , Gentleman . 

This proud Seat of Error lying now only glowing in Emberss , ( being a Figure or Type of his Lordship's justice on all wicked offenders in the Time of his Government , ) I now conclude , holding it a more learned Discretion to cease of myself , then to have Time cut me off rudely , and now let him strike at his pleasure . 

TAM ROBUR · TAM ROBOR . IN-COLIS ARBOR JOVIS . 1610. ❀ 

no 

♃ 



The Song with the Note . 

Mother of many honourable Sons , think not thy glass too slowly runs , That in Time's hand is set , because thy worthy Son appears not yet , Lady be pleased the hour grows on , thy joys will be complete anon , thou shalt behold , the man enrolled , in honors-book whom virtue raises , love circled , round , his triumphs crowned , withal good wishes , prayers and praises . 

What greater comfort to a Mother's heart , 
then to behold her son's Desert : 
Go hand in hand with love , 
Respect and Honour ( Blessings from above ) 
It is of power all griefs to kill , 
And with a flood of joy to fill . 
Thy Aged Eyes , 
To see him rise , 
With Glory decked , where Expectation . 
Grace , Truth , and Fame , 
Met in his Name , 
Attends his Honour's Confirmation . 
BASSUS . 



FINIS . 





Saint Paul's Cross . 