The smoke in the temple . Wherein is a design for peace and reconciliation of believers of the several opinions of these times about ordinances , to a forbearance of each other in love , and meekness , and humility . 

With the opening of each opinion , and upon what scriptures each is grounded . 

With the several exceptions which May be made against each opinion from the scriptures . 

With one argument for liberty of conscience , from the national covenant . 

With another argument to prove the gospel , or new testament of Jesus Christ the very word of God ; tendered to all the believers , to show them how little we have attained , and that there is a more glorious fullness to be revealed . 

With a discovery of the Antichristian way of peace , &c. for opinions . 

With a full answer to Master Ley one of the assembly of divines , against my late new-quere . 

With some spiritual principles drawn forth of the controversy . 

revel. 15.8 . 

And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God , and from his power : and no man was able to enter into the temple till the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled . 



By John Saltmarsh , preacher of the gospel at Brasteed in Kent . 

The second edition corrected . 

London , printed by Ruth Raworth for g. Calvert , at the sign of the black spread-eagle at the West-end of Paul's . 1646.  

To the right honourable the Lord Viscount Say and seal , and lieutenant general Cromwell . 

Noble patriots , 

If i mistake not , you May here single out something of the Lords from what is mine , and discern some beams of God amongst many things of man . i know the candle of the Lord cannot shine anywhere with more snuff than in me ; however since the Lord hath lighted it , i dare not but let it shine ( Or rather glimmer ) before men . i have writ your names to my book that i May be one of your remembrancers amongst the rest to the advancement of truth ; not but that they who know ye , know ye to be acted by a spirit of truth in yourselves . The Lord remember ye according to all the good ye have done ( in your several ministrations ) to this persons ; and do that for ye which gives you most , and yet takes most from ye , even filling ye with himself , till he hath emptied ye of all but his own glory , and gathered ye up into the fullness and righteousness of himself in Christ , where we are only nothing in our selves , and every thing in him ; and surely the most , and best , and greatest thing he can do for the sons of men , is , thus to make them nothing in their own account , that he that glorieth May glory in the Lord . i May seem strange to wish ye thus ; but i know it is not strange to ye , who know the mystery of the spirit , and of Christ . 

My Lord , and Sir , go on still , yet still laying your designs in a glory above that of states and kingdoms , and involving all your counsels there , where there is most of heaven , and lest of the world . 

so prays 

Your servant in the Lord John Saltmarsh . 

To the believers of several opinions for outward ordinances or dispensations , scandalously called independents , Presbyterians , Anabaptiss , seekers . 

Brethren , 

I have fairly set down how far each of you have attained in the mystery of truth ; and surely we are all short of the glory which shall be revealed in the temple or church of God ; and there are such clouds rolling about each opinion , that May darken it , or something of it . So as things are not so clear as they are commonly taken by each of us ; if any man think he knoweth any thing , he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know . so as the common ignorance and infirmity amongst us , May be a rise for a common unity amongst us : and seeing we all come out of Babylon ( Though in several ways ) to the glorious temple or tabernacle which God hath sent down to be with men , and walk thus diversely thither ; yet our several and distinct goings are but like so many travellers to the city of London ; some travel from the North , some from the South , and from the West , some from the East , yet all thither ; though too , there May be some mistaking of the way in each , because of the little light that is abroad . The gathering of the saints into the heaven , or kingdom below , in this day of revelation , is like the gathering at the last day , which shall be all into one glorious body , though the gathering shall be from the four winds or ends of the earth , by the several trumpets or angels . 

One thing i have more . Let us seek for the spirit of wisdom and revelation , to open to us the mystery of the scriptures called the revelation ; for in that book is the prophecy of the churches laid up , and the seasons and times for truth revealed . Let us search and seek out by the spirit of Jesus , even that Jesus which was in the vision , and gave it out to John ; for there is none found worthy to open the book with seals but the lamb . surely in the mystery of angels , vials , sea of glass with fire , temple with smoke , the angel with the everlasting gospel , the angel enlightening the earth , the whore in scarlet and precious pearls , the cup of abomination , the beast like a lamb , the image of the beast , the horns and Kings of the earth , the mark in the forehead and in the right hand , the buying and selling , the tabernacle of God with men , the first and second resurrection , the throne of God , the pure crystal river of water , the holy Jerusalem descending from God , &c.  In these is much of the glory wrapped up , and from these shall the truth we contend for , appear to our further enlightening . 

Yet one thing more . We that are thus contenders for ordinances , for the temple and the vessels in it , let us take heed we forget not him who is greater than the temple ; for one greater than the temple is here . It would be spiritually considered , that while we strive for the vessels and cups , we spill not the wine . 

And it ought to be so carried by all of us , that , because we are so much in opinion , we May not be thought to place religion there , as i fear too many do , making a Christ of the very ordinance of Christ , and pressing some outward ordinances of the gospel so legally ; as some hearing such a power of salvation put into them , and finding an outward dispensation more easily got then the spiritual , make haste thither only , and then sit down as saved under a mere outward ordinance . The Lord grant that we May neither undervalue an ordinance nor the least institution of Jesus Christ , nor raise it up into a Jesus Christ , and set up the law above or beside the lawgiver . we must now learn to know Jesus Christ less after the flesh , and not to embody salvation in a mere outward dispensation , and so incarnate Jesus Christ over again from the glory and spirituality he is in . 

Brethren , farewell : for my part i am fully assured from scriptures of the church of Christ here , or gospel-fellowship of the saints ; and unto this fellowship with the father and the son , i endeavour ; and i have one way to reveal truth to me which i cannot conceal , nor yet cannot practise as i would , and that is this ; 

To see truth by living in the power of truth , and by first obtaining Jesus Christ to live in us in the power of his suffering , death , and resurrection ; for surely Jesus Christ must do all ( Though more gloriously and spiritually ) over again in his , which he did in himself . 

If Jesus Christ the light be in us , the light by which every outward dispensation is seen , will flow in ; for where the sun is , there will be every beam with it . 

The contents . 

A way of peace , or a design for reconciliation . 

1 God's love the first and last glorious union to be considered , to draw us to unity . page 1.  
2 names of sect and division to be laid down . p. 2.  
3 passions and railings forborn . ibid.  
4 reviling each other for infirmities forborn . ibid.  
5 the sins of any not to be laid on the cause . ibid.  
6 liberty for printing and speaking . ibid.  
7 let all subscribe their names to what they print . ib.  
8 let all be severally accountable . p. 3.  
9 free debates , and open conferences . ibid.  
10 let us call believers , th•ugh of several opinions , if the name of brethren cannot be justly allowed . ibid.  
11 no believers to esteem too highly of themselves for what they attain to . ibid.  
12 no assuming infallibility over each other . p. 4.  
13 no civil power drawn into advantages . ibid.  
14 tenderness in offending each other in things of an outward nature . ibid.  
15 several opinions from the gospels first discovery , yet all believers . p. 5.  
16 no despising for too much learning or too little . ib.  
17 we be one in Christ , though divers . ibid.  
18 the spiritual persecution to be forborn . ibid.  
The unwarrantable way of peace , or the Antichristian design for reconciliation . 

1 to believe as the church or councils . p. 6.  
2 to set up one as the Pope , for infallibility . ib.  
3 to allow that all May be saved in their several ways . p. 7.  
4 to forbid interpretings and disputes . ibid.  
5 by a compulsive power . ibid.  
The opinions of these times . 

Presbystery so called , what it is , and what they hold . p. 8.  
exceptions against presbytery . p. 9  
Independency so called , what it is , and what they hold . ibid.  
exceptions against independency . p. 10.  
Anabaptism so called , what it is , and what they hold . p. 12.  
exceptions against the grounds of the new baptism . ib.  
Seeking , or seekers , so called ; what their way is , and what they hold . p. 16.  
exceptions against them . ibid.  
conclusion . p. 19  
the gospel , or new testament , proved undeniably to be the very word of God . p. 20.  
one argument from the national covenant ( Artic. 1. and 2. ) for liberty of conscience . p. 23.  
objections against it , answered . p. 25 , 26.  
Spiritual principles drawn forth of the controversy . 

gospel-truth one and the same . p. 60.  
prudence and consequences , are the great engines of will-worship . ibid.  
the persons are brethren and saints in Christ's church ; but in antichrists , parishioners and servants . p. 61.  
Presbytery itself is founded on principles of separation , which yet they condemn for schism in other churches : nay , is the greatest separation . p. 62.  
none to be forced under Christ's kingdom , as in the kingdoms of the world . ibid.  
the power of a formal reformation , in a government , makes it not Christ's government . p. 63.  
the visible church or communion , is the image of the invisible or mystical . p. 64.  
how Christ is a King of the nations and of the church , and how an head . ibid.  
the presbyterial government and the world's , of the same equal dominion . p. 65.  
the national , and congregational church-covenant , both lawful , or both unlawful . ibid.  
we receive and give out truth by parts . p. 66.  
all Covenanters are bound to contribute to religion as well as state . p. 67.  
we are to try truth , and so receive it in its degrees . ib.  
no churchway independency . p. 68  
a spirit of love and meekness becomes believers . ib.  
when a state-conscience is fully persuaded ; doubtful , and so sinning . ibid.  
a postscript . with Salmasius his testimony against the present presbyterial way . p. 69.  
A way of peace , or a design of reconciliation ; how the believers of several opinions , scandalously called Presbyterians , independents , Anabaptists , seekers , May be reconciled to forbear one another . 

( 1 ) God's love the first and last glorious union to be considered , to draw us to unity . 

One way , is to consider love as it is in God , and flowing from him upon the creature : God is love ; and he that dwelleth in love , dwelleth in God , and God in him . now the more love there is in any , the more of God there is in any . Satan , the first fountain of sin , made the first schism in the glorious communion : all was one , and in one glory , till the first division , and till Satan fell like lightning ; and he envying the whole creation , which was in love with itself , and him that made it , drew it into sin , and antipathies , and mutual persecutions ; and when it began to leave loving him that was pure and infinite love , it began to hate it self , and divide from it self : so as the less love , the more of Satan , and sin . the consideration of God's love to himself which is infinite , of his love to his , which is no less infinite , because to sinners ; and of his sons love , spiritually uniting himself here , and gloriously hereafter , into one body and communion ; cannot but make us love one another . 

( 2 ) names of sect and division to be laid down . 

Let all names and notes of distinction taken up by way of scandal and reproach , be laid down and forborn ; names and notions are like standards and several colours in wars , whereby men are gathered into several orders , armies , and bodies of division , one against another ; one saith i am of Paul , and i of Apollo , and i of Cephas ; is Christ divided ? 

( 3 ) passions and railings forborn . 

Let a spirit of meekness run in the artery of preaching and printing : let not passions , evil speaking , railings , which inflame and do not edify , be heard amongst us : the angry stir up strife ; wherefore let all bitterness , wrath , malice , with evil speaking , be put away from you . 

( 4 ) reviling each other for infirmities forborn . 

Let there be no rifling into each others infirmities , to the advantaging or disadvantaging the cause : what is any thing of the man to the thing itself ? what is ones darkness to the light he professes ? Any ones errors to a single truth ? There is rubbish enough everywhere if swept from every corner . 

( 5 ) the sins of any not to be laid on the cause . 

Let not the miscarriages , the failings , the sins , the hypocrisy , &c. of any that profess a truth , with others , be charged upon the truth he or they profess , making such sins to be the sins of the opinion , not of the person , as one of late who hath charged the unfortunate end of one , as a fruit of separation , whereas he Might so argue against the very doctrine of Christ , because of one Judas who did the like to himself . 

( 6 ) liberty for printing and speaking . 

Let there be liberty of the press for printing , to those that are not allowed pulpits for preaching : let that light come in at the window which cannot come in at the door , that all May speak and write one way that cannot another : let the waters of the sanctuary have issue , and spring up valleys as well as mountains . 

( 7 ) let all subscribe their names to what they print . 

Let all that preach or print , affix their names , that we May know from whom : the contrary is a kind of unwarrantable modesty at the best : if it be truth they write , why do they not own it ? if untruth , why do they write ? some such must either suppress themselves for shame or fear ; and they that dare not own what they do , they suspect the magistrate , or themselves . 

( 8 ) let all be severally accountable . 

Let all that teach or print be accountable , yet in a several way ; if it be matter of immediate disturbance and trouble to the state , let them account for it to the magistrate , under whom we are to live a peaceable and quiet life ; if matter of doctrine , &c. let them be accountable to the believers and brethren who are offended by conference , where there May be mutual conviction and satisfaction . 

( 9 ) free debates and open conferences . 

Let there be free debates and open conferences and communication for all , and of all sorts that will , concerning difference in spirituals : where doors are not shut , there will be no breaking them open : so where debates are free , there is a way of vent and evacuation , the stopping of which hath caused more troubles in the states than any thing : for where there is much new wine in old bottles , the working will be such as the parable speaks on : still allowing the state to secure all tumults or disturbances . 

( 10 ) let us call believers , though of several opinions , if the name brethren cannot be justly allowed . 

Let all who pretend to come out of the Antichristian state , be acknowledged as those several Jews and Christians , who came out of Judaism and gentilism in the apostles times ; some were more and some less zealous of the law , yet all believers ; some made conscience of the idol , and sacrifice , some not . 

( 11 ) no believers to esteem too highly of themselves for what they attain to . 

Because we are but yet in our comings out of Babylon , and the fall of Babylon not yet , the smoke yet in the temple , the angels but pouring out the vials , the angel that enlightens the earth with glory not yet flying through the heavens ; let not any account of themselves to have attained any thing yet as they ought , or to know there is not any church or believers , but if one see more of one truth , another May see more of another ; if one see one thing for a truth , another sees another thing for a truth , and yet all see short of the fullness of truth ; there is so much want , darkness , and so little light or glory in each , as is rather matter of humiliation and praise , then glorying and exception one against another : if any man think he knoweth any thing , he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know , 1 cor. 8.2 . 

( 12 ) no assuming infallibility over each other . 

Let us not , being under no further degree of the revelation of truth , and coming out of Babylon , assume any power of infallibility to each other : so as to force up all to our light or degree of knowing or practising ; for there lies as much on one side for compulsion , as on another , respectively to one another ; for another's evidence is as dark to me as mine to his , and mine to his as his to me , till the Lord enlighten us both for discerning alike . So as when there is no power in us to make that appear to another which appears to us , there can be no reasonable equity for any enforcing or compelling in spirituals . the first great rent betwixt the Eastern and Western kingdoms , began when the Bishop of Rome would needs excommunicate the East , for not believing as they believed . 

( 13 ) no civil power drawn into advantages . 

Let not those believers who have the advantage of the magistrate , strive to make any unwarrantable use of it one against another , because scripture-principles are not so clear for it , and because they know not the revolution of providence , and we are to do as we would be done to : that very day which should have been a bloody day to the Jews , was turned into the contrary ; Esther and the Jews had power over them . 

( 14 ) tenderness in offending each other , in things of an outward nature . 

Let there be much tenderness in not offending each other , but pleasing one another to edification : Paul would not offend the idolatrous weak : the weakest and most superstitious makes most conscience of outward things ; and the strong should know , that idol or idol-temple is nothing : many a one are more offended at truth by the carriage of another , who sometimes reforms with as much superstition , as the other offends . It is as much below the glory of the gospel to think one place unholy , as holy : no place can defile now Salomon's temple is not standing ; yet let all truth be brought forth peaceably : truth and peace can offend nothing but that which May be justly offended ; which is the corruption , not the person . 

( 15 ) several opinions from the gospels first discovery , yet all believers . 

Consider the differences and several opinions from the first discovery of the gospel : some believed not Christ's sufferings and resurrection ; as the disciple whom yet Christ took to him , and walked with , and Counted as his : some believed not the holy ghost , nor Christ's baptism , and were zealous of the law , and yet the disciple Counted them as believers . John's disciple would have followed John only ; but John sent two of them to Christ at one time , and told them again he must increase , but himself must decrease . Christ in his time would not forbid any that went about in his name ; there is none that doth any thing in my name , can lightly speak evil of me . when the spirit was given , the disciple bore one another out of the church , as the believers of John's baptism , and the zealots of the law , and one another in the church ; they that did eat , them that did not eat ; and they that regarded a day , them that regarded not a day ; walking together as far as they attained by the same rule . 

( 16 ) no despising for too much learning , or too little . 

Let not one despise another for gifts , parts , learning : let the spirit be heard speak in the meanest : let not the scribe or disputer of the law despise the fishermen , nor they despise them because scribes and disputers : the spirit is in Paul as well as Peter ; in both as well as one . 

( 17 ) we May be in one Christ , though divers . 

Consider that we May be one in one Christ , though we think diversely ; and we May be friends , though not brethren : and let us attain to union , though not to unity . 

( 18 ) the spiritual persecution to be forborn . 

Consider there is a twofold persecution : there is a spiritual or that of believers , and a mixed persecution , or civilly ecclesiastical : the spiritual persecution is that of the spirit merely ; and this kind of persecution little thought on and studied ; this is when we cannot bear one another's several opinions or soul-belief , in the same spiritual society , or fellowship , but they must either be of us , or out of us ; and surely this kind of persecution is as unreasonable as any other ; for what is this but soul compulsion , when another must only believe as we believe , and not wait till the Lord reveal even this ? this kind of spiritual compulsion will in time break and dissolve the visible communion of saints , and body of Christ exceedingly , if taken up or continue ; and it will be amongst Christians , as amongst the Antichristian where they divide and •ubdivide , and some cast themselves into a monkery from all the rest : Jerusalem and Antioch were not of this way , to cast out one another upon such grounds , but to meet , reason , and counsel , and hear : and surely the churches can ill complain of a mixed persecution from without , if they persecute one another from within ; the magistrate May as justly whip them both , as they whip one another : such grudgings , complainings , dissolvings , spiritual enforcings , gives hint to the civil power to compel , while it beholds them but a little more spiritually compelling one another : let all church-rights , privileges , boundaries be preserved ; all heresy and schism by the rule rebuked , but in all spiritual meekness and wisdom , and not call heretic and schismatic too suddenly , since we see but in part . 

The unwarrantable way of peace , or the Antichristian design of reconciliation . 

( 1 ) to believe as the church or councils . 

That all should believe as the church believes ; and this church is the great councils of Bishops , Cardinals , &c. as if the souls of all were to be saved only in the bundle of theirs , as if they could believe both enough for themselves and all others . 

( 2 ) to set up one as the Pope , for infallibility . 

Because there May be difference amongst many , and all May not agree , therefore there shall be one ( Say they ) with the vrim and thummim , one infallibly decreeing , and interpreting , and unerring , to whom the spirit of truth is successively derived ; and his determinations , interpretations , shall be final , conclusive ; and this that vicar of Christ , the Pope this one way in the Antichristian state , and all reform kingdoms were once under this peace . 

( 3 ) to allow that all May be saved in their several ways . 

Because there be several believers , and several interpretations and opinions , one saying this is the way , and another that , therefore say some , all in all ways May be saved , every one believing every thing . now this is one way to make peace , but not the way ; there is but one Lord , one faith , one baptism . 

( 4 ) to forbid interpretings and disputes . 

Because several opinions arise by interpretings and disputings about scripture , therefore all openings of the word , all disputings must be forborn . Because the sunshine offends some weak sight in the house , shut up doors and windows and make all dark . thus the Papists and prelates in forbidding scriptures and marginal notes , and thus fearing there May be something false , they will hear nothing that 's true . 

( 5 ) by a compulsive power . 

Some take the civil power in to make peace , reckoning a compulsive uniformity for unity , peace , and truth . this is one way to deal with the body indeed , but not with the soul ; to mind the outward man , but not the inward . this way of civilly ecclesiastical peace is the Antichristian design , who having got the Kings of the nations to give their strength and power and kingdom unto them , supplies that from the world which they want from the word , making the spiritual power of Jesus Christ to receive its honour , life , efficacy , power , from the power of men . this way of peace is such as hath by experience troubled nations , and troubled it self at length too ; and broken it self against that way which it aimed to break : for whosoever false upon this stone shall be broken , and on whomsoever it shall fall it shall break , them to powder . 

The opinions of these times . With the exceptions each opinion May be charged withal ; being the great argument for love , meekness , and forbearance one to another , or of peace and reconciliation till the Lord reveal more . 

Presbytery so called ; what it is , and what they hold . 

the presbytery is set up by an a alleged pattern of the eldership and presbytery of the apostles and elders in the first churches of the gospel , strengthened by such scriptures as are in the margin , and by allusion to the Jewish government , and to appeals in nature . Their churches are parochial , or parishes , as they are divided at first by the Romish prelates and the statute-laws of the state . which parishes and congregations are made up of such believers as were made Christians first by baptism in infancy , and not by the word : and all the parishes or congregations are under them , as they are a classical , provincial , and national presbytery : and over those parishes they do exercise all church-power and government b ; which May be called the power of the keys . 

Exceptions . 

1.  The apostolical and primitive eldership were not so a authoritative over their congregations as these pretend , nor so compulsive or forcing their respective congregations . 

2.  The apostolical eldership and presbytery were more b infallible ; they were more in the light , and the immediate way of the revelation of truth . 

3.  They took not in the power of the c magistrate to help them , nor did they clasp it as one with their own . 

4.  They consisted of d brethren as well as of the presbytery , and both together had a joint interest and concurrency in all power . 

5.  The presbyteries were not as now , classical , provincial , national : these are no scripture-forms , but devices of men . e 

6.  The f presbytery is of no more in the * Greek then of a g metaphorical or figurative signification , signifying seniority or eldership : and the setting it up in a notion of power and office , is more than the scriptures will clearly bear : such notions in the word , are but notions of form and order , not of office . 

7.  The presbyteries now are not rightly constituted , because they consisted of a ministry from h Antichrist , and the Bishops of Rome , ordaining one another by the same power they received from them . 

8.  Their i congregations are not such as before , so constituted ; because parishes are of a popish and politic constitution . 

9  Baptism is not to be received by generation now , as circumcision was , but by k regeneration or visible profession , as at first : nor are the carnal seed now any more children of Abraham , but the l faithful : and no ordinance is now to be administered upon legal consequence , but upon gospel-precept . 

Independency so called ; what it is , and what they hold . 

the persons of God are only a a church , when called by the word and spirit into consent or covenant , and saints by profession ; and all b church-power is laid in here , and given out from hence into c pastorship and elders , &c. and a just d distribution of interest betwixt elders and persons . all spiritual government is here , and not in any power foreign or extrinsical to the congregation or authoritative : their children are made Christians first by infant-baptism , and after by the word : and they are baptised by a e foederal or covenant-holiness , or birth-priviledges , as under the law : they May enjoy all f ordinances in this estate , and some May g prophesy . 

Exceptions . 

1.  That there is not such a power radically or fundamentally placed in the church to make pastors and elders , &c. because there is , first , no such practice in the word , but rather of an apostolical or a ministerial power , which made or gathered churches first , not churches them . 

2.  The eldership and presbytery of apostles and elders did b principally act , and authoritatively act , and not the whole church or persons ; they in a lower and less interest , in a way of choice or vote and consent . 

3.  That which is called ordination , &c. was by the apostles , and a power established in the c presbytery , not in the church , as mere believers . 

4.  They that were baptised by an d Antichristian power , are no right baptised members of churches ; and yet so are all of their churches as were baptised under prelacy ; the power of the dispenser being Antichristian , and the subject or e infant no visible believer for that ordinance . 

5.  Their church consists not all of visible saints or believers , according to their own f principle : for their children being baptised , and in that condition , are no actual visible saints ; all their church are not living stones , nor visibly holy . And it May be more clearly proved that mere civil and moral men are rather to be admitted of their church-society then such as children are , who are but merely naturally visible ; neither spiritually , civilly , nor morally visible . 

6.  That of foederal holiness in * 1 cor. 7.14 . is only to satisfy a scruple , that if unbelieving made wife or husband unholy , it made children unholy too ; and so both , or none , must be put away . 

7.  There is no carnal seed now to be sealed , Christ being come in the flesh ; which g flesh before , had a seal of circumcision ; but there is no such h external privilege now , by any such right . 

8.  All consequences drawn from circumcision , are of no more force than from the i cloud and the k sea , and the rock , and Noah's ark , and other typical and figurative places in the word , nor can any legal or probable scriptures make any law or rule for any such gospel-administration , which is not directly and in l scripture-words to be found . 

9  children's baptism in the church is a way never to have a church of such M baptised believers as in the apostles times . 

10.  baptism being a n visible sign , cannot rationally be administered upon one that can neither see nor discern what is done , to whom the water can be no o sign , but they are only told of it when they come to age : and how can it hold proportion with circumcision , when as that was a p mark remaining in the flesh when they came to age to signify to them ? But water is like a flash of q lightning which must be taken by the believer in that quick and r vanishing act , or else it hath no ſ sensible efficacy to which it was instituted ; nor doth the believer thus any other way enjoy it but by way of history , or a thing past and done , which he never saw . baptism is as a flash of lightning , ( As is well observed by one ; ) circumcision was as a fixed star ; so much difference in these two rites . 

11.  Institution of baptism is to t duty as well as grace , which children cannot perform , and so answer the sign . 

12.  Institution of baptism is doctrinal in the very act of it , as is acknowledged by all of the present baptism , matth. 28. baptising them in the name of the father , son , and holy ghost , &c.  Now this implies a capable and teachable subject . 

13.  Their churches are not distinct from other societies Antichristian , because there is no visible gifts by which their churches are u visibly qualified from any other societies , and according to the promises of gifts in ephes. 4.11 . nor no such church-gifts as in 1 cor. 12. &c. where there was the w gifts of the spirit powerfully and visibly spiritualizing that body , and making it to excel all other bodies civil or Antichristian . 

And that prophecy was a more x extraordinary gift than is now anywhere in the churches . 

Anabaptism so called ; what it is , or what they hold . 

the church of Christ are a company of a baptised believers ; and whatsoever b disciple can teach the word , or make out Christ , May baptize or administer other ordinances . 

that the church or body , though but of two or three , yet May enjoy the word and ordinances , by way of an c administrator , or one deputed to administer , though no pastor . 

that none are to be baptised but d believers . 

that those commonly called church-officers , as pastors , &c. are such as the church or body May be e without . 

that none are to be called brethren but baptised believers . 

all administrations of ordinances were given to the apostles as f disciple ; not so under the notion of church-power as is pretended . 

that none ought to communicate in the ordinances of Christ till first g baptised . 

Exceptions against the grounds of the new baptism . 

1.  That those places commonly taken for the commission for Christ's baptism , as matth. 28.18 . Mark 16. and where they that now baptize ground their commission and practice , hath no such thing in it ; for the baptism there is a baptism in the name of the three persons , of father , son , and holy ghost ; and not the baptism of Jesus Christ alone , which the apostles only baptised in by water , as in a act. 2.38 . act. 10.48 . act. 19.5 . act. 8.16 . rom. 6.3 . where it is still said , baptise in the name of the Lord Jesus , or of Jesus Christ ; and a name of any more persons is not the least mentioned . So as to baptize as they commonly baptize in the name of father , son , and holy ghost , for Jesus Christ's baptism , is contrary to the full b practice of all that baptised by water , as they do , as in act. 2.38 . act. 10.48 . act. 19.5 . act. 8.16 . &c. and a confounding scriptures together , viz. several institutions and practicer . 

2.  That baptising , in matth. 28.18 . cannot properly , nor in the word , and letter , be understood of baptising by water , because there is no more mentioned in the letter , or scripture , then merely the word baptising ; and to expound it as they do , by a baptising by water , is to put in a c consequence and interpretation of their own for scripture ; which way of consequences they condemn in all others , presbyterials , &c. as will-worship , and traditions of men , and justly too : now there being no water , nor any circumstance in the text to make out any sense of water , as in other places , it is an usurpation upon the spirit and the word , to put such a sense so infallibly and peremptorily upon the word which Jesus Christ himself uses in other d significations then that of water , as in matth. 20.22 , 23.  matth. 3.11 . 1 cor. 12.13 . 1 cor. 10.2 . all these places are of baptism and baptising ; yet not one of them of baptising by water , but of metaphorical and figurative baptism by his sufferings , by the holy ghost , by the spirit , by the cloud and sea . 

3.  That matth. 28.18 . Mark 16. &c. are rather and far more probably to be expounded of the spirits baptism , or the e baptism of the holy ghost , because it seems to be prophesied on by Joel 2.28 . isai. 44.3 . where the holy ghosts baptism is promised to come by Christ ; and in matth. 3.11 . act. 1.5 . joh. 1.33 . prophesied on to come by John , and Christ himself to his disciple , and was fulfilled in Christ's institution , and power which he gave ; in matth. 28.18 . by baptising with the holy ghost , which the apostles did accordingly practice , and by their ministry was given , as in f act. 8.17 . and Mark 16.16 , 17. compared with matth. 28.18 . doth show that the baptism in matth. 28.18 . is a baptism of gifts , as Mark 16.15 , 16 , 17.  

4.  That the baptism of Jesus Christ by water , was only in the name of Jesus Christ , as appears in all the places where such a g baptism was practised , as in act. 2.38 . act. 10.48 . act. 19.5 . act. 8.16 . rom. 6.3 . all which is a baptism only in the name of Jesus Christ , of the person of the son , not of the father , son , and holy ghost , as they now practise , and which was never practised as appears in all the apostles and disciple practice . 

5.  That the form by which they baptize , viz. i baptize thee in the name of the father , son , and holy ghost , is a h form of man's devising , a tradition of man , a mere consequence drawn from supposition and probability , and not a form left by i Christ , to lay over them at the dipping them in the water : if Christ had said , when you baptize them , say this over them , i baptize thee in the name of the father , son , and holy ghost ; and unless Jesus Christ had left this form thus made up to their hands , they practise a thing made up by themselves , and drawn or forced out of Jesus Christ's words in matth. 28.18 . 

6.  That to preach in the name of Jesus Christ , or to do things in the name of Jesus Christ , is not always in that gross manner as it is taken , viz. naming Jesus Christ , or the father , son , and holy ghost over them . 

But in the k power , virtue , efficacy , ministry of Jesus Christ , or the persons of the godhead of father , son , and holy ghost , as in these scriptures matth. 18.20 . Mark 13.6 . joh. 14.3 . act. 19.15 , 16.  joh. 17.6 , 11.  act. 9.14 . revel. 11.18 . So here they are at some more loss . 

7.  That though i deny not but water is a sign , and one of the l witnesses that bear record ; and in the word though not yet clear , yet neither can Christ's institution of water , as his own baptism , in his own person , be made appear out of all the new testament ; nor can the apostles practice by water yet be fetched from such a particular institution , unless from John's : and if so , i am sure they are then at as great a controversy one with another concerning M John's baptism and Jesus Christ's , making them to be two several baptisms . 

8.  That every common disciple cannot so baptize as the first disciple did , because not gifted , or n qualified as they were . And there is as much necessity to make out the truth in the same power and way of evidence to an Antichristian estate , as to a Jewish and heathenish , and with a word written as well as preached ; speaking and writing lying both equally open to question and exceptions , without a power o gloriously working in the behalf and to the reputation of it . Nor is there any one disciple in all the new testament preaching and baptising by way of authority , but he was able to make out the truth of his calling and dispensation , either by miracle or gifts . There are but three exceptions , and they have no weight in them . 

1.  p Ananias was a disciple . 

I answer : yea , but he restored sight to Saul , and had vision . 

2.  q Philip did no miracle to the eunuch . 

I answer : we can neither conclude he did , nor he did not , from the word ; for it is silent : but he did miracles in Samaria . 

3.  They that were scattered went everywhere preaching . 

I answer : who they were , or how they preached , or what power they manifested , is not laid down in the word neither for nor against : the word is silent . 

9  That there is not such an officer as administrator in the whole word ; but apostles , evangelists , prophets , pastors , teachers , elders , rulers , deacons , &c. and therefore administrator is an unwholesome word . 

10.  None ought to give the baptism now , because there is none can give the gift of the holy ghost with it , to make up that glorious supplement of gifts which it always had ; and they are joined both in the word and practice , as in heb. 6.1 . doctrine of baptisms and laying on of hands : and in their practice they were joined as in act , act. 8.14 , 15 , 16.  And it will appear in the word that the apostles did not so reckon of them single , but together , as in act. 8.14 , 15 , 16. where it is said they were only baptised in the name of the Lord Jesus ; but they prayed for them that they Might receive the holy ghost . So as baptism by water , and by the holy ghost , being joined together both in institution , doctrine , and practice , are not to be separated , nor given in such a time wherein that of the holy ghost is not given : for , what God hath joined together , let no man put asunder . 

11.  That it is as unreasonable to take any such ordinance of Jesus Christ from any that is not distinctly , specially , spiritually , powerfully enabled as the first dispensers , as it is to take the word of any a common man charging us in the name of the parliament , and cannot visibly make out a visible excellency and supremacy of power by ordinance or commission . 

12.  That these churches who enjoy Christ's mind , as they think , most fully in the practice of ordinances , yet have no greater gifts in their b churches then there are in those called independent , or separatist ; prayer , teaching , prophesying being as fully and powerfully performed in the one as the other . and being so , whether must not the churches of Christ be distinguished by some more visible glorious power and gifts as at first , c by which they May be discerned to excel all othe•societieses ? 

13.  That the fullness of time is not yet come for ordinances : for as there were several d seasons for the givings out of truth before , so now . 

Seeking , or , seekers so called ; what their way is , and what they hold . 

that there is no church nor ordinances yet . That if they did not end with the primitive or apostles times , yet they are to begin as in the primitive times , with a gifts and miracles ; and that there is as much reason for the like gifts to make out the truth of any of the gospel now to an Antichristian estate , as formerly to a Jewish or heathenish . that such a believer as can dispense ordinances , must be qualified as the believers in Mark 16. and as the former b disciple were . That there is a time and c fullness for the spirit , and for the latter pure spiritual dispensations , as there was formerly for the first dispensations : and whether this shall be while the angels are but pouring out their vials or not , or when Babylon is fallen . And whether there is not as much need for d new tongues to reveal the pure original to us , it being conveyed with corruptions and additionals in translations ; by which , truth May be more purely discovered , and the waters of life that now run muddily , May flow more clear and crystal-like from the throne e of God . 

The exceptions . 

1.  That Jesus Christ did promise to be ever with his a church , and therefore cannot be reasonably presumed to leave them without b church and ordinances . 

2.  That if c scriptures were not so pure and clear to us , as the word of life were not sufficiently there ; God were less d gracious to us now under grace , and Christ come in the flesh , than before to the Jews , who gave them a book of the law , which remained with them to the coming of the Messiah . 

3.  That such gifts and miracles were rather for bringing the word into the world , and for glorifying Christ's first coming in the flesh , then for e after . 

4.  That if we must have miracles to make us believe , and not believe any truth till then ; we must have for every truth , as well as for one or two , a miracle to give it evidence : and so there must be a continual and new miracle-working for every new believing . 

5.  If there must be miracles for believing , truth is not of that excellent nature that it seems : for if it be not able to make itself evident , and cast a native and spiritual f shine or brightness upon that soul it comes into , it is but weak , dark , and insufficient . 

6.  If truth be not discernible in itself by its own glorious light-some nature , by beams from it self ; it is of a worse condition than many things b•low , as the sun , and stars , and candles , &c. which bring that light in their own nature and dispensation , by which they are discerned . 

7.  If every truth be a beam of g Christ the truth , than every beam hath h light in itself , because it streams from the fountain of light , and so is discernible . 

8.  That it is more glorious to take evidences from the spirit , then from any thing without ; which can at farthest of itself but convince the outward man . 

9  That all shall now in the last times be in a secret , invisible , inward , spiritual glory , no more in gross , carnal , visible evidences and material beams , as gifts and miracles . and this is to know Christ no more after the flesh . 

10.  No miracles can in their own nature make one believe , without a spiritual conviction from the spirit of Christ going along with it ; so as we see when miracles were wrought , some believed , and some believed not : so as then there is no such reason for miracles as pretended , because that conviction which comes from the spirit through the work of a miracle , May come by any other instrumental or organical way . Or , it is a more glorious operation , by how much more single , or by way of immediate revelation it works . 

11.  To believe merely by the i spirit , is far more glorious than by any other outward means , though never so outwardly glorious : by how much the spirit is more excellent than any thing else , by so much more divine and spiritual are the impressions of it . 

12.  That when miracles are wrought , yet a pretender May work a miracle for the contrary ; like the sorcerers of Egypt against Moses : and Antichrist is spoken on rather to come k with signs and wonders of the two , than Christ . so as here shall be a loss to any that thinks to believe merely by miracle . so as the spirit is that which must make us believe beyond all the power of miracle , which can give out its power but upon the sense at furthest , being merely outward and visible . 

13.  That there is no such power for ordinances as is pretended ; but believers , as l disciple , May administer ; and so did the apostles and believers formerly , as they were disciple . 

14.  That the scriptures of the gospel , or new testament , are of such a M divine and even spiritual glory in the letter , as no other word : there is a power to discover the reason and secrets of the heart , which the reason and heart of man witnesses unto : there is a power to convince , and accuse , and terrify , and comfort , clearly , and undeniably , and experimentally known . 

15.  These scriptures we have , as they are , do make a discovery of such a way of religion as reason never yet in any age attained to : the men of purest reason , as your old philosophers , never attained further than the knowledge of something infinite which they did not know , and a religion of human or moral righteousness and purity , and some sacrifices of atonement , &c.  And there is not any religion in the world , Jewish or Turkish , but they are made up of carnal principles , and are founded upon reason and nature ; but this gospel-religion hath opened a new way of righteousness in one that is both God and man in a most rational though infinite way of salvation , and a way of worship cross to all methods and ways of reason , and the world , opening new ways by a new spirit , purifying natural reason into more divine and glorious notions then ever it yet attained , bringing in a way of b•leeving , and placing a religion upon a spiritu•l persuasion called faith , which is more proportionable to an infinite God , and an infinite way and depth of salvation , than reason ever invented , viz. for the soul to believe upon one , even Jesus Christ , in whom God hath laid up all love and fulness• ; and so for man to become one with him who is God and man : and there cannot be a more rational way for man to become one with God , then by one who is both God and man . 

16.  That though there be not such glorious powrings out of spirit , and such gifts as believers both May and shall have ; yet all believers ought to practise so far of the outward ordinance as is clearly revealed they May . 

17.  That the scriptures or gospel of the new testament being as many hundred years old as from the apostles , even in that original we have them , no very material differences in copies , as it seems ; and though they have passed through the great apostasy , yet they have not had the power to corrupt them materially in their original , to advantage their heresies and corruptions ; which very constant preservation of truth in the midst of the very enemies of truth , is both a constant and standing miracle of itself ; and so we need not stay for a ministry with miracle , being we have a word with miracle , which in its matter , subject , power , speaking of God , of his son , God and man , of his spirit the actor in man from both , by ways of outward ordinances , of the depths , windings , and workings of reason , &c. is of as much efficacy to persuade as any thing else we can have ; and the way of the pure spirit is a more glorious way of operation than any other of a visible sensual nature : and God May be more glorified by quickening and spiritualizing a word , and using the spiritually glorious ministry of that , then of man : and they are far too low who look for their original teachings from man , and not from the word and spirit . 

Conclusion . 

I have drawn out this map of each opinion , that your eye May travel over that in an hour , which otherwise you Might be a year in going over . Thus each are discovered in a narrow yet full discovery ; and i think all that are divinely rational , will see no such cause to think that each hath attained so far , that either they should presume in their degree , or look down from the pinnacle of an infallibility upon each other . I have set the strength and weakness of each opinion before itself , that on the one side as it May glory , so on the other side it May fear and be humble . all i wish now is that we be all so far one , at least in infirmity , and this common weakness , as May be a ground of common embodying and associating against the common enemy , or grand Antichrist ; as in states , who when they are at lowest , have least factions ; and when weakest , are most peaceable with one another . 

The gospel , or new testament of Jesus Christ , proved undeniably to be the very word of God , without miracles , to assure us of the particular duties in it . 

Because there are some men now of more reason then sound belief , i cannot but in a spiritual rationally way bear witness to our salvation in the written word . 

1.  If there were not a word or will of God revealed in laws and ordinances written , God were worse provided than the lawgivers of nations and kingdoms , and the world were left to their own wills ; which is esteemed ridiculous in the eyes of all the nations of the world in their very politic condition . 

2.  The laws and ordinances contained in the word , or new testaments , bear only the image of a God , in their holiness , purity , righteousness , glory , infiniteness , eternity , immortality , which are all , with many more things of like excellency , there , which are as the beams of light to the sun , or so many things of God , revealing God . 

3.  The word is so tempered into a middle nature betwixt God and man , as no word can be more revealing the most glorious , spiritual , infinite things from a God , in a mean , literal , figurative , comparative , significative way to man . 

4.  To have a standing word as the gospel is , is more for the glory and authority of a god than any ministry of man , though with miracles and signs ; because such a word , where none can join themselves as authors or parties , as in other ways of dispensation by men , men May join themselves , doth undoubtedly hold forth most of God and of divine authority ; and thus to maintain or preserve a law or word in the world , is not so much with God as for Kings and Princes to maintain statutes and laws in their kingdoms . 

5.  A word as the new testament is , May be as well a way and dispensation to an infinite God to make out himself by , as any other , either of dream or vision , or revelation or oracle , all being but ways of a natural strain and condition , no more than the word . 

6.  The very manner of dispensation or writing , is such as hath the authority , power , wisdom , couns•ls of a God , the whole business of it being a work discovered to be begun by God , and amongst men , to set forth the glory of God , the mercy , love , and wisdom of G•d , and the way by the son of God , and spirit of God , and all to be glorified with God ; and thus treating only of things divine , and a work divine , in a way divine . 

7.  We must either give up ourselves to this word wholly , or not at a•l ; and than let the world and experience judge what kind of religion reason at large unbounded , or unenlightened , will bring forth , by the former patterns of heathenish and g•ntilish religion . 

8.  Why should it not be thought the most clean and direct w•y for God , to manifest himself to man by word , gospel , and epistle , and so by an infinite and invisible power and hand commend and convey it from age to ag• , from generation to generation , as well as for men to make out their art , reason , knowledge , experience into books and words written , to their own and other generations ? 

9  This gosp•l of Jesus Christ places religion upon a more glorious transcendent way , to suit with an infinite God , than ever any device of man , or reason could invent , viz. upon faith , upon a believing or spiritual persuasion wrought by the same God , by which men are carried out into depths of infiniteness and glory , no way measurable nor discernabl• but by this way of believing ; and there could never have been an engine contrived which could have gone from man into God but this of faith by God himself ; nor more for the advantage of the glo•y of a God , taking all from the creature , employing it wholly upon a God . 

10.  There is more reason in this gospel , or new testament , in the way of r•ligion which it holds forth by Jesus Christ , then ever could be thought on by the reason of man ; as for instance , each man's internal conscience hath a light or law in it which condemns or accus••h for murder , &c. now if there be accusations , against whom is the offence committed but against something infinite ? and what way is there more divinely rational to apply to the justice of such an infinit• , being on God offended , but by one who is both man and god , even J•sus Christ ? so as the mystery of salvation is such as even reason itself cannot contradict or gainsay , though it cannot comprehend to leave the world inexcusable in their unbelief , because it commands them to believe in one whom in reason they cannot deny to be a way proportionable betwixt God and themselves for salvation . 

11.  It carries things in such a rare way of mercy , of justice , of love , of piety ; an• as it is a salvation from God to man , so it is a salvation managed by one who is God and man ; and every thing belonging to it , is accordingly mixed or tempered , of word and spirit , of power divine and outward dispensation , or ordinance ; and all this for man who is of a mixed nature of flesh and spirit : thus things are carried in a way of proportion and suitableness , so full , so suitable , and complete , and serviceable , as the invention of men could never device . 

12.  It discovers reason to itself in all its workings and ways , in its purity and corruption , in its virtues and vices , conscience bearing witness to the laws and commandments of it ; it purifies and spiritualizeth reason , and brings it into such a way of communion with God , as the souls that read it , and are exercised in it , seem to be new born , to receive in another nature , an immortal and incorruptible seed . 

13.  It manages all the design of salvation contrary to nature and the world , upon contrary principles , dispensations and hands , by a person poor , humble , and crucified for the good , by ministers and dispenser's , mean and contemptible fishermen , tradesmen , &c. yet inspired by graces contrary , as self-denial , humility , love to enemies ; by conditions contrary , as weakness , affliction , poverty , suffering , dying , carrying a treasure , a comfort , a riches , a life , a glory , under all these . 

14.  It is accompanied by continue or standing miracles , though miracles of a more spiritual nature , as discovery of the counsels and hearts of men , as conversion from sin , mortification of sin , changing natures from evil to good , planting in new dispositions , inclinations , affections into the soul . Now , if such changes and conversions were in material or sensible things , as from water to blood , from water to wine , how would it astonish ? Which in spirituals is more wonderful , though only less discernible , and not to be so sensibly perceived , preserved by its very enemies , the Roman cruelty of Emperors , and Antichristian traditions . 

15.  It refers the discovery of all truth in itself to the spirit of God , which no word but the word of God would do , and will not take in men into glory with itself which miracles do , which are done by the hand and ministry of man ; and the spirit in this way must needs be a more glorious interpreter of the will of God , than the mere ministry by man and miracles can be , by how much it is of a more spiritual nature ; and it is more excellent to seek things in the spirit , then in any out ward dispensation , which as it comes more immediately from God , so it comes in more immediately upon men ; and to take in truth by sense and sight , or miracle , is rather to know Christ after the flesh . 

16.  Yet after all , the word itself is the best way to bring in evidence and discovery in its own behalf to the souls of those that will come under the power , operation , and experiments of it , under the enlightening , convictions , impressions of it , in the reading , hearing , and meditating of it . these things are written that ye May believe : and they that are thus exercised , are above all miracle , and are persuaded enough by itself without the help of an outward work . 

17.  To these i add the testimonies of the most ancient in witness of it . 

Dionysius Areopagita , thought to live in the times of the apostles , & not daring to take his divinity anywhere but from these scriptures . 

Irenaeus , who was in the year 180. affirming the fullness of these gospel-scriptures , and accounted them the pillar of truth . 

So Tertullian , who lived 1400 years since , doth accordingly witness to their perfection . 

Origen , Athanasius , Chrysostom , Constantine the great , in the first nicene-council , with thousands others all along to our own age . 

18.  The Jews , whose very testament and condition answers to every prophecy and gospel-scripture . 

19  The many of those most eminently ancient , learned , and godly , who have shed their blood in testimony of it . 

20.  The power of God going along with it . 

21.  The confessions of the most learned in that , confess , that the original copies are not corrupted , but continue pure . 

One argument from the national covenant for liberty of conscience , yet with all subordinate and just obedience to the state . 

Art . 1.  

the first branch of the covenant is , 

That we shall sincerely , really , and constantly , &c. endeavour , &c. the reformation of religion in the kingdoms of England , &c. in doctrine , worship , discipline , and government , according to the word of God , &c.  

Art . 2.  

The second branch of the covenant , 

that we shall in like manner without respect of persons endeavour the extirpation of popery , &c.  Superstition , heresy , schism , &c. and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound doctrine , &c.  

Now from these i argue , 

1.  Each one is personally and individually bound by the covenant , and in his own proper conscience is obliged to endeavour a reformation according to the word of God , and so far to the example of the best reform churches as they are agreeable to that word ; i hope no further . Now who shall be the judge and interpreter of this word of God , to each man's conscience in the things of God , but he who is Lord of the conscience , in things immediately divine & spiritual ? the consciences of men are under a spiritual and immediate interpreter of the word , even the spirit of the Lord , in all things of spiritual cognizance , as every scripture-truth , or truth , in the word is : and this is not only strengthened and clear from the word , but from a testimony which some when they read , May know better than many others . 

By the clause , according to the word of God , we understand , so far as we do or shall in our consciences conceive the same to be according to the word of God . 

Now each man standing thus engaged in his own particular and in his own proper conscience by a covenant recommended and imposed , each is bound to bring forth the evidence of their consciences in particular , concerning this to which they are covenanted : so as i , or you , being covenanted against popery , heresy , and according to the word of God , you and i stand bound by our own private consciences to reveal to the state , who hath recommended such a covenant unto us , what our consciences interpret according to this word , against popery or heresy , unless there could be one universal or public infallible interpreter of the word of God and truth , who Might determine concerning heresy and the word of God , and whose determinations is as in the formerly inspired apostolic•l teachers we May rest . 

So being thus engaged by covenant , we are at the same time , by one and the same act , bound to liberty of conscience , in these particulars of the things of God : and if there should be any persecution for the pious , modest , and peaceable liberty , so taken and practised , whether would it not clearly and undeniably follow , that our consciences are not under the Lord Jesus , and his spirit immediately in the things of God , but under the interpretations of men . 

And surely that one clause , according to the word of God , is most providentially inserted ; for if we be so closely covenanted to the word of God , how tender ought we to be ? lest in this dark season of our discerning , we oppose something of the word , and so in ignorance , persecute what we covenant to maintain . I wish our assembly would press this equally with the covenant in their sermons . 

object . but must every one be the interpreter of the covenant ? 

answ. nay , not every one , in every thing : the magistracy in all things of a civil cognizance , and in all spiritual things which go out from their mere spiritual condition into a moral offence , as injustice or evil transgression into tumult or disturbance of public or private peace , actually and expressly , not interpretatively ; for so the nations interpreted the Jews as troublers of the state ; and the Jews , Christ and his disciple , as movers of sedition : the Papists and prelates interpreted the Nonconformists or reproached Puritans , as factious and tumultuous : so as in all things of moral , civil , or secular cognizance , which the magistrate hath clear rule for to walk by , he ought to interpret and proceed by ; partly , because he is the legislator , and so is the best interpreter , and can best resolve us in things of law and public liberty ; and in morals , his duty lies out more clearly ; but in merely divine and spiritual interpretations of truth and gospel-mystery , the Lord Jesus and the spirit of Jesus Christ are both the legislators , or lawgivers , and interpreters to the conscience . 

object . but shall there be no power to compel consciences into uniformity ? 

answ. i shall give light to this by propounding a case . Suppose the several godly parties , or believers , were equally principled for persecution or non-toleration , and were equally numbered , and were equally strengthened by parties of magistracy on their side , what would come forth according to such principles ? I sigh to consider : there would be edge against edge , authority against authority , power against power , and all the state or kingdom involved into blood and confusion : so as we must consider things according to their principles , not according to their temporary or occasional advantages . 

object . but you give not enough to the magistrate . 

answ. yea , more than any . He that gives him that which God hath given him , gives more than any that pretend to give him the most . 

The pretenders that bid for the magistrate at this time are , 

1.  They that put him as an help and government in the church , as some , viz. they of the Erastian way . 

2.  They that make use on him but as an help to the church extrinsecally , and by way of foreign assistance , as others , viz. they of the presbyterial way . 

3.  They that give him power over body , goods , over all moral and civil behaviours of men , professors and believers , of what sort soever , of what opinion soever , as i and the rest of our brethren do , praying with all manner of supplication that under them we May lead a peaceable , godly , and quiet life . 

object . but why dare you not engage civil magistracy in religion over consciences , as some others do ? 

answ. yea , in all things morally good and evil , God hath engaged them , and hath set the law and light of nature and conscience in all persons to side with them , condemning and excusing what they and their law doth condemn and excuse , and thus to bear witness with their dominion and power . 

But in things of pure gospel-mystery and evangelically good or evil , i dare not engage them ( Whatever others do ) over consciences , because i give more to their just power , and because i dare not draw them into such principles , which hath broken more magistracy , than all the other plots and devices of men . 

For things of worship which are laid up in the pure simple mystery , in the light of the spirit , not of nature , as all mere gospel-mystery is , to engage the magistrates sword into these , is rather a way to dash them against every man's conscience , and so in time to lay in a fatal power or a fatal suffering . 

We know that power which makes kingdom's soùndest in their dominion , and most lasting , is the truest and wholsomest ; and surely that which engages them lest into that part of the soul , the conscience which can lest endure to be oppressed , is the safest and most peaceable . 

To my reverend learned friend Master Ley , one of the assembly of divines , at Westminster , author of a book called the resolution of the new quere , published by Master Saltmarsh . 

Sir , 

I shall give you a public account according to your public charge in your leaf concerning me , that i intended to make you my censor for some papers which i did not publish . Pag. 1.  

Sir , those papers were an answer to Master Fuller's last book ; and the question about reformation betwixt him and me being so out of all question , as Master Herle observeth , and he as i heard , being dead , made me rather put up my arrows into their quiver , theen shoot them at such a mark . 

For my contending with you in this , i hope it is but as that of Paul and Barnabas , and Paul and Peter , a contention of brethren , not of enemies ; for i think you would oppose truth no more than myself ; but we both May be said to contend rather for the truth then against it , and rather with one another's reason , then with truth . 

In this controversy you have much advantage of learning , and experience ; but there is a spirit and the inspiration of the almighty . which enlightens the young man and the old ; Elihu as well as Job or his friends . 

Your other advantages are , the magistrate whom you have more on your side ; we only are more on the magistrates side , than they are on ours ; yet we cannot but say , and bless the Lord for them , they are so far on ours , as we lead a peaceable and quiet life under them . 

Your other advantage is an assembly of learned divines , yet not so wholly yours ; the way of truth we stand for , hath a party there ; and i hope when the veil of prejudice is taken away , and truth is brought home to their souls in its nakedness , power , and evidence , by a power more spiritual than is yet given out from heaven , our party there will be greater : i willingly presume so much of them . 

I have laboured that a spirit of love and meekness Might run through all my reply unto you , though in my travelling over your paper i have met with some things in the way too sharp , and your way hath more briars and thorns in it than you promised in your first leaf : i had much ado not to be provoked , by how much your promise had removed all offence on your part from my expectation . If you find any passions in my book , charge them on my unregenerate part ; for i find that when i would do good , evil is present with me . 

You see my labours , deducting the time of their printing , are of about two week's growth , younger by some six weeks ( If i mistake not ) than yours . i hope where you could not expect much , you will not look for more than i here return you in this time . 

Sir , i salute you in the Lord , and with all due respects to your self , your age , your learning , i begin my discourse with you ; and the Lord let me see the failings on my part , while i seek to discover those on yours , that i May take out the beam from my own eye , as well as the mote from yours . 

You desired me in your book to enter upon a way of peace ; and i have accordingly presented my model to be perfected and refixed by any that will set upon the work : i do not love in any thing i write , to fume out merely in controversy ; but in something if it May be to edification . i rest 

Your friend in the Lord John Saltmarsh . 

The smoke in the temple . Wherein is the vindication of the new quere from Master Ley's resolution . 

Master Ley's resolution , page 2 , & 3.  

I put a question , whether he were an independent or no ? he told me , he was not ; but that he had a latitude of charity for them of that way . since that , i had a glimpse more of his inclination by his dawning of light : but a full discovery of his mind in his book , the opening of Master Prynns vindication . i will not entertain him as an enemy . To give him his due , in all that i have seen set forth in his name , i find him rather opinionative than passionate . 

Reply . 

Your question was accordingly put by you , and accordingly answered by me . And for my appearing for truth not all at once in my treatises , you May see i was not hasty to believe , nor to write in the behalf of a truth before i saw it , nor to plunge myself into any way till i had examined it . The apostles waited for the full revelation of all truth by the spirit 's coming . the Bereans searched daily to see whether the things were so , or no . Apollo's preached not Christ clearly till he was instructed in the way of God more perfectly . we are bidden to try the spirits , and prove all things : so as i appeared in those degrees but by scripture-warrant . And i could name to you examples of another sort ; Augustine , Luther , both finding truth but in degrees ; and the latter sweetly acknowledging how he was enlightened by beam after beam . angels , who lie more naked towards God , and take in the things they know , by way of vision ; yet see not any of that will of God which gives laws to them , but as he reveals : much less such as we who dwell in houses of clay , and whose foundations are in the dust , and who come by the sight of things discoursively , and by spiritual reasoning ; God giving in the revelation of his truths in a natural , yet supernatural way . 

But for that notion of independency you speak on , i dare not own it , because i account myself both under a spiritual and civil supremacy ; under Jesus Christ and the magistrate severally , and exempt from neither . We are not of those that despise governments and speak evil of dignities , not are we under any such singular notion that i know on , to be called independents , &c.  we all hold of the body of Christ , and of the communion of sain•ss below , and we hold one upon another , but not one over another . we dare not be classical , provincial , national ; these are no forms of wholesome words to which we are commanded , nor know we any such power ; but that of brethren , and ministry , and fellowship . we dare not take out a copy either from the states of the world , or the state of Israel , to obey or rule by under the gospel . And if you call the churches of Christ independent for this , we must suffer till the Lord bring forth our righteousness as the noonday . yet this you and we both know , that when truth would not embody or mingle at any time with corruptions , it had presently the name of sect , schism , faction ( All which are employed in the name independency ) put upon it . Thus were the reform nations of England , Germany , France , &c. scandalised by popish writers , and the old Non-conformists by the prelatical ; the Jews formerly by the nations , and the Christians by the Jews . we have heard enough of independency and presbytery ; such notes of distinction are now become names of reproach : and so i lay them down . 

And whereas you say you will not entertain me as an enemy ; it is more likely than in the end both you and i May prove a better friend to the truth . it is possible many in this age Might have seen more , had they not cast so much dust in one another's eyes by their strivings : it were well such a gospel-spirit would walk more abroad , and that spirit which casts men sometimes into the fire , and sometimes into the water , were not so stirring . Well , since you will be no enemy to me , i shall not , i hope , contend with you , though i dare not but contend earnestly for the truth . and the truth itself which i write for , May ( I hope ) at length find you no more an enemy to it than you are to me . I cannot but wish one of your experience and abilities , like Paul , to preach for that truth which before he destroyed . our heart's desire and prayer should be for any of Israel . 

And for that you say of me in your observation , that i am rather opinionative than passionate , i cannot take it so ill from you that will needs be no enemy to me : i interpret any thing from such a one on the better side of it . But i shall allow you your liberty at myself : and if the truth of God May more abound through my opinion ( As you take it ) unto his glory , i have enough . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 4 , & 5.  

I wonder he , who hath writ a whole book of policy , should be so unpolitic as to think it seasonable , since it tends to retard the establishment of government , whereto the parliament is so much engaged by declaration , &c. by solemn league and covenant , art. 1. already setting it up in ordinance for ordination , &c.  though the liberty of speaking lengthens the debates , and delays the votes , &c. and so much the more , because they are more in number than we , and because their determinations are final , as ours are not . 

Answer . 

For some things in my book of policy , i praise the Lord i can look on them as on part of the darkness i was in : and i can freely join with any in censuring any unregenerate part in me , as i esteem much of my carnal reason to be . when i was a child , i spoke as a child ; neither have i any fruit now ( As the apostle says ) of some of those things . nor would i have any go thither for direction , but so far as they find scripture or sound reason . i cannot but give a caution concerning this book , because i would have readers to look on any thing from me , as Luther speaks of himself , as i receive in light . and methinks i scarce do any thing which i could not with Augustine , when it is done , find something to retract in it : either something is too dead , or too dark , or too carnal . thus you see i willingly help you against myself ; and i account it a part of my condition here , not to see all at once . 

For the unseasonableness of my quere , you allege the declaration of parliament , and the covenant in art. 1. wherein they are engaged to endeavour reformation ; and the ordinances , &c.  

Now where is my unseasonableness ? The parliament is endeavouring , &c.  May i contribute my monies , my vote , my pains , my informations to the civil engagements , and not my notions to the spiritual ? are we not to bring in all our disoursements , either natural , civil , or spiritual , into that public treasury ? though you of the assembly cast in of your abundance , May not the poor ones cast in their mite ? are we not by the same covenant bound to discover anything against God and the state , and the glory and peace of both ? and if i find my conscience persuading me such or such a thing is not accordingly , ought i not by all the obligations that are upon me , of gospel , parliament , and country , peaceably and meekly to speak a word ? May we discover any thing to the state we conceive of malignity or danger in civil things , and not in spirituals ? Is not the spiritual or soul-liberty , the more glorious liberty of the subject ? We cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard , saith the apostle : and , what you hear in the ear , that speak you on the house top , saith Christ . We know who it was that said , prophesy not here ; for it is the King's chapel . and for things of a spiritual nature , we are allowed almost the fullness of time for season . be instant in season and out of season , saith Paul . 

But , what better season could i come in , than such a one , wherein things were but ripening and moving towards establishment ? where nothing is settled , there can be nothing disturbed . where nothing is concluded , there can be nothing repealed . where nothing is established , there can be nothing disordered . but since you put me to a further account . I shall give it . My spirit was not my own so wholly then , but his ( I hope ) whose motion i obeyed , the Lords . such breathings of heaven who dare safely quench ? It is as fire in the bon•• ▪ says the prophet : and like that of Mordecai , if thou altogether hold thy peace at this time &c.  

And whereas you say , that the parliaments determinations are final , that holds better for me , who Might have spoken to much less purpose , had i stayed till all had been done , and the determinations ended , and become final ; sure it was time then to speak before determinations were final , or never , and by your own account too ; for you are pleased to reckon up the proceedings of state in the business of religion ; which are such , as had i stayed , i had had a worse season ; however , as the prophet says , i have delivered my soul : they were , you know , the foolish virgins that came not with their oil till the door was shut . Whatever my oil or my lamp was , yet i think it not agreeable to the wisdom of that parable , to come and knock only when the door is not open . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 6 , 7 & 8.  

The title of the quere is baited with truth and peace . he a private divine to put such a quere , both of state and religion , and to suggest such a suspicion of haste , and to tax the ministers for putting in for a power not consonant to scriptures and prudence , &c.  His rendering the original word metaphorically : his artificial colours , rhetorical , &c.  and my marshalling his reasons in a right method . 

Reply . 

I have gathered up into one bundle your pieces of a lighter concernment : i would not stay tithing anise and cummin , but i hasten to the weightier matters of the law . a word only to each . 

For baiting my quere with truth and peace , you allude to Christ's allegory , that we are fishers of men : and if i have no worse things to bait with then these two , truth and peace , none need , i hope , be afraid of the hook . and for the proof of them both , argument and time will evidence . 

For me , a private divine , to put a quere of state and religion . what were John Hus , Wickliff , Luther , Paphnutius , who in their several ages gave out their testimonies ? They were but single men , compared with councils and synods . not that i would compare with them , who am less than the least of all the mercies of God ; yet they were but single , though singular men . And what if a private divine ? Jesus Christ May bid a private man stand and speak to the persons . there is a law of the spirit commands to speak as well as the law of a state ; and though you speak by the later law , another May speak by the former . and what though a quere both of religion and state ? is not our covenant mixed accordingly of religion and state ? doth not the state itself mix with religion where churches are national ? and how can i speak properly but to both , where both are in interest ? 

For my suggestion of a suspicion of haste ; you know , words and phrases are not the same to all : one May interpret thus , another thus . i had no thought of Jehu's driving , as you imply , when i wrote . I must lay the supposed crime at your own doors ; for it is none of mine ; nor have i ( Nor any ) reason to tax that honourable senate , whose counsels are grave , and serious , and deliberate . had i looked for Jehu , i should have looked to another coast and quarter , where they drive more furiously . why deal you not more candidly ? Why are you not more faithful in your interpretation to the original ? 

For that of my taxing the ministers for desiring power ; none have reason to speak but the guilty ; it concerns not the innocent . it is not strange for some ministers to affect government , or rather ruling : we have so much of prelacy yet left , and working in the country with us ; and if not in the city too , i refer you to Master Coleman . 

For the word rendered from the original metaphorically ; i quoted only the text , to my remembrance , to the printer's hand ; and how he came by the metaphor , i know not ; but i find fault as well as you : however , to make the best of it now , translations of scripture are not all grammatical , as you know ; nor to the letter , as i could wish them with you . 

For artificial colours , or rhetorical , &c.  You make me guilty of such varnish as i have not laid on , to my knowledge ; nor have much to lay on , if i would : truth and peace , which were my subjects , are fair enough of themselves , without any colour of mine : and i desire not to bring forth either , but in the evidence and demonstration of the spirit ; and if there be any thing of their own beauty there , call it not artificial ; put not suspicions and jealousies into any , that such things as they see are not so , to make men sceptical . it is as much injury to truth and peace to misreport them , as to counterfeit them . 

And for your logical marshalling my reasons , i thank you ; you took more pains with them than i would do . I gave them out in that notional order i received them in . Nor dare i be too logical and notional in things divine . Systems and forms of art , have done our divinity some harm . such classes and methods of reason have been found too strait for the more spiritual enlargements of truth . yet i honour your learning , though i thus speak . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 9 & 10.  

His first reason taken from rules of faith , rom. 14.3 , 13 , &c. now he should have planted his reason directly against the imposing a government , rather than obedience to it ; as thus , &c.  those that set up a government which they are not fully persuaded on , sin : but , they that now set up church-government with power , &c. do set up a government whereof they are not fully persuaded on : therefore in so doing , they sin . The major is true , but the minor not , because of their faithful learned counsellors , and scripture-discussings . 

Reply . 

Since you will help me to prove , you are welcome : you have furnished me with one argument more : you are a fair enemy , to lend out your own weapon . And now you have made your argument half for me , i shall make the other half myself . You say , 

What the imposers of government cannot do in faith , is sin : this is your half argument . But you take it for granted , our imposers of government are not such , but such as are fully persuaded , and can set up the government in faith ; and you prove it thus , from those of their counsellors so near them , and from their scripture-discussions . 

First , i know not what counsellors you mean ; but they are too wise a senate to be carried by any interest but their own ; and i wish them no other counsellors than truth and peace : nor do i know that they are so fully persuaded of any such government . i believe some of them are not so fully principled for your way ; and then they all are not persuaded so of the government : nor have you yet been able to make out the evidence of every truth you presented them from clear scriptures , saving your art of deductions and consequences , and prudence : and if all cannot be persuaded that state conscience or public conscience is not so wholly nor fully persuaded : then , as you imply , a state or public conscience is like a particular conscience ; which if it doth not wholly consent , is doubtful , or weak : for it is not in spiritual things as in civil : votes of major parts make laws , and they stand good from any such forms of policy : but i never yet saw that rule in the gospel for any such proceedings in spiritual things : but that is a law in Christ's kingdom , not that which is voted so , but that which is so in the truth of it : for else popery were the best ; for it hath most voices and counsels . so as unless you can prove the parliament to be of one mind in it , how can you prove a parliament so fully persuaded in mind as you imply ? Let them prove a truth by most voices that please or can ; but i wish the business of a state-conscience , in a thing of this nature , were more enquired into then yet it hath been . 

But if the parliament were fully persuaded of the truth of the government , yet there would be a new question , yea , and is , very learnedly discussed by our worthy brethren Master Coleman and the commissioner , how they could be persuaded of the imposing , and power of settling . for my part , if there must be an imposing of government ( For i would have the state-consciences left to their liberty as well as particular , and yet truth to have the liberty of access unto them ) i would have the power of the parliament laid up there : we have had too sad experience when it hath been given out from thence , and trusted too far . Paul referred himself thither , ( i stand , says he , at Cesar's judgement-seat ) rather then to the council of the priests and elders . Christ had more favour from Pilate a Roman governor , then from Caiaphas the priest . 

One word more . How can the parliament properly be said to be fully persuaded , &c. unless they could freely sign it with a jus divinum , or divine right ? nothing but scripture and the word , can properly fully persuade . Now if they cannot find so much scripture as to warrant it for Christ's government , how can there be a purely gospel-warrantable , a full persuasion , or faith , where there wants a word of faith to secure it ? 

And now i shall form your argument you half made to my hand thus , and return another with usury . 

Your argument is this : 

those that set up a government which they cannot be fully persuaded on , cannot but sin . 

but , the parliament cannot be fully persuaded of this government : 

Therefore , if they set it up , they cannot but sin . 

My proof is this , in behalf of your argument . 

that conscience which is not wholly consenting , is not fully persuaded . 

but , such is the state or public conscience , viz. not fully consenting at this time : 

Therefore , the state-conscience is not fully persuaded . 

Note 

Because some are more for it , some are less for it . 

I prove the state-conscience not fully consenting . 

that conscience which hath not scripture to secure it , cannot be fully consenting or persuaded : viz. as full persuasion is taken in the word . 

but , such is the public conscience at this time concerning this present government : viz. not fully persuaded from scripture concerning it . 

Therefore , the public or state-conscience cannot be so fully consenting or persuaded . viz. in a scripture-sense . 

Note . 

Because they which cannot call it a government by divine right , are not secured concerning it by the word ; and then , by consequence , are not so fully consenting , nor persuaded . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 9 & 10.  

If we take his reason to stand immediately against obedience , and so consequently against commands , &c.  it is more formal , but still as feeble ; repugnant to religion and reason , against former protestations , and the covenant ; for some will always scruple , &c.  

Reply . 

Some of this Might have been spared . Let us have as much reason , and as little reviling as May be . Your reason is . Because than neither protestations nor covenant of state can be administered ; for some will always scruple . So as here is the force of your reason ; because protestations and covenants in the state are put upon a persons unwilling and malignant , therefore government should . 

First , a truth of government , and the establishment of it , is but indirectly , unsutably , and disproportionably proved from oaths and covenants . indeed , under the old testament , and in the state of Israel , covenants were more agreeable to the way of that church ; they were part of the worship then ; and it was a way of obligation and engagement fitted more to the policy of that nation : they were a persons or nation of themselves , singled out from the world , and marked by a carnal ordinance : and their discipline was fitted to the whole nation by God himself ; and so covenants , &c. gathered them up from the world into their national way of worship , &c.  But now , the way of church and worship changing , and the laws of such kind of external pedagogy ceasing , and a more inward and spiritual law coming in , you Might have done well , ere you took things thus for granted , to clear the way of covenants under the gospel , and not to prove one probable thing by another . Those of your way are against a little church-covenant , and why not a great one ? 

For the imposing of protestations now , &c.  It is not my work here to discuss ; nor am i against any way of state-security that May consist with sound prudence : and for the spiritual part of them , wherein men covenant in the things of God , let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind : that is the apostle's rule , i am sure , whatever any say to the contrary , and will stand . In civil things , i would have any way or design of assurance that is fairly and justly politic : in spiritual things , only such ways of assurance as are gospel-ways , and May suit with the new testament-believers . 

And now you are to prove more than perhaps you thought on ; that is , to clear a church-covenant , which many of your way are against : for though you condemn it in some churches , not of your way ; yet a national church-covenant you plead for . And how can this be both true and false , that a great church-covenant is lawful , and a little one unlawful ? A national church-covenant lawful , and a particular or congregational church-covenant unlawful ? This only by the way : to show you how one May mistake his way in a mist : you were proving a government , and now you are engaged to prove chuch-covenants , which you are both for and against . 

And yet , after all this of protestations and covenants , there is no fair proof of establishing a government , or imposing it in your way and design from these . It is not safe going to the state for a pattern for the church . If the state in certain seasons of unfaithfulness and unsettlement , contrive any way of security or assurance ( Necessity is often a lawmaker in states , yet not so in the church ) will you from hence argue for a liberty in the church ? Will you make necessity your gospel , your lawgiver there ? Necessity is sometimes a suspender of laws in the gospel , but no lawmaker . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 10.  

But i answer : i wonder an ingenuous man , as m. Saltmarsh is , should make such an objection . 

Reply . 

These are good words ; and i hope you shall have no worse than you bring : yet we must speak truth . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 10.  

I answer : the church-government is such as in the chief parts of it is from the word . 

Reply . 

You grant then the government is but in some parts warrantable by the word : so was episcopacy and prelacy in some parts of it . There is not any false worship or way , but it hath some parts of truth in it . The great image had a head of gold , &c.  The mystery of iniquity sits in the temple of God , &c.  The whore of Babylon sits in scarlet decked with gold , and precious stones , and pearls . Truth must be all one and the same , and homogeneal , not in parts . The Jews had the law , but then their own traditions mingled . There is one Lord , one faith ; not two . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 10.  

Things of lesser moment in it , though they are not directly from scripture , yet not repugnant ; they are of prudence , and agreeable to the best reform churches . 

Reply . 

But , why of lesser moment ? all things are of moment in spirituals . indeed if they be such as be not the gospel's , they are then , as you say , of lesser moment : and yet of moment too , in another sense ; for , traditions of men make void the commandments of God . 

Nor are grounds of prudence any scripture-grounds to rule by . prudence hath let in more will-worship than any thing . prelacy had its prudence for every new additional in worship and government : and if presbytery take prudence too , let the reader judge what May follow . 

And what is that , not directly from scripture , yet not repugnant ? Surely Christ's rule is not such ; he opposes any tradition to the commandments of God . not directly from scripture , is repugnant to scripture : such is the oneness , entireness , indivisibility , and essentiality of the truth . He that is not with me , is against me . 

And for the reform churches as a rule ; that is to set the sun by the dyal , and not the dyal by the sun . we must set the churches by the word , and not church by church , and the word by the church . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 10 & 11.  

Because the practice of the government belongs not to the people's part , but to the ministers and elders . 

Because , so far as concerns the people's compliance , they are to be instructed before they yield submission . 

Because if any remain unsatisfied , they are not to be put upon his dilemma of sin or misery , or to be ruled with the rod , but meekness , 2 cor. 4.21 . 2 tim. 2.25 . 

Because the ignorance of the persons generally , which he would have for a reason to suspend it , aught to be rather a reason for expedition , that they May practically know it : for while it is unknown , it is slandered , which Might have been more amiable . 

Because his two texts make not only against the suspending for a time , but for ever . I wish he would preach such texts as these to his persons ; 1 thess. 5.12 , 13. 1 tim. 5.17 . heb. 13.7 , 17.  

Reply . 

To your first , it belongs not to the persons , &c.  It seems then the persons must be kept out from all intermeddling . But i would have the persons mark well what kind of government that is that sits upon the waters or persons : i am sure Christ's government takes in the persons : and being once in a churchway , they lose their old capacity for a new , and are raised up from persons to brethren , act. 15.  It is a worthy saying of Master Goodwin and Master Nye , that the clergy got the golden ball of government amongst them ; and i censure it is not much mended in the presbytery . 

But you say the persons must be instructed , that is , they must only know that they must obey . but are they called , and consulted with , and owned , as the scripture holds forth , wherever there is any church spoken of ? But what though instructed ? they are only to be instructed and taught that this is the government to which they must submit . So the persons under popery , prelacy , &c. were instructed , with that limitation and restriction . but shall they be thus instructed and taught in it ? persons , here is a government which to some of us seemeth to be a government according to the word ; take it and examine it : if you be so persuaded , and that the word holds it forth clearly , embrace it ; if not , do not obey any thing in blind and implicit obedience . this were fair dealing with conscience ; thus the churches of Christ had their government among them . 

To that of the pe•ples' compliancy you speak on , it is not my work here to dispute the interests of elders and persons distinctly ; but to make answer , that the compliancy and submission which are the duties you set out for the persons , are such as they May easily see the interest you allow them : viz. an interest of compliance only , and submission or obedience to what is done already ; not any liberty to examine and refuse . 

And when persons are instructed , still your work remains to prove your presbytery over congregations , or a church gathered out of a church to be over a church ; which May upon the presbytery more justly be recriminated then where you do so often recriminate , upon gathered churches . and methinks to me it is unreasonable to tax any for church-gathering , when your very presbytery is maintained by such a kind of principle . what is your classical , your provincial , your national presbytery , but a church gathered out of the rest , call it a virtual , or representative , or what you please ? 

For that of meekness ; how meek i• will prove , and how meekly they shall be dealt with under it , we are not to judge by any promises of meekness , but by principles . are the principles such as naturally bring forth meekness , or rather such as invest the ministers and elders with a power supreme and of dominion ? but what if such as yourself , and some other godly meek of your way , May propound nothing but ways of meekness to yourselves ? Can you undertake to secure the persons for hereafter , and for all of the way , and for the way in its own nature ? 

There are things of meek appearances , as the presbytery May be , yet prove not so . The lamb in the revelation had two horns , though a lamb . Hazael could say , am i a dog , that thou shouldst think so harshly of me , that i should kill the children in the womb , 2 king. 8 ? He as little suspected his own cruelty which the prophet foresaw in his nature would come to pass , as you do in your presbytery , which some , seeing into the nature of it , cannot but prophesy accordingly . You know episcopacy began in meekness , and Bishops were brought in first for good and for peace : but how proved they ? tyranny had ever a countenance of meekness and love , till it got seated in the throne . So Absalon was very fair spoken in the gate ; but how was he in the throne ? 

For that of my dilemma of sin and misery , which you say persons shall not be put upon ; it May be some in your or another classis May find more meekness , a spirit of more love and ingenuity : but what is this to the nature of the government , that some in it are well natured ? 

And for that of sin and misery ; surely , if the presbytery be set on with power , many a one will be in that snare , partly in fear , and partly in an easy compliancy : for there are whole parishes and counties of this constitution : and you yourself say , the wilfully weak must have the rod . and who will this be ? Such as are so in the judgement and interpretation of the classis ? or how ? I would this were well cleared . 

And for your scriptures of 1 cor. 4.21 . 2 tim. 2.25 . shall i come to you with a rod , &c. and in meekness instructing , &c.  These are full scriptures for ordering any church-government : these are good laws ; but than men must be rightly in commission for ruling by them , and persons rightly ordered and disposed for such rules , as in all other laws and kingdoms . But what is this to your purpose , till your government appear to be all Christ's ? 

To that of the ignorance of the persons , which you would have for a reason of expedition rather than suspension , that they May practically know it ; i answer : 

In practical godliness , the scripture-way is not so : things must first be known , before practically known , or else the obedience can be but mixed , blind , and popish . who can practically obey , taking practically in a scripture-sense , that is , with knowledge , till they know and be persuaded ? indeed in things civil , &c. or moral , practice May bring in knowledge ; habits May be acquired and gotten by acts ; a man May grow temperate by practising temperance , and civilly obedient practising civil obedience : but it is not so in spirituals ; there , habits go before acts , spiritual infusions before practices . 

And for the amiableness of it , look into other reform kingdoms , and see what power of godliness is there by reason of it . do we not see the huge bodies of nations very sinful , corrupt , formal ? for Scotland , our brethren's preaching and watchfulness , it May be more powerful in a reformation upon them , than their government . and further , i deny not but a government of that nature May much reform the outward man : so May a mere prudential government , a mere civil government , if sincerely executed . the Romans had a very moral persons under their yoke , when their laws were well executed . prelacy and Bishops had a government which was Antichristian , yet by an exact execution , could chastise the outward man in some measure . 

For your other reason , that my texts make against not only the suspending for a time , 〈◊〉 for ever ; i answer : 

It is true , principles and circumstances considered : for if neither the government be Christ's , nor the persons nationally a church , when can you settle it ? And if there be no gospel-promises that persons shall fall in so nationally as the Jews did , excepting some that concern the world in general , as isai. 49.22 . then how or when will you settle , or what will you settle , or upon whom ? 

And for the texts you commend to me for preaching , 1 thes. 5.12 , &c. they all concern people's obedience to their elders and rulers ; they are very material and pertinent to that : and i shall in requital commend some other back to you ; as those of not Lording it over the heritage : against preeminence ; as helpers of your faith ; of service , and ministry : we are your servants ; we entreat you , and beseech you , not seeking our own things , not for filthy lucre , but of a ready mind , &c.  

We must consider , scripture must be taken in the wholeness and entireness of it ; and we must not only mind persons of their obedience , but elders and ministers of their service , duty , ministry , humility , self-denial , &c.  And thus in a just distribution , deal out both to ministers and persons their measure . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 12.  

Strange that he should plead for a delay in establishment of reformation from the covenant , wherein we are bound to endeavour it sincerely , really , &c. and more strange , under the title of popery too , which in the next article of popery is disavowed . 

Reply . 

Not so strange as you make it ; for we are covenanted to endeavour a setting up the government , not a government ; that is , as it is expounded in the article , the government , or reformation according to the word of God , &c. not a government or reformation of any other sort . So as i plead for a delay only in setting up a discipline , not the discipline : or more plainly , that the discipline be such , that the covenanters May not violate that article , wherein they are bound to do every thing according to the word , and so prove unfaithful in their covenant , while they are most zealous for it . There was such a kind of mistake in the Jews , who would have stoned the Lord of the Sabbath in zeal to the Sabbath , and following after righteousness , yet did not attain to the righteousness of God . 

And for the title of popery which i put upon such obedience ; which you say cannot be , because discovered in the next article of the covenant : i answer , the popery is not in the covenant , but in the interpretations upon it , and the mistaken practice of it , which is the thing which i only aver . O! how soon May we be popish under a covenant against it ! What are the maintenance of ministers by tithes ? Jewish and popish undeniably , and yet no notice of this at all . I had as great a tithe once as another , but i could not hold it so , neither by covenant nor gospel . Nor do i tax the parliament , but those who are betrusted to commend spiritual grievances to their senate , &c.  Brethren , let us lay down these grievances : countries and families are burdened : let not the ministers have their hooks abroad in every thing of the peoples , like Eli's sons . We know the kingdoms of Scotland and the Netherlands take their tithes to maintain their wars , and will not let their preachers live by decimation , but by pension . And methinks you that profess ingenuity , should be so candid to distinguish where you see i distinguish , and not to force on constructions of this nature , which neither any thing of mine nor the covenant will bear . 

And for what you say concerning the composers and penners of the covenant , i am willingly silent : i would not aggravate any thing against a brother , as you are , which Might be only a failing in your pen . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 12.  & 13.  

For that he saith of people's implicit obedience , &c. of their being devoted to any thing the state sets up by statutes , cannot be , for these reasons : 

Because , as in the former reason , instruction must go before . 

Because , for that of their being devoted , it makes against setting up doctrine as well as discipline , and authority of parliament as well as authority of ministers : they , not ministers , make statutes . 

Reply . 

To your first , that instruction must go before , i have answered to this before , as you propounded it before : one word more will suffice . What kind of instruction is it you mean , but authoritative compulsive instruction , such as the schoolmasters , even your own instance , and here most pertinent , who teaches and whips every one of those that will not understand as well as he ? something an unreasonable way of correction in matters of pure belief & conscience , and best among boys , as your instance implies : men of scripture-consciences cannot bear it . 

And for that you say it makes against doctrine as well as discipline : yea , in some sort it is granted ; for neither doctrine nor discipline ought to be forced but in a gospel-way . 

And for that you say it makes against the parliament , because they make statutes : i answer , nothing makes against a legislative power , which reduces it to purer , and clearer , and freer principles : and thus the parliament very justly argues in all their remonstrances touching the King , while they go about to reduce him to his just rights , from those exorbitancies he suffers himself to be brought into . For instance : he that wishes the parliament Might only proceed in a way , not grieving the spirit , nor hazarding the persecution of truth , nor oppressing any gospel-principles , to which they are covenanted , not keeping on in any sin of former parliaments , of severe imposing in matters of religion so controvertible : is not he , i say , that so wishes , a better friend to parliaments , laws and statutes , than those of contrary principles ? Nay , i must profess that to me that very one article of reforming to the word of God , most providentially inserted , is an article of caution , both against imposing and punishing , lest through want of a clear discerning , we be found violaters of that we covenant to maintain , and aught to be sadly considered by all . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 12 , & 13.  

His second reason of experience , that the speedy settling , &c. takes little root but in the outward man , &c. concluding pathetically , why , do not days speak , and multitude of years teach knowledge ? In answer , 

1.  That the fault was not in the over-speedy settling , but in the choice of a wrong government . 

2.  Because doctrine goeth on with discipline , and so the power of the word May go deep into the conscience , as a schoolmaster who teaches and corrects . 

3.  Because the discipline is an hedge or wall about the doctrine , a goad to the means of grace , a curb to licentious courses ; though with many it go but to the outward man , that is not to be imputed to the discipline , but their corruptions , &c.  

4.  Because where the discipline hath been rightly chosen and settled , God hath blessed it with better fruits ; as in Scotland , where there is no heresy nor schism , &c.  

5.  For that of Elihu in Job , why , do not days speak , &c. it makes not for his purpose ; but that wisdom is with the ancient , and gray-headed to be heard before young or green-headed counsellors , &c.  

Reply . 

To your first , that the fault was in the choice of a wrong government , &c.  I answer , that is the fear now , lest there should be a choice of a wrong government , and so the same fault should be committed again : and this very government hath no image of divine right upon it , nor hath it warrant in all things from the word , as yourself acknowledge . 

To your second , that doctrine and discipline go together &c.  Yea , pure doctrine and pure discipline go rightly together : and if either be impure or unsound , there is so much the more danger : so as this is an argument rather against you , because where doctrine opens the conscience , and lets in any thing of discipline but that of the pure word , there is one evil only mended with another . 

And for your instance of a schoolmaster , who both teaches and corrects : you know we are not to prove , but to illustrate by similitudes : and that of a schoolmaster is a fit illustration for the pedagogy of the law and that discipline than the gospels : you know the apostle uses it only to that ; the law was our Schoolmaste , &c.  gal. 3.  

To that of your description of the government that it is a curb , a goad , &c.  I answer , there is nothing you say of government in these words , but May be said of any civil government , nay , of prelacy , when it was in its primitive form : but that only which you ought to say , and which only differences it from all devised forms of men , as your covenant binds you , and aught to be your only reason for erecting and setting it up , is this : is it the scriptures form or model ? Is the persons so in the exercise and capacity of it as in the gospel times ? If so , than you prove something . And further : all this you say is true in a kind too of Christ's government ; but yet , in some sort communicable with devised governments . The only distinguishing and essential marks are not to be a curb and goad , but the scriptures only mark , and image , and some spiritual operations , &c. which no other devised form of man hath . 

To your other , of the blessings and blessed fruits in Scotland , that there is no heresy nor schism there , let Master Coleman ( Our learned and pious brother ) speak for us both , from his experiences . And for that kingdom , time will show whether it will prove to be a blessing or no , to want that which you call heresy and schism . surely to be free from heresy and schism , in a scripture sense , it is such a blessing as the whole gospel cannot pattern . What ? No heresy in a whole kingdom ? No schism in a whole kingdom ? Never such a pure church heard on ? Corinth , Ephesus , coloss , Jerusalem , Antioch , all not comparable ? The worst i wish our brethren there , is , that all were so pure as we hear on . Indeed Scotland had the honour to awaken us first in the work of reformation and liberty ; but lest Scotland should be puffed up , England shall have the glory ( I hope ) to improve that liberty to a fuller light , which some would close up too soon , in the narrowness of a presbytery . 

Methinks there is something of this nature considerable in the Lutherans , who though they follow the first light in Germany , yet the Lord hath suffered them to stick there without a fuller reformation , that the first May be last , and the last first ; for if a state be covenanted so close to the word , they had need be favourable and free to all that are accordingly covenanted ; for each man's conscience is the interpreter in himself of what makes for or against the covenant he takes ; and by this very covenant , you are all to be tender to consciences , because the spirit of God ( Not power of men ) can interpret the will of God ; but in their civil and prudential things only , they May intrepret themselves . 

to that of Job , that with the ancient is wisdom , and with the gray-headed ; which you apply in way of reproach to the younger , whom you call as it were green-heads : i answer , that the elder i esteem as fathers , and the younger we know are such in whom the Lord speaks more gloriously , as he himself saith , your young men shall see visions , and upon your sons and daughters i will pour out my spirit , your old men shall dream dreams . Now whether is it more excellent to dream dreams , or to see visions ? The Lord delivered Israel by the young men of the provinces . Surely we May more safely hearken to the younger that see visions of reformation , then to the elder that dream dreams of it only . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 15 , & 16.  

There is great disproportion of times . Men were then converted from paganism , and while they were so , they were uncapable . Our congregations in England are professed Christians ; and though there be many not so wrought on by the word , &c.  that is rather a reason for the establishment of it , ezek. 22.26 . 1 cor. 4.21 . prov. 23.13 , 14.  Nor can Sabbath nor sacraments be administered without i• . 

Reply . 

To that of the disproportion ( You speak on ) of times , and conversion , &c.  I answer ; 

The apostle's and primitive times are the times we are to look at for a pattern and model . 't is true , there is great disproportion ; for they were apostles who gave the government then ; yet are but private divines , as you say by me , if you be compared with them . 

For that of the conversion from paganism to Christianity ; 

There is no such disproportion there neither , but that very proportion which our saviour hath himself foretold , and set forth : for how doth a Jewish and Antichristian state differ ? Nay , how doth a heathenish or paganish state , differ from an Antichristian or parochial state , as parochial or parish is in that notion ? Christ hath put them that are out of the church under that very notion , matth. 19.17 . and the spirit in the revelation makes the Antichristian state to be as unlawful as a paganish , and calls out equally from that as from the other , as by comparing 2 cor. 6.17 . revel. 18.4 . together will appear . 

So , as speaking of things and notions , i cannot but speak in a scripture way ; nor am i uncharitable in this neither , though i thus speak ; i look on thousands in this state as godly believers : it is not the pastors i write against , but the way . There May be a Moses in Pharaoh's court ; a Joseph in Potiphar's house ; a Cornelius , or devout man , though out of the church ; a Luther even in Rome , till the Lord enlighten . 

So as government and discipline is a churches right , and privilege , not the worlds and nations privileges , as so and then . Where are all your quoted texts which are applied ? Surely that of Corinth , is the churches ; and that of Ezekiel , and proverbs , makes not for the discipline of a church at all . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 16 , & 17.  

He makes a comparison betwixt material and spiritual buildings , as stone and timber should not be clapped together in the one , so one in the other . 

1.  Similitudes May illustrate , but not prove any thing . 

2.  Conformity betwixt material and spiritual things is not to be carried too far . 

3.  In material buildings , or the temple , there is not only squared stones , but pieces and rubbish which have their use ; not so in the spiritual ; all things there are homogeneal , and square , and living stones , &c.  

4.  Those that he accounts rough and unsquared , are in some conformity , though not so polished as others . 

5.  The best stones are not to be taken from the rest , to make up a building by themselves , as in separated congregations . 

6.  Let him show any such example in the new testament where when there was a mixture of holy and profane , as in Corinth , 1 cor. 11.21 . the apostles gathered out the holy part . 

7.  That of axes and hammers hath a mysterious truth in it , but not to his purpose , viz. that the spiritual building is built of the soft and secret whispers and motions of the spirit . 

Reply 

To that of the similitudes ; 

I fully agree with you , they illustrate better than they prove . 

To that of not carrying a conformity betwixt materials and spirituals too high ; 

I agree with you in that too , yet not so fully ; for Jesus Christ the great prophet of the gospel preached the glory of the kingdom in material comparisons , in salt , water , leven , mustard seed , sowers , husbandmen , vines , vineyards , &c.  

To that of spiritual buildings , which you say are to be made up only of squared living stones ; 

I agree with you ; and here the controversy Might be ended : if your temples shall be of living stones ; the controversy is granted : but because i will not seem to mistake you , i believe the spiritual building you mean , and i , are not the same here : you mean as it appears , the invisible spiritual , or church mystical ; and yet there , all is not so homogeneal and of the same kind neither : the head of the body is both God and man , and one member like one star differs from another in glory . 

But , we are speaking of the spiritual building or church here which is the image of the church above ; and as that is of true , real , essentially spiritual living stones ; so the church below is to consist at least of such as visibly and formally appear so ; and therefore the apostle calls them in his epistles saints , and called to be saints . 

And to that of your pieces of rubbish in the material building ; 

It is true ; but what is that to Solomon's temple , which my comparision drives up to ? How much rubbish can you prove in that type , nay , square stones , pure cedar , gold , &c. to figure out the gospel-building or temple , as in heb. 9  So as your rubbish is only in your own allusion , not in mine 

To that of your unpolished stones in your parishes , which May fit the temple now ; i answer : 

It must be then only such a building as the material one you speak on , which is made up of rubbish and broken pieces : and if that be according to Christ's pattern , let these scriptures in the margin , with many more , determine . 

And for their submitting in deed , there is a national , blind , traditional obedience in them , i cannot call it gospel-submission . 

to that of the best stones not to be taken out to make up a building , i answer , 

I am sure we are to take in no ill , unhewn , unpolished ; and the scripture cautions and practice are clear , &c. then judge you what the stones must be . 

Nor do we so pick and choose as if all stones were to be square alike , or equally polished ; that is not in any material building : though we would take in no rubbish , yet we take in stones differently squared . as in the body one member differs from another ; the eye , and hand , and foot , &c. and members less honourable , 1 cor. 12. so in the body of the church , every one according to his measure , and as every one hath received . 

Nor do we stand so for the first polishing as you pretend . You make as if we set up such degrees of perfection as were only the degrees of the invisibl or mystical body , when it is merely in the degrees of visible gospel-perfection . by this you would make the carnal to abhor , and the weaker to stumble and be offended ; as if the door of our churches were not open for any such whom you imply , were of a temper merely spiritual , and of a size of our own , not the scriptures . let the doors of our churches be as strait as you imply , i am sure your doors are set open , or rather cast off the hinges : but a pure gospel-entrance is neither too wide nor too narrow . We know there is smoking flax and bruised reeds , measures of grace ; if they can willingly submit to Jesus Christ their lawgiver , and walk as members of the body , there they May receive polishing , and have honour , and building up , and many other degrees of perfection which the saints of God obtain when they are in fellowship with the father and the son . 

To that of your challenge that i should show any such example in the new testament of taking out the best , when there was a mixture of holy and profane ; i answer , those were gospel-churches gathered by the word and spirit into gospel-fellowship : and when you make your parishes to appear such churches , than i shall tell you more : till then , i suspend your challenge . The world , and an Antichristian nation , are both under Christ's fan for gathering them out . 

To that of a mysterious truth you speak on in the axes and hammers ; i agree with you in that ; and because of the mystery i therefore quoted it . And whereas you sum up all the mystery into the soft whisperings and motions of the spirit , you can hardly warrant us , or secure us that your interpretation is the whole mind of the spirit , and that very interpretation of yours is part of it the very same i aim at , viz. to show how the gospel-building is softly gathered and made up by the ministry of the word and spirit , and not with axes and hammers , tools of a compulsive , forcing , sharp , and authoritative nature , as , &c.  

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 17 , 18 , 19  

For that of his , &c. where he makes Christ's description of himself , &c. to be against the establishment , and the suitableness Christ presses for ; i answer : 

1.  If his reason be of force against a speedy government , it is as well against a government at any time . 

2.  That Christ in his own nature , and his government , differ exceedingly . Christ came to suffer , phil. 2.7 . 

3.  Neither is Christ so remiss as not to take upon him a government . The head must govern the body . Nor so meek : he hath an iron rod as well as a golden sceptre , psal. 2.9 . esth. 5.2 . and though he was sometimes a servant , &c. yet sometimes a Lord too , joh. 2.14 . and though he be a lamb , yet he hath a formidable mouth too , &c. revel. 8.15 . 

4.  For his scriptures produced , matth. 12.19 . 1 joh. 5.3 . they make nothing against a speedy , but against a grievous government . And though his yoke be easy , yet not easy to flesh and blood , matth. 5.29 . and 16.24 . &c. as in self-denial . 

5.  Nor hath his other place any sober sense in it , matth. 9.17 . nor makes it against government at this time , but any time . The wine will be always new at the first ; and the longer delayed , the older will the bottles be . 

Reply . 

To that if against a speedy government , then against a government at any time , i answer , 

How do you infer that ? Nothing of those makes against the government of Christ rightly constituted , and ordered and settled upon those called to be saints . indeed they make against any other government at all times as well as now . nor will there be always such a persons under Christ's yoke as you think on . But you look further abroad than i , and in that we mistake one another . You look that whole kingdoms and nations should submit , and i look only for one of a tribe , two of a city , &c.  Your horizon and the scripture's , for government , are not equal . 

To that of Christ's nature and government differing so much , and therefore my text prove nothing ; i answer : 

Every thing of Christ's , bears the image of Christ . Every truth of his hath something of himself in it , who is truth itself by way of excellency : i am the truth , saith he . Every beam of light is light : then how can Christ and his government differ so as you pretend ? 

Surely , if we observe well , there is not any truth but it partakes of him who is the truth , and is a beam or sparkle of him . truth is homogeneal , and not so unlike and contrary dispositioned and natured as you pretend . 

And for your expounding the text he shall not strive , &c. as a prophecy ; you do well in part : but you know prophecies have a latitude ; and scriptures have not only one main and principal , but many subordinate aims : so as though this scripture concern his sufferings principally , yet it doth in a latitude set forth the nature of him who is truth ; and in him we May see how those things which are pretended for truth hold proportion . 

To that of Christ the head , and taking the government of his body , &c.  I answer . 

It is true , Christ is a head , but he is not a head to every . he will have a body proportionable to his head . is a nation of all sorts a fit body for such a head ? is he not a pure , holy , glorious head in his gospel-dispensation ? and is a body so leprous , so wicked , so formal , so traditionally and antichristianly corrupted , a fit body ? Shall i take the members of my body , saith Paul , and join them to an harlot , to make one flesh ? God forbid . what then shall the head do with such members ? 

To that of his ruling with a rod of iron as well as a golden sceptre , psal. 2. esth. 5.  I answer . 

And doth he rule any in his church with his rod of iron , who were not called in first by his golden sceptre ? 

And for that of his iron rod in psal. 2. that is spoken of Christ , not as King of his church , but of nations . 

And that of esth. 5. what is that golden sceptre to Christ's ? unless you bring a text only to prove that there is such a thing as a golden sceptre in the scriptures . 

For your other texts of Christ's being a servant and a Lord , a lamb and terrible ; you only prove what i grant , that he is more a King and a Lord in his government then in any other of his gospel-dispensations : but all this will not prove the lordship of such a presbytery or government . certainly you intend it a terrible government , because you bring in those texts that have all the judgement and severity in them which Christ threatens to the nations and Kings of the earth , not to his churches . will you make Christ rule in his church as he doth in the world ? well , let your presbytery enjoy the iron sceptre , while the churches of Christ enjoy the golden ; and try if you ruin not more than you rule , and break not more than you bow . 

To that of matth. 12.19 . 1 John 5.3 . the yoke easy , &c. they make not against a speedy , but a grievous government ; i answer , 

I cannot express myself better then in your own words , they make against a grievous government , which is all i aim at in the quotation . And whereas you say the yoke is not easy to flesh and blood , so say i too ; it is very burdensome , and the commandments grievous to the unregenerate ; and therefore i prove from hence , that it is only a fit and suitable yoke for the saints , and a commandment for them . And there is the same proportion of the outward government to the outward man that there is of the other spiritual laws in the gospel to the inward man , and none but the saints can delight in either . Men are to be spiritually moulded and framed to the law of gospel-discipline : that kind of discipline is not like your civil discipline : this way of discipline you would have , is too politic and national ; it takes in a persons to subdue as the laws of civil policy , which finding a persons unsubdued , subdues them : so doth not Christ as we read of ; the dispensation of the word ( Not the government ) subdues . 

And thus with much ado , you only prove them to be as i intended them , no commandments for the mixed and unregenerate , or in a word , Christ's government no national government . 

To that where you say , nor hath his place any sober sense in it . matth. 9.17 . The new wine will be always new , and the longer delayed , the older the bottles will be . i answer : 

I wonder that one of your experience in the majesty of the word , should be so pleasant with a scripture allegory , because the scripture is of wine . you jest on it , as if it had made the sense less sober , i am sorry my younger pen should reprove the aged for jesting , which the apostle says is not convenient . and truly it is not comely for the servants to play upon the Master of the feast , or any thing in his house , especially upon his wine , which alludes so to his blood , and which he hath promised to drink with us new in his father's kingdom . 

Nor will the wine be always new to those that are renewed as they ought to be indeed ; for your parishes which you call old bottles , i am sure the wine , or pure government , is too new for them . 

Nor will the bottles be older , as you say , the longer the government is delayed , if the power of the word be there for renewing them . 

But you say , what sense is this ? what logical connexion ? 

I answer , that shall appear there is sense enough , and connexion enough , and logic enough , though i had rather have more scripture and less logic ; for all i aim at , is what the scripture aims at , that the bottles should be fit for the wine , the necks for the yoke , and the subjects for the commands . 

Master Ley's resolution . Pag. 23.  & 24.  

To that of his , that Jesus Christ could as easily have set up his government by miracle , had there been such a primary &c. necessity , &c.  

1.  The acts and times for divine providence towards his church are various . God had his church at first and no written word for it till the law was write , and Moses wrote , &c.  and God added to the moral laws , ceremonial and judicial , divers of which were not executed till forty years after , at their coming into Canaan ; so far was God beforehand . 

2.  Whereas he saith , Christ could as easily have settled the government by miracle ; we grant it , yea , and more ; without a miracle ; and yet more that he did so , in matth. 16.19 . joh. 10.23 . matth. 18.15 , 16 , 17.  

3.  If Christ's delay of government must be our example , then as well for the anabaptistical delay of baptism till his age Luke 3.23 . nor was it John's office to set up a government , but to prepare the way , &c.  and Christ's public ministry lasted but four years , or three years and a half , and he began then to set up government . 

Reply . 

All your proof reaches but to this : 

1.  That God dealt variously with his church . they had first no written word , and after , a written word . 

2.  That Christ could have settled his government by miracle , but did not . 

3.  That Christ's delay of government must be no more our example then his baptism . 

My proof was to show there was no such moral necessity of the settling , because it was not settled . Now , what have you overthrown here ? Not that Christ suspended his government , and the settling of it ; for , that you grant with me , and prove it more at large then i did : so as all your rest will be answered in two particulars . 

1.  To that of God's church and government before his word , &c. which you would insinuate as some advantage to your settling , &c.  

What is that to God's dispensation now ? if there wanted a word , there was a supplement of vision and dreams , &c.  And i hope you will not go before the law , so much as you do for a pattern : you go too far when you go to the times of the law : you have a prophet now to hear in all things , act. 3.22 . 

2.  To that of baptism to be delayed as well as government from Christ's example : 

I cannot dispute that here , Master Tomes will satisfy you at large in his learned examen , where he hath made work for a whole assembly , that he knows not but it May be delayed till they be of years . 

But , to answer you in your scope : 

You bring this to prove , that Christ is not to be imitated in all things . I grant it . But what is that to prove that Christ settled not his government when he began his ministry , or John's ? for the business on your part is to find out , either that the government was settled before , or with the ministry ; or there was as much necessity of it as of the word ; but for some reason ; and not from any thing in the nature of the government , but some other extrincicall reason ; it was delayed : which ought not to take place now . 

And this is yet to prove ; all your proof summed up , reaches not to this 

But you imply , the will of God in his dispensations was the cause . but the will of God in his dispensotions carries a rule of righteousness along with it , and of spiritual reason . and in gospel dispensations and extrincicall proceedings of God's will , you will find a rule and golden reed of righteousness measuring the temple ; and every dispensation , and even this of suspending government , hath its rule in the gospel , that a word of obedience must precede and go before a form of obedience , and a word of faith before the obedience of faith , and living stones before a living temple . 

Master Ley's resolution . Pag. 24.  & 25.  

Whereas he saith the gifts for government were not given till Christ ascended , it is answered : 

1.  That he ascended 43. days after his ministration ; and that added to the year forementioned , makes but small difference , &c.  

2.  He put his apostles upon neither of these offices , preaching or governing , without competent gifts and qualifications . 

3.  For the model of it , which he saith persons fell under as they were capable ; if he mean the written model in the word , though it were young in Christ's time or his apostles , yet not now , we have had 1500. years since . Why should that which is so old in constitution , be thought too soon for execution ? And besides scripture directions , we have had many years the patterns of it i• ma•y reform churches . 

4.  It hath by fast and slow degrees been brought in , as both in debates of assembly , parliament , &c.  and so for execution too , first an ordinance for ordination , and then a directory , &c.  

Reply . 

You prove here , 

1.  that Christ gave gifts when he ascended , and not any long time in all his ministration and sending gifts . 

2.  that he qualified his apostles for government and preaching . 

3.  that the government of Christ now so old , should be seen set up as in other kingdoms . 

4.  that it proceeded by degrees in its setting up here . 

Now all this thus gathered up , proves not any thing against my assertion , that Christ proceeded by degrees in his ministry , and giving out his government ; but rather strengthens my assertion . 

And for your arguments for settling employed in these particulars : 

1.  That Christ's government was but a while in bringing forth , the years considered . 

2.  That the government in the gospel being now so old , aught to be soon executed . 

3.  that the patterns of it are in other reform churches . 

I answer to all these in as few words : 

1.  Prove your argument first to be Christ's , the particulars , and entireness accordingly , and then i shall allow you your argument ; but you grant it to be but partly Christ's , and partly the assemblies , or of prudence . 

2.  You must prove but the same again , that the government you have , is the government , there withal gospel-necessaries take in ; else , though the gospel-government be never so old , yours is but new ; and this argument is no better than the first . 

3.  Prove the other reform kingdoms to be reform churches , as churches are taken in the gospel , and their patterns pure gospel-paterns , which by your own you acknowledge to be in part prudential or human as well as evangelical and divine ; and than your reason May have some force in it . Till then , you see with all you can do , you cannot prove but Christ's government was divers years in bringing forth by himself and his apostles ; and so by your own account , you ought not to be before them , unless you assume fuller revelations of truth than they did . 

Let the reader judge whether any of these makes for the setting up your government , or the taking down my reasons . 

To your last ; that this reformation hath proceeded by slow paces and degrees . 

What ? Would you prove it by its slow proceeding to be Christ's government , and therefore to be settled ? That were a strange kind of reasoning : because Christ proceeded by degrees in giving out the glory of his kingdom here , therefore every thing that proceeds by degrees , is Christ's government . Here is some kind of logic indeed , as you say , but no scripture : as for instance ; he that says such a one is a living creature , says tru•ly ; he that says such a one is a beast , says he is a living creature : therefore will it follow , he that says such a one is a beast , says truly ; so , he that says Christ's government proceeded slowly , says truly ; he that says your government proceeded slowly , says truly ; therefore , he that says your government is Christ's government , says truly . What have you got now by your logic ? 

Whereas you say in your second , Christ gave gifts and qualifications for government ; i answer , if you and your parishes have such gifts and qualifications as in ephes. 4. 1 cor. 12. set it up when you please ; if not what haste ? 

Master Ley's resolution . Pag. 26 , & 27.  

Now to his rules and considerations of prudence ; the more time ( Saith he ) for trying spirits , the less danger to that state , &c.  i answer 

1 it is the duty of a state not only to try spirits , but to rule them . 

And rather to rule them , than to try them , prov. 29.15 . and the longer they live without the yoke of discipline , the more enormous . 

And for trying all things , there is a due proportion of time to be observed . 

Though it hath been the ill hap of our church , &c. to have the government fluttering on the lime-twig at Westminster , when it should be on the wing of actual execution in all over the kingdom . 

2.  He makes it a dangerous matter for the state to involve itself into the designs of ecclesiastical power . 

But unseasonably applied to presbyterial-government , because both popish and prelatical power is abjured by i• by covenant . 

3.  Whereas he saith , there can be no danger in the not too sudden incorporating &c. since Moses is not aliu•&c . a new star May arise . 

It is a groundless conceit refuted already ; and for that of Moses &c. he bewrayeth his d•signe to debar the government for ever ; and for that of a new star arising , it prepares the way for some Barchochebas , who pre•ending to be J•cobs' star mislead th•j•weses , and was called •sword• the son of a i•e . 

Reply . 

You prove against me , 

1.  That persons ought to be ruled rather then tried , &c.  

2.  That some time is to be allowed for trial . 

3.  That the government hath been fluttering too long at Westminster . 

4.  That there is no danger to fear the presbyterial government , which hath abjured popery &c.  dominion by covenant . 

5.  That some of this is refuted already . 

6.  That my design is to debar it for ever . 

7.  That a new star is a misleading star . 

To your first i reply ; 

It is true in civil government , rule there rather than try : but what is that to church-government , or discipline ? The rule there , is the will of God , which is the only rule in government , and legislative power in the church ; and that is , try all things before either you rule or be ruled . 

To your second ; 

some time you will allow ( I see ) for trial ; but you ought not to measure and deal out time but by the standard of the word ; and before you call for such quick obedience as you do , and as the apostles did , prove your power , and truth , and conclusions , and by such apostolical and infallible evidence , and then it is our sin if we submit not . And let the time you deal out not be like that of states and armies in their treaties , who are final and peremptory in the seasons they set : you cannot set such time ; the spirit breathes when & where it lifteth . 

To your third ; 

what is that to the present discipline what the covenant abjures ? Covenant and discipline are two distinct things ; a covenant May abjure in word , what yet a government May practise indeed . 

Nor is it enough to abjure popery in gross , but in every part and parcel . and now having abjured , it is not enough to sit down in that satisfaction that we have sworn against popery ; but to search out , lest we be forsworn in the practice of it . Such a duty begins from the time of abjuring ; and it lies not only upon the state to find out popery ; but every one in his own particular is engaged , you and i , and every covenanter : and therefore seeing you have engaged thousands by conscience against popery and to endeavour &c. you are bound to give the same conscience liberty to bring in its result and enquiry ; else you make it a snare and trouble to Israel , and not a covenant . and now i profess here a just and undeniable liberty by covenant to bring forth all of popery , prelacy , or truth they know . 

To your other ; 

why should ye speak of the governments fluttering on a lime-twig at Westminster ? 

Sure the state or parliament May deserve better of any of the assembly , then to be thought their retarders or lime-twigs : how have they honoured them above their brethren , printing their engagements to the world before every sermon , calling them into so near a capacity with themselves ? though divines have been unfortunate before , and their predecessors raised in the courtesy and piety of former states and parliaments into a law and power above their brethren ; which i hope our brethren will remember and beware of . 

But because i would not wholly interpret you into so dangerous a sense against the state , it May be you May call your dissenting brethren the lime-twig ; which if you do , you are contrary to your own argument ; for you argued but lately the slow proceeding into a very warrantable and scripture way : and will you now mar all , and defile your argument with a lime-twig , and bewray rather your slow proceeding to have been of constraint than conscience ? 

To your other ; that this is already refuted : 

I say no more ; but as you have formerly refuted , so i have formerly answered . 

To your other ; that my design by that of Moses is to debar it for ever . i answer : 

Yea for ever would i debar a government not clear from the word , and not one hair would i debar a government that had the name of Christ in scripture-letters engraven upon it , pure gospel-principles and proceedings . 

To your other , that a new-star is to prepare for a misguider , and your story of Barchochebas upon it , it hath more lightsomeness than light in it . But why should you be so pleasant with my expression of truth by a star ? it is the very allegory of the spirit . Christ calls himself the morningstar , the light which springs from above . The spirit is called the daystar arising in our hearts ; and the spouse is attired in a crown of twelve stars . 

Nor do i call to any to look for a new create star of truth , but an old , yet new appearing star to us ; one of those stars in the gospel-firmament , which the clouds of tradition and ignorance hinder us from seeing : and now , what of your story ? 

But what way is most likely to misle•d ? That which bids you prove and try all things , and accordingly follow ? or that which saith , this is the way , compel them to come in , not only as the gospel compels in the parable by a spirit of power , but by a civil power ; not a power of word only , but of state too : and so twisting the gospel with the law , and human authority with divine ? 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 27 , 28 , 29.  

To his other prudential rule , which is , that he makes the civil and eccesiastical power so linked that if there be motions in the one , there will be no quietness in the other ; i answer , 

1.  He aims at the perpetual prohibition , not at a temporal forbearance only . He carries it on so , as if we must allow him the authority of a politic dictator . 

2.  What if they reciprocate interests ? must the civil state leave every man or congregation to be governed ? judg. 17.6 . 

3.  Because disturbances are communicated , therefore the civil state ought to settle the ecclesiastical , that it May enjoy its own peace . 

And for that he saith of the toleration of the Protestant's of France ; Henry the fourth being a Protestant , though a revolter , and recovering his rights by the arms of Protestant's , he could do no less in humanity then allow them their religion ; though now tolerated , because the trustiest friends to the crown of France . 

For that of the state being most free where the conscience is least straitened : if free in indulgence to all religions , he complies with the author of the bloody tenet : if free from commotions , experience in several ages and countries prove the contrary . 

For that of his parable of the tares and the wheat : if there must be such mixtures tolerated , what warrant have they to pluck the wheat from the tares , nay , wheat , from wheat , in their new gathering churches ? 

Reply . 

You prove against my reason the compliance and nearness of the civil and eccesiastical power , occasioning motions in each other . 

1.  By the authority i assume of a politic dictator . but what doth my assuming prove against the compliancy and motions of the two powers ? This is no proof against the two powers of church and state , but against me . i hope you conceive not they are concentred in me a private divine , as you call me ; nor would i give any thing out in way of magistrality , but evidence : you and i , and assemblies of men , are not infallible . 

2.  By my aiming at the perpetual prohibition . but what doth this prove against the compliancy and motions in the two powers ? this is still against me , not against my reason . and further , because i suggest a reason of not embodying the civil and ecclesiastical powers too suddenly , therefore , saith he , i aim at a perpetual prohibition . how doth this follow ? I aim to prohibit it , rebus sic stantibus , therefore for ever ? I aim to prohibit it , because as yet neither the discipline appears to be all Christ's , nor the parishes fit matter for churches ; therefore i prohibit it for ever . Is this good reasoning ? They that do over-desire the enjoying any thing , do measure time by eternity , and weeks by ages , and take a little deferring for everlasting . Why is his charets , saith Sisera's mother , so long in coming ? 

3.  Because they reciprocate interests , therefore is every congregation to be left at liberty ? yea , at liberty in spirituals ? and not as they will , but as the gospel persuades the will . yea , and because they reciprocate interests , therefore to be left at liberty , say you . Rather , because they reciprocate interests , to be cautious how they mingle and incorporate interests too soon . And if any just liberty May arise to the persons of God from such state-pauses , why not such a liberty ? should the churches be ever persecuted , and have no rest ? It was not so under the first persecution , then had the church's rest . 

Because , say you , disturbances are communicated , therefore settle the ecc••si•sticall , that the civil May enjoy peace . 

But can you secure the civil from the ecclesiastical in peace ? aught you to have a state-being or a church-being first ? Is this good reasoning ? Because disturbances are communicated , therefore order it so , that the civil May be within the line of communication , or of ecclesiastical disturbances , by clasping and incorporating them together . So as it follows better thus : because they reciprocate interests , therefore take heed how you establish , because the state cannot but establish a way something of its own , in the ecclesiastical . 

To that of Henry the fourth's humanity which you press , because the Protestant's helped him by arms : i answer ; 

Let but the same humanity be copied out by the state here , and press for it here as you do there , and we are agreed . Surely you have the same and greater engagements . Your brethren whom you call schismatics and heretics , have not been sparing of arms and blood in the high places of the field , and in a cause more glorious , with success more admirable , with cou•age as gallant : and sure they have been found as trusty friends to this state , as the Protestant's to the state of France . 

You say , that state is rather free in indulgence , as the bloody tenet , then free from commotions , &c.  

For the freedom contended for by the bloody tenet , when i undertake to prove his freedom at large , then put us together ; till when , deal fairly . I could as easily draw something of yours under the line of prelacy ; but i would not force any man's notions , much less yours . 

You see of what stamp the liberty is i contend for . And for commotions , let the world judge , if all the broils and combustions kindled not from the coals on the altar , and from the flame of an ecclesiastical interest , such as you contend for . 

for that of the tares and wheat , &c. where you charge us with mixture tolerated , or rather with plucking up wheat from the tares , &c. in church-gathering : i answer , 

We tolerate no mixture , but in the world where Christ himself tolerates , as in the same parable ; not in the church . 

And for our plucking , it is not plucking , but gathering and calling out : your words are of more violence than the word will bear ; that is , more properly plucking which is a destructive pulling ou• a bloody separation , a plucking of persecution ; such a plucking as some contend for , and would requite our gathering with plucking , and take us all not for a mixture of tares and wheat , but all for tares . 

You say we gather out the wheat ; it is well you observe that we have wheat amongst us , which some of your brethren will scarce allow us ; and you very hardly . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 29 , 30 , 31.  

his other politic consideration is this , our parties , or dissenting brethren now together , and clasped by interest , &c.  i answer . 

1.  No clasping in the camp must loose us to division in the city . 

2.  Mr. Saltmarsh in his politics adviseth to repress factions , &c.  

3.  The delay hath occasioned a multiplication of heresies & schisms . 

4.  Many disposed to division , heighten their spirits to contumacy and contempt . 

To that other of his , it is possible while time is given , opinions May be sooner at peace . i answer . 

1.  Possibility is no plea against probability , nay , clear experience , that by the brethren's amiable carriage , they have driven on their design with a politic activity , and gained more by their adversary's slowness , than the goodness of their cause . 

to that of his fire let alone under wood , and so to die out , &c.  i answer . 

1.  Will fire under dry wood quench itself , or the settling of a government be as the bellows ? 

2.  The contrary is plain by examples of Anabaptists and other sectaries in Germany , whom Luther at first mediated for with Frederick Duke of Saxony ; but after he was glad to stir up the Princes and persons of Germany for extinguishing a common combustion . 

to that of his , &c. the contentions of brethren are like the bars of a castle , prov. 18.19 . i answer . 

1.  This is his seal to his politic aphorism : but will the bars of a castle be taken by letting alone ? We have not found it so in our wars , &c.  

Reply . 

To your first , that we must not clasp in the camp , and divide in the city . 

You say well ; we are to agree , or clasp , both in camp and city , and to divide in neither . 

To your second , Mr. Saltmarsh in his politics , i told you before , i dare not allow myself the privilege of an aphorism of light then , when it was rather night than day with me , as i told you . You know Paul's regenerate part or law of his mind , quarrelled with the law of his members ; so doth mine ; so Luther , Augustine , &c.  

To that of delay occasioning heresies , whether May not your settling things thus , be as great an heresy as you complain against ? Be sparing . You May call these truths , which you now call heresies ; Paul preached that doctrine after , which before he destroyed , 

to that of many heightening their spirits into contempt . 

Do not aggravate against your brethren ; remember your own professed ingenuity , in these words , i would not excite authority to needless severity . 

To that of the brethren's politic advantage on your slow pace , and amicable carriage , as you say . 

Give not over your amicableness for that , their policy is no warrant against your duty ; and if they be politic , blame them in print : for my part , i hate to see in any too much of man in the business of God ; but if some of the brethren be politic , what is that to the rest , who wait for the spirit in the simplicity of their own ? 

But it May be you mistake the advantages , and put their increasing upon brethren's policy , which is the power of the gospel . you know in Christ's time many believed on him , and the persons went after him ; and yet not policy , but his power gathered them . 

To that of your fire and dry wood , and that your settling a government would be no bellows . 

Who are the dry wood you mean ? and what fire ? and what by the bellows ? if it be this , that the settling a government will quench our contentions ; yea , and it May quench more than it ought , even something of the spirit May be quenched by it : persecution May put out many a candle of the Lords lighting , and many a coal kindled from his altar . but take heed there be not more fire in the bellowss then in the wood . 

To that of the Anabaptiss and sectaries , quenched by Luther's mediation : 

I dare not believe your historian , nor take all against them from the pen of an enemy . He that takes the parliaments battles from an Oxford pen , shall read nothing but rebellion , rather than religion , and methinks i observe much here in your observation to the contrary : we May rather think that Germany is a field of blood to this day for shedding the blood of so many consciences for some points of diff•rence . And for Luther's mediation against them ; look well , and tell me how much the Lutherans there have advanced in the reformation : have they not rather stood like Joshua's sun , where he left them ? Let England take warning by Germany . 

To that of the brethren's contentions , which are like bars of a castle ; and must not then be let alone ( You say ) as in our wars : 

Yea go on , take these offended brethren , these castles , in your military way ; but then , let your warfare be spiritual , your weapons not carnal ; put on the armour of light , &c. and take them by a gospelsiege , and we are satisfied . 

But if you take them with the power of the magistrate , with sword and staffs , as they took Christ ; if you come in this gospel-controversy to take them as the parliament takes in their towns and cities , by force of arms and compulsive artillery , as your instance seems to imply ; take heed lest you shed more spiritual blood to that under the altar that never ceases to cry how lo•g , Lord , how long ? 

Master Ley's resolution . Pag 32.  

To that he saith , we have not yet any experience of our new clergy . answ . 

How can there be experience of them , if there be no government to try them withal ? 

Reply . 

So as you will have an hazard run both in state and church for a new experiment upon the ministers : but sure , your statists will tell you , it is not safe trying experiments with states ; they are too vast bodies for that . What think you of that physician that will cast his patient into a disease , to try a cure on him ? You know the old moral adagy , Turpiùs •jicitur quàm non admittitur hospes : one is sooner kept out , then cast out . 

Master Ley's resolution . Pag. 32.  

To that , it is not safe trusting a power too far into those hands . answer . 

He need not much fear , the government will be so qualified , so disposed for the persons that manage it , &c.  

Reply . 

These are fair promises . It is pity that government should ever be set up , that cannot tell beforehand how well it will carry itself . Oh i saith Absalon , if i were King , it should not be thus . 

But , what is a qualified government that is not Christ's ? I can never hope to gather grapes of thorn•ss , or figs of thistles . sure it can never be well for the trees of the forest when the bramble will reign . 

Master Ley's resolution . Pag. 33.  

There are many of note who affirm the best way to suppress the multiplicaity of sects is to let them have scope , and they will run themselves out of breath ; but i cannot give my vote , false teachers are not be tolerated , no , not for an hour , gal. 2.5 . 

Reply . 

I would there were more such , of that mind ; i am sure it is safest and soundest . it is safest , there is no such danger in that of crucifying Christ in ignorance , of fighting against God . and soundest , for so they die out most naturally by their own unsoundness , without noise and commotion . sometimes the cure makes the greater disease , when the cure is not natural but violent . For that of Paul's withstanding Peter to the face , i allow you all such gospel-wayes of contention , so you only withstand them to the face , and do not as the high priest did command them to be smitten on the face . oppose with words as Paul did , but not with swords , taking and turning the edge of authority against us . 

Master Ley's resolution . Pag. 33.  

we experience , saith he . But where reads this writer this phrase ? 

Reply . 

You criticise on words ; i cannot take time to do so ; i wonder you ( An assembly-man ) have leisure for that ; this is logomac•ice , or word-fighting : and why not we experience ? You know our times have found out such ways of elegancy in t•e English , though i thought not any such thing when i wrote : but why do i trifle too ? To your matter . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 33.  

But it appeareth by his &c.  Whether it be safe to commit the power , &c.  that to commit any power or establish any government , especially the presbyterial , is too soon or suddenly done , if done at all . 

Reply . 

Yea , and it is not too suddenly if done at all , and not done as it ought , or in Christ's way ; i am for any thing of Christ's , when , and where , and how soon you will . 

Master Ley's resolution . Pag. 34.  

we May say as he , some May like be the ten yet others like the two brethren . for two ambitious Presbyterians , there May be ten more modest . 

Reply . 

But how come you by such plenty of the better sort ? It is not thought by most of your way . I am sure some of your way were taking care how to furnish their presbytery , their 10000 parishes . And this i know , that if there were such plenty , why do you make shift with so many of the episcopal stamp , who keep their parishes , and resolve while they live , to try out all turns of government , rather than turn off a tithe of two hundred per annum ? But i believe the English presbytery and prelacy are well agreed in that . 

Master Ley's resolution . Pag. 34.  

Besides , the presbyterial government is framed directly according to the resolution of our saviour . 

Reply . 

Not so directy neither . It is rather directly according to the prudential design of your ass•mbly , as you say : so as all yet is but so you say , and we say the contrary ; there is you say , and we say authority , not scripture and evid•nce , carries it on your side : and let the reader judge betwixt us . Indeed you are able to prove by the magistrate that your presbytery is some of it Christ's way : that is an argument of power , not of scripture . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 34.35 , & 36.  

To that he saith , the controversy is hottest above government , &c.  it May be so without fault in those that are for it , but not without crime in those that oppose it . 

To that of his , is it good parting with the stakes ? 

The question presupposeth evenness betwixt parties , whereas the difference is betwixt government and no government . The high court of parliament and all the orthodox churches &c. on the one side , and a small inconsiderable party on the other . 

Nor is it so much injury to resolve for government against them , as the Bishops , who had possession of prelacy by a prescription legally , &c.  

To that of his , it is to be feared there is too much of man : 

It is likewise to be in those who despise government , &c.  

And if the bias run most to this truth of government ( As he saith . ) it is but as it should be . 

The Bishop's government being put down , it is necessary some other should be set up , and before all the presbyterial . 

And if ( As he saith ) some other truths are wholly set by , it May be the fault of those who set themselves too much against government , i am sure not in such as are for the presbytery . 

And for his caution as he concludes with , i wish he had had more caution in his mind , and his paper ; he had had few faults , and a shorter refutation would have served . 

Reply . 

You say , the controversy May be hottest , yet no fault in those that are for it , but against it . 

But , is all the heat in those that oppose it ? Nay sure . Witness the importunity , the petitioning of your party , &c. we silent all the time . 

You say , the difference is not so equal but betwixt government and no government ; parliament and all orthodox-divines against an inconsiderable party . 

Indeed it is unequal : it is betwixt a government of man of prudence , as you confess , and a scripture-government ; betwixt an huge national government , and Christ's little flock , or church . nor is it a controversy with the high court of parliament ; we contend not with them , but humbly petition and represent the truth unto them : but this is the old way to wind in under the wing of authority , and to engage them . But they are wise to discern , and not to be engaged as their predecessors were by the churchmen , as they called them ; there are too many sad stories . 

But what of our inconsiderable party ? we had rather be a few with truth , than a multitude against it . And how inconsiderable soever we are in number , the stone cut out without hands May fill the earth : the kingdom of Christ , and the worlds , are not so one as you would make them . vnus homo totius orbis impetum fustinuit ; it was said of Luther ; he was but one against a world . your Non-conformists were but inconsiderable to the kingdom of prelacy almost . A pebble in the hand of David , May do more than a mighty spear in the hand of Goliath . 

You say , the Bishops had a better prescription even by law for their government than we . 

But how is this ? Is a legal prescription better hold then a gospel prescription ? is it more privilege to be founded upon a statute , or act of parliament , than scripture ? 

You say , if too much of man be in this controversy , it is in those that oppose and despise government . 

But what is that to our controversy ? We are not of those that speak evil of dignities , or despise governments , unless you Count your presbytery to be that government and digniny spoken on by the spirit ; and that remains to be proved : that which cannot be proved to be a scripture-government , cannot challenge a scripture-law to defend or secure it . 

You say , if the bias run most towards government , it is but as it should be . 

Yes , if towards a scripture-government ; else it is as it should not be , and not as it should be . 

You say , the Bishop's government 's put down , some must be set up ; and that is presbytery . 

But there is one set up already , a civil parliamentary government ; and will you set up another above that ? or cordinate with that ? Will you set up one government to rule another ? or tutor another ? And must you needs set up as large a dominion as the civil power hath ? Must our presbytery be full as ample , as high , and supreme , as our parliament ? will no less territory or kingdom serve it but all England ? Whole nations ? must Christ's government be just as broad and long as the worlds ? You find not the golden read for the temple of that length . Now reader , judge , which government affects dominion ? Which brings in whole nations under the sceptre of it ? Poor scripture-government can be content to sit down in a village ; to the church in thy house , saith the spirit ; in a city as Corinth ; and over but a few there , the saints only in fellowship ; to the church in Corinth : in a country , not over a country : to the seven churches in Asia , not to the church of Asia , or the church Asia , a church taking in half part of the world . Sure if Christ would have had such a national comprehensive church , he could have converted Kings and Princes first , and they should have given up their sceptres and kingdoms to Jesus Christ , in the way of a Presbyterian : nay , it ought to have been so ; Jesus Christ was bound in the way of righteousness , to have begun the practice and modell•o us , over whole kingdoms , having not left it in precept in the whole gospel ; and we ought either to have had practice or precept to order and command us in what we obey . 

You say , if other truths be set by , it is by those that so oppose government , and not by the presbyterial . 

I see the presbytery must be in no fault : happy men ! that have nothing but truth on their side . 

You wish i had more caution in my mind and paper , and a shorter refutation had served . 

cautions are not amiss both for you and me ; and i think you had need of more caution of the two , by how much more vast and national the government is you manage . you that put yokes upon whole nations in a day , had need to have the cautions of a years provision laid in beforehand . 

And for your refutation of my paper ; do not bear witness of yourself ; let truth judge betwixt us , and let the reader pray for a spirit of discerning to judge both what is truth , & which is truth ; that which you , or i , affirm . Nor will i say i have made here a refutation of yours . if i have done well , what have i that i have not received ? And if i have not , the Lord enlighten and enable me to refute myself . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 36.37.38 . 

To that of his , that the material temple was more clearly left and known then the gospel pattern ; &c. answer , 

1.  He would not be thought to side with Sanballat and Tobijah , and so endeavours to show some considerable difference . 

2.  If it be too soon now for the government , will he set a time for it when it will be seasonable ? or will he have it stay till it be a material building , or till we have inspired prophets ? 

3.  It cannot be of too quick dispatch , if we set it up by the dictates of the holy ghost in the new testament ; nor the determination sudden , if after consideration with scriptures , with the best divines , and collation of the exactest patterns , after long debates in the assembly of divines , where the dissenting and liberty to object ; and lastly , received by parliament . 

4.  By the builders , special regard hath been had to Jesus Christ for foundation , &c.  And now by Master Saltmarsh his consent the work May go on , &c.  

Reply . 

You say , i would not seem to side with Sanballat and Tobijah . 

You say true , i would not . But every building is not templework . and though i would not with knowledge hinder the temple of the living God , yet if another kind of frame were in building , i would do my best to hinder , and be no Sanballat neither . but they are Sanballats , not whom man , but whom the Lord Counts so . But surely they hinder more , that set up another kind of temple than Christ's , than he that advices to look well that all be right and temple-work that is set up . 

To the difference i made of the material and gospel-paterns , you say nothing ; and that is the only considerable . it May be , as you said you said by me , you are best able to deal with the other . 

You say i should set a time then for the setting it up . 

Yea , i shall set you a time , yet not in mine own authority but Cerist's : when your pattern is all gospel , and your persons all qualified that in ▪ gospel-patern , than is my time for setting up , and then is Christ's time too . 

Nor would i stay you for a material building , as you say . You know i call you on to the gospel : i am very far from turning you back to the law . i call you on to Christ ; i would not turn you back to Solomon . 

And for the inspired prophets you tell me i stay for , and would have you stay too : 

Is not that a very gospel-way to stay for the spirit 's coming into the servants of the Lord ? take heed of denying inspired disciple . you know it is part of the fulfilling of the great prophecy , acts 2.  Indeed some of the prelates , many of them being uninspired themselves , & having little of the spirit , or none , would needs say therefore all inspirations and spiritual enlightenings , &c. were ended in the church , because ended in them : and because they were so carnal themselves , they thought none was spiritual . and you remember how they made laws even against the spirit in prayer . 

I speak thus , only to remember you who spoke most against inspiration and the spirit , lest you May let fall some words which May be taken up by some of that way , to countenance them in their invectives . Not but that i esteem of you as one inspired yourself in a measure , and having the spirit of God in you ; and herefore i know the spirit will be very tender in opposing the stpirit . 

You say you ought to dispatch the government , because you have followed the dictates of the holy ghost , of the assembly , and parliament . 

Then let me put one question ; why is it not called Christ's government ? why hath it not a jus divinum , a divine right put upon it , if all be of the holy ghost in it ? But i would not mistake you ; you say only that all is by the dictate of the holy ghost , of the assembly and parliament . so it is but part then , by your own confession , of the holy ghost ; the rest is of the assembly and parliament . 

You say the builders have had special regard to Jesus Christ the foundation . 

I will not suspect the counsels and debates of any of the builders . i know the disciple of Christ were true disciple , though they had not all of the spirit at one time which they had at another . i hope and i pray that the Lord will make up to the builders what of the spirit he hath not given them , that they May both see to build right , and see where they have builded wrong ; and so pull down again , as well as set up . 

And whereas you say the building May go on , by Master Saltmarsh his own consent : 

I say your building will go on , it seems , whether Master Saltmarsh consent or no . Master Ley , in his capacity , is better able to put it on at this time than Master Saltmarsh is to put it off to another time , unless the Lord who is above all , and hath the mighty , even the Princes of the earth to command , work for his own glory above all that we can or think . 

Master Ley's resolution , pag. 38 , 39.40 . 

To the second objection and answer of heresies and schisms , and so they Might have done from John's first sermon , he saith , 

1.  Why doth he begin at John's first sermon ? Were not the Esseans , &c. heretics and schismatics ? see Epiphanius , &c.  

2.  He makes Paul's epistles the terminus ad quem , which from John's first sermon to the last , make up twenty nine years . After the epistles , he brings in the sending the spirit , &c. which was but five years after the first sermon of John Baptist . 

3.  Before the end of the epistles , that government was not which we find in scripture ; and if so , the church-government was not long suspended . 

4.  Nor would it prejudice our expedition : persons of that age could not be so easily gathered as with us they May be . 

5.  What was long in establishing in primitive times , cannot be said to be hastily done now , after so many discussions and delibrate resolutions . 

Reply . 

You say first , why begin i for heretics and schismatics from John's first sermon : 

I begin there , because there began the mystery of the gospel . and yet i show you that no government began with that gospel manifestition ; by which i made appear that if government had been of such moral necessity , why was it not given out with the gospels first giving out ? 

Now you prove in a chronological discourse the space of time from John's sermon to Paul's epistle , to make the time appear for government . and , after you have summed up all the time and periods , and find it no two or three years' work , you conclude persons of that age could not be so easily gathered as now : nor the long establishing then to be an hasty establishing now . 

And now , after all this discourse and ravellings out of time from John's sermon , &c.  What have you gained ? Not that the government was soon settled . Then you have proved ( Much to my advantage , and in a clearer and fuller computation than i did ) the contrary . so as you have only been taking some learned pains , if you well observe , and the reader well observe you , to prove that the government at first was not suddenly cast into model nor brought forth in practice , which is the very thing i aimed at ; and truly your pains in it have been more exact than mine ; and i thank you for it . 

But you say , it ought not to be so now ; nor can it be said to be hastily done now , that was done so long ago . 

You say true in that : but you know the same spirit must reveal it that form it ; and it form it at first by degrees : and the way of revelation hath been more years than the first forming ; reckon but your Antichristian years as exactly as you have done your first Christian and primitive years , and you May be more satisfied . So as all , both the first revelation of it from prophecies , and the latter from Antichristianism , makes all for the not hastening , which i aimed at . 

Indeed if you can as infallibl assurey us this form and model is the very form then given out , it were very true that you say , that it cannot be said to be hastily done now , what was done so long ago : viz. if it be that very one which was done so long ago . 

For your exception against me , concerning my placing the giving of the spirit so late , if you interpret sense by the strict order of words , you will lose many a scripture truth in the words , as you well know . 

Master Ley's resolution . Pag. 40.  & 41.  

To that of heresies , &c. he saith ; 

What if they do not stir up their patrons against the state , &c. but they busily poison the souls of the persons ; and shall they ( If as Paul Best ) be suffered to blaspheme , and reproach , and perturb the public peace ? An indulgence much like old Eli's , &c.  

If truth be not more precious than peace , why doth our saviour say , he came not to send peace ? and why do the fathers contend so against the Arrians about a letter ? And why we so with the Romish religion rather than be at peace with them ? 

For that of moral transgressions , he would have the magistrates set on . 

Set on ? By whom ? We have not such mean thoughts of the magistrate as to make mention of him in such terms of disparagement . 

And for all his disciplines regulating men for religious walking , there will be work enough for the magistrate to bring them under civil trial for contumacy , &c.  

Reply . 

You say , what ? If heresies stir not up , they poison souls . 

If they poison , let the gospel antidote be applied then , and no other way which the gospel will not bear nor allow ; there is the sword of the spirit , and weapons not carnal , but mighty and spiritual . 

For that of old Eli's indulgences which you speak on , you are still looking upon Moses , though you tell us of Christ . make the kingdom of Israel and of England the same ; a Jewish and Christian state the same ; and then we shall allow you both Eli's sin , and his son's maintenance by tithes and offerings . 

You say , truth is more precious than peace ; yet there is a peace precious as well as truth , even the peace of Christ as well as the truth of Christ . 

But to the business ; you would prove truth to be precious , to the disadvantage of peace ; and therefore you bring in the fathers against the Arrians , and us against the Papists , and Christ against peace : but what would you prove ? Would you prove that truth ought to be established against peace ? and peace to be no way to truth ? Surely truth and peace do meet together ; nay , they are so much one , as there is even a truth in peace . he that was truth itself could say , my peace i leave with you . 

But , what of the contentions spoken on of the fathers and us , &c.  If there be any quarrelling for truth either by the fathers or us , but in a gospel-way , we are not excusable ; neither doth Christ speak of truths drawing swords , but of swords drawn against truth ; which is no argument for you . When Peter would draw a sword in the defence of truth , Christ bid him put it up . So far is he against your way of defending truth . 

You say , by whom should magistrates be set on ? and that you cannot speak in such disparaging words . 

by whom be set on ? by the legislative power , by the parliament : the parliament can set on their respective committees , justices , &c. and is this any disparagement ? I speak of subordinate magistrates , not of the supreme . 

You say , there will be work for the magistrate enough , to punish the contumacious , &c.  

That is in English , the presbytery will keep the magistracy doing : and now who disparages the magistrate ? who set them on work ? Who makes them their deputy-punishers ? nay , who is the Satan to whom the excommunicate are delivered ? It is an expression not much besides your principles : and who disparages the magistrate in that ? 

Master Ley's resolution . Page 41 , & 42.  

To that of truth being otherwise armed from heaven , i answer . 

We think it not meet to divide the subservient means from the supreme power , nor the exercise of discipline from his assistance who can make it effectual , the sword of God and Gidion . 

To that of the imputation of jealousy , &c.  

There is a godly jealou••e , which would set up as many securities as May be against heresy and impiety . 

The faulty jealousy is theirs that would stifle the government : but there is a fear which we profess of God's anger for connivance and communion with heretical men &c.  there is in some an averseness to heresy in a true zeal and love of God . 

There be many other causes of jealousy , but i will take but that one of the Lords and Commons , p. 43.  

If Master Saltmarsh had well considered who were engaged , &c. he would not have undervalved their piety and prudence , to compare them with Papists and prelates . 

I will conclude with a piece of his own politic advice , &c.  Upon such principles is church-government ordained ; for his text out of the revelation , revel. 18.1 . As he began , so he ends with misapplication of scripture . 

Reply . 

You say you cannot divide discipline from his assistance , who can make it effectual . 

That is from the magistrates . this is a sign without further argument , that you do not hold your government for Christ's , because it cannot be effectual of itself , without help from below , and the world , and to another power then its own ; nor is the sword of God , and Gideon any fair and just proof for joining presbytery and magistracy ; it joins only God and the magistrates . 

You say , your godly jealousy will set up as many securities as May be . 

But than they are warrantable and gospel-ways of security . that is no godly jealousy which sets up other ways ; as Herod killing all the children to secure his kingdom ; David dissembling to escape ; Jacob to get a blessing : there is jealousy , but no godly jealousy nor warrantable security . So to secure any way , though of truth , by a power not allowed on in the gospel , as no such compulsive power is in your way , is not to be jealous with a godly jealousy ; though i deny not but some of those May be godly who are so jealous , but not in that . 

You say that some fear God's anger for their communion with heretics , &c.  

You know all such fear is only warrantable in the church , not in the world : it is not so with the nations now as with the Jews . now if we have not communion with them in the nation , we must go out of the world . but , what communion is this you mean that will bring God's anger ? You have your liberty to withdraw , to separate , as they from you : if it be national or civil communion , than you pluck up the tares before the time of harvest . 

But whom you esteem heretics , they it May be think they have as good scriptures to esteem you so ; and this is heretic for heretic , interpretation against interpretation . and since there is only a sufficiency but no infallibility now as before ; since there is no apostles for interpretation as at first , for revelation , why do we thus cry out heretics , heretics ; the sword , the sword ? Let me put one question here . 

Suppose those you call heretics , were of equal number to you , and both of you equally numbered with magistrates , and both of you equally principled for persecution , and both equally calling out for the magistrates sword ; what clashing of swords would there be ! What edge against edge , what authority against authority , what power against power ! What bloody doings , what sad workings , what confusion would there be ! This is an image of your incorporation of your two powers that you so plead for in this kind . If we were equally principled and armed for persecution , as you are , and acted by your spirit ; ah what a kingdom would here be ! 

You say some have averseness to heresy in a true zeal to God . 

These are but general notions of heresy . every thing is not heresy that is called so . And for true zeal to God in that averseness , all this is granted , if that be heresy indeed . But how if it be such a zeal as Paul saith the Jews had , a zeal , but not according to knowledge ? how if it be such a zeal to God as crucified the son of God ? and such a zeal there hath been , we know . The Jews did much in zeal to truth , even against truth . 

But you close up with that of the Lords and Commons in an ordinance , &c.  

I am afraid these are such proofs as you intend most in your presbytery , to make your supplement to scripture from authority , and so to make us believe what you cannot persuade us to believe , and to make it out by an ordinance what you want by scripture . 

But i hope that honourable senate will rather let you argue from the scripture against us then from their authority . 

But i have not to do here with answering ordinances of parliament . i contend not , but submit to them in every ordinance for the Lord's sake ; nor doth my argument lie against any thing of theirs , but yours . i dare not undervalue them to Count them as parties , but judges in our difference . I appeal to the parliament , as to Caesar : nor in it a fair proof of truth , to draw the magistrates sword out of the scabbard . 

You say you wonder , considering who was engaged , i would so undervalue them to compare them with Papists and prelates . 

I did consider who was engaged , a parliament , &c. and had i not highly valu•d them , i had not ventured so far in my quaere . i considered the sad and fatal troubles which attended the magistrates engagements with the ministers ; the blood which hath been poured out by national compulsion of tender consciences ; and like a spiritual watchman i could not but blow my trumpet , and give warning . And for my comparison of Papists and prelates , i appeal to the world if there be any reproach ; whether it be not in the interpreter rather than in the author . but i know no such thing by my paper : and if it be lawful to draw in consequent conclusions , and then father them , i could prove you to speak treason , blasphemy , idolatry , atheism , heresy , nay , independency , which some of your way think worse , Anabaptism , separation , which would seem to be as hateful to you : but i judge you not in any such sort ; nor had i spoken so far now , but in a just vindication . 

You say you will conclude with my politics ; and upon such principles as mine , church-govenment is ordained . 

I have told you my politics were written by my dimmer light . and if your government be built upon no better principles than mine , i cannot but be out of conceit with that government , being so far out of conceit with mine own principles ; and it makes me think the worse of it , because my former principles fit it so well . Those principles you speak on , are partly of civil power and the sword ; and the dominion or sceptre in the gospel , is more spiritual . 

You say of my text in the revelation , revel. 18.1 . that as i began , so i end , with misapplication of scripture . 

misapplication is a word soon•r writ then proved ; and my reasons were rath•• crowded then ordered in my paper . 

The scripture was this : for the angel that came down from heaven hath great power , and the earth is lightened with his glory . 

Which scripture there applied , doth hint to any that will not rather cavil then interpret , that my only reason for delay of government was in this : an angel was yet to come with power and glory ; or , the gospel would fill the earth with more light ; so as we should not shut up ourselves too soon in the dark . 

And now reader , judge whether it be my misapplication , or his misinterpretation . 

Spiritual principles drawn forth . 

Gospel-truth is one and the same . 

That which is only in some parts of it warrentable by the word , is not purely , nor in a scripture-way warrantable : for there is not any will-worship but it hath something from the pattern of the true . the samaritan-worship was copied after the Jewish ; and the Jewish , when Christ came , had priests , and temple , and sacrifices , and was copied by the law : but then there was traditions and commandments of men . that is pure gentilism , which hath no image of gospel nor legal truth . Antichrist sits in the very temple of God , though rather upon it . false Christ's call themselves Christ's as well as the true . the great image had a head of gold , though feet of iron and clay . every heresy hath a scripture-word in it . But truth must be all one and the same , and homogeneal ; not in parts so , but all so . there is but one Lord , one faith , &c.  

Prudence and consequences , are the great engines of will-worship . 

Things of prudence merely , are not to be admitted into the spiritual way and gospel-design . Prelacy had its prudence for every new additional in worship and government . and once let prudence open a door , and then will more of man crowd in , than the law of God can keep out . Nor is that to be admitted which is so received a maxim , though not directly , yet not repugnant to the word . Christ's rule is not such : he opposes any tradition to the commandments of God . not direct from scripture , is indirect and repugnant though not to the very letter of such words , yet to the form and analogy of truth to the general scripture-law , viz. the will of God that nothing shall be added nor diminished ; and ye are only my friends , saith Christ , if ye do what i command you ; and the Lord will raise you up a prophet , him shall ye hear . for if any thing of prudence is to be let in , than something of tradition ; for prudence can make nothing higher , nor purer , nor better ; man can but give his own image to the things he makes himself : though he make them up of divine materials from scriptures , yet the form none but the Lord himself can give ; and the form is that which stamps Christ's image upon every truth . Every thing in the word hath a form ; that is , it is such a thing of truth , and not another . Nothing but God's power and will can make a thing truth : his power creates it , and his will creates it such a truth . nothing is agreeable to the will of Christ , but the very will of Christ . the will of Christ is the only legislative power in the gospel . nothing is agreeable to his will but what he wills ; and every thing is repugnant to his will but what he wills : so as this will is the supreme general law , and indeed the very form or essence of scripture and the word of God . And whatsoever is devised by prudence , though upon scripture-materials , yet being not the work of this will , nor having the stamp or image upon it , is none of Christ's , but as repugnant as any other trad•tion or invention of men . 

And here let us look to that new , though old design against truth , the most subtle undiscernable , and divinest kind of will-worship in the world : that which some call scripture-consequence , an unwholesome word as it hath been used : for under colour of consequence , what conclusions May be promoted ! What May not reason draw from scripture , and what May it not fashion like a truth ! But consider , in parliament laws , or ordinances , or commissions , is it lawful to take them , and from every part of them to draw out results of our own ; and when there is but one law , make many subordinate laws of our own ; and frame laws out of laws , and ordinances out of ordinances , and commissions out of commissions ? no sure : but we must keep to that one , general , entire literal law and will of the parliament . Is it thus in laws human , and not much more in ordinances divine ? Yea •here is the same oneness , entireness , indivisibility , and essentiality of the truth . 

Nor do i here disapprove any scripture-consequence , if merely consequent and not form up into a law by mere reason ; for then man makes laws from the laws of God ; and this is not the least engine that Antichrist hath wrough• with . 

The persons are brethren and saints in Christ's church ; but in antichrists , parishioners and servants . 

What kind of government is marked out in scriptures for sitting on the waters , or persons ? Christ governs by the persons ministerially , not over the persons authoritatively only ; and the persons being once in his churchway , lose their old capacity for a new , and are raised up from persons to brethren , to churches . It is a saying of Master Godwin's and Master Nye , not so pleasant as true , the clergy had at first the golden ball of government amongst themselves , and it is not much mended anywhere but in that church where the persons have their interests as well as others ; they are the clergy properly , a notion which the ministers got only to themselves till of late : the interest of the persons in Christ's kingdom is not only an interest of compliancy , and obedience , and submission ; but of consultation , of debating , counselling , prophesying , voting , &c. and let us stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free . 

Presbytery itself is founded on principles of separation , which yet they condemn for schism in other churches ; nay , is the greatest separation . 

What is a presbytery over congregations or a congregation , but a church gathered out of a church ? Nay is not that the only church ; and the remainder of persons made but an accessary , or something of another kind , or rather the nation or kingdom which is only subject to this power supreme ? And though presbytery be but a very church-gathering , and founded on a principle of separation , yet do they not disapprove , and condemn separation and semi or half-separation and church-gathering for schism , & c ? when their own power is a schism respectively to the parishes that are distinct ; and whatever distinction is form to make them appear as part of their congregations , yet is it indeed so . Is not their whole power defended to be entirely , essentially , dispensatively in the presbytery called by themselves the church , and by the very authority of one whom i name with reverence to his learning and moderation , Master Herle ? 

So as i wonder why there should be such envyings , railings , accusings , dissentings , betwixt us that are believers , though of several ways , when as each is principled , founded , administered upon the same ground and way of schism , separation , and church-gathering ; nay , the presbytery hath more schism and separation in it then the rest , by how much it is constituted from the persons and brethren , and acts in its ministration apart too , viz. over the persons , rather than with them . 

None to be forced under Christ's kingdom as in the kingdoms of the world . 

In a spiritual government the ignorance of persons which some would have for expedition , that they May practically know it , is no scripture way of knowing : in practical godliness , things must be known before practically known ; and practice is to begin from faith , and faith from knowledge ; else the obedience can be but blind , mixed , and popish . indeed in things civil or moral , practice May bring in knowledge , habits May be acquired and gotten by acts ; a man May grow temperate by practising temperance , and civilly obedient by practising civil obedience ; but it is not so in spirituals there , habits go before acts , spiritual infusions before practices . 

Indeed the laws of states and kingdoms and civil policy , teach men best by ruling them practically ; but it is not so in the church ; men are not to be forced into Christ's kingdom as into the kingdoms of the world ; the Kings of the nations exercise their dominion ; it shall not be so among you . 

The power of a formal reformation in a government makes it not Christ's government . 

A government , though not purely Christ's , May be made up of such scripture and prudential materials as May much reform the outward man , even as a mere prudential gavel-government May do , if severely executed . The Romans by how much they excelled other nations in laws , so much the more they excelled them in a persons reform , moralised , •nd civilised ; in many civil states , merely from their wholesome policy and administration , excellent and precious flowers spring up , many moral virtues , as prudence , temperance , obedience , meekness , love , justice , fortitude : yet all this makes not a government to be Christ's ; but only that which is merely the discipline of Christ , and policy of Christ . Prelacy in its primitive time did reform ; the beast like a lamb , which compelled the nations to worship , and made even fire to come down from heaven , or was religious in the eyes of men , and did miracles ; yet was no true nor heavenly power neither . 

There are certain parts and degrees of reformation common and communicable with the government of Christ & other governments ; but then , there is a form and image of Christ in it which no others have , and some certain spiritual operations and workings which exceed the power of all other governments ; and this makes the difference and puts on the essential , true , and individual form upon it ; so as in choice of governments they are not to be chosen by some summer-fruit in the outward man , but by the word and spirit . 

The visible church or communion , is the image of the invisible or mystical . 

The invisible or mystical church is made up of pure living stones ; all is spiritual , and yet all not spiritual in the like kind , nor degree ; Jesus Christ the corner stone is both God and man ; and some of his differ in glory as one star differs from another : and as it is here , in this spiritual , invisible , glorious building ; so it is in the outward , visible communion below , or building here , which is the image of that above : the temple here is according to the pattern there ; and as that is of true , real , essentially spiritual living stones , so the church here is to consist of such as visibly , formally , and outwardly appear so , and therefore called saints , and golden candlesticks , and holy nation , &c. and though all the materials in this building are to be proportionable , & pure , to make up a representative of the church above , yet all is not of one square , and measure , and polishing ; some are greater , and some less ; some babes and children in Christ : some smoking flax , and bruised reeds : and as this church bears the image of the heavenly , so the material one bore the image of this ; there was pure stones , gold , and cedar ; so as there is room in the church now for any small stone or the lest piece of timber , if it be but lively or squared , if cedar or fir . 

How Christ is a King of the nations and of the church , and how an head . 

Christ is a King to the nations , and to the church ; nor doth he rule the nations as the church , nor the church as the nations ; he rules ministerially in his church , and monarchically in the nations ; he rules with a golden sceptre in his church , with an iron rod in the nations ; nor doth Christ rule as the Kings of the nations , who finding persons rude , barbarous , uncivil , subdue them into obedience and civility ; but so doth not Christ in his church , that we know on ; the dispensation of his word ( Not of the government ) first subdues . 

And it is true , Christ is an head , but not an head to every ; he will have a body proportionable to his head both here and hereafter , in earth as well as in heaven ; he is a pure , holy , glorious head in his gospel dispensation , and well have a body suitable pure . 

Not only is the visible body of Christ thus pure , but every truth of Christ bears the image of Christ ; every truth of his hath something of himself in it who is truth itself ; i am the truth , saith Christ ; every beam of light is light ; every truth is a sparkle of truth itself . Thus we May judge of truth , by what of Christ we see in it . They who break a crystal , May see their face in every piece and parcel ; so in every thing of Christ there is an image of Christ , either of his purity , or holiness , or love , or humility , or meekness , &c.  

The presbyterial government , and the worlds , of the same equal dominion . 

What kind of church-government is that , which will set up itself with the civil and state-government , even coordinate with it , if not to the ruling and tutoring of it ? which hath as large a dominion as the other ? which is as full , as ample , as high , and as supreme ? which no less territory than a kingdom will serve , than a whole nation ? Must Christ's government be just as large as the worlds , which government affects dominion ? which brings in whole nations under the sceptre of it ? This , or that little one in the scripture which sits down sometimes in a house , to the church in thy house ; sometimes in a city as Corinth , and over a few there , to the church in Corinth ; in a country , not over a country ; to the seven churches in Asia , not to the church of Asia , or the church Asia , a church a fourth part of the world . Sure if this national and comprehensive church were the pattern we should walk by , why did not Christ begin first at Kings and Princes and so bring nations & kingdoms , and make churches of them ? But we see no such thing ; he begins lower , at the base and weak , and foolish , and few ; and raises up his kingdom from the bottom of the world , and not from the top or pinnacle of Princes , kingdoms , and nations . 

The national , and congregational church covenant , both lawful ; or both unlawful . 

How can a church-covenant be unlawful if the national covenant be warrantable ? and why do any plead against that , who are for this ? a covenant is condemned in the congregational church , & yet commended in the national . Now , how can a church-covenant be both true and false ? is a great church-covenant lawful , & a little one unlawful ? A national church-covenant warrantable , and a congregational unwarrantable ? But covenants in their nature were a dispensation more of the old testament-strain ; a national church had a covenant to gather them up into their national way of worship , and were under the laws of an external pedagogy ; and now the spiritual dispensation being come , even the gospel of Jesus Christ , there is a fullness of spirit let out upon the saints and persons of God , which gather them up more closely , spiritually , and cordially , than the power of any former dispensation could : the very covenant of God himself , of which the former were typical , and prophetical , comes in nakedly upon the spirits of his , and draws them in , and is a law upon their inward parts , sweetly compelling in the consciences with power , and yet not with force ; with compulsion , and yet with consent ; and surely where this covenant of God hath its kindly and spiritual operation , there would need no such external supplement as before ; but because of the hardness of our hearts , it is thus ; from the beginning it was not so ; the spirit tied up thousands together then . 

Let states than have any prudential security , any design of sound wisdom , to consorate persons together ; but let the church only be gathered up by a law of a more glorious and transcendent nature , by the pure covenant of God himself with the souls of his . 

We receive and give out truth by parts . 

Men are to be judged and followed according to the degrees of light they receive ; and if any have some light , that light is not to be used as an advantage to all their other darkness , as if all their darkness Might pass under that one beam of light . the light rises upon the prophets , as the sun upon the earth , it is dawning , and morning , and noon with them , thus came the gospel ; John preached repentance , Jesus Christ faith and repentance ; John came with water , Christ with the spirit , and first in parables , and after in power : the apostles they knew first Christ for Messiah ; then that he should suffer , and die , and rise again ; and than the kingdom of God . Luther knew first that indulgences were unwarrantable ; and after , that popery was Antichristianism , and Rome was Babylon , and works could not justify ; and after , conscience was not to be compelled in spirituals , thus we grow from faith to faith , to the fullness of stature in Christ , to a perfect man in him , growing with the increasings of God : the kingdom of God is like a little leven , like a grain of mustardseed . so as wh•le we see but things in degrees , we are neither to be too suddenly admired by others , nor our selves . 

All Covenanters are bound to contribute to religion as well as state . 

Whosoever hath covenanted , is bound to assist the public to his utmost in every condition , and calling , and place , and way accordingly ; from natural abilities to his relations , from one relation to another , even to all : to that of Christian and spiritual ; his prayers , counsel , notions , with contributions of all sorts , civil , natural , temporal , spiritual : he is bound by covenant to discover malignity in state , in church ; enemies to God as well as man ; endeavours to any thing of popery and prelacy , under what visage , habit , form of words , of doctrine , discipline , be it presbytery or whatever , if repugnant to the word of God , as we are persuaded in conscience who have personally covenanted . The breathings and speakings of the spirit , are not to be quenched : every season is for the Lord's service ; in season and out of season : watchman , watchman , what of the night ? The spirit is poured upon sons and daughters . Synods of men are not infallible : not because more men , more of the spirit . the liberty of the subject is that of soul as well as body ; and that of soul more dear , precious , glorious , the liberty wherein Christ hath made us free . Be not ye then the servants of men in the things of God . 

We are to try truth , and so receive it in its degrees . 

Inquiries for truth ought to be according to scripture-rule ; and that rule lights us on to the trial of all things , and proving spirits , and judging between the precious and the vile . the water that is mingled with the wine , the tares with the wheat , will require sound trial , lest we make but an exchange of one error for another . The apostles waited for the spirit , the Bereans searched the word : we are bidden to try and prove . the prophecies of seducers , false Christ's , Antichrist with lying wonders , are as real cautions given out by the spirit . the examples of former ages , Luther . &c. were enlightened by degrees . Angels , who see by vision , see but as God reveals ; much less men who take in truths by spiritual reasoning as well as revelation . Arise , why tarriest thou , is a text only for him who had such a vision as Paul to obey by , and such a vision as Ananias had to preach by . 

No churchway independency . 

The believers for the churchway falsely called independents , they hold on Christ for a spiritual head , on the magistrate for their civil head , on the body of Christ above and below in the communion of saints here : their dependency is spiritual , ministerial , communicative ; not classical , provincial , national : their power is for one another , not over one another . They cannot mingle or embody with those in a way not of truth . their separation is not from men but manners ; not from believers themselves , but their practices and corruptions . Nor go they out , but they are called out : come out of her , my persons , &c.  And thus the Jews were independent to the nations , the Christians to the Jews , the reform to the Papists , the Non-conformists to the prelatical , and these to the Nonconformists . 

A spirit of love and meekness becomes believers . 

They that write not as enemies , are likely to prove better friends to the truth , because they raise not so much dust with their striving as others , to blind one another's sight . Those spirits which cast men sometimes into the fire , sometimes into the water , are not from Christ ; it were happy the Lord would cast out those , and let a more gospel-spirit walk amongst us ; we Might then sooner attain to that of the apostle , to walk by the same rule so far as we have attained together , till the Lord reveal , and the stronger to bear with the weak ; and to please one another to edification , rather than ourselves , in all things wherein the Lord May not be displeased in the way of his dispensation . I know no advantages we have got , but the reviling ourselves before our enemies as well as one another . and oh ! why do we tell it Gath , and publish it in the streets of Askalon , to make the uncircumcised triumph ? Was the Lord in the wind , or in the fire , or in the still small voice , when he spoke to the prophet ? only in the still voice . how was the Lord heard in the time of his indignation . Man heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day . oh! could we find out the coolest times to speak and write one to another in , and not in the heat of the day , as we do . 

When a state-conscience is fully persuaded ; doubtful , and so sinning . 

It is with a public or state-conscience , as it is a personal or particular conscience : what is done , must be done in faith , or else there is weakness , doubting , and sin . now where there is not a full consent and persuasion from the word of faith , there cannot be faith properly ; and where there is not a word of faith for that conscience to be grounded upon , there cannot be a purely and •piritually full persuasion . And one May question whether in spirituals , as in civils , votes & voices are to make laws ; for in the gospel we find that divine laws have their subsistence there , without the vote of any : and that is only to be a law or truth in the church and kingdom of saints , not what is so in the common consent or voice , but what is a law in the very gospel-truth of it . If the laws of truth were founded as the laws of civel states , in a mere legislative power ; then popery hath had as good assurance as any ; they have had most voices , most counsels : and so Arrianism , when the world went after it . 

Postscript . 

The testimony of Salmasius the approved German writer of the presbyterial way , and employed by the states of Holland to write . 

That the baptism in the name of the father , son , and holy ghost , is not that way of baptism practised by the apostles . 

The baptism of apostolical use and institution , is in the rivers not with invocation of the three persons , seeing the apostles baptised only in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ . 



in his own Latin thus 

Baptisma in aquis perennibus apostolici instituti & moris sed non invocatio trinitatis super baptizatum , cum apostoli in solo nomine jesu baptizarent . 

Salmasius in apparatu ad libros de primatu papae , fol. 193.  



Salmasius his testimony against the present presbyterial-way . 

Duobus modis hac independentia ecclesiarum accipi , si vel respectum non habeant ad vicinas ullas ecclesias , aut si non pendeant ab authoritate aliquot ecclesiarum simul in unam classem vel synodum conjunctarum unius conventus cujus partem & ipsae faciant . Prior modus similior reperitur primitivae ecclesiae praxi consuetudini ac usui quo voluntina haec communio inter ecclesias fuit . Posterior magis convenit cum instituto quod postea a juris humani dispositione introductum est . 

Hoc posteriore modo libertas perticularium ecclesiarum magis imminuta videtur quam priore . 

Sed quod ab initio fuerit voluntatis b postea factum est juris . 

hoc jus sane positivum atque ecclesiasticum humanumque , non divinum : juris est quidem divini ut una sit ecclesia christo , unitas autem ejus non gregalium aut c concorporalium plurium adunate collectione consistat sed in fidei ac doctrinae unanimi consensione . 

pag. 265.266 . in apparatu . 



in English thus : 

This independency of churches May be taken two ways ; either as not having respect to any neghbour churches , or as not depending on the authority of some churches that are joined in some classis or synod , of which the churches themselves May make a part ; the former way is found to be more like the practice , custom , and use of the primitive church , whereby this voluntary communion was among the churches . The latter way doth more agree with the institution which afterwards was introduced by a human authority . 

By this latter way the liberty of particular churches seem to be less diminished then by the former . 

But that which from the beginning was arbitrary afterwards is made necessary [ as a law . ] This law truly is positive and ecclesiastical and human , not divine . 't is by a divine law that the church of Christ should be one , but the unity of it doth not consist in the union [ or collection ] of many that are of the same flock or body , but in the unanimous consent agreement in faith and doctrine . 

page 265.266 . in apparatu . 



Fjnjs 





1 cor. 8.2 . if any man will do his will he shall know of the doctrine , joh. 7.17 . 

1 John 4.1 . 1 John 4.16  Luke 10.18 . Matth. 24.12 . 1 John 4.8 . 1 John 3.6 . John 13.1 . 1 cor. 1.12 , 13.  prov. 6.28 . phil. 1.15 , 16 , 17 , 18.  Luke 22.58 , 60.  Gal. 2.12 , 13 , 14.  

See Master Baily his dissuasive . 

Acts 1.25 . 

1 thess. 5.19 . prov. 28.1 . 1 tim. 2.2 . gal. 2.11 . act. 21.20 . 1 cor. 8.7 , 8 , 10.  revel. 5.6 . Revel. 18.1 . matth. 7.1 , 2.  1 cor. 9.20 . Rom. 15.2 . 1 cor. 8.9 . Rom. 14.17 . John 20 9  Luke 24.26 . John 3.25 . Acts 21.20 . Matt. 11.1 , 2 , 5.  Mark 9.38 . Luke 9.49 . Acts 19.2 , 3.  1 thess. 5.20 . phil. 3.2 , 5 , 16.  Acts 15.3 , 4.  1 cor. 13.12 . Col. 3.13 . 1 cor. 8.2 . revel. 17.17 . Luke 28.18 . a matt. 18.15 . Act. 15.19 , 28 , 31. and 16.4 . 1 tim. 4.14 . Tit. 1.5 . 1 tim. 1.2 . Tit. 1.6 . Acts 13.1 . 1 cor. 12.17 . b Acts 6.6 . 2 tim. 2.2 . 1 tim. 4.14 . Eph. 4.11 , 12.  Heb. 13.17 . Act. 20.28 , 29.  Revel. 2.14 , 20  a act. 15.21 , 25 , 29. 2 cor. 1.24 . 1 pet. 5.3 . 1 tim. 5.1 . Matth. 20.25 . b Acts 15.29 . Joh. 16.13 . Gal. 1.12 . Acts 2.43 . c Mark 10.42 . Luke 22.25 . Joh. 18.36 . d Acts 1.15 . & 15.22 . & 14.23 . e 1 tim. 6.3 . Matth. 15.9 . f Acts 20.17 . and 15.4 . * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . g matth. 16.11 . and 13.3 . Joh. 6.12 . h revel. 13.16 . Matt. 7.14 , 15 , 16 , 17.  Joh. 10.1 , 5.  Acts 19.15 . i 1 cor. 14.23 . Acts 6.3 . 1 cor. 1.2 . k joh. 3.5 . Acts 2.31 . l gal. 3.7 . Ephes. 2.15 . Acts 3 22.  a 1 pet. 2.5 . 1 cor. 1 2 , 9  Col. 1 2. 2 cor. 6.16 , 17 act. 2.41 , 42.  Revel. 3 1 , 17.  Act. 9.26 . b matt. 18.15 , 16 , 17 , 18 20.  Matt. 16.18 , 19  c 1 cor. 12.28 . Ephes. 4.11 . d act. 6.3 , 5.  & 15.22 . 1 tim. 3.15 . e 1 cor. 7.14 . Act. 2.39 . Rom. 11.16 . f act. 2.42 . 1 tim. 3.15 . g 1 cor. 14.22 , 6 , 11 , 4.  a matth. 28.18 . & 18.18 , 19  Acts 14.21 , 22 , 23.  b Acts 15.6 . & 14.23 . 1 tim. 4.14 . Acts 6.2 , 6.  c Acts 14.23 . 1 tim. 4.14 . d revel. 13.16 . Joh. 10.1 , 5.  Matt. 7.14 , &c.  e matth. 28.18 , 19  & 3.6 , 9  Acts 8.37 . f 1 cor. 1 , 2. 1 pet. 2.5 . &c. joh. 3.6 . * 1 cor. 7.14 . g gal. 3.16 . Rom. 4.16 . Joh. 3.6 . h matth. 3.9 . i 1 cor. 10.1 , 2 , 3 , 4.  k 1 cor. 10.1 , 2 , 3 , 4. 1 pet. 3.21 . l joh. 15.14 . Acts 3.22 . M matth. 3 5 , 6.  Acts 2.41 . and 8.12 . & 10.48 . Ephes. 5.26 . n rom. 4.11 . 1 cor. 14.22 . o act. 22.16 . p rom 4.11 . Gen. 17.11 . q matth. 24.27 . r jam. 1.23 . ſ rom. 6.3 , 4.  Acts 22.16 . t Acts 2.38 . Rom. 6.3 , 4. gal. 3.27 . Coloss. 2.12 . Matt. 28.18 , 1• heb. 6.2 . Mark 16.15 , 16.  u ephes. 4.11 , 12.  w 1 cor. 12.8 , 9 , 10.  Acts 2.38 . and 2.34 . x 1 cor. 12.10 , 29.  & 14.29 . a heb. 12.22 . Acts 10.48 . & 2.41 . & 16.32 , 33.  b matth. 10.1 . compared with matth. 28.18 . Joh. 4.1 . Joh. 8.31 . Isai. 1.16 . Acts 9.10 . and 1.15 . c 1 cor. 12.5 . d act. 2.38 . & 10.48 . Matth. 28.18 . Mark 16.16 . Act. 8.37 . e act. 1.15 . and 2.42 . f matth. 10.1 . compared with 1.28.18 . Isai. 8.16 . Acts 9.10 . g Acts 2.41 , 42 and 16.31 . a Acts 2.38 . & 10 48. and 19.5 . and 8.16 . Rom. 6.3 . b Acts 2.38 . & 10.48 . & 19.5 . & 8.16 . c Acts 3.22 . Joh. 15.14 . Matth. 15.9 . Revel. 22.10 . d matth. 20.22 , 23. and 3.11 . 1 cor. 12.13 . and 10.2 . e Joel 2.28 . Isai. 44.3 . with matth. 3.11 . Acts 1.5 . Joh. 1.33 . f act. 8.17 , 18 , and 10.44 . and 11.15 . g Acts 2.38 . & 10.48 . & 19 5. and 8.16 . Rom. 6.3 . h matth. 9.15 . Revel. 22.19 . Joh. 15.14 . i Acts 3.22 . k matt. 18.20 . Mark 13.6 . Joh. 14.13 . Acts 9.15.16 . Joh. 17.6 , 11.  Acts 9.14 . l 1 joh. 7.7 . M joh. 1.26 . Mark 1.4 . Matth. 11.30 . Acts 19.3 , 4.  n Mark 16.17 . Acts 2.3 , 4. and 16 , 17.  o joh. 1.25 . Matth. 21.25 . Heb. 5.4 . p Acts 8.6 . q Acts 9.17 . 1 cor. 12.29 , 30.  Ephes. 4.11 . matth. 39.6 . a joh. 1.25 . Heb. 5.4 . Matt. 10.1 , 5 , 8 ▪ Mark 16.16 . b revel. 15.8 . 1 cor. 8.2 . c 1 cor. 12.  d Acts 1.4 . and 7.17 . Gal. 4 4.  M•rk 1.15 . Revel. 15.8 . & 16. and 18.1 . Acts  6 ,  . a matth. 10.1 . Mark 16.16 . 1 cor. 12.  b Acts 8.6 . and 9.17 . c revel. 15.8 . and 18.1 . d Acts 2.4 . Mark 16.17 . Acts 19.6 . 1 cor. 14.22 , 39  e revel. 22.1 . a matth. 28.20 . and 16.18 . b joh. 14.16 . c revel. 22.18 , 19  d heb. 7.22 . e joh. 20.29 , 30 , 31.  f ephes. 5 . 1• . g joh. 8 . 1• . and 9 5.  h revel. 22.5 . i joh. 20.29 , 30 , 31.  k matt. 23.24 . l matth. 10.1 . compared with matth. 28.18 . Joh. 8.31 . Isa. 8.16 . Acts 9.10 . M 2 cor. 3.6 , 8 , 9  Rom. 1.16 . 2 tim. 3.16 , 17.  Heb. 4.12 .  pet. 1.19 . phil. 13.16 . 1 cor. 8.2 . John 20.  de divinis n•min . c. 2.  iren. lib. 3. c. 1.  Tertullian . lib. contra Hermogen . 1 cor. 2.28 . Acts 1.  & 1• . 1 joh. 4.1 . 1 thess. 5.21 . Acts 4.20 . 1 cor· 2.9 . Ephes. 2.19 , 20 , 21 . 22·  1 pet. 2.9 , &c.  the beginning of this postscript witnesses to page 13.  exception 4.  







































































































































