Rogero-mastix . 

A ROD FOR William Rogers , In Return for his Rhyming Scourge , etc.  

By Thomas Ellwood . 

Printed in the Year 1685.  

TO such as ask , why I in Verse have written ? 
This Answer I return , I held it fit , 
Verse should in Verse be answered , Prose in Prose . 
My Adve●…ry his o●… Weapon ●…se . 
〈◊〉 chose ●…ore in Prose to wri●… , and th●… 
I ans●… him in Pro●… . 〈◊〉 now again , 
Since he his Style from Prose to Verse hath changed , 
And in the Muse's Walks hath boldly ranged , 
In his own Method him I choose to Treat , 
lest he should wise be in his own Conceit , 
prov. 26. 5.  

A Rod for William Rogers , in return for his Rhyming Scourge , etc.  

The Preacher tells us , that beneath the Sun 
there 's no new thing : for , That which shall be done , 
Hath been before , And what is now a doing 
Shall acted be again , in Times ensuing . 
●…t none be shaken , therefore , in his Mind , 
〈◊〉 he God's People now Reviled find , 
Reproached with bitter Words , and Vilified , 
With filthy Slanders loaded , and belied 
By Wicked men : Such was the Church's state 
Of old , as sacred Story doth relate . 
That Railing Herald of th' Assyrian Host , 
The foul-mouthed Rabshakeh , that man of Boast , 
Who from Senacherib , Assyrian's King , 
Did a proud Message unto judah bring ; 
When he designed the faithful jews to draw 
From their Observance of the holy Law , 
He laboured to persuade them they had left 
The way of God already , and bereft 
Themselves , by that means , of all ground of hope 
That God would them defend . This was the scope 
Of his false Reas'ning with them : If , said he , 
〈◊〉 answer , In the Lord our God trust we ; 
Is not that He , whose Altars and High-places 
Your Hezekiah takes down and defaces ; 
And hath to Judah and Jerus'lem said , 
Your Worship at this Altar shall be made ? 
By this , he hoped their Confidence to shake , 
In God the Lord , and them 〈◊〉 make 
Of God's Protection , and from thence afford 
An open Ear to his seducing Word . 
And that he might the more amuse them , he 
Pretends his Mission from the Lord to be . 
am I , says he , come up without the Lord 
Against this place , to put it to the Sword ? 
The Lord ( adds he ; for in a Lie he 'll stand ) 
Unto me said , Go up against this land 
then let n●…t Hezekiah make you trust 
Still in the Lord , saying , The Lord ( who 's just ) 
Will surely us deliver , and this City 
Shall not be subject to Assyria is Pity . 
To this effect that Wretch , with strained Voice 
Proclaimed , and in his Lewdness did rejoice 
A little while ; but , ever 't was long , the Rod 
Taught him what 't was to Rail at Israel's God.  
When Treacherous Sanballat and Tobiah 
Perceived the godly zeal of Nehemiah , 
The care and pains he took , his Diligence 
The holy City with a Wall to fence , 
How hard he laboured ( in despite of them ) 
To build the Breaches of jerusalem ; 
Set up the Gates thereof , and hang the Door , 
That they no longer could , as heretofore , 
Go in and out at pleasure , and profane , 
With unclean Mixtures , Iacob's Seed again ; 
Bring in mixed Marriages , and thereby make 
God's People him offend , him them forsake : 
At first it grieved them sore to hear some tell 
Of one that sought the good of Israel . 
then when they found the Work would be begun , 
They laughed , and into scornful Scoffs did run ; 
And by Derision and Disdainful Cries , 
Declared how much they did the Work despise . 
But when they understood the Work went on , 
And was in likely posture to be done , 
They waxed exceeding wroth , and straight combined 
Together to oppose it ; with them joined 
th' Arabian , Ammonite and Ashdodite , 
In League , against Jerusalem to fight : 
And all to the intent , to bring to naught 
The Work , which God had by his Servants wrought . 
Their Warlike Preparations proving vain , 
They use a Stratagem , they lay a Train 
To catch the Innocent ; thus him they greet , 
Come , let us in one place together meet . 
Fair the Pretence appeared , but their Thought 
Was , by that Medium , to have Mischief wrought . 
Good Nehemiah saw their Snare , and scaped 
The hands of them that for his Ruin gaped . 
I am , quoth he , about a Work too great 
To leave it , and come down , with you to treat . 
Four times ( so did they long to circumvent 
The Righteous ) They the self same Message sent 
And the same Answer did as oft receive , 
I may not stop , the work 's too great to leave . 
When thus Sanballat saw his Counsels fail , 
That nor by Force , nor Guile , he could prevail ; 
With Rage and Envy swelled , at length he burst , 
And cast up Gall , and whatsoever was worst ; 
Not only Nehemiah to defame , 
But bring an Odium on the Jewish Name . 
And that he might his Slander public make , 
( As public as he could ) this way did take . 
He gave unto his Servant a command , 
To bear a Letter open in his hand , 
In which he did suggest an Accusation 
Upon Report , ( a sly Insinuation ) 
That Nehemiah had employed the jews 
To build the Wall , that he might them abuse , 
And thrust himself upon them for their King , 
And thereby double Bondage on them bring . 
And , that he might the Crown the better reach , 
He had appointed Prophets too , to Preach 
So of him at Jerusalem , and say , 
There is a King in judah at this day . 
Thus wrought Tobiah , Sanballat , and those 
That with them joined , the Work of God t' oppose . 
One while , by Scoffing , Scorning and Deriding , 
Another while , by Force and Factious Siding ; 
then by Deceit , and many a subtle Wile , 
In hopes they might the Innocent beguile ; 
And lastly , by a public Defamation , 
To make the jews a Scorn to Gentile-nation . 
When proud Diotrephes , whose swelling Breast , 
Love of Pre-eminence had long possessed , 
Had by Surmise and false Insinuation , 
Leavened a Party in the Congregation , 
The Rancour of his Venomed heart broke forth 
Against some , in the Church , of greatest Worth , 
Prating against them , with Malicious words , 
As , in his third Epistle , john Records ; 
Nor only Prating , but from Words proceeds 
To work Division by Mischievous Deeds , 
Opposing what the Inspired Apostle written 
Conducing to the Church's Benefit . 
By these Examples , plainly it appears , 
How Satan played his Pranks in former years , 
What Arts he used , how craftily he wrought , 
What Instruments , w●…ereby to work , he sought ; 
One while , professed Enemies , and then 
Another while he choose false brethren . 
And though those Agents now are dead and gone , 
Satan remains the same , the Evil One. 
He Mischief always to the Church intends , 
And Mischief to effect , his Agents sends . 
Though Rabshakih be dead , Tobiah Rotten , 
Sanballat and Diotrephes forgotten , 
The Wicked Spirit that in them did strive 
Against God's Truth and Church , is still alive ; 
And other Instruments doth daily raise , 
To hinder truth 's fair Progress , in these days . 
He Agents has , great store , of every size 
And sort . How num'rous are truth 's Enemies ! 
Yet blessed be God A greater number 's those 
That stand for Truth , than those that it oppose . 
I list not here a Muster-roll to make 
Of all who , from without , in hand did take 
To Battle against Truth , and shake their Spears 
At Israel's Camp within these twenty years . 
Nor do I purpose to enum'rate all , 
Who , in that time , themselves did Quakers call , 
That through Misguided Zeal , or Discontent , 
Their Bows against their brethren have bend . 
But since some few , of late , appear to be 
With Rage and Envy filled , to that degree , 
That with more Bitterness than all the rest , 
Their Malice against Truth they have expressed , 
My purpose is to single out from these 
him , that appears as their Diotrephes . 
And that is ROGERS : For though Crisp and Bug , 
With other some , do at the same Oar Tug , 
And Toil hard at it too , with all their Might , 
Yet can they do no more but show their Spite . 
And for the rest , that lie behind the Screen , 
And move the Wheels , but like not to be seen ; 
Although they help to carry on the Work , 
I take lesle notice of them , while they Lurk . 
Them therefore leaving , I return again , 
To view William Rogers his Poetic strain ; 
Who having been too often foiled in Prose , 
To try his Fortain , now in Verse hath chose ; 
If Verse , without Offence , that may be called , 
Which is delivered in Rhimes so bald , 
So flat , so dull , so rough , so void of Grace , 
Where Symphony and Cadence have no place ; 
So full of Chasmes , stuck with Prosie Pegs , 
Whereon his Tired Muse might rest her Legs , 
( Not having Wings ) and take new breath , that then 
She might , with much a do , hop on again . 
His [ Words to that effect , — Why so ? — How so ? 
Hence I observe , — Hence I conclude — ] do show , 
His Pu●…sy Muse was often out of Wind , 
And glad when she a perching place could find . 
What drew thee , William , to this Rhyming fit , 
Having no more p●…opensity to it ? 
Couldst think such hobbling and unequal Rhimes , 
That make a jangling , like disordered Chimes , 
could of a Poem ever deserve the Name , 
Or ever be read without the Author's Shame ? 
What Clouds of Darkness in thy Lines appear ! 
How is thy Style perplexed ! how far from clear ! 
Thy Muse is wrapped in thickest Fogs of Night , 
Which shows thou art departed from the Light. 
Nor Sun , nor Moon , nor Star throughout thy Book 
Is to be seen . no Spring nor Crystal Brook 
Glides through thy Margin . no , thy Waters run 
Black , like the Streams of Styx , or Phlegeton . 
I will not , William , take the pains to trace 
The Snakey windings of thy crooked Race ; 
Nor do I mean to give myself the trouble 
To hunt thee , foot by foot , through every double ; 
Nor do I purpose here to spend my time , 
To sweep away the stinking Mud and Slime , 
( The Sanious matter of a Putrid Brain , 
Which doth well nigh each page of thine distain ) 
Which in base Terms , and for the basest Ends , 
thou belchest forth against those worthy Friends , 
Who , maugre all thy foul Calumniation , 
Have in the Church an honourable Station . 
I hold it needless now to make Defence , 
Against plain Envy , for plain Innocence . 
Besides , they are more able far , I know , 
Thy Vomit back upon thy face to throw , 
〈◊〉 they think fit ; or , with a noble Scorn , 
●…nd , silent , set their feet upon thy Horn. 
●…oiding therefore that Scurrility , 
●…herewith upon some persons thou dost fly , 
●…purpose more especially to look 
●…to those envious Parcels of thy Book , 
●…hich seem to have a more extenc●… relation 
To all the faithful Friends in every Nation ; 
●…ot only those whom God hath called to be 
●…is Servants in a public Ministry , 
●…t even all , beneath the Cope of Heaven 
Now living , who their Names to Christ have given 
And , in this Search , I make no doubt to find , 
And manifest , that , with malicious Mind , 
Like Sanballat , Tobiah , and the rest , 
Whose envious workings are before expressed , 
●…ou either chargest Friends with what 's not true , 
〈◊〉 blamest their doing what they ought to do . 
After thou hast , in Misty Phrases , told 
What those called Quakers used to preach of old , 
( Which yet thou dost in Language so unclear , 
That common sense doth not therein appear : ) 
thou slily dost suggest , That Friends are gone 
From that great Truth they first insisted on . 
But thy Suggestion's false : We firmly hold 
The sure Foundation that was laid of old . 
Quakers ( thou sayst ) in Christ's Name thus did preach , 
Christ's light 's our Guide , it fallen Man doth teach . 
And Quakers still ( say I ) do preach the same , 
[ Christ's light 's our Guide ] and preach it in Christ's Name ; 
And that it fallen man Would teach , if he 
Would be persuaded by it taught to be . 
●…ut fallen man rebels , and often kicks 
Against this inward Teacher , when it pricks . 
And that 's the soundest Reason can be brought , 
Why thou , being fallen from Truth , remain'st untaught . 
Christ's Teaching by his Spirit few denied , 
thou sayest . Why Few ? Let Truth the case decide . 
If [ few ] relates to Friends , there was not any : 
If to the World , not few , but very many , 
Christ's Teaching by his Spirit did deny , 
And against immediate inward Teaching cry . 
Now take which course thou wilt , 't is plain in view , 
That what thou hast asserted is Untrue . 
Thus runnest thou on , till thou thy way hast lost , 
And runnest thy heedless head against a Post.  
Look not , said they , to us , 't is our concern , 
That you from th' Light within your duty learn ; 
So thou reportest . The same concern remains 
Upon Friends still , say I : Their Care , their P●…nss ; 
Is exercised in this , that all may learn , 
From Light within their Duty , and discern 
The light 's true Voice , which never did oppose 
In some , what from the same in others rose . 
And , if some said , Look not to us ( which yet , 
I never saw proved in aught that thou hast written ) 
It cannot well in other sense be taken , 
That they would not others so should look 
To them , as thereby to neglect or slight 
The inward Teaching of the heavenly Light. 
And that , all faithful Friends at this day are 
As careful to prevent , as ever they were . 
But that Friends ever ●…eemed it unright , 
To look to one another , in the Light , 
To help , encourage , comfort any Brother , 
Be good Examples one unto another , 
To stir the pure Mind up , provoke to Love , 
And to good Works , ●…s God thereto doth move ; 
That ever this by Friends condemned was , 
I never heard , ●…or to believe see cause . 
We read , that the Apostles , ( chief Paul ) 
On the believing Christians oft did call 
To follow them , as they themselves were found 
The followers of Christ : Was this unsound 
In them ? If not , how comes it now to be 
Exclaimed on , as so high a Crime , by thee ? 
But of this Subject , William , thou hast written 
Before ; and I at large have answered it . 
What in thy Book comes next , is very dark , 
And , as it stands , seems quite besides the Mark. 
From th' Scriptures they Light , such a Teacher proved , 
As into Corners could not be removed : 
These are the words ; If Printer be in fault , 
( Which I to know , have the Errata sought , 
●…t find no mention of it there ) than he 
The blame must bear , and set the Author free . 
●…an while , so far as I thy meaning guests , 
〈◊〉 will Reply , and readily confess , 
●…at every one , who in the Gospel-path 
●…th walk uprightly , such a Teacher hath , 
〈◊〉 can't into a Corner be removed , 
●…hich from the holy Scripture may be proved . 
●…hich if it be of th' inward Teacher meant , 
●…s I to take it here , am well content ) 
●…t do the Scriptures plainly too declare , 
●…d Paul himself doth Testimony bear , 
●…at Christ , when he ascended up on high , 
●…e Teachers for the Work o' th' Ministry . 
●…d gave those Teacher's Gifts to fit them to 
●…e Work he had appointed them to do . 
●…e of those Teachers too , in downright Terms , 
〈◊〉 Apostle Paul himself to be , affirms . 
〈◊〉 which we plainly see , our gracious Lord 
〈◊〉 outward Teachers to his Church afford , 
●…ough they had the inward . And to them 
〈◊〉 outwardly , he said , who do condemn 
〈◊〉 me contemns ; who yield to you the E●…r , 
〈◊〉 you receive , me too receive and hear . 
I have enlarged , because I see thou 'rt bend 
To vilify those Teachers Christ hath sent . 
thou add'st ( while speaking of Teacher proved , 
That into Corners could not be removed ) 
But did not preach it up , a slight to bring , 
On holy Scriptures , penned for our Learning . 
What means this , William ? Dost thou any know 
amongst the Quakers , who do now preach so ? 
Name , if thou canst , among us all , one Friend , 
That sleights the Scriptures for our Learning penned . 
Such dark Suggestions do from Envy ●…ow , 
And a malicious concred Mind they show . 
For selfish ends , thou sayst , some thus did se●… , 
You see not right , your Light directs not well . 
Thy drift is here , the Quakers to compare 
With the World's Teachers , who in Darkness are ; 
And so art thou . The cases differ quite : 
For their Objection was against the Light ; 
But so 's not ours . You see not right , they said , 
The fault whereof upon the Light they laid . 
We see , and truly , that you see not right , 
But far be 't from us to reproach the Light. 
We never say , the Light directs not well : 
We tell you , That you from the Light are fell . 
Their case with ours , doth no proportion bear , 
But serves to make thy Envy more appear . 
In all these Passages that I have quoted , 
And diverse others that I have not noted , 
Of the same tendency with these , thy aim 
Is , by Insinuation to defame 
Gods faithful Servants , and beget suspicion , 
That they have lost their primitive condition : 
Whenas it is indeed thyself , and those 
Who with thee join . Truth's Order to oppose . 
That art from Truth and Godliness departed , 
And leagued in War against the honest hearted ; 
Whom , with malicious Mind , and words untrue , 
thou , in the following Lines dost thus pursue . 
What Hypocrites , are all such Quakers then , 
As touching Souls concern , have said Amen , 
On the mere credit of auother's Lines , 
That seeking Self , from Scripture-truth's declines . 
here 's Slander by the Lump : A Wholesale Trade : 
Who are the Quakers thou dost thus upraid ? 
Come to Particulars ; leave general Work : 
Deceit , thou know'st , in Generals doth Lurk . 
Name none against whom thou darest undertake , 
The charge thou here hast published , good to make , 
And make it good too : I will then declare , 
He and thyself , may make an even pair . 
Hadst thou considered , as it thee behoved , 
How many things must in this Charge be proved ; 
Not only that the Author of those Lines , 
Which Souls concern , from Scripture truth 's declines , 
And seeketh self ; but that some Quakers do , 
On his mere credit , say Amen thereto : 
It might perhaps , have thee more wary made , 
And the loose Rambling of thy Pen have stayed . 
But when dark Envy once the Eye doth blind , 
It bars Consideration from the Mind . 
Have any told thee , that they said Amen 
On the mere credit of another ? then 
Prithee conceal them not , disclose their Names , 
And let them of their Follies bear the Shames . 
But if none so have told thee , prithee , whence 
Assum'st thou to thyself the Confidence , 
To dive men's Hearts , and undertake to know 
The only Motive whereupon they go ? 
thou , that hast so derided inward S●…se , 
wilt not pretend , I hope , to judge from thence . 
And if thou hast not been expressly told 
By themselves , how dar'st thou be so bold 
And positive , that some have said Amen 
On the mere credit of another , when , 
For aught thou knowest , they had an inward sense 
The thing was right , and said Amen from thence . 
And that Amen may to another's words 
In Truth be said , the Scripture Proof affords . 
And for that cause th' Apostle doth command , 
To use a Tongue that People understand . 
In thy third page , thy Mouth thou open'st wide , 
To Rail at Fox , his Preachers and his Pride . 
Thy rail 's slighted , and laid under foot , 
And for the rest , I 'll say but this unto 't ; 
George Fox is , of the Truth , a faithful Teacher , 
And hath been from the first : but has no Preacher 
That he calls his . They that by thee are meant , 
Are Preachers that , as he , by Christ are sent . 
I dare thee but one Preacher to impeach , 
That was by him commissioned to preach . 
And as for Pride , hadst thou been half so humble , 
thou hadst not climbed so high , to take this tumble . 
thou sayst , He framed i' th' Church a Government . 
I say , not he , but Christ , that had him sent . 
Christ , by his Spirit , first in him did move : 
The Church the same , in Spirit did approve . 
When Deacons first were in the Church appointed , 
By those that with the Spirit were anointed , 
Was that appointment to be called their own , 
Or Christ's , whose Life and Power through them was shown ? 
Paul in the Church did sundry things ordain , 
( Bear with the word , the Scripture speaks it p●…in ) 
For Order sake . Was therefore th' Order his ? 
no sure , not his , but Christ's : And so in this . 
thou Cavil'st too , that ( after Government ) 
Preachers , approved by man , beyond Seas went.  
This too , perhaps , may serve , at least is meant , 
〈◊〉 kindle Jealousies and Discontent 
●…raw unsettled Minds : Let 's therefore scan 
●…e meaning of those words [ Approved by Man ] 
〈◊〉 Man thou meanest the Church ( for so I find , 
●…hou hast a few Lines off expressed thy Mind : ) 
●…d to approve , imports to own , receive , 
●…end , or like : This than no room doth leave 
〈◊〉 Cavil : For he must be stupid grown , 
●…at thinks Christ's Church should not Christ's Preachers own . 
●…dess , I note that here thou hast not said 
●…ose Preachers were by man ordained or made ; 
●…t that that they were approved . Now 't is most plain , 
〈◊〉 thing it Approve , another to Ordain . 
●…ey had their Ordination from above : 
〈◊〉 Christ Ordains , his Church may well approve . 
●…d to receive the Church's Approbation , 
〈◊〉 to Christ's Servants no Dis-reputation . 
〈◊〉 that in Righteousness and Peace , says Paul , 
〈◊〉 Christ , and in the Spirit joy withal , 
〈◊〉 ●…to God acceptable , and then , 
●…dds he , Approved also is of men . 
thou giv'st an hint , as if of them that went. 
Beyond the Seas , some by G. F. were sent . 
How provest thou that ? I Proof thereof demand : 
Thy proofless Affirmation will not stand , 
●…ch lesle dark Hints . Come , name the man that went 
A preaching at G. F's commandment , 
Without an inward Motion from the Lord , 
To sound abroad his everlasting Word . 
〈◊〉 solemnly profess , I do not know 
One Friend amongst us all , that ever did so . 
thou sayst , The Church hath cried once and again 
Against Black-coats , for their being sent of men . 
thou Envy-blinded art , and much unlearned 
〈◊〉 Truth , nor hast thou Right from Wrong discerned . 
Seest thou no odds ? Puttest thou no difference then 
Betwixt those that run , as only sent by men , 
Who neither waited for , nor yet believed 
The spirit 's motion was to be received , 
And did 〈◊〉 Mission too from such men take , 
As have against the spirit 's sending spoke : 
And them that ●…wait for , and in Truth rejoice 
At hearing , in themselves , the spirit 's Voice 
Giving a certain Echo to the sound 
Of the same Voice , when in another found ? 
Hast thou not read , how , in the purest state 
Of Christian Faith , ( as Scripture doth relate ) 
The blessed Apostles sometimes others sent , 
And sometimes also , sent by others , went ? 
How oft did Paul send Timothy and Titus , 
Beloved Tychicus , Epaphroditus , 
Onesimus , Erastus , and some others , 
True Gospel-preachers , and beloved Brothers ? 
Was this like Black-coats sending ? Blush for shame , 
That ever thy Envy did thy Black-coats name . 
Canst thou imagine , they who thus were sent , 
On the mere Motion of th' Apostle went ? 
no : They , no question , in themselves did find 
The same good Motion stirring up their Mind . 
With what the good Apostle did advice , 
The holy Ghost in them did harmonise . 
Titus' his case so clearly is expressed , 
That it may serve to open all the rest . 
Him Paul to Corinth had desired to go ; 
He thereunto a Readiness doth show : 
But why ? God put it in his heart to do 
What the Apostle did exhort him to . 
Peter and john , Luke tells us , being sent 
By the Apostles , to Samaria went. 
The Church too , after Stephen's fatal Stroke , 
Scent Barnabas as far as Antiock . 
Examples of this kind are many found , 
The holy Scriptures do therewith abound . 
One Instance more is in my mind to give , 
Of some that in the purest Age did live , 
Even holy Barnabas and blessed Saul , 
( Whose Christian Name was after called Paul ) 
That these were sent by Simon , and the rest , 
In Scripture positively is expressed : 
Yet in the very words that follow next , 
It is recorded in the holy Text , 
That they were by the holy Ghost sent forth : 
Whence plainly follows , ( and indeed 't is worth 
Our Observation ) that what those men did 
Is to the holy Ghost attributed . 
And there 's great Reason that it should be so , 
Since what they did , did from the Spirit flow , 
Yet , think I , not the other two did go 
Without a Motion , in themselves , thereto . 
But , William , that which frets thee most of all , 
And makes an overflowing of thy Gall , 
I●… , that the Church hath Money to supply 
The just occasions of her Ministry , 
When they , to preach the Word , are moved to travel 
Beyond the Seas . At this thou thus dost cavil ; 
S●…h Church men unto Christ's Church strangers are , 
And most rely upon their Church's car : 
Unlike those whom Christ sent i' th' Ministry , 
Without a Scrip , to sound the Gospel free : 
●…d therefore when her Cash was emptied , she , 
●…ved Money for to serve the Ministry . 
Hence prating Preachers turned the Silver Bait , 
●…ught not a few o' th' Church with zeal to wait . 
As favour was obtained by Parasites , 
They laboured hard to ga●…n more Pro●…eliteses . 
Thus , like a troubled Sea , thou ' castest up 
The Mire and Dirt that 's in thy filthy Cup : 
then , in a paltry kind of Bal●…d Tone , 
Like scoffing Ishma●…l , thou thus goest on ; 
At length her Papers , like to Briefs , did e●…y . 
For Money , Money for the Ministry . 
A●…d in th●… fifth page , having given a yerk 
A●… R●…chardson , for being an hired Clerk , 
thou sayst , it 's true , that some do frequent say , 
Both Cl●…kss and Priests from th' Flock obtain their pay . 
Thy envious term of Priests , as 't is applied 
To Friends , is by the Truth in Friends denied . 
th' Apostle Peter called the Saints of old 
A Royal Priesthood : We no other hold . 
But that Christ's Ministers should be supplied 
With necessaries , by the Church ( his Bride ) 
Is such a known and certain Truth , as none , 
Perhaps , hath ever opposed , but thou alone . 
Read but the Scriptures in the Margin set , 
And thou 'lt be forced to grant ( though with Regret ) 
That 't is the Church's duty , to supply 
Th●… needful wants of all her Ministry . 
I know , these Texts which I have here inserted , 
Have oft been misapplyed , and much perverted 
B●… Parish-preachers , who these Scriptures strain , 
To draw unto themselves dishonest Gain . 
But what of that ? Truth must not be refused , 
Because it is by Evil men abused : 
And truth it is , too plain to be denied , 
Christ's Church should for Christ's Ministers provide . 
What carp'st thou at then , William ? Would thy Muse 
Pled that St. Paul did not his Privilege use ? 
I grant he did not , in some special cases , 
And that too only in some factious places : 
And I , perhaps , if need required , could name 
Some scor●…ss of Friends too , that have done the same , 
That at their own charge have a Warfare gone , 
And crossed the Seas , being chargeable to none . 
But what of that ? th' Apostle Paul we find 
His Right assert●…d , though he had no mind 
To tak●… it there : And elsewhere doth declare , 
That other Churches did of him take care ; 
That what was lacking to him , privately 
The Macedonian brethren did supply . 
Thus it appears , th' Apostle did partake 
Of that Provision , which the Church did make . 
And what , but Envy , hath bewitched thy Mind , 
With what was then approved , now fault to find ! 
Pretend thou canst not , that the stock is given 
To such as have no need thereof ; for even 
Thyself here sayst , The Church supplied the need 
Of those that wanted Monies to proceed 
To go beyond Seas . What a groundless Cavil 
Is this of thine ! How should such Preachers travel 
Beyond the Seas , whom Christ thereto doth move , 
And whom the Church , as faithful , doth approve , 
If neither have they Monies to proceed , 
Nor Church may , with her Stock , supply their need ? 
May none beyond Seas go , but who can spare 
Sufficient of their own , the charge to bear ? 
Must Christ be so confined , he may not send 
Any , but such as have Estates to spend ? 
God bless us from such Doctrine , and such Teachers , 
As will admit of none but wealth Preachers . 
Peter , we read , nor Silver had , nor Gold , 
( So he the Cripple , at the Temple , told ) 
Yet after that he travelled far and near , 
By Sea and Land , pray , who the Charge did bear , 
Unless the Church ? And is that now a Crime , 
Which was a Virtue in the purest time ? 
no sure : Though Dissolute Apostates slight 
Her care , the Church then did , and now doth right 
Christ's Messengers to furnish , and their need 
Supply , when they want Monies to proceed 
In this Work. As for what thou add'st , to wit , 
[ If they their Motion freely did submit 
To ●…h ' London Church , and do as she thought fit : ] 
I count it a malicious Slander , and 
Of thee an Evidence thereof deand . 
●…duce one I●…iance , if thou canst ; declare 
One person 's Name , with whom it did so fare . 
Name one ( or else thou may'st be thought a Liar ) 
Of whom the Church in London did require , 
That he his Motion freely should submit 
To her , and do therein as she thought fit . 
I know , 't is usual with thee to suggest 
The false Surmizes of thy envious Breast , 
void of all Proof , and many a Calumny , 
By thee flung at us , yet unproved doth lie . 
I know , the Friends of London , to whose Care 
And Trust , those Services committed are , 
Are faithful men , and tender of the good , 
By whom true Motions will not be withstood . 
they 're such as would not break a bruised Reed , 
Nor quench the smoking Flax. Yet they had need 
Be satisfied , how they dispense that Stock , 
Which is the Freewill Offering of the Flock , 
Not limited to any single use , 
( As thou insinuatest in Abuse ) 
But is impl●…d in a more general way , 
The Churches common Charges to defray . 
And , William , ask thy Friends , T. C. E. M. 
If the Accounts were not perused by them 
Within these few years , and each set his Name 
Thereto , to show he did approve the same . 
thou sayst , Her Papers , like to Briefs did cry 
For Money , Money for the Ministry : 
But thou sayst falsely ; I thy words deny : 
Prove them , or Falsehood at thy door shall lie . 
Thy naming Briefs , on this occasion , shows 
Thy Cavil from a Scoffing Spirit flows . 
Paul to the Church did his Epistles send , 
In which he to their care did recommend 
Collections for the Saints . Why dost not flout 
At those Epistles too ? Why criest not out 
Against the Papers of th' Apostle Paul , 
That They , like Briefs , for Money , Money , call ? 
Thy Cavil doth as mach against him lie , 
Is against us : and 't was thy subtlety , 
Not openly of Paul to show dislike , 
But rather through our sides at him to strike . 
Thy Work is seen ; thy Undertaking's vile ; 
Thy Spirit scornful ; frothy is thy Style . 
But , William , art thou sure , thou never yet 
To what thou termest Briefs , thy Name hast set ? 
Take heed , lest while thou Stones dost upward throw , 
They fall not back , and give thyself a blow . 
Thy flirt at Richardson , for taking pay 
for what , as Clark , he writes , doth much bewray 
Thy Folly and Injustice : Is 't not fit , 
Who works for others , should be paid for it , 
And that by them , who him , to work , desire ? 
The Labourer is worthy of his Hire . 
Have you no things , called Clerks ? From whom , I pray , 
Do your Apostate-clerks obtain their pay , 
Save from the Herd to which they do belong ? 
And is Reward due only to the Wrong ! 
Come , William , come ; one Heaven , instructed Scribe 
Will weigh down all your Pharisaical Tribe . 
thou mentionest Impositions , Human Laws , 
●…mss , Yokes , Decrees , Pales , any thing to cause 
Strange Apprehensions , Fears and Jealousies , 
( Whence Discontent and Prejudice might rise ) 
In some professing Truth , who have not taken 
Root deep enough therein , not to be shaken : 
And that thou also mightst the Church expose 
To the Contempt and Fury of her Foes . 
But ( blessed be God ) though thy mischievous Heart 
Be desperately Wicked , yet thy Art 
Hath failed thee : for thou art so full of Fiction 
Confusion , Envy , and Self-contradiction , 
That he must be already more than blind , 
Who to believe thee can persuade his Mind . 
One while thou sayst , ( but in deriding-wise ) 
The Church's Laws , are , to her Members , Eyes . 
This is a plain Acknowledgement , that she 
Would have her Members with their own Eyes see . 
Yet , ten Lines further off , thou sayst , she cries , 
Dark Spirits , he that sees not with our Eyes . 
This needs no Comment : 't is so plain , that he 
Is blind , that don't the Contradiction see . 
But , William , here 's not only Contradiction , 
But a foul Slander too ; a Lying Fiction . 
thou , speaking of the Church , here sayest , She cries 
Dark Spirits , he that sees not with our Eyes . 
This is a downright Falsehood , I declare ; 
Make Proof on 't , if thou canst , and do not spare : 
Acquit thyself thereof , or it shall lie 
Upon thee , as a Badge of Infamy . 
't is by such base dishonest tricks as these , 
thou thy misguided Party , seekest to please , 
And captivated hold : But Truth thee strips , 
And thy deceitful workings open rips . 
Fox is termed Head , thou sayest . I ask , By whom ? 
Such terms never from the Church of Christ did come . 
This is another Slander : One would think 
Thy Heart were full of Falsehoods to the Brink , 
And these run over . What a horrid Sin 
Is this of Lying , when it 's once let in ! 
And thou hast let it in so deep , that now 
thou tumblest out thy Lies , thou carest not how . 
thou sayst , External Forms by Fox decreed , 
Are set as Marks to know the Chaff from th'seed . 
This is another Whisker , like the rest , 
Hatched by the Lying Spirit in thy Breast , 
●…rought forth by cankered Envy , with design 
To shake the weak , and cause them to decline 
The way of Truth . Thus doth the Serpent lay , 
His baited Hooks , the simple to betray , 
●…ut by the Truth , his Wi●…eses discovered are , 
That the most weak may see , and eat the Snare . 
●…n thy last cited words I do detect 
●…o most notorious Falsehoods , and expect 
Thy Proof ; for what thou chargest , I deny , 
●…nd turned back on thee as a double Ly. 
One , That External Forms have been decreed 
●…y FOX : This is a shameless Lie indeed . 
Bring that Decree forth , that it may be seen , 
〈◊〉 ever any such Decree hath been , 
That every one may with his own Eyes see , 
●…nd not be fain to pin his Faith on thee . 
Thy other Falsehood is , Those Forms decreed , 
●…e set as Marks to know the Chaff from th' Seed . 
●…his also , as a Slander , I reject , 
By which thou wouldst unstable Minds infect . 
●…o Forms , as Marks to know the Seed , are set . 
●…he Seed is known by weight and Virtue ; yet 
〈◊〉 is not void of Form , but doth receive 
●…s proper Form , which thou canst not bereave 
〈◊〉 of , with all thy Railing : Truth remains 
●…e same , not blemished by Envy's stains . 
The Chaff too , William , is by lightness known : 
●…y lightness hath thy chaffy Spirit shown . 
●…rnt up , the Chaff shall be with quenchless Fire : 
●…h William ! unto thee that day is nigher 
●…han tho'rt aware . My Spirit mourns to see 
Thee raving on the brink of Misery . 
Some scattered flurts , with hideous Exclamation , 
Thy Pamplet has at Excommunication , 
Wherewith thou mak'st a rumbling noise , to scare 
●…ch as thou apprehendest unsettled are . 
thou talk'st of BULLS and Persecution too : 
And with thy BULLS thou mak'st a great ado . 
Rome thou upbraid'st us with ; but prithee whence 
Hadst thou thy Bullish Term , if not from thence 
Sp●…ak plainly , William , tell us , who thee hope 
U●…o that title [ BULLS ] unless the Pope . 
〈◊〉 ●…hamed the Pope should thee so gull , 
To make thee take a Paper for a Bull ! 
That whilst thou of a Paper wast a Treating , 
The thought of B●…llss straight made thee fall a Bleating . 
Come , William , whilst thou written such Paltry Trash , 
Ne'er , wo●…der , if thou sometimes gettest a Lash . 
thou 〈◊〉 whose Back , the Wise man says , The 〈◊〉 
Is for : Henceforth let Wisdom's Path be trod . 
Leave thy Scurrilities ; cease to Revile : 
And , if thou wilt write , learn a more cleanly Style , 
Thy Language is most Loathsome : Take a taste 
Thereof , in what thou in thy tenth page sayest ; 
[ Hence Sixty Six , like Mercenary judges , 
Or rather like Self-seeking slavish Drudges , 
By Satan led : ] What N●…sty Terms are these ! 
How Foul must that Mind be that this can please ! 
no question . William , but thou , at this rate , 
May'st all the Scolds out scold at Billingsgate . 
As to thy Cavil , that what was prepared 
By one , was passed against thy john unheard ; 
Thy story 's false : He had been fully heard , 
And faulty found , as at Drawell appeared . 
But this same Cavil has before been brought , 
And Answered fully in my Antidote , 
To which I now refer thee , not delighting , 
On the same ANVIL to be always-smiting . 
Thy Curtailling the Number of the Beast , 
To make thy g●…ddy Folk a j●…lly Feast , 
Is such a Beastly Prank , as n●…'er was played 
By any , that of Truth Profession made . 
What ? To profane the Text with frothy wit , 
And sport at what the Holy Ghost hath written ? 
He that shall dare invent such slipp'ry Tricks , 
May shrink the Number of the Beast to six . 
But William , nothing can more plainly show 
How scared that Conscience is , from which did flow 
Thy scoff , than that thou therewith dost belie 
The Chief of Christian Virtues , Charity . 
Thy Clamour against Excommunication , 
Shenws what thou wouldst be at ▪ A Toleration 
For Unclean Spirits in the Church to l●…rk , 
And uncontrolled to carry on their work 
Against the Truth ; that so they might effect ? 
The Mischief the●… design , and not be checked . 
That such as in their practice do Oppose 
The principles of Truth , as do all those 
That pay the Priest for preaching ( though they may 
It do , in never such a covert way ) 
That these , and other such ( who are no lesle 
Unfaithful to the Truth which they profess ) 
Might notwithstanding from Reproof be free , 
Upon pretence they don't the Evil ●…ee . 
That such as will , when Persecution shall 
Arise , may let truth 's Testimony fall ; 
Forsake their Meeting Places , Skulk and hide , 
And closely into Obscure Places glide ; 
Meet now and then , by stealth , in pit , or Gill , 
And set a Lad to watch upon an Hill , 
Or Hireling like , into a Cock loft creep , 
Themselves to save , what ever befalls the Sheep . 
And though by such Unfaithfulness they break 
The strength of Others , and make many Weak ▪ 
Though they Examples so pernicious show , 
Yet should f●…r Friends , and Preachers , blameless go 
That such as hau●… in truth 's Profession stood , 
May now , as ●…me such did before the Flood , 
In Marriages with Unbelievers link , 
And yet expect , the Church , at least , should wink . 
That Zimri might his Cozbi ( without fear 
Of being pierced by a Phineas-spear , ) 
From Mid●…an fetch ; And with her ( as befell 
Of old ) the Plague bring upon Israel . 
That by such Mixtures , They the Holy seed 
Might Stain , and introduce a Mongrel Breed , 
Which half the Language should of Ashdod speak ; 
And make God's Warth against his People reek . 
That such as list might in their Discontent , 
The seamless Garment of our Saviour rend : 
Make Breaches in the Church , D●…ssention sow , 
And cause Divisions amongst Friends to grow ; 
And that they might , although they Guilty be 
Of All these Crimes , from all Reproof be free ; 
Nor only so : but to be owned expect 
Even by that Church , whose Power they reject . 
This pleases wondrous well the Libertine ; 
The loose Licentiats think it very fine . 
And to be loose and yet retain their Station , 
They bawl amain at Excommunication . 
But ( blessed be God ) our Saviour hath not left 
His Church so void of power , nor her bereft 
Thereof to be will suffer ; but that she 
Hath in she full power herself to free 
From such Pretenders , who unto her cling , 
Only that they may Scandal on her bring , 
Our Saviour his Disciples hath directed , 
That such , as private Warnings had neglected , 
Should to the Churches Censure be referred , 
( Which plainly shows , The Church is to be heard ) 
And ●…whoso Her neglects to hear , saith He , 
Let him be as an Heathen Man to th●…e . 
And that the Church did such Cut off declare 
From her Communion , as unruly were , 
In the Apostles days , the Texts here set 
Sufficient are a Credence to beget . 
This is a Principle that hath a place 
Even in Nature too as well as Grace . 
In living Bodies how doth Nature strive 
The foul and penant Humours out to drive ? 
And reason good : for why should that remain 
Which would corrupt the Health , or Beauty slain ? 
All Liquors that have life , by defectation , 
●…urge out their Dregss , and make a separation . 
And shall Christ's Church alone lesle power have , 
Than unto natural Bodies Nature gave , 
That she must to Communion those receive , 
Who her of Life and Honour would bereave , 
no , no our Saviour hath his Church endued 
With power , from her Communion to exclude 
●…ruly spirits , Evil Workers , Those 
That Christian Order in Christ's Church oppose . 
That which to other Churches is a stain , 
〈◊〉 that they don 't within due Bounds contain 
Themselves ; but outward paenalties impose , 
●…n Body , or Estate , or both on those 
They Excommunicate : which doth not stand 
With Christian Practice , or with Christ's Command . 
But William , no such things can charged be 
On Friends ; Nay , that they from such things are free , 
Thyself hast owned , than whom where's any more sparing , 
To own a Truth , or to Asperse more daring ? 
That which of Persecuting thou dost tell us , 
〈◊〉 but what Hymeneus , or Phygellus , 
Dimas , Her●…ogenes , Philetus , with 
●…rim Alexander to●… , the Coppersmith , 
●…ight have Objected to th' Apostle Paul , 
●…ad they as Envious been , and apt to brawl . 
●…or Two of these th' Apostle doth declare , 
●…or their bold ●…lasphemiess , delivered were 
●…y him to Satan : And of all the rest , 
●…ome Evil Note , or other , is expressed . 
These thought , no doubt , N-ab Paul was much to blame , 
For casting such a Blemish on their name . 
't is like , They took it for a Defamation ; 
As thou , a Wounding of their Reputation : 
And might against N-ab Paul have learned to prate , 
Had they but had thee for their Advocate . 
But , William , One short Answer may Suffice , 
To stop the Clamour of thy causeless Cries 
All they that into such disorders run , 
As cause the Church their Fellowship to eat , 
And to the World ev'n-force Her to declare , 
That they in her Communion have no share : 
These on themselves do that Discredit bring , 
Which thou so fain upon the Church wouldst fling . 
't is They themselves their Reputation wound : 
The Church is only in Her duty found . 
But OH the Impudence ? that Friends should be ▪ 
With Persecution taxed , and that by thee , 
By thee , who with some others did combine 
At Bristol , and a kind of Warrant sign , 
By which you took upon yourselves , OH base ! 
To Order him that kept the Meeting Place , 
That Friends he should not there to Meet permit , 
Because ( forsooth ! ) to you it seemed not fit . 
By Thee , I say , who but a while agoo , 
Didst keep Friends out at Olston-meeting too ; 
And didst to such their Meetinghouse deny , 
As had therein a rightful Property ▪ 
By thee , whose Party to your foul disgraces 
Hath done the like in diverse other places 
Now after all these Arbitrary Tricks , 
The same which now , on Friends the World inflicts , 
Who can , without a just Abhorrence , view 
Thy charge against Friends , for persecuting you ! 
thou spendest some pages , William ▪ to inherse 
Thy John in dobefull Weeds of Threadbare Verse ; 
●…mickle Pains thou take 't to gain some glory , 
●…king Rhymes , unto thy lifeless STORY . 
〈◊〉 dead : His Memory , perhaps , may want 
〈◊〉 Odours than his Friends can cast upon 't . 
●…ll , make the best on 't : I no pleasure have 
●…et my foot upon a Dead Man's Grave . 
〈◊〉 William , let me tell thee , Couldst thou free 
〈◊〉 Story from the Faults , that fastened be 
●…n him , by The Line of Truth ( A Book 
●…hich thy Title page some notice took ) 
●…ld unto his Credit more conduce , 
〈◊〉 all the hobbling Rhymes thy fumbling Muse 
〈◊〉 tag together , to Revive his Name , 
●…ile still that Book , unanswered , Speaks his shame . 
●…t leaving john to moulder in his Urn , 
●…en doth , William , unto thee return , 
●…d to thy Work Some notice I have took 
〈◊〉 what seemed most material in thy Book . 
〈◊〉 all the Filth that thou , and Others Spaul , 
〈◊〉 honourable Friends , in course will fall 
●…pon yourselves ; On them it never can stick : 
〈◊〉 selves your Vomit up again must lick . 
●…iam , Thy work is weighed , thy Spirit tried ; 
●…d both thy Work and Spirit are denied . 
●…y Spirit is the same that wrought of old 
〈◊〉 Sanballat , Tobiah , and the bold 
●…yrian Railer , Rabshakeh , who sought 
●…d's' Work and People to have brought to naught , 
〈◊〉 thou hast done : And what the Prophet cried 
〈◊〉 that case , may to thee be well applied . 
●…he Virgin hath despised thee , Zion's Daughter 
●…akes thee the Object of her Scorn a●…d Laughter . 
〈◊〉 Daughter of jerusalem hath shaken 
〈◊〉 thee her head ( with a disdainful look : ) 
●…or , whom hast thou Reproached and Blasphemed , 
And against whom hast thou so loudly Screamed , 
And life thine Eyes on high ? Thy spleen doth swell 
Against the Holy One of Israel , 
To this effect the Prophet did declaim 
Against the proud Assyrian , from whom came 
That cursed Railer , who even seems to be , 
In railing Blasphemies , a Type of thee . 
What Nehemiah , to Samballa●… said , 
( When he foul Slanders to his charge had laid ) 
That I to thee , of all thy Slanders , Thus , 
There are no such things acted , amongst us , 
As thy abusive Pamphlet doth contain ; 
But out of thine own heart thou dost them feign ▪ 
And where thou carp'st at what we do aright , 
We can for truth 's sake , in Reprocah delight . 
The Lord rebuilding is his Holy City , 
Which thou and Others envy ( more 's the pity ) 
And put forth all the strength and Art you have , 
The work to stop , the Workmen to deprave . 
But never be so vain , to think you can 
The work obstruct : 't is not the work of man  
The God of Heaven , he will prospero us ; 
And therefore we his Servants , ( strengthened thus ) 
Will rise and build , as God shall us endue 
With courage , Strength and Counsel for 't : But you 
no Portion have , who do the work condemn , 
Right , Nor Memorial in Jerusalem . 
My soul laments your state , who once have felt 
That tendering Power , which stony hearts can melt , 
And have been in some measure , tendered by it , 
But now so hardened are as to defy it : 
All you I mean , who have in Print appeared 
( With Envious hearts and Conscience doubly seared ) 
To fight against the Truth , and to expose 
God's People to the Fury of their Foes . 
And all you too , who do that work abet , 
Although your Names thereto ye have not set 
Ah? had ye kept unto the heavenly Grace , 
( Which in your inward Parts the Lord did place ) 
And not , in discontented Humour , run 
After Lo-heres , Lo there's , as you have done ; 
ye mi●…ht , in Truth , the Bond of Peace have known , 
And in the Spirits Unity have grown , 
Which is the Church's Girdle , highly prized 
By all the Faithful , though by you despised , 
Whereas ( by letting in first false Surmising 
Of others , which ere long Produced Despisings , 
And so made way for Prejudice to enter , 
Till cankered Malice in your hearts did centre ) 
ye now are broke , and into pieces Shattered , 
And from the Body and the Head are Scattered . 
Without the Camp ye stand ( O dismal State ! ) 
●…rling amongst the Dogs , without the Gate ; 
●…elching forth Slander and Calumniation 
●…ainst those that in the Light have kept their Station . 
Oh! may the God of Heaven stop your Way , 
That ye no more the Simple may betray . 
THE END . 





Eccles. 1. 9 and 3. 15.  2 Kings 18.  Vers. 22.  Vers. 25.  Vers. 30.  Nehem 2. 10.  Vers. 19  Ch. 4. 7.  Verse 8.  Vers. 11.  Vers. 15.  Ch. 6. 2.  Verse 3.  Vers. 4.  Vers. 5.  Vers. 6.  Vers. 7.  Vers. 10.   P 11.   p 3. 11. 16.   p. 9 17   p. 5.   p. 20.  See more p. 12.  Pag. 1.  Acts 9 5.  1 Cor 4 16. and 11 1.  Phil. 3. 17.  〈◊〉 Tim. 4. 12. 1  These 1. 7. and 2. 14. 1  Pet. 5. 3.  Antidote , p 17 , etc.  Isa. 30. 20.  Ephes. 4. 11 , 12.  1 Ti●… . 2. 7. 2  Tim. 1 11.  Luke10 . 16.  Mat 10 40.  Joh. 13. 20.  Pag. 2.  1 Cor. 14. 26.  pag 3.  Acts 6.  1 Cor. 7. 17. and 16. 1.  Pag. 3.  Rom. 14. 17 , 18.   1 Cor. 4 17.  Phil. 2. 19 1  Tim 3. 2.   2 Cor. 8. 6. and 12. 18.   Ephes. 6. 21.  Col. 4. 7 , 8. 2  Tim. 4.  ●…2 .  Phil●… . 2. 25.   Col 4. 〈◊〉   Acts 19 22.   2 Cor. 8. 18 22  2 Cor. 8. 6.  v. 16 , 17.  Changed 13●… , 〈◊〉  v. 3.  1 Pet. 2. 9  〈◊〉 ●…0 10 〈◊〉 107 ●…im 5.  Cor 9 ●…l . 6 6.  ●…r . 9  2 Cor. 〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 . 2 Cor. 〈◊〉 9  Phil. 4 〈◊〉 18.  Acts 〈◊〉  Tit. 3   In 1681.  1 Cor. 16.  2 Cor. 8 , & 9  Mat. 13.  5●… . pag 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8.  Pag. 8.  Pag. 9  pag 10●… 1●… . prov. 26. 3.  Pag. 98. etc. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉  See Line of Truth , pag. 14.  & 〈◊〉  Gen. 〈◊〉  Numb . 25.  Ezra . 9 2.  Neh. 13. 24  Mat. 18.  Vers. 17.  1 Tim. 1. 20 1  Cor. 5. 5.  Rom. 16. 17  Gal. 5. 12.  P. 17. 18.  〈◊〉 Tim. 1. 19 20. 2  Ti●… 1. 15.  & 2. 13. 18.  & 4. 10.  R. Sading . Chippenham ▪ Clan . 2 Kings 19 vers . 21. 22.  Neh. 6. 8.  Neh. 2. 20.  rev. 22. 15  