Zion-college visited . Or , some brief animadversions upon a pamphlet lately published , under the title of , a testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ , and to our solemn league and covenant , &c.  subscribed ( As is pretended ) by the ministers of Christ within the province of London . 

Calculated more especially for the vindication of certain passages cited out of the writings of j. g. in the said pamphlet , with the black brand of infamous and pernicious errors , and which the said ministers pretend ( Amongst other errors so called ) more particularly to abominate . 

Wherein the indirect and most Un-christian dealings of the said ministers , in charging & calling manifest and clear truths , yea such as are consonant to their own principles , by the name of infamous and pernicious errors , are detected and laid open to the kingdom , and the whole world . 

By the said John Goodwin , a servant of God and men , in the gospel of Jesus Christ . 

i write not these things to shame you : but as my beloved [ brethren ] i warn you , 

1 cor. 4. 14.  

tantum religio potuit suadere malorum . 

non sentimus nos p•rire , dum perimus in turba . 

sen.  

London , printed by m. s. for Henry Overton , at the entering out of Lombardstreet into Pope's head alley , 1648 

Zion-college visited . 

It is a sad observation , but full of truth ; that religion never had greater enemies , than those of her own house ; yea then those , who were pretenders in the highest to her advancement . When a commodity is engrossed , and brought into few men's hands , it is so much the more like to suffer , to be adulterated , and embased . It was never well with Christian religion , since the ministers of the gospel , ( So called by themselves , and so reputed by the generality of men , for want of knowing , and considering better ) cunningly vested that privilege of the church , of being the ground and pillar of truth , in themselves ; claiming Nebuchadnezar's prerogative amongst men , over the truths of God ; whom he would , he slew , and whom he would , he kept alive : and whom he would , he set up , and whom he would , he put down b . 

There came lately out of the press a few papers , styling themselves , a testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ , and pretending to a subscription , by the ministers of Christ within the province of London . i wish , for these ministers sake , to whom ( I appeal to him , who searcheth my heart and reins ) i wish nothing but good , and for the truth's sake also , that i could conceive the impudence or boldness of any man , so great , as to present them in print unto the world for the authors , or subscribers of such a piece of weakness ( To forbear words of more provocation , though of truth ) without their knowledge , or consent . I should be enabled by such an apprehension , both to maintain in myself ( At least for a time ) those honourable thoughts of their persons , which ( My witness is on high ) i have always unfeignedly laboured to do , though still opposed by themselves , in my way ; as also to comfort myself over that religion , which they , & i , jointly profess , that it should not suffer upon any such terms of disadvantage & dishonour , which those papers , if ever owned by the persons , whose names are subscribed to them , are like to expose it unto . The image and superscription stamped upon the piece , and the men , ( Especially some of them ) whose names are affixed , if not enforced , to it , are so unlike and contradictious the one unto the other , that being not able to found an act of judgement or conjecture , who should be the author , or authors of it , upon both jointly , i am in some straight , on which hand to lean ; whether to judge & conclude any of those learned and pious men , whose names are subscribed , or those weak and unworthy ones , whose image and superscription the piece beareth , for the authors of it . 

But that neither dr Gouge , nor Mr. Calamy , nor mr Case , nor Mr. Cranford , nor any of those great names of men , which parallel with these , were either the authors , or subscribers of the said pamphlet , these considerations ( Methinks ) should be sufficient demonstrations unto any man . 

1.  The very title itself , and that in the first and principal part of it , contradicts the tenor of the book , and that in more places than one . The title pretendeth thus ( In the first words of it ) a testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ . whereas the book itself , testifieth against the truth of Jesus Christ , viz. by numbering the precious truths of Jesus Christ , amongst infamous and pernicious errors . witness 1. page 5. where this assertion , that no writing whatsoever , whether translations , or originals , are the foundation of Christian religion , is made an infamous and pernicious error . For is not this a clear truth of Jesus Christ , and asserted ( In part ) in terminis , ( But with fullness of evidence otherwise ) by the great apostle , where he saith , that other foundation can no man lay , than that is laid , which is Jesus Christ a ? Except Jesus Christ be transubstantiated into ink and paper , no kind of books or writings whatsoever , neither translations , nor originals , can be ( In the apostles sense ) any foundation of Christian religion . Again , is it not a precious truth of Jesus Christ , that no act of man whatsoever is any foundation of Christian religion , the apostle affirming ( As we heard ) that other foundation can no man lay , but Jesus Christ : and yet the denial of the act of man to be a foundation of Christian religion , ( As viz. the believing of the English scriptures ▪ to be the word of God ) is by the said book ( Pag. 5. ) ranked amongst infamous and pernicious errors ? the scriptures indeed or the word of God , are ( In a regular sense ) the foundation of Christian religion : but to believe them to be this foundation , cannot be the foundation itself , but only a superstructure , or building upon it . So that it is only the denial of a superstructure to be the foundation , which is charged by this learned province of subscribers to be an infamous and pernicious error against the divine authority of scriptures . more instances of this kind , by the light whereof the palpable interferings between the title , and the book itself , May be clearly seen , we shall have occasion anon to observe . And is it not a very hard piece of belief , to think that learned and pious men , should so far forget themselves in the body of their book , as to break the head and title of it ? 

2.  In the latter part of the said title , in these words , and to our solemn league and covenant , there is too little good sense to answer the worth and parts of the men mentioned . For what can reasonably be meant , by a testimony to our solemn league and covenant ? do they mean , that in the book itself , they give the same testimony to their solemn league and covenant , which they do to the truth of Jesus Christ ? though the truth is , that it is a very poor and empty testimony given to the truth of Jesus Christ , to make infamous & pernjoyous errors of what opinions , assertions , & truths , they please , without any manner of conviction . To cry out : it is not meet that such , or such opinions should live , or be tolerated ( As if life and toleration were an heritage appropriate , and belonging of right to their opinions only , how inconsistent soever either with reason , or with truth ) is little better testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ , than that deportment of the Jews was unto Moses , when they cried out with a loud voice , stopping their ears ▪ and run upon Stephen with one accord , to cast him out of the city , and stone him , acts 7. 57  But i trust their meaning is not , that they intend by their book , as solemn and sacred a testimony to their league and covenant as they do to the truth of Jesus Christ : 1.  To assert the worth & excellency of it with as high an hand , with as much zeal , vigour , and vehemency of spirit , as they intend to the great truths of Jesus Christ , though they make no difference ( In words ) between the one , and the other . For otherwise , the solemn covenant they speak of , being only matter of engagement , not of assertion or opinion , i know not what testimony it is capable of : unless they will call a regular , full , and through observation of it , a testimony unto it : which is a testimony ( If testimony it be ) unpossible to be rendered unto it in this , or in any other book , or writing whatsoever ; the best part of this testimony consisting in going before one another in a real , not verbal , reformation . but what it is they mean , or would have others to conceive they should mean , by calling their piece , a testimony unto our solemn league and covenant , i solemnly and seriously profess is above the reach of my understanding , or learning , reasonably to imagine . Have i not then reason to doubt , whether any of those men of renown , and not rather some petty scribe , was the compiler of it ? 

3.  Whereas to amplify and enrich their title , they add ( Over and above the former expressions , of a testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ , and , and to our solemn league and covenant ) these words : as also against the errors , heresies , and blasphemies of these times , & the toleration of them ; i submissively demand of them , whether there be any thing more , any further matter of consequence held forth in these words , above what was contained in those first words , a testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ . if so , i desire to know where , or in what part of the book , they give testimony unto the truth of Jesus Christ ? and again ; where , and in what other part of it , they give testimony against errors and heresies ? i can find no other testimony given in it to the truth of Jesus Christ , but only that ( Which i confess is very unproperly so called ) which stands in a citation of certain passages , or sayings out of other men's writings , imperiously sentenced for errors and heresies ; as if the chair of papal infallibility were of late translated from Rome to zion-college . if not , they shall do honestly and well in the next impression of the book , ( Though it had been more honesty to have done it in the first ) to leave out of their title , the false flourish , of , a testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ , as also those words , and to our solemn league and covenant ( There being no such thing in all the book , as any testimony thereunto ) and content themselves only with calling it , a testimony against errors and heresies , only mollifying it with this soft and Christian explication [ as we Count and call errors and heresies . ] For certainly there are in these papers , that are so called , errors many , and heresies many ; which yet have nothing of the nature , but only the names of both . So than these words in the title , as also against errors , &c. being so merely and broadly tautologicall and empty , are a ground of conjecture unto me , that the men prenamed with their compeers , are wholly innocent from the offence committed in making the book . 

4.  Whereas the title is yet further extended by the addition of these words , and the toleration of them ; which is a mere non-ens , a thing not in being , i cannot conceive that the judgements or parts of the said persons should so far fail them , as to appear in print , and that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , with a testimony in their pens against that , of which God made the world ; i mean , nothing , or that which is not ; i Might further add , nor is ever like to be . For if a captious pen had the expression in hand , it would find no difficulty at all in carrying it into such a sense , which would import a calumniating insinuation against the parliament , as if they were so inclinable to grant an universal toleration of all errors , heresies , and blasphemies ; that unless they were counterbalanced with the fear of displeasing these men's zeal , burning so vehemently in opposition thereunto , there were no other means under heaven to take them off from it ; yea it May not without some ground of probability be conceived ; that the authors of these papers proclaim so loud their enmity against toleration , to make the friendship of all lukewarm and formal professors round about them ( Being the great bulk of the kingdom ) who know not what to do , what shift to make for a religion , if the state be not merciful unto them in providing one or other for them . But as far as yet i have understood , or do for the present apprehend the genius or temper of the parliament , in reference to an universal toleration , i have reason to judge them by many degrees further from it , than to stand in need of the importune heat of these men , to quench their inclinations to it . 

5.  The book itself being every whit as capable of bearing the title of , a testimony against truth , sound and orthodox opinions , as ▪ against errors and heresies , ( As hath already , in part , and will more fully appear hereafter ) it is a piece of incredibility to me , that men of that note and interest , of which the persons named , with several others of the same line , are known to be , should so prevanicate with their respective reputations , as to prefix a single-coloured title before a particoloured book . 

6.  Whereas all the errors mustered together in the book , are said ( In the title page ) to be collected out of their authors own books alleged in the margin , and yet ( In fair and full contradiction hereunto ) are said page 2. to be the very dregs and spawn of those old accursed heresies , which have been already condemned , dead , buried , and rotten in their graves long ago , and are now by evil men and seducers , raked out and revived ( By which this present generation however is fairly acquitted from being the authors of them , revivers being no authors ) i cannot so far undervalue the worth of the persons named , as to judge them conscious of so gross an oversight , or ( Consequently ) interessed in the composure of the piece . 

7.  Whereas the subscribers of the book , style themselves ( In the title page ) not partitively , some of the ministers , but collectively , the ministers of Christ within the province of London , there being to my knowledge , several ministers of Christ within the province of London , and those not of the abhorred order of independency neither , & yet commensurable too , both for parts & worth , with the tallest of the subscribers , though not equal ( It May be ) to some of them in church livings by two or three , for whom God ( It seemeth ) hath provided a better thing than to suffer them to fall into the snare of so unworthy a subscription , i must dispense very far with my thoughts concerning the goodness of the consciences of the men i have named , with their fellows , to judge them so much as acquainted with the first page of the book . I cannot so far suspect their skill in grammar , as to suppose them ignorant of the difference between some of the ministers of Christ , and , the ministers of Christ ( Simply , ) nor would i willingly suspect the goodness of their consciences so far , as to think they would wittingly , and only to ferve a turn , as viz. to make the concurrence seem the greater and more entire in the eyes of their simple ones , write the one , when as the truth would only bear the other . 

8 whereas they entitle their book , a testimony to our solemn league and covenant , and pag. 28. acknowledge , that neither is this , nor any other oath otherwise to be interpreted , than according to the common , plain , and true grammatical sense of it , confident i am , that according to such an interpretation as this of the said covenant , they have not done any thing at all in a regular and due pursuance of it in this piece , but several things most notoriously and palpably against it , and with the violation and breach of it . 

First , all they can with any tolerable colour pretend to be here done in pursuance of their covenant , May be recalled to these two heads . 1.  That which is pretended to be done in order to the extirpation of errors , heresies , &c. 2.  Their pleading for Presbyterian government . Now ( For the first ) that here is nothing done in any regular or due way for the extirpation of errors , heresies , &c. is evident : for what is it they do in order hereunto ? To scrapple together a few sayings , or passages out of several men's books here and there , without taking any notice , or giving any account of their true sense and meaning in them ; yea , and some of these as fair , clear , obvious truths , as ever themselves delivered any ; yea sometimes to falsify their sayings , by leaving out some material words in the bodies of them ▪ and only to clamour and cry out upon them , and call them , horrid and prodigious opinions , ( As pag. 23. ) infamous and pernicious errors , ( As pag. 5. ) the very dregs and spawn of those old accursed heresies , &c. ( Pag. 4. ) antiscripturism , popery , Arianism , Socinianism , Arminianism , &c. ( As pag. 33. ) I say only , to pour out floods of such reproachful and foul language as this , upon men's sayings or opinions , without so much as levying one word of an argument against them to convince the assertors or maintainers of them , or without answering so much as any one reason or ground , upon which they build such assertions , is a course and practice , not only irrelative altogether to the extirpation of errors and heresies , but very pertinent & proper for the further propagation and radication of them . For when men shall speak evil of that , as an error , or heresy , against which they have nothing of moment , or which is solid , to oppose , the assertors May very reasonably suppose , that they speak this evil of it , not out of judgement , as knowing it to be an error , but out of affection only , not being willing it should be owned for a truth . In which case they cannot lightly but be further confirmed in their error ( If error it be ) than before . 

Again 2o . when men shall rend or tear a parcel of words out of the body of a large and entire discourse , which May probably carry some face or appearance of an hard or unsound saying , which notwithstanding by the author's explication is reconciled , made fully and fairly consistent with the truth , without so much as mentioning or intimating the author's explication of himself in these words , and then to insult and stamp with the foot , and cry out , error , heresy , blasphemy , antiscripturism , Arminianism , and i know not what , will any man call this a way , method , or means , for the extirpation of error and heresy ? and not rather a direct course to harden and strengthen men in both ? 

3.  When men for want of such sayings , which are erroneous and heretical indeed , in the writings of such men , whom their carnal interests call upon them to expose , to the uttermost of their power , to the public infamy and reproach of being Counted erroneous and heretical ; shall pitch upon such passages and sayings for their purpose , not which are ambiguous , or of a doubtful interpretation , and so capable of a sinister or erroneous sense , as well as of a good , but which are pergnant and generally acknowledged truths , yea and fairly consistent with their own principles ; i refer to the judgements and consciences of all men , who lie not under the sad judgement of self-condemnation , whether there be any thing regular , or of any probable tendency in this , for the extirpation of errors and heresies ; and not rather much , which directly tends to the further radication of them . They acknowledge and profess unto the world , ( Pag. 28. ) that they still stand as firmly engaged to the real performance of their covenant with their uttermost endeavours , as at the first taking of it . i appeal to their own consciences ; let these judge , whether barely to cite a few men's sayings , and several of these rational , orthodox , and sound ( According to their author's sense and explication ) without so much as showing or pointing , where , or in what part of these sayings , the supposed error should lie , be the utmost of their endeavours for the extirpation of errors and heresies . if it be , then are they most unworthy their places in the ministry : if it be not , then are they covenant-breakers by their own confession . And whether the authors of the subscribed piece now under examination , have therein done any more , than what hath been now mentioned in order to the extirpation of errors & heresies , i am freely willing to make themselves judges . 

The night is too far spent for them to think , that men even of ordinary judgement or consideration , will now measure or judge of error and truth , only by their magisterial votes , or imperious decisions , either because they are a multitude , or because they lay claim to Moses chair , calling themselves , the ministers of Christ . indeed when it was midnight , the gross darkness of popish ignorance and superstition as yet spread upon the face of the nation , it was enough for a province of priests , or clergymen , gravely met together in the name and authority of their sacred unction , to stigmatize what opinions they pleased , for errors and heresies , and so to render them unclean , and not lawful to be received or believed by their blind proselytes . But the dayspring from on high hath now ( Blessed be God ) visited this nation , and men have put away those childish things from them , to believe as the church ( I. as the clergy ) believeth : to call error , whatsoever 52.  Churchmen , though in conjunction with threescore church-livings , or more , shall baptize by the name of error : to build their faith , and soul-provisions for eternity , upon the sandy and slippery foundations of the judgements ( Or affections rather ) of such men , who have put the stumbling-block of their iniquity , ( I mean this present world , and self-interests ) before their faces . these things considered , evident it is , that the architects of the building called , a testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ , &c. have not laid so much as one stone aright in all this pile , for their purpose of extirpating errors or heresies . therefore , as to this point , they have done nothing at all in pursuance of their covenant , but several things ( As hath been showed ) to the violation of it . The covenant binds them to endeavour the extirpation of errors and heresies : and they have endeavoured , or at least directly acted towards , the establishment and further rooting of them . 

Secondly , neither have they pursued their covenant ( According to the plain and true grammatical sense of it ) in pleading as they do for presbyterial government . For first , it is the assertion and confession of that great Hyperaspistes of this government , Mr. Edwards , that the covenant of the kingdoms doth not tie us to the government of the church of Scotland a . If not so , hardly then to presbyterial government . And secondly , whether he had confessed it or no , the truth itself hereof had been never the further out of the way . For certain it is , that there is not so much as any one syllable , word , clause , or sentence in it , by which , according to the plain and true grammatical sense , it engageth any man to the contending for , or endeavouring of presbytery . Presbyterian government is but apochrypha in respect of the covenant . And though with magisterial confidence enough they conclude ( But without premises ) pag. 24. that presbyterial government ( truly so called ) by presbyteries and synods , is that government which is most agreeable to the mind of Jesus Christ revealed in the scripture , yet as if their consciences had not taken the expression well at their hands , by that time they come to page 34. they abate of their former reckoning half in half . For here , speaking of the government they had declared for , which ( Say they ) we conceive to be most agreeable to scripture . but upon these terms , they that should declare for the independent government conceiving it to be most agreeable to the scripture , should pursue their engagement by the covenant , every whit as much as they . Therefore in whatsoever they say or plead in their testimony for presbyterial government , they do nothing at all in any pursuance of their covenant , according to the plain and true grammatical sense of it , but only in pursuance of such an interpretation or sense of it , which lying most commodious for their honour , profit , and ease , hath by the mediation of their affections , prepared itself a way into their judgements , and hath there obtained the pre-eminence above all others : it being very incident to men , to suppose ( As the apostle expresseth it ) gain , godliness . a i. in all matters of question and dispute , to judge that most agreeable to the mind of Jesus Christ in the scriptures , which is best consisting with worldly ends . So that howsoever they flourish in the front of their book , as if they meant to give such an high and honourable testimony to their solemn league and covenant ; and again in the rear , as if they had accordingly avouched that covenant which they have sworn to God , b in this piece ; yet the clear truth is , that their flourish , is all their fight ; they have not struck so much as one stroke with their pen in any legitimate or direct prosecution of their engagement by it . 

And though it had been no great work of super-erogation in case they had done ten times more than now they have , of such a tendency and import , especially upon such a goodly frontispiece of pretence , being also numerous enough ( If not many to spare , and of superabounding abilities for such a work yet had they not violated this their covenant , and that ten times over , yea and this in the most notorious and shameless manner ( In stead of keeping it ) they had consulted much better both for their credits and consciences , than now they have done . The truth is , they have made more breaches upon their covenant in this little piece , than can readily be brought to account , or ranged into form . For how often do they dissemble and prevaricate with their professions ? And again , after all their shameless and most notorious prevarications , and unconscionable dealings , how do they in the close wipe their mouths ( With you know who , ) professing that all that they had done was in the integrity of their hearts to discharge their duty conscientiously , in appearing for God , his truth , and cause of religion . ( P. 34. ) but 

1o . Was it in the integrity of your hearis to discharge your duty conscientiously , that you charge him with errors against the divine authority of the scriptures ( As you do page 5. ) who you cannot but know hath bent himself with the uttermost of his endeavour for the vindication of their divine authority , yea and who you have reason to judge hath laboured in this argument , as much , if not more , and this with as much faithfulness , as any of you all ? how did not your hearts smite you in drawing up this bloody charge against him , lest that very book of his , which you had in your hands when you did it , and which you cite in your margin , should rise up in judgement against you in the great day , considering that your consciences could not but tell you , that he had dealt faithfully , thoroughly , and sincerely , in pleading the cause of the divine authority of the scriptures therein ? Is this your real reformation , to cry out midnight when the sun shines in his might upon your faces ? 

2.  Was it to discharge your duty conscientiously , that you cite some of my words barely , suppressing ( Craftily ) my sense and explication of them , being near at hand , as you do twice ( For failing in your wickedness ) pag. 5. of your book ? Or do i not , plainly , clearly , and distinctly enough , declare unto the world ( In my treatise concerning the divine authority of the scriptures ) in what sense i hold the scriptures , whether translations , or originals , to be the word of God , and consequently the foundation of Christian religion , and in what not ? Let the 13th and 15th pages of my said treatise be looked upon . Therefore for these men , to cite these words from my pen , questionless no writing whatsoever , whether translation or originals , are the foundation of Christian religion , which clearly relate in the passage where they stand , to a sense a little before explained ; without citing , or so much as intimating those other words of mine , wherein ( In a true and orthodox sense ) i assert them to be of divine authority , and none other but the word of God a with more to this purpose ) can it be by the mediation of any charity whatsoever conceived , to be any other appearing for God , his truth , and the cause of religion , than theirs was , who appeared before Pilate to testify against Christ , that he should say , i am able to destroy the temple of God , and to build it in three days b ? 

3.  Was it in the integrity of your hearts , and to discharge your duty conscientiously , &c. that you must needs make it an error or heresy ( As you do , page 12. ) to say , that it were a needless thing for Satan to blind the eyes of natural men , lest the light of the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ should shine unto them , if they had not eyes to see , and to receive this glorious light of the gospel , when it was declared unto them ? Is this to appear for God , or his truth , to appear against evident reason , yea common sense itself ? Is there any need of charging a stone , that it do not speak ; or a deaf man , that he do not hear ; or a blind man , that he do not see ? Must we needs speak nothing but nonsense , and inconsistencies , to be free from errors and heresies ? is this the suprcma lex in the republic of presbytery ? 

4.  I beseech you , brothers , answer candidly , and in the integrity of your hearts , where , in what phrase or clause , of the period ensuing , lies the error , or heresy ; for you charge it with one , or both , pag. 12.  if God should not make men capable of believing , i mean , endue men with such principles , abilities , or gifts , of reason , judgement , memory , understanding , by the diligens improvement whereof , they Might come to be convinced of a willingness or readiness in him to receive them into grace and favour , upon their repentance and turning to him ( upon which conviction , that repentance and turning unto God , which we speak of , follows ) they which are condemned , would have their mouths against God's proceedings with them thereunto , and furnished with an excuse ? the period ( Setting the parenthesis aside , which i suppose is innocent ) is but one plain hypothetical or connex proposition . Now though i confess that consequences in such propositions May be weak and false , as well as categorical assertions ; yet amongst all the old accursed heresies , so long since condemned ( As you speak ) and which you say are now raked out of their graves , and revived , i remember none that was ever put into any man's roll or catalogue of heresies , in an hypothetical form . If your reading or memory will instruct me better , you shall find me a disciple tractable enough . But for the consequence in the proposition rehearsed , which you put down in your catalogue for an error or heresy , it is built upon this principle , or maxim : that a true plea of want of power for the performance of what is commanded , is an excuse in the case of non-performance . If this principle fail , the said consequence is weak : but if strong and pregnant , the consequence is partaker with it in both . But however , doubtless neither the integrity of your hearts , nor the goodness of your consciences would have suffered in the least , though you had not compelled a poor plain hypothetical proposition , which never did , nor meant , either you , or any other man , the least harm , to bear the cross of being numbered amongst errors or heresies . 

5.  I desire also some ingenious shadow ( At least ) of a reason from you , how it relates to the conscientious discharge of your duty , to cite an whole page together ( Besides what you fraudulently leave out , as not serving your turn ; and what you cut off , by an &c. ) consisting of three or four and thirty lines , under the name and notion of one and the same error . Was it to represent me to your reader as a man of monstrous and prodigious errors ? one of which could not be expressed or contained in fewer words , than would fill an whole page in 4o ; nor this without the interposal of an et caetera , and a false finger besides ? Or was it to edify the world in the knowledge and consideration of your great zeal , and unwearied pains , to discover errors ; so that rather than one of these should escape you , you would undergo the labour of transcribing whole pages together ? Or was it for fear , in case you had determinately pitched upon any one line or sentence , you Might more easily have missed the error , and have beaten a bush , where the bird was not ? Or was it in hope , that within so large a circuit or compass of ground , your reader possibly Might find two or three errors , though yourselves could not well tell where to find any ? But if you be unwilling to render unto me a reason of this your extraordinary quotation , give me leave to render one unto you . I suppose the reason Might well be , because in that wherein you magnified yourselves , God had a mind to be above you for the propagating of his truth . For whereas you ( It is like ) meditated an unusual citation to show the world a more than ordinary error ; God Might suffer you to take this compass of matter , that so that great and precious truth of his , which you call error , contained therein , Might be presented from your hand with so much the more advantage to be discerned , acknowledged , and received by men ; yea by such men , who probably Might never have had the opportunity to have seen so much of it , but by means of the book . 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

Doubtless the passage though injuriously dealt with ( As we shall show presently ) and purloined of some of its strength , towards the beginning , yet carries light in abundance in it for the conviction of any ingenuous and unprejudiced man , that what is asserted therein , is truth . 

6.  Would not the integrity of your hearts to discharge your duty conscientiously , suffer you to pass by similitudes , comparisons , and resemblances , but that these must be crucified too for errors and heresies ? doubtless never were parables or similitudes arrested , or attainted of error or heresy , until now . A considerable part of that long error we spoke of , cited by you in folio ( P. 11. ) consists of a similitude . When you make errors and heresies of similitudes , you give us just occasion to think , that you are not so much troubled with some men's errors and heresies , when you find them , as you are with seeking errors and heresies in other men , until you find them . But they that will find knots in rushes , are necessitated to knit them themselves . But i beseech you , tell me seriously : is it matter of conscience indeed with you , to punish the innocent with the guilty ? If so , i am not for your laws , nor commonwealth . but 

7.  What say you to the mangling , maiming , and deforming the sayings of your brethren , when you cite them , by leaving out very emphatical and material words , and clauses ; yea such scripture expressions , as you found in them ? Or do you not in citing the passage ( Lately pointed at ) with which you are pleased to adorn your catalogue of errors about natural man's free will ( P. 11. ) after these words , ( line 11. ) in a way of justice , leave out all this [ and according to the law , an eye for an eye , and a tooth for a tooth , this man having cut off the legs of another . ] Were you afraid , that the passage would not look so like an error , as you would have it , if any lineament of scripture should be seen in the face of it ? What you express in your testimony , you say , ( P. 3. ) that you express not with a bitter , but with a bleeding heart : but what you leave out , relating to this , and to other passages cited by you ( Of which notice hath been already taken ) i fear you leave out , rather with a bitter , yea and bloody , than bleeding heart . 

8.  Do you in the integrity of your heart , and cut of conscience to appear for God and his truth , judge it an error , or heresy , to say , that if a doctrine be asserted by Paul and Peter , it ought to suffer no disparagement for being found among the tenets of Arminius ? For of this assertion of mine you make an error ( page 13. ) unless the words imprisoned in a parenthesis , which are these , [ as most assuredly it is ] must bear the blame . Do you not want errors and heresies to complete your catalogue & roll , when you are necessitated to muster and take in such as these ? Are not most of your own doctrines found amongst the tenets of Arminius ? Some of you ( I suppose ) cannot be ignorant , but that they are : but do you therefore judge them errors or heresies ? yet 

9  The testimony now under contest , is in nothing more unlike , at least more unworthy , the ministers of the province of London , than that importune , and most unnatural strain in it , which presenteth sayings and opinions , for errors and heresies , which are fairly and fully consistent with their own principles and grounds . Hereof many instances Might readily be produced , were not prolixity inconsistent with our present design . Is not that of the apostle , other foundation can no man lay , than that which is laid , which is Jesus Christ , a one of their principles , and main grounds ? and yet ( P. 5. ) they make me erroneous , for not granting another foundation besides Jesus Christ , viz. translations and originals : which notwithstanding , sensu sano , i do assert also for foundations . Again , is it not one of their own principles , that no act performed by man , can be the foundation of Christian religion ? Yet pag. 5. they stigmatize me as an erroneous person , for affirming the act of believing the English scriptures to be the word of God , to be no foundation of Christian religion . yet again : is not that of Paul , that was not first , which is spiritual , but that which is natural ; and then that which is spiritual , b another of their principles ? yet ( pag. 14. ) they represent it for an error in me , to say ; doubtless men are natural men , before they are sprirituall , and supernatural . once more , is it not a ground and principle of their own ; that men are but natural men , till faith comes and makes them spiritual , or supernatural : yet they condemn it ( pag. 14. ) for an error in me to affirm , that we cannot be made spiritual or supernatural , but by believing . yet once more ; is it not one of their own principles , that God hath promised favour , acceptation , yea and salvation itself , to those , who shall believe ; yet they make me a transgressor in point of error , for saying , that if it be possible for natural men to believe , then May they do such things , whereunto God hath by way of promise annexed grace and acceptation . yet once again : i suppose it is a principle or supposition of theirs ; that the apostle all along the 11th chapter of the epistle to the Hebrews , speaks of such a faith , which is true and saving : and yet ( P. 15. ) they make me an erroneous offender , for saying , that to believe , 1. that God is : 2. that he is the rewarder of those who diligently seek him , is all the faith or belief that the apostle makes simply and absolutely necessary to bring a man unto God . 1. into grace and favour with him . Caeterá de genere hoc adeò sunt multa , &c.  

10.  Certainly it cannot be out of the integrity of your hearts to discharge your duty conscientiously , &c. to dissemble , connive at , and take no notice of , the very self same opinions published , printed , countenanced , recommended , by men of your own interest and party , yea by some amongst yourselves , honouring such with the titles of orthodox and sound men notwithstanding , for which you most unworthily , and contra-conscienciously defame others , who do not syncretize with you , labouring in the very fire day after day , in your preachings , in your printings , in your conversings , to render them the off-scourings and abominations of men . Let all the passages and sayings , which with all your double diligence , and the help of an evil eye , you have discovered and found in all my writings , and presented upon the theatre of your testimony , as containing matter of error about natural man's free will , and power to good supernatural , be drawn together , and the rigidest extraction made of whatsoever imagination itself is able to imagine erroneous in them ; there will be found the very same spirit and quintiscence of error ( If yet it were error ) clothed too with visibility enough , in that discourse of Mr. John Ball , entitled , a treatise of the covenant of grace , lately published by mr Simeon Ash ( One of the subscribers . ) recommended to the Christian reader by three of them more , viz. Daniel gawdry , Edmond Calamie , Anthony Burgess ( Besides two more of the assembly . ) The said author , p. 44. of this discourse , writeth thus . no man is hindered from believing , through the difficulty , or unreasonableness of the command , or through his own simple infirmity , as being willing and desirous to believe , but not able ; which inability deserves pity : but his inability is of corruption and wilfulness : he doth not believe , because he will not : he is unable , because he doth not covet or desire , which is inexcusable . is there not every whit as much power , and freedom of will here attributed unto natural men , as can be wrested or wrung out of any , or all those erroneous passages of mine , ( Erroneously so called ) which are cited in the provincial testimony ? do i there say any whit more , or doth mr Ball here say any whit less , than that in case natural men were not wilful , they have a sufficiency of power to believe ? And that it May not be pretended that this passage fell from this author's pen at unawares , or that the contents of it were not his settled and bestresolved judgement , you shall find the very same things , and almost in the very same words , reasserted by him , pag. 226. of the same discourse . Are those opinions erroneous , or heretical in independents , which are orthodox and canonical in Presbyterians ? or if they be as erroneous in the latter , as the former , why is not i. b. brought upon the stage , as well as i. g. in the habit and reproach of an erroneous and heretical man ? Yea and why do not Simeon Ash for publishing , and Daniel gawdry , Edmond Calamie , and Anthony Burgess , ( Together with Edward Reynolds , and Thomas hill ) for countenancing and recommending erroneous and heretical opinions , bear their proportions also in the censure and shame ? Accessaries deserve to suffer , as well as principals . It is said indeed of the Donatists , that they disparaged and condemned all other Christians , but were indulgent in point of censure , towards their own a : and of Eunomius the heretic , that he bare with all manner of wickedness in his own seat b are not these sons of presbytery to be found in the same condemnation ? Is their love any whit more extensive , than only to cover the multitude of their own sins ? or their zeal , than to censure and punish the sins of other men ? Is this their faithfulness unto God , for which they seem afraid ( page 34. ) lest the world should frown upon them ? or is this the fruit and product of their glorious profession ( page 5. ) that as ministers of Christ , and stewards of the mysteries of God , in zeal to God's glory — from their very hearts and souls , they utterly detest and abhor all the errors , heresies , and blasphemies whatsoever swarming amongst us in these times , howsoever minced , masked , and palliated , and by whomsoeverembraced and countenanced ? can the children of this profession be ignorant , that there are amongst themselves discrepances in judgements , and contrarieties in opinions ? Or doth not this plainly imply , that there is apprehension of error in the respective dissenters amongst them ? yea it is famously known , that some of the ablest and most learned amongst them , differ from the greatest part , if not from the generality , of his fellows , in matter of opinion , and that about a subject of as high a nature , as any within the whole compass of Christian religion . If then in zeal to God's glory , they from their very hearts and souls utterly detest and abhor , all the errors , heresies , and blasphemies amongst us , by whomsoever embraced and countenanced , how cometh it to pass , that they do not declare with the same acrimony of spirit , and height of indignation , against their own errors ( Mutually so believed ) wherein they rise up , like lions , against the supposed errors of other men ? Brethren , give me leave to be serious with you : i believe you are straitened in your own bowels , in comparison of the enlargement which you have in mine , ( Though i fear , you believe nothing less . ) I hear of many complaints , and sad regrets from you ; as that the ministers , and the ministry of Christ , are of later times , much despised : your auditories , much depopulated : your respects with the persons , brought well nigh to a morsel of bread . I beseech you consider what i shall say unto you : hath he that voluntarily puts his singer in the fire , any cause to complain , that the fire burns him , and puts him to pain ? Or he that sows only tares in his field , to find himself aggrieved , that the earth makes him not a return in wheat ? Or is it any wonder at all , if , when under a pretence of so much zeal to God's glory , such integrity of heart , such conscientiousness of appearing for God , his truth , & cause hf religion , such unpartial detestation of all errors , heresies , and blasphemies amongst us , by whomsoever embraced and countenanced ( With many such like glorious and glittering professions and protestations more , wherewith your testimony is garnished ) you do in the very face of all these professions , all things contrary , stigmatize the truths of God , with the odious and hateful names , of infamous & pernicious errors & heresies , set yourselves to pull down with both your hands the precious names and reputations of the faithful servants of God , you brethren , & this without any cause at all given by them , report their sayings by halves , leaving out their explications , on purpose to defame them , represent such opinions & assertions as erroneous and heretical in them , which you allow for orthodox & sound in yourselves , exasperate and incense the sword of the magistrate against such as are peaceable in the land , and wish you no harm ; foment divisions , multiply distractions , obstruct the quiet composure and settlement of things in the land , recompensing no degree of all this unworthiness , with any proportionable or considerable good ; is it any marvel ( I say ) if , going thus to work , coupling such vile & unworthy actions with such precious and specious professions , you sink and fall in the hearts of men daily more and more ? Know this for a certain , that the hearts and consciences of men will never be able to rise up before you , & call you blessed , unless they be holpen up by the hand of some visible worth , and excellency in your ways . Following showers of uprightness and sincerity from your hearts and hands together , will make your crowns of honour to flourish again upon your heads ; which otherwise will certainly languish , fade , and die away . In the mean time ( To return to our business in hand ) though i find the best of you no better , than a briar unto me , in pursuing me with the out ▪ cries of your pens for a man of i know not how many , nor of what , errors ; yet are there four men amongst your 52. who have appeared in this ostracism against me , to their deeper shame , and confusion of face , than others . For what ? they who publish and print books of errors , they who countenance and recommend books of errors , to be read ; can these men find in their hearts to lift up their heel against those , who shall receive them from their hand ? 

Delicti fies idem reprehensor , & author ? 
At scelus hoc meriti pondus , & instar , habet . i.  
What ( Man ! ) the author , and rough censor both 
Of the same crime ? the crime , if crime it be , 
Which i committed have , yet merit doth 
Praise , and approvement , not reproof , from thee . 
Mr. Ash , Mr. Candrey , Mr. Calamie , Mr. Burgess ? how could these names of men anoint Mr. John Ball with oil , and salted me withfire , only for speaking what he speaketh , yea and what themselves speak in him , or in that book of his , which they recommend unto me ( Amongst others ) let the sun of Christian ingenuity be ashamed , and the moon of human candour be abashed . For ( Questionless ) such a thing hath not been heard of , either amongst the sons of nature , or of God , for many generations . 

But for the opinions , or opinion rather ; ( For though the citations be many , yet the error , if error if must needs be , contained in in them all , is , for substance , but one ) which this grand subscription voteth an error in me about natural man's free will , and power to good supernatural ; i desire the whole covent , or college of the two and fifty , and all that dogmatise with them against the said opinion , to take knowledge , 1.  That it is no new or strange doctrine in the reform churches : 2.  That it was a doctrine taught and avouched by some of the reformers themselves ; and those not of the least note , either for learning or religion . One instance in either shall suffice for the present . 

For the former , that the doctrine condemned for error by the error-makers of the province of London , is the publicly-received doctrine of the reform churches within the province of Orleans in France , appears from several passages in a treatise of Paulus Testardus , pastor of the reform church at Blois , entitled , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , sen synopsis de natura & gratia ; the said passages being compared with the approbation of the book printed in the beginning of it : the tenor whereof imports , that the said book was ordered by a synod of the reform churches in the said province , to be perused and read by two of the ministers ( There named ) who give this testimony of it upon their reading , that they find nothing in it repugnant to the doctrine of their orthodox churches , and in that respect they judge it worthy publication . 

The said author in the treatise mentioned , having ( P. 83 , 84 , 85. &c. asserted and cleared three several ways or means , whereby God calleth men unto communion in that covenant of grace , which he hath made with mankind , the first , by providence ; the second , by the ministry of the word ; the third , by the effectual workings of his spirit . P. 91. he affirmeth , that in all these ways or methods of calling men , God doth not only show unto the sinner what his duty is to do , but also exhibits and gives unto every man thus invited and called , power wherewith to perform it , and be saved , if he will : insomuch , that if he that is invited [ or called ] in the most general [ & lowest ] way of invitation of all , be not saved , he is altogether inexcusable before God . this the apostle Paul teacheth expressly : that which May be known of God ( Saith he ) is manifested in them , or unto them ( meaning the gentiles ) for God hath made it manifest , &c. that they Might be without excuse . But certainly , excusable they had been , if they had been willing , and only wanted power a there is not an hair's breadth of power to superuatur all good , more attributed by me unto natural men , than is clearly , and above all controversy asserted in this passage ; which yet is avouched ( As ye have heard ) by two sufficient witnesses , and these of the approved order of presbytery itself , to be the doctrine of the orthodox reform churches within the province of Orleans in France . but whereas my London subscribers transcribe so many passages of mine under their title , or head , of , errors about natural man's freewill , etc. let all these passages be sifted , from the first to the last , by lines , words , syllables , and letters , yet will there not be found the least or lightest insinuation of any freeness of will in natural men to any good that is supernatural : yea they that have been the most constant and intelligent hearers of me in the course of my ministry , cannot but testify on my behalf , that i have still upon all occasions , resolved the condemnation and perishing of men into the most miserable and strange servility , bondage and thraldom of the will to corruption and vanity : yea and have urged and pressed the necessity of the grace of God for turning the captivity of it , and setting it at liberty . Therefore , oh province of London , study thy teachers , that thou Mayst know what , and what not , to learn of them . It were easy to draw forth many more passages out of the Treatise specified , of the same import and inspiration with that which hath been produced ; but this is sufficient for these two ends and purposes ; 

1o . To demonstrate , that the authority of a province of ministers , though all receiving the honour of orthodox from one another , is yet a miserable support or stay for the judgements or consciences of men , in matters of doctrine . That which is asserted for orthodox and sound by a province of ministers in France , is importunely censured and condemned for an infamous horrid , and pernicious error , or heresy , by a province of the same profession in England . 

2o . To show , with how good a conscience the subscribers jointly affirm , ( As they do , page 3. that they find , to the abundant satisfaction of their judgement , and rejoicing of their spirits , the confession of faith humbly advised by the assembly of divines , singularly pious , prudent , sound , and agreeable to the scriptures , and confessions of other church's . If it be agreeable with the confession of those churches lately mentioned , they have as much , or more , need to confess their fault , as their faith . 

As to the second particular , wherein i affirmed , that that doctrine which these men call infamous , pernicious , horrid error and heresy , was also taught to the full extent and compass of what i deliver in it , by some of the chief reformers themselves , it appears sufficiently by this ensuing passage from m. Bucer , who in his enarration of the epistle to the Romans , chap. 2. vers. 14. writeth thus : a here let us observe two things ; that God in no age whatsoever , left men destitute of the doctrine of salvation : therefore whoever at any time perished , perished through their own default [ or neglect . ] for God so bedeweth ( Or washeth ) nature with his light , that they only remain strangers unto righteousness , who willingly , & of their own accord cast it from them . There are at this day nations not a few , to whom the gospel of Christ is not sincerely preached : others there are , who hear nothing of it . But if these did not voluntarily put from themselves the desire of righteousness , the Lord ( questionless ) would so animate them with his spirit , that they should , or Might , perform the things of the law , commit themselves wholly to his ( Grace , or ) goodness , and do unto their neighbours what they would that they should do unto them . Hence it would come to pass , that God would sooner send an angel unto them , as he did unto Cornelius , than suffer them to remain ignorant of his Christ . But whilst through impious ingratitude , they detain his truth revealed unto them , in unrighteousness , they do not only deserve to have no more of the good spirit given unto them , but even to be givenup to a reprobate sense , &c.  The other thing here to be observed , is , that we ourselves also hearken unto the work or effect of the law , which is written in our hearts , that same right and divinely-impressed sense of things within us , whereby we are continually called upon for holy and honest courses , and called back from those that are dishonest , and that we narrowly listen unto and mind , those thoughts which accuse us , and our conscience , when it witnesseth against us . — verily , we reject God himself , when we do not yield obodeince to such holy cogitations as these . i appeal to the consciences of the testimony-subscribers themselves , whether this passage be not much fuller and ranker of the spirit of that opinion , which they reckon amongst the very dregs and spawn of those old accursed heresies , amongst noisome , infamous , horrid , and pernicious errors , than any , than all the passages they have raked together out of my writings . Yea if they please , they May read more of the same author's judgement upon the same point , and to the same purpose , in what he comments upon verse 25. of the chapter ; where ( Amongst other things ) he conceiveth , that Paul offered this to the consideration of the Jews , that the gentiles , even before Christ was revealed unto them , were partakers of true righteousness a . which is a saying ten degrees beyond the line of any of mine . And yet m. Bucer was never ( To my knowledge ) Counted an Arminian by any , nor branded for an heretic , or a man of a rotten judgement , by any , unless it were by the ministers of the province of Babylon , who ( As the story saith ) diged him out of his grave , and made a sacrifice by fire of his dead and buried corpse unto the genius of their bloody religion . It were easy to fill many pages with passages from other orthodox and reform authors , as Melancthon , Musenlus , &c. wherein they deliver many things fully consonant with what i have written , and the subscribers branded with the broad seal of their authority , for erroneous . But miserable is the condition of truth , which must not be suffered to pass by the warrant of its own light , without letters of recommendation from the darkness of men . Nor were it any matter of much more labour or difficulty , to bring in antiquity itself , and particularly those very authors who were the greatest opposers of Pelagius , and the than errors denominated from him , as Hierome , Austin , and prosper by name , with their mouths wide opened in approbation , and coassertion of the same things , for which i am arraigned at the tribunal of Sinon a college , as an heretic . it is manichism ( Saith Hierome ) so condemn the nature of man , and to despoil it of freewill . ( Unless any man can find better , or more proper English for , liberii arbitrium . and elsewhere , thou blasphemest in vain , continually buzzing it in the ears of the ignorant , that we condemn freewill : let him be c•demned , who condemneth it c ▪ yet again in another place : we so maintain freewill , that we deny not the adjutory ( Of grace ) to it in all things d . Augustine himself , the famous antagonist of Pelagianism , maintains to the full whatsoever is asserted by me , concerning the will and power of man . if there be no grace of God ( Saith he ) how doth he save the world ? If there be no freewill , how doth he judge the world e ? And again , the Catholic faith , neither denies freewill , either in respect of a bad life , or of a good : nor doth it attribute so much to it , as if without the grace of God it could do any thing , &c.  yet again , the Pelagians conceit that they know some great matter , when they say , God would not command that which he knew could not be performed by men . I wonder who knows not th••… f . It seems Austin supposed no man ignorant of the truth of that , which these subscribers persecute under the name of a pernicious error . the fame author yet again , we exeorate the blasphemy of those , who affirm , that God enjoy••… any thing that is impossible unto men , and that the commands of God cannot be observed and kept by every man in particular , but only by all men in common , or in general h . I•…austins' verdict will pass , the subscribers are the blasphemers , not the author of the divine authority of the scriptures asserted . consonant to the last recited saying of Austin , is this of Basil the great , it is impious to say , that the precepts of the holy ghost are impossible i . So that evident it is , that these men confute Pelagianism by plain manicheism ; nay , that which only themselves call Pelagianism . for it clearly appears by the writings both of Hierome and Austin , that the question between Pelagius and them , was not whether man hath freedom of will , either in respect of good or evil : for these fathers constantly defend themselves under the shield of this assertion against Pelagius his charge . b but whether men , notwithstanding their freedom of will , did not still stand in need of ajutorium gratiae , the auxiliary or adjutory of grace , both for the performance of , and perseverance in , what was good . But these men have exchanged the fathers adjutorium , into their own compulsorium . for me , i never denied , but always have asserted the necessity of grace by way of adjutory ; only the necessitation or compulsion of grace , is no article of my creed . 

Reader , i had not troubled thee with so much as any one of these quotations , but that it is the calamity of these times , to judge truth and error still commensurable with the votes of those men , who having engrossed the honour and repute of being orthodox men unto themselves , square these votes of theirs concerning truth and error , not by any principles of the clearest reason , nor yet by the scriptures soundly interpreted and understood , but only by the traditions of the elders , and by what they read in the writings of such men , whom they are pleased to take into part and fellowship with themselves in their own glory , and vote , orthodox . 

But to leave this ; there is yet one thing more in the testimony ( So called ) to the truth of Jesus Christ , &c. which hath too much shadow in it for the pencil of such exquisite artificers , as the ministers of the province of London : and therefore , represents it with much suspicion of being a spurious and suppositious piece , and not the genuine {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; of such Masters . For doth not this testimony once and again ( viz. p. 24. and 26. ) commend the government , whereunto the hearts of the authors seem to be so impotently lifted up , by the success wherewith it hath been crowned ? Doubtless the real and true ministers of the province of London , having such abundant opportunity of converse with travellers from all parts , cannot but be full of the truth of this information , that there was more of the truth and power of religion in England under the late prelatical government , than in all the reform churches besides . The best success , which they can with any colour of truth entitle this government unto , is but the success of the gardiner's shears , which prosper only to the keeping all even and smooth in the privet-hedge , by the snipping off , and keeping under those thriving twigs and branches , which otherwise would outgrow their fellows , and hinder uniformity . 

Lastly , me thinks there is too palpable a reflection of prejudice and dishonour upon the parliament in several passages and strains of this piece , to issue from between the feet of the sacred conclave of zion-college ; though wiser men ( I confess ) than myself , resent the affirmative stronger in this , than the negative ; conceiving an evil eye looking out of a fair face of words upon the parliament , to be no dissenting character of the genius of the ministers ( Indeed ) of the province of London . 

To draw towards a conclusion ; if any man shall ask why i could not be content to sit down by my charge , with the same patience wherein others charged as well as i , possess their souls ; no man's pen moving against his accusers , but mine ? I answer . 

1.  I was loathe , that either the stones in the walls , or tiles upon the houses , should take the honour and comfort of this service , out of my hand . if these should hold their peace ( Saith Christ ) the stones would erie a . The honour of Christ must be vindicated : and if the Jews , who are a persons , will not do it , the gentiles , who are no persons b , shall and will . If men endued with reason and understanding , shall not appear in asserting the honour of God against those , who sin with an high a hand against it , the inanimate and senseless creature will certainly rise up , and take away this crown from them . 

2.  The demand proposed , supposeth that , which ought not to be supposed ; viz. that my patience is not only exercised , but overcome , by my charge . The truth is , though i do not •it down by it in patience , yet i rise up with it , and bear it upon my shoulder , with more than patience ; even with joy and gladness ; as i stand charged from heaven to do : my brethren , Count it all joy , when you fall into divers temptations c . I trust the tenor of my answer doth no ways imply , that there is so much as the least hair of the head of my patience fallen to the ground . 

3.  One part of the rest , who are compelled to drink of the same college cup with me , May possibly either have reversed the errors here charged upon them , or otherwise be conscious to themselves of insufficiency to defend them . Another part of them , for aught i know , May rise up in their own defence , as i have done ; yea , and possibly May prevent me . But for those assertions of mine , which these ministers have baptised by the name of errors , i neither know any reason why i should proscribe them , nor yet despair of strength from God , sufficient to maintain them against all contradiction whatsoever . but 

4.  ( And lastly ) the chief motive which engaged me to this undertaking , was , because i look upon myself as the chief , if not the only person , for whose sake the 52. hands were at this time drawn out of the bosom to smite the rest . When the chief priests and elders , had with more than ordinary diligence and importunity wrought Pilate to sign his warrant for the crucifying of Christ , because matters deserving death were not so clear against him , as they desired ; they procured two thieves to be crucified with him , the one on his right hand , the other on his left a , who in all likehood had not suffered death , at least at this time , but only to colour over the foul act of crucifying Christ , with the justice of their execution ( If yet this execution itself were allowable by the laws of God ) and to represent the Lord Christ as a man only worthy such company . In like manner , i have some reasons importuning me to conceive , that this court of assize was called principally , if not only for my sake : and that no testimony had been given at this time , either to the truth of Jesus Christ , nor against the errors or heresies of other men , had not the two and fifty prudently judged it expedient that my name should be blasted , and not the reputation of a whole province of ministers suffer by the greenness of it . The grounds of my belief in this point are , 

1.  The sore wound given to their cause by Hageomastix displayed , &c. was never mollified with oil , until now . They never eased themselves of that sorrow , till this congregatio magna being called to advice about the cure , prescribed this recipe in order thereunto ; viz. that 4. or 5. innocent lines of this treatise should be cited to appear upon a stage , purposely built for errors and heresies , and here receive the shame due to innocence and truth . But in vain have they rubed themselves & their sore upon this Dictamnum a the imflammation is never a whit allayed by it . Yea to this day — haeret lateri aethalis arundo ; nor have the 52. hands of this subscription , with all their versatile motions and endeavours , been able to wriggle , or wrest it out . 

2.  I judge the greatest part of the other errors and heresies produced upon this theatre , to be beneath their cognizance , by reason , partly of the silliness , contemptibleness , and irrationality of them ; partly , of the obscurity and inconsiderableness of their authors . I can hardly believe that such eagles would have stooped to catch such flies , such dead flies , as these , but only to put into my ointment , to cause that to cast forth a stinking savour . 

3.  The said testimony produceth my errors & heresies ( So called ) by whole pages , & half pages , as if it were loathe to leave any room for other men's ? Whereas my fellow-heretiques and erratiques , are quickly dispatched ; little being cited out of their books in comparison ; i suppose , lest their errors should seem as great , as large , as dangerous , as mine . 

4.  Lest i should seem not to abound with errors above the rate and proportion of other delinquents in this kind , they cite sayings ( Almost ) of all sorts out of my writings to make errors of , as parentheses , similitudes , suppositions , assertions of a most direct and clear consistency with their own principles , and what not ? 

5.  This testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ , made all the haste was possible after the coming out of the divine authority of the scriptures asserted , to blast the credit , and waylay the acceptation of it with the generality of men . Whereas there are very few , if any , of those other writings , which are attainted of error and heresy , with mine , but have been extant in print some considerable time , yea some of them ( To my knowledge ) several years . But by the way ; is it not very in-harmonious , that these great professors of enmity and abhorrency against errors and heresies , should persecute the assertion of the divine authority of the scriptures ? 

These , with some other considerations of like nature with them , render the jealousy very opportune and strong , that myself only was the standing mark , at which the arrow of the testimony was shot ; and that the rest were made to stand by only to give aim . They are brought in to partake of my condemnation ; that so i Might partake with them in their guilt and shame ; or at least with such of them , who being guilty , deserve shame . 

To conclude : whereas the subscribers , with many others of the same interest , are still instant upon all occasions , in season , and out of season , to declaim against me , as a friend to publicans and sinners ( I mean , to errors and heresies ) and cry out that i desire & plead for a toleration of them all ; i here solemnly profess , in the sight of God , angels , and men , that whoever they are , that bear the errors and wicked opinions of the times , as a burden of sorrow upon their hearts and souls , i bear my share and part with them . Nor do i believe that any of them all , who seek to render me the hatred of men , by the imputation of such a delinquency , have run , either faster , or further , in the way of God , for the pulling up those noisome weeds out of the fields of Christ amongst us , than i have done . I have professedly engaged myself in the public court of my ministry against 4. of those errors ( And am at this day in full prosecution of this my engagement ) which are generally looked upon as the most predominant amongst us , and unto which , all others whatsoever , May ( I conceive ) easily be reduced ; Antinomianism , Anabaptism , antiscripturism , querism , or seeking ; unto which i Might add a fifth also , called manicheism : which , had it not the countenance , which the other 4. want , would soon be found to be of as sad and dangerous a consequence to religion , as they . I am a fool to boast myself : but wise men have compelled me : and wise men ( I hope ) will pardon me . I have again & again in several of my writings , declared my sense and judgement to be , that no error whatsoever ought to be tolerated ; but that every error sufficiently detected , and evicted , aught to be proceeded against , in such a method and way , and upon such terms , which are justifiable by the word of God , or by such principles of equity and good conscience , that are found in prudent , disengaged , and conscientious men . The height of my interposals in this kind , hath been this ; 1.  That men be very cautious and wary , lest intending only to crucify thieves , they crucify Christ also . 2.  That they do not make thieves of all those , who through infirmity or mistake in judgement only , declare themselves to be men . 

Finis . 

Errata . 

Page 6. l. 34. deal , to . p. 11. l. 22. for you , r. you . p. 12. l. 35. after , mouths , r. open . p. 13. l. for consequence , r. consequences , p. 17. l. 1. for quintiffence , r. quintessence . p. 21. in the margiu , for inexcusabilis , ( In some copies ) r. inexcusabiles . 





b dan. 5. 19  a 1 cor. 3. 11.  a antap. pag. 259.  a 1 tim , 6. 5.  b pag. 34.  a divine authority of ser. asserted , p. 13.  b mat. 26. 61.  a 1 cor. 3. 11.  b 1 cor. 15. 46.  a donatistae qui praese omnes alios christianos condennabant , se veritatem censurae in suos relaxabant . p. mart. loc. p. 785.  b Eunomius suis sectatoribus quodvis scelus indulgebat . i plead for no error , truly so called : nor for any persons , worthy blame & censure . Let malefactors and thieves be crucified , but let not Christ be crucified ▪ with them . a in quo nihil , quod ecclesarum nostrarum orthodoxarum fidei •repugnet , repe•imus ; e•que nomine dig num publicà luce judicavi . mus . a qòd in omnibus vocandi rationibus , deus peccatori , quid debeat non modo ostendit , sed & omni invitato , vocato , det posse illud praestare , & salvari , •i velit : adeo ut si non salvaturis , qui generalissimâ tantum ratione invitatus est , fit prorsus inexcusabilis coram deo.  Id expressè ▪ docet paulus , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ( inquit ) {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} manifestum ▪ factum est in ipsis ( gentibus scilicet ) deus enim manifestum secit , etc ▪ ut inexcusabilis ipsi sint . At certe si , etsi maximè voluissent , non potuissent , •uissent excusabiles . p. t•st•r does , synopsis . Thesi 121. p. 91.  a hic duo observemus ; deum nullis unquam saeculis homines doctrina salutis destituisse : proinde , quicuuque unquam perierunt , suâ culpâ periisse . Naturam ita perfundit suâ juce deus , ut hi tantum à justitiâ alieni maneant , qui eam ultrò à se rejiciunt . sunt & hodiè gentes non paucae , quibus evangelium christi haud quaquam sinceriter praedicatur : sunt quae de eo nihil prorsùs audiunt ▪ hi autem si non ultrò justitiae studium repudiarent , dominus indubiè spiritu suo sic eos animaret , ut quae legis sunt praestarent , committerent se totos ipsius bonitati , proximis facerent quae cucupiunt fieri sibi . Hinc fierer , ut deus citius angelum eis mitteret , uti fecit Cornelio , quam ut ignorare eos christum suum pateretur . Sed dum impiè ingrati iniquitate suâ detinent revelatam jam ipsis veritatem , merentur , non solum ut nihil praetereà boni spiritus accipiant , sed etiam ut dentur in sensum reprobum , &c.  Alterum hic observandum est , ut ipsi quoque huic operi legis , quod in scriptum est cordibus nostris , recto illi , ut divinitùs impresso sensui , quo perpetuò vocamur ad sancta & honesta studia , revocamur à pravis , auscultemus , cogitationes nos accusantes , & conscientiam contrà nos testificantem , exaudiamus . — deum sanè ipsum rejicimus , cum sanctis hujusmodi cogitationibus non obsequimur . a sed ut superiùs quoque ostendimus , magis id ex instituto pauli suit , ut objiceret judaeis , gentes etiam ante revelatum eis christum , verae justitiae fuisse compotes . a the ancient records , ( as i 〈◊〉 informed ) m•ntion it by the name , not of Zion , but Sinon college . But they that have authority to make errors , May change names at pleasure . manichaeorum est , hominum damnare naturam , & liberum auserre arbitrium . advers. pelag. in proem. c frustra blasphemas , & ignorantium auribus ingeris , nos liberum arbitrium condemnare . Damnetur ille , qui damnat . ad c•esiphontem d sic liberum servamus arbitrium , ut ei per singula adjutorium non negemus . Hicron . l. 1. dial. advers. pelag.  e si non sit dei gratia , quomodo salvat mundum ? & si non est liberum arbitrium , quomodo judicat mundum ? aug. epist. 46.  f fides catholica non liberum arbitrium negat , sive in vitam malam , sive in bonam : neque tantum ei tribuit , ut sine gratiâ dei valeat aliquid , &c. aug.  Epist. 47.  magnum aliquid Pelagiagiani scire se putant , quando dicunt , non juberet deus , quod sciret non posse ab homine fieri : quis hoc nescit . aug. de grat. & lib. arbitr . c. 16.  h execramur blasphemiam eorum , qui dicunt impossibile aliquid homini à deo esse praeceptum ; & mandata dei non à singulis , sed ab omnibus in communi posse servari . idem . i {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . b dicat Pelagius , per gratiam nos posse praestare legem dei , & pax est . aug.  a luk. 19 4.  b rom. 10. 19  c iam. 1. 2.  a mar. 15. 27  a Dictamnus , or dictamnum , is an herb ( in English Ditanie ) having a property to draw out any thing fastened in the body ; upon which wild beasts are said to rub themselves , when they are hurt , or wounded , for their ease and cure . 










































