The moderate enquirer resolved . In a plain description of several objections which are summed up together , and treated upon by way of conference , concerning the contemned persons commonly called Quakers , who are the royal seed of God , and whose innocency is here cleared in the answers to the many objections that are frequently produced by their opposers . Which May be profitable for all to read that have any thing against them ; and useful for all such as desire to know the certainty of those things which are most commonly reported of them . 

Written in the behalf of the brethren , in vindication of the truth , by vv. c.  

The way of the wicked is as darkness , they know not at what they stumble , 

prov. 4 19  



The simple believeth every word ; but the prudent man looketh well to his going , 

prov. 14. 15.  



London , printed for Thomas Simmons , at the bull and mouth , near Aldersgate , 1658 

To the reader 

My friend , 

For as much as many of these persons have t•ken in hand to set forth large declarations of those things which are most surely believed among them , ( Even as they have received them from the Lord ) it seemed good to me also ( Having had perfect knowledge of the things herein contained ) to publish them to the view of many persons , accordingly as they were laid before me in the light of truth , that all such as are inquisitive to understand the certainty of those things which are usually reported of these persons , Might be further informed , satisfied , and resolved . 

Moreover reader , if certain strange things have been brought to thy ears concerning these persons , and that thou art desirous to know the truth of them , as the Athenians were to know what Paul's new doctrine meaned , than this small book is very suitable for thee , and if thou look it over with patience , moderation , and sobriety , i shall account thee more noble in that particular than they that should reject it , and account it not worthy of reading , as they have •one others of the writings of the•e persons , who have written most excellent things according to the wisdom given unto them , in which writings there are many things hard to be understood , which ev l men terms error and blasphemy ; but be thou wise unto that which is good , and simple concerning evil . 

The moderate enquirer resolved . 

Enquirer .  I hear great rumours and reports of a persons called •uakerss , which should be risen up in these last days ; canst thou tell me what a persons they are ? When they arose ? By whom they were raised ? And to what end ? 



Resolver .  I do believe thee , that great rumours and reports thou hearest of them , but know this , that the generality of the reports which are reported of them , are mixed with untruths ; therefore have patience a little , and by the Lord's assistance i shall endeavour rightly to inform thee , & ( So far as i am allowed of God ) sha•l also seek fully to resolve thee concerning them ; but thy first demand cannot in a few words be answered but afterwards it May more fully ; yet in a word or two i say , they are a persons that fears God above all the families of the earth , and that do worship him in his own way , viz. in spirit and in truth ; they do also love God above all , and their neighbour as themselves , &  . 

They were raised up ( From death to life ) about eight or nine years ago , and since the year ( 52 ) they have much multiplied and increased , for the blessing of the Lord hath been ( And to this day doth rest ) upon them , and by him ( Who causeth them to multiply ) were they raised up , for this very end and purpose , to praise and magnify his name in the earth ( Who is God over all , blessed for ever ) & to publish his living truth abroad , that his salvation Might be known unto the ends of the earth , & therefore hath he manifested his eternal power in them , by which the world shall be overturned . 



Enq.   Tho• speakest strange things o• them , which if i knew that thou spoke the truth , i would become one of them , for unto such a persons i desire to be united . 



Res.   Thou now seemest to wonder , but if a third part of the dealings of the Lord with them , were declared in thy hearing , than thou wouldst stand astonished to hear ▪ what the Lord hath done for them ; but peradventure thou art one of them that cannot believe it though men should declare it unto thee ; and whereas thou •ais• ,  if thou knew that i spoke the truth , thou wouldst become one of them , for unto such a persons thou desirest to be united , &c.  but consider , it is not an easy matter to become one of them in truth , & to be united to them in the spirit , yet it is an easy matter to come among them , and to conform unto them ; but before thou become one of them , & united to them , thou must be turned from darkness to light , from the power of Satan unto God , and then thou wilt become as they are , and where they are , thou wilt be also , & then thou wilt come to receive the desire of thy soul , as they have done . 



Enq.   Thou thyself give• a good report of them , •ut i hear otherwi•e abroad in the world , where one speaks well of them , there is a hundred that cries out against them and their errors , and blasphemies , and d•mnable doctrines . 



Re•f .  My testimony is true which i give of them , for i am one that hath perfect understanding of the dealings of the Lord with them , and am very frequent among them , and far be it from me to extend beyond the truth in any particular , or •o fall from my testimony , which i could •eal with my blood ( •f thereunto called . ) And what if thou hear thousands in the world controlling of them , exclaiming out against them , esteeming them not fit to live upon the earth ; this May the more confirm thee that they are of God ; for if they were of the world , the world would love them ; and if they spoke of the world , the world would hear them ; but because the Lord hath chosen them out of the world , therefore doth it hate them , and cry out against their doctrines and opinions , and doth suppose them to be erroneous , blasphemous , & damnable ; but their censuring & supposing of them to be so , doth not make them so ; for the Jews supposed Christ to be a blasphemer , but he was not ; the same generation supposed the apostles to be movers of sedition , & pestilent fellows , but they were not ; and at that time they were by more condemned then owned , as many examples Might be produced , but i believe thou thyself art not ignorant of this . 



Enq.   No , no , but i only tell thee what i hear of this persons , i myself do not say that they are such , but i would gladly be informed of the truth of the things reported of them , for it is a good sign to me that all men speak evil of them , it is so much the more apparent that they are of God , for his persons was always hated of the world . 



Res.   This is but words springing forth of •heir persecutors , and backbiters will not say the same to their face , when they are present to answer for themselves , and for the truth . But tell me , couldst thou with M•seses , rather s•ffer affliction with such a persons , ( To wit ) imprisonment , spoiling of thy goods , loss of thy good name and reputation , and be bitten with the priests mouths , to be deprived of thy liberty & estate , & to be separated from thy wife and children , kindreds and relations ; wouldst thou suffer this for the truth's sake as these persons are ready to do when they are thereunto called ? Would not this cross fall on thee heavy , this way prove to thee strait , and this gate narrow ? Wouldst thou not rather choose to enjoy the pleasures of sin , the delights and vanities of the world , the pleasures and renown thereof , & while that thou livest in the same , thou Mayst inquire after the certainty of the reports which are reported of those that are redeemed from those things in which thou livest , and confess the truth of that which they possess , and thou thyself be out of it . 



Enq.   That is true ; but i hope we need not be so severe and strict , & so wil•ul as to leav• our wives , and children , and callings ; for dost 〈◊〉 not know , that he that doth not provide for his family , is worse than an infidel ? 



Res.   Thou canst not be too strict and severe in godliness , but thou waist be too wilful , peevish , and perverse in wickedness , & too faithless in trusting God to provide for those that he hath given thee , & in that particular thou Mayst be as an infidel thyself , or as one of the gentiles which seeketh after things pertaining to this life , saying . What shall we eat ? or what shall we drink ? or wherewithal shall we be clothed ? but by taking of thought , they cannot add one cubit unto their stature : now if thou come to the light wherewith Jesus Christ hath enlightened thee , it will bring thee to the faith of God's elect , by which the ust doth live , and then thou wilt come to provide things honest in the sight of all men , & to be diligent in the creation , serving the Lord in thy place & calling wherein thou art to abide , and not voluntarily to leave thy wife & children without providing for thy family that which is honest , decent , and fitting , otherwise thou wilt be condemned by the light in thy conscience , which is a swift witness against all wilfulness , peevishness , and perverseness , both in Jew and gentile . 



Enq.   Well , these things doth pertain to one• own particular , ( •hich indeed are good in thems••veses ) but i woul• be further informed •oncern••g these persons ( Called Quakers ) in general : i would have thee tell me how they came to have that name , and who gave it them ? 



Res.   To speak of things which concerns ones own particular , is commonly the most beneficial ; but it is the property of fools to be busy in other men's matters , but let us come to thy question , how they came to have that name , the which i intend to declare unto thee if the Lord will . 

After that the Lord had visited them in his everlasting love , and convinced them of his eternal truth , then did he manifest his eternal power in them , which made the strong man to bow himself , and the keepers of the house to tremble ; by the operation of which power the bodies of some of these persons came to be shaken , ( Like as David's was ) and this being apparent unto many spectators , who despised and wondered at the workings of the power of the Lord ; these despisers and wonderers , ( Who were also scorners ) did from hence give these persons this name , so that thou May take notice , that it was the generation of scorners that gave them it . 



Enq.   Now i understand it , but thou hints David , as though he had been a quaker ; 't is true , fearfulness & trembling came u•on him , but was there any other of the holy men of God that quaked ? if so , why then do the persons think it so strange now ? 



Res.   The work of the Lord was eve• strange to the world ; for when David qu•ked , trembled , and roared , all they tha• saw him , laughed him to scorn , so that h• was a reproach of men , and despised of the persons , and his words do the scoffers and scorners o• this generation read and sing and reproacheth and despiseth them tha• tremble & quake at the word of the Lord as he did . There were other of the holy men of God that were Quakers ; as for example . mo•es he was one that did fear and quake ; and the prophet Haba kuk , his lips quivered , his belly shook , and rottennes• entered into his bones ; and that was strange to the men of his generation , like as David's quakings and roarings was strange and wonderful in his days ; and several more examples Might be instanced , by which the ignorance of this generation Might more fully be understood and manifested . Some of which hath not been afraid to call the power of God ( Which hath made thes• persons to quake and tremble ) wi•chcraft , and to say that it was of the devil ; but they were such as spoke evil of dignities , and did err , not knowing the scripture , ( Which speaketh of Quakers ) nor the power of God , which causeth the fleshly man to quake , and the keepers o• the house to tremble , the which these persons do witness ? 



Enq.   But as touching their worship , or the manner of it , what is it ? Read they sing they , or pray they in their meetings ? Or deny they singing and praying , as is reported of them ? 



Res.   Their manner of worship doth differ very much from the world and they that are of the world can neither take pleasure nor delight in it ; for when they come together , they wait upon the Lord in his light , it May be sometimes two or three hours in silence , and sometime it happeneth that in less space than one hour some of them May be moved to speak more or less to the edifying of the rest in the mos• holy faith ; but their worship consisteth not in words but in spirit and in truth ; and in the light of truth they read their own conditions , which light doth open unto them the mysteries of the kingdom . And for singing and praying , they do them both with the spirit and with understanding , but the formal singing and praying of the world , which is not in the spirit , nor with understanding , this they do deny , for they see that God is not honoured by it ; and that which dishonoureth God , they disowned ; but that which honoureth and exalteth him alone , to that their souls are united and dearly they do it own . 



Enq.   But this doth seem very strange 〈◊〉 me , that they should sit some hours together silence , had they not better read , pray , an• sing , that they Might thereby get the motion• the spirit , by exercising of themselves in s•cred devotion ? 



Res.   It seemeth not strange unto the• alone , but unto thousands more , who can• not apprehend that which they are mad• partakers of in silent meetings , in the which they witness the workings of the power of God , which raiseth the life tha•• is immortal in them , upon which the• feed , and by which they come to be nourished up unto eternal life ; so that the motions of the pure spirit of life they fee• daily , which is not obtained by bodily exercise , ( Which profiteth little ) neither by self-performances , which availeth not , but by waiting in the light of life , there are the motions of the spirit of the Lord known , and there is the sacred devotion , which is acceptable unto the Lord ; and that devotion which is out of the light , is not sacred• but imperfect , and unholy . 



Enq.   Thou speakest so promis•uously when thou speakest of the light of life , that i do not comprehend thee , wilt thou therefore t•ll me if it be the same light of which these persons speak so much , and show me what that ••ight is ? and where that i May find a measure •of it , for i would willingly comprehend it ? 



Res.   If my words be obscure and promiscuous to thee when i speak of the light of life , it is because thy understanding is dark , for my words are words of plainness and of truth ; yet nevertheless i shall endeavour to speak to thy capacity and understanding , that i be not as a barbarian to thee , that so our reasoning together Might not be in vain ; neither would i willingly multiply words to no purpose , which doth not tend to edification , for there is enough of that abroad in the world ; wherefore let us come to the thing itself , viz. to the light of which i spoke , which is the selfsame of which these persons speak ; and that of which they speak , is the same that John the Baptist bore witness of , and the same of which the prophets ( By whom God spoke unto our fathers ) prophesied and foretold ; and he who is the light of the world , acknowledged it when he was come into the world , whose name was Immannel , which by interpretation is , God with us , & they that desire to see the presence of the Lord to be with them , they must come to the light which cometh from him whose name is called Immanuel , and they that believe and walk in his light , shall come to have the light of life , a measure o• which thou hast in thy conscience , which shows thee thy sin & transgression , which separates from God ; and if thou turn thy mind to it , thou wilt find it a swift witnes• against thy lusts , and earthly desires , and vile affections , and against all manner o• evil whatsoever . But this i would have thee to know , that it is in vain for thee to go about to comprehend it , for it shineth in darkness , & reproveth the works of darkness , but the darkness doth nor comprehend it . 



Enq.   Is there not great contention , and much dispute betwixt these persons , and busy-minded men about the light , which ( I suppose ) is tedious and weari•om to this persons , is it not ? 



Res.   Yea , for they meet with many of these busieminded men that seek to intrude into the knowledge of high things , who by their sensual wisdom seek to comprehend this incomprehensible light , and the more they strive , the more they puzzle themselves , and although they be puzzled & confounded in themselves , yet they will not cease from propounding frivolous questions about the light , many of which have been fully answered according to the folly of these unruly and vain talkers , lest that they should be wise in their own conceit ; but the truth is , these persons will many times avoid the questions and genealogies of these unreasonable men , because they see them to be unprofitable and vain , and that doth very much torment them . 



Enq.   Why are they not given to disputing ? for if the truth be on their sides , they Might thorough disputing overcome their opposers , and instruct them that wilfully oppose themselves , and so do much good thereby , Might they not ? 



Res.   There is so much disputing in the world , which is altogether unprofitable , that it is a mercy that they are no more inclined to it ; for what good can there be brought forth by it , seeing that by the generality of disputers the holy scripture is not a little wrested & perverted , the name of God too much dishonoured , and many precious hearts disturbed , grieved , and wearied by the tedious disputing which is among men , and by reason of it much strife and contention is brought forth , in which these persons have no pleasure nor contentment ; for they have not so learned Christ , neither do they seek by way of disputing to overcome their opposers , ( Whom they with meekness do instruct when they wilfully oppose themselves ) but to that of God in the consciences of their opposers , they seek to be made manifest , that by that they Might be overcome , which will convince them of the truth which these persons hath on their sides , & by turning persons to that of God in them , they do much good ; for as men come to be brought to that , they come to be brought off from disputing , to the life of that which disputers dispute upon . 



Enq.   It is very true , the scriptures are much wrested by disputers ; but ( Pray thee ) tell me what do these p•ople hold of the holy scripture• ? it is reported they do deny them , is that true ? 



Res.   No , they do not deny them , but doth read & peruse them above all books , and they do affirm , that they are able to make a man wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus ; and that they which were given by inspiration of God , are profitable for doctrines , for reproof , for correction , for instruction in righteousness , etc : they also hold them to be a true declaration of those things which were most surely believed among the saints of old , who were eye-witnesses , and some of them ministers of the word of God , of which the holy scriptures do testify . And further they say , that the holy scripture was written for their learning , that they through patience and comfort of the scripture , should have hope ; this with much more , they affirm of the scripture , the life of which they witness manifested in them . 



Enq.   All this is good ; but is there any man now that hath the same spirit the •postless had ? Or is the same light , life , and power now to be enjoyed , which the saints in former ages witnessed ? 



Res.   I tell thee , whosoever hath not the same spirit by which the apostles were guided and led , they are none of his whom the apostles served and owned to be their Lord and lawgiver , Jesus Christ , who is the same to day , yesterday , and for ever ; & they that are his , of his fold , and of his priesthood , they have unity in his light , in which the apostles had fellowship , & they are lead and guided by the same spirit that revealed things ( Which had been hide from all ages and generations ) unto the apostles and saints , and they are preserved in that power which gave the saints victory over the world , and they live in the life of immortality , which was made manifest in the saints of old ; so that the same light , life , spirit , and power , is now made manifest among the saints , and to the truth of this these persons can set their seals , who are made partakers of the same according to their measure . 



Enq.   Have they then revelations now by the same spirit ? Or is there any miracles wrought among them by the same power ? 



Res.   Yea , they have revelations by the same spirit which revealed the my•terieses of God in former ages to the saints ; for if they had not revelations , how should they come to the knowledge of the father , whom none knows but by the revelation of the son ? and by the mighty power of God , miracles hath been wrought amongst them , and miraculous things hath been brought to pass in a mystery , which is hide from all vulturous eyes living ; and they are privy to these things who are witnesses of the power of God , which hath wrought them ; but from scoffers & scorners , despisers and wonderers , these things are concealed . 



Enq.   But such would have a sign , that they Might believe , and be convert•d also , would they not ? 



Res.   Yea , but none must be given them but that of Jonah , for they are of the adulterous generation that seeketh one , saying , show us a sign , or work us a miracle , that we May believe that your god is the living God , and that he hath sent you , &c.  now they that will not believe and be converted without a sign , would no more believe & be converted if one were showed them , than they would have been persuaded to have repent by one that had been raised up from the dead , when they rejected Moses and the prophets , Luke 16. 31.  



Enq.   But thou spoke of miracles being wrought among these persons ; do they all work miracles ? Is the gift of prophecy given to all ? Or have they diversity of gifts ? 



Res.   They do not all work miracles , neither do they all prophecy , for they have differences of administrations , but the same Lord ; & diversities of operations , but the same God , who hath given to one by the spirit , the word of wisdom ; to another the word of knowledge , by the same spirit ; to another discerning of spirits ; so that they have received diversities of gifts , but the same spirit . 



Enq.   Have not every one of them received• according to their ability , and are they not in several states and conditi•nss ? 



Res.   Yea , some of them have received one talon , some two , some five , and they boast not of that which they have , because they have received it from him who is the giver of every good and perfect gift ; their conditions are also divers , for there are fathers , young men , and babes , among them ; and some there are who do not yet witness the birth brought forth , which is begotten by the immortal word of life ; no•v he that is the strongest among men , will bear with the weakest ; and he that is the greatest among them , will become servant to the least ; and when one among them is overtaken with a fault , they that are spiritual , doth restore such an one with the spirit of meekness ; for sometimes they that are weak among them , doth that which the witness of God in them alloweth not , & to the witness they consent , which convinceth them of the evil ( That they do through weakness ) which their soul hates ; and a law in their members they find , which warreth against the law of their mind , by which they are sometimes brought into captivity to the law of sin , so that they cry out as Paul did in his warfare , oh wretched man that i am , &c. yet herein they find comfort , that with their minds they serve the law of God , though with their flesh ( In which no good thing dwelleth ) the law of sin ; these are such as are not yet come through the law , nor to the end of the warfare , but finds daily the flesh lusting against the spirit , and the spirit against the flesh . 



Enq.   Well , is not that a good condition ? Did ever any saint come further in this life ? Or are any of these persons made free from the law of sin by any other law ? 



Res.   The time of the warfare must be known and passed through by as many as comes to be made free through him who is the end of the law for righteousness sake ; and he that is faithful to the Lord in the light which brings to the warfare , the same will bring him through the warfare , yea , to the law of the spirit of life ( By which some of the persons are made free from the law of sin and death ) in Christ Jesus ; and this the saints witnessed , in whom the righteousness of the law was fulfilled , through which they are come unto him who is the end of the law , and the prophets , by whom they are made free from the law , that being dead wherein they were held , and they become dead to it , by the body of Christ , which was made a curse for them , to redeem them from the curse of the law ; so that they are now no more under the law , but under grace : 



Enq.   But what , do they expect to be perfect , or free from sin in this life ? What ground have they for this in scripture ? Was such a state ever commanded or witnessed by any of whom the scripture doth speak ? 



Res.   That which is perfect , is manifested in them , and by that they wait to be perfected ; for perfection is that which they earnestly press after , and have hope to attain unto the fullness of it , for they do believe that God would not command and require that of men , which could not possibly be attained ; for he that said , be ye perfect , ( As your heavenly father which is in heaven , is perfect ) he hath perfected for ever , them that are sanctified ; and among such as were sanctified and perfected for ever , did Paul preach wisdom ; & their perfection he wished , who had not then attained to it , but were pressing after it , as many of these persons are now , who expecteth to be made free from sin , as the saints were , rom. 6. 18. and by the blood of Jesus they hope to be cleansed from all sin , that being thoroughly sanctified and cleansed with the washing of water through the word , they Might be presented to him a glorious persons , not having spot or wrinkle , nor any such thing , but that they Might be holy & perfected for ever ; but this seems incredible unto many who are not yet come to the godly sorrow for sin , which worketh repentance ; but these persons ( Whose eyes the Lord hath opened ) do see a possibility in the thing , & they are not without faith , but that they shall obtain it , and therefore go they on unto it , and will proceed , if the Lord permit , who hath manifested that in them which is perfect , by which he will bring them ( And hath brought some of them ) to the perfection of purity , and to the beauty of holiness , where Halelujah is sung unto the most high . 



Enq.   The scripture ( I suppose ) is much wrested about that point , is it not ? 



Res.   Yea , very much : for they that are against it , heapeth up all the scripture-places that possibly they can , of the saints failings , of their expressions spoken in the time of their warfare ; and places of scripture they produce , which was spoken of men in their unconverted estate ; and these scriptures they wrest & pervert , and doth add their meanings and conceivings unto them , & therefore it is that thousands hath so much to say against that point , which they will as earnestly plead against , as any other particular thing that is in dispute among men at this day . 



Enq.   What such men are they , that do wrest the scripture , and differs so much in their in••rpretati•nss , which these persons cries so much against ? 



Res.   They are such as are unstable , and unlearned , who errs , not knowing the spirit , nor the guidings and leadings thereof , but are truce-breakers , and incontinent , who seek to subvert whole countries by their delusions , which persons are led into by giving heed unto their false interpretations which they give of the holy scripture , which is of no private interpretation , and they are such as gainsay the truth , being p•oud and presumptuous , doting about questions and strife of words , unruly and vain talkers , such as teach things which they ought not , for filthy lucre sake ; these & such like , do these persons cry out against , for each of them do wrest and pervert the scripture to their own ends , seeking thereby to confirm their erroneous opinions , which are contrary to scripture , and contrary to truth ; so that these persons have good reason to testify against them , being that the name of God is so much dishonoured by them , and the holy scripture s•••taordinarily wrested among them , by the different interpretations thereof . 



Enq.   How d• these persons understand the scripture ? Is there not strife and contenton a•mong them about the meaning of it ? 



Res.   By the same spirit ( By which the• were guided that spoke forth the scripture do these persons understand it , every one o• them according to their measures ; and the light in which they walk , doth give the•••he same understanding in the holy scrip••ure , which they had that spoke forth 〈◊〉 •cripture , although many among them 〈◊〉 •rt of so large a measure as the authors the holy scripture had ; yet that under••ding which God hath given them by holy spirit , is the same which holy men God had , ( In its measure ) so that they far from striving and contending about meaning thereof among themselves , for 〈◊〉 which the light opens to one , is not •tradicted by them that are in the light ,  therefore they are at peace among ••selvess , and in unity one with another . 



Enq.   It is reported of them , that they go in•any churches to disturb them , and that  speak before the minister have ended , and •ieth themselves unruly in the time of his •ed devotion , is this true ? 



〈◊〉 .  't is true , some of them have gone in•any congregations ( As lambs among •lvess ) in obedience to the motions of the •er of the Lord , and in the assembly 〈◊〉 have spoken that which was revealed •hem while they stood by , and he that •ld have holden his peace ( Who had first •en ) left his matter in hand , and cried 〈◊〉 constable , or an officer to take him •y that begun to speak his revelation ; 〈◊〉 the unruly speaker ( That should have •en his peace , and kept the persons in or•• beginning to be so •urious and angry ••st the other , this occasioned great disorder in the congregation , which 〈◊〉 have been prevented if the spirit of the speaker had been subject to the spirit him that had the revelation , then m• the thing have been done decently an• order , according to the rule of the 〈◊〉 •stle , i cor. 14 , 30 , 32 , 40.  And as touc• carrying of themselves unreverently , 〈◊〉 is said of them because they do not their hat in the time of their prayer , join with them in their unholy devoti•• which they are not free unto , neither 〈◊〉 they bid them God speed , because 〈◊〉 know that they are out of the Doctrin• Christ  offering unacceptable sacrifice• which act these persons will not be pa••kerss ; but for any of them to go purpo•• with an intent to disturb any congre•• on , i believe such a thing hath never en• into their thoughts ; for commonly 〈◊〉 they have gone upon service for the 〈◊〉 to such places , it hath been in the cross• their own wills , whose lives have bee• great danger in them houses called c••cheses , and much of their blood have 〈◊〉 spilt , many bruises they have gotten , most shamefully have they been intrea• & handled in them places called Churc• by those that have resorted unto them , this hundred will witness and testify , 〈◊〉  been eye-witnesses of it . 



•nq .  It is a strange thing that they will not from such places then ; had they not better •ill and quiet , and molest none , than so to •ard their lives , or at least to take other op•unitieses then when persons are at church ? 



•es .  The thing is strange in the eyes of 〈◊〉 , that they should ( So as it were ) ha• their lives among unreasonable men , seeketh to do them mischief ; but that •er of the Lord by which they are mo•o go to such places , doth oftentimes •culously preserve them , and into his 〈◊〉 they commit their life , who hath gi•t them , the which they could freely •own for the truth's sake , if ther•unto were called . Now if they should mo•ny in their own wills , by speaking their words to them , they had better be still •iet , then to do so ; but if the Lord move 〈◊〉 to speak to any , or to go to any place , had better obey him , then bear his •em•ntss for disobedience ; & if the par•oken unto , be one that cannot bear •d doctrine , then will they be offended •olested by him that speaketh , like as •ziah ( Amos 7. 12 , 13. ) was molested Amos , and therefore would he have •im to have fled into another land , •ot to have prophesied at Bethel , because it was the King's chapel , and court , as now several there are , 〈◊〉 would not have these persons to come their churches , because the congrega••on is disturbed by them , like as the ki•• court & chapel was disturbed by mos , and the synagogues of the Jews Christ and the apostles , and many 〈◊〉 persuade them to the contrary ; but 〈◊〉 persuasions of such they do no more guard , than Amos regarded the persw•onss of Amaziah . 



Enq.   What go they to churches then , cause Amos went to the Kings chap• and because Christ and the apostles wen• the s•nagogueses as their manner was ? 



Res.   Oh no ; if they had no other grou• then were they but wilful imitators , 〈◊〉 like unto the false prophets who run w• the Lord had not sent them ; but these 〈◊〉 are moved by the same power ( 〈◊〉 moved Amos to go the Kings chap• by the same power ( I say ) are they mo• to go to steeple-houses , & other place bear testimony unto the same truth 〈◊〉 Amos held forth ; & the same power 〈◊〉 moved the apostles to go into the sy• gogues of the Jews ; the same doth m• these persons now to go into the meet• places of the Jews and gentiles , the• declare the powerful truth of God to them that have the form , but not the power , showing unto them how they May come to find that which hath been lost , viz ▪ the life and power of truth . 



Enq.   Well , but do they not know that t•ere are acts in force against disturbers of ministers put forth by our honourable magistrates , who will not suffer godly ministers to be di•turbed ? 



Res.   Yea , they know it well , and do find •t , but rather than they will disobey the Lord , they will choose to suffer by such acts as shad•ach , M•shach , and Abednego did , •ho disregarded the decree of Nebu•hadnezzer , and would not worship the golden image which he had set up ; and •hey who act by the virtue of these acts , •o say , they have a law by which they •ught to suffer ; like as the Jews did con•erning that law which they had ; by which they said Christ ought to die , &c. •ut show me out of the scripture , where •ver any honourable magistrates ( Or any •hat ruled for God ) made acts to pro•ect godly ministers , by the virtue of wch•he men that spoke unto them was to be •ast into prison ; if they did it in their •eeting-place ; had not godly ministers •lwayes spiritual weapons to defend them withal ; and was not Peter & Barn•bas , Paul and S•las , godly ministers , wh• suffered by the acts of the magistrate• that upheld the chief priests ? and wer• they honourable magistrates , or godl• ministers , who resisted these godly men whipped them , and cast them into prison & is it not to be feared that many wh• are called honourable magistrates do pro•tect such ministers as are persecutors an• oppressors of the servants of the Lord who lie in holes & dungeons , by virtue o• the acts which are made by impruden• magistrates to protect ungodly ministers by whom the nations are deceived ; tru•ly godly ministers are ashamed of such & the power by which they are upheld• 



Enq.   Do these persons contemn author• then ; as is commonly r•por•ed of them , 〈◊〉 are they subject to the higher power , like 〈◊〉 the apostle commandeth us to be ? 



Res.   That authority wch• is of God , an• from him they do not contemn , neithe• are they disobedient , but subject to him that rules in this authority for God , if h• exalt righteousness in the earth , and be  terror to evil doers , and a praise to the• that do well , such a magistrate they hono• in the Lord ; & to the higher power the•i• soul es are subject , in which the magistrate rules , who is God's minister ; & of this power unto which their souls are subject , they are not afraid , neither are they subject because of wrath only , but also for conscience sake ; for this they know , that whosoever resisteth the power , resisteth the ordinance of God , and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation . 



Enq.   But they do not honour magistrates with their hat and knee , as they ought to be honoured , and that offends magistrates , that receives honour of one another . 



Res.   't is true ; they do not bow before them so , as most men do , neither have they freedom thereunto ; for the honour that pertains to a magistrate consisteth not in such trifling things which are of no weight . And i believe thou cannot produce one scripture out of the whole bible , that will prove that magistrates ought to be honoured with hat & knee , that is but a mere compliment , & vanity , a foolish fashion of the world which will pass away ; & the non-performance of that doth but offend such magistrates as receives honour one of another , & how can such be•ieve ( Saith Christ , mark ) if they be not yet come to believe ; who dare say that •hey are God's ministers , or that they rule •or God ? & these persons will rather offend them that believe not , then that of God in their consciences , which learneth them to seek that honour which cometh from God only , before which humility doth go . 



Enq.   But hark ; it is not only said of them that they contemn authority and are not subject to magistrates ( To which thou hast answered ) but also that they are against gospel• ministry ; & are great railers against Minist•rys ; and their maintenance ; is that true ? 



Res.   Magistracy , and ministry , they allow & approve of , the one i have showed thee before , the other i come unto , and that is ministry ; first , i shall show thee what ministers and ministry they own , and what maintenance they allow of , that ministers May have ; secondly , what ministers and ministry they disowned , & what maintenance they do not approve of . 

First , such as are endued with povve•• and wisdom from on high , and called to the work of the ministry immediately , having received gifts from him that is ascended far above all heavens , who for•merly gave some apostles , some prophets ▪ some pastors , & teachers , for the perfect•ing of the saints , for the work of the m•nistry &c.  And such as he now calleth & chooseth , who abide in his doctrine , & giveth that freely , which they have received freely : such these persons do own & their ministry ; but railing against any they do deny , and ministers that are so called and qualified as beforementioned , they do esteem very highly for their works sake , & alloweth them food & raiment , and all things that are convenient ; & herewith are these ministers contented , even with that which they have of free gift from those unto whom they minister spiritual things , & so in love , peace and unity they live together , & thus it is with these persons & the ministers whom they do own . 

Secondly , the ministers that they disowned are such as runs when the Lord hath not sent them ; and do feed with the fat , and clothe with the wool , & make a prey upon the persons ; such ▪ as are called of men Master , & stands praying in the synagogues , teaching for doctrines the traditions of men ; who keep persons ever learning & never able to come to the knowledge of the truth , who are out of the life of that which they preach to others , by whom the holy scr•ptureses are wrested and traded 〈◊〉 who are cove•ous , •pro•d , hea•y and high m••ded , having a •orm of godl•ness  the power thereof , such they disown to be ministers of Christ , who preach for hire , and divine for money , the love of which constraineth them to teach the persons , and they that will not give them money , or put into their mouths , they prepare war against them , and compel them by suit of law , and thus they rob their mintenance from poor persons , whose goods they will take away by force , from such as hath nothing of them nor from them ; now all such greedy unreasonable pretended ministers & their robbed maintenance , these persons do deny & disown , neither can they pay them wages , nor in no wise uphold them• 



Enq.   Well , but have they not such in their parishes , to whom the law of the land alloweth tithe ; whether do they pay them , or suffer the penalty of the law , & the cruelty of such men ? 



Res.   Oh , alas , the covetous hirelings they are so spread over the nation , that scarce either city or parish are free of them , and truly volumes Might be filled of the sufferings of these harmless persons , which they undergo , & have undergone in that particular , through the cruelty & mercilessness of that unreasonable generation of greedy perverse priests , ( Whose blessings are cursed , & whose seed is corrupted ) for truly they have even made havoc of the persons , who for conscience sake cannot pay tithe , & therefore have their goods been pitifuly spoilt ; as hath been pretty largely published to the shame & confusion of these merciless & cruel men ; but a book of remembrance is writ , and their actions are upon record . 



Enq.   But are these persons so simple that they will not go to law with those that wrong them ; what is not the law open ? and the magistrates will do justice ; will they not ? 



Res.   If thou observed Christ's words well , thou would not call them simple , for not going to law with their adversaries ; for did he not say , if any man will sue thee at the law and take away thy coat , let him have thy cloak also ? now they that walk in his light who spoke these words , they abide in his doctrine , & when their adversary hath sued them & recovered treble damage , & taketh away twice the worth of that which he recovered , they resist not , but bears it patiently , knowing this that there is one that will plead their cause , to whom vengeance belongs and he will repay . 

And although that the law be open , yet they are not free to go to it ; for what said Paul to the •orinthianss , did he not tell them that there was utterly a fault among them , because they did go to law one with another ; why ( Saith he ) do you not rather take wrong ? why do you not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded ? so that here thou May see it doth not become saints to go to law , and that especially before them that are out of the truth ; for such magistrates will connive at the sufferings of the oppressed , & not reprove the oppressors , who ought by magistrates to be rebuked : but there are some prudent understanding men that are much wearied , with being so daily encumbered with the beggarly suits of these covetous priests , against these harmless , innocent persons : and some of the magistrates are backward enough in doing justice , and too forward in fulfilling the desires of unjust men , who deals unjustly with these persons , & this is not unknown to some in authority , whose bowels are sometime moved with compassion to behold the many greivances and annoyances which are daily renewed upon these that fear the Lord . 



Enq.   I suppose that saints in former ages have suffered much by the untoward generation have they not ? 



Res.   Yea , yea , a cloud of witnesses Might be produced of the sufferings of the saints , some of which had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings , of bonds and imprisonments , some of them were stoned , others sawn asunder , others slain with the sword , &c. & he that was a precious saint , & a sufferer by the untoward generation , he testified , and said , that through many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God ; & further he said , that they that will live godly in Christ Jesus , must suffer persecution . 



Enq.   But these whom thou mentionest were comforted in the midst of their tribulations and sufferings ; are these persons so ? 



Res.   Yea , they also are comforted in their tribulations , that they are able to comfort them which are in trouble , by the comfort wherewith they themselves are comforted of God ; for as the sufferings of Christ abound in them , so their consolation also aboundeth by Christ , of which all the opposers and adversaries in the world cannot deprive them of ; they May be bereaved of their goods , & separated from their friends and brethren , & be debarred of their liberty & freedom by the power of their adversary ; but his power extendeth not so far , as to deprive them of their peace in him which is their life , and of the comfort and consolation which they receive from him ; and that they prefer above the whole world . 



Enq.   And how comes it that so many of them are cast into priso• , and some whipped , and others banished from some places ; is it for misdemeanour , or for the truth's sake ? 



Res.   Thus it is , many of them have been moved of the Lord to go to steeple-houses ( which are called churches ) & to speak unto the priest & persons , that which the Lord was pleased to lay upon them to declare , it May be sometime before the priest had done , and sometime after ; so some in authority being then present , have forthwith sent them to prison , for disturbing the congregation , as they said , & it May be have caused them to be whiped , &c. & for this very particular hundred have been put in prison ; several others have been cast into prison , because they could not pay tithe to the hireling priests ; others because they could not swear ; others because they have not put off their hats before magistrates ; others for going to visit their friends that hath been in prison , others for riding above five miles upon a first day to a meeting ; others for speaking a few words in a street , or a market to persons , whom they have exhorted to fear the Lord ; others for speaking to •ome upon the high way ; & for such like things as these , are the most part of them 〈◊〉 if not all ) cast into prison ; and some of •hem have been fined for standing cover•d before the judge , and hath laid above a •ear ( Or years ) in prison for non-payment of the fine , and some of them after they •ave •uffered imprisonment a certain time have been banished , and sent away like •agabondss ; & more favour is showed unto malefactors by many in authority then is •fforded them ; and all this do they patiently suffer for righteousness sake . 



Enq.   It seems by thy relation of them they suffer much wrong , do they not petition unto the powers of the earth for relief , and make •heir redress unto them in such causes ? 



Res.   They cry unto them for justice , but to petition unto them as unto gods , they cannot in the least do it : although many petitions have been put up against them ; but that doth not molest nor troubble them whose trust and confidence is in the Lord , by whom they do expect to be delivered , & not by the arm of flesh ; their manifold greivances are not hide from the Lord , who will arise and plead their cause , and rebuke those that afflict them , and severely punish those that do oppress them . 



Enq.   But in the mean time do they not seek to avenge themselves of their adversaries , seei•g they are now become a great body ? 



Res.   Oh no , they have no such thoughts , for they have referred their cause wholly to the Lord , to whom vengeance belongeth , and he will repay , of whom they have learned to love their enemies , to bless , those that curse them , to do good to those that hate them , to pray for those which despitefully use them , and persecute them ; and they are so far from avenging themselves that if one smite them on the one cheek they will turn the other : and they look not upon the number of themselves to be any thing , in reference to their redemption , out of their hands , who exercise lordship over them , for they know that by one , the Lord is able to chase a thousand , and by two to put ten thousand to •light , 



Enq ,  Yea , that is true , yet nevertheless will they not carry weapons , for their own defence , and for the defence of their country ? 



Res.   The weapons of their warfare are not carnal but mighty through God , to the pulling down of strong holds , casting down imaginations , and every high thought that exalteth itself against the kingdom of God , and only such weapons carry they , and he that put them into ••eir hands is mighty enough to preserve ••em and their country , with whose ar•ur they are always armed , having their ••nes gird about with truth , having on the •est-plate of righteousness , and the shield 〈◊〉 faith , wherewith they are able to quench 〈◊〉 the fiery darts of the wicked ; they •ve also the helmet of salvation and the •ord of the spirit , which is the word o••od ; thus are they armed against their Ene••eses that seek to bereave them of their •ace with God , whom they only with•••nd , but violence to no man will they do , •at is contrary to the doctrine of their ••rd to whom they do commend them•••veses . 



Enq.   I suppose by this declaration of them •at they are a peaceable persons : but what 〈◊〉 they in life and conversation , for by their •itss we must judge of them ? 



Res.   My report or declaration of them 〈◊〉 true , and the truth i speak & lie not , for 〈◊〉 have known them from a child ( Or •ce that i was a babe in Christ ) & my •ucation in the Lord hath been among •em , and for the space of several years i •ave been daily conversant with them ; •d in all this time , i have found their life •d conversation , to be good , honest , and •reproveable ; do but ask any conscientious man fearing God , that know• these persons , and thou shalt find that 〈◊〉 testimony of them will not contra•• mine , yea many of their opposers will 〈◊〉 knowledge , that for their life & conver••tion they have nothing to accuse them• 



Enq.   But it is said they are rude 〈◊〉 speech , and useth the word thee , and 〈◊〉 particular persons ; is not that an unman••ly and absurd thing in them ? 



Res.   No , it is the language of the 〈◊〉 scripture ; and to use thou , and thee , 〈◊〉 a particular person , is proper , and 〈◊〉 unmannerly nor absurd : for when 〈◊〉 Lord spoke to Adam , and Adam to hi•• they used that language ; when 〈◊〉 spoke to Pharaoh , & Pharaoh to him , th••• used that language ; when Paul spoke to 〈◊〉 ••grippa , and Agrippa to him , they used 〈◊〉 language , and it was not unmannerly , 〈◊〉 absurd with them , neither do we read 〈◊〉 it was then accounted rudeness of spee••• and although that this seems so stran••• to the men of this generation , yet it is 〈◊〉 proper phrase of the scripture , and 〈◊〉 language of all them of whom we read 〈◊〉 the scripture . 



Enq.   I have not observed that so 〈◊〉 before ; but now in their buying and selli••• how do they do ? are they of as many 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 other men ; or keep they to yea or nay in ••eir communication ? 



Res.   To yea and nay , they keep , knowing 〈◊〉 whatsoever is more cometh of evil , 〈◊〉 when they have a commodity to sell , ••ey set a reasonable price of it , and do not •act upon the persons ; and when that •ey buy a commodity , they proffer a rea••nable price for it , for the which they ••ppose the party May well afford it , and •at which they judge to be the value of •e thing , and so in few words dispatch•h ; and thus they abide in the doctrine 〈◊〉 their Lord , who hath said , let your yea 〈◊〉 yea , and your nay be nay , for whatso•er is more than these , cometh of evil . 



Enq.   But men are so accustomed to many 〈◊〉 in their dealings one with another , that should think men will scarce meddle with •em in affairs , if they will abate nothing of •e price which they first set on their com•odity , for that is most usual among •n ? 



Res.   't is true , it is usual among men to ••ter many needless words in their deal•gss , and to swear many grievous oaths •ecause they will not trust one another ; ••t is not the manner of these persons to •o so , neither have they freedom thereun•• in the least , whereupon some of their cu•tomss have absented from them 〈◊〉 season , and have made trial of others ▪ 〈◊〉 they not finding such •idelity in others , 〈◊〉 such just & upright dealings by them , 〈◊〉 have returned again to this persons , & 〈◊〉 made further proof of them , & have fou• their commodity to be good and substa••tial , and well worth that which they ga• for it , whereupon they have brought oth•• customers with them , & acquainted the• with the condition o• the persons , that the would have so much as they asked , and the they were not given to many words , & 〈◊〉 to the which the persons in process of 〈◊〉 have well condescended , so that now whe• they are known , they are credited , & 〈◊〉 extraordinarily provoked ( By those th•• know them ) to superfluity of words ; and 〈◊〉 they come to use men to that which the• have been little accustomed unto , ( To 〈◊〉 to few words in their buying and selling ▪ 



Enq   That is well done of them ; yet 〈◊〉 much against them ; for it is said , they 〈◊〉 not speak to men upon the way , but pass 〈◊〉 them without saluting of them , neither 〈◊〉 they doff their hats to any , which gives gre•• offence to many ; wherefore do they carry th•m•selveses so uncivilly ? 



Res.   When they have occasion to spea• to any man , they speak unto him wh•the• 〈◊〉 be upon the way , or in the street , or up•n the market , or in any other convenient •lace ; but to salute men in a complement•ng way , by doffing their hats unto them , •nd bowing before them , and giving them •attering titles , ( According to the custom •nd manner of the world ) that they are 〈◊〉 free to do , and that is a principal thing 〈◊〉 of the many ) which men have against •hem ; although they honour all men in the •ord , without respect of persons , and be•aveth themselves civilly towards all , yet •an doff their hat to none , for that is an •ct of as proud and uncivil persons , as lives , •ho will show humility in that thing , when •hey are as proud in their heart as Haman•as , and will deride and scorn those that •annot for conscience-sake do it ; and these •re they that are offended when it is not •one , and carry themselves uncivilly to •ch as doth it not . 



Enq.   Well , but it is a fashion which men •ve , and a token of civi• respect ; had they •t better please men by conforming unto them 〈◊〉 this thing of small importance , then to of•nd them through abstaining from doing of it ; •r we read that Paul became all to all ; unto 〈◊〉 Jews he became as a Jew , &c.  



Res.   The fashions of this world will •ass away , but the word of God endures for •ver , by which word these persons 〈◊〉 redeemed from the world , so that the• cannot be conformable to it in its way• worships , customs , and fashions ; all whi•• will pass away , and if they should seek 〈◊〉 please men , then were they not the se••vantss of Christ , whose servants never 〈◊〉 such a token of civil respect ( As doffing 〈◊〉 the hat ) that we read of in the whole sc••pture ; and who dare call them his servan• that receive honour of men from their ha•• and are offended if it be not given the• surely they are not like unto him in the thing , for he received not honour from me• neither did he seek it , but said unto tho• that did , how can ye believe that recei•• honour one of another , and seek not 〈◊〉 honour that cometh from God only ? 

And although Paul became as a Jew u•• to the Jews , as without law to them th•• were without law , yea all things to all me• this he did for the gospel's sake , not 〈◊〉 please men , but that he Might by all mea• save some , therefore condescended he 〈◊〉 the simplicity in them , speaking low thin•• to their capacity and understanding , the so by guile he Might catch them , and ga• or win them to the truth ; but who dare 〈◊〉 that he became an idol-worshipper wit• idolaters ? If so , how should he hav• brought any from that idolatry to have worshipped the living God ? Or who dare say that he became an opposer of truth with opposers ? If so , how should he have gained any of them to the truth ; but it was not so with Paul , who showed himself in all things approved of God , •n whose sight he commended himself to every man's conscience ? 



Enq.   I am persuaded that if these persons •ere admitted to answer for the•selveses upon •ll occasions , many would come to be satisfied 〈◊〉 things concerning them , wherein they are 〈◊〉 - informed . 



Res.   Oh yea ; but alas such reports are •umored abroad of them ( By such as say , •eport , and we will report it ) as is not fit•ng to be named among Christians ; and •ese reports being credited , or regarded •y simple persons , they become odious and •espised among men , and therefore is it •at there is so much whooting and hissing 〈◊〉 them in the streets ; but if they Might 〈◊〉 admitted to make their own defence in •e presence of prudent and understanding •en , having their accuser's face to face , to •ove their accusations that they have a•inst them , i believe many would come to 〈◊〉 better satisfied , the mouths of gain 〈◊〉 would come to be stopped , and the ignorance of foolish men would come to be silenced ; but that is the policy and subtlety of their grand adversary ( Who was a liar from the beginning ) to make persons believe all the horrid lies that can be spoken & invented of them , and thereby comes the minds of thousands to be evil affected against the precious truth , which if the• were but rightly informed of the certainty of things reported , they would either b• brought to the acknowledgement of the truth , otherwise to lay their hands upo• their mouths , and become silent , if the• were not evil men , and seducers , and suc• thou knowest will grow worse and wors• 



Enq.   Hath the truth of God been so d•famed , blasphemed , and reproached in oth•• generations , as it is now in this age ? 



Res.   Yea in all ages , when the Lord appeared by his power to reveal his precio•• truth upon the face of the earth ; sat•• ( Who goes to & fro in the earth ) hath sti•red up his instruments to defame , bla•pheme , and reproach it , by whose blasph•mieses the living truth hath been much ••faced , and so it is now at this day , by 〈◊〉 multitude of lies , false reports , and aspe••onss which are cast upon it by wicked a• ungodly men , who cry out against such 〈◊〉 formerly have defamed , blasphemed , a•• reproached the truth , and they themsel••• are blasphemers and reproachers , like as the Jews did , who exclaimed against their fathers for killing the prophets , & yet they themselves put him to death who was the Prince of glory , of whom the prophets prophesied . 



Enq.   But i would yet ask something concerning these persons ; baptise they their children ? Or are they themselves baptised ? 



Res.   Their children they do not baptize according to the course of the world , for they find no scripture that speaks of infant's baptism , nor no example in the scripture for the same ; yet they who are in the unity , are baptised by one spirit , into one body ; and so many of them as were baptised into Jesus Christ , were baptised into his death , that they should walk in newness of life ; and this is the only baptism which they do witness . 



Enq   But were •hey never baptised with elementary water ? 



Res.   Some of them in the time of ignorance were baptised with outward water , supposing that it were necessary for salva•ion , but after they had taken up the ordi•ance , they took up their rest also in the •ead form , & did apply the promises whic••as due to believers , although little or no •eformation was wrought in them , yet •hey were conceited in themselves that it was well with them , until the Lord in his infinite love opened their blind eyes , and then they saw themselves to be poor , naked , and miserable , & that that rest which they had taken up , was not the rest which the Lord had prepared for his persons ; neither was that baptism wherewith they were baptised , the baptism which should save them by the resurrection of Jesus Christ ; neither did the promises pertain unto them , which they had applied to themselves ; and that which gave them to see these things , was the light of Jesus Christ in them , bywhich they were brought afterwards to witness the baptism of the holy ghost , and fire . 



Enq.   But are there none of them sent to baptize , that so others being baptised by them , Might come to witness , the one baptism also ? 



Res.   The same command that Christ gave at the first , he is with us to the end of the world ; which is , go teach all nations , baptising them in the name of the father , of the son ▪ & of the holy ghost ; but here is no outward water mentioned ; and the everlasting gospel they are sent to preach , and they do turn persons from darkness to light , from the power of Satan unto God , and so many as receive their testimony , & believe in the light which they are turned unto , they come to witness the one baptism , which is by one spirit , into one body , although they be never dipped nor sprinkled with outward water , and hundred of these persons are come to witness this , who have never been baptised with outward water since they believed . 



Enq.   Own they the Lord's supper ? 



Res.   Yea , the supper of the Lord they own , and at the table of the Lord ( Which is richly furnished ) they sit and do eat abundantly , to the eternal refreshing of their souls . 



Enq.   Well , but do they break bread , and drink wine at that table , like as professed Christians do ? 



Res.   The bread that they break is the body of Christ ; and the cup that they drink , is the blood of Christ ; but many professed Christians who talks of the Lord's table , discerns not his body , and so eats and drinks their own damnation , yet notwithstanding Christians in Christ breaks one bread , and drinks of one cup & they have unity one with another , even as these persons do witness with whom Christ doth •up , and to the substance they are come , and therefore go they not by imitation , •ike as many do who are called Christians , who yet never came to eat the flesh of Christ , nor to drink his blood , and therefore have they no life abiding in them . 



Enq.   But yet there is something more in which i desire also to be satisfied concerning these persons , for many exclaims out against them , for judging and condemning others : now pray thee tell me , what do they judge in others ? any thing besides that which is condemned in themselves ? 



Res.   Nay , it is that only , ( To wit ) deceit and unrighteousness , which the judgements of the Lord hath passed upon in their own particular ; and when they meet with such as pleads for that which is ordained of old for condemnation , perhaps they May sharply reprove them , if they judge not the deceit in them ; then the party reproved being one that cannot stand in the judgement , exclaims out against them as if they were censorious judges , and horrid blasphemers , when they have judged and reproved nothing but deceit in them , and that which is to be eternally condemned , even the very same that is judged in their own particulars . 



Enq.   Well , but duth not Christ say , judge not , that you be not judged ? And Paul saith , the man that judgeth is inexcusable , whosoever he is ? 



Res.   Yea , those are the words of Christ and Paul ; by the way take notice of the following words : did not Christ there speak to the hypocrite that beheld the mo•e that was in his brother's eye ; but considered not the beam that was in his own eye : and •ake Paul's words also as they are : thou art inexcusable , oh man ( Saith he ) whosoever thou art that judgest ; for wherein thou ••udgest another , [ mark well ] thou condem•nest thyself ; for thou that judgest , dost the ••ame things : there is now the man that is •nexcusable , who judgeth another for that which he is guilty of himself ; and if thou •or any man can tax these persons in this , •hen say that they are inexcusable who are ••ound guilty in this thing , 



Enq.   There is another thing which men ••ath against them , which is this , they say •hat they will not respect persons , but to a Prince or Lord , or whatsoever that he is , they will say thee , and thou to him , and stand with •heir hats on in his presence , as if he were a •an of no reputation ; is this true ? 



Res.   He who is their god ( Who hath •ade of one blood all nations of men for •o dwell upon the face of the earth ) he is no respecter of persons , and if they who •are his persons , should have respect to persons , they should commit sin , and would be convinced of the law as transgressors ; and for them to have respect of persons , that were not good ; and as for the properness of thee and thou , i have showed thee before . And why May not they stand with their hats on in the presence of the greatest man upon the face of the earth , •e•ing that they stand daily covered in the presence of their God , whose name is the Lord of hosts , who filleth heaven and earth , in whom they honour all men , without the respecting of any ones person , or the greatness and magnificency of any , for what is man but dust ? and wherefore should he be adored by his fellow-creature ? as if honour pertained to him , which indeed is only due to his creator , who form him of the dust , to which he must return , and then his honour shall be laid in the dust with him . 



Enq   Well , but hear , these persons say that they are moved of the Lord to do this , and the other : and that they are sent of God to publish his truth ; now if this were true , they should turn many from their wickedness , should they not ? 



Res.   The truth they must acknowledge , whether they before whom it is acknowledged , can bear it or no ; the which truth hath been often rejected by such as resist the holy ghost , by the which these peo•le have been often moved to declare un•• the sons of Adam their sin , and to show •hem their transgression , and to exhort •em to repentance & amendment of life , •nd many have been turned from darkness 〈◊〉 light , from the power of Satan unto God , by those among them , that were sent 〈◊〉 publish his tr•th , and to preach his e•erlasting gospel unto the spirits in pri••n ; yea , thousands are converted , & tur•ed from iniquity and wickedness , and are •rought to serve God in purity and holy•ess in his own temple , and therefore they •ave not run as uncertainly , ( Or without •••ding ) neither have they fought as one ••at beateth the air , for they who are tur•ed from wickedness , by them are the seal 〈◊〉 their apostleship in the Lord . 



Enq.   It is said that they permit women to •eak or prophesy among them ; is not that ex•es•y against the scripture ? For did not Paul 〈◊〉 that he would not permit a woman to speak 〈◊〉 the church ? And where do they read of any •omens in the new-testament that prophesied ? 



Res.   For women to prophesy ( Upon •hom the spirit of the Lord is poured out )  not expressly against the scripture , but a •••filling of the scripture ; for the scripture •ith , that is shall come to pass afterward ••at i ( The Lord ) will pour out my spirit upon all flesh , & your sons & your daughters shall prophesy : now the fulfilling of this , these persons do witness , who will no• permit a woman ( Upon whom the spir•• of the Lord is not poured out ) to speak in the church ; but notwithstanding every sister in Christ upon whom the spirit of the Lord is poured out , ( Who by that spirit is moved to prophesy ) they forbid not ; fo• the same Paul that did not permit a woman to speak in the church , he wrote un•to the church that they should not quench the spirit , nor despise prophecy ; neither do we read that he , nor none of his company did forbid Philip's daughters to prophesy , [ Acts 21. 8 , 9 ] who were virgins , and four in number , upon whom the spirit of the Lord was poured out ; & who will say that he would have quenched the spirit in Phoebe , if she had been moved by it to prophesy in that church of which she was a servant ? And the spirit of the Lord , these persons will not limit in male or female , who are one in Christ . 



Enq.   What charity hath these persons ? will they relieve the fatherless and widow , &c.  



Res.   They have that charity which suffereth long , which is kind and envieth not ; which vaunteth not itself , nor is puffed up ; they have that charity which rejoiceth not 〈◊〉 iniquity , but in the truth , which bear•••h all things , hopeth all things , endureth 〈◊〉 things ; yea the charity which they ••ve will never fail ; and therefore are ••ey so charitable to the fatherless and •iddowss , whom they rel•ive within their •atess ; if they be naked they clothe them , 〈◊〉 they be hungry they feed them , if they 〈◊〉 destitute of lodging , they take them in ; 〈◊〉 discreetly they do it , and with much •isdome , lest any should depend upon it , •nd live in idleness , and this they do , espe•ally to them of the household of faith , •ho cannot work , nor have not of their •wn wherewith to subsist , such they re•eve , that so there need be no beggar in ••rael . 



Enq.   According to the words in thy an••er to my first proposition , so i find it that 〈◊〉 few words my first demand could not be •swered , but afterwards it would be more •lly ; truly i May say to thee as Agrippa •id to Paul , that he almost persuaded him to 〈◊〉 a Christian , even so thou ( By thy sober 〈◊〉 plain answers ) hast almost persuaded 〈◊〉 to be one of these persons ; for verily i have 〈◊〉 desired to be satisfied in those things •herein thou hast kindly resolved me , like a ••reind that desireth my eternal felicity , and 〈◊〉 the future i hope not to entertain every unsavoury report of them as some do , but 〈◊〉 to withstand false reporters , for no•• have wherewith to answer them . 



Res.   I am glad that thou art so well••tisfied and resolved , for that was the 〈◊〉 thing that i aimed at , ( Excepting the 〈◊〉 of God , and the clearing of these peo••• innocence ) from the very beginning ; 〈◊〉 when i wished thee to have patience a 〈◊〉 , than i told thee that by the Lord's a•••stance i should endeavour to inform 〈◊〉 rightly , and to resolve thee fully so far 〈◊〉 was allowed of God . And now seeing 〈◊〉 it is come to this issue , let me persw••• thee to wait upon the Lord in his 〈◊〉 light , which now in some measure do••• convince thee of his precious truth , 〈◊〉 which these persons do walk ; and be 〈◊〉 too forward in contending for them , 〈◊〉 thou be one with them in the life a•• power of truth , and then thou will't be •••able to answer their opposers , as i ha• been ( By the Lord's assistance ) to ansvv•• thy objections , 



Enq.   For my own particular i find mu•• more contentment in myself than i did , a•• am for the present as an empty vessel ( 〈◊〉 touching objections against these persons ) 〈◊〉 i know the subtlety of Sa•an is great , 〈◊〉 May yet possess me wi•h do•btss and fear•• 〈◊〉 bring objections into my mind when thou 〈◊〉 not with me to answer them , and to 〈◊〉 me : therefore i entreat thee to tell me 〈◊〉 i should do in such a cause . 



Res.   Thy chiefest remedy in such a 〈◊〉 , is to stand still in the light which ••weth thee the subtlety of Satan to be •at ; and enter not into consultations 〈◊〉 flesh & blood , for that is the way to 〈◊〉 in doubts and fears , and the same that ••teth them in , will bring objections 〈◊〉 thy mind , and take exceptions against 〈◊〉 truth , and against them that are in it ; 〈◊〉 all these thou must judge down with 〈◊〉 light , and let them be made thy foot••ol , then will that spark of love in thee ••hich is towards the truth ) become a ••me , which many waters will not be 〈◊〉 to quench ; and when things ariseth in 〈◊〉 mind which thou art not clear in , nei•••r can comprehend , cumber not thy 〈◊〉 with them , but dwell low in the cross 〈◊〉 thy will , & then the aspiring mind ( From ••ich frivolous objections doth arise ) 〈◊〉 come to be kept under the judgement , 〈◊〉 then a principle of life thou wi•t feel , ••ich will thresh and hew down thy lusts , •••rupt desires , and inordinate affections ; 〈◊〉 as these come to be mortified in thee , •wilt thou come to be brought into unity with the Lord's persons , and to lie do•• with them in their father's bosom of lo• where ( I hope ) thou Mayest at any 〈◊〉 find me , in the general assembly of 〈◊〉 ransomed ones of the Lord , where 〈◊〉 is sung to the most high witho•• ceasing . 



The end . 

•ostscript ▪ or , something written after . 

•ultitudess of objections May arise out of that mind against the truth , which cannot close with truth ( To wit ) the carnal mind , in which an irrecon•ble enmi•y lodgeth against the ways of God , the •••ship of God , the righteousness of God , and against truth of God , in which these persons are established , that nothing can satisfy that unsatiable mind but 〈◊〉 and destruction , for i know if many volumes were •it ( More than are ) in explanation , and vindication of 〈◊〉 truth , yet notwithstanding this busy mind would 〈◊〉 blemishes upon the truth , through its defaming , scan••••zing , and reproaching of it , whereby their mind's 〈◊〉 to be blinded in whom death reigns , so that they •old no beauty nor comelines• in the pure everlasting 〈◊〉 , being surprised with jealousies , doubts , and fears •••cerning the immutability , the eternal excellency of the 〈◊〉 truth of God , which to us that believe is exceed••• precious , and beauty , glory , and majesty we behold in 〈◊〉 which doth as far exceed the words , beauty and glo••• as the light of the sun exceeds the light of one sta• , 〈◊〉 all things below to us that are saved , are but as ••oss and dung in comparison of the eternal living •••th of God , the excellency of which hath not been •own by the apostates , who have been apostatised ( Or ••anged from that of God in them ) since the days of 〈◊〉 apostasy . 

But rejoice oh ye saints , and be exceeding glad , who 〈◊〉 come out of that long , dark , and dolesom• night of ••ostacy ( Where you were well acquain•e• with sorrow and grief ) unto the everlasting day of joy and glad••• where sorrow & sighing is stead away ; rejoice i say 〈◊〉 joy unspeakable , for the Lord God is your shepherd ▪ 〈◊〉 you shall not want , •ut with the finest of the vvhea•• 〈◊〉 shall be •ed , in pastures which are green a•d large , 〈◊〉 your souls May delight themselves in fatness . And 〈◊〉 this my friends , that the Lord God will wipe away 〈◊〉 r•proach , and sweep away the refuge of lies , 〈◊〉 which your enemies ( Who have smitten you with the 〈◊〉 of wickedness ) have with falsehood hide themselves , 〈◊〉 their rod shall not always rest upon your lot , 〈◊〉 shall you always be a prey unto them , for the Lord 〈◊〉 will deliver you out of the hands of those that 〈◊〉 you , and Kings and Princes he will rebuke for 〈◊〉 sak•ss ; where•ore be of good cheer in the Lord , he 〈◊〉 shall come , will come , and will not tarry . 

The end . 










































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































