The fallacy of infant's baptism discovered . Or , five arguments , to prove that infants ought not to be baptised . 

Delivered in private by captain Hobson , who should that day ( With Master knowlss , and some others ; ) have discussed the thing in public with Master Callamy , and Master Cranford , &c.  

And now published for the benefit of those that seek the truth in love . 

col. 2.23 . 

Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship . 



isai. 1.12 . 

Who hath required this at your hands ? 



London , printed in the year of discoveries . 1645.  

To the courteous reader . 

Reader , 

i who am one that waits upon truth , desiring to know truth , but am not to be considered under any of those names of distinction , as a member of any independent congregation , or one that they call an Anabaptist , but a friend to them and others , so far as they are one with the truth : i having by a providence , had an opportunity to hear one captain Hobson ( With two ministers more ) in private , who should have disputed in public with Master Callamy and some others , about the point of baptism , having taken the heads of what captain Hobson delivered , and conceiving that the good which i received by it , should engage me to communicate it to others , i was therefore willing to put it forth in print . But i desire you ( Christian reader ) that you would consider that it is but the heads of what he delivered , as i took it from him in shorthand , and therefore if there be any broken expressions in it , attribute it not to him , but to me , who am not so well skilled ( As in understanding , so ) in writing syllogisms , which ( I understand ) he was enjoined so to speak , had he spoke in public , and he seemed to be willing to speak in private , as he should have done there . There was two ministers more who exercised also , whose arguments were worthy the printing , could i have taken them so as to bring them out but not taking of them so perfectly , i was loath to dishonour that truth that i believe was in them . 

My desire is , that neither i nor you , May so look upon this , under the consideration of that division that seems to be amongst men of Presbyterians and Anabaptiss , and separatists , but that these names of distinction May be laid down , and that we May all as sons of truth , try every thing by the rules of truth , and love each other in truth , which i know is that which would put an end to that great confusion and trouble that i see abroad . And i hope when you have read this , you will see ( As well as i ) that we have for a long time been led in blindness , taking that upon trust , which now i see is contrary to scripture , even infant's baptism . 

so desiring you to pass by infirmities in it , and make a good construction of it , i leave you to truth , desiring you not to have any prejudicial thoughts against him that spoke it , notwithstanding any infirmities you May see in him that writes it . 

Yours in the Lord Jesus , s.s.  

The fallacy of infant's baptism discovered . 

Dearest friends : 

Seeing a providence hath brought us together at this time , i shall therefore endeavour , according to the intent of our meeting to declare myself , and so declare myself , that i May not only answer your expectations , but directly our intentions , in speaking to the point in hand , which this day should have been discussed in public : but seeing a providence hath prevented us ; and we who thought to have been in public , are now prevented by the civil magistrate , whom we much honour ; and with all willing subjection , are willing to obey in all things that cross not the Lord Jesus Christ : and truly here is that which stays our spirits , though we were willing to declare our judgements in public , to the view of many ; yet if God will have it other ways , herein is our joy that the truth knows how best to make out itself ; and it God by our silence , will cause truth to speak , we rejoice : or if the time is not yet come to have things brought to a public view , we desire to wait upon God , knowing that his time is best to make out truth to the sons of men . 

But before i address myself to what i intend to speak , i desire that you would give me leave to speak to two or three things : First , to desire you not to think it strange that not only one , but two , or three should speak to one , and the same thing . 
Secondly , that you would not think it strange for us to trade so much in the shadow , in breaking up the shell , and not a little to trade in the kernel ; my meaning is , that we should speak so much of the outward ordinance ; and not enter into the unfolding of the sweet , and glorious mystery of God in Christ , wrapped up in the ordinance , which is the life as of the ordinance , so of saints while they are observing it . 
Thirdly , i desire that you would not think it strange for me to speak to you , contrary to my wont practice , which i shall at this time do , only speaking in a syllogistical way ; for the truth is , i shall here endeavour to declare myself in private , as i did intend , to declare myself in public ; and the same grounds i intended to lay down in public , i shall lay down here against the baptising of infants . 


And the reason of my speaking syllogistically , is because it was an injunction laid upon us so , to speak , had we met in public . 

But before i come to lay down my reasons , i shall take a portion of scripture , and draw a conclusion , which conclusion shall be as a ground , from whence i purpose to build all my following discourse , the scripture is . 

matth. 28.20 . 

Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever i have commanded you . 



In the words there are these two things considerable : An exhortation , 
And a sweet direction . 


The exhortation doth arise from the words considered in reference to the words before , ( Verse 19 ) Go•e therefore and teach all nations . 

The direction in these words , teaching them to observe whatsoever i have commanded you . 

In the exhortation ( If we had time ) we Might observe : 

First , the party exhorting ; that 's Christ . 

Secondly , the parties exhorted ; that was the disciple , or apostles , who were taught of Christ . 

Thirdly , the matter exhorted to , go teach . 

From all which you May observe this conclusion . 

That it is the duty of all those who are taught of Christ , to declare to other what they enjoy from Christ . 

But this is not that which i intend to build my following discourse upon . Therefore i pass it over . 

And i come to the direction , in which we May observe . 

First , the party directing . 

Secondly , the parties directed . 

And thirdly , the direction itself . 

●rt , the party directing ; that 's Christ . 

Secondly , the parties directed , that is the aposles , on the disciple in this word ye . 

And thirdly , the direction itself , in these words , go and teach them to observe whatsoever i have commanded you . 

That which i shall at this time speak of , is in the direction itself ; and from thence briefly observe with me these things . 

doct. 1 first , that the teachings of the apostles concerning our duty to Christ , are the command of Christ : in these words , teach them to observe whatsoever i command you . so that their teaching duty to Christ , was the command of Christ . 

The second conclusion is from these words , teach them to observe whatsoever i command . 

doct. 2 thence observe , that the commands of Christ ought to be observed . 

I Might be large in speaking of this ; 

First , because i see men are apt rather to observe the commands of men than the commands of Christ ; and so do exceedingly slight and undervalue the commands of Christ . 

Secondly , because i apprehend that men are apt to mistake in the commands of Christ , and to take that for a command that is not ; and to make that no command that is . But i shall not at this time speak of that . 

The third conclusion doth arise from something included in these words , teach them to observe what i command . implying not only that we should observe Christ's commands ; but in observing any thing as a duty to Christ , it must be in reference to a command of Christ , from thence observe this conclusion . 

doct. 3 that all that we are to observe as a duty to Christ , must not arise from supposition , but it must answer a command given out from Christ . 

And at this time this is the conclusion i shall speak to ; explaining the terms , and confirming the proposition ; being that which i intend to build my following discourse upon . 

And in opening the terms , i shall be very brief : First , to show you what is meant by the law of Christ , or the commands of Christ . 
Secondly , what i mean by observation . 
Thirdly , what i mean by supposition . 
Fourthly , the reasons why we are to observe nothing as a duty to Christ , but that which answers a law given forth by Christ . 


1 first , by the commands of Christ , my meaning is , not the ceremonial law , which was a type of Christ , and did in a dark way hold forth Christ . nay , by the laws of Christ , or the commands of Christ , i do not intend the moral law considered in the hand of Moses : though i must tell you , first , i own the authority of that law : secondly , i own the materials of that law : but the obligement of that law , do and live ; ( For so it was considered in the hand of Moses ) so it is not to be considered in the hand of Christ to us ; for now we are not to do for life ; but because we live : but consider the authority of God , and the materials of the law handed to us in Christ , so i own it , and desire all saints May do so . But by the commands of Christ , my meaning is , all those commands that Christ gave as he was a prophet , priest , and King of his church ; either concerning our believing in God , or of our worshipping or walking with God . And so much of that thing . 

2 secondly , my meaning by observation , in a word is , actually , and truly , and really to do and conform to what Christ commands . 

3 and what i mean ( In the third place ) by supposition : by that i mean a doubtful apprehension that men gather up consequentially , by the strength of reason and art , and have no plain word for it . Now in such a case , supposition of one side , is as strong as of the other : and if it be a duty to observe a thing under such a supposed consequence , then if there be a supposed consequence for the contrary , it is also a duty to observe a thing contrary to that . 

but a duty doth not consist in answering a supposition , but a command ; and that it doth , i will prove from these reasons . 

First , because nothing is a duty , but as it answers a command , Luke 17.10 . 

reason 1 reason 2 secondly , every thing that we observe , doth directly answer that light which doth present the thing to us to be observed . If it be a supposed light , it is but a supposed duty ; if a civil light presents to a civil man any truth of God , in his observation of it , it is but civil in reference to him ; if a legal light presents an evangelical truth , to a legal person , in his observation of it , it is legal in reference to him in his observing ; if a self light present a real duty to an hypocrite , he observes it for self-ends . This you May see , zach. 7.5 , 6. where he saith , when ye fasted , did ye as all fast unto me , even to me ? so than if a man observes a thing only from supposition , and not a command , at the best , it is but a supposed duty . 

reason 3 but thirdly , the will of Christ is , that as his members are to believe in light , so they should do in light , or obey in light , ephes. 5.8 . But if we observe any thing barely from supposition , and not from a command , it is observed in darkness , and not in light : therefore not as a duty to be observed . 

reason 4 fourthly , we are so to observe things that we present to Christ , that not only the manner , but the matter should not come under the reproofs of Christ ; but if we observe any thing as a duty to Christ , and have no command for it from Christ , it comes under the reproof of Christ ; and he will one day say , who hath required this as your hands ? the gospel forbids will-worship . now , will-worship is not only to do a thing contrary to a command ; but to do a thing that is thought right or good by the wisdom of man ; as worship without a command , which the apostle condemns , col. 2.  

reason 5 fifthly , Christ doth not only hold forth his laws so as to declare duty ; but so as that they May be sufficient to stop the mouths of them that oppose duty , matth. 5.16 . But to observe any thing as a duty , and not from a command of Christ , but from supposition ; that is not sufficient to stop the mouths of them that oppose duty : therefore ought not to be done ; for you must know suppositions ( As i said before ) are as strong of one side as of the other . 

reason 6 sixthly , the sixth reason i shall draw from those words , rom. 15.4 . where he saith , what is written , is written for our learning : i shall form my reason thus , that which is written the saints should learn ; but it is nowhere written that we should observe any thing as a duty , in reference to supposition , but to answer a command therefore to observe any thing as a duty to Christ , without a command , is not a doctrine for saints to learn . 

reason 7 in the seventh place , i Might give you one reason more , and that thus , that which answers the love of Christ , and our friendly relation with Christ , that 's duty and nothing else ; but to observe any thing not from supposition , but to answer a law or command of Christ ; that 's that which answers to the love of Christ , and our friendly relation with Christ , and therefore duty , John 14.23 . and 15.14 . 

These reasons ( Dearest friends ) i have given to you to confirm what before i spoke , which was , that we are to observe nothing as a duty to Christ , but that which answers a law given forth by Christ . 

I Might here draw divers uses , which Might be useful for us ; but at this time i shall only speak of a use of reproof ; to reprove those that will observe things , and in their observing , plead for it as a duty to Christ , and yet have no command for it from Christ : amongst the rest , this is that which i shall here reprove , the baprizing of infants ; which is the very point in controversy : and because i desire to speak directly to the question as it was stated ; i shall here rehearse to you what the question was , and what they were to prove and what we were to prove . The question was whether infants of believing parents were to be baptised , ye• , or no ? they were to prove that it was their duty , and they ought to do it . we were to prove that they ought not to do it . 

I shall not at all go about to meddle with the justifying of our practice concerning the baptising of believers ; for that is not the point in hand . Though i must tell you , it had been but a reasonable thing for them by scripture to endeavour to justify their practice ; and we by scripture to justify ours ; and then neither of us would have been put upon the proof of a negative , which every rational man knows is the worst and of the staff . But seeing it was so , i shall therefore direct my speech to give forth my judgement concerning that thing . 

The reasons that i shall at this time lay down ( According to time and strength ) why children ought not to be baptised , are these : 

argum. 1 the first is this : that which doth ( Not only accidentally , but ) directly deny Christ to be come in the flesh , that ought not to be done : 

But the baptising of infants doth directly deny Christ to be come in the flesh ; 

Therefore ought it not to be done . 

I know that no man can deny the major , which is so clearly confirmed , 1 John 4.3 . with divers other places . 

But at this time i will prove the minor , that baptising of infants doth directly deny Christ to be come in the flesh ; and that i prove thus : 

That which doth keep on foot that which was before Christ , and ended by Christ , considered come in the flesh ; that denies Christ to be come in the flesh : 

But the baptising of infants doth keep on foot that which was before Christ , and ended by Christ , as come in the flesh ; 

And therefore it denies Christ to be come in the flesh . 

For the proof of this , 

First , i shall unfold to you what i mean by that which was before Christ , and ended by Christ come in the flesh . That which was before Christ , was , that God made a covenant with Abraham , which covenant run in the flesh , and was entailed to generation ; and not upon condition of regeneration . And this you May see , gen. 17.7 , 12.  And this was that covenant that circumcision of children had a reference to ; and whosoever was a child of Abraham , considered as a son of the flesh , had a right to it , and Might , and did plead for privileges by it . But when Christ came , the natural branches were cut off rom. 11.20 , 21. and no man is now considered a son of Abraham , or the seed of Abraham , but as he believeth , gal. 3.7 , 9 , 14 , 22 , 28 , 29.  And now there is no promise that runs forth to any considered in referened to a carnal generation ; but a spiritual regeneration , John 3 , 5.  Therefore when they came to John ( matth. 3.7 , 8 , 9 ) to be baptised . He takes them off from pleading their privilege considered in the flesh , and tells them , say not in your heart , you have Abraham to your father , and so plead for baptism . But he exhorts them to believe and repent . 

And by this you see what i mean by that which was before Christ , which was , the promises and covenant running in a natural line ; but it is now ended , and runs in a spiritual but now to baptise children because their parents believe , and upon this ground , because it was the same ( As they say ) with circumcision ; in so doing they go about to make the promises to run in a natural line , which was ended by Christ ; and therefore in the observing of it , deny Christ to be come in the flesh . 

Secondly , 

That which doth directly take from Christ that which the holy ghost gives to Christ , considered come in the flesh ; that denies Christ come in the flesh . 

But the baptising of infants doth directly take from Christ that which the holy ghost gives to Christ considered come in the flesh . 

Therefore it denies Christ come in the flesh . 

And for the proof of this , i shall declare to you what i mean by that which the holy ghost gives to Christ considered come in the flesh . 

The holy ghost gives to Christ a preeminence above all others that were before him in his prophetical and kingly office . 

In his prophetical office , that neither Moses nor the prophets were to be compared with him , but far inferior to him , and his office ; so inferior , that he was not to be expounded by them ; but in giving out his mind considered come in the flesh , he was to expound and unfold them . But now men in their going about to plead for the baptising of infants , do exceedingly undervalue Christ's prophetical office in this , that they make the old testament expound the new ; whereas the new should expound the old ; Christ should , and doth expound Moses ; but there is no warrant for us to bring Christ under the exposition of Moses ; and men do undervalue the Lord Christ , in making Moses speak that which Christ speaks not , or bringing Moses to Christ , as a greater light to unfold the lesser ; they do ( I say ) exceedingly undervalue Christ , and that thus . 

The light unfolding or the wisdom unfolding , must be greater than the matter unfolded : and therefore he that goeth about to make Moses mouth to speak out Christ's mind , in things that concern Christ as come in the flesh , sets up Moses above Christ ; and denies Christ to be come in the flesh . 

Secondly , they exceedingly take from Christ's kingly office ; whereas the holy ghost sets up Christ a King in his church , and a lawgiver , as equal to , so transcending all others that were before him : but that men in the baptising of infants do undervalue the kingly office of Christ , in giving laws to his persons . that 's clear in these two things . 

First in this , that they say it is a duty to baptise infants , and answers the mind of Christ , and yet cannot show a command from Christ ; whereas the apostle saith , Christ was as faithful in his house , as Moses . and you know the faithfulness of Moses did consist in this , that he gave laws and commands to the Israelites , to declare their duty : and lays nothing upon them as a duty , but what they had a command for . And it he gave them laws for every thing they were to observe , and Christ was as faithful in his house as he ; i will leave this to the judgement of you , whether or no that this doth not undervalue the kingly office of Christ , to say , that baptising of infants is a duty that they owe to Christ ; and yet can show no command for it from Christ . 
Secondly , they undervalue the kingly office of Christ , in giving laws to his church in this ; that they go about to perform ( As they say ) a duty to Christ , but can show no command for it from Christ ; but must use there own art and reason to make Christ's law strong enough to hold it out to be a duty . And whether the joining of man's art , policy , and reason to the laws of Christ , doth not exceedingly undervalue Christ , as though his laws were not perfect enough for his persons , i leave you to judge . And in so doing they do exceedingly take ( As before i said from the prophetical , so here in the kingly office of Christ ) that honour and pre-eminence from him , which the holy ghost gives to him , considered as come in the flesh : and therefore so to do , denies Christ as come in the flesh . 
Secondly , 

That which is no part of righteousness , that as a duty to Christ , ought not to be observed . 

But , the baptising of infants is no part of righteousness ; 

And therefore it ought not to be observed . 

The major proposition none can deny , i will prove the minor , and that thus . 

Whatsoever is considered as a part of righteousness , was seen either in the person or practice of Jesus Christ . 

But neither in the person nor practice of Jesus Christ , is the baptising of infants seen or held forth . 

Therefore it is not part of righteousness . 

And that whatsoever is a part of righteousness , was seen in the person or practice of Jesus Christ , is clear from this scripture , matth. 3.15 . and Jesus said , suffer it to be so : for thus is becometh us to fulfil all righteousness . if all righteousness , than there was no righteousness but was considered either in the person or practice of Christ . And that the baptising of infants is not-held out in the person or practice of Christ , i leave to you to judge . He himself was not baptised when he was an infant , though he Might plead the same privilege as they do who say they are children of believers : had it been a part of righteousness , Christ would ; nay , Christ should have done it . 

object . if you object , and say , there was none to baptise him before : 

answ . i answer , had it been a part of righteousness , God in a providence would have provided one before , as well as then ; for he was to fulfil all righteousness . and for his practice ( though he baptised not , but his disciple , John 4.2 . ) yet , in all their baptising where Christ was , you never hear that ever they baptised any infant , or gave any command for it ; and therefore it is no part of righteousness , and ought not to be done . 

Thirdly , 

That which is not the baptism of Christ , that ought not to be done . 

But the baptising of infants is not the baptism of Christ ; 

And therefore ought not to be done ( We are now speaking of the baptism of Christ , considered in an external way . ) 

And that the baptism of infants , is not the baptism of Christ so considered ; i prove thus . 

First , that which doth not answer the commission of Christ , that is not the baptism of Christ . 

But , the baptism of infants doth not answer the commission of Christ ; 

Therefore it is not the baptism of Christ . 

That it doth not answer the commission of Christ , it is clear from the commission itself , matth. 28.19 , 20.  Mark 16.15 , 16.  Where you shall see these things in the commission , go teach , discipling , and baptising . and they that were to be baptised , were such as must first be taught , and discipled , and being believers , must be baptised , Mark 16.16 . 

And that an infant in the first place , is capable to be taught the mystery of the gospel , and so to be taught as to be made a disciple of Christ , and a believer in Christ . It is clear that it cannot be ; and therefore the baptising of them , doth not answer the commission of Christ . 

Every man that professes to act by a commission , most not only do things because there is not an express command against it : but if they observe any thing as a duty ; they must have a command for it , in , and by it ; or else it will come under the reproof of him that gives the commission ; as those come under the reproof of Christ ( collos•…i• ) who by the wisdom of men , went to present a will-worship to God . And so you see the baptising of infants doth not answer the commission of Christ ; and therefore it is none of Christ's baptism , and ought not to be done . 

Secondly , Christ's baptism is a baptism of faith , and a baptism of repentance . 

But , the baptism of infants cannot be a baptism of faith and a baptism of repentance . 

Therefore it is not the baptism of Christ ; and ought not to be done . 

argum. 4 fourthly , 

That which causeth inconveniences in the church , that ought not to be done . 

But , the baptising of infants doth cause inconveniences in the church ; 

Therefore it ought not to be done . 

I must tell you ( Dear friends ) for this argument , i borrowed it from them that oppose the thing , who laid down this as an argument for baptising of infants ; and that thus : 

That which causeth inconveniences in the church , that ought not to be done : 

But , ( Say they ) the denying of children's baptism , causeth inconveniences in the church ; and therefore it ought not to be 〈◊〉 . 

And to prove this , they go to prove a supposition by a supposition ; and that thus : 

It will make the children of believers ( Say they ) to be no other ways than the children of heathens ; and so they go about to prove a consequence by a consequence ; which is but  upon . 

But that the baptising of infants doth cause inconvenience in the church , i will prove from scripture : and that thus ; 

That which doth not only , present one , but make one a member of a church ; before being called of God , that is inconvenient : 

But , the baptising of infants makes them members of their church , before they are called of God ; and therefore it is inconvenient , and contrary to these scriptures , 1 cor. 1.1 . and 2 cor. 1.1 . 

Secondly , 

That which intails mercies and privileges to generation , which alone is to be entailed upon men in reference to regeneration , that is inconvenient . 

But the baptising of infants , doth entail mercies and privileges to them in reference to generation , and not regeneration ; and therefore it is inconvenient , and contrary to this scripture , John 3.5 . gal. 3.9 . with many other places , as 2 cor. 1.1 . where he doth declare that all those that were in the church of Christ , and impriviledged with the ordinances of Christ , they were fanctified by Christ . 

Thirdly , that which causeth a separation , and distraction in Christ's conjunction ; that 's inconvenient . 

But , the baptising of infants , doth make a separation , and distraction in Christ's conjunction ; and therefore it is inconvenient . 

By Christ's conjunction , i mean the oneness that is between the ground that Christ lays down for men to be baptised , and the ground he lays down for men to break bread ; which is one and the same thing : he that believes , and knows , and discerns Christ , he is to be baptised , acts 8.37 . And he that doth so , is to break bread , in remembrance of Christ , 1 cor. 11.  

Now , those that plead so much for the baptising of infants , by the same ground they would baptise infants upon , they will not admit them nor others to break bread ; and therefore as Christ's ground is one , theirs is two : and under that consideration , they make a separation in that which Christ makes a oneness ; and that is inconvenient in the church of Christ , and ought not to be done . 

argum. 5 fifthly , that which doth directly cross the proceedings in the time of the law , and in the time of the gospel . That ought not to be done . 

But , the baptising of infants , doth directly cross the proceedings in the time of the law , and in the time of the gospel ; and therefore it ought not to be done . 

By that , i mean , that no man in the time of the law , and in the time of the gospel was to do any thing by the virtue of a right , without a rule ; but whatsoever they did as a duty , it was to answer a rule . Had Abraham been circumcised by the virtue of a right , as he was a believer , and not by the virtue of a rule ; then Lot Might have pleaded for the same privilege , for he was a believer as well as Abraham ; yet God did not make choice of Lot , but of Abraham . and then , Ishmael should not have been circumcised , but only isaa• ; but though Ishmael was a son of the flesh , and cast out by God , and not a believer in God ; yet he must be circumcised : and therefore this was not by the virtue of a right , but by the virtue of a rule . 

The same thing also was in the time of the gospel , where it is clearly discovered that Christ owns nothing as a duty , but as it answers a law ; and they were to do nothing pleading a right , without a rule ; but to do all things by the virtue of a rule : therefore under that consideration , will-worship was condemned . 

Now if there be any rule , or any command in the scripture for infants to be baptised , i desire they would show it : here is the word of truth , which justifies all things suitable to itself ; and owns nothing else to be a truth . And i do exceedingly wonder that any men should go about to plead for a thing by the virtue of a right , without a rule . 

I have much more to say to you in this thing , had i time and strength : but , i hope these five grounds that i have here laid down , will clearly discover to you , that infants ought not to be baptised . 

I am not here now to prove to you the baptising of believers ; that 's not the controversy in hand , though a thing clear by scripture ; and that which i should be glad if i had an occasion to speak of . Not only to speak of baptism in the letter , but baptism in the spirit , which was the mystery of the gospel , and the glorious excellency of Christ in the spirit , held out in the administrations of Christ considered in the flesh ; which administrations in the flesh , are as so many signs to declare the mystery of the spirit ; though i know none can understand it , but they that do enjoy it ; for none can unletter the letter , but the spirit : but i cease from that , and cease giving you any further reasons ( At this time ) to prove that which we were to have proved in public , had we had liberty ; which was , that infants ought not to be baptised . 

But i leave them and you so to the truth ; desiring that we May all be taught by the truth ; and sweetly made one in the truth ; and carried out from thence , to walk up in an acknowledgement of the truth , suitable to the rules of itself . 

Finis . 





doct.  1 what the law of Christ or the commands of Christ is . 2 what is meant by observation . 3 what is meant by supposition . the reasons why we are to observe nothing as a duty , but that which answers a law , or command of Christ . isal. 1.12 . use . col. 1.18 . Phil. 2.9 . joh. 6.68 . Matth. 11.9 . Luke 24.19 . matth. 5.21 , 22 , 27 , 28.  isai. 9.6 , 7.  Revel. 15.3 . heb. 3.2 , 3.  dy. 3.  Acts 8.37 . Mark 16.16 . Acts 8.12 . Acts 2.38 . Acts 28.8 . isai. 8.20 . 



















