Truth and love happily married in the saints , and in the churches of Christ . The contract drawn in one of the spital sermons , preached April 3. 1648.  

By Thomas hill d. d. Master of Trinity college in Cambridge . 

prov. 23. 23.  

Buy the truth , and sell it not . 



joh. 13. 35.  

By this shall all men know that ye are my disciple , if ye love one another . 



gravitèr peccant qui propter indifferentes ceremonias turbant ecclesias , damnant alios principes & magistratus haeccine pietas quam jactamus , haeccine charitas quam debemus fratribus , & ecclestiis ? zanch. 1. de Redemp . pag. 765.  



London : printed for Peter Cole , at the printing-press in Cornhill , near the royal exchange , 1648.  

To the right honourable , alderman Warner , Lord major of the famous city of London ; the worthy sheriffs , aldermen and common-council , all the sweet fruits of truth and love through Christ Jesus . 

As when King Solomon built his temple , which was typical to Christ and his church , there were two pillars which did both adorn and strengthen it : when Zachary speaks prophetically of the government of that church , he tells you of two staffs , beauty and bands : and when Paul writes apostolically of the building up , and beautifying the churches of Christ , he commends to you truth and love . and if an apocryphal book May be heard ( As why not , in the instruction of manners , and things of this nature ) amongst three things of strength , wine , women and truth , truth carries it away as most potent . 

And as for the power of love , Solomon will tell you it is as strong as death ; the powerful workings whereof , are most emphatically represented by Paul to the Corinthians , charity suffereth long , and is kind ; charity envieth not ; charity vaunteth not itself , is not puffed up ; doth not behave herself unseemly , seeketh not her own , is not easily provoked , thinketh no evil , rejoiceth not in iniquity , but rejoiceth in the truth ; covereth all ( So i am bold to render the Greek word , rather than beareth , because you have even the same in the end of that verse , endureth all things . 

And surely never was there more need of such an union in England , as truth and love would make up amongst saints , than now , when the disaffected in all the three kingdoms are like to make a prey upon the persons , by reason of their unkind and most unbrotherly divisions . this is like to be our sad motto , whilst we dash one against another , we are both like to be broken in pieces . 

If these differences were about fundamentals , or any matters of faith , God forbid but we should zealously , and resolutely appear in it : even they who are most moderate in their opinions about externals and circumstantials ( I speak knowingly , for myself and many of my moderate brethren ) when it comes to subsatials of faith and worship , will answer as b. Andrews did , being asked at the first coming over of the Archbishop of Spalleto , whether he though the were a Protestant , or no ? he answered , truly , i know not ; but he is a detestant of divers opinions of Rome : so i am confident do we abhor , not only Romish , Arminian , and Socinian opinions , and whatever is unsound , and contrary to the doctrine according unto godliness ; only we believe about all matters of church-government , which are neither so clear in scripture , nor of such concernment to salvation , there had need be some Melanchthon's as well as Luther's ; there must be mortar to bind the bricks together , some soft spirits ; if all be rugged , we shall have no spiritual building . 

This is the scope of this plain sermon , which now you have been pleased to make more yours , by your order for the publishing of it , intending ( I hope ) by your desires to have it repeated to your eyes , that you May the better repeat it in your practices . 

Durandus tells us Paul was pictured with a sword , and with a book ; intimating by the sword , what he was before his conversion ; by the book , what after , when he so much minded the edification of the churches of Christ . 

Oh that we ministers and brethren who differ , Might lay aside our swords , and seriously try what faith and love will do to compose our unhappy and most unseasonable controversies , which doubtless need not so divide us , neither should we in things of this nature , prescribe or impose one upon another . 

There were three fellows of Merton college in Oxford , the one a Thomist , the other a Scotist , the third an occamist , that going to Woodstock to petition the King that they Might have a door out of Merton college for their conveniency ; they all agreed to desire to have a door , but could not agree upon the manner of the petition ; one was for habeamus ostium , the other thought that too general , and therefore would have it Ostium fieri , but then the question was , who should make it , or where ; the third ut ostium factum sit , yet that pleased not . we all would have a government , but cannot agree upon the manner , divers forms being in view : oh that truth and love Might be the umpire ! 

This i have for divers years endeavoured , according to my measure , and still shall , what ever others say of me , as being confident , moderate counsels conduce much more to an happy settlement , than such as are high and rigid ; and i rest assured , that sober moderate spirits are much better friends to presbyterial government ( Which i desire May besettled here ) than they who drive so furiously . it 's true , i believe the abounding of heretical opinions , and schismatical practices , have begotten many malignants amongst us , but withal i fear , the severity of some Presbyterians gives too much advantage to heterodox and schismatical spirits . i cannot believe it , though i have often heard , that some of my brethren were angry at this discourse , because so moderate ; surely , it is either because they are guilty , and too much engaged in a party , whereas i being unengaged , can with freedom of spirit ( Which liberty , i highly value ) unpartially oppose what is amiss in any , and embrace what is good where ever i find it . Solomon saith , a man of understanding is of a cool spirit : the Lord make us such , which will express a more full conformity to Christ , and a sweet resemblance of his spirit , which will be the beauty of ministers and other saints . 

My Lord , be pleased with my humble and hearty acknowledgement of the many respects of this renowned city to me , to accept my desires and endeavours , to approve myself , 

from my lodging in Westminster , May 8. 1648.  Your most faithful servant for your salvation , Thomas Hill . 

Truth and love happily married in the saints , and in the churches of Christ . 

Ephesians 4. 15.  

but speaking the truth in love , May grow up into him in all things , which is the head , even Christ . 

Paul's chains and tears have had a prevailing rhetoric ; he hath wept as well as sweat over his hearers with good success : when he was to preach to Felix , though a prisoner , though with a chain , he made him tremble ; and here in the first verse , he comes as a prisoner for their sakes to beseech them ; and a further and special emphasis , he comes to persuade them to that which is most pleasing , namely , to unity ; to which purpose he uses four several arguments ; 

first , there is a common engagement of all saints to unity : i beseech you walk worthy of your vocation , whereu to you are called , with all louliness and meekness , forbearing one another in love ; there is one body , one spirit , even as you are all called in one hope of your calling , one Lord , one faith , one baptism , one God and father of all , who is above all , and through all , and in you all ; here is a whole bundle of arguments , in this first consider your vocation , those privileges to which you are advanced thereby ; and they leave a very great obligation upon you , as saints to study unity . 

secondly , there is an argument from the equity of the thing , in the 7.  Verse . unto every one of us is given grace , according to the measure of the gift of Christ : unto every one of us ; every one hath some gift , as it pleases Jesus Christ to proportion out such a measure to this saint , and such a measure to that saint ; the little finger in the mystical body , so much as is fit for him , in the hand , so much as is fit for him , and this with a common respect , that there Might be a mutual use of all those , with subserviency to the whole ; in reference to the mystical body of Christ , there is an equity in it . 

thirdly , there is a very great congruity ; and that argument you shall find in the 8 , 9 , and 11 , verses : Jesus Christ when he did ascend , he gave gifts to men ; all the gifts that are in the churches , and graces , they are derived from the same efficient cause , and therefore it is most incongruous , that they should be distracted and divided , so as to reflect dishonourably upon him that is the sole efficient cause of them , and that with common intents and purposes , for good of the mystical body . 

but then fourthly and lastly , you have here another argument from the necessity of it , till we all come to the unity of faith , and that we be no more tossed to and fro as children , and carried up and down with every wind of doctrine ; but that we speak the truth in love , and so grow up into Jesus Christ in all things , who is the head ; here is the necessity of it , you 'll never grow up to intimate communion and fellowship with Jesus Christ , you 'll never make a wise improvement of him , as members of the mystical body , unless you learn this heavenly skill , namely , how to advance unity ; and so i come to show you what propositions this last argument , drawn from the necessity of the thing , will afford us ; in the 15.  Verse , which by God's assistance , according as the weak measure of strength i have will bear , i shall insist upon at this time , but speaking or following the truth in love , grow up into Christ in all things , which is the head : where first , its clear , 

doctr. 1 Jesus Christ is the head of saints , the head of the church . 

doctr. 2 2.  The Lord Jesus Christ when he ascended and gave gifts to men , did intend , did expect , that there should be such an entertainment of the gospel , that we should grow up into Christ in all things , who is the head . 

doctr. 3 3.  Thinking , speaking , following the truth in love , is the gospel method to our spiritual welfare ; I 'll begin with the first , 

doctr. 1 Christ is the head of particular saints , & the head of the church : in the state of innocency , Adam was the head of the great family of the world , when he forfeited his headship , and all that he did enjoy , by eating the forbidden fruit , that family was dissolved , he was turned out of paradise , all was scattered abroad , and we with him , were then cast into a desperate condition , unless God would be pleased to find out a second head ; and to that purpose , out of the riches of his grace , and the infiniteness of his wisdom , that which angels could not reach , which men had not so much as any thoughts of , or desires after , God pitched upon , namely , Christ , and designed him the head of the corporation of his church , of a certain number given unto him in his eternal counsel , for whom he should undertake ; and this learned expositors conceive to be the meaning of that place , where he speaks of {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} there in Ephesian 1. 10.  That he Might gather together all things , that all things Might be headed under one ; headed under Jesus Christ : now before the fall , all were headed under the old Adam ; now when they were in a shattered condition , they should be reconciled and collected , headed under Jesus Christ ; for the better opening of this , you May be pleased to take notice of three particulars : 

first , here is the headship itself . 

secondly , here is the appropriation of this headship , to whom he is head . 

thirdly , here is the title to this headship . 

First , for the headship itself ; he is head , 

1.  in regard of his pre-eminence ; it is an expression in 1 col. 17. 18.  In all things having the pre-eminence , he is the head ; every member in the mystical body hath a dignity , and is advanced to an excellency , to some degree of it , but he that is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} that hath the preeminency , he is the head , that is Christ ; but this is not all , if you look upon a picture , there the head of a man hath a pre-eminence , therefore we must have more than this : he is head , 

2.  in regard of direction , and in regard of power , being a wise head , able to advice , and guide , and govern the body ; as the apostle Peter speaks of him in 1 pet , 3. 22.  Who is gone into heaven , and is on the right hand of God , angels , authorities and powers being made subject to him ; he hath a universal , and absolute regiment over all things in heaven and earth , over men and devils : but then 

3.  in regard of that influence that he doth convey to the bodies : sense and motion is derived from Christ as the spring ; it is true , that in the natural body , there the heart is primum vivens , but in the mystical body , the head is primum vivens , and he gives life to us , and we derive our life from Jesus Christ , the head ; he hath life , and he hath it abundantly in himself , and he lives , that we May live ; as i remember there is such an expression in John 10. 10.  

4.  in regard of union , he doth tie altogether ; the nerves and sinews would not unite the members of the mystical body , unless Jesus Christ were the head ; as he is the foundation stone , and so supports the building , so he is the corner stone , both the beauty , and strength , and union of the building , fundatio fundatissima , as Junius renders it , in isa. 28. 16.  A most sure foundation , and the corner stone , as Peter hath it , in 1 pet. 2. 7 , 8. with reference to that place ; and so in these four particulars Jesus Christ hath a headship : the next thing is now , the appropriation of this headship , to whom is he a head ? he is an external head to all the members of the visible church , to all professors as he is a vine , and doth communicate some sap to those that are in him , no way but by an external profession , as you have it intimated in John 15. 2.  Every branch in me that bears not fruit , shall be cut down and cast into the fire ; and therefore there are some branches in him externally , as he is an external head to the church , as he is a vine ; but indeed , he is properly the head of his body , the saviour of his body ; he is a head to those , to whom he is a saviour , in Ephesians 5. 23.  As the King hath a common relation to all his subjects , but a more pecular relation to the Queen , who is a subject and a spouse , note . and so hath Jesus Christ to his church ; and the reason is this , because there is a full commensuration betwixt all the three glorious persons in the trinity ; they are grossly mistaken that will make Jesus Christ to die for all , and yet will not in their sense , so as to make them salvabiles if they will , and yet cannot say , that either God hath given Christ to all , or given all to Christ , or that the spirit of God will apply that redemption to all , for there is a commensuration , there is an adaequation , betwixt the three glorious persons in the trinity , and their workings for the salvation of the saints : Jesus Christ dies for those whom God hath given to him , with purposes of salvation ; i do not deny , but all the wicked in the world , May have some benefit by the death of Christ , as all have some common pledges of the bounty of God , and all May have some common operations of the spirit of God ; but if you 'll speak of any thing as to salvation , there is a commensuration betwixt the three persons in the trinity , and their workings ; elect according to the foreknowledge of God the father , sanctification of the spirit , and the sprinkling of the blood of Christ , in 1 pet. 1. 2. indeed in 1 John 2. 2.  He is a propitiation for our sins , note . and not for ours only , but for the sins of the whole world : to whom did John write that epistle ? to the Jews ; and therefore to show that they had not all religion now engrossed amongst them , and that the election of God did not still run amongst them , only he speaks in that dialect , he did not intend every particular man in the world , for than he must intend men that sin against the holy ghost , which is impossible that they should be saved : no man will say that understands any thing , even in catechistical divinity , that Jesus Christ died to save them , which he must do , if he died for every man in the world , with such purposes to save them ; and so in 1 tim. 1. 4 , 5 , 6.  He is given a ransom for all ; why all ? there is one God , and one mediator , now Jews and gentiles ; as Jesus Christ did take our nature upon him , both Jews and gentiles , all estates shall have the common privilege , and benefit , and advantage of being in a capacity to receive blessings from him , spiritual saving blessings , that is , all conditions , whether Kings , and all in authority , or servants , or others , not every particular person , but as in one place Jews or gentiles , so in another place , not this or that condition , but all estates , and all relations , and all conditions ; but still the appropriation is to the church , as here he saith , from whom the whole body is joined together in the 16.  Vers. from whom , from Christ the whole body is joined together , so it is the body that hath this influence from him ; but then 

3.  What is his title to his headship ? it is threefold ; 

first , the designation of God and the father : God the father hath sealed him , he gave him to be a head to the church over all things , in ephe. 1. 22 , 23. and then 

secondly ; his personal fitness : of his fullness we all receive grace for grace , in him are hide all the treasures of wisdom ; and then 

thirdly , his own propitious readiness : we were not in any degree so willing to be saved , as he is to save us ; he came down to seek , and to save that which is lost ; the spirit of the Lord was upon him , and anointed him to preach the gospel , it was his business ; and as he had a commission from his father , and came under the broad-seal of heaven , so he had a strong inclination from his own bowels , to engage him to it ; there is his title : the use of this , 

use . 1 1.  To try the title of the Pope's headship to the church ; how comes he by it ? for a church to have two heads , one body to have two heads , it is a monster , you 'll make it monstrous ; we do allow in a good sense , that the supreme magistrate is , caput politicum in the church , to command good things according to the word of God , and to restrain evil according to that word ; we hold forth confidently , that Jesus Christ , he is the only proper head of the church , that doth convey all saving spiritual blessings ; life , nourishment , direction , and all those admirable advantages to the body ; we cannot allow a caput vicarium , a ministerial head , there is no need of that ; Jesus Christ is the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} the head ; here is an article that gives an emphasis , what needs it any other ? Jesus Christ is present always in his church ; when he withdrew his corporal presence , he would then requite his church with his spiritual presence ; and that presence of his spirit , it should accompany them to the end of the world : but the Pope as great as he is , cannot be present in every place ; we need not spend any more time in crying down that that is so prodigious : so many several saints , and so many several churches , in several parts of the world , how is it possible that a Pope can be head of them all ? but then 

use . 2 2.  Beware of being injurious to the least member of Jesus Christ : if Christ be the head of the body , surely his body is dear to him ; never think to ruin the body , or to drown the body , as long as the head is able to keep itself above water ; never think to hurt the body , as long as the head is able to secure it , and protect it , and defend it ; there are very notable expressions in several of the prophets , as in Daniel , there are four great monarchies , then came a little stone hewn out of the mountain , and breaks them all , one after another ; all opposite powers to the kingdom , and headship of Jesus Christ , shall be confounded , in despite of the Pope , and Turks , and devil and all : all the kingdoms of the earth shall at last become the Lords , and his Christ's , and then in the 12. of Zachary , you shall find there in the 5.  Verse , Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls numerously , for i , saith the Lord , will be unto her a wall of fire round about , and will be the glory in the midst of her ; a wall of fire to burn up the enemy , and i will be the glory in the midst of her , for the comfort of his persons , the presence of God is the glory of any place , and therefore he saith , he will create a defence upon the glory ; an admirable place in the 4. of Isaiah , pour upon them a spirit of burning and judgement , to direct them , and consume the enemies , and he will create a defence upon all the glory , upon his saints which are the glory , so he is pleased to Count them , though there be no preparations in them to raise a defence , he will create it ; yea in zach. 12. 2.  behold , i will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling to all persons round about : and in that day i will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all persons , all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces , though all the persons of the earth shall be gathered together against it ; oh what encouragement is here for the poor saints , the citizens of Jerusalem ! let all the desperate atheists , and profane opposites , combine against the persons of God and plot , although they May have it May be some particular advantages , as it is said of the Romans , they were praelio victi , but not bello , it May be now and then they May get an advantage in this combat against the church , but yet they shall never totally and finally overcome them , though they be all gathered together ; God will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone to all that burden themselves with it : there will a time come , when the Lord will grind to pieces , all those that have any antipathy against Jerusalem , when God will trample Satan and all other enemies under the feet of his Jerusalem , when God will call for all them forth , that would not have him to rule over them , bring forth mine enemies that would not i should reign over them , and slay them before me , in Luke 19 27. there is the second use . 

use . 3 3.  If Jesus Christ be the head of the church , then surely he must have a body ; an head without a body were prodigious , and therefore that doctrine of the Arminians must needs prove false , that would have Jesus Christ come into the world upon these terms , and to die upon such considerations , that all things should be left so far to man's freewill , that it was in their power , unless they would be so good natured as to believe , when Jesus Christ called upon them , that he should not have one member , no at all : this is the erroneous doctrine of Arminius and his followers , that go upon his principles ; is it impossible that Jesus Christ should not have one member , for he gives only posse , he gives not velle , if you will not believe , and improve your freewill , you May choose whether ever you will believe or no ; they will not allow , that Jesus Christ by an invinciable , by an almighty power , shall carry men , and overcome men so far , as to make them of unwilling , to be willing to believe ; yea , where Arminius hath four decrees concerning the salvation of men , you May be within the compass of all those four decrees , note . and yet not be saved , a miserable condition ; he tells you , God hath decreed to give Christ , and means , and that all who believe shall be preserved and saved , but he tells you not that he hath decreed to give faith and repentance to any one man , to enable him to believe , and therefore it is a most dishonourable doctrine to the headship of Christ ; blessed be God that it so much discovered , and we are so far delivered from it , though it is most unhappily of late in some parts of it , got into too many popular hands . But then 

use . 4 4.  Take heed ( I beseech you ) of any obstructions that Might hinder a sweet communion betwixt the head and the members , that Might hinder an intercourse betwixt Jesus Christ and your souls ; let this rather be your care , to gain that heavenly skill , how you May make use of Jesus Christ as the head . 

1.  Give him the glory of his sovereignty , let him be all in all ; the sovereignty of his grace , and the sovereignty of his independency , to save whom he pleaseth , and to do what he pleases with men , to have mercy on whom he will have mercy , and because he will have mercy . 

2.  Give him the glory of his wisdom as a prophet , seek wisdom from God , and it shall be given you , in James 1. 5. as you should give him the honour of his sovereignty , allowing him this , that as the potter , he May make some vessels to honour , and some to dishonour , as he pleaseth . 

3.  Give him the honour of his riches and fullness , seek supplies from him , do not live upon yourselves , nor upon your duties , nor upon ordinances only , but live upon Jesus Christ in all , so give Christ the honour of being the spring of your supplies ; in him are fresh springs . 

4.  Give him the honour of being the best friend in the world , and labour for such an intimacy with him , that he and you May be acquainted , for he saith , if ye love him , and keep his commandments , he and his father will come and take up his abode with you , and he will manifest himself to you , in John 14. 23.  Oh how much of heaven will that soul have upon earth , that he should have Jesus Christ come and dwell with him ! and when he goes to prayer , manifest himself , when he goes to read the scriptures , paraphrase upon the bible , and suggest sweet hints to him ; when he is in any straits , overpower him with a divine instinct , though he hath not an express revealed will to walk with , as we have not in every particular circumstance of an action ; oh that then Jesus Christ should particularize some general scripture to you , or bring something to your mind that you have heard in a sermon , it May be a dozen years ago ; give him the glory of this , and improve him to this blessed purpose . 

doctr. 2 the Lord Jesus Christ did intend , and doth expect , that upon his ascension and giving gifts , there should be such an entertainment of the gospel , that we Might grow up into him in all things , who is the head : it is the perfection of a Christian , to improve all the three persons in the trinity ; when you look upon God and his attributes , to find proportionable impressions upon your souls , by his greatness , to learn to fear him , by his godness to love him ; when you look upon the spirit of God , and his working , than likewise to feel some stamps answerable thereunto , that you May have an inclination to comply with him in all things ; so likewise when ye behold Jesus Christ in the passages of his redemption , to make use of all , that there May be some proportionable correspondency betwixt his dispensations towards you , and your improvement of them . And here i shall briefly desire you to consider under this point , these three particulars : 

first , the intention itself , and the expectation of Jesus Christ . 

secondly , the grounds of it : and 

thirdly , the ends of it . 

1.  for the intention and expectation of Jesus Christ himself , when he did ascend and gave gifts , it is this , in three particulars : 

1.  That there should be a growth . 

That there should be a growing up into Christ . 

that there should be a growing up into Christ in all things : i beseech you mark these three particulars . 

first , that there should be a growth ; how a growth ? so as to complete the number of all the saints , that not one of them be lost : Jesus Christ hath undertaken , that he will not lose one that God the father hath given him , and therefore all those must be called in ; and it is conceived by learned expositors , that that is the meaning of this place , Christ hath given gifts , for the perfecting of the saints ; that is , for the completing the number ; 

To fill up the number of persons , that so many as were elected from eternity , so many Might be called in : and then 

for the completing of the graces of those saints , both in the degrees , and in the activity of them , for Jesus Christ ( It is an admirable condescending expression ) reckoneth not himself complete , till all his members be complete ; i beseech you take notice of that first chap. and the last verse of the Ephesians , which is his body , the fullness of him that filleth all in all : Jesus Christ fills all in all , and yet ( He saith ) his body is the fullness of him ; he is pleased not to account himself complete as head of the church , till his members be completed , as to the number of them , and till their graces likewise be complete to such a degree as he intended : but than 

Secondly , there must be a growing up , there must be the manner , grow up into Christ ; not only a concorporating with Jews , as the gentile churches did , in the 3. of the Ephesians , not only an incorporating into Jesus Christ , though that is very much , into the body of Christ , but a transforming into Christ , that you May be moulded in Christ ; i would not be too bold with those expressions of Nazianzen , because i see they are abused , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} it is an admirable one that Athanasius hath , that Jesus Christ took the nature of man upon him , that so we Might have the nature of God conveyed to us , the divine nature ; there is a ground for that expression , in 2 pet. 1. 4. and a delivering up into Christ , into his word , in rom. 6. 17. the form of doctrine into which you were delivered ; here is an admirable improvement of Christ , when a sermon is delivered to you , the mind of Jesus Christ discovered , for you to be delivered up to it , that you May go out of the assembly under the power of that truth , and moulded in it ; and then withal , that Christ Might be in you , and you Might be in Christ , that there Might be a mutual indwelling , as in that place in John , yea , that we May come to live in the spirit , and walk in the spirit , in gal. 5. 25. yea , and that the very life of faith , the life that we live , May be by faith in the son of God , in gal. 2. 20. not only now and then to pray in faith , but to live by faith , to act all in faith ; here is a growing up into Christ , not only a growing to some knowledge of Christ , or to some profession of Christ , or to make towards Christ , but to be moulded , to be transformed into Christ ; here is the entertainment and improvement of the gospel that Christ expects : but than 

Thirdly , growing up in all things unto Christ ; there is the proportion , or the dimension , as a head , our growth must be as large as his headship ; now as he is a prophet , so we must grow up into him , that we May have wisdom , and all those supplies from him ; as he is a priest grow up in him , that we May have righteousness from him , for the covering of all our sins ; as he is a King grow up in him , that we May have a redemption from all our snares , bondages and enthralments ; for our being and well being , having our subsistence in him , in God the father , and in Christ Jesus , as in 1 thess. 1. 1. when we are converted , we come to have a new subsistence in Christ : for truth , and for degrees of grace grow up into him , for habits and acts , for the velle , as well as for the posse , for converting and renewing grace , for it is he that works in you the will and the deed , of his own good pleasure , as in phil. 2. 13. for comforts , and for hopes , in 1 pet. 1. 8.  That you May have joy through believing , and the god of peace fill you with hope , in rom. 15. 13. all our strength and comfort lies in union with Christ , and influence from him : note . it is an easy matter to sprout in hypocrisy , and in self-love , and in earthliness , and so in a formal external profession , and to have a bulk of outward performances ; but its an hard matter to grow into an inward communion and intimacy with Jesus Christ , to be transformed into him . So i have done now with the first thing , the sum of the expectation ; the next is , 

The ground , why Jesus Christ expects this ; for very good reasons , 

reason 1 1.  This is the grand purpose and effect of Christ's ascension ; he did ascend to give gifts , he did ascend to give his spirit , and that is the great promise of the new testament ; he promised to give his spirit , and shall he give his spirit which he purchased at so dear a rate , and shall the spirit give gifts to men , and those gifts be actuated , and exercised , and prepared for you , and shall not we improve them ? Oh what an ill requital is here ! 

reason 2 2.  He hath a vehement desire of union and communion with all those that God the father hath given to him , behold i stand and knock at the door , if any will hear my voice , than i will come in to him , and sup with him , and he with me ; that is a melting place , a winning place , in rev. 3. 20.  Jesus Christ is impatient ( As it were , i May speak it with reverence ) to want communion with them who are his in God's eternal counsels . But than thirdly , Christ May well expect this , 

reason 3 because attaining the intended stature and measure of the fullness of Christ , we are fit for heaven , as in ephe. 4. 13.  Till we all come to the unity of faith , and to the perfect stature of the fullness of the age in Christ , therefore there is such a pitch , and Jesus Christ expects it ; you will never be fit for him , till you come to your pitch : there is a minimum quod sic , as philosophers speak about natural bodies , so about every member of the mystical body , you must come to such a degree of grace before you are fit for heaven ; now God hath designed you that , that you May be meet to be partakers of the inheritance with the saints in light : note . it is not slipping out of a drunkard's habit , and to desire to be dissolved , or to receive the communion , or to give such and such legacies , or to send for a minister , and say , Lord have mercy on me . no ; thou hast been a drunkard and an atheist all thy days , thou art not meet to go to heaven ; Paul blesseth God that hath made him meet : heaven is a holy place , and God is a holy God , and thou hast a very cursed sinful nature , very unfit for heaven , till thou be polished , fashioned and framed ; now Jesus Christ expects this : the third particular follows ; i shall not dispatch all , you 'll give me leave to consult for my own health . As you have had the expectation itself , and the grounds of it , so you shall have 

The end : now the ends of it are two , why Christ intended this , and expects this : 

first , for your stability in Christ : and 

secondly , for your improvement of Christ . 

1.  Your stability in Christ . 

2.  stability in judgement ; oh that is an admirable thing : health of body is a great matter , but truly soundness of faith , especially in these unstable times , is much greater : it is a good thing to have the heart established with grace ; that is , with the doctrine of grace , and not with meats , not to be carried up and down with this wanton opinion , and that wanton opinion , in heb. 13. 9  A good thing to have the heart established in grace . 

To have a stability in affection ; that thy affections May centre upon Christ , as thy love , and thy desire , and thy hope , and thy joy ; thou Mayest desire other things , yet thou Mayest be able to say , i have none in heaven but thee , and none in earth that i desire in comparison of thee ; you May love other things , but you May be able to say , i love Jesus Christ for himself , and love myself and all other things in reference to him ; i value power , and estate , learning , and all outward thing , nothing , but with reference and subservience to Jesus Christ : oh here is a sweet stability of affection ! and that Jesus Christ May not only be thy joy , but the exceeding gladness of thy joy , a triumph of joy , to joy more in knowledge of Christ , and communion with Christ , than you do in all outward comforts and advantages whatsoever : here is a sweet stability of affection ; these persons will not be carried up and down so much with either crosses or comforts , as very many are . But then 

There is a stability of conversation , that is , a blessed stability , in James 1. 8.  A double minded man is unconstant in all his ways ; as long as you have an end and an end , a heart and a heart , a mind and a mind , you 'll never be constant ; you know not where to find any men in the world , but godly men , because they have fixed principles , note . they make conscience ; but come to a covetous man , when you speak of his covetousness , there you have him , when you speak against his earthliness , there you lose him ; he hath a double mind , something for God , and something for the world , hath no more religion than suits with his worldly designs ; he will hear a sermon because it is cheap , yet he will ( It May be ) deceive you in his shop , because there is his interest ; and he will ( It May be ) be jolly and frolic , and scoff over a cup of sack at the persons of God soon after sermon , though he hath expressed ( It May be ) a great deal of zeal to the minister ; why , there lies his interest , he is a jolly man , a professor at large , & he must be bold ; oh here is no stability . It is a blessed thing , and a sweet advantage , and Jesus Christ intends this , that you should be grounded in Christ , being rooted , and grounded , and established in the faith , in Colosians 2. 7.  Now the next end is this , 

Your improvement of Christ : an improvement of him , for what purpose ? 

Why , for all necessary gifts ; as a magistrate , as a minister in any place of trust , he hath variety of gifts , in 1 cor. 12.  

For all graces ; he hath variety of graces , he hath abundance of spirit , that you May be filled with all the fullness of God , as i remember in eph. 3. 19  

in all conditions and relations ; that you May know how to be sick , and how to be poor ; how to be magistrates , how to be ministers ; i have learned to want and abound , i can do all things through Christ enabling me ( Saith Paul ) in Philippians 4. 13.  And then , 

in all duties ; you can do nothing without Christ , but as he gives in , as he communicates himself , and vouchsafes to assist you ; when he withdraws , you flag , you wither . 

use . 1 I 'll be bold to say a word to my brethren of the ministry : oh that ministers would chiefly study and mind this work , this is proper pulpit-work , to put persons upon such an entertainment of the gospel , that they Might improve Jesus Christ , and grow up to a stability in him ; Paul was sent , had a commission , according to the faith of God's elect , in tit. 1. 1. and gal. 4. 19  I travel in birth with you ( saith Paul ) till Christ be form in you : oh what pain it cost him every sermon . It was a great speech , yet i have heard it as a certain truth concerning reverend Mr. Bains , that every sermon cost him as much in his sense ( As he thought ) as it did ordinarily cost a woman to bring a child into the world ; i travel in birth , till i see Jesus Christ form in you ; note . pulpits are not for news only , and to lead persons this way , and that way , upon politic designs , and sometimes upon our own carnal interest ; pulpits were never intended for passionate invectives , to cry up this party , or cry down that party , in a vehement passionate manner ; let us rather use hard reasons , and soft words : if we conceive they be in an error , undermine their error , and avoid any exasperating provoking names , which rather alienates them , & hardens them , then recovers them : this is not the method to preach men unto Christ , but rather to preach away the most and best of our hearers . 

use . 2 is it thus , that Jesus Christ intendeth this entertainment of the ministry , that we May grow up into him in all things ; then i beseech you give me leave to call upon you , & i do not know where i could speak more fitly in any place of the world , then in this famous city , and never more seasonably , than when the representative of the city is met , namely , that you would consider , what means you enjoy , what gospel-light the Lord hath entrusted you with , and what he expects from you ; will it not be much easier for Sodom and Gomorrah , then for London another day ? you that have been lifted up with Capernaum to heaven , if you improve not the means , make account , if one place in hell be hotter than another , to be thrown down into it : and all i have to say , is this , let it be your care so to improve the gospel , that you May derive more from Christ , and live more in Christ , and express more of Christ , that you May be inclined and enabled to do more for Christ : here accept these two short hints ; 

1.  growth must be proportionable to the means you do enjoy : brethren , let me confidently say it , that measure of growth that Might please God in some parts of England , will not satisfy God from you that live in London ; why ? because as you have higher food , and more spiritual and more glorious gospel-discoveries , the Lord expects proportionable improvements : and let me say this , 

2.  there must be a growth of all the members of the body ; that is a rule philosophers give , augmentation is of all the parts , and therefore to grow upwards and downward ; to grow more humble , more in faith , more in love to the saints , more in activity for God ; this it is the Lord expects , 2 pet. 3. 18.  

use . 3 this May rectify our judgements concerning the ministry of the gospel , and that in two great points : 

First , behold it in its original , it is the ordinance of Christ , and it is the fruit of the ascension of Jesus Christ ; they are to be instructed and pitied ( I believe many of them May go according to their present apprehensions , and therefore it were happy if they Might be with a spirit of meakness reduced ) that will cry down all our ministry as Antichristian ; why ? because there were or are some defects in ordination by Bishops , or whoever ; admit that to be true , but i beseech you , what is the original ? from Christ ; and if any man will ask an able godly minister in England , where had you your ministry ? you 'll say from the prelates , he will say from Jesus Christ , though it is true , the manner of conveying the power of exercising the ministry be by men , for Paul saith , he was an apostle neither of men , nor by men ; not of men , so he differed from false apostles , not by men , so he differed from ordinary ministers : now suppose i , note . or any other minister of the gospel , have had our ministry conveyed to us from Christ by men , and there hath been some defects in the manner , will you say , that that defect in the manner , destroys the thing ? i think not any would say , the marriage was null , because they were not so rightly married in every particular , as to the manner , or to say , that a magistrate is no magistrate , because in every particular , it May be he received not his magistracy , in the due form according to the statutes , &c. there is a great deal of difference ( My brethren ) betwixt the grounds of nullifying , and reforming a thing ; we are all sensible of it , and desire God to pardon what hath been amiss , and to heal what is still out of frame ; there hath been defects in the manner of conveying our ministry , or else why do we desire to reform it , but we confidently affirm our ministry is from Jesus Christ ; Christ gave gifts , with the office and authority , but what ? not only prophets and apostles , but pastors and teachers : then 

2.  behold the ministry , in Christ's intention in giving it : why did he give it ? it were a sweet thing to consider , and i am persuaded it were a good method to cure some of London distempers ; no marvel , if you that have such admirable gifts , be still so lean and crazy in spirit : what will cure that distemper ? look at the ministry of the gospel , as the ordinance of Christ , and the fruit of the ascension of Christ ; therefore when you go to a sermon , say not , I 'll not hear this man or that man , because he is a fierce independent , I 'll not hear that man , because he is a rigid Presbyterian , nor such a man , because he is a vehement independent , away with all such unseasonable words ; but say this , I 'll go and attend upon the ordinance of of Christ , and I 'll go and attend upon that which is a fruit of the ascension of Christ ; and withal let me add this , and i desire it May be remembered , i wish i had more strength to insist upon it , because it is a most dangerous opinion , and doth undermine the very foundation of the gospel , namely , to hold as some do , and vent it with much boldness , that the ordinances and the ministry cease , and because that popery did once overspread the world ; now we have no ordinances , and now we have no ministry : and what place do they bring , it is a most strange confidence , and it is in print , and many of you know the book , it is cried up sufficiently : one interprets this place of scripture ( I beseech you let us consider it in the fear of God , and with the spirit of meekness ) Christ promises he will be with them , he gives his apostles commission to go abroad , and saith , he will be with them to the end of the world , mat. 28. 20.  ( The Lord pardon and heal all wresting of scripture , if it be his will , and prevent it for time to come ) to the end of the world , saith he in print , that is , to the end of this age of ministration , they are his own words , to the end of this dispensation : now he makes account that this gospel-dispensation is ended , and now we are come under a third dispensation or administration ; we were all under low administrations , the gospel is in a manner at an end , and God is all in all immediately in his saints . oh that scripture should be made to serve our purposes ! weigh the place meekly , i desire not to meddle with men's persons , but i must be faithful to Jesus Christ , and the souls of his persons ; and according to the light he hath given me , i shall endeavour to make it appear , that interpretation is not consistent with the text : 

Jesus Christ in the 18.  verse of the 28. of Matthew saith , all power is given to me in heaven and earth , go therefore and teach all nations . 

teach all nations ; surely if this dispensation be now ended , if the ministry be at an end , all nations cannot be taught , and so Jesus Christ will lose some of his elect , for they cannot be called in , for there must be no teaching ( it seems ) no ministry . 

2.  Teaching them to observe all things , whatsoever i commanded you : all nations will never be taught all things , whatsoever Jesus Christ commands them , and the apostles and mysteries cannot fulfil their commission if the ministry be ceased , and we must have no ministry , and no ordinances to instruct them in all these things . 

And lo ( lo , Christ would have you take notice of it ) i am with you , not only i will be with you , but am with you , and that every day , he is with you always , always even to the end of the world . 

4.  the end of the world : what , to the end of this dispensation , and for the age of this ministration only ? brethren , i could fetch it out of the very original itself ; whereas he saith , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} signifies an age , i grant it doth , but it signifies eternity many times in scripture , for thine is the kingdom , power and glory , for ever and ever , i am sure of it , there it is not a dispensation only . And then for the end , 

I could fetch it not only out of Plato , but also out of the Septuagint , and out of other places , where that Greek word signifies consummation , therefore there must be an end ; but let us go on further . 

I 'll ask any man that will say these words , that i am with you to the end of the world , that is , to the end of this dispensation ; when did this dispensation begin ? in what year did it begin ? let any man tell me that Jesus Christ will be with his disciple or ministers , to this hundred year , or to this age , and then he forbears : is it to all persons , or to these persons only ? then who are they ? i would very fain have these plain questions resolved : oh you 'll say , it is till the spirit comes ; the spirit comes ! Why , the spirit was coming ever since Jesus Christ ascended , and doth come with new lights daily , and the spirit will be coming , till Jesus Christ come again the second time . 

6.  And i would ask further , i beseech you , unless there be a ministry , how shall we have popery confuted ? you say , because popery hath defiled the ministry , there is no ministry ; i say , popery must be confuted by the ministry : you May burn an Arian on the head , but Arrianism must be confounded by the ministry ; you May hang a Papist , but we know that you can never confute popery , but by the light of the ministry ; and Paul hath said this , the Pope shall be destroyed by the brightness of Christ's coming , viz. in the ministry of the gospel . 

7.  I would know this also , if the faith were once delivered to the saints , that is , once for all , as interpreters have expounded it ; what , shall we have a new edition , or a new gospel ? had we not an everlasting gospel before ? nay further , Jesus Christ will give up all things to the father , when ? when he hath conquered all his enemies , and after the resurrection , and then God will be all in all : well , they say , they are goded and christed , and God is immediately in them , and they are under the third dispensation , and we are still under these low administrations , than they must make us believe , the resurrection is past ; for God shall never come to be all in all , and Jesus Christ never give up his kingdom , till the resurrection be past ; and then further , go now to the neighbour words of my text , he gave gifts to men , that all Might come to the unity of the faith , and to a perfect stature . all come , and therefore be confident , i dare venture my soul upon it ( Which is a great word ) that Jesus Christ will have a ministry more or less , till he have brought in all the elect , and i have this ground for it out of the word , he gave gifts , pastors and teachers , till all come to the unity of the faith , and to the acknowledgement of the son of God , and to a perfect stature : now if they say there is no ministry , than they must make us believe , that all the saints are come in , and that there is a perfect number , &c. and their graces completed ; but i must spare myself , the time is past , i have had late and sad experience , what it is to spend too much upon weak spirits , not recovered ; though i confess i intended most upon the third point , following the truth i• love . 

What is this truth ? why , as God's glory is the constellation of his attributes , as God's happiness is the absoluteness of his self-sufficiency , as God's holiness is the impression of his image , as comfort from God is the glimpse of his loving countenance , as the learning we receive , is a beam of his wisdom falling upon us , so indeed truth is the issue , the representation , and the discovery of his revealed will , and of his mind to us concerning doctrine and worship , what we should know , and what we should practise . 

What is love ? not only a love to the truth , that is good , not only a love to Christ the head , that is as good , and the proper genius of saints , carries them to both these , but indeed a love to the saints , to the members , love the brethren , love the corporation of saints , in 1 pet. 2. v. 7.  

What is it to follow or speak the truth here ? 

For explication , where three things considerable ; the Greek word here signifies , sometimes , 

To speak the truth , in gal. 4. 16.  

To do the truth , in John 3. 21. and in eph. 4. 24.  

to follow the truth with a sincere constancy ; so learned men interpret it , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} doth answer to an Hebrew word , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} in Niphal , that signifies to be firm , and to be constant ; and so doubtless it is a great part of the meaning here , by the opposition , that you May be no more as children tossed to and fro , but following the truth in love , that is , following it with constancy , and firmness , and cleaving to it . 

I humbly conceive , to speak the truth here , is too straight , as will appear , if you please to compare the context . i choose rather to take the largest sense ( Adoring the deep and mysterious fullness of holy scripture ) so to seek , follow and embrace the truth with that firm constancy , that we should be ready to speak and do the truth upon all occasions . indeed , truthing it in love , which were an admirable motto for saints , and most seasonable in these unsound and censorious times , truthing it in love . 

truthing it in love , seeking and following the truth with constancy , is the gospel method of our spiritual welfare ; this was John's counsel to the elect , and his comfort concerning the Lady ( A practice worthy it seems of great persons : ) this was John's joy concerning her and her children , and concerning his Gaius too , in the beginning of his third epistle , that they walked in the truth , and the truth dwelled in them , and they in truth , loving one another ; here is truthing it in love : now in short , what reasons why this is the gospel method to our welfare ; first , considered , 

singly , truth and love , as they are in themselves , contribute much . 

Secondly , jointly , consider the happy marriage of truth and love , they operate much to advance this gospel-design . 

First , for truth , it hath a sovereign virtue to prevent and to cure those spiritual maladies , which are most obstructive to the good of persons and churches : truth keeps from ignorance , from superstition , from errors , from heresies , yea from profaneness . 

love keeps from strife , from schism ( Although there be some differences amongst saints , all men see not by the same light ) if there be love , it will keep them from making a difference in affection , or keep them from all unwarrantableness , disclaiming communion with their brethren ; it is want of love that doth that . 

Secondly , truth , if there be differences in judgement ( As there May be ) yet it hath this power , that it will teach men to hold their Christian liberty , by satisfying their conscienees in the lawful use of it . 

love will teach them not to use their liberty unseasonably to the offence of their brethren ; the truth makes you free , if you know the truth , in John 8. 32.  Truth will give us a freedom , that we shall not suffer ourselves to be under unnecessary and unwarrantable human impositions , but shall see our freedom ; and in the use of indifferent things , love will make me so tender , and so indulgent to the conscience of my brother , that I 'll rather deny myself , then offend him ; here is love and truth singly , as to the preventing of evil . And then 

Secondly , here is truth and love , that have a direct subservience to promote the best good of saints in their communion with Christ ; now truth enlightens the mind concerning the whole council of God , concerning agenda , and credenda ; teaching us , that like as usurpers , not as libertines , we encroach upon the headship of Christ ; and love inflames us , and inclines to embrace truth , and reject falsehood , and what ever is profane , psal. 119. 127 , 128.  I hate every false way , i love thy statutes , &c.  truth will not only inform us , but engage us to inform others , to teach and instruct them , that they should know what they should do , and love will teach us to do it with meekness ; exhort them that are contrary minded with meekness ; oftentimes we preach smart sermons , give hot reproofs , like as when physicians give potions scalding hot , they will spit them out again , and cannot endure them , and they go away prejudiced ; i cannot endure to hear such a man , he is so hot and furious , and vents his own spirit : oh its love and meekness causes us to deal tenderly , and softly , meekly with our brother , and this is indeed the spirit of the gospel ; there is no more diabolical spirit , than a furious spirit , and no more gospel spirit , than a meek and calm spirit : but i must contract . The next thing is , 

love and truth jointly , when they are married jointly together , and go hand in hand , and saints by them join heads and hearts , oh then , and then only then operate fruitfully : truth without love , breeds only empty dry speculations , which puff up ; love without truth , is a blind , if not a popish , yet an unwarrantable devotion amongst formal Protestant's ; note . what is the reason ? you shall see now amongst many of your dull and cold Protestant's , more zeal about Christmas day , than the Lord's day , about hearing a passion sermon upon that they call good Friday , then upon any other day : here is love without truth , now truth and love joined together , would keep the persons from being too fond about these unwarrantable practices ; but will some say , what , do ye blame us about Easter , and a communion at Easter ? &c. have we it not in scripture ? See what scripture they have for it , i would this secret were declared to all the world , it would break many snares with which divers are entangled : 

In the acts , there is the word Easter indeed , in the twelfth chapter , when he had apprehend him , he put him in prison , and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him , intending after Easter to bring him forth to the persons : there is Easter , but will you hear now , how it came in first ? you 'll easily believe that it must be jumbled in one way or other , if you understand the original ; there was the word Passover , but no Easter , the word Easter was not found out in many hundred years after this was spoken of Peter : but here was a secret . 

It was a glorious work of King James , he set divers Oxford men , and Cambridge men , and city ministers , with others to translate the bible , a glorious work , how ever translations May be slighted amongst us , yet Bugenhagius and other divines , when they had the bible translated into the Dutch language , note . they kept that day of the year a feast of thanksgiving for the translation of the bible , they were so affected with the mercy , but it 's a great unhappiness , when the translation of the bible shall be brought to serve our purposes . 

I have it from certain hands , such as lived in those times , that when the bible had been translated by the translators appointed , the new testament was looked over by some of the great prelates , ( Men i could name some of their persons ) to bring it to speak prelatical language , and they did alter ( As i am informed by the means of one that was a great observer in those times , and lived them ) fourteen places in the new testament , to make them speak the language of the church of England , that was so cried up : and I 'll tell you some of them . 

First , in the first of the acts , speaking of Judas , let another man take his bishopric ; it is forced , it signifies charge or inspection : but that you May believe that the Bishops are the apostles successors , let another man take his bishopric . 

Again , in the second of the acts , it is not suffer my soul to lie in hell ; this is clear , former translations have it , not suffer my soul to lie in the grave ; but it was learned Bilsons opinion , and thrust into the thirty nine articles , that Christ did locally descend into hell ; and to make that translation agree with the articles , they must change grave into hell . 

Also the fourteenth of the acts , they ordained them elders , they loved to cry up consecration of churches , and dedication , and such kind of things , and episcopal ordination too ( For these all advanced the power of the priests and the Bishops , which brought in transubstantiation amongst Papists ) and therefore in the Geneva translation , that was rendered , chosen by suffrages , by lifting up of hands , the word primarily imports that , it May be in some of the fathers it includes both , they will tell you , because afterwards having chosen elders by suffrages or voices , they did ordain them . 

Next , i come to the first of the Corinthians , 12. 28.  An abominable violence offered to the original , God hath set in the church , apostles , teachers , helps , governments , and you shall find here a great imposture , it May be now altered , appearing so gross , but i have seen it , and read it in some translations , helps in government ; which is a most horrible prodigious violence to the Greek words , for they are both the accusative case , helps ; there are elders , government , there are deacons ; now to obscure these , you must put it , helps in government . 

I had it related since the delivery of this plain sermon , by one who most confidently affirmed it , that the learned man to whom it belonged to translate the first book of Samuel , having rendered that which Samuel from God spoke concerning Saul , 1 sam. 8. 11.  this shall be the manner of the King that shall reign over you , he will take your sons , &c.  he was sent for to Lambeth , and there persuaded to make the words will take your sons , &c.  shall take ; which he conscientiously refused , well knowing it was not spoken by Samuel to Saul , by way of direction for duty what he should do , but prophetically and eventually what he would do . 



And then lastly , for Easter ; this was another place that was altered ( As you have heard ) to keep up that holy time of Easter , as they would think it , for herein was the innocency ( Though unhappiness unto us ) of the primitive worthies , and other Christians ; these had fair intentions in bringing in many things , they thought to win upon the heathen , and therefore would not wholly annul , but change things , change some of their great feasts into Christmas-time , change now ( It May be ) Pentecost into whitsomide , and the Passover into Easter ; it had a good intent : but minding their own intentions , more than God's word , their rule , you see how these constitutions of men are degenerated . now i beseech you , let us not suffer ourselves to be abused , when a word Easter shall be thrust in ( For it was divers hundred years after Peter , that the word Easter came in ) shall we therefore go and keep up an Easter communion above all times else , for such pretences as these are ? Brethren , the more you join truth and love together , the more you 'll be free from these fond kind of devotions : and let me say this , it is blind devotion indeed ; and many men that are so zealous for these , and women too , they think to get protection for other courses . 

It May be many a Lady that paints and spots , and trifles away precious time , if she be but zealous at an Easter communion , she thinks to get a protection for all vanities else : a citizen , if he be a patron to such a minister , frequent lectures , than he May be frolic , and vain , and loose , &c.  Here is love without truth . 

Let me add this , truth without love makes many swell , and contemn others ; and love without truth edifies to superstition and to idolatry sometimes : what brought in praying to saints , but love without truth ? but you 'll allow me to be so indulgent to myself , as that if either the ordinary place , or the ordinary time be not observed , to pity a man that hath seven months laboured under a quartan ague , and had a fit late last night . i Might make three uses : and the first should have been this , 

To show you , why many professors are so barren , and many Christians so dry , and unstable amongst you , because they have not minded this conjunction of truth and love ; which is the gospel method to grow up into Christ , and so to our spiritual thriving : for upon him all our fruit is found , hos. 14. 8.  

Take this as a use of caution , i beseech you , would to God i knew what language to speak to win upon you : i would beseech you , this honourable representative city , who have so great an influence , have been so much concerned , and are still so much interested , to beware that you suffer not yourselves , by any policies of men , or cunning undermining whatsoever , to be cheated of your truth and love , left you lose yourselves , and religion , and city , and estates , and indeed the kingdom . brethren , there are desperate designs on foot ; and as so much good hath been brought to this kingdom heretofore by the city , and their zeal , and their purses , and their courage , and their fidelity ; so now there hath been of late great tryings of conclusions , how to work upon the city so fat , to make them instrumental for the destruction of all , and the devil hath many active soldiers abroad . 

first , there is indeed one unhappy regiment of those that are erroneous , though divers of them very honest-hearted , and of those that are not such friends to love as they should be ; and certainly , much hath been our misery , by reason of uncharitable mistakes , of errors in matter of faith , and schisms in point of love . 

secondly , there is another Jesuitical , atheistical , profane party , that take advantage of these errors , and these divisions , as he saith , they do fish in troubled waters , that know how to improve all these errors and divisions , to drive on their own design ; and nothing more ordinary than for some malignants ( Though i love not names ) or disaffected persons , call them what you will , those that are no friends to truth and love , nor parliament , nor army , nor any scripture-reformation , they will come in one company , and aggravate the miscarriages of the parliament and army , now what is their plot ? to keep open the breach , that so at last episcopacy and the old common-service-book May come in again : who sees not this ? And i confidently say , and pray God it May be considered in time , that you , out of any discontent , or out of any passionate animosities ( I hope the Lord will keep so wise a city from it ) suffer not yourselves to be ridden by them : do you not remember first they would have divided army and parliament ? there was a time God prevented that : do you not remember there was a time they would have divided city and army ? the Lord keep you from that evil : and now their last conclusion is , to divide those that are friends , and engaged in one covenant , to try if they can set England and Scotland at variance , and engage them in blood again : and this is their plot , and how shall they bring this about ? Oh , by that malignant Jesuit Contzen's rules ( There is a little book called look about you , translated out of his works ) and he gives you eight rules to cheat persons of their religion , and to serve in popery by art : i would you could all get that little book , and you should see that very Contzen's spirit is amongst malignants , and they walk by the same rule , come by degrees , and come by compulsions , and such politic strains he hath there : take notice of your ways ; and ( My brethren ) it is most clear , your friends grieve for it , your enemies begin to triumph in it , that they can have such a power in the city , and with several well-affected persons in the land , who are friends to truth , to peace , and to the government of Christ : they will come and tell you , what , no government ; can ye believe they are friends to government ? note . what , drunkards , and atheists , and profane wretches friends to government ? They that cannot endure a personal reformation , would they have an ecclesiastical reformation ? will you trust them with a government ? and a government of their own settling ? what government think you we should have ? Now so many of the well-affected both of ministers , and gentlemen , and noblemen in Scotland are against an engagement in war , and so are they in England , who are they that are forward to engage ? I 'll put no character upon them , you know who in England are , and you have heard who in Scotland , and what government think you they would settle ? God keep us from a government of such men's settling ; for we should have profaneness , and looseness , they would make such a latitude in government , that all should return to the old tract again ; we must have as grossly mixed communions as ever , and their old ceremonies , their zeal for Christmas-day , and their Good-friday ( More zeal this year than last , for these things , and more last than before ) and what do these men aim at , i beseech you ? The Lord God of heaven inform us aright , if i be mistaken , i wish i Might see my error ; if any of you May through discontent , be transported , the Lord discover it to you ; and let us take heed of this , that while we are jarring one with another , we do not betray ourselves and all to a third party , to a common party , that would destroy both : it May be here May be the advantage , which is but a poor one , first destroy independents , and then destroy Presbyterians , and set up profaneness and looseness as much as ever . Now the Lord cause you to join faith , and love , and truth so together , that you May not be cheated by such men . The third use ▪ and truly , i have one word more to say , and if i thought i should die the next fit , i should desire to speak to this city , and that is this ▪ 

I come hither this day , ( And though i do it cheerfully to observe your pleasures , yet not without some hazard to my health ) that i May say a few things to you , and the Lord help me , that i May deliver what i did intend , and that you May entertain it with the same affection i tender it to you : my business should be , if i had power this day , as a poor unworthy friend to the bridegroom , to draw a contract between truth and love , in all you citizens of London , that all you , though you May have some different opinions , yet i would have truth and love matched and married happily together in you . brethren , i confess that there are many errors , but take heed you be not more offended than needs , note . or at least thereby perverted by the politic designs of those that serve themselves in these divisions , and upon you . 

First , i do not think all opinions are errors , that some men call errors . 

Secondly , all errors are not alike , not equally opposite to the faith . 

Thirdly , clubbing , and imprisoning , and compelling , is not the proper way to cure errors , though there May be some course taken to restrain erroneous persons , when they are opposite to the peace and welfare of the state , &c.  But that i would say , is this , that errors , they must be reduced and confuted by truth ; and then withal , it is most certain , that errors abound not by reason of a reformation ( And therefore to charge it upon a reformation , is very gross ) but there is a defect in our reformation which gives occasion to them . 

And as for love , they cry for love , for love , and it is a wonder , men that are against the very substantials of the gospel , yet they will cry out against any little heterodox opinion , and for love : how can they ever expect that godly and wicked men should join together in love ? What churches then should we have ? indeed we will love the most carnal men in the world with a love of pity , but not with a love of complacency and delight : and Jesus Christ expects it not , but that we should love as he loves . but then further , what love should we have ? such a love as indeed doth tend to edification , and doth tend to reformation , and such a love as is soul-love , and such a love as is a love to the head , as well as to the members ; such love as is not complemental , and frothy , and flattering . oh therefore let it be your care still , not to suffer yourselves to be any ways misled , because there are some defects , and want of truth and love , it hath always been so : in Origens time and Chrysostom's , they came to them , complaining , that there are divisions amongst saints ; they answered , and divisions will be : are all philosophers of a mind ? Are all physicians of a mind ? and if all saints be not of a mind , it is no marvel ; only let them have a care to preserve affection , though they differ in opinion . But to close up all . 

That great oracle of the law , learned Sir Edward Cook in his institutes , gives five properties of a parliament-man , and i think they will as well agree to an alderman , to a common-council-man : i desire they May be considered ; 

First , saith he , he must be wise , and constant , so able to discern and know things a right , persons , circumstances , that he be inflexible . 

Secondly , he should have a good memory , so to remember past evils , that he labour to prevent future dangers . the other three he takes from the elephant : first , saith he , 

Thirdly , an elephant is without gall , that gall that he hath doth transire in nutrimentum corporis ; if he have heat he will use it , not out of a selfish passionate respect , but rather guide and direct it to a zeal for the good of the whole body the commonwealth . and then secondly , for that too he draws from the elephants ; 

Fourthly , the elephants they never go alone , but they go gregatim ; and those creatures that go alone , bears and foxes , they are hurtful ; those creatures that are most innocent , they go together : if you 'll show you are most useful , and innocent creatures , like sheep , oh keep together . And then the third is , 

Fifthly , the elephant is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , he saith , that the elephant loves men : i would have all these properties meet in every one of these worthy citizens , that are any way betrusted with the government of the city : the god of heaven give you wisdom , and give you to remember all providential dispensations that are past , and deliver you from passion , and gall , and make you flock together , and head together , and teach you to love men ; all this would still engage you against a common enemy : love men as men , love the bodies of men ; and you have given a most glorious account of that this year , to your praise i must report it , here is this year , &c. why , here is a glorious proof of your love to men ; love their bodies , love their souls , love them as Christians , especially love them as saints , have a care to breed them up in callings , train them up in some degree of learning ; this is most honourable , and , i hope , being done with an honest heart , it will further your account at the great day . 

I yet dare take the boldness to add the rules , i chiefly intended : some rules now for your pursuance of truth , and some for the pursuance of love , that they May be happily married this day . 

For truth , let the word of God be rule and judge ; when you inquire after truth , study the revealed will of God , and make use of revelations in concurrence with the word of God ; but do not set up revelations against the word of God . It was a desperate expression from valde , in a book of his in great request now adays ; it is true , he had many things good in him , considering the darkness of the times wherein he lived , a Spaniard ; saith he , we must use the scriptures , as we use pictures ( He was a Papist ) use pictures for a while , till we get apprehension of the thing or person realized to us , then throw them away , because now we can pray without pictures : so , use the scriptures till we have got our minds raised and elevated , and then we need no scriptures . the Lord deliver us from this opinion , which tends to undermine the very word of Christ . 

Far be it from me to say any thing against new-light , properly so called , though there is some so called , which is , i doubt , darkness ; nor against all revelations , for there is a spirit of revelation : but i desire it May be wisely considered , how the spirit of revelation discovers itself ; thus chiefly , not in bringing in a new gospel , and such new dispensations to us , as many talk of ; but in discovering that word which he hath revealed , and we have by us , in raising our minds to understand that word more fully , and those works of God that are in it more clearly : i would heartily bless God for it in myself , or in others , if it were such a spirit of revelation , as should help me to see any word of God , or any work of God in me more clearly : this is the spirit of wisdom and revelation the apostle to the Ephesians speaks of ; but if you 'll talk of revelations , that you have revelations beyond the word , and it May be sometimes in a manner contrary to the word ; surely this is not the way of truth . there is a poor old man hero in Cassianus , that thought he had a revelation , that when he was in the bottom of ae pit , he should get out ; but for all his revelation , he was deceived . I desire such things May be considered . The next thing is this , 

mind truth wisely : i would say under this head , 

1.  be sure it be truth that you contend for ; not for unwarranted ceremonies , not for trifles , for those things that deserve not the name of divine truth : and then 

2.  proportion your zeal to the nature of truth : there are some truths de fide , circa fidem , and in some sense praeter fidem ; i must not allow the like zeal for all ; i will have the substantial part of my zeal for substantial truths , and for other truths , so much zeal as the nature of them calls for : this is to mind truth wisely , this is that that becomes you . And then withal , 

Mind truths according to the directions of truth : 

1.  Meddle not with things too high , be sober ; a spirit of sobriety in divine things , and modesty in secret things , is most suitable to a saint , rom. 12. 3.  

2.  mind not curiosities , with neglect of those things that are necessary : affirm constantly ( saith Paul to Titus ) that those that are believers maintain good works , but as for fables , let them go , tit. 3. 8.  

3.  If you 'll do what becomes you concerning truth , do not clap a jus divinum rashly upon every one of your opinions : oh that brings us into a great deal of bondage ; divers things May be very good , and yet better , and more safely settled is prudentials , as human constitutions , then as divine constitutions , unless we be sure we are upon scripture-grounds , than i say nothing against it . What is the reason now that the Pope cannot alter ? i have heard it from some that have spoke with learned sober Papists , asking them , what think you of transubstantiation , or the like opinions ? they profess , though we would , yet we cannot alter them , the Pope having asserted them , who is infallible ; so that if we change one point of our religion , we spoil all . note . truly , if we clap a jus divinum , we cannot alter it , for we are engaged to hold it , though we were mistaken : i had rather settle too little , then too much , than we leave room for new discoveries ; we May better add then diminish : i cannot take away a jus divinum , without a great deal of disparagement . 

Do not presently obtrude with confidence your own conceits upon others , but rather mistrust them : learned men have had their errors , the wisest men have been deceived ; and do not rashly run from one extremity to another . Chrysostom he would , and others they would run from the manichees so far , that they went too far towards Pelagius : many of us run so far from popery and prelacy , note . that we run into other extremities , very dangerous and unhappy . oh take heed , let me add this further , as you would be friends to truth , 

Know that you have to deal with those men , that will bring in errors , sensim sine sensu ; as the devil dealt with Adam and Eve at first , how did he beguile them ? he corrupted their minds by degrees ( Take heed of his methods ) from the simplicity that is in Christ : you shall first have a little step , and something like a truth , and that May be disputed at first , than comes another , and then comes another , and so at last you are involved in inextricable errors . but the sixth and last thing i shall say under this head ; 

Take heed of being too far engaged in a party ; it is the way to sell a man's judgement : for if i be one of a party , i must strain hard to say as they say , and subscribe as they subscribe , else i shall be an apostate ; this is dangerous , than all must be proclaimed heretical that differ . many a man hath broke his conscience , note . violated his peace , by this engagement , because he must not break with his party . 

It is a notable rule politicians have , he that inclines to neither party , is Master of both : and i profess , i know not any generation in England that sleep so quietly , as those that are unengaged to this or that party : what there is good in episcopacy , they will not decline it , because the Bishops had it ; what there is good amongst the independents , they will close with it ; what there is good in presbytery , they will entertain that : and these are the men that preach with freedom , that converse with freedom . i do desire and hope there May be a good moderate presbytery settled amongst us ; yet I 'll profess to the world , I 'll not be so engaged to own every thing in it , that i will not embrace any thing that is good in another way : the Lord keep us from being engaged to such parties , that will make us slaves in our consciences to them . 

In your contending for truth , let there not be an abatement of love : think it not enough to be an orthodox , unless you be a loving Christian too , that all things May be done in love , that there you May walk in love , and be clothed with love ; three places are to that purpose . let me add this then further , that you May advance this happy union and marriage betwixt truth and love , 

Love men more for the work of God you see in them , than you slight them for any such defects or mistakes , as are consistent with godliness and with saintship , eph. 4. 1 , 2 , 3 , 4.  

Do not think ever to recover men with passionate invectives ; do not think to confute their opinions with vehement reproachful speeches : it is love that melts , that wins upon them : and i desire that you , and i , and all ministers Might practise this , that when we deliver the most sharp reproofs , it Might be scripture-language , and with a scripture-spirit , that May be the way to recover them ; whereas the other hardens them it May be they will never hear you more , and then what have you got by it ? you May preach against them absent , and that prejudices them still , till at last it May be you have preached away almost all your hearens . further , that you May advance this happy union of truth and love , 

Study to please , every one your godly neighbour , for his good to edification ; and such as are strong , must bear the infirmities of the weak , and not to please ourselves , saith Paul . it argues a great deal of proud fondness of thy own conceit , and want of love to thy brother , when thou wilt contemn every one who attains not thy measure . there must be a Christian personal toleration , forbearing one another in love ; though there May not be a state-toleration of all religions . 

Do not delight in affixing reproachful names ; to cry down persons under this or that name , never any good comes by it : for there is this inconvenience , you wrap in all , that it May be do not deserve it , not going so far as others : as to cry down all men under the name of Anabaptists , though it May be some of them do only scruple about the baptising of infants , and are far from the opinions of the German Anabaptists , who deny magistracy , &c. and so , many such like instances i Might give . Let meadde this : if you would indeed get a spirit of love , and advance it , let this be your care , 

That in the midst of all differences of judgement , you maintain a sweet harmony of affection , and labour to study a sweet compliance : what if thy brother be not come up to thy light , wilt thou therefore renounce him , and reject him ? It May be God intends not to all men the same proportion : shall i contemn my brother , because i have more grace ? If another man should renounce me , that hath more grace than i , what would become of me : these and many such rules i Might give . I have but this one word , and that is as a means by way of direction , how to marry these , truth and love together : oh that the Lord would help us to enter into covenant to complete the marriage , seriously to resolve now , that for time to come we labour more to truth it in love , and more to love with truth ; labour lovingly to embrace the truth , and sincerely to pursue love : the very heathen could say this , and it is a good rule , i wish we Christians Might learn it too . if you would be too hard for the common enemy , and not suffer him to gain advantage against you , agree , otherwise he will prevail over both parties of honest-hearted Christians ( For so i am confident there are amongst those that differ in church-matters ) God forbid either of them should be destroyed : i say , if you would keep a third party from destroying both , let there be concord ; your union will be strength , it will engage the presence of God ; whereas your divisions ali•nate and estrange God from you . and here let me tell you a story out of Livy , there was one Packuvius , that if he had not been so vicious , had been happy , and more worthy of our imitation , but his practice herein is commodious for you , there being a great difference betwixt the Commons and the senators ▪ and nothing would satisfy the Commons , but the senator's death ; he gets all the senators once by a stratagem into the senate house , and locks them in , and comes to the Commons , well , 〈◊〉 have now got them at your mercy ; and then they were frolic , and would be revenged ; he resolves to give them out one by one : and they had the first out : but i pray you gentlemen , said he ▪ let us consider , if we destroy all the senators , who shall we have in the place of them to govern the city ? Who shall come in the stead of them to rule ? why , one man would have this governor , another man would have that ; so at last they fell all to pieces , and they were glad to let the senators alone : then he quieted the commoners , and fetched off the senators , because they could not agree upon a successo ; you have discontents in the city and country too too many , and if it be the Lord's blessed will ▪ i would they Might be healed : and some would have the army destroyed , and a great many care not what becomes of the parliament , and i fear , many care not what becomes of the city ; but suppose this , that either parliament or army should for prese•• be destroyed ( I speak to wise citizens ) before you would have either of them destroyed , consider who should come in their places : note . if malignants should come into their power , and destroy you and the kingdom too , better the Commons had spared the lives of the senators . remember this story , and make this use of it . I have said enough to wise men , and I 'll end all with that prayer of John in his second epistle to the elect Lady ▪ and her children , grace be with you , mercy and peace from God the father , and from the Lord Jesus Christ , the son of the father , in truth and love : and hope you 'll all say amen to it . 

Finis . 





1 king. 7. 21.  Jachin and boaz.  zach. 11. 10 , 14.  cant. 8. 6.  1 cor. 13. 4 , 5 , 6 , 7.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} omnia tegit . Beza . dum collidimur frangimur . fr. l. Verulam . Apotheg . 241.  1 tim. 6. 3.  paulus eum ense & libro pingitur , mucro furor pauli , liber est conversio sauli . dur. l. 1. c. 3.  potest mibi atiquid videri alteri aliud , sed neq ego quod dixero praescribo alteri , nee ille mihi . aug. in psal. 16.  this learned Bishop Morton applies to the Papists , who all concur in having transubstantiation , but whether per productionem or per eductionem , &c. cannot agree . prov. 17. 27.  

Acts 24 , 25.  the apostle useth four arguments to unity . Endeavouring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace  verse 7.  vers. 11 , 12.  vers. 13 , 14.  verse 15.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . the headship itself of Christ . 1.  Respectu dignitatis . 2.  Respectu regiminis . 3.  Respectu influxus . 4.  Respectu vnionis . the appropriation of Christ's headship . Christ's title to this headship of his church . Luke 19 10  Pope no vicarious head of the church . v. Polau Sputag . p. 3351.  v. Bedel . caution , it 's dangerous to be injurious to any of Christ's members . dan. 2. 45.  verse 4 , 5.  strong encouragement for all Christ's members . rom. 16. 28.  contrary to Paul's doctrine . Phil. 2. 13.  to believe is man's act , but faith is God's gift . caution . rom. 9 15.  2. tim. 2. 20.  Christ's intention and expectation in giving gifts . that there should be a growth . eph. 1. last . 2.  A growing up . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 3 growing up to Christ in all things . the grounds  the end . the stability in Christ . stability in judgement . stability of affection . psal. 73. 25.  psal. 11.  stability of conversation . improvement of Christ . in all conditions and relations . in all duties . that is , to preach the gospel for the working faith in God's elect . for citizens chiefly , who enjoy such rich gospel-advantage . mat. 11. 22.  growth must be proportionable to the means you enjoy . growth must be of all parts . for information concerning the ministry ▪ consider the original of the ministry . gal. 1. 1.  doubtless it is a great and provoking evil , to cry down the whole ministry , because some seek themselves , or others of the ministers affect too much power , hereby the devil carries on his design  behold the ministry , in Christ's intention in the giving of it . that ordinances and ministry now cease , and we are under another new administration . A most dangerous and most unsound opinion . see Mr. Saltmarsh his book called , beams of the bright morning star . p. 134 &c.  what another administration then that of the father through the son by the spirit . reasons against this interpretation of mat. 28 20. for his third administration . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ▪  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 2 thess. 8. 9  Jude ver. 3.  1 cor. 15. 9 , 24 , 28.  eph. 4. 11.  1.  What is truth ? 2.  What is this love ? {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 3.  What is it to speak or follow the truth in the text . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} vers. 14.  scripturae plenitudinem adoro . truthing it in love , a good motto for saints . doctr. 3.  2 ioh. 2. 4 , 5.  verse 2 , 3.  reasons , why truthing it in love so useful . what truth and love do to prevent evils , singly considered . 1 tim. 4. 3 , 4 1 cor. 10. 28 , 29 , 30.  1 cor. 8. 13.  what truth & love do to promote the best good of saints , being jointly considered . 2 tim. 2. 25.  what truth and love being jointly considered . 1 cor. 8. 1.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} after the Passover , not after Easter , if truly translated , acts 12. 4. vid. Minshuls' dict.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , Acts 1. 20.  Acts 2. 27.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . there was both {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} & {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , yet sometime the former included in the latter . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , helps , deacons , governments , elders . note this grand imposture . 1.  use of instruction . 2.  use of caution . two dangerous regiments . captare impacata & inquieta tempora . a little book in quarto , called look about you . 3 use of exhortation . some errors are 1.  Contrafidem . 2.  Infide . 3.  Praeterfidem . in elephante melancholia transit in nutrimentum corporis . though the elephants be maximae virtutis & maximi intellectus , yet gregatim semper in cedunt , and so not nociva as solivaga are . homini erranti viam ostendit . rules concerning truth , and the pursuance of it . 1.  Rule about truth . Ezek. 13. 2.  eph. 4. 17.  cassainus his collat. 2. de discretione , cap 5.  2.  Rule about truth . 3.  Rule about truth . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . jus divinum nititur verbo divino . Ames . 4.  Rule about truth . 5.  Rule about truth . 2 cor. 11. 3.  6.  Rule about truth . inclinans ad neutram partem fit dominis utriusque . 1.  Rule about love . 1 cor. 16. 14.  eph. 5. 2.  col. 3. 12 , 13.  2.  Rule about love . 3.  Rule about love . 4.  Rule about love . rom. 5. 1 , 2.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . basil.  eph. 5. 2.  5.  Rule about love . 6.  Rule about love . phil 1. 27.  & 3. 15 , 16.  Concordian communae periculum tollitur . Livy . 1. 28.  






























