The love of truth and peace . 

A sermon preached before the honourable house of Commons assembled in parliament . 

Novemb. 29. 1640.  

By John Gauden , bachelor in divinity . Published by order of that house . 

London printed by g. m. for Andrew Crook in Paul's churchyard at the green dragon . 1641.  

To the honourable house of Commons , assembled in parliament . 

such is the powerful , and universal influence , which the great and noble constellation of your house bath , under God and the King , over all that are members of this state , that none with modesty May deny your desires , or with safety ( at least of their discretion ) disobey your commands ; so irresistible a force must the intimation of that will carry , which proceeds from somany wise and excellent judgements united together . This May sufficiently justify my obedience , in presenting this sermon to your , and the public view : which not any self-forwardness , or overvaluing hath obtruded . It was enough , in the author's opinion ( if not too much ) that so sudden and abortive conceptions had once adventured the hearing of so learned , pious , and judicious an assembly . Where obtaining ( through God's blessing ) some approbation , ( by doing some good , i hope ) they were further , by the vote of your honourable house , required to be printed : which they now are ; and with all humility presented to your acceptance . That at once i May , both cast in a mite to God's glory in the public good ( which should be the end of all our actions ) and also testify a mind vehemently sensible of , and thankful for those free and noble expressions of favour generally from the whole house , and particularly from some members of it , my special friends , conferred upon me . What good others May now get from these notions , i know not : i pray , and hope , they May not be wholly useless to candid , pious , and unprejudiced minds , since your censure hath allowed them as fit and necessary for our times . 

this i am sure , your wisdom and piety are ( above all others ) by the publication of this sermon , more straightly obliged in conscience , to justify before God and man , your desires and opinion of it , by your proceedings answerable to the subject and intent of it ; which is the love of truth and peace . the splendour of so many clear minds , concentred in truth , cannot but kindle to a public love of it . And from the sacred light , and heat of so many wise and warm hearts , the life sweetness and abundance of our peace cannot but grow and flourish . 

that this May be the happy success , wherewith with God will be pleased to crown your public endeavours ; as also these , which from my private pen are now adopted unto your so great and honourable protection , is the earnest prayer of 

Your most humble servant , Gauden . 

The love of truth and peace . 

zach. 8.19 . 

thus saith the Lord , the fast of the tenth month , shall be to the house of Judah , joy and gladness , and cheerful feasts ; therefore love the truth and peace . 

Though the weight of this service and employment be so great , that it Might well have required abler shoulders to bear it , and longer time to prepare for it , and not to have put Saul's armour on David's back : yet that i May not be wanting , to God's glory , my own conscience , or your desires and expectation ; i have adventured to appear this day , in this place , before this honourable , grave , and judicious assembly . Nothing did more encourage me , against the greatness of the work , the shortness of the time , and the insufficiency of my own abilities , than the auspicious fitness and readiness of this text , so every way suitable , as i conceive ; 1.  To the auditors . 2.  To the times . 3.  To the present occasion . 

1.  To the auditors ; who are , or should be all filii veritatis & alumni pacis : lovers of truth , and peace : professors of truth , and protectors of peace : being called together by his sacred majesty , and deputed by the country , to be counsellors , and vindicators of truth and peace . 

2.  To the genius of our times ▪ nothing is more needful to be preached than the love of truth and peace . the winter's distemper of our age is such , that the love of many ( If not most ) is grown cold to both : truth much obscured , depraved , blemished , prejudiced , undermined , discountenanced , suppressed : peace very crazy and shaken : rumours of wars , preparations for wars , study of sides & parts , great division of thoughts , pertinacy in opinions , breeding disaffections ; and disaffections flaming to open contention and hostility ; so far , as from the strife of pens and tongues , writing , and disputing , we are come to the terror of war , to swords and arms ; that if the great God , who is the father of truth and peace ( Who refrains the spirits of men that delight in war ) had not been gracious unto us , and inclined the heart of our King to counsels of peace , you had not this day been auditors , nor i a speaker of this theme , but all of us miserable actors , or spectators of the contrary , the suppression of truth , and utter subversion of our peace . 

3.  The text suits to the present occasion of the sacrament : your late fasting is this day happily turned to a cheerful feast : your water changed to wine ; the best viands , the best wine ; the soul's provision for eternity , the body and blood of Christ . A soul's feast , a feast of exceeding joy , of eternal gladness . A feast of love ; God's love to us ; Christ's love for us ; our love to them , and to each other . 

A feast of truth ; the sealing and confirmation of the highest , most necessary and comfortable truth , which received by faith , is able to save our souls . And a feast of peace too ; the most glorious peace between God and our souls , between Christ and his church ; between one another . 

So that nothing can come more seasonably after your fast , and with this feast of spiritual joy , the holy sacrament , than this divine exhortation , most worthy of God to teach , and of us to learn , as men , and as Christians : both which names import a special relation we have , above all creatures under heaven , to truth and peace , as we are {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , rational and social creatures ; as {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , regenerate and sanctified by the spirit , which raiseth our souls to the enjoyment of the highest truth and peace , which is in God , and from God , bringing the soul to God , and uniting it ever with him . 

The three words in the text ( Whereon i purpose to insist ) are a sacred trinity . Three precious jewels ; truth , peace , and love ; all eminent in God , and from him : objects , and affections of the highest capacity , use , and excellency to our souls ; truth , as the light of the sun ; peace as the heat , which enlivens , fosters , quickens , makes fruitful all . love makes us enjoy them both . truth and peace are , bona publica & universalia . Truth for the soul , peace for the body and state ; every one hath a share and interest in them , Prince , peers , and persons . 

Of these i intend to speak , not as a statist or politician ( To which i pretend not ) but as a divine , a messenger from the god of truth and peace ; seeking to kindle and inflame your hearts to such a love of them , as May be most happy to your own souls , and most beneficial to our church and state : in the good of both which , you are all highly concerned : and in nothing can you promote the prosperity of either or both of them , more , then in your love and advancement of truth and peace . 

May God the fountain of truth , Christ the saviour of love , the holy ghost the spirit of peace , assist me in speaking , you in hearing , all in doing so , as we May show a pure impartial , and unpassionate love of truth and peace . 

In the words consider three things : first , the inference , therefore : secondly , the objects propounded , truth , and peace . thirdly , the duty required : love . 

Every word hath a weight , beauty and benefit in it ; so that they well merit and require your attention . 

First , the inference , therefore : the greater mercies God shows to us , the stricter obligations to love and obedience he hath upon us . When our fasting and mourning are happily turned to cheerful feasts , our fears and jealousies cleared up to joy and gladness , to hopes of better estate and times , what doth God require of us , but this ? therefore to love the truth and peace . 

When God's infinite mercy and patience to us hath beyond expectation , as well as desert , brought back our church and state , from the brink and precipice of war , ruin , and confusion , which threatened our peace . from the spreading , and prevailings of errors , heresies , schisms , and superstition , which strive to oppress or eclipse our church and truth : that there is a breathing space , a lengthening of our tranquillity , put into our hands , what doth God require of us by way of gratitude to him , of loyalty to our sovereign , of fidelity to our country , then to love the truth and peace ; which are so happily still continue to us ; and by an active , serious , and industrious love to study the settling and recovery of them both . 

Secondly , the objects propounded : here we will consider . 

First , what truth is . 

Secondly , what peace . 

Thirdly , the union of them : truth and peace . 

Fourthly , the loveliness in them : which best appears in the benefit by them , so as to merit our affection . 

1.  Of truth . 

That question of Pilate to Christ , will here be made : what is truth ? i answer . It is a conformity , agreeableness , or answerableness of our minds or things to their ideas , patterns , rules or measures ; as that copy is true , which agrees with the original ; that weight or measure true , which fits the standard , that impression true in wax or paper , which exactly fits the types and engravings , that notion or perception true in the mind or sense , which agrees with the nature of the thing or object , whereto they are applied . 

truth is the increated light of the intellectaull world , shining from God to angels and men . 

The first idea , rule , measure or standard of truth , is God : his will , which i call veritas dei . whereby he is , what he is , essentially , simply , immutably : by which he wills all things to be , what indeed they are , and knows them to be , such as they are most certainly . This sun of truth is in God : never clouded , spotted , or eclipsed ; never setting or changing . Eternal light , day , noon , a constant serenity . 

From this is the eradiation of truth ; or shining forth of the divine will by his works and word . Which we call veritas rei : and this is first entitatis , whereby things are such as God would have them to be , and so are true and good . 

Secondly , veritas mentis ; whereby things are known or believed by us to be such , as indeed they are , either made or revealed by God to us : this is the truth of science or faith ; 

Thirdly , hence flows veritas sermonis , of dicti ; when our words and oral expressions are conformable to our knowledge , and belief or things speaking the truth . ephes. 4. 15.  

Fourthly , veritas facti & vitae ; whereby our actions are conformable to what we say , and seem to know , judge , or believe of things , which is the doing of the truth . 1. ioh. 1. 6.  The idea or pattern of our actions are our words ; of our words , our minds and conceptions ; of our minds things themselves ; of all things the divine will , most wise , powerful , and immutably good . All truth as being , is originally from God , as a sea and sun derived , and must by a right beam and clear stream be reduced to him again : and so it is ; when we do as we speak : when we speak as we think , know or believe ; when we know or believe , as things are either made , or revealed by God : then doth the ray or veyn of truth flow aright from God to us , and reflect back again from us to him : when in any of these we fail : there comes in hypocrisy and simulation in our actions ; lying in our words ; error , falsity and unbelief in our minds , when our actions contradict our words , our words our minds , our minds the nature and truth of things , made , or revealed by God : whose will in his works and word , is ( As i said ) the rule of truth . 

There are divers manifestations of truth ; though it be but one , yet as light shining through divers pores ; or one fountain derived in several conduits , for the benefit of rational creatures . 

First , there is truth , natural or physical in the works of God , which by sense and discourse , by art and science we learn . 

Secondly , there is truth moral , political , or civil ; which is in the enacting , interpreting , and executing of laws according to the rules of justice . 

Thirdly , there is a truth theological , supernatural or religious ; which chiefly concerns our souls , and is immediately taught from God . 

The first is in the works of God and nature . 

The second in the laws and edicts of men agreeable to principles of reason . 

The third is in the sacred scriptures , the only foundation and rule of faith and religion . 

The first concerns us as creatures severally . 

The second as sociable creatures jointly in a state or commonwealth . 

The third as Christians , in a church and nearer call or relation to God . 

The first requires our love to it , as we love ourselves in a natural way : the second , as we love our country , relations and liberties : the third as we love our souls . 

By the first , the health and welfare of our bodies , and pleasure of our senses , fancies , and minds , are maintained , while we know and enjoy the true virtues , power , and use of creatures ; able to apply fit means to our ends . 

By the second , the health of the state , or body politic is preserved ; while laws , which are the nerves and ligaments of civil societies , are grounded upon innate , infallible and eternal principles of equity , reason , and justice , to which all men agree ; and being so constituted , are truly interpreted and executed ; not wrested , depraved , obscured , or violently broken : this is veritas justitiae & decisionis : the truth in judicature , zach. 8. 16.  execute the judgement of truth and peace in your gates . 

By the third , our soul's health and happiness are maintained ; while we see , know , believe , and rest upon those excellent and saving truths , which God hath in his word revealed to us , in the plainness and simplicity of the sense , not denying or doubting any thing , but humbly and willingly embracing every truth revealed , as it agrees to the general rule and analogy of faith , contained in the holy scriptures , this is veritas fidei & religionis . 

The first truth we gain by senses and discourse . the second by common notions , or inbred principles of reason . the third by divine revelation ; depending upon the veracity , infa•libility and authority of God . 

No truth is to be neglected , because it is a beam or lineament of God ; but those are most to be loved and esteemed , which discover God most clearly to us ; bring us nearest , and make us likest to him ! This , as the most excellent and useful truth , i chiefly here understand ; which exceeds all others , as much as the soul doth the body ; or eternity a moment . And in this , men's hearts are most prone to be negligent , and coldly affected . 

2.  Peace . 

peace in any kind , and under any notion is sweet and lovely . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} naz. we can better tell what it is by the fruition , than description of it : what health is to the body , and calmness to the sea , and serenity to the day , such is peace : which ariseth from the fit , orderly , and proportionable disposing of things . It is a kind of sweet , divine , and heavenly consent , harmony or beauty of things , subordinate one to another . 

Such it is : first , peace in nature , and the greater world , from the wise and apt combination of creatures ; by symbolical qualities so contempered , that all agree to make up one entire body , the world . 

2.  In the lesser worlds of mixed bodies , peace is that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} or {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} due temper and moderation of humours and parts , which keep their true place and proportion ; quá quodlibet corpus non minus appetit unitatem suam quam entitatem . 

3.  In the rational world ; peace is that composedness , and tranquillity of the soul , whereby all the inferior faculties , and the populacy of affections or passions are regular , and subject to the rule , and sovereignty of reason . 

4.  In the spiritual world , the regenerate soul ; peace is the humble and willing subjection , and suitableness of the conscience in all things to the will and spirit of God . 

5.  In the political or civil world , the state , or church ; peace is the settling and due ordering of things by just laws of government ; and by true grounds or rules of piety and religion ; whereto all submit . It consists , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , in the right skill of governing ; and will to be governed . When all agree in one thing , all think , speak , and do by the same thing , all conspire in one main end , the glory of God , and the public good , which is the supreme law : when all are settled on one ground , move by one rule , and tend to one end . Truth , order , and justice , are the only foundation and pillars of peace , in both church , and commonwealth . 

2.  The second consideration is the union of the two , truth and peace ; in God they are united : and so in every good soul , & well ordered church or state , they May , and do best agree together : no firm , or durable peace , which is not fastened and cemented with truth : so false and pernicious a principle is that of some ; that the less men know of truth , the more easily they will be kept in peace ; that the way to subdue men to an asinine patience , is to cast them into an asinine ignorance . whereas on the contrary , no men or minds are more obedientially disposed to an heroic patience , as to the burdens , pressures , and exactions upon their states and liberties , &c. than they , who are best informed , how little all these worldly things are to be valued , having hopes of far better . And no men are more stubbornely contumacious , refractory and prone to flame , to rebellion and munity , than they , who know , and expect no better , or higher good than those of sense and present life , who think you rob them of their heaven , God , and all happiness , if you injure them in their estates , honours , or liberties . 

Those subjects are most shy , and prone to start from obedience , and fall from peace , who live by moonlight of human reason , and senses only , which amazeth their minds with the shadows of good in riches , pleasures , honours , and liberties temporal , and walk not by the sunshine of divine truth , which discovers the only necessary , excellent , and satisfactory objects , worthy of the soul's love and acceptance ; for nothing is truly lovely , which is not spiritual and eternal . 

No such bonds of peace and unity , then , as the spirit of truth , which ties the conscience to obedience and patience ; the wisdom from above is first pure , then peaceable , James 3. 17.  

So that they best May March together ; but first truth , than peace . Truth must have the precedence : rather truth , than peace . Truth we owe to God , and our souls immediately ; peace only to our bodies and states , &c.  If one must be dispensed withal , it is peace , not truth : better truth without public peace , than peace without saving truth . Truth alone will bring us peace , the best peace , Christ's peace , which the world can neither give nor take away . pax est omni bello tristior , quae veritatis & justitiae ruinâ constat . that peace is far to dear , which costs us the loss of truth , i mean great , saving , necessary , and fundamental truth . 

2 where these truths are asserted , study to add peace to them ; that truth May root , spread , fasten , and fructify the more . Nor is the public peace to be violated for every truth , such as neither tends to faith , nor much to good manners . Dissidiis magnis , & controversis non sunt redimendae minores istae veritates . 

We must not by contention of tongues , or pens , or hands , so far vindicate truths of lesser size , and consequence , as to break the peace of our affections , words and conversations . 

Let truth and peace then go together , in our loves and lives . Truth as the root , peace as the fruit : truth as the light , peace as heat : truth as the foundation , peace as the structure . 

And certainly in the church , those tenets and propositions are likeliest to be true , which tend to the peace of the church , as it was the true mother , which pleaded against the dividing of the child . And that peace in the civil state is likeliest to be lasting and sound , which is built on the truth of reason and religion both , and not upon the fancies , opinions , dictates , traditions , examples , and tyranny of custom and men . 

Neither peace of church nor state is to be purchased with the sale of truth , saving and necessary : nor yet are all truths to be prosecuted with such vehemency , heat , and contention , as to make shipwreck of either's peace . the windows and lights of truth must not be so enlarged as to weaken the firmness , solidity , and entireness of the building : nor May the walls be so thick , close and compacted , as to exclude or obscure the light : which the Turks do , who so far secure their peace , as they forbid the searching of truth : neither darkness May make the house of God useless ; nor breaches , under pretence of letting in more light , May be made so wide , as to render the edifice unsafe and tottering . 

As divine truth of religion , so civil truth of judicature and peace must kiss each other . Here the veracity and conscience of judges , and magistrates is chiefly required ; that they be men of truth , exod. 18. 21.  For , false , corrupt , and unjust judges , like comets , portend wars and commotions in a state ; scattering so malignant an influence into men's minds , that every one had rather adventure the injuries of war than suffer the injustice of peace . 

4 the loveliness of them , which will best appear by the benefits from them , why truth and peace are to be loved . 

1 civil or political truth is the mind of the law , the rule of justice , the right measuring and distribution of things to every one , according as equity and reason require . 

By this truth the propriety and enjoyment of what is our own are maintained ; fraud , injuries , and violence , detected , punished , and restrained . Innocence relieved , industry maintained and encouraged ; due rewards to virtue and merit , as well as punishments to sin and vice are dispensed : in a word , the safety of your persons , wives , children , houses , lands , goods , honours , liberties , lives , and all that is dear to you in this world , depends upon this truth in judicature , without which no society of men can subsist , at least not flourish ; but degenerate to a poor and slavish vassalage , and such a lazy despondency of minds , which sink them next degree to beasts ; seeking no more but to live , having no thoughts or designs generous , noble , or extending beyond the present supply of back and belly . 

See then how much they deserve public hatred , who through fear or flattery , or base and sinister ends , falsify the mind of the law ; at once cutting asunder that great cable which holds the state from shipwreck : turning the sword of justice put into their unworthy hands , to cut the throat of laws and liberties . 

2 the loveliness and benefit of divine truth revealed , whereon our faith , our religion , our souls , our church depends , is so great that no time or words serve to let it forth . 

By this light of sacred truth , we know ourselves in our worst , lost , sinful , and damnable estate , wherein else as heathen or beasts we should stupidly and miserably die and perish . By this we know God in his infinite mercies through Christ , which is life eternal , ioh. 17.3 . By this we discover his grace and love to us : for our free justification by the righteousness of Christ , and sanctification by his spirit . 

By this truth the burdens of our sins , our fears , our miseries , the horror of death , hell , and eternity , are disarmed and relieved : by this blessed light of truth , we have many sweet and precious promises to support us in all states , and all trials and temptions . But this as Moses from mount Nebo , we discover the pleasant and happy prospect of heaven and eternity : the joys , peace , pleasure , happiness , and security of that afterstate we expect in the other world : we see a full , though future , victory over sin , fatan , flesh , world , men , death , hell , and all ; a full triumph and crowning of the soul and body in eternal glory . you May see then how little experience or knowledge they have of this truth , and the comforts by it , who are weary of it , enemies , or indifferent to it : better not have the truth , than having it to want the love of it . 

3 the amiableness of peace , public and national in church or state ; it is like the smiling of a beautiful face , when peace flourisheth with truth : oh how lovely is it , at once to serve God with purity and safety ; with sincerity and security ; to enjoy the blessings of God's right and left hand together ! 

to eat every man with joy and cheerfulness of heart the fruit of his own vine and plantings ▪ to reap the harvest he hath sowed : to dwell in the house he hath builded : to enjoy the wife he hath espoused , and the children he hath begotten . 

Your own long and happy experience May best teach you , what is the beauty and sweetness of the breasts of peace : whence plenty flows ; learning , arts , industry , trading , thrive and prosper ; your private and in them the public strength , honour , and treasure increaseth . 

God grant you be not taught to prize and be thankful for it , by the want of it yourselves : look over sea on the sad and black characters , which fire , famine , and sword , have wrote , nay engraven , and ploughed upon the faces of men , women , and children ; on their houses , fields , vineyards , cities , churches , &c. and you May with weeping and amazed eyes read this lesson ; oh the sweet and lovely blessings of truth and peace ! Oh the horrid , hideous deformity of errors and wars ! 

— En quo discordia gentes 
Perduxit miseras . 


3 we come now to the third general head : having seen what truth and peace are ; how well they agree , how much they merit our love ; now we go on to the last part , which is our duty . Therefore love them . here we will inquire two particulars . 1.  what need there is that men should be thus exhorted to love these , which have so attractive a loveliness in them . 2.  wherein most effectually we must express our love to them . 

I although nothing more deserve our love : yet such is the ignorance , dulness , or depravedness of men's minds , affections , and manners , that few there are , which truly love them . First , some love neither truth nor peace ; of which temper the Jesuitick spirit seems to be , which deceives the nations with the cup of error , and scatters coals of fire and dissension among men . Secondly , some love truth , but not peace : zealously affected to truth , but for want of sound and steady knowledge , or meek and humble hearts , they are full of violence and bitterness ; so prone to strife and contention , that from words and disputes they easily kindle to blows : some , when you speak to them of peace , prepare for war , quia multis utile bellum ; their best fishing being in troubled waters . Thirdly , some love peace but not truth ; as Ishachar , sluggishly couching between the burdens of superstition and oppression , rather than trouble their peace , in a land of plenty . out of a lazy , gross , and sensual humour , so addicted to the enjoyments of peace , that they care not what encroachments are made on truth . fourthly , many seem to love them , but not simply , per se and propter se ; but corruptly and partially , for by-ends and advantages to be had by them , of profit , preferment , applause , and the like ; as Demas did 2 tim. 4. 10.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . It is neither truth nor peace so much they love ( Though they stickle for both ) but their bellies , pleasures , plenty , and selves , which they enjoy under the wings of truth and peace . 

5.  Many love what they think truth ( And happily is so ) yet not because it is so , but because they think so ; extremely biased with self love and pride ; that they pertinaciously retain , what ever opinion they have once undertaken , though they cannot maintain it ; only on this ground , ne videantur errâsse ; so hardly drawn by overcoming themselves to triumph over their errors . Ita perit judicium , ubi res transit in affectum , & nostram qualemcunque praevalere volumus sententiam , quia nostra est : so much do our affections blind , bri•• , corrupt , and warp our judgements . 

6.  Many say they love truth ; but not universally ; not such truths as cross their credits , opinions , ends , pleasures , sins and lusts ; nolunt id verum videri , quod affectibus suis adversatur . He loves not any truth , that loves not all ; as he likes not the light or sun , who is offended with any beam of it . 

7.  veritas animae sponsa ; truth is a pure virgin , which every soul should woo and seek to wed to itself ; many pretend to love it , but not casto & honesto amore sed meretricio & prudendo . Lascivientia ingenia , such as fondly and wantonly out of a vanity and curiosity only court that truth , which they see is countenanced and shined upon by public favour and authority ; ready enough to discountenance and forsake it , if the stream of things should change : venales animae , vile and mercenary souls , that buy and sell the truth , prostituting it , not entirely loving and wedding themselves to it . 

8.  Some to purchase their peace , are ready to sell the truth , by flattering , complying and mancipating their judgements to other men's opinions and errors , either discovered , which is very wicked , or unsearched , which is very weak , degenerate minds which so easily enslave that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the noblest and sovereign faculty of the soul , which is the understanding , to other men's errors never so great , if their power be so too . 

9  veritas animae pabulum , there is as great an aptitude and proportion between the mind of man , and truth , as is between the eye and the object , meat and the stomach : now we know , it must be a pure and unblemished eye , that sees with certainty and constancy ; a clear , sound , and undiseased stomach , that desires , likes , and digests wholesome meats . Such must that mind be which loves . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . wholesome truths , sound doctrines . 

1.  Many are so vitiated and distempered by sin , the world , their lusts and vanities , that they wholly refuse to take down any truth ; what the ear May receive sometime , their heart casts up again profanely and reproachfully , by their words and actions . ita veritas odium & nauseam parit . the speediest way to lose the love of many is , freely to tell them that truth , which Might do them most good , for it seems to them as Michaiahs' words to Ahab , odious and offensive , although it gave him warning of his danger , and showed him the only way for his safety . 

2.  Many like choice and wanton stomaches , receive and digest indeed , some truths in their minds and memories ; but it is morbum alere non hominem ; only thereby the better to nourish and strengthen their erroneous humours and conceits ; and what ever truth they meet with , is presently swallowed without chewing by some monster of opinion , which they maintain . For error is so feeble and unbottomed , that it must have some buttresses and seeming basis of truth to support it . By this means detaining the truth of God in unrighteousness , rom. 1. 18.  

3.  Many are of so hot , unquiet and choleric stomaches , that they love not truth sweetened with peace ; not calm and sober truths . Afraid to be thought coldly , if peaceably religious , even in matters of lesser moment . Interpreting that zeal , which is but natural passion and choler , an human feverish and praedatorious , not that holy , gentle , and propitious heat of love , which only well digesteth sacred truths . 

So that most men we see had need to be called upon to love truth and peace . in some , hopes of preferment will do much to pervert , leaven , and suppress truth , warping which way the sun of favour shines warmest . In others , despair of preferment , and popular inclinations May do as much to disturb peace , and established truth : every way pronus lapsus , major sit cautela . Few are true , sincere , and hearty lovers of them ; by the antiperistasis of others coldness , let the heat of your love grow more intensive . 

2 which is the last particular : the way most effectually to express the love we owe to truth and peace : first to truth , then to peace , to both if possible . amor est pondus animae : love is the weight and motor of the soul , the spring that sets all the wheels on work . It is a vehement , active , industrious , unwearied , invincible affection ; if rightly placed on worthy objects , it works wonders . amor non potest abscondi , the fire of love is impatient to be hide or smothered : nescit nimium , never thinks it hath done enough : est extaticus , nec sinit amantem esse sui juris : it hath a kind of rapture and extatick power , which transports the mind beyond itself , and dispossesseth it of itself , to bestow itself on that it loves . delicata res est amor ; it is a tender affection , impatient of any injury or dishonour cast on what we love . et sibi lex est severissima : love needs no motive but itself to carry it to the extremity of its power . 

If our love then to truth be real , it will show itself . 

1 in the serious and earnest searching for , finding out , and discovering of truth : for , veritas in profundo : truth is not obvious in the surface of things , but hath a depth , being sunk and retired from us , as now we are . There is a great deal of false and loose earth , rubbish of opinions , probabilities , and falsities to be cast away , before we come to the clear stream of truth , which by secret derivations flows from the eternal fountain , God . there are not only grosser clouds of errors and falsities , which darken truth ; but parelii too , verisimilia , seeming suns of truth , which are but apparences and probabilities , of no long continuance . He then that will seek and find certain , and saving truth , must apply himself to God , his word , and spirit , not take it upon trust and credit of human fancy , or reason : multi taedio investigandae veritatis ad proximos divertunt errores : many out of an easiness , laziness , or presumption , take up truths from custom , education , prepossessed conceits , show of antiquity , excellency of men's parts , &c. prone to Count that truth , which themselves or others have a long time believed to be such . sed oculos à rebus omnibus abducas , quae deus non sunt si veritatem quaeras , Esay 8. 20.  to the law and to the testimony , joh. 5.29 . search the scriptures ; from these wells must we draw the waters of life , purifying , refreshing , and saving truths ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . The vein and mine of truth , hath many windings , and intricate turnings , requiring a sagacious and industrious mind to follow it . 

2 show your love to truth , by propagating , and imparting it to others , when yourselves have discovered it . veritas nihil erubescit , praeterquam abscondi ; truth is only ashamed to be hidden ; as the sun to be clouded , or eclipsed . truth , as light , wastes not by communicating itself to others . quò communius bonum eò divinitus . show your love to it and to men , by teaching it to others , but in a calm and unpassionate way ; truth is best seen in clear and untroubled waters , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , ephes. 4. 15.  speaking the truth in love . pitying not triumphing in other's ignorance , or reproaching their errors and weakness of judgement . Farther , show your love , by using all means to plant and nourish truth , by setting up the lights of good and painful preachers , in the dark , and obscure corners of our land , where , God knows , many poor souls perish for want of knowledge ( Such i mean ) as can and will rightly divide the word of truth , 1 tim. 2. 15.  there is no engine you can invent so effectual , to batter down and demolish the adverse party , or to secure the prosperity of our church and state . But this will hardly be done , without encouraging men to the study and preaching of truth in the way of necessary , competent , and liberal maintenance ; for it is most certain , as Bishop jewel sometime told Queen Elizabeth , in a sermon , tenuitatem beneficiorum necessario sequitur ignorantia sacerdotum . never flatter yourselves , that the lamps of the temple will burn at all , or but very dimly , and poorly , if you supply them not with oil sufficient to enliven themselves and enlighten others . 

3.  Show your love of truth , by a zealous , active , and constant maintaining of it : zeal , is flamma amoris : love raised to a flame : by all justifiable ways asserting the honour of it , and the professors of it , against the profaneness , idleness , envy , calumnies , and oppositions of the enemies thereof , either atheists , sensual , ignorant , or superstitious , 2 cor. 13. 8.  we can do nothing against the truth , but for the truth , do all you lawfully May : by severe , and wholesome edicts , fencing in , and fortifying truth against the seminary incursions of those , that seek to encroach upon its ancient bounds : also against the bold , and impudent preaching , printing , and disputing for the contrary errors , which have been long ago exploded and confuted ; which by misused power , or tacit connivance , seek to creep in , and undermine our truth . Leaks May sink us , as well as rocks split us . Jude 3.  contend then earnestly for the truth ; but with the power of gods , not man's arm of flesh ; with a contention of love , not of force ; such as May not destroy men , but their errors , which otherwise will destroy them . truth is so sufficiently armed with its own power , that it needs not the assistance of the sword or canon , which reach not the minds of men ; nor can divide them from their errors , nor batter down the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , strong holds of prepossessed false opinions ; that excellency if power which is in the word of God and his spirit , is only able to subdue the understanding ? Yet must not the magistrate ▪ so far be wanting to God's glory , and the churches good , as to fail to defend truth against those that by cunning or force seek to subvert it , setting up the just to  or of those laws , which May chase away those owls , and bats , and feral birds , that love darkness , and portend a night , where ever they appear ; that cannot endure the light , because their works are evil , as well as their doctrines false . 

4.  Show your love to the truth , as by doing for it all you can ; so by obeying the truth from the heart , 1 pet. 1. 22. by living conformably to it : that there be no solecism in your lives , that the truth of your doctrine be not confuted , by the corruptness of your manners : not only seeking the truth , and speaking the truth , and defending the truth ; but farther , doing the truth , 1 John . 1. 6. which is the strongest vindication of its honour , and your belief of it . There is a labour of love , which loves its labour ; ready to deny ourselves , in any thing near or dear to us , rather than deny any saving truth : cheerfully suffering for it , rather than it should suffer ; a good mind , that loves the truth , suffers more in truth's suppression , than its own ; yea , by dying for it , if need be ; and God choose us out for his champions to crown and improve the necessity of death , with the glory of martyrdom , which is the highest witnessing of our love to God and his truth . Difficulties rather wh•• and twist to a firmer resolution , than any way bl•t or discourage a well placed affection . The heathen man set such a price on truth , that he thought it worth our life ; — Vitamque impendere vero , 
Nec propter vitam vivendi perdere causam . 


it is a blind & preposterous love , that loves life better than that , for which only life is worth the having ; better we die , than truth decay , which as a phoe nix is wont to renew its life out of martyrs' ashes . 

5 , lastly , what we come short in doing or suffering for the love of truth , at least , seek to supply by our frequent and fervent prayers to God , that he would so make the way , and carry on his truth that it May prevalile upon the hearts of men to a love of it . 

But in this variety of opinions , and distraction of sides , every one challenging truth to be on their party , how shall we know , what is that truth , which we ought to love and adhere unto ? 

I answer , the truth of God , like the light of the sun , is best known and distinguished from all other , by the beauty and excellency of its effects , of life , heat , and fertility ; that is infallibly the saving and necessary truth of God , most deserving our love and study , which hath , and always had the greatest and best influence on men's hearts and lives : that is , God's truth which makes men more godly , more holy , pure , just , good , humble , peaceable , charitable , self-denying , and conscientious in all their ways : what brings us nearest , and makes us likest to God , which conforms us most to that highest and divinest pattern of Christ's mind and conversation . 

It hath been always the seal of honour set upon Christian religion : and that truth , whereon it is founded , that it most magnifies God and goodness . those truths which have the greatest operation on men's minds , consciences , and lives , so as to amend them , are set beyond all question and disputes : these let us chiefly study , love , and live by . 

2.  If our love be thus rightly set to God's truth , he will take care to settle our peace : to which we owe a love too , and must show it in the second place . First , by praying heartily and constantly for it , psal. 122. 6.  every one should think himself called upon in those words . oh pray for the peace of Jerusalem . Prayer engages God on our side , and calls in an omnipotent arm to settle , strengthen , and secure our peace . secondly , by assisting really , to the support and maintaining of it , against the perturbers of it . 1.  By seasonable counsels , and faithful advise grounded on truth and justice . 2.  By arming counsels with power and subsidies of purses and persons ; to suppress all unjust and rebellious practices , which seek to violate our peace . Peace is not safe , except there be power for war ; which is the guard of peace ; as power without counsel is brutish , and self confounding ; so counsel without power is feeble , and subject to be despised . 3.  By living orderly in a way of meekness , humility , and subjection in the fear of God , and obedience to the wholesome laws established ; which is that we are taught by the truth of God , rom. 13.   . let every soul be subject , &c.  this i am sure will bring a man peace at the last . If not external , yet internal , which will be eternal . 4.  By searching out , and exemplary punishing those that are the perturbers of our peace ; justly troubling those that have troubled Israel , as Joshua to Achan . Psal. 34. 14 , Thus seek peace and pursue it ; by pursuing those that would rob us of it . And certainly you will find , none are more enemies to , and perturbers of our peace , than those that are the perverters and opposers of our truth : either in judicature , or religion , for these scatter and blow the coals of discontent in every corner , that the whose house must needs be set on fire , if they be not timely quenched . 

And now give me leave by way of conclusion , a little to apply to you and myself , the weight and force of this text . 

Therefore love the truth and peace . 

Had we in this church and state ( Right honourable , and the rest ) been so happy in the love of truth and peace , as we have been in the long glorious enjoying , and the miraculous preservation of them among us , certainly , neither truth had this day been so clouded and perplexed , nor our peace so broken and distracted . 

The god of truth and peace declares his displeasure , and high indignation against us , for the negligence , coldness , and ingratitude of many ; for the profaneness , atheism , and malice of some : for the superstition , formality , and backesliding of others . How many are there , that deny , or despise , spise , or suppress , or oppose , or contemn , scorn , and deride , and corrupt and belie the truth ? that the prophet's complaint May come near our times , Esay 59 15.  Truth faileth , and he that departeth from iniquiry maketh himself a prey : Nos patim•r longae pacis mala saevior armis , 
Luxuria incumbit — 


long peace , like fair weather , hath raised up the vapours of sins to cloud our sun , and trouble our heaven withal ; which almost of us , from highest to the lowest are not guilty of one or more of those forenamed degrees of neglect against truth : which shows , we have either no love at all , or a small love , a tepid , and Laodicean love , a shamefaced , which is a shameful love , or a false and base love of truth , not for itself , but for ourselves : as our Diana ; the mystery , by which our gain or greatness are sustained . If we have not loved truth in peace , were it not just with God to make us want truth in war ? and because men received not the love of the truth , he should give them over to strong delusions , to believe a lie , 2 thes. 2. 10.  

Certainly God will severely exact of this church and nation , of Prince and persons , of preachers and hearers , an account for our long enjoyed and undervalved truth and peace . have we so long been a vine planted , and watered , and fenced , both to necessity , and omament , by an excessive indulgence of God , and do we bring forth sour grapes ; that neither please God , nor profit men ? May we not justly fear ( What we have deserved ) to be laid wast and desolute , to be made a hissing and astonishment to all nations ▪ , that God should remove , or extinguish the glorious lamp of the gospel , in whose light we have not rejoiced , because we have not loved it ? 

love is an affection of union and fruition . Do we love the truth if we are weary of it , tediously and peevishly affected to it , willing to leave it , and withdraw from it ? The loathing and nauseating of this heavenly manna , as if we have had so much , that it is necessary to recover and quicken men's appetites to it , by a more scanty allowance of it , is this to love the truth ? the tampering and essays of someto clip , or wash , or new coin , or allay , and abase , with some Romish mixture , the gold and purity of our doctrine ; is this to love the truth ? that pure and refined truth , which hath passed the fiery trial , hath been baptised in the blood of many martyrs , sown in a field , made fruitful with their ashes ; who loved not their lives so much as the truth . To set up lying vanities , pictures , and images , and to cry down praying and preaching , whereby those toils May be useful and necessary to the ignorant ( Because untaught ) persons , is this to love the truth ? to suffer idolatry , or superstitious formalities in serving God to get ground upon our opinions and practices . Is this to love the truth ? Quae quo nudior , eô venustior ; which the less it hath of painting , the more it hath of true loveliness and native beauty . are not the lengthen and increase of ceremonious shadows , a presage and sign of the shortening of our day and setting of our sun , or diminishing of our light . 

To quarrel at those truths , which have been long ago determined by the scripture , in the public confession of our church , and in the writings , or preachings of our gravest & learnedest divines , prelates , and others ; as in the points of justification by faith alone ; of trasubstantiation , of auricular confession ; of prayer for the dead ; of worshipping before images ; of fiduciary assurance , and the like ; which some doting and superstitious spirits , dare to question , and retractate ; is this to love the truth ? what hath been done by preaching and printing , by correcting , or rather corrupting of books ( Where the correctors themselves deserve to be corrected ) your piety and wisdom May best find out . Nay , such hath been the shameless impudence and effrontery of some ridiculous heads , that plain and honest minds shall be scorned , derided , and in judgling fashion , cheated out of truth , and the power of religion ( Which is a holy life ) if you do not harden your faces , and confirm your resolutions against , supercilious vanity of such men : whether they have any intent to re-edify Babel's ruins or no , i cannot tell ( Some vehemently suspect it ) sure i am , there is such a confusion and novelty of language affectated by some men of altars , sacrifice , priests , corporiety of presence , penance ; auricular confession . Absolute , that is , blind obedience ; the holy of holies ; and adoration , which must be salved from a flat idolatry , or at best an empty formality by some distinction or notion that must be ready at hand ; that most persons know not what they mean , what they would have , or what they intend to call for next . 

Not that i am ignorant how far pious antiquity did use these and such like words innocently , without ill mind or meaning , and without offence to the church , as then times were : yet let me tell you : 1.  Such swerving from the form of sound words used in the primitive and purest times , occasioned and strengthened after errors . 2.  They were not then engaged to maintain truth against such erroneous and pernicious doctrines as we now are of the reform church : which doctrines are now eagerly maintained by a proud faction , who seek to abuse antiquity , and patronize their own errors , by using those names and words to other intents , and things , than ever was dreamt of by the ancient church . 3.  By such dangerous symbolising with them in words , and some outward formalities , we do but prepare our minds , and sweeten them with less distaste to relish their doctrines and tenets ; and as it were in a civil way we compliment ourselves out of our truth ; giving the adversaries strong hopes and presumptions , as they have discovered , that we are inclining towards them : to be ashamed of frequent , serious and conscientious preaching , which was the work of Christ and the holy apostles ; the honour and chief employment of the primitive and best Bishops and ministers , in all ages , as that deservedly famous Bishop jewel in his apology proves out of the fathers sufficiently against the Popes , and other idle bellies ; which Count preaching as a work below their greatness , as indeed it is above their goodness . Is this to love the truth ? to preach ridiculous , impertinent , flattering or corrupt matter , which is the shame of the pulpit and foolishness of preaching , in good earnest ; so as to bring an infinite contempt , odium and envy upon the sacred function of the ministry , that men abhor the services of God , and daily separate by swarms from our church ; are these the fruits of our love of the truth ? — pudet haec opprobria nobis , &c.  Sure there is something extremely amiss and displeasing to God as well as men , either in our doctrine , or manners , or hearts , or all . Else whence should that burden of dishonour , those loads of reproaches be cast upon the clergy , which makes them drive so heavily : and this even among Christians , and reform churches ; whereas naturally all men , though otherwise barbarous , and insolent , yet are prone to pay a special reverence and double honour to their holy men , such as are in a more immediate nearness and relation to their deity or gods : now truth carries a divine majesty and lustre with it , casting a glory on every Moses or man of God , who converseth with it . The more truth there is in any religion , the more love and honour will arise from the professors to the preachers of it ; if they seriously affect the one , they cannot scornfully neglect the other . God himself hath long ago taught all men , especially churchmen in Ely's heavy doom , this lesson as an infallible maxim in point of true honour , 1 sam. 2. 30.  those that honour me i will honour , and those that despise me shall be lightly regarded . saint Paul gives a charge to Timothy , 1 tim. 4. 12. and to Titus , tit. 2. 15. both Bishops , let no man despise thee , &c.  One would think the apostle should rather have charged the Ephesians and Cretians not to despise them ; but the apostle shows the true way for ministers , to be Masters of men's love and affections , is to be a holy rule and example to men's life and actions . To Timothy , but be thou an example in word in conversation , in love , in spirit , in faith and in pureness , 1 tim 4. 12.  To Titus , showing thyself a pattern , tit. 2. 7.  

Certainly had divines both great and small , been more busied in preaching and practising those great weighty and necessary truths , that are able to save their own and others souls , they would not have had such leisure , to have been so inventive and operative in poor beggarly toys and trifles , which neither bring honour nor profit to God , themselves or others . nothing ( I say ) nothing , will restore the church and churchmen to their pristine honour , love and authority in men's hearts and minds , but a serious setting of themselves to the study , preaching and practising of truth and peace in a holy life . these , these were the arts , these the policies , these the pious frauds , and stratagems by which anciently they won people's hearts to love God , his truth and of themselves the witness of it . To such a height of honour and ecstasy of love , that they received them as angels of God , ambassadors from heaven ; Counting them dear as their right eyes . humility , piety and industry , laid the foundation of all those magnificent structures , dignities , titles , places , revenues , privileges wherewith churchmen were anciently endowed : what hath or is likely to wast and demolish them is easy to conjecture . jisdem artibus retinenda quibus olim parabantur . 

Oh consider then ( I beseech you ) how precious a jewel , how sweet and necessary a blessing we are like to loose by our want of love to it . solem e mundo tollunt ; what the sun is to the world , that is God's truth to our soul , the light , life , joy , day and soul of our souls . As the darkness , barrenness , coldness and deformity of the earth would be , if the sun were always absent from it , or clouded to it , such will the state of our poor souls and our church be , if the healing wings of the sun of righteousness , truth , be quite removed ; or only a winter's truth , clouded , deadened and obscured by many superstitious doctrines and practifes . If ( I say ) such a truth content us ; where will be the cheerful light of the promises , which now we enjoy ? where that only rock of the soul's comfort , which no temptation can shake or undermine , the free justification of our souls by faith in the merits of Christ only ? where the sound and well grounded peace of our consciences ? where the warmth of our zeal , love and affections to God , from the fiduciary apprehensions of his love to our souls ? where will be the ravishing joy , hopes and expectation of a better life ? where the zealous care of leading here a holy life ? will not all these fail us , if truth doth ? and is not truth like to fail if our love doth ? Are not all those flowers and beauties of our souls and church heliotropia , such as have their life and motion from the sun ? following and depending upon that glorious truth ; which so much offends weaker eyes , is so little seen or desired by blind , darkened and sensual minds ? If this go , ickabob ; the glory is departed from our land . our Goshen will soon turn to an Egypt : our fruitful field and garden of God , where so many famous preachers , and zealous professors of Christianity have flourished , will be changed to a barren howling , and desolate wilderness . 

If the love of ourselves move us not ; nor the love of truth and peace , which have happily dwelled together a long time with us , yet let us not be so barbarously cruel to posterity , as to put out their soul's eyes before they can see , and deprive them of the light of the gospel , before they enjoy the light of the sun . what can you transmit to posterity more desirable than truth and peace ? Paix & peu . Peace and a little , but truth and less , will do very well , and make you and them live and die happily : what will your honours , lands , offices , estates , houses , names do them good , if they be betrayed to ignorance , superstition and slavery of conscience , which are in the bottom and dregs of error and confusion . 

Oh then let the first care be to clear , and settle truth among us ; and then peace ; sweet and most desirable peace , which we have had to the envy , wonder and astonishment of all our neighbours , enemies and friends . Alas ! have we so long drunk of peace , as to become intoxicate with so sweet wine , and now do we fall to quarrel with tongues , pens and swords ! 

That we in this island are divided from all nations is our safety under God , and by the providence of our gracious sovereign : but to be divided among ourselves will be infallibly our ruin . Si collidimur , frangimur : as two strong arms united to one body and under one head fighting against each other ; that censure of a great captain and statesman is remarkable which he gives of our state . that it is a great and strong body which will never die , unless it kill itself . 

civili in bello trist is victoria , civil wars can neither merit nor expect laurels , triumphs nor trophies : the memory and monuments of them are best , when buried in oblivion ; victory itself is sad , and ashamed of itself ; weeping , dejected and blushing with its own blood unnaturally and barbarously spilt ; as having fought not so much against enemies as humanity ; not so much conquering others , as wasting and destroying itself . — Pax una triumphis 
Innumeris potior . — 


one fair and spotless lily of peace is a greater ornament to a Prince's diadem , than to have it beset round with many red roses of bloody triumphs ; especially in civil , which are the most sanguinary wars . Oh then let us not so easily abandon so great , so precious , so hardly recoverable a blessing , if once it be lost . The orator said well : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Any rash hand or furious head May inflict a wound , or kindle a fire , but it 's God alone , who can heal up the breaches , or extinquish the flames of a state or church . The miserable spectacles of other countries and churches , do they not , as foils , sufficiently set forth the beauty and loveliness of this jewel of peace ? oh then let us all take up thoughts , words , counsels , resolutions , prayers for peace : away with all bitterness , strife , malice , jealousies , and all those devilish maxims of severing the interests of the Prince and the persons as inconsistent ; whereas rightly considered they are , as the head with the body ; united , both are safe and firm ; severed , both inevitably ruin . divide & regnare desine : divide them and you destroy them . love and union are the mutual safety of Prince and persons . 

counsels of truth and peace , like light and fruitful showers , descend from above from heaven , from God : but falsity and dissension , like tempestuous vapours and fiery exhalations , come from the earth , from the devilish hearts , designs and practices of men . 

Oh consider then ( As i know you do ) how large afield , how ample a province the mercy of God , the favour of our King , the love of your country hath put into your hand , where to show your love of God , his truth , worship and religion ; your loyalty to your King , his throne , dignity and succession ; your fidelity and zeal to your country , its peace , liberty and prosperity . How great a disservice you must do them all ( Besides yourselves in particular ) if you fail or slacken by any means in your love to these two , truth and peace . 

Imagine with yourselves you hear daily , your noble and famous progenitors ( Who being dead yet speak , by those blessings of truth and peace , which by their studies , prayers and endeavours they have bequeathed to you ) imagine ( I say ) these calling earnestly upon you all , oh love the truth and peace . Shame not our names , and yourselves by being wretchedly negligent of what we esteemed the most precious jewels , the honour and happiness of our times : which were dearer to us than our lives : which we purchased for you with our blood , with infinite expenses , hazards and sufferings . 

think you here the joint prayers and importunities of all estates in the kingdom , the nobles , the gentry , the Commons ; your parents , wives , children , friends , alliances , neighbours , all with one voice calling to you , pacem te possimus omnes . Oh love the truth and peace , and by your love preserve them for us . betray not us and yourselves , to the darkness of errors , to the miseries of war . Be you as suns and shields to us , and the commonwealth : your populous cities and towns , your stately houses , your fruitful fields , your pleasant gardens , your costly clothes , your plentiful tables , your ancient liberties and noble immunities , wherewith above all subjects in the world you are invested and honoured , all join in this voice , oh love the truth and peace : which affords you all these sweet enjoyments and noble ornaments of life . All complaints , all grievances , all petitions May be resolved into this lesson , love the truth and peace , in so doing you shall remedy , relieve and satisfy all . 

Oh have a care then , that truth as the pillar of fire May go before us to enlighten and direct our way to the heavenly Canaan ; and peace as the pillar of the cloud May overshadow , and refresh us in our travails ; through the tedious wilderness of this life . 

The way to peace is by the paths of truth , never hope to recover and settle your former peace , unless you return to your first love of the truth . 

truth is but one , as the centre , and draws all minds to an unity , which tend to it . errors and falsities are various and full of crossings enterfirings , and contentions both with truth and themselves : as several cards in a map , whose lines drawn out infinitely cross , cut , and thwart each other . 

Here give me leave by way of short digression , in so great and public an assembly , to recommend to your favour , the noble endeavours of two great and public spirits , who have laboured much for truth and peace , i mean , Commenius , and Duraeus : both famous for their learning , piety and integrity , and not unknown , i am sure by the fame of their works , to many of this honourable , learned and pious assembly . 

The one hath laid a fair design and foundation for the raising up a structure of truth , human and divine , of excellent use to all mankind , for the easiness and exquisiteness of attaining the true knowledge of things . 

The other hath long studied , and with great pains , endeavoured and well advanced the peace and unity of the reform churches ( A blessing that cannot be purchased at too dearea a rate ) whereunto he hath the suffrages and assistance of many learned divines , and some of our own , especially the reverend Bishop of Salisbury , as you May see in his letters to him , and his late tractate , de pace ecclesiastica , &c.  

But alas , both these noble plants ( To the infinite shame and reproach of the present age , to the loss and detriment of the future ) a  like to wither to a barrenness for want of public encouragement and aid to go on in so noble , great and useful undertakings ; i leave it to your wisdoms , at your leisure to consider , whether it were not worthy the name and honour of this state and church , to invite these men to you , to see and weigh their noble and excellent designs ; to give them all public aid and encouragement to go on and perfect so happy works , which tend so much to the advancing of truth , and peace . * 

But to return to your particular and nearer concernments ; if you love yourselves , your relations , wives , children , houses , lands , liberti•ss , lives and honours ; if you love your King , your country , your church , your consciences , your souls , your saviour , your god ; love the truth and peace ; but heartily , sincerely , courageously , constantly . let your faith in the truth , work and show itself by an active love of the truth . shall the adversaries of our truth and peace , be so bold , vigilant and desperately active , for the bringing in of their shadows , lies , paintings and adulteries of truth and religion ; and shall we be cold , remiss and timorous ? Shall they as assassinate's , be prodigal of their own and our bloods , and shall we be sparing of our words , estates or persons ? hoc agite . Do then God's business , and the Kings , and the countries , and in them all your own . Do them worthy of yourselves , worthy of the honour of this church and state , worthy the memory and renown of your ancestors , worthy the expectation of the world , both at home and abroad ; the eyes of all Christendom being upon you especially the reform churches , whose hopes and prayers meet in you . Do them worthy the majesty and favour of our gracious King ; worthy of the truth , worthy of the glory of our God , and great redeemer : at once show yourselves good subjects , good patriots , good counsellors , good men , good Christians . 

You have long enjoyed truth and peace , therefore love them ; no nation under heaven , hath more cause , and will be less excusable , therefore love them ; none hath had a clearer light of truth , and a greater length of peace , therefore love them ; you and yours have long thrived by them , therefore love them : you have fasted and prayed for the preservation of them , therefore love them : you are this day solemnly to renew your covenant with God in the holy sacrament , the seal of God's love to you , and yours to him , therefore love the truth and peace , for they are God's . And upon the heat and sacred flames , which by this day's duties possess your affections , take up ( I beseech you ) serious resolutions , and make tacit vows in yourselves to God , that you will love the truth and peace , and by all lawful ways ( For other they neitherneed , nor will allow ) seek to advance them . 

None are fit and prepared to receive , but such as have hearts filled with this love ; none will have the comfort of worthy receiving , but such as daily increase , and persevere in this love . 

For conclusion , i will use the last and weightiest argument in the world , which raised the victorious soul of that great apostle saint Paul , to such an invincible patience and unwearied activeness for God's glory and the churches good , 2 cor.   . 14.  oh let the love of Christ constrain you ; that free , preventive , transcendent love ; that humbled , sorrowing , sweeting , bleeding , crying , crucified dying love , which this day is presented to you , who loved our souls more than his own life : greater love can no man express , greater motive to love can no man desire . 

quid amplius pro se facere aut pati potuit , quam pro te & fecit & passus est christus ? what could Christ have done , or suffered more , if he had been to redeem himself , than he hath both done and suffered to ransom thee and me . Content to make himself the object of his father's wrath ( Whom he infinitely loved ) that he Might procure our peace . 

Oh what shall we render to him again for this excessive love ; but an unfeigned love of him and his church , his truth and glory , an undaunted zeal for his honour and worship , for the purity and peace of his church ? these are the things you shall do , speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour . Execute the judgement of truth & peace in your gates . That so it May be fulfilled on you , and us all which the prophet prays , Esay . 26. 2.  The gates of mercy and peace here , of glory and happiness hereafter May be opened , so that the righteous nation which keepeth the truth May enter therein . 

Finis . 





Acontius . straying . Sat.  •ing . 3. 25.  mich. 4. 4.  1 tim. 4 3.  1 Kings 22.  T•rtul . mal. 4.  1 sam. 4. 21.  d. de Rohan . interest des estates . Angle terre est ungrand animal , qui ne mourira ja mais si lue se tue luymesme . dur  s.  Cousmenius . * whereunto if it shall please God to incline any of your thoughts for the effectual promoting of so commendable purpos•ss , notwithstanding the distances whereat they now are , the one being in ••land , the other in De•marke , yet there is a fair , easy , and safe way of addresses to them both , opened by the industry and fidel•ty of Mr. Hartli•e , whose house is in Duke's place in London , a gentleman who hath been a constant furtherer , and great coadjutor wit• them both , in their works : who hath correspondence with them ; whose learning , pi••y and unwearied industry towards the public good , are so well known to the learned world , and many of yourselves as well as to me , that he needs not the farther testimony of my pen . zach. 8. 16.  






















































