The spirit convincing of sin . Opened in a sermon before the honourable house of Commons , assembled in parliament upon the solemn day of their monthly fast , novemb. 26. 1645.  

By Peter Sterry , sometimes fellow of Emanuel college in Cambridge . and now preacher of the gospel in London . 

Published by order of the house of Commons . 

London , printed by matth. Simmons , for Henry Overton , and Benjamin Allen , and are to be sold at their shops in Popes-head alley , 1645.  

To the honourable the knights & burgesses of the house of Commons assembled in parliament . 

God hath promised his persons to carry them on the eagles' wing . the only desire and humble endeavour of your lowest servant in Christ , hath been to work with God in this sermon ; that your souls , counsels , wars , May be carried on by the spirit of God ; who in the language of the scriptures is not only the dove for purity and peace ; but also the true eagle for wisdom and power . 

Worthy senators , if you knew this spirit , you would ask him of your saviour ; and he would be in you a fountain of counsel and strength springing up to everlasting peace and glory . But have you not known the spirit ? his sound hath gone forth into all your ears . All the scriptures speak of him as they do of Jesus Christ . 

Daniel was chosen by the King of Assyria to sway the great affairs of that vast empire ; because the spirit of the immortal God was found in him . 

David was a statesman , wiser than his teachers : David was a soldier ; his fingers were skilled in fighting , his hands trained up to victory over wild beasts , giants , armies of men . was not the spirit the lamp of God which shone thus gloriously on David's court and camp , which made his throne so great ? thy word , saith he , was a light to my feet . the word of God is the spirit of God , saith St. Paul ; the sword of the spirit , a which ( spirit , not sword ) is the word of God . this made David when he had sinned , cry : take not thine holy spirit from me . When the spirit of God once left Saul , an evil spirit came upon him , which vexed him , which haunted him to the loss of his kingdom and life together . 

Honourable fathers of your countries , i humbly move to know , by what title you sit there and rule over us . Is it not as powers on earth ? but all power on earth as well as in heaven , is given to Jesus Christ . You are substitutes and vicegerents to the Lord Jesus . Look then to Jesus the beginning and end of your authority . God hath laid the government on his shoulder . What is his sufficiency for it ? The spirit of the Lord resteth on him , and this is , a spirit of counsel and Might in him . 

You who sit at the right hand of the Lord Jesus , in this commonwealth , as the Lord Jesus sits at the right hand of his father in that kingdom , which is over all : pray , that the same spirit , which was poured forth on him , May be by him poured forth on you : so shall you be Messiahs , anointed ones , and saviours to this persons . Can you be able to rule over any spot of this earth ; when Jesus Christ was not fit for the government of the whole ; without the spirit ? 

Do you put your whole trust in the promises of God , and expect by them to be made partakers of every blessing ? Do you believe the promises made in the word of God ? I hope , i May say , at least with as good confidence , as Paul said it to Agrippa ; i know you believe them . 

This is the promise : the spirit shall lead you into all truth . you are now searching into the deep things of God , which concern religion ; live in the spirit , and the spirit shall bring all into your mind , and show you the things of Jesus Christ . It behoves you to know the method of Satan ; the stratagems and dark deeps of the devil himself , in mysteries of state and religion . walk in the spirit ; he shall lead you into their chambers , as he did Ezekiel ; and let you see what mischiefs they are there contriving in secret . 

This is the promise : the spirit of God and of glory shall rest on his servants , in their conflicts and sufferings . sit still in all humble resignation of yourselves , to the working of this spirit ; that he May rest on you : so shall he manage your counsels , finish your wars ; and end all your sufferings with glory . 

I shall conclude my epistle with an humble petition to your honours : an hearty prayer for you . 

My humble petition is , that you would ever remember to converse as doves , among doves ; with this dove ; he is a tender spirit , take heed of grieving this spirit , where ever he dwells : for by him alone can your hopes be sealed to a day of full accomplishment . 

My hearty prayer is , that , as you sit debating in parliament , the appearances of the holy ghost May be among you ; as he was with the apostles , sitting over them in the form of fiery tongues : that when you fight in the field , the holy ghost May be as a two-edged sword going forth from the mouth of the Lord Jesus into your enemy's hearts : that you May never see upon the walls of your house , that hand-writing which made Bel-shazzer tremble ; your kingdom is divided ; but in stead of this , that uniting and building principle ; not by might , nor by power , but by my spirit , saith the Lord . this is the fervent , constant prayer of 

Your honours humble servant in Christ , Peter Sterry . A sermon preached before the honourable house of Commons , novemb. 26. 1645.  being the public fast . 

John 16. 8.  

when he shall come , he shall convince the world of sin , &c.  

I will at once open to you the public scope of this place ; and the private sense of my text , as it lies embodied in the context . 

Our tender-hearted saviour is now cheering the hearts of his disciple , drooping with the sad presages of their dear Master's death . 

The Lord Jesus sweetly gives them for a revival of their fainting spirits , a gracious promise of his own spirit . 

This promise is threefold , the spirit 's 1.  Personal coming , 
2.  Particular comforts , 
3.  Universal convictions . 


Pardon me , if i be somewhat larger in the explication of these . For this also will serve my purpose ; which is , to set before you the spirit of the Lord Jesus ; that spirit , by which we know those things , which reason cannot reach ; and live , not a as men , ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) but as b partakers of the divine nature . 

The first promise is the personal coming . this hath two parts . the person coming . 
coming of that person . 


part 1st . The first part is the person coming . It appears to be a person of whom our saviour speaks , by those demonstrative particles : he : him . it appears to be some great one , a divine person , by those works , which are to be done by him : to comfort hearts : to convince a world : to be in stead of Christ ; nay , to be a better comforter than Christ himself in the flesh . 

Commentators , common-placers , controversiaries , schoolmen ; all sorts of divines in general , choose this place , and such like places in this dying discourse of our saviour's ; for principal proofs of this fundamental point in divinity ; that , the blessed spirit is not only , the power of the godhead , but , a person in the godhead . for , say they , Christ speaks of him as of a person ; he ; himulco : and as of a distinct person in the trinity , joh. 14. 16.  Another comforter . Another besides Jesus Christ . 

Now these places with the same force prove it to be the same person , which was to come to the disciple . For Christ speaks of him not simply , but in respect of his coming . 

Part. 2.  the second part of this promise is ; the coming of that person . Schoolmen call the coming of the spirit : Novus modus existendi & apparendi : a new way of the spirit 's being in men , and appearing to men . 

All that i shall say concerning it , amounts to this . The scriptures very often represent the coming of Christ in the flesh , & this coming of the spirit in the same forms of expression . I have culled forth these five : coming , sending , giving , dwelling , appearing . 

1st coming . you read of the coming of Shiloh , which is Christ : he , to whom . Gen. 49. 10.  My text tells you of the coming of the spirit . The divine and human nature are , as it were , two terms of reciprocal motion , for these two glorious persons . 

2d . sending . the father sends the son , joh. 3. 17.  The son sends the spirit , in the verse going before my text . The father's love-token to man , is his own son . the son's love-token to his spouse , is his own spirit . 

3d. giving . Christ is the gift of God to the world , joh. 3. 16.  S. Paul tells us that the holy ghost is given to us , rom. 5. 5.  In a gift there is a conferring of propriety , and possession . 

4.  dwelling . joh. 1. 14.  the word was made flesh , and dwelled among us . 2 tim. 1. 14.  by the holy ghost which dwelleth in thee . these two texts have this difference . Christ dwells in flesh , as in a tabernacle , or tent , like a pilgrim or soldier . The spirit dwells in Timothy as at home , in his own house . 

5.  appearing . Christ is God manifested in flesh , 1 tim. 3. 16.  Jesus speaks of the spirit to his apostles , you shall know him , joh. 14. 17.  These two are distinct persons in respect of their appearances , as well as subsistencies . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

This concurrency of expressions seems to signify that these two comings of Christ in the flesh , and of the spirit , are true , real unions of God with man ; true , real appearances of God to man ; in these two persons of the trinity , the son , the spirit . But with this threefold difference . 

First , the coming of Christ in the flesh is a union of two natures in one person . This is that which we call the hypostatical union ; where there is a distinction of natures without a distinction of persons or subsistencies . The coming of the spirit is a union between persons as well as natures . here is a distinction and a union both at once , between natures and persons jointly . Compare those two places of scripture , 1 cor. 6. 17.  he that is joined to the Lord , is one spirit . and rom. 8. 16.  The spirit witnesseth •ith our spirits . the result of these will be ; that the spirit of Christ , and of a Christian , are two spi•itss , by distinction of persons , one by union . 

Secondly , the coming of Christ was into the broad street of the same common nature of man ; to be with us ; yet so , as to be without us . The coming of the spirit is into our particular persons as into the same house with us . See this opposition , gal. 4. chap. 4. verse . he hath sent his son , [ made of a woman ] ; that is , made of the human nature . Then , vers. 6.  he hath sent the spirit of his son into our [ hearts ] . Christ came into our flesh . the spirit comes into our hearts ; so as to be both with us , and within us , John 14. chap. 16. verse . he dwelleth [ with ] you , and shall be [ in ] you . 

Thirdly , the coming of Christ in the flesh , was visible to all alike , to the eye of sense . But the coming of the spirit is invisible to all the world ; visible only to those who receive him , joh. c. 14. v. 16.  the world seeth him not , but ye shall know him , for he shall be in you . to these he is visible inwardly , and after a spiritual manner . 

This is the first promise , the personal coming . 

The second promise is , the particular comforts of the spirit : he shall come as comforter , saith the verse immediately foregoing my text . 

But can any thing comfort a spouse that mourns for her beloved one , besides his own presence ? therefore this makes the spirit , a comforter indeed ; he brings Christ for a comfort along with him . Christ was to live again in the spirit , 1 pet. 3. c. 18. v. he was crucified in the flesh , but quickened by the spirit . Christ was to appear again to them in the spirit , and to be for ever with them , joh. 15. chap. 26. vers. when the spirit come , he shall testify of me . the spirit was to give them a second sight of their husband , in a more true , divine , lasting way ; as he was unveiled of flesh , and in his own heavenly form . 

Yea , this comfort was to be doubled at the coming of the spirit : for the father was to come along with his dear son , joh. 14. c. 23. v. i , and the father will come unto him , and make our abode with him . but which way would these persons of glory come to lodge themselves in the humble cottage of a saints heart ? In the spirit . this person was to be the chariot for the other two . Therefore but two verses after this promise , Christ explains it by another promise , that of the coming of the comforter : and St. Paul tells us , that we have access to the father , by one spirit , ephes. 2. c. 18. v. thus the father , son , spirit , and a saint , dwell all together , and converse : the father and son in the spirit ; the spirit in our hearts . This is that unity of the spirit , which is the band of comforts , ephes. 4. c. 3. v.  

The third promise is the universal convictions of the spirit . Christ and his disciple were singular in the world ; they saw those things which none could see besides themselves : blessed are your eyes , for they see . they were as mad men ; they filled the world with a noise of things , as present , real mighty in glory ; they spoke everywhere of a rising sun , of a wonderful light , which made all other lights a deep darkness ; when all this while the whole world of men round about them could discern no other sun without them , save that which had shined from the creation until now ; no other light within them , besides that which their own reason had ever in an ordinary way supplied them withal . Isaiah prophesied of Christ and his disciple , es. 8. chap. 8. v. i , and the children which thou hast given me , are for signs and for wonders . 

Would our saviour now leave his disciple alone in such a world as this ? Therefore he comforts them with this ; that his spirit should come and convince the world , anoint the eyes of mankind generally , to see the same light of divine truth with them . 

The text reads it , reprove , but the word in Greek ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) more properly signifies to convince , as the margin hath it . 

This conviction is threefold : 

First , of sin ; because they believe not in me . the spirit should show the world this as the centre , where all sin met in one ; from whence all sin flows ; their not believing in Christ , their neglect of the person of Christ . 

Secondly , of righteousness , because i go to my father , a by Christ's returning thither , where he was at first ; by his going back to the father , the spirit should teach the world ; that he alone came forth from the father : b for no one ascendeth up to heaven , but the son of man , who came down from heaven . and by this argument shall the spirit demonstrate Christ alone to be the righteousness of God to man . 

Thirdly , of judgement , because now the Prince of this world is cast out . the spirit should read this lecture upon the world ; how , since the fall , the whole frame , all appearances of things , had been one great enchantment raised and maintained upon the spirits of men , by the father of lies , the Prince of darkness ; to hide their eyes from the sight of God . But how Jesus Christ had by his death cast down that old magician from his throne and power ; and now the whole enchantment , the fashion or show of this world was dissolving and vanishing , till it should appear no more . 

Thus large i have been in the opening of the context and text . 

Now , without any further stay , or needless division of my text ; my doctrine from it is this . 

Rightly to convince of sin , is the proper work of the spirit . 

i shall give you only one place of scripture to prove it ; but that , i hope , a fit and full one , zach. 12. 10.  I will pour out upon them the spirit of grace and supplications , and they shall see him , whom they have pierced , and mourn over him . 

You have here two successive effusions : one of the spirit , and another of tears . 

First , an effusion of tears ; they shall mourn . Mourning expresseth true repentance in all the four parts of it ; conviction , confession , contrition , conversion . The force of the conviction here , as in my text , lies in a sight of Christ pierced ; in a sense of unbelief . Not to receive Christ for your husband and King , is to pierce him . To take away his crown and your hearts from him , is to kill him the worst way . But this is only a consequent and secondary effusion . 

Secondly , an effusion of spirit . this is the antecedent effusion . The pouring forth of the spirit is the cause of pouring forth tears . But who ? or what is this spirit ? He is marked by a double character : a spirit of grace and supplication . 

First , a spirit of grace . there is a twofold grace . The grace of loving-kindness in the heart of God . The grace of divine loveliness in the heart of man . If this latter be here meant , than the spirit of grace is he , whom St. Paul calls the holy spirit , ephes. 1. and we generally know by the name of the holy ghost . 

But this cannot be the sense : for in the original , it is chen , not chesed : grace , or loving-kindness , not graciousness , or goodness . 

This spirit of grace than must be , either the spirit , the spring of love in the bosom of the godhead : or , the spirit , the diffuser , the discoverer of this love in the bosom of man . Both these are that one spirit , the holy ghost . divines give to the third person , the name of love ; as they do to the second , that of wisdom : and we read from St. Paul's mouth , rom. 5. 5.  The love of God is poured forth in our hearts , by the holy ghost , which he hath given us . this is the first character . 

Second . a spirit of supplication . you have a commentary upon this character , rom. 8. ch. 26. vers. the spirit helpeth our infirmities , making intercession for us by groans unexpressible . this is the spirit which convinceth of sin , the holy ghost himself . 

Reasons . 

The spirit is truth . these are the words of the holy ghost himself , 1 joh. 5. c. 6. v. the spirit is truth . truth absolutely , that is , the highest and fullest truth ; the principle of all truth : the first truth , and so the last measure of all truth . 

Take two distinctions upon this reason . 

Threre are three principles of truth 

1. sense . 
2. reason . 
3. spirit . 
1. princ. sense , prov. 20. ch. 12. vers. the seeing eye , and the hearing ear , God hath made them both . God hath made the senses , standards and judges of truth , within their own circuit , in such things , as May be seen or heard ; as appertain to sense . 

2. princ. reason , prov. 20. ch. 26. vers. the spirit of man is the candle of the Lord , searching out the hidden parts of the belly . though the candle of reason excel in light the glow-worms of sense ; yet is it but a candle , not the sun itself ; it makes not day ; only shines in the darkness of the night . You will more clearly see this spirit of man to be the principle of reason , planted by nature in man ; if you compare this expression of Solomon's with that of St. Paul , which seems to have some glance towards this proverb , 1 cor. 2. ch. 11. vers. no man knows the things of a man , but the spirit of man , which is in man . The things of a man are all the things of this creation , visible , invisible ; a man is the sum of them all ; all are subject to man ; God hath , b set this whole world in the heart of man , to search it out ; these are the hidden things of his belly : and thus far the spirit of man , the candle of reason , spreads his beams , to enlighten this world of nature . this the scripture calls man's day , which is God's and a saint's night . 

3. princ. the spirit 1 cor. 2. c. 11. v. the things of God knoweth no man , but the spirit of God . The spirit searcheth out the deep things of God . divine truths are the depths of things ; the rest are only the surface . no plummet is strong , no line long enough to sound these depths ; save only that of the spirit . 

These three different principles of truth constitute the three different parts or states of life : 

First , the brute part of the world ; it is that which is acted by sense . 

Seconly , reason makes man ; or the rational state . 

thirdly , the spirit is the principle of a saint c as many as are the sons of God , are led ( or acted ) by the spirit of God . 

I cannot leave this distinction between these three principles of truth , before i have annexed three rules . 

1.  Rule . every principle of truth is to be confined to its own compass , to its own object . to seek out spiritual things by the scent and sagacity of reason ; were to plough with an ox and an ass . sensus non fallitur circa proprium objectum , sense is not deceived in judging of its own proper object . If sense and reason make no other report but this ; this is the state of things , according to our principles : this is the appearance of things to us : sense and reason May be admitted for true witnesses . But if they will be wise beyond what is written in their book , and say : this is the only , absolute , true appearance of things ; because this is the appearance which things make to us . now sense and reason become blind guides , and will lead you into the ditch : 1 cor. 2. 12.  Spiritual things are spiritually discerned . by proportion : sensual things are sensually discerned : rational things are rationally discerned . You cannot reach the things of reason by the hand of sense , though it be stretched out like jeroboam's towards the prophet . You cannot understand spiritual things rationally ; that is , upon the grounds of reason . 

2. ru. right appearances of things to one principle of truth , May be directly contrary to those which are right appearances of the same things to another principle of truth . the greatest lights of this world , angels and invisible things , are mere darkness to the eye of sense . The light of this life is darkness in the language of the scripture . Darkness itself is as the light before the face of God . 1 cor. 2. 14.  the wisdom of the spirit is foolishness to the natural man . the apostle distinguisheth between two men , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . & {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : man , whose principle is rational soul : and man , whose principle is the spirit . that which is wisdom to one , is foolishness to the other . 

3. ru. lower principles of truth cannot comprehend the higher ; but they are comprehended and judged by these . so philosophers say , that reason corrects the errors of sense . 1 cor. 2. 15.  the spiritual man judgeth all things , but he is judged or discerned by none . ver. 9  eye hath not seen , ear hath not heard , neither can the heart of man receive the things of the gospel . see here both principles of sense and reason . the senses are too superficial : the large heart of man , the vast spirit of reason in him is too narrow to take in any thing of the spirit . But the spirit understands them with all their ways and workings {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; distinctly and critically . 

These three principles of truth are as three circles upon the face of the water ; one within another : the lesser are enfolded in the greater ; but cannot extend themselves to the wide compass of the greater circle , unless they break and vanish in themselves , that they May become one with it . if any man be wise , let him become a fool that he May be wise . 

The soul shuts the windows of sense when she would have the room filled with the light of reason . Reason's self must first be cast cast into a deep sleep and die , before she can rise again in the brightness of the spirit . I have dispatched the first distinction . 

dist. 2d . All three persons in the trinity are truth , but with their several and distinct idioms or characters . The father is the only true God , joh. 17. 3.  The son is truth , joh. 14. 6.  The spirit is truth , joh. 5. 5.  But , 

1.  The father is truth in the root : therefore he is called the father of lights , jam. 1. 17.  

2.  the son is truth in the image . he is the image of the invisible God , coloss. 1. 15.  

3.  The spirit is truth in the irradiation or discovery : therefore the spirit is the witnessing truth , 1 joh. 5.  The spirit is the testifying truth , ioh. 15. 26.  

Nazianzen delivers the doctrine of the trinity to us from that place of scripture , psal. 36. 9  In thy light shall we see light . 1.  The father is light in the fountain . thy light . 2.  The son is light in the face or fullness : see light . 3.  The spirit is light in the flowing or emanation of it : in light . the father is the light , from which is all we see : the son is light , which we see : the spirit , the light by which we see . 

sin is spiritually discerned . privations and habits ; perfections and defects , are judged by the same faculty . The eye discerns light and darkness . Sin is a privation or the absence of divine grace . Holiness is frequently expressed by light ; sin by darkness . Holiness is a spiritual beauty : sin , deformity . Both are perceived by the same spirit . 

Uses . 

an admonition . you have dedicated this day , and many such days , to a holy sorrow . I know some , i believe many , i hope most of you carry broken hearts in your bosoms through these days . Indeed very nature in you cannot but relent ; and reason itself tremble , to see those things , which your eyes see . Three kingdoms stand before you this day , like those three crosses on mount Golgotha , all laden with broken and bleeding carcases . These three doth your God take , as one text , that he May preach sin to your souls from it , that he May convince you of sin by it . 

Behold , Scotland comes with her thousands of slain men ; England with her ten thousands ; Ireland with her million ; besides innumerable multitudes which no man can reckon up , of families , persons , now undone , now famishing . These come crying to every one of us , our bloods be upon your heads , if you weep not for us before our god this day whilst we bleed and die . sure your hearts do break at the representation of these things ; which yourselves know to be at this present far more sad in fact , than they can be made by any relation . 

You that are the fathers of your countries over all this nation , do you not often look back upon your several countries with a tender and dropping eye ? Do you not find as much reason and sweetness as once David did , to sigh and say within yourselves , Lord , we have sinned , we should have kept this persons as their shepherds : but we have procured their woe . Alas ! what have these sheep done ? 

But now is it not pity that broken hearts should be worthless and useless ? that God should say of our mourning , as Solomon says of mirth : what doth it ? yet so it will be , if it be your reason only , and not the spirit , which by your sufferings convinceth you of your sins . If your convictions and contritions be rational and no more ; your groans will be to God as the unpleasing cry , the howling of wild beasts when they are pinched with famine , or caught in a toil : he that sacrificeth with a heart thus broken , will be as if he offered a dog's heart . 

Doth it not much concern you to know whether your convictions be from a rational or spiritual principle ? Are you not eager to understand the difference between these , that you May judge your sorrows ? As God shall assist me , i will assist you in this enquiry , by which you are to examine yourselves . 

rational and spiritual convictions differ in their persuasives , in their principles . 

rational persuasives in conviction for sin are such as these . 

First , self-love . will you hear the workings of this ? One man afflicted and oppressed , laments after this manner : i have blasted my reputation ; wasted my estate ; brought my body into diseases ; by my lusts : and now i hang over a pit of flames by the thin , worn thread of this life ; in the same moment that this thread is cut ; i drop in , and am lost for ever . Woe is me ! thus he cries ; then he runs to prayers , sermons , fasts , in these he hopes for ease . Another , as he , lies restless all the night ; hath these thoughts working like a storm in his breast . i have expos•d my life to the censure of the laws , by treacheries against my country , and my god . If the preacher's words prove true , and there be a hell at last ; there remains nothing for me , but a fearful expectation of my share there . in these anguishes this man breathes forth a groan , and cries to God , to have mercy on him . So Pharaoh , so Ahab were convinced . This is like weeping with an onion ; the eyes shed tears because they smart . 

2.  sparklings of natural worth . a generous heart , if it be no more , when it hath done any thing foully dishonest , or dishonourable ; will call aloud for seas of tears ; a laver of blood to wash it clean . 

The Jews in the wilderness , when once they had refused to fight at God's command , would purge that blot with their blood , fighting though forbidden , when they were sure to fall . This is not beyond that elephant , which reproached with the offer of another elephant to draw his burden for him ; drew till he broke his heart , and fell down dead . 

3.  natural religion heightened by temper , education , custom , formalities of nation , age , in which we live . The heathen Romans wounded deeply with the loss of an army , or the pestilence ; sought relief in reforming their religion : the sibyl's books were searched : ludi instaurati : solemn shows and pomps for devotion renewed : temples set open . Cushions laid ; holy tables , seats , beds made ready : the matrons flocked in troops , filled the churches , fell on their faces , with their hair spread and torn ; moistening the marble pavement with their plentiful tears at the feet of every idol . 

in aftertimes the heathens among whom the Christians lived , on every sad accident , exclaimed : the Christians are the cause of this , which join not with us in the worship of our gods . Appease the gods , by the suppression , or slaughter of these Christians . 

Happy are our times , if some amongst us do not , upon no higher conviction , than these of natural devotion , call for days of humiliation , reformation in religion . 

But do i condemn these convictions ? No . God commands and commends them from the example of Brute creatures : the ox knows his own ; and the ass his Master's crib . but this i say ; these are no better things than the best of beasts , the worst of men have attained unto . These indeed , if they be but single , May procure temporal , temporary blessings . But if they be not subordinate to the convictions of the spirit , they can do your souls no good . You May save the kingdom by such tears , but alas ! what shall be done for your souls ? 

Spiritual persuasives follow . 

First , sense of divine love . Zach. 12. 10.  

First , a spirit of grace , or love , is shed upon the heart ; then tears are shed . What an eye was that which Christ cast upon Peter , when he went out and wept bitterly ? Was it not an eye of love ? A melting look ? You have seen how a sugarloaf dissolves , and weeps itself away , when it is dipped in wine . So hearts dissolve , so they melt , dipped in the sweet sense of divine love . Who knows not what a wound , abused love , a wronged friend makes upon a tender breast ? How then doth the dearest love , the sweetest friendship of the great God wound a soul with the sense of love and sin . 

Have you not sometimes read that place , and dropped tears upon it ? some have told me , that they have done it often . The place is es 43. 22.  i have not wearied thee with sacrifices ; thou hast wearied me with thy sins , oh Israel . I blot out thy transgressions like a cloud , & remember then no more . give me the worst , the hardest heart in this great assembly : how soft would it grow on a sudden , if the spirit of Christ should whisper to it such words as these are : many years hast thou lived profanely ; many a secret wickedness hast thou practised , which mine eye hath seen . Often i have set myself before thee in the blood of my manhood , in the glory of my godhead , in the love of both my natures : thou hast wearied me with thy scornings : — but thou shalt be mine , i freely forgive all thy sins , as if they never had been committed . Come and see how much i love thee ! how i have ever loved thee ! what temper would thy heart be in when thou shouldst hear these words ? Would it not be like unto that , when Joseph revealed himself to his brethren : while thy saviour falls on thy neck to kiss thee , thou wouldst fall at his feet unable to speak any word for weeping . 

I appeal to you that feel the love of your God , how it works in the souls of men : do you not often in sweet pangs cry out ? Ah! my God , the sweeter thou art to me , the more sinful still do i appear to myself . This is a spiritual conviction , a conviction by love . 

2.  sight of Jesus Christ . They shall see him whom they have pierced , and mourn over him . as the looking forth of the sun melts the snow ; so do the shinings out of Jesus Christ melt the soul . 't is sweet when a saint says ; mine eyes have seen my saviour , and now they pour forth tears . a rainbow , the covenant of peace is then form•d , when the sun shines upon a watery cloud : when Christ puts forth himself , and scatters his beams upon a mourning cloudy soul ; then follows fair weather : there is peace . This is a spiritual conviction , a conviction by the beams of beauty . 

3.  The greatest sin , the not-beleeving in Jesus Christ . in spiritual persuasives the person of our saviour is the argument and conclusion of all convictions . a sight of Christ , is that , by which men are powerfully convinced . not-beleeving on Christ , is the grand sin , of which they are convinced . 

They shall mourn over him whom ▪ they have pierced . Not to believe on Christ is to pierce him . 

To believe Christ is to see him . So in those chronicles of faith , hebr. 11. c. 27. v. Moses' faith is expressed by his sight : he saw him who was invisible . but this sight is inward , spiritual , divine : a sight by no ordinery light . St Peter describes the state of believing , the sight of faith , 1 pet. 2. 9  He hath brought us into his ( His own {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) marvelous light . He that sees Christ , sees him in a strange , wonderful , in a divine light , in God's own light . To believe , is thus to see Christ , and to live continually by this sight of Christ ; the life i live ▪ is by the faith of the son of God , gal. 2. chap. ver. ult. 

Paul was convinced by this sight of Christ ; and of this sin , that he had ever lived on any other sight . gal. 1. chap. 16. vers. when it pleased the father to reveal his son in me , i consulted not with flesh and blood . 

You May see by Paul's conversion , what his conviction was . He had consulted with flesh and blood ; that is , with principles of reason , with the spirit of man ; what should he have consulted with ? or whom ? with the word , the immortal word : with the wisdom of God ; with the discoveries of Jesus Christ in him . 

Is this the sin , you chiefly mourn for this day ? By this judge of your convictions . Do you grieve to think ; that the glory of God hath shined so long , so sweetly from the face of Christ ; filling all things round about you : while you have been sitting under the shadow of human wit and reason , as in the shadow of death ; that so bright a day hath dawned from the person of the Lord Jesus ; and yet you sit spinning out your counsels and course ▪ by the candlelight of man's spirit , and policy , as in the night ? Do your hearts sigh-forth this sense ? Lord , we have sat in counsel concerning the great affairs of many kingdoms , churches , commonwealths ▪ but not by thy wisdom ; by the shining forth of thy son in us . Many principles of state , reason , policy , have reigned over us ; but the sight of thee , oh Jesus , in our hearts , hath not ruled us . 

When the spirit convinceth of sin ; he makes this the great sin and folly ; that the appearances of Christ have not been our sun and shield . no such shield is there to defend us from the strifes , contentions , conspiracies of men and things ; as to be hide in the light of our saviour's looks . No such advantage is there as to gain this sun , to have the beamings forth of our husband-king on our side : how do the glorious dartings of his presence from among us , dazzle the spirits of our enemies , trouble their order , and make them unable to fight against us , or hurt us ? 

When the spirit convinceth of sin , he shows us , that the story of things in the wilderness , was a figure for us under the gospel , 1 cor. 10. c. 4. ver. when the Jews were to pass over the river Jordan , the ark went before them ; so they passed through dry-shod . When they traveled through the desert ; the cloud , the glory went before them : as that moved , they Marched on ; when that rested , they stood still . 

Your ark now is the spiritual presence of Jesus Christ in your hearts ; the cloud , the glory now , is the appearance of your saviour , resting upon your spirits . You have waded through many rivers of blood , have you seen the discoveries of your Jesus going before you , and followed these ? You have made many Marches , many rests ; hath the well-pleased face of your Jesus , as your leading-star , been still in your eye ? Have you Marched as this hath moved ? Where this hath stood still , have you stayed ? 

The Jews sung of old ; what ailed you , ye waters , that ye fled ? ye seas , that ye were driven backward ? The waters saw thee , oh God , and fled before thee . If these things be thus with you , you May go forth , and say in your songs : what ailed you , ye mighty armies , at Keinton , Newbury , York , Naseby ; that ye fled , and were driven backward ? What ailed you , ye strong treasons , close conspiracies , that ye trembled , and fell , and your foundations were discovered , before you could take effect ? They saw thee , oh Jesus ! they saw thee appearing in the midst of us ; so they fled , so they fell before thee . 

If things have not been thus with you ; behold the sin , over which you are principally to pour out your tears . Behold the sin , which troubles you . Assure yourselves ; all your acts in counsel and camp will be null ; till the Lord Jesus be as the shout of a King , in the midst of you . Vain are all our hopes , sweet dreams of peace ; till our dear saviour show himself among you , as once among his disciple ; saying ; peace be with you ; breathing peace upon you . 

These are the persuasives , in which rational and spiritual convictions for sin differ ; not all , but some few , which i have chosen for you from among the rest . 

Now remains the difference between these convictions in the principles themselves . 

Principles . 

The principles themselves are the spirit of man or reason ; the spirit of God . but i can no more convey a sense of this difference into any soul , that hath not seen these two lights shining in itself : than i can convey the difference between salt and sugar ; to him , who hath never tasted sweet or sharp . these things are discerned only by exercise of senses ; and are too hard for those , who have not their own senses exercised in them , as St. Paul speaks , hebr. 5. chap. 14. ver. when you shall see the sea of truth , the spirit ; then you will know , that the great river of reason was not the sea . 

I can tell you , that as much as the complexion of a face ; the colour of a cloth or lace , seen by moonlight , and sunshine differ : so , and far more do the convictions or discoveries by reason , and the spirit . 

but still this is the difference in the effects , not in the principles themselves . To give you , as i May , some shadowy description of this ; i will commend to your most constant and serious meditations that place , 1 cor. 15. chap. 45. v. the first man was a living soul ; the last man a quickening spirit , vers. 46.  The natural is first , and then the spiritual . vers. 48.  As the earthy , so are they that are earthy ; as is the heavenly , so are they that are heavenly . vers. 49.  As we have born the image of the earthly man ; so shall we bear the image of the heavenly . 

From these places you May draw these Architectonick , or commanding conclusions . 

1.  A living soul in her full glory , as she was in the first man in innocence , in paradise , is not the principle of the second man , the new birth ; but the all-quickening , the eternal spirit . 

2.  A living soul , with the highest improvements , raised to the noblest actings of wit , reason , worth , is natural , not spiritual ; the image of the first Adam , not the image of the Lord Jesus . 

3.  the natural and spiritual man differ as much as earth and heaven ; corruption and immortality ; flesh and spirit . 

You see the difference between these two sorts of convictions ; as i have been able to set it before you . I will now conclude this use with an admonition , as i begun it . 

An earthly root May bring forth earthly fruit ; nothing can reach up to heaven , and immortality , but that which first comes from heaven , and that immortal spirit . If you see your sins this day , and weep for them , though it be only by the owl-light of your own reason , ( As the philosopher himself styles it ) you shall not lose your reward , though you May lose your souls . 

But what will it profit you to save three kingdoms by your sorrows ; and in the mean time to carry in your own bosoms , dying , perishing souls , of which every single one is more worth than all the world ? 

't is dreadful to express ; but i will speak it for your sakes . If God should please to put the choice into my hands ; i had much rather , that all these three kingdoms should be consumed at once , in this very moment , with fire from heaven , by an outward destruction ; then that any one the meanest , most miserable soul in them , should perish everlastingly . 

Draw then water out of that well of salvation , the spirit ; and pour it forth before the Lord . If the spirit be the spring ; your tears will quench both flames , those that burn outwardly , and inwardly ; so you shall at once save these nations , and your own souls . 

a caution . if it be the work of the spirit to convince of sin ; than it is his work more especially , to convince of spiritual duties , and spiritual truths . take heed of measuring divine things by the model of reason . take heed of rejecting what reason cannot receive . St. Paul gives you a full account of the Jews case and ruin , in a few words ; rom. 10. 3.  While they sought after righteousness by the law , they fell short ; because they were ignorant of the righteousness of God . fear , lest you also fall after the same example of unbelief ; lest you fall short of the knowledge of spiritual things ; because you seek it by reason , and know not the spirit of God . 

It is true ; all grant , that some ; some say , that all truths which come by revelation of the spirit , May also be demonstrated by reason . but if they be , they are then no more divine , but human truths : they lose their certainty , beauty , efficacy ; they become like the name of Jesus in the mouth of those counterfeit exorcists , which made them not the devil's Masters , but his scorn . Spiritual truths discovered by demonstrations of reason , are like the Mistress in her cook-maid's clothes . They differ from themselves in their own true shape ; as those little plump boys with wings , the pictures of angels in churches , differ from the angels in heaven . spiritual things are foolishness to the natural man , 1 cor. 2. chap. no visible shape is so lovely , so full of majesty , as that of man : no shape is so deformed , ridiculous , as the resemblance of man in a beast , in the ape . so heavenly things lose their majesty , become weak and contemptible , when they are represented by reason only : for they are not the things themselves ; but an apish , mimical imitation of them . 

The philosopher gives us this rule ; that we should seek for suitable demonstrations in every sort of truths ; and not leap from one kind to another . The apostle gives us this rule ; to compare spiritual things with spiritual . spiritual conclusions , with spiritual principles . 

You will reap both pleasure and profit from this observation ; that the true Protestant differs from all sorts of men and religions , by making the three persons in trinity , according to their several properties , the foundation of all truth . 

1.  He distinguisheth himself from the atheists , by worshipping the father as the fountain of truth . 

2.  He dissents from Mahometans , Indian's , infidels , while he sets up Christ in himself , for the only image of truth . 

3.  By seeking and embracing the discovery of truth in the spirit , he differs from all sorts of Christians ; especially three . 

1.  The Papists , a faction of policy . these persuade us to receive the testimony , not of the spirit , but of the church , for a touchstone of truth : and this church is the Pope's private consistory , or general council . thus the church's authority , not the demonstration of the holy ghost shall be the light of faith to truth . Thus not content with an Antichrist , they set up their consistory , or council for an anti-spirit . but we need no visible judge on earth , to determine upon our consciences ; what is scripture ; what is the sense of scripture . we have an invisible judge and witness in our own breasts : he that believeth , hath the testimony in himself , 1 joh. 5. chap. 10. v. for he hath the spirit . 

2.  The Arminians , a sect of moralists , who give the over-perswading power of the spirit , to strength of rhetoric and reason , inward or outward . 

3.  A party of wit and worth : so far as the wit and worth of man can go ; if they would submit the wit and worth of man to the power and wisdom of God : the Socinians ; the principles of reason , are the pillars of religion , and truth to these men . But reason is a pillar of a cloud ; the spirit only is the pillar of fire , which hath light in it . Reason is that gladius versatilis , that sword in that hand of the cherubin , that kept paradise ; a sword that turns every way . It May keep men from the tree of life , but can never bring them to it . Our faith is not in the wisdom of man , but power of God , 1 cor. 2. chap. 5. verse . 

Now , worthy senators , give me leave to make my particular addresses to yourselves . You have commanded me to speak before you ; how far so ever i find myself below a sufficiency for it , i must speak ; i would not seek to work upon you by art or cunning , if i had any skill in these things . My earnest desire is , with all humility and lowliness , to speak the things of God , as a man ; on whom the earliest glimmerings of the spirit have scarce yet dawned . I have believed , so i will speak ; to you ; those things ▪ on which i fasten the immortality of mine own dear soul . 

Pardon me , honourable patriots , if i speak twice to you , once as private Christians , a second time , as public persons and magistrates . 

First , as private Christians . if the words of a weak , worthless man May have place in your large hearts , i beseech you to lay up within you , and to ponder frequently upon this short word which i am now about to speak : remember , remember , not to trust to the strength and wisdom of that living soul , which dwells in the breast of man . but , have all your dependence upon that spirit of the immortal God , which comes forth from our Lord Jesus Christ . i speak this to you , who are Princes of reason , in whom the spirit of man is at a high pitch : your saviour died , that he Might send you this spirit : he left you in his fleshly presence , that you Might have this spirit with you . Oh wait for him constantly , till he come : wait upon him diligently , when he is come . 

Saint Hierom thought he ever heard the last trumpet sounding in his ears . How well should i think myself rewarded for all the pains of this day , if i could fix upon your spirits the constant sound of two only sentences , as two blasts of the last trumpet ? The sentences are , esa. 2. vers. ult. 

Cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils ; wherein is he to be esteemed of ? 

verse . 17.  

The Lord alone shall be exalted in that day . The great God make that day , this day , to every one of your souls . 



thus much to private Christians . 

Secondly , as public persons . Christ tells the Jews : 

If any one sin against the son of man , it shall be forgiven him : but if any one sin against the holy ghost : it never shall be forgiven him . you will allow it , if i shall make a little change in these words , and so return them to you . if a state sin against the son of man , it shall he forgiven : but if a state sin against the holy ghost , it shall never be forgiven . 

remember Jerusalem , Christ came in the flesh , and was crucified , yet Jerusalem stood . The spirit of Christ came in the persons of the disciple , in the power of the gospel , and was cast out ; then Jerusalem fell . Divided into three factions within , beleaguered with a fourth enemy without ; Jerusalem miserably fell . 

oh England ! London ! Remember Jerusalem . you have had the first day of your peace , and passed it . Christ hath been preached among you ; but as in the flesh ; clouded with carnal rites and ceremonies . Christ hath been pierced among us , that is , not believed on : yet we live , though we bleed . you have had the first day of your peace , and passed it . Be careful ; be careful , to know the last day of your peace ; the coming of the spirit among you . 

you have set me on your watch-tower , and made me your watchman for the few sands of these glasses ; if you ask me now ; watchman , what of the night ? my humble answer is : the nights is almost past , the day is at hand , if you will receive the spirit when he comes : if you shall refuse to hear , you will look for day ; but i fear , i fear , it will be blackness of darkness , and desolation . 

But i bend my knees to the father of our Lord Jesus , who hath hitherto made you tender in a very great measure ; that he would send the spirit of his son into your hearts ; that you May know him , that he May be in you ; that all this persons May honour the spirits as they honour Jesus Christ . 

a vindication of the spirit from those who 1.  Pretend it to profaneness . 
2.  Profane it under pretentes . 


1.  From those who pretend the spirit to profaneness . can any think they have the spirit of grace in them , and yet sin , and yet not mourn for sin ? Can any man make that spirit , whose work is to convince of sin , a colour for sin ? Can any man paint his foul lusts with the specious name of this holy spirit , whose property it is to paint out lusts in their true deformities , their hellish shapes ? 

I read in ecclesiastic writers , that in the primitive times there were those that deserved the name of Borboristae , or coenosi : the dirty sect : and yet a branch of the gnostics . 

But i Might perhaps fear this to be the malice , or mistake of some in those ages ; if i did not read in the holy scriptures of a filthy-dreamers . 

Spiritual discoveries are either waking sights , or dreams . dreams are false visions of sleeping men , without connexion , full of absurdities , inconsistencies . It is not strange for a filthy vile person to have fair glorious dreams . It is monstrous , that glorious discourses , notions and apprehensions , should be set upon vile affections , actions , and conversations ; as the head of an angel upon the body of a beast . But all is a dream . 

If any man indeed have the spirit , he hath a true dove in his breast . The dove's eyes are the emblem of chastity ; the dove's song is in groans . Who , so mourn for sin ; who , so moan day and night after their god , as those who live with this spirit ? 

This is the first part of the vindication . 

Secondly , from those that profane the spirit under pretences of fancy , profaneness . 

1.  Under pretences of fancy . why should Joseph be despised as a dreamer among his brethren ? Paul as a babbler among the Athenians ? The spirit as a fancy , by men only rational ? That scurrilous comedian in his Greek play called the frogs , reproached Socrates , as a worshipper of clouds , and the air ; because he neglected their idols , and conversed with the Invisible-god , so the workings and discoveries of the spirit , often seem to men of mighty reason , cloudy , airy . yet the spirit is truth ; the only solid and weighty truth , carrying the power of God for a demonstration along with it . 

Some learned men bear such a modest respect to nature , that they affirm it probable , some beasts May have a sense more than we have , which we can neither judge of , or guess at ; because we have it not . O! that the most rational men , were so modest towards their maker ; as to suspect , that there May be in him a divine sense , a spirit of light , above the compass and conjectures of their reason ; which he May communicate to whom he pleaseth ! 

2.  Under pretences of profaneness . the heathens mingled with Christians , of old charged their secret meetings with the beds of Oedipus , unnatural incests , the feasts of Thyestes , monstrous cruelties . 

The late Protestant's at large clothed the best men with the name of Puritan , as with a cap of paper ; then they painted that cap with devils ; they loaded that name with all the foul things of all sects or persons ; as before them the Papist did the Protestant . 

God grant that the father of lies May not still live between the lips of men by the same art of names ; representing the most spiritual men like Christ on the cross , under the most carnal titles of ambition , lust , falsehood . 

The spirit is holy , so are they that are his . this spirit cannot encourage to sin , comfort in sin ; for his work is to convince sin . 

Believe it , 't is true as gospel : no man that is led by the law of the spirit of life ; can walk contrary to any law of nature , common honesty , civil policy , or whatsoever is of good report , praiseworthy . 

If any man walk by any other rule ; an evil spirit hath deceived him ; only let not the reproach of such fall upon them , who with humble and panting hearts call upon the name of this holy spirit . 

A consolation . this spirit , which convinceth of sin , is the comforter . if you have this day received his conviction ; you shall now go away full of his comforts : with bosom's full of all comforts of peace and joy in yourselves ; of peace and love , one towards another . 

Where the spirit convinceth of sin , he communicates all contents in these two bundles of comforts ; righteousness and peace . 

1.  righteousness . have you seen your sins by the light of the spirit ? by the same light you shall see your righteousness . Humble yourselves before this spirit ; let him cover your faces with shame ; and he shall clothe your persons with glory . He shall make you precious in the eyes of your God , honourable in all the world : nations round about shall say , this is a wise and righteous persons , for the spirit of the eternal God is come down among them . 

2.  peace . naturalists say , a wound is a separation of parts in the whole . How full are all of wounds ? Alas , do we not begin to have wounds upon our breasts , near our hearts ? And still we strive to make that good in civility , which is true only in nature ; that the best balsam for a wound is its own blood : we would make up our divisions , by making them more . 

Who now shall restore peace to our mourners ? This spirit will restore peace to his mourners . This dove , though he come groaning , yet he brings an olive branch in his mouth . Oh ye ! every one of you in particular , give this spirit your single hearts to break in pieces ; and he will make them all one heart . How happy should we live , if God would do this ! 

If the Lord would pour forth his spirit upon our souls , and melt them ; how sweetly would they run all into one piece , like gold ? 

Then should righteousness and peace kiss each other in these lands ; and these three kingdoms should mutually kiss and embrace in this union . The lambs , England and Scotland , Presbyterians and independents , shall feed together in fat pastures . The lambs and the lion shall live lovingly , and converse one with another . 

Then shall your cattle go forth again in herds and flocks : your children in dances ; your saints in their assemblies ; and the Lord Jesus shall be known for a god in the midst of them . 

Then shall after-ages call this age , this parliament ; the blessed of the Lord ; and make it your motto for ever . 

Blessed are the peacemakers in divided commonwealths . 
Blessed are the peacemakers in divided consciences . 


Thus if the holy spirit set a crown of thorns by conviction on your hearts ; he shall crown you with righteousness and peace : for ; the kingdom of God is righteousness , peace , and joy in the holy ghost . 

Finis . 





a {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as relating to {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} not {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as relating to {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

a 1 cor. 3. 3.  b 2 pet. 1. 4.  pro. 1.  prom. 2.  prom. 3.  a John 6. 62.  b John 3. 13.  doctr.  proof . reason 1.  distin. i. a eccles. 6. 10.  b eccles. 3. 1• . c rom. 8. 1.  1 cor. 3. 18.  reason 2.  use 1.  pers. rat . Perswa . Spir.  use 2.  1 cor. 2. 13.  use 3.  a Jude 8.  1 cor. 2. 4.  use 4.  rom. 14. 17.  


































