Unity our duty . 

In twelve considerations humbly presented to the godly , reverend , and learned brethren of the Presbyterian judgement ; and the dissenting godly , reverend , and learned brethren , commonly called independent ; contending together about church government . 

Which tends earnestly to dissuade them from bitter speaking , and writing one against another . 

By i. p.  

phil. 2. 3.  

that nothing be done through strife or vain glory , but that in meekness of mind every man esteem other better than himself . 

James 3. 14 , 15 , 16 , 17.  

but if ye have bitter envying , and strife in your hearts rejoice not , neither be liars against the truth . This wisdom descendeth not from above , but is earthly , sensual , and devilish . For where envy and strife is , there is sedition and all manner of evil works . But the wisdom that is from above is first pure , then peaceable , gentle , and easy to be entreated , full of mercy and good fruits without judging , and without hypocrisy . rom. 14. 19  let us then follow those things which make for peace , and wherewith one May edify another . 

Licenced and published according to order . 

London , pinted by t. Paine , for John Hancock , and are to be sold at his shop at the entrance into Popes-head Ally out of Cornhill . 164• . 

Unity our duty . 

In twelve considerations humbly presented to the godly , reverend , and learned brethren of the Presbyterian judgement , and the dissenting godly , reverend , and learned brethren , commonly called independent , contending together about church government . 

The errors of the times doth abunantly vindicate the defect of our faith in the knowledge of the truth , and the divisions of the times the defect of our love in the prosecution of the same , the form of sound words is to be held fast in faith and love , 2 tim. 1. 13.  The devouring sword abroad , and the deviding pen at home , rendereth our condition very near the pit of destruction , and that by a divine hand of justice ? for as the want of sound knowledge argueth the weakness of our heads , ( And so our unprofitableness for God ) so the want of love the rottenness of our hearts , and what shall God do with a weak headed and rotten hearted persons . It is hard to say whether is the saddest omen of our approaching misery ; either the unhappy divisions of our own party , or between ourselves and the common enemy , whose promising advantage against ourselves in that particular , is their greatest hopes , and our greatest fear ; they are united , we divided ; they are all one against us , & each of us one against his brother , unity acteth the sons of error & division the sons of truth , which is as if the good should with the wicked , change qualities , and yet retain privileges ; the spirit of pride , peevishness ▪ •ssion , perverseness , malice , confidence , envy and emulation doth apparently look ( As through a lettuce ) ▪ through these late times of contention about church discipline , between ( I hope ) godly parties on each side , which is as sad in itself as the consequence , ( If not prevented ) are like to be ; the melancholy and serious observation whereof hath cast me upon these present , sudden , but seasonable thoughts , which i have moulded into several considerations and motives unto a more sweet , Christian , and lovely demeanour of ourselves in our mutual pleadings and writing against one another unhappily dissenting about the truth , first consider the mind of God , revealed in the scriptures about the same who hath commanded us , to love one another , John 15. 17. to follow the truth in love , ephes. 4 15 ▪ to provoke one another to love , heb. 10. 24. to reduce the fallen brethren either in judgement or practice with the spirit of meekness , bearing one another's burdens , and so fulfilling the law of Christ , oal . 6. 1 , 2. to take heed of biting and devouring one another , least we be consnmed one of another , gal. 5. 15. to walk by the same rule so far as we have mutually attained , and if any be contrary minded , to wiate with Christian respect and love in confidence that God will seasonally reveal the truth unto the mistaken , phil. 3. 15 , 16.  to be kindly affectioned one towards another with brotherly love in honour , preferring one another , rom. 10. 12. and that this love should not be complemental , but without dissimulation , rom. 12. 9 with a pure heart fervently , 1 pet. 1. 22. in deed and in truth , 1 John 3. 18. that this brotherly love should continue , heb. 13. 1. and be daily increasing and abounding one towards another , 1 thes. 3. 12. with many other scriptures of the like importance . 

Consider the pattern which is set before you , God is love , and he that dwelleth in love , dwelleth in God , and God in him , 1 John 4. 16.  We differ from God in heart , in life , in judgement , in practice , and yet still God is love , the father himself loveth you , John ▪ 16. 27. be ye therefore followers of God as dear children , and walk in love , ephes. 5. 1 , 2. the son hath loved you ▪ in nature , kind , and degree , even as the father hath loved the son , John 15. 9  That is infinitely , eternally , and in things infinite ▪ there are not degrees of comparison , he gave himself ( A measure of his love to us ) than the which there could be no greater love , John 15. 13. the inference from hence is verse 17. that ye love one another , the holy spirit is a spirit of love , 2 tim. 1. 7. and the fruit of it is love , gal. 5. 22.  And where ever it is in truth , it knits the heart with the saints in love , colos. 2. 2. rooting and grounding them in love , ephes. 3. 17. causing not only the report of their faith in Christ Jesus , but also of their love to all saints to be heard abroad in the world , colos. 1. 4. the father , the son , the holy spirit loveth us not withstanding our vast and infinite disproportion and difference from this holy trinity in our judgements , wills , affections , lives , and conversations , and surely they that are taught of God do love one another , 1 thes. 4 9  Consider how sweetly , and kindly the almighty treateth with the sons of men , his words are soft breaking our bonds , prov. 25. 15. and his writings are words of reconciliation ▪ sending his ambassadors to beseech us , and most kindly to pray us in Christ's name and stead to be reconciled unto God , 2 cor. 5. 20.  

Thirdly consider , we cannot as yet be all of one mind , which is our affliction as well as our sin , yet May we be all of one heart , the fallings wherein is more our sin then our sorrow , unity in judgement is the promised blessing of another age , but unity in affection is our present duty , though we cannot speak all the same things of saith , though our difference in judgement , yet we May all speak the same things of love through the unity of our affections ; though we cannot agree in all things , which should be all our grief , yet we all agree in this thing , to strive together to know the truth as it is in Jesus , which calls for our love to one another , God in Christ , and Christ in God is the pure spring of that divine love which is always running from God to Christ , and from Christ to God , the streams whereof do cheer the hearts of all the saints , but the saints in Christ and Christ in saints should make each lovely in each others eyes , our mutual interest in Jesus Christ should make us value each other as precious jewels which God will make up in the day of his glory , mal. 3. 17  We are all acceptable to God in the beloved , ephes. 1. 6 , and why not then unto one another . 

Fourthly , consider , we all know but in part . 1 cor. 13. 9  And therefore none are so perfectly acquainted with one truth that he needs no further light about the same , and it is to beconceived that the errors of judgement in the godly , ariseth not from the love of error , but the mistake of truth ; so that the light of the saints possibly May be dim ; and their darkness or ignorance not absolutely without or utterly remote from some light : they ought therefore to here on another patiently , and to bear with one another kindly , it is the property of the father of lights ▪ and ▪ of the son of righteousness , the light of the world that in him should be all light and no darkness at all : he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in light , for God is light . he that saith he is in light , and hateth his brother is in darkness , and walketh in darkness . ( Notwithstanding his great presumption of his large abilities . ) he knoweth not whether he goeth , because that darkness hath blinded his eyes . verse 11.  

Fifthly , consider a passionate , peevish , froward , pettish , perverse professor is seldom acquainted with the truth as it is in Jesus , meekness encapableth a man to receive the truth . James 1. 21.  A froward heart and a perverse tongue , or pen commonly goeth together , and Solomon saith that one findeth no good , and the other falleth into mischief , pro. 17. 20.  He that thinketh he knoweth nothing as he ought to know is in the sweetest capacity to be taught of the father , who filleth the hungry with good things , but sendeth the rich empty away . Resisting the proud , he giveth grace to the humble , the Lord guideth the meek in judgement , and them will he teach his way . psal. 25. 9  Those who are become like weaned children doth he teach knowledge , and understand doctrine . Esay 28. 9  A froward heart , tongue , or pen , is an abomination unto the Lord , and therefore the secrets of the Lord cannot be with such swelling words commonly come from shallow brains ; and the most ignorant are most conceited ; with the lowly there is wisdom . Pro. 21. 2.  A railing tongue or pen is like the raging waves foaming out its own sham• . Jude 13.  The Lord teacheth the lowly person , and such is fit to teach his brother . 

Sixtly , consider how much men preiudiceth the truth by apassionate endeavour to vindicate the same , railing language and invective lines ▪ veils the truth that it cannot be seen , who loves to drink in troubled waters ? or puddle streams ? When men's foam of malice , envy and discontent , appear ▪ in the surface of their peevish lines , who will look for truth therein ▪ a smooth pen shall not bewitch me , for i will examine what it affirms . A scolding dialect shall not corrupt me , for i will never bestow the pains to read it , truth hath never need of passion , but oft of patience . A froward pen oft times stir up other men's passions , but seldom settleth any man's judgement , frowardness raiseth up frowardness , and strife stirreth up strife , and both together rejoiceth the devil and sporteth his children , and the truth is neglected all the while : he that endeavours to conquer error with good success , must bring along with him meekness and truth , and having both May ride on and prosper . psal. 45. 4.  

Seventhly . Men do seldom contend for truth in a railing dialect , it is mystery more than truth that is so sought out , passion , envy , hatred , malice are the fruits of the flesh , and can these contend for their distroyer the spirit of truth ? an unbridled tongue , a licentious pen , is the common character of a rotten heart , 1 James 26.  The passion of the pen above that of the tongue is the more dangerous sign that the heart is rotten : a passionate tongue doth many times argue the distempers of the head , when the consent of the heart cannot begotten ▪ but a railing pen doth clearly evince the heart's malice , commanding the head to subserve the same , a passionate tongue doth often declare a man robbed of his reason , but a passionate pen doth more clearly evince a man robbed of the truth , for his reason is ranged in his malicious lines , the passion of the tongue doth largely proclaim sin in the heart , but the passion of the pen the heart in sin , for deliberation , invention , memory , wit , reason , all are commanded by that heart of sin , truth triumphs only in tittle , but pride and arrogancy in the matter itself . 

Eightly , consider how doth it gratify the designs of the adversary , that the saints should thus wrangle each with his brother , how doth this cheer up the popish , episcopal , presbyterial , independent , antinominicall , annabaptisticall , Jesuit : for i presume the Jesuit personates them all : and whose ends we prosecute by our unhappy divisions amongst ourselves , how is this told in Gath , and published in Askalon , how do the daughters of the Philistines rejoice ? and the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph ? How do they jeer at our discord ▪ that we ourselves proves thorns in one another's eyes , and goad in one another's sides ? boasting that they lashed us with rods , but we ourselves with scorpions , and that our own little fingers will be heavier upon one another , than their loins were upon us all . They oppressed us and we were pitied of all , we oppress ourselves and then who pitieth us : they ruined us by an usurpation , and shall we strive to ruin one another by a law ? They crushed us by the heavy sentences of the heigh commission , & star chamber , & shall we endeavour to do the same by the authority of parliament ? If we love not one another , let us love ourselves , for each undermineth his own security by circumventing his brother's peace . 

Ninthly , consider how do saints loose in each others hearts , when they gall and grieve and vex one another in each others pen . To give milk and honey for vinegar and gall , blessing for cursing , kind words for bitter language , this is indeed our duty , but hereunto who hath attained ? And shall we tempt one another with such provocations ▪ sorrow and trouble , persecution and affliction , envy and malice , evil speaking and railing , we expect from the world , but bitter quarter from bitter persons : the saints should be each other's shelter , we do not gather grapes from thorns , not briers from vines , men do not gather figs from thistles , nor prickles from fig trees . Churlish language i expect from a Nabell , not from a David , scoffs from an Ishmael not from an Isaac , railing from a rabsheika , not from an Hezekiah , dungeons from an Ahab , not from a Michaiah , prisons from an Herod , not from John the Baptist , chains from a Nero , not from a Paul , banishment from Flavius Domitian , not from John the evangelist , jeers from a Julian , not from a Christian . No , no , gentleness and meekness , love and peace , kindness and goodness , bowels of mercy and compassion from the hearts and tongues , the hands and pens of all wherein dwells the spirit of Christ . But when our expectations are failed , looking for peace with Jeremie and no good comes , for help from the saints and behold trouble . When our brethren turns dragons , as Job saith , and we are companions to owls even birds of prey : how will our bowels boil and resteth not , our harp turns into mourning , and our organs into the voice of them that weep ? Job 30. 29. 31.  Hard speeches and heavy hands upon the saints of God from great professors , proud looks , and swelling words have formerly been the certain prognostics of approaching apostasy : and that character seldom fails . As for my part God give me favour in the eyes of those who are his favourites , love in their hearts , interest in their prayers , and make me to the uttmost a friend and a favourer of them , however they differ from me in my judgement . 

Tenthly , consider , wrangling , writing , and railing language each against other in our own party , hasteneth our destruction ▪ and hindereth our reformation and who but a Jesuit delighteth herein ? What is it which obstructeth the parliament assembly , or armies , but our unhappy divisions amongst ourselves ? We want love , and where love is not , where is our piety ? and where there is no unity , there is as little policy . For my part the unhappy quarrel between Presbyterian and independent speaketh as sadly to me , and threatneth as sorely , as the woeful distance between King and parliament , and the happy reconciliation of the former parties would quit my thoughts of the fear of the latter , and happy should that man be called by this present age , which should prove an instrument of so good a work , but where is that pen of peace ? and that heart of love ? that spirit of meekness ? and that head of wisdom ? How beautiful should the very feet of those be which could bring such tidings of joy to this kingdom . 

Eleventhly , consider , the difference is more in the heart then in the head , in the affections then in the judgement ▪ which is more dangerous because less reconcilable , a gracious heart commands the head to hearken to truth , but a more sound head cannot command a perverse mind , the difference between the parties we speak of is more in show , then in deed and truth , the Presbyterian is departed from episcopacy . the independent questions such and such a qualified presbytery , but they that are godly of both parties , are not engaged past a retreat to the truth of God . Who ever can show it , could each of us lovingly here his brother , happily each Might be bettered by the other , those that are the strongest antagonists about discipline suppose it a piece of policy , not of divinity , and is it policy for the saints to ruin one another ? Inteligent men are of opinion that i• each party would with meekness and patience here one another , reconciliation between them would attend the issue , and shall we destroy one another before we will give one another the heating ? What aparrant untruths , and gross mistakes even in matters of fact have been reported of their dissenting brethren ; for want of hearing them speak for themselves ? I could instance in many in mine own observations , but that the making up , and not the widening of breaches is my present purpose . 

Twelfthly , consider the dear relation wherein we stand each to other in Jesus Christ , have we not the same Lord ? the same faith ? the same baptism ? Did not we all lie together as it were in the same womb of the almighty's gracious purpose ? are we not all the price of the same ransom ? the redeemed of the same saviour ? Doth not the same spirit of Jesus breath in our hearts ? the same blood of Jesus run in our veins ? Are we not all brethren in the faith ? and shall brethren reproach brethren ? brethren rail against brethren ? brethren undermine the peace and comfort of one another , is it brotherly to discover one another's weaknesses , failings , and indiscretions ? brethren accuse brethren ? brethren betray brethren ? What! brethren without bowels ? without natural affection to brethren ? Who but a Cain will seek the ruin of a brother Abel , because his holy services are more acceptable than his own ? Who but a ham will betray the nakedness of his own family ? God put enmity between Satan and saints , but Satan puts enmity between saints and saints ; whose works they do that foment the same . an ungodly man diggeth up evil , and in his lips there is a burning fire , and a froward man soweth strife , and a whisperer separateth chief friends . pro. 16. 27. 28. and it is a wicked man that walketh with a froward mouth , pro. 6. 12.  And shall such be found among the saints ? Oh where is that spirit which should knit our hearts together in love ? Are we not all members of the same body ? if one suffer do not all suffer ? and shall we persecute one another ? if one be disgraced do we not all blush ? and shall we shame one another ? is love the sign of a disciple of Christ ? and shall we hate one another ? doth not each member need his fellow : and shall each destroy each other ? Is the body of Christ the horrid monster of these monstrous times ? Is it thus amongst Turks , and pagans' , Mahumitans , atheists , or Papists ? do malignants thus pen it against malignants , cavaliers against cavaliers ? are there such bitter words or bitting language ? such harsh sayings or hard speakings to be heard in the camp of our adversaries ? Dear Sirs is it truth or trouble you thus pursue ? if the truth , fight for it in its own way , it calls for your love to itself & children & not for your rancour , for your pains & not your passion , it calls for help and not for hindrance , if truth doth reign , why scratch you her with a crown of thorns , giving her vinegar and gall to drink , if truth be Queen her royal attendance and maids of honour should be love , and meekness , gentleness and goodness , kindness and mercy , forbearance and pity . Why do men vex her with pride & passion , strife & contention , forwardness and anger ? Her kingdom is peace , her commands are love , her royal law to her •oyal subjects is follow the truth together in love , ephes. 4. 15.  Lions & wolves , bears & tigars , dragons and ultars , with such hurtful creatures becomes the shady wilderness of the wicked world , but none that do destroy should once approach the Lords holy mountain . it becomes toads to belch out venom , and hellish furies to spit fire , each at other ▪ and not the saints of the most high God , shall they dig out one another's bowels , rend one another's name , plunder one another's reputes dearest Sirs turn your swords into plowshares , and your spears into pruning hooks , and learn no more to war one against another . Esay 2. 4  Let the wolf dwell with the lamb , and the leopard lie down with the kid , and a child by truth lead them both ▪ let no corrupt communication come out of your mouth ( Or pen ) but that which is good for the use of edifying , that May administer grace to the hearers , and readers , and let all bitterness and wrath and anger , clamour and evil speaking ( Or writing ) be put away from you , with all malice ▪ and be ye kind one to another , tender hearted ▪ forgiving one another , as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you . Ephes. 4 29. 31. 32.  

Finis . 





















