THE PRIVILEGE OF THE Saints on Earth , BEYOND Those in HEAVEN , In respect of Gifts and Graces exercised , Duties and Services performed , sufferings and Trials undergone by them , which the Glorified are not capable of . 

BEING The Sum of a Discourse upon a part of Hezekiah , Song of Thanksgiving after his Recovery from his Sickness . 

To which is added , A short Discourse of the Nature and 〈◊〉 of the Gospel-day , reaching from the Destruction of the Old , to the 〈…〉 of the New Jerusalem out of 〈…〉 . 

By WILLIAM HOOKE , Preacher of the Gospel . 

LONDON , Printed for John Wilkins , and are to be sold at his Shop in Exchange-alley , next door to the Exchange-coffee-house , over against the Royal-exchange , 1673.  

Courteous Reader , 

thou art desired to correct with thy Pen these following Erratas . 

Page 9  Line 15. for imparted , read imported . P. 11. in the Margin , r. Eph. 3. last . P. 13. l. 6. f. hence , r. here . P. 16. l. 10. for Spiritual , r. special . P. 22. in the Margin , r. Job 7. 2.  P. 23. l. 10. for the , r. this . P. 35. l. 13. blot out yet . P. 51. l. 28. r. bridled . P. 53. in the Margin , r. Luke 8. 48.  Luke 7. 50.  P. 65. l. 9 for the , r. your . P. 91. l. 23 , 24. for Argumentations , r. Augmentations . P. 92. l. 8. for for , r. so . P. 92. l. last , for were not the , r. were it not for the. P. 95. l. 20. f. from plain to Plain , r. from Place to Place . P. 101. l. 22 , for lon , r. long . 

In the second Sermon in the Epistle , for go , r. therefore . 

TO THE READER . 

The greatest and highest Honour of the reasonable Creature is to serve him , who is the best Good , and last End. Herein do we communicate with Angels , whose glory it is that they are Ministering Spirits , always beholding the face of God our Father for this very purpose . How diligent then should we be to lay hold on , and to improve all opportunities of service , seeing our time is so short , our work so great , and our salvation nearer than when we first believed ? The Son of God hath given us a glorious pattern herein , I must work the work of him that hath sent me , etc.  Christ Jesus our Master improved all opportunities , went up and down doing good , filling all places where he came with the favour of his Doctrine and Miracles , because he knew his time was short , and the recompense of reward at hand . The serious thoughts hereof would exceedingly spur us to a holy diligence , especially considering that Heaven is a place not of work but reward , where the Saints will be divested of serving and honouring God in many of these ways , wherein now ( through grace ) they are enabled to bring much glory to his Name . Many Graces , Duties , Gifts have here their place , while we are Viatores , but shall have no room when we come to be Comprehensores . 

And this is the design of the worthy Author in this little Tract : viz. to set before thee the great opportunities thou hast of service to God , while thou art on this side Heaven , beyond what are to be enjoyed there . Were this thoroughly weighed , how would Holiness be promoted , Saints thrive , Families flourish , Churches revive ? we should not so passionately desire death merely to be rid of all sufferings , but should prise life , if with it Christ Jesus might be magnified . It is glorious work that God calls his Saints to ' ere they get to Heaven . Is not suffering for Christ , glorious work ? is not the exercise of Faith , Hope , and Patience , glorious work ? To do good , and to communicate both to the bodily and spiritual necessities of Saints and others , is not this glorious work ? In a word , to propagate pure Religion , & undefiled , to the generations to come , is not this glorious work ? Why , herein are the Saints on Earth privileged beyond those in Heaven , where there is no room for the exercise of these Graces , and Duties . 

Oh! who would not pray that he might live to do God service ? spin not out precious time unprofitably . Pray that thou mayest be counted worthy of this calling ( which is indeed a high calling ) and fulfil all the good pleasure of his Goodness , and the work of Faith , Hope , and Patience , with power , that the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you , and ye in him , according to the grace of our God , and the Lord Jesus Christ . 

Isaiah 38 18 , 19  

For the Grave cannot praise thee , Death cannot celebrate thee : They that go down into the pit , cannot hope for thy truth . 

The living , the living , he shall praise thee , as I do this day : The Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth . 



The words are a part of Hezekiah's thanksgiving for his recovery from his sickness ( beginning at the ninth verse . ) This good King was not simply afraid of Death , as appeareth , ver . 3d. But 

First , He had then no Son to succeed him in the Kingdom , ( for Manasseh was not then born ) and he was solicitous for a Successor , and the fulfilling of God's Promise to David , which we have four times expressed , ( viz. 2 Sam. 7. 12 , 13 , 16. 1  King. 8. 25.  Psal . 89. 28 , 29.  & 132. 12.  In all which places we find this Promise to David , that there should not fail a Man of his Seed , to sit upon the Throne of Israel , so that his Children took heed to their ways , to walk before the Lord in truth , as David their Father had done . Here was a Promise with a Condition . And hence it is , I suppose , that Hezekiah in his Prayer ( vers . 3d ) makes mention of his fulfilling that Condition , viz. That David's Children must take heed to their way , ( if they desired to sit upon his Throne ) that they walk before him , as David had done . For , saith Hezekiah , Remember now , OH Lord , I beseech thee , how I have walked before thee in truth , and with a perfect heart , & have done that which is good in thy sight . As much as to say , Lord ! I hope thou wilt not cut me off , and leave the Kingdom without an Heir of the Seed of David , seeing thou didst promise him that thou wouldst not ; provided that his Children took heed to their way , that they walked before him as David did . And , through thy Grace , I have so walked in my measure , and therefore , I hope , thou wilt not take me away , who have performed the Condition . 

So that Hezekiah ( though a very good Man ) was afraid of Death ; yet not simply , but lest the Kingdom should want an Heir of the Seed of David . 

And this that I have said confirms the Opinion of those that say , that Hezekiah was loath to die , because than he had no Heir ; though that was not all the reason . 

For , Secondly , He was also loath to die in God's displeasure , so as a Child of God my do . For God doth testify his temporal displeasure many times against his own Children . If his Children forsake my Law , and walk not in my Judgements : If they break my Statutes , and keep not my Commandments ; then will I visit their transgressions with the Rod , and their iniquity with Stripes . And he testifies it sometimes in their death , as he did in the death of the Prophet that came out of Judah , and Prophesied against the Altar it Bethel , who was slain by a Lion for his disobeying the Word of the Lord  

And Hezekiah was afraid , that God had some controversy with him , and he was loath to die in God's displeasure . Peradventure , he was somewhat lifted up with his miraculous deliverance from the Host of Senacherib , mentioned in the former Chapter : For God did wonderful things , as you know , to effect that deliverance , and this sickness was immediately after the destruction of Senacherib's Army ; for that happened in the 39th year of Hezekiahs' life , who lived fifteen years after his recovery from his sickness , which two numbers make the whole number of Hezekiah's years , which were 54 , 2 King. 18. 2.  So that this sickness of his fell out presently upon that great deliverance . And the good Man was not so thankful ( perhaps ) as he should be , but somewhat elevated . For this was his weakness after his recovery . His heart was lifted up , and he rendered not again according to the benefit done to him , for which God was angry with him . What the sin was , I will not positively determine , only I thus conjecture ; but that he apprehended God's displeasure for his sin , is evident from the words immediately before my Text , saith he , thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back . Therefore , it seems , his sins lay before the face of God , till his recovery , and upon this account he was loath to die . 

Thirdly , He was loath to die , as fearing what should become of his Reformation . For he knew what became of Jehoshaphats though he left a son behind him ; and of Jehojadah's , though he left a well-educated Nephew behind him . Add hereunto , that he found the Church in a very deplored condition , when he came to the Crown . And as for his present Reformation , it had not lasted so long as his Father's Deformation and Idolatry ; and his Reformation had scarce taken root as yet ; therefore he was willing to live longer , and not , as yet , to die . 

Fourthly , That which made him the more unwilling , was the nature of his Disease , which ( by the Remedy , and way of Cure , a lump of Figgs laid for a Plaster upon the Boyl , Ver. 21. ) I say , which by the Cure , seems to have been the Pestilence : And he was not willing to go to Heaven that way ; though good Men may die of that Disease , and many times have done . But yet a Child of God would , for several Reasons , willingly decline that way of dying , if it might stand with the good will and pleasure of God.  

Thus you see the Reasons why Hezekiah was loath to die . 

Now then being recovered , and having a lease of his life for 15 years granted him , he writeth down his thanksgiving , as much affected with God's mercy towards him , verse . 9 , etc.  

In the Text read unto you , there is , 

1.  A Declaration of the state of the Dead , as to the loss of all opportunities ever to praise and magnify God any more , or to hope for his truth in this world . 

Secondly , An Assertion of the opportunities enjoyed by the living , thus to praise God , and to make known his Truth , that is , His Truth and Faithfulness in his Promises . For , I conceive , Hezekiah hath here a special respect to the Truth and faithfulness of God in his Promise made to David and his Seed , in the foremtioned Texts of Scripture . 

And therefore it is very likely , that Hezekiah made known this Truth and Faithfulness of God to his son Manasseh , who was twelve years old when Hezekiah died . Though Manasseh ( it seems ) did little mind it , or made any good use of it . That Point of Doctrine , which I shall insist upon , is this , That 

Doctrine . 

There are opportunities of service to be performed to God in this life , which are not to be enjoyed after death . 

Or thus , 

The people of God may do that for him in this World , which they cannot do in Heaven . 

David therefore makes an Argument of it in his Prayer , and sad Complaint in his Sickness : For , saith he , in death there is no remembrance of thee ; ( not but that the Saints in Heaven do remember God , ( for they see him there ) but they cannot keep up his memorial any longer among the living ; he goes on ) In the Grave who shall give thee thanks ? The like we have in the 30th Psalm , entitled , A Song at the Dedication of the house of David , viz. after his return ( as 't is conceived ) from his victory over Absalon , who had dreadfully defiled David's house with Incest , in abusing his Father's Concubines ; which house therefore David endeavours to purge and cleanse in a solemn holy manner at his return , and to dedicate it anew to God. And in that Psalm he showeth , how he cried to the Lord in the day of his trouble , when Absalon rose up against him , & when he was afraid of his life , and was loath to die by the hand of his son ; saith he , What profit is there in my blood , when I go down to the pit ? shall the dust praise thee ? shall it declare thy Truth ? And dark deserted Heman makes use of the same argument , Psal . 88 10 , 11.  wilt thou show wonders to the dead ? and shall the dead arise and praise thee ? Selah . Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the Grave ? or thy faithfulness in destruction ? Shall thy wonders be known in the dark ? and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness ? saith he , Thy people may make known thy wonders in this life , but not in the Grave . 

But then , do not the Saints , when they are dead praise the Lord ? 

Yes ; But the Psalmist speaketh not of that , but of praising God , and declaring his loving kindness , faithfulness , and righteousness in the land of the living . And all their service that way is at an end , except by Miracle any be raised from the dead , as Lazarus and Tabytha were . So Psal . 115. 17.  The dead praise not the Lord , neither any that go down into silence . And hence saith David , I shall not die , but live , and declare the works of the Lord , Psalm . 118. 17.  As much as to say , there is no declaring of them after death ! 

But what are those services that may be done here , which cannot be done in Heaven , that so we may see the Point in Instances ? 

They are many ; and let me begin with these in my Text.  

The living , the living , he shall praise thee . i e. He shall praise thee before the Children of Men in the Land of the living . Now , this is a glorious service , containing as much as is imparted in the first Petition of the Rule of Prayer , i e. Hallowed be thy Name ; which , though it be a service done in Heaven , yet in the presence of glorified Saints only , without any propagation of praise to the Name of God , for that is the privilege of the Saints while they live in this world , where they make the Name of God known to them , that knew it not before . This is the first and highest Petition of all in our prayers , and therefore of greatest concernment . 

Secondly , There is another service in my Text , which cannot be performed in Heaven , and it is contained in these words , The Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth . And is not this also a most blessed service ? for it contains what is imported in the second Petition in the Rule of Prayer , ( viz. ) Thy Kingdom come . For this is one excellent way of advancing and enlarging the Kingdom of God in this world , ( viz. ) when Parents shall make known the Truth and Faithfulness of God to their Children . To which purpose consider , Psal . 78. 2 , 7.  Deut. 4. 9 and 6. 6 , 7.  And this is the great service of the Saints upon Earth , both Ministers and People . The things ( saith Paul to Timothy , 2 Epist . Ch. 2.  Ver. 2. ) That thou hast heard of me among many witnesses , the same commit thou to faithful men , who shall be able to teach others also . And this is a service , which cannot be done in Heaven . For the dead Saints cannot contribute aught to the enlarging of the Kingdom of Grace in this World ; and as for the Kingdom of Glory , there are but two ways of enlarging that , which are by the departure of the Saints on Earth to Heaven , and by the Resurrection ; in neither of which doth God use the service of the glorified Saints at all . 

The care therefore of the choicest Saints hath been , not only for the time of their lives , but for the Generations to come , that they might know what God had done . The time would fail to tell of Moses , and Joshua , and David , and Paul , whose Epistles close with this Doxology and hearty desire of glory to be given to Christ in the Churches for ever . The truth is , the whole Scripture is a Book of the Acts and Monuments of the lord 's wonderful works in gathering , and building , protecting , saving , and doing good to his Church , and that for this end , that the Generations to come might put their hope and trust in God. And this was the unanimous design of the Penmen of holy Scripture . This shall be written for the generations to come ; and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord  

Thirdly , Here in this world the Saints may live exemplarily , blameless and harmless , as the sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation . And this is a great service also ; For 

First , Hereby some may come to be converted , 1 Pet. 3. 1. and so the Kingdom of God is enlarged by this way also . And 

Secondly , Many hereby will be convinced , and left without excuse in that great day . For this is one way whereby the Sains shall judge the world ; they shall judge it exemplarily , and ( in concurrence with Christ ) sententiarilly : Now ( I say ) this is a service , which cannot be done in Heaven ; where , First , There is no evil person : Nor Secondly , Any need of examples for the glorified Saints to walk by , who are all perfect , and under the immediate and sole Government of the Spirit of God. There is but one example in Heaven , and that is the exemplary cause of the glorification of our bodies , viz. The glorified body of Christ . For in this life the Saints conform to the grace of Christ actively , and at the Resurrection , they conform to his glorified body passively , as to their pattern . 

Here in this world the Saints have opportunities of reproving Sin , confuting Errors , instructing the Ignorant , warning the Unruly , comforting the Feeble minded , praying for their Relations and Friends , etc.  Now there are no such things in Heaven , where there is no Sin , no Error , no Ignorance , no Unruliness , none Afflicted , no praying for Relations . I remember how dying Mr. Rollock was much offended with a Kinsman , for desiring his Prayers when he should come to Heaven . God will have but one Intercessor there . 

Hence they may do good to the bodies , of Men. For they may feed the hungry , give drink to the thirsty , lodge the harbourless , cloth the naked , visit the sick and imprisoned ; whereas in Heaven there are no necessities or wants . 

Here the Saint , may suffer for Christ & give a testimony to his Cause , and to the Truth , by the loss of their Relations , and Friends , of their Goods , Health , Ease , Credit , Liberty , Houses , Lands , Countries , Life , etc.  For , Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord , from henceforth , yea , saith the Spirit , that they may rest from their labours , and their works follow them . And this is such a service , as the very Angels are in no wise capable of . 

So that you see , there are many services which the Saints may do here for Christ , which they cannot do in Heaven . 

Indeed , if they could return to this life again , they might do such works as these . For when Lazarus was raised from the dead , he entertained Christ again . And when Tabytha was raised from the dead , it is very probable that she fell to her good Works and Alms-deeds again , to her making of Coats and Garments again for the poor , as she had been wont ( Act. 9 39 ) But these are rare examples of the returning of the dead Saints to this world again . For as the Cloud is consumed , and vanisheth away : so he that goeth down to the grave , shall come up no more . He shall return no more to his house , neither shall his place know him any more . 

Lastly , There are some gifts of grace which cannot be exercised in Heaven . For 

First , Here the Saints do believe , whereas in Heaven Faith is turned into Vision . Here they walk by Faith , and not by sight , as they shall do in Heaven . And Faith is a gift of Grace , whereby God is much glorified ; for it empties and humbles the Heart , and carrieth it forth to Christ , and glorifies God in all his Attributes . Whereas in Heaven the Saints have all in hand , and therefore they live by sight , and not by Faith. There is but one thing there to come to them ( to the completing of their happiness ) and that is , the resurrection of the dead , in the Faith whereof they live , but yet this Faith is of another nature , than that which justifieth and saveth in this life . 

Secondly , It followeth hence , That here ▪ in this life the Saints do exercise Hope , waiting for the good which is held forth in the Promise , which their Faith believeth they shall have . Whereas in Heaven , Hope is turned into fruition and enjoyment . For Hope ( that is , the thing hoped for ) that is seen , is not Hope : for what a man seeth , why doth he yet hope for ? There is no hope in Heaven ( the Fathers to the Children cannot hope for thy Truth , as Hezekiah here saith ) except it be of the Resurrection , whereof the Saints have a most joyful expectation . They are glad , and rejoice , in that their flesh doth rest in hope . Not that their flesh doth hope , but that rests , and their Souls hope for its rising again . 

Accordingly it followeth , That here in this life the Saints do exercise their patience , which ceaseth in Heaven , because our hope ceaseth there . For patience is the servant of Hope , ( 1 These . 1. 3.  ) called there the patience of hope ; For if , we hope for that which we see not , then do we with patience wait for it . There is nothing in Heaven to put our patience to it . 

It is true indeed what the Apostle saith , 1 Cor. 13. last . Now abideth Faith , Hope , and Charity , these three ; but the greatest of these is Charity . Because Charity ( i e. Love ) never faileth ; ( ver . 8. ) that is Heaven's grace in a Spiritual manner . But yet , notwithstanding , even Love itself hath a larger Object here in this world , than in Heaven . For there is a Love here , which cannot be exercised there . And that is , 

To love our enemies , which is the Command of the Gospel , and a great Duty , and was one of the last Acts of Christ upon the Cross , Luke 23. 34.  And the very last Act of Stephen the Protomartyr , who was never like to act it more , Act. 7. last .. Lord , saith he , lay not this sin to their charge . 

Here in this life you may love all Unregenerate men , and show it in your desires and endeavours for their conversion . 

Here also you may exercise a Love of sympathy with all , both good and bad , in their sufferings . But in Heaven there is no room for this Love.  

And as these gifts of Grace forementioned do greatly glorify God , but cease in Heaven ; so do Parts and common-gifts also cease there . For whether there be Prophecies , they shall fail ; or , whether there be Tongues , they shall cease ; or whether there be knowledge ( that is imperfect , mediate , and the communication of it to others ) it shall vanish away . And yet Prophesying is much to God's glory . For , He that Prophesieth , speaketh unto men to Edification , Exhortation , Consolation . And Tongues do also edify . So likewise for knowledge . 

So that put all this together , and there is much to be done here , whereby God may be glorified , and men edified and benefited , which cannot be done in heaven . 

And thus you see the Point made good in several Instances , That there are opportunities of service to be performed to the Lord in this life , which are not to be enjoyed after death . 

Quest . 

But if it be thus ; why have some of the Saints mentioned in Scripture desired to die ? 

Answer . 

Some of the Saints have done ill in so doing , but others upon good ground . 

First , Some of them have not done well in desiring death , for they have passionately desired it , and to their own loss , if God should have answered their desires herein . For instance . 1.  Moses , he was the meekest Man upon the Earth , yet he seems to be in a passion , when he said , If thou deal thus with me , kill me , I pray thee , out of hand . Why ? was there no remedy , but God must kill him , and presently too , if the burden of the people lay a little longer upon him ? This was a passionate expression and desire of death . And had he died there presently , he had incurred a double loss ( to say no more in it ) 1.  He had been cut short of the opportunity of doing that eminent service in conducting the people through the Wilderness . For he lived 38 years longer , and did much for God and his people during that time . 2.  If he had died then out of hand , he had not died , and been buried so honourably , as he was afterwards upon Mount Nebo , even by God's hand . 

2.  And though Job was a patient Man , yet he passionately desired death . Oh! saith he , that I might have my request , and that God would grant me the thing that I long for : Even that it would please God to destroy me , that he would let loose his hand , and cut me off . Whereas God meant Job better than so , ( viz. ) to turn his Captivity , and to give him twice as much as he had lost , and the full number of his former Children , and so , to double their number also ; showing him , that his first number was not last . Moreover , he shall yet live 140 years longer to serve and honour God in this world . Again , 

3.  Elijah was a Man subject to like passions as we are , and being persecuted by Jezebel , he requested for himself that he might die , and he said , It is enough now , OH Lord , take away my life , for I am not better than my Fathers . Whereas God intended better for him , ( viz. ) that he should live yet longer , and finish his Testimony against Ahab , Jezebel , and Ahaziah , and then be carried triumphantly to Heaven in a fiery Chariot . So 

4.  Jonah would needs die in a fret , O Lord , saith he , Take I beseech thee , my life from me , for it is better for me to die , than to live . no , Jonah was not in case to die at present , God would not take him at his word , but he must live yet longer and repent . 

Secondly , As for some others of the Saints , death hath been desired by them , and not impatiently , nor any way sinfully , but very well , and upon good ground . You know 

1.  Just and devout Simeon , when he had taken up Christ in his arms , he blessed God , and said , Lord now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace ; and the ground of this request lies in the words following — according to thy Word . His Prayer , it seems , was grounded upon a word from God. For as God had told him , that he should not see death , before he had seen the Lord's Christ ; so he had promised him , that then he should die , and so his Prayer was grounded upon a Promise . 

2.  And as for Paul , He desired to depart , and to be with Christ , which ( saith he ) is far better , i e. for me . Nevertheless , to abide in the flesh is more needful for you . And having this confidence , I know that I shall abide and continue with you all , for your furtherance and joy of Faith. So that 1.  When he desired to die , he looked upon the benefit thereof abstractedly , and absolutely , but not comparatively . 2.  When he looked upon it on comparison with the benefits of life , he was not so positive in the desire of death , but having done great service , and , that too , a long time for Jesus Christ ( for then he was Paul the aged , Philem. ver . 9 ) and being then in prison at Rome , he hung for a time in Aequilibrio , midway between two , till at last the Scale turns to a desire to live , further to serve Jesus Christ , and his Church and people . For though Paul was then in prison , yet he did very much good there , which had been lost , had he then gone to Heaven . For his bonds furthered the Gospel . And they strengthened the brethren , and wrought upon several in Caesar's Palace . And there be converted Onesimus ; and there he wrote his Epistles to the Galatians , Ephesians , Philippians , Colossians , and the second Epistle to Timothy and that to Philemon . In all which are many excellent Points of diverse kinds , which greatly conduce to the Church's edification : And better a thousand times that Paul had been kept 20 years out of Heaven , than that the Church should have wanted these Epistles . 

But is it not lawful then in any case , to desire to die ? 

Yes ; with subjection to God's will , in case especially there are appearances that a Man's work is at an end . For a Child of God may live so long , that his faculties may be impaired , his strength decayed , his spirits spent , and he may be full of pain too , and so shut up , that he can do little good . And as Job saith , A servant that hath wrought hard all the day , and is weary , earnestly desireth the shadow . And so it is with a Child of God in this case . The weary body naturally desireth the bed . And sometimes God makes a clear discovery to some of his servants , that their work is at an end . Thus it was with Paul , I am ready to be offered up , and the time of my departure is at hand ; I have fought a good fight , I have finished my course , I have kept the Faith. And it is with gracious Souls ; as with the Fruit of the Tree , which when it is ripe , drops naturally from it . There is a Spiritual instinct , inclining the Soul of a Believer Heaven-ward , when the Fruit is ripe : So that they come to their graves , as a ripe Shock of Corn cometh in its season . And a desire to die in such a case is still the better , when it proceedeth from a longing to be freed from sin , and a desire to be with Christ , Phil. 1. 23.  

Application . 

If there are opportunities of service to be performed to God in this life , which are not to be enjoyed after death ; and , that the Saints may do that for God in the world , which they cannot do in Heaven ; we are then 1.  Informed , 

That Heaven is the place of the Saints reward , and not of their work . When they die , they cease from their labours , and their works do follow them . They do not follow the Saints , as if the Saints were there to follow their work , but they follow them to be rewarded and crowned . For their course is now finished , their race is run , and henceforth is laid up for them a Crown of Righteousness . Heaven therefore is not their working-place , but their restingplace ; they rest from their labours ; there is much to be received there , but nothing to be done there , but to live in the high praises of God and the Lamb to Eternity . 

If our opportunities die together with us , than we are further informed , That ( as there is no working in Heaven , so ) there is no returning after death to work again in this world . If a Man die , shall he live again ? no , saith Hezekiah ( ver . 11. ) I said in the cutting off of my days , I shall go to the Gates of the Grave ; I shall nor see the Lord , even the Lord in the Land of the living , I shall behold Man no more with the inhabitants of the world . That is , I shall no more appear before the Lord in his Sanctuary , to perform any more service there to him . 

As if he should say , I shall see the Lord in Heaven , but I shall see him & serve no more in the Land of the living , which I desire to do . For when Isaiah brought him the welcome tidings of his recovery , one of first things that he saith to him is , what is the sign that I shall go up to the House of the Lord ? For a King to go to the House of the Lord , and to lead the way to the Worship of God , was a very glorious service . He looked upon it as a very great mercy , to see and serve the Lord in the Land of the living ; but he thought he should see him so no more , nor behold Man any more with the inhabitants of the world ; and therefore he should return no more . 

Men have but one Soul , and but one opportunity to act for the eternal salvation of it ; when they are dead , the Eye that hath seen them , shall see them no more , and he that goeth down to the Grave , shall come up no more . 

And therefore it was not Samuel risen from the dead , but the Devil that appeared and spoke to Saul in the house of the Witch at Endor . For the appearance ascended out of the Earth in the house of the Woman , which was in the Tribe of Issachar , whereas Samuel was buried at his house at Ramah , which was in the Tribe of Benjamin . Besides , he was buried in his Graveclothes , whereas he is described rising in his Mantle . And he was ( as all the Saints are after death ) at rest ; where●s he that is there called Samuel saith to Saul , wherefore hast thou disquieted me to bring me up ? And it is not in the power of all the Devils in Hell to disquiet the Saints after death . Other Reasons I might urge , but these may suffice . 

The dead return not again ; as David said of his Child , when dead , I shall go to him , but he shall not return to me . Opportunity is a part of time , and hath nothing to do in Eternity . Neither is there any regress or returning , but by miracle from the Land of forgetfulness . 

2.  Instructed in matter of Reproof , 

To such as live long , and do but little ; whereas we may reckon our lives by the good that we do in this world . For as for lost time , it cannot come into the account of our lives ; and it is a pitiful thing to be old only in time : And all the good of many stricken in years will lie within a very little compass ; and to be an ancient Man or Woman of two or three years old , sounds like a Contradiction . 

So teach us ( saith Moses ) to number our days , that we may apply our hearts to wisdom . And surely this is one special way of numbering our days ; to know how long we have lived in serving our Generation , and what time we have spent that way : and he never applied his Heart to Wisdom , who hath not learned so to number his days . 

There are but two lives , that can be lived in this world , viz. a Natural , and a Spiritual ; and all live the first , but few the second : whereas it is our wisdom to live spiritually ; and so to live , is to live , First , for the Generations that succeed us , so as Hezekiah here desired to live . Secondly , To live for Eternity . To live only a natural life ; is for Brutes , and not for Men.  

And therefore you that are entered into years , and have done but little , are justly reprehended , as having lived more like Fools than wise Men.  

Secondly , What shall we say to such as have lived to no purpose at all ? All that they have done , hath been to eat and drink , and make a number . And there are multitudes of these , who have profaned their lives , in not answering the end of them . They are mere Earth-cumberers , and such who have lived only to themselves . 

Thirdly , But ( which is worse ) some have lived to wicked purposes , having spent their days in sin , and been offensive both to God and Men , who as last will come to die like Jehoram , without being desired . And such another was Hezekiah's Father , even that King Ahaz , who when he died , was buried like Jehoram , and not brought into the Sepulchers of the Kings of Israel . And such another was that persecutor Jehoiakim , for whom they lamented not , saying , Ah Lord , or ah his glory . Oh! these are to be exploded out of the Land of the living ; For Men shall clap their hands at them , and hiss them out of the world ; he never did good work while , he lived , and he shall have never a good word when he dieth . So much for Reprehension . 

This Point instructs us in matter of Humiliation . What hath been said , should humble even the very best of God's people , in that they have done no more service for Jesus Christ in their Generation . You have ( possibly ) done something for him , but you might have done more : You might have praised him more , declared the Truth more to your Children ; you might have projected and designed more for the glory of God , and the good of Posterity ; you might have devised liberal things , & lived more exemplarily , been more zealous of good works , more edifying in your conversation ; you might have adventured more for Christ ; and whereas you have gained two Talents for him , you might have gained five . Truly ( for my part ) I might have done more , and it humbleth me that I have done so little . I remember it is said of Doctor Usher in the Narrative of his Life and Death , that when he was a dying , he was humbled for his omissions . And indeed they are great sins , and the judgement of Christ , at his appearing , will pass much upon good works on the one side , and omissions of them on the other . And therefore we had need to sit in judgement upon ourselves for our omissions before we die . For it is not enough to do good sometimes , but we should be rich in good works , and prepared unto every good work , always abounding in the work of the Lord , giving a portion to seven , and also to eight , going about as Christ did , doing good . And he that is thus exercised , is fit to live , and fit to die . 

But let us be humbled this day for our neglects . For have not our hearts sometimes checked us , upon reviews of the loss of our opportunities to do such or such a good work ? saith a gracious and tender heart , when he is come from such a person , or such a place , or such a company , or occasion ; Alas ! what have I omitted ? I might have put in such a word for Jesus Christ , I might have reproved such a sin , or given such or such counsel , or stopped such a vain discourse , or given such an example , or moved for such a good work , etc.  



Alas ! who knows the errors of his life this way ? and therefore this consideration calls for deep Humiliation , and self-judging at this time . 

3.  Exhorted . 

We are here Exhorted , and the Point affords Exhortation several ways . 

To do all the good you are able , during your abode here below , seeing death will put an end to all your opportunities . If God enable you to speak a good word to his honour , and to the edification of others , when you lie a dying , you are never like to do so much good again to Eternity . When you take your leave of the world , you take your leave of doing good . And therefore you had need bestir yourselves , while your Bodies and Souls abide here together . 

Whatsoever therefore thy hand findeth to do , do it with thy might ; for there is no work , nor device , nor knowledge , nor wisdom in the Grave whither thou goest . 

And suppose you have done well hitherto , like a good and faithful servant , be not yet weary of well doing , but up and be doing still , and in due time you shall reap , if you faint not . What a deal of good had Hezekiah done , before he fell into this sickness ? He destroyed the Monuments of Idolatry , set up a notable Reformation , brought back the Tribes of Israel to the Lord God of their Fathers . And yet you see here , he is willing to live longer to do more . So Peter had done much good in his time ; you know he converted about three thousand Souls at the beginning of his Ministry , he had a most happy handsel , Acts 2d . And yet he takes another opportunity , and sped well . And after this , he passeth through all quarters , and came at last to Lydda , & Saron , and Joppa , & you know what good he did in the house of Cornelius , etc.  At length he becomes old , & then he writes to the Saints ; For , saith he , I think it meet , as long as I am in this Tabernacle , to stir you up , by putting you in remembrance , knowing that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle , even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath showed me . Moreover , I will endeavour that you may be able after my decease , to have these things always in remembrance . 

First , saith he , I am aware of death approaching . 

Secondly , I will therefore do all the good I am able , both with my Tongue and Pen.  

Thirdly , I will endeavour that the good I do may live when I am dead ; that you may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance . 

Even thus we should endeavour to live in this world after our departure . Survive your Funerals , and outlive your deaths . For it is not enough that we shall then live in Heaven , but we should endeavour to be doing of that good while we live , that may make us live on Earth ; even when we are dead . And in this way the memory of the Just shall be blessed , and the Righteous had in everlasting remembrance . It is the Saints happiness to have Glory , and Honour , and Immortality in Heaven ; but it is much to the glory and honour of God for the Saints to be immortalised on Earth , and to live in their good Examples , good Counsels , good Names , and good Works , when their Souls are shining in Heaven . Particularly , 

1.  Dilate and diffuse the praises of God , and make his Name glorious to the utmost of your power . And let this be often sounding in your ears . The living , the living he shall praise thee . Speak much , and live much to his praise . Let the high praises of God be in your mouths . Ainsworth , and the Dutch Interpreters tender it , Let the exaltations of God be in your throat , and it suits with the Original , as also with the Translation of the 70.  

The Exaltations , i e. the lifting up of God in his Name , Attributes , Precept , Promises , threatenings , Providences , etc. let them be in your throats , i e. exalt your voices in exalting these praises , cry with the throat , and lift up your voices like Trumpets . And this argues , that God's praises comes from your hearts , when they are thus sounded , as it were from your throats . And this work exalteth you , and that as high as the Heavens , for it is the very service of Heaven , only it is a greater service , seeing the Proclamation of God's praises upon Earth , tends to the propagation of them , so as it is not in Heaven . 

And truly , he that is good at this , is good indeed . He is no Hypocritie ; for he is a selfdenying man , and one that love's God far above himself , one that life's in God , and delights in him , and gives him the highest place in his heart . Do what you can therefore this way , and it will redound to a singular evidence of your sincerity . 

2.  Endeavour also the Propagation of Christ's Kingdom ; pray for it , and according to your capacity promove it . 

You may remember what is written , Psal . 72. 15. where it is said of Solomon in the Type , and of Christ in the Truth , He shall live , and to him shall be given of the Gold of Sheba , Prayer also shall be made for him , and daily shall he be praised . Why ? must we pray for Jesus Christ ? yes , by all means . Of all that we pray for , we must be sure to pray for Jesus Christ , but not considered personally , but Mystically . You know how the people , and the children prayed for Christ , when they cried , saying , Hosanná to the Son of David ; Blessed is he that cometh in the Name of the Lord ; Hosanna in the highest . The words are taken out of the 11th Psal . ver . 25 , 26.  They cried , saying , Hosanna , that is , Save , I beseech thee . It is as much as , God save the King , send now prosperity . It is meant especially of Christ as King , Christ and his Kingdom . And we never say , Thy Kingdom come , but thus we pray for Christ , who prayeth for us every day , or else we should be in a very sad case . 

And truly , if the Kingdom of Christ be within us , we shall be very solicitous and active for the Kingdom of Christ without us , which Kingdom of his this day is in a very low condition , as to the professed power and purity of the Gospel . And yet if we can do little or nothing else , yet we may pray for the Kingdom of Christ . Let us therefore lay the state thereof to heart this day . How often do the Saints under the Old Testament , pray for the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus under the New ? say they , God be merciful to us , and bless us , and cause his face to shine upon us ; That thy way may be known upon Earth , thy saving health among all Nations , etc.  

Mark ye , That singular blessing , which God commanded Aaron and his Sons to pronounce upon the people of Israel , The Lord bless thee , and keep thee ; The Lord make his face to shine upon thee , and be gracious unto thee . The godly in David's time turned it into prayer for the enlarging of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus under the Gospel , accounting it a great blessing to themselves , to have it enlarged by the accession of the Gentiles ; though ( yet ) it was to be accomplished in the rejection of the Jews ; but it is ( as if we should say ) Let God do what he pleaseth with a Nation , so that his Gospel may be propagated , and his Kingdom enlarged in the World. If God's way may be known upon Earth , and his saving health among all other Nations , We should accounted that the Lord is merciful to us , and blesseth us , and causeth his face to shine upon us ; We should love the Kingdom of Christ above all the Kingdoms in the World , and That it shall come to pass in the last days , that the Mountain of the Lords house shall be established upon the top of the Mountains , and exalted above the Hills , and that all Nations shall flow unto it . You know what great heaviness and continual sorrow of heart Paul had for his brethren the Jews , and kinsmen according to the flesh ; and yet he magnified his Office , in that he was the Apostle of the Gentiles . That is , he accounted it to be a glorious Office to be a Preacher to the Gentiles . So that , Le● the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus come , whatsoever become of any Kingdom , or of all the Kingdoms under Heaven . 

Thirdly , Live exemplarily , that your patterns may survive you , and live when you are dead . Thus Paul lived , brethren , saith he , be followers together of me , and mark them which walk so , as ye have us for an ensample . And he denied himself , to make himself an example to others . You know , saith he , how ye ought to follow us ( viz. in orderly walking in your particular Callings ) for we behaved not ourselves disorderly among you , neither did we eat any man's bread for naught ; but wrought with labour and travel night and day , that we might not be chargeable to any of you . Not because we have not power ( that is , night to be maintained at your charge ) but to make ourselves an ensample unto you , to follow us . And thus also he did unto the Corinthians . For thus did Christ deny himself to give us an example , Joh. 13. 14 , 15.  If I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet , ye ought also to wash one another's feet . For I have given you an example , that ye should do as I have done to you . Consider also , 2 Cor. 8. 9  For ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ , that though he was rich , yet for your sakes he became poor , that ye through his poverty might be rich . And when Paul took his leave of the Elders of Ephesus , who were never like to see his face more , he leaves his example with them ; I have , ( saith he ) coveted no man's Silver , or Gold , or Apparel ; Yea , you yourselves know , that these hands have ministered unto my necessities , and to them that were with me ; I have showed you all things , how that so labouring , ye ought to support the weak . — The like did Samuel . Thus also David left his example behind him , for God set him up for a pattern to all succeeding Kings in Israel , whose Life and Reign God therefore measureth by their care to follow him , as you may read frequently in the Books of the Kings and Chronicles . For of such & such Kings it is said , They walked in the ways of David ; and of others , that they did not so walk . Examples are very prevalent in utramque partem , either one way or tother , either for good or evil . 

And therefore so walk according to God , that others may follow you , seeing your example will live whilst you live , yea , and when you are dead too . For it will be said , such a one lived thus , and walked thus , and thus he behaved himself in his family , and thus in his fellowship with the Saints , and thus in his dealings with his neighbours , and with all men ; and thus he carried it under his trials and oppositions in an evil day , and this and that was the Rule he walked by . For he was a wise Man , or she was a wise Woman , and very conscientious , and tenderhearted , and sincere , and active , and stirring , and zealous for Jesus Christ , and fearful to give the least offence , and ready to every good work , and pitiful to the poor Saints , his Heart , and Purse , and House were open for Jesus Christ . And he was a just and peaceable Man , and one that could govern his Spirit , and Tongue , and that could keep down his passions , and one that was a mortified person , dead to the world , and the things thereof , etc.  Now , what a blessed example is this ? and what a glorious report ? what an edifying pattern , and for the glory of God , and our Lord Jesus Christ ? Yea , this example will preach your funeral Sermon , ( you need no other to do it ) and it will keep you alive when you are dead , and immortalize you upon Earth , make you of blessed memory indeed , and to be had with the righteous in everlasting remembrance ; when the names of others shall be written in the Earth , which will soon be obliterated , and quite blotted out ; and when it shall be said of them as of Hezekiah's Father , by way of reproach , This is that King Ahaz . And such a good example many have left behind them , and we are ever and anon speaking of such as these are , whose names are as a precious Ointment , and which were embalmed when they died , with the Graces , Virtues , and good Works of their Lives , that still they send forth a sweet savour to surviving posterity . And thus was that good Woman's name embalmed , who poured out a very precious Ointment on the Head of Christ against his burial . Verily , saith Christ , wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole world , there shall also this , that this Woman hath done , be told for a memorial of her . So that this good Woman is still alive in her memory , and she 〈◊〉 thus lived these 1600 years and more , and shall never die so long as the world standeth . And such another was Tabytha . And the like I may say of many more , whose names are recorded in holy Writ , who obtained a good report , and though they are now dead , yet still they both speak , and are spoken of . 

brethren , will ye think upon these things ; And will ye now study & endeavour to live exemplarily , and to live lives for posterity , and so to live converting lives , and convincing , and edifying lives ; yea , and to live the lives of such , as must be the world's Judges ? And will it not be greatly to the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ , and to your Eternal Consolation , to hear of your lives and examples in that great day of Christ's appearance , when your examples shall have their resurrection as well as your bodies , when Christ shall produce your patterns before all the world , and convince and judge the ungodly world by them ? As if he should say to those on his left hand , who lived in your days , and saw your examples ; Lo , do you see these Men and Women on my right hand , who lived thus and thus in your sight , and gave you a blesse● example , which either you censured , or were unwilling to follow ; they lived and conversed in direct opposition to you ; they lived so and so , when you did thus and thus : Therefore they shall be your Judges . 



Methinks I cannot speak enough of this Subject , which is of very great moment , viz. the transmission and recommendation of patterns to posterity , as one grieved , that I can see no more of it , but rather such a common and ordinary kind of walking , as hath little or nothing of singularity in it . 

Alas ! How few , that profess the fear of God this day , are writing of Copies for posterity to walk by ? And where is singularity of life to be seen ? Yea , how many are there among the Professors of the Gospel , by whose failing we may learn more than by their Virtues ? and this I speak to my grief ; O , let your light so shine before Men , that they may see your good works , and glorify your Father which is in Heaven . Jesus Christ there speaks of the light of good works and good examples , which are visible to standers-by , and such as do occasion them to glorify our Heavenly Father . 

And know thus much also , That Men live much by example , either on the one side or other . And where good examples are given , God expecteth that others should follow them , and that not only the examples of the living , but of the dead also , For what saith the Apostle ? Remember them which have the rule over you , who have spoken unto you the Word of God , whose Faith follow , considering the end of their conversation . The Apostle there speaketh of such as had been their Guides , but were now dead ; for the words in the Original are not , remember them : that have the rule over you , but , remember your Rulers , i e. Ministers of the Gospel , who are now with the Lord And he exhorts the Hebrews not to forget their Faith , and holy lives , who had no other end in their conversations and good examples , but God's Glory , and the Salvation of them that beheld them . 

But I must pass from this Particular , though somewhat loath to leave it , and should much rejoice , if what I have said of it , may take place in all your hearts and lives . 

Live exemplarily , that your patterns may outlive you , and edify others when you are dead . And this is a work which cannot be done in Heaven . And take heed of scandals and visible infirmities , which edify beholders to ruin . For there is a sinful mischievous edification , of which the Apostle speaketh , 1 Cor. 8. 10.  For if any Man see thee , which hast knowledge , sit at meat in the Idols Temple : Shall not the Conscience of him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered to Idols ? The word rendered , Emboldened , is Edified in the Original . You may so live in your Examples , that you may edify and teach beholders to sin in following them , as Jeroboam the son of Nebat did , who made Israel to sin . And many that profess to the Gospel , do so live and walk , the Consideration whereof is very sad and miserable . OH beware of giving such examples , for they will diminish your glory in Heaven , if you shall be so happy , at least , as to arrive there . But so much for this 3d Particular . 

Embrace and improve all opportunities of appearing and speaking for Christ ( another service peculiar to the Saints on Earth , who cannot speak a word for Christ in Heaven . ) And many such seasons are providentially administered to us , viz. sometimes of reproving sin , both in such as fear God , and such as fear him not . In the Scriptures you find the Saints reproving one another ; Moses reproveth Aaron , and Nathan David , and Hanani Asa , & his son Jehu Jehoshaphat , and Paul Peter , and one private Brother another . And how often also do the Saints in Scripture reprove the wicked and ungodly ? I need not give you Instances for that . It is not enough that we have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness , but we must also reprove them . We must appear for Christ , his Truth , his Rules , and Glory ; or where is our love to him ? Sometimes you shall hear cursing , and swearing in your presence , sometimes reproaching , slandering , flithiness , foolish talking , and sinful jesting ; sometimes you shall see Covetousness , Pride , Passion , Anger , and uncomely Language , and sometimes inordinate affections , and sometimes gross omissions of duty either to God or Man Here now are opportunities of doing a service for Christ , and of appearing and witnessing for him , so as you cannot do hereafter in glory . In such cases therefore consider your duty , and what the Lord requireth of you , who will take it very ill , if you have never a Tongue for him . And do not say , I am loath , or I am afraid to speak , and it will be ill taken , or I shall do no good by testifying , or I shall be accounted a busybody ; but attend your duty , and leave the event to God ; only beg Wisdom , which is profitable to direct : And however a Reproof take , or speed , yet you have done a better service for Christ , than any Saint in Heaven can do . I know , indeed , that such testimonies for Christ are soldom well taken , but that ariseth from the pride of Man , and however , that must not hinder your duty , for I am sure , that the withholding such testimonies , when you are called to give them , is very ill taken by Christ ; and if he take them well , let proud spirits take them as ill as they please . 

The like I may say as to the opposing of Error and Heresies , according to your capacities , and of informing and instructing the ignorant , when a season is offered , and of warning the unruly , etc.  And you know not , but you may do much good in such cases , and your work may live when you are dead ; however your reward is with the Lord , for whom you have performed this service . 

There are other good and gracious Offices to be discharged , which cease when you are dead . I did briefly mention some of them in the Doctrinal part . Let me now exhort you to attend them also ; As to pray one for another , which Duty ends with our Lives . For ( as I have said ) God will have but one Intertercessor in Heaven , but here he requireth many . Here we may , yea must be trading one with another , viz. Prayers for Prayers , Ministers with people , and people with their Ministers , and one Saint with another : Not but that we must pray for others also . 

Oh! what a trade did Paul drive this way ? I have sometimes thought , what a Catalogue of Churches and Saints he had to commend to God in his daily prayers . How many Churches did he usually pray for ? saith he to the Church at Rome , God is my witness , that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers . The like for the Church at Ephesus , saith he , I cease not to give give thanks for you , making mention of you in my prayers . So for the Church at Philippi , saith he , I remember you always in every prayer of mine for you all , making request with joy . And thus too , he saith , he prayed for the Church at Colossus . The very same for the Church at Thessalonica , We give thanks to God always for you all , making mention of you in our prayers , remembering without ceasing , your work of Faith , labour of Love , and patience of Hope in our Lord Jesus Christ — And doubtless , had he written Epistles to all other Churches , we should have heard of his prayers for them . Neither did he pray only for Churches , but also for several Saints in particular ; For he saith , that he prayed for Timothy night and day ; that is , Morning and Evening , the whole put for the part . And as for Philemon , he saith , That he made mention of him always in his prayers . What a Catalogue than had Paul of Churches and Saints to recommend to God in his daily prayers ? For it is very likely , that he prayed for many more , than we find in his Epistles . 

And as he prayed for the Churches , so he desireth to be remembered in their prayers . For , as I said , he driven a holy trade this way . He begs the prayers of the Church at Rome , in the very Language of a Beggar for an Alms. Now I beseech you , brethren , for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake , and for the love of the Spirit , that ye strive together with me , in your prayers to God for me , that I may be delivered . — So of the Church at Ephesus and of the Philippians , and of the Colossians , and of the Thessalonians , and of the Hebrews ; ( for the greatest Apostle had need of the prayers of the meanest Christian ) only he begs no prayers of the Church at Corinth , in his first Epistle to them , as looking upon them under many and great offences , for which he there reproves them : Nor of the Churches of Galatia , whom he looked upon as greatly backsliden from the Faith : And he would not trade with broken men . But here you see , I have given you a notable example for your imitation in this Point . Pray therefore for one another , and trade together as you shall see occasion . Yea , you must pray sometimes for such as never desired it . So likewise , if you do hear of the afflicted condition of such and such of the Saints , suppose in great poverty , or in prison upon the account of Christ , and a good Conscience , or in some great distress otherwise , or under sickness , and in danger of death , look upon yourselves as obliged to put up one Prayer for them . You know what the Apostle saith , Remember them that are in bonds , as bound with them , and them which suffer adversity , as being yourselves also in the body . Remember them ; How ? To sympathise with them , to pray for them , and ( to your power ) to help and relieve them . 

And think it not enough , that you pray for Saints , but perform the like service for sinners also ; for your prayers may contribute much to their conversion , as Christ's prayer , Luke 23. 34. did to the conversion of many that were his enemies , Acts 2. and Stephen's prayer ( probably ) was heard in the conversion of Paul  

And be sure to pray for Children , and children's Children , that they may live in the sight of God , and bear up his Name in their generations . 

Neither rest in particular persons , but pray also for the Churches of Christ this day , in whom he is so much concerned , as exercising his special Government in and over them . Pray therefore for their peace and purity , and progress in holiness , and that they may be edified , and walking in the fear of the Lord , and comfort of the Holy Ghost , be multiplied . And this is to pray for the peace of Jerusalem . And when you hear of a Church bereft of its Pastor , pray to the chief Shepherd , to supply the empty room with a meet successor : As Moses said in another case , Let the Lord , the God of the Spirits of all flesh , set a man over the Congregation , which may go out before them , and which may go in before them , and which may lead them out , and which may bring them in , that the Congregation of the Lord be not as sheep which have no Shepherd . 

O sirs ! There is a great service to be done for Christ by prayers , during the opportunity of our intercession , which dieth together with us . What great things have been , and still are done by prayers ? By these was the Church delivered out of Babylon , and Peter out of Prison . By these was Zion built . By these is the Gospel upheld , the enemies thereof brilded , and liberty obtained , etc.  And when God will do great and wonderful things , he will gather his praying Saints together , and pour out a mighty Spirit of prayer upon them . 

Sixthly , Comfort the feeble minded , and support the weak . Speak a word in due season to the weary . For sometimes you shall meet with such as want it , and who walk in darkness and see no light , and are ready to complain like Heman , Psal . 88 at large . In such cases , Strengthen the weak hands , and confirm the feeble knees , and say to them that are of a fearful heart , be strong , fear not . And this ( it seems ) was Jobs practice . He strengthened the weak , and his words upheld him that was falling . And if they were in affliction , the moving of his lips assuaged their grief . For , heaviness in the heart of man maketh it stoop , but a good word maketh it glad . And this savoureth sweetly of the Spirit of Christ , who would not break the bruised Reed , nor quench the smoking Flax. The words are diminutive , for the meaning is , he would strengthen the bruised Reed , and blow up the smoking Flax. For he carries his Lambs in his bosom , that is , he tenders them , and lays them near his heart . 

As when the Church was in affliction , and sick of love , he stays her with flagons and comforts her with Apples ; his left hand is under her head , and his right hand embraceth her . Not his right hand under her head , and his left hand embraceth her ; for that is not next the heart of Christ . He is our High Priest , who is touched with the feeling of our infirmities , & hath compassion on us in just proportion . He speaks to the heart of the trembling Haemorrhoiss , when she fell down at his feet , and saith unto her , Daughter be of good comfort , thy Faith hath made thee whole , go in peace . And he takes part with that brokenhearted sinner that sat behind him at his feet , weeping , and washing , and wiping , and kissing them , and rebukes censorious Simon ; and saith to her , Thy sins are forgiven , thy Faith hath saved thee , go in peace . O the sweet Spirit of Christ ! Let the same mind then be in you which was in him . And comfort them that are in trouble , with the comforts wherewith you yourselves have been comforted of God ; And be kindly affectioned one toward another in brotherly love . And when the case requires it , show yourself a son of Consolation . 

Seven , In Heaven ( you know ) are no necessities , whereas here are many , which will give occasion therefore to such service as Heaven hath no need of . For here are poor Saints , and the poor are always with us , who sometimes want Food , sometimes Clothing , sometimes Lodging , sometimes Money , etc.  You then that are able must follow Job's example ; saith he , I have not withheld the poor from their desire , nor caused the eyes of the Widow to fail , nor eaten my morsel alone , but the Fatherless hath eaten of it also . Neither have I seen any to perish for want of clothing , or any poor without covering , but his loins have blessed me , and he was warmed with the fleece of my sheep . The stranger did not lodge in the street , but I opened my door to the Traveller , etc. and the eyes of our Lord Jesus are much upon such good works as these ; for he beheld how the people cast their money into the Treasury . Heaven affordeth no such objects of your Love and Compassion . 

There are indeed many Beggars at Heavens' Gates , but never a Beggar within Heavens' doors . And there are many Widows and Fatherless Children here , but never a Widow nor Orphan there . 

brethren , Be ye then merciful , 〈◊〉 your Father in Heaven is merciful . And blessed are the merciful , for they shall obtain mercy . And it is that which will lengthen out your lives . Mercy , even to the bruit , creatures , shall prolong your days , much more than to Men , especially to the household of Faith. Lazarus shall rise , and have a new lease of his life to entertain Christ again . And so shall Tabytha to make Coats and Garments for Widows again . Life is well bestowed upon merciful ones . And life is the time of acting this Grace , for bowels are shut up in Heaven , and no pity shall be showed to the nearest perishing relations in the day of Christ . Again , Here you may entertain Jesus Christ in his Members , and Ministers . Here you may be fellow-helpers to the Truth and Gospel . And what says John of that ? We ought therefore to receive such , that we might be fellow-helpers to the Truth . 

And , saith the Apostle , Be not forgetful to entertain strangers , for thereby some have entertained Angels unawares . We cannot entertain Angels in Heaven , ( for they have their places there as well as we , and there we are rather entertained by them , Zech. 3. 7.  ) but here it hath been done , as by Abraham and Lot. And though we cannot expect to entertain them as they did , yet , ( if we could ) what is that to the entertainment of Christ himself ? And if we entertain his Members at our houses , or do any Office of Love for them , we do it unto Jesus Christ . 

Eighthly , Let us be willing also ( if need be ) to suffer for Christ , which is a service peculiar to this life . But I say , If need be , because we are not to cast ourselves upon suffering , uncalled . We must take up , but not make a Cross . But when the providence of God , and his Word calleth us to witness for Christ to the loss of aught that is nearest and dearest to us , let us remember , that this is one of the services , which termineth with our lives , and cannot be performed in glory . It hath indeed been our portion hitherto to escape those sufferings , which many of our brethren have undergone . But have we been sufferers in affection ? Have we been prepared for the Cross ? Or , have we not been among the fearful ? And have we sympathized with our brethren in their sufferings ? and have we accounted them happy that have endured , yea , and their sufferings honourable for the sake , and in the quarrel of such a Lord and Master ? Consider what I say : For it is a very honourable thing to suffer for Christ , his Gospel , and Kingdom . For the Spirit of God , and of glory rests upon all such . And what are all the sufferings of this present time , in comparison with the glory which shall be revealed in us ? But though we have escaped what others have undergone , yet we know not what may be our portion , as to suffering before we die . Perhaps there is the more behind . God hath appointed the number of them that shall suffer for Christ . And who knows what God hath appointed for him this way ? But what ever it be , Heaven will put an end to it , where are no sufferings but Crowns , even incorruptible Crowns of glory . You know what is said of them that came out of great tribulation , they were clothed with white Robes , and had palms in their hands . 

Ninthly , Exercise those fruits of the Spirit , which are proper to this life . You have heard of several , as Faith , Hope , Patience , love to Enemies , and to Men out of Christ , Sympathy , common gifts for Edification , Communication of Knowledge , which is mediate in this life . 

All these are the gifts of the Spirit on this side Heaven , in the exercise whereof God is much glorified , and others edified , which is that which should be the scope and aim of us all . 

Tenthly , and lastly , There is one thing more , which we are exhorted to do in this world , which cannot be done after death , and it is a very great service , and highly incumbent on us , and I was willing to reserve it to the last place , that it might the rather abide by us ; and 〈◊〉 this , Endeavour to transmit pure Religion and undefiled to posterity , by commending it to your Children . The Fathers to the Children shall make known thy truth . And we may run it through Fatherhood at large . But 

Let me speak of Domestical Fathers , that is , Fathers of Families . This is a great matter , and is the special work of the godly in their generations . How else shall that be made good , which is written , His Name ( that is , Christ's ) shall endure for ever , his Name shall be continued as long as the Sun. Some tender it , His Name shall be continued as a son continueth his Father's name , for the Original Jinnon , or Janin cometh of Nin , 〈◊〉 son . As if one should say , Filiabitur nomen ejus , or sobolescet nomen ejus , as Tremellius renders it ; That is , Christ shall not only himself live for ever in his person , but his Name also shall endure for ever , and be derived to his Children , who therefore shall prolong his days , ( as Children meet out their Father's mortality ) in bearing his name , being called Christians , and the sons of God , and the Children of Christ . And this shall be ( saith the Psalmist ) before the Sun , that is , as long as the Sun endureth . 

Now God will use means to bring this to pass , and what are those means ? one special one is this , The Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth . For how should the Name of Christ be childed from generation to generation , ( as some tender it ) if care be not taken by Parents to Child Christ's Name downward to their Offspring ; that his Name may be put upon their Children , by being not only Christians by Baptism , but by Regeneration . And this is one of the great works and ends of our lives ; for Hezekiah , here mentioneth , First , Praising of God , and Secondly , Making known the Truth to our Children ; which was a great Statute in Israel , and obliges us no lesle than them : saith the Psalmist , I will open my mouth in a Parable , I will utter dark sayings of old , which we have heard and known , and our Fathers have told us : We will not hide them from their Children , showing to the generations to come , the praises of the Lord , and his strength , and his wonderful works that he hath done . Here 

1.  Are such as are worthy of the name of Fathers , viz. who transmit to posterity the Truths of God contained in the Scripture , so as these here did , as appears in the sequel of the Psalm . And 

2.  Here is the only infallible sort of Tradition , viz. that which delivereth to posterity , what God first delivered to the Prophets , Apostles , and holy men of God , and is now contained in the Scriptures . 

3.  From these words we are taught , that the godly in every age ought to have the same care to transmit the Word of Truth to their posterity , as their Ancestors had to transfer it unto them ; and so to pay the debt which they owe to their godly Ancestors , unto their succeeding Children : for our Children are here called their Children , vers . 4th . And if you descended not from such Parents immediately , yet ( peradventure ) mediately you did . However , this here is your duty , out of love to God , to Truth , and your Posterity . Mark therefore what followeth in the same Psalm . For God established a Testimony in Jacob , and appointed a Law in Israel , which he commanded our Fathers , that they should make them known to their Children , that the generation to come might know them , even the Children which should be born , who should arise and declare them unto their Children . You see this transmitting of the Truth and true Religion to Posterity , is God's love and Testimony , because it testifieth and witnesseth for God , and against us , if we break it . And this Law and Testimony we have several times in Moses . So that the Law and Testimony is , to transmit the Truth to Posterity . For God did not deliver the Truth , and true Religion to a person or people for the use of themselves alone , but for the benefit of their Children also : And he never loved the Truth truly , who is careless , whether it die with himself , or outlive him . 

Let such Parents and Masters look to it , who have been negligent in instructing their Children and Families . The handing of Religion from Parents to Children , & from the Living to the next succeeding Age , is a standing part of our Generation-work . It is said of David , That after he had served his generation , he fell asleep . And truly , such as fall asleep before , go to bed before they have done their work , and that is the way to make them start , as many do , when they are newly setting themselves to sleep . 

O sirs ! care and pains for the godly being of posterity , is a great and necessary business . I many times think of the care and endeavour of the nine Tribes and half , lest their Children should lose their interest in the God of Israel . To which end they built the Altar Edelbert , as they tell the two Tribes and half in their Apology . Say they , The Lord , God of Gods , The Lord , God of Gods he knoweth , and Israel he shall know that we have not done it in rebellion , to turn from following the Lord , etc.  But we have done it rather for fear of this thing , lest in time to come your Children might speak unto our Children , saying , What have you to 〈◊〉 with the Lord God of Israel ? For the Lord hath made Jordan a border between us and you ; ye Children of Reuben , and Children of Gad , ye have not part in the Lord : So shall your Children make our Children cease from fearing the Lord : Therefore we said , Let us now prepare to build us an Altar , not for burnt-offering , nor for Sacrifice , but that it may be a witness between us and you , and our generations after us , that we might do the service of the Lord before him with our Burnt-offerings & our Sacrifices , and with our Peace-offerings , that your Children might not say to our Children in time to come , ye have no part in the Lord , etc.  Here you see the care and endeavour of the two Tribes and half for the preservation of the true Religion , and way of God's Worship among their posterity , which is the Point that I am now pressing . I beseech you lay it to heart ; for I fear that many are guilty in this matter , and that posterity is like to be little beholding to them . Admit of a few Expostulations , and consider , 

What will your Children and Servants say , when they come to succeed you , and peradventure die at last in ther●● sins ? 

Lord , our Parents and Masters did not make known the Truth to us ; they did not Catechise and Instruct us ; they did not deliver to us the form of sound words , nor any brief sum of the Articles of Faith , and true Religion ; but we lived and died in ignorance , for they had no care of our Souls ; and if others dealt thus with their Children and Servants . Religion itself might have perished , as we have done . 

Now would not this be most miserable ? And are you willing to be thus indicted by your Children and Servants in that great day . 

Doth not Hezekiah here say , The Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth ? And is it not expressed as a duty , and a great one too ? And doth not Hezekiah look upon this as one of the great works to be attended in this World , without which it is not worth while to live ? Hezekiah indeed had no son at this time , but he resolveth here , that if God shall give him one , he will make known the Truth and Faithfulness of God to him ; for he looks upon it as his duty , when he saith , The Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth . And what is the reason , that many are so ignorant this day , but because they wanted Family-instruction from Parents and Masters ? For it is not enough , that such do live under the preaching of the Gospel , if they want instruction in the Families wherein they have lived ; the want whereof makes the Ministers Blow to go so heavily . O let not the Children and Servants rise up in judgement against you , and charge their ignorance and damnation upon the neglect of your duty towards them . 

Thirdly , Consider with whom God hath betrusted the Gospel and true Religion . 

1.  He puts his Ministers in trust with it . For , saith the Apostle , We are allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel . And it is a great trust , and we must be faithful in the discharge of it ; and you must not be offended if we deal plainly with you . 

2.  He betrusteth all his people with his Gospel and pure Religion , expecting their discharge of this trust by their utmost endeavours to transmit it to posterity , as you heard but even now from that Text , Psalm 78. 3 , — 7.  For he doth not , as I said , put the trust into your hands for yourselves only , that you should make use of it during your lives , and then die , and let others that shall come after you shift for themselves ; for this were to be cruel , like the Ostriches in the Wilderness , who leave their Eggs in the Earth , and warm them in the dust , forgetting that the Foot may crush them , and the wild Beast break them ; but he expecteth and requireth your faithfulness , and utmost care and labour to recommend the same Religion to your Children and Servants that live with you . And what saith Solomon ? My Father taught me , and said thus and thus to me , prov. 4. 4.  And my Mother also taught me , and she said so and so to me , prov. 31. — But how have you taught those that are under your care ? and what have you said to them ? And where is the Altar Edelbert , that you have built for them , as a witness and memorial of the true Religion and Worship of God , which you have commended to them ? no marvel that Religion decayeth in many Families , when their Governors have wrapped up their Religion in a Napkin , and professed only for themselves , and not for them that should come after them . You that are guilty in this part , will have a sad reckoning to make , when you shall be called to give an account of your discharge of that trust , which is commended to you , and have never an Edelbert to witness your care of conveying the Truth to the generation to come . Know therefore , that it is your duty , according to this trust committed to you , to turn and wind your Religion for God's Glory & the advantage of posterity ; which , if you neglect , take beed you be not numbered among the wicked , and slothful servants , and have your portion with them . 

Consider the common care of Parents to bequeath their Houses , Lands , and Goods to such as are to succeed them . They leave their substance to their Babes , saith the Psalmist . And the inward thought is , that their houses shall continue for ever , and their dwelling places to all generations , and they call their Lands after their own names . That is , they are thoughtful for the upholding of their Families , and the continuing of their names from one generation to another . But as for the Gospel , which they profess , and the Religion which they own , they have little or no care at all . They leave their Earthly substance to their Children , but that which is the most substantial thing of all , they leave it not to them ; and they leave their names to their Children , but the Name of God and Christ they leave not , nor have they any care , that Christ's Name be named upon them , by endeavouring to make them Christians indeed , according to their duty , as the Psalmist saith , I will make thy Name to be remembered in all generations . They care not that his Name should be childed from generation to generation . Truly it were just with God , that their names should be blotted out from under Heaven , who love their own names better than Christ's . 

Consider the Covenant that pious Parents are entered into with God. For when God saith , I will be thy God , and the God of thy Seed ; He expecteth and requireth , that Parents do not only give up themselves , but their Seed also unto God. As Hannah said in her prayer , If thou wilt give unto thine Handmaid a Manchild , I will give him unto the Lord all the days of his life : She spoke indeed of more than an ordinary devoting him to the Lord , viz. in the way of Nazariteship : But yet she bound however , to have given him back to the Lord , in and by an ordinary way of dedication , common to herself with all Parents , who are bound to this duty by the Law of Nature , and by many commands in the Word of God , which I have already mentioned . Train up therefore a Child ( or Catechise him ) in the way he should go . So did David deal with Solomon , as you have heard , and so Lois with Eunice , and Eunice with Timothy , and so the godly Fathers in their generations . It was as you have heard , a Testimony and a Law in Israel . And when you brought your Children to Baptism , you did solemnly engage unto this duty . For the Covenant which gave your Children right to that Ordinance , and which sealed it to them , strongly obliged you to give them up to God in the use of all such means as he hath appointed . 

And therefore you are a Covenant-breaker in the neglect of this duty , which is the ruin both of many Children and Families , as of Elie's in particular , and yet Eli did reprove his sons , but did not do his utmost . And this is the reason why many Children of godly Parents prove lewd and vicious , and their Families at last , loose all power of godliness , if they grow not loose and profane . For it is with Children , as with the Flowers in your Gardens , which without care and culture will soon degenerate . Remember therefore your Covenant , and attend the terms thereof , which concern you in relation to your posterity . And say , I am not only naturally , but also federally bound to use all means to train up my Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord , and to serve the purpose of God as to their Eternal Salvation . 

For do you think it enough , that you breed them up to live in this world ? And is it enough that you provide Meat , and Drink , and Apparel , Portions , and Trades , and ways of livelihood for them ? Or , that you give them civil Education , and teach them how to carry themselves as men ? will you love their bodies , and neglect their souls ? Do you know the price of your own souls , and not of theirs too ? Or , are not theirs as precious as yours ? Or , is it all one to you where you spend your Eternity , and whether you go to Heaven or Hell ? In the meanwhile , where is your Religion ? where your love of God , and Godliness ? Where your Conscience as to your Covenant ? Or , what care have you , that Godliness may flourish in the next generation , who take not the course that it may thrive in your own Family ? Take heed lest you prove to be an Hypocrite at last . O , remember the care of good Manoah , when the Angel told him , he should have a son ; But , saith he , How shall we order the Child ? and what shall we do do unto him ? 

And seeing you are a Covenanter with God , and have given up your Children to him , who hath accepted of them , and sealed the Covenant to them ; you should now consider , that they are his Children , his Sons and Daughters , as well as yours , as he expressly calleth them . And he puts them out to you to Board and Breeding , and you must give an acount to him , how you have bred them up for him . 

And what ? will ye rob God of his Children , and bestow them upon the world , or sacrifice them to devoured , and cause them to pass through the fire , as God challengeth those Parents in the aforesaid place of Ezekiel . I mean to be devoured of that roaring Lion , and ( not to pass through the fire , but ) to dwell with devouring fire , and with everlasting burnings . Doth not Nature teach Men to propagate their kind ? And doth not Grace teach them to propagate the Truth , and true Religion ? without the first , Mankind would perish ; without the second , Religion would soon be extinguished : or , have you more care to uphold the World , than to propagate the Gospel of Christ's Kingdom ? if so , you are no better than a Man or Woman of this generation . 

I perceive , there are many Bills presented for prayers in behalf of ungodly Children . It is well , if their Parents have not been wanting in their duty towards them . If they have not , let them not despond as to the success of their endeavours . I have lived to see the blessed fruits of pious Education , and that though Children so Educated have gone astray for a while , yet they have been graciously reduced at the last , & made their Parents joyful . And I think , it is not usual , that a Father should be a true fearer of the Lord , and one that conscionably dischargeth his duty towards his Children , and yet all of them should prove ungodly , and none of them be converted sooner or later , but perish in the uncircumcision of their hearts . Perhaps Parents may not always live to see it , but it is well enough if their Children come to Heaven after them . 

I have insisted the more upon this Point , it being the great duty of my Text , and of such concernment as to generation-service . 

The Exhortation reaches Ecclesiastic Fathers , such as are the Ministers of the Gospel . For such Fathers also to their Children shall make known the Truth . And that is the reason why we make known those Truths to you , viz. that we may discharge our duties to our Children , that you may discharge the like to yours . And every week , and every Sabbath , and every Sermon we preach can testify , that we are careful to make known the Truth unto you . For we have kept back nothing that was profitable for you , nor have shunned to declare unto you all the Counsel of God. For as John saith to Gaius , We have no greater joy , than to hear that our Children walk in truth , even in the Truth that we make known unto them . And let all that fear the Lord , bless his Name , that in such a day as this is , there are yet such Spiritual Fathers , who know the Truth , and labour to make it known to their Spiritual Children . For the time may come , that you may want them , when the Truth which is now made known to you by us , may be impugned by them that shall come after us . 

There are also Scholastic Fathers , who have the care of training up Children in Learning , and these have their place as well as the former in the fifth Commandment . And a great advantage is put into their hands to make known the Truth unto their Children , as well as to inform their understandings in a way of Human Learning . And I know no Calling , nor Relation , excepting that of the Ministry , that hath the like opportunity of making known the Truth unto posterity . 

There are likewise Fathers Political . For there is the Father in the Family , the Father in the Church , the Father in the School , and the Father in the Commonwealth , or Country . And some think , that Naaman's servants called him Father , because he was a great Commander and Prince in his Country , to which also he had been a Father , having wrought great deliverances for the same . However , such a Father was the good King in my Text , and he owns himself as such an one in the very entrance of his Reign , when he was but 25 years old : For saith he to the Priests and Levites ( exhorting them to their duty ) My sons , be not now negligent , for the Lord hath chosen you to stand before him , to serve him , and that you should minister unto him , and burn Incense . They were ( themselves ) Fathers , for Hezekiah calls them God's Ministers , and so they were Fathers to Hezekiah ; but as he was their King , he was their Father , and they his sons . They his Spiritual Fathers , he their Political , and so , he was not only Pater patriae , but also Pater patrum , not only the Father of his Country , but the Father of his Fathers , i e. the Political Father of those who were his Fathers Ecclesiastically . But here is no opportunity of speaking to such Fathers as these , whose duty it is also to make known the Truth unto their Children , as Hezekiah did , as appears at large in his Reformation , 2 Chron. 29th , 30th , and 31th Chapters . 

There are Fathers in age , gravity , & seniority , viz. such as are well stricken in years . Such are they , 1 Tim. 5. 1.  Rebuke not an Elder , but entreat him as a Father , the younger Men as brethren , the elder Women as Mothers , the younger as sisters . The Elder here is not a Church-officer , as some ( perhaps ) may think . For though it is Presbyteros in the Original , yet the same word is applied to Elder Women also , in ver . 2. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the Elder Women , or ( as if I should say ) The Presbyteresse● . So that the Apostle here speaketh only of the several degrees of Age in each Text , Elder and Younger , calling the Elder Men Fathers , and the Elder Women Mothers , and the younger Men and Women , brethren and Sisters . And that this is the true meaning of the Apostle , appears also , Titus , 2. 2 , 3. where the Elder here , is called Aged there . 

Now there is a duty also incumbent upon these , as touching the transmission of the Truth to the generation to come . Make it known therefore by your Examples , Counsels , Encouragements upon all occasions ; for you have heard much , and seen much , and known much , and treasured up experiences , and therefore certainly , you should have much to say to such as are of the younger sort , and your years , gravity , wisdom , experiences will the better recommend the Truth unto them ; for there is an honour due to you also , by virtue of the fifth Commandment . 

Let me commend to you that Text of Scripture , O God , thou hast taught me from my youth , and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works ; Now also when I am old , and gray-headed , O God , forsake me not , until I have showed thy strength unto this generation , and thy power to every one that is to come . The Psalmist was now an old Man , one of much experience , being taught of God from his youth ; and as God taught him , so he taught others : For saith he , Hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works ; Hitherto , that is , to old Age , for now he was aged , and gray-headed . And had he not done well ? and was it not time now to die ? Yes , he had done very well , but yet he is willing to live a little longer , to do more , and therefore ( saith he ) Forsake me not , until I have showed thy strength unto this generation , and thy power to every one that is to come . As if he should say , I am willing yet to live a little longer to do more generation-work , there is a care and zeal for posterity upon my heart , there are young people ready to come after me , and peradventure they will listen to the Counsel of an old experienced servant of God ; and upon this account I am willing to spend a few days more upon Earth , to serve God and Posterity , without which it were not worth while to live . 

Think upon this Text of Scripture , you that are old and gray-headed , and improve the little remainder of your lives to serve the succeeding generation . For you do not love Religion , if you do not love that it should live when you are dead ; neither are they worthy of experiences , who dig and hide them in the Earth . When God had showed his singular care and power in the preservation of his Church against her Enemies that attempted the ruin thereof , saith he , Walk about Zion , go round about her , tell the Towers thereof , mark ye well her Bulwarks , consider her Palaces , that ye may tell it to the generations following . So when God ariseth to build up Zion , and appears in glory upon the prayers of his poor people , This must be written for the generations to come , that the people which shall be created may praise the Lord  

Lastly , There are such , who though they are not called Fathers , yet are called Elders , viz. the Members of the Gospel-churches . And they are so called , not in respect of age , but of state in these Gospel-times , wherein the Church is passed her nonage , and is now in an Elderly state , requiring more Knowledge , Wisdom , Strength , Seriousness , Gravity , and Solidity in the things of God. How should such , as these walk before others , so as to answer the Character of Elders ? Let such take heed then of carrying it below their state . It is not for Elders to behave themselves like Children . I have thought many times of that description of the Gospel-churches in the Revelations , and how little it is answered this day by many that relate to such Societies . Take heed then of scandals , answer your State , live up to your Privileges , shine in Holiness , that you may adorn the Doctrine of God and our Saviour , and commit and commend your State , Examples , and holy Lives unto the Generation to come , that they may attain to the knowledge of the Truth , by your walking in it ; and say , These Truths and Ways of holy Walking were made known to me by the Gracious , Grave , and serious Lives of such as did relate unto the Churches of Christ . 

The Exhortation hitherto hath been to do all the good we are able , during our abode here below , seeing death will put end to all our opportunities . And I have propounded to you several Particulars wherein to be exercised this way . 

Now before I proceed to any further Use of Exhortation , Let me mind you of that which may conduce to the attendance of this Duty , and that is , an heart enlarged unto public service . For that which greatly hinders the prosecution of this work , is the narrowness and straightness of the Spirits of Men , whose concernments are commonly bounded within themselves . Therefore you must endeavour to abound in love . 

First , To the glory of God. For this was at work in Hezekiah's heart , when he said , The living , the living , he shall praise thee . This was uppermost , this was the first thing that was in his Eye , in his desire of prolongation of life . For indeed , it is the chief good of Man , whom God made for himself , and who therefore is to have this end continually in his aim , and to be often thinking , What shall I do to glorify God ? For of him , and through him , and to him are all things , to him be glory for ever , Amen . And all is lost that ends not in him that is Omega , to whom you may well afford this honour , when you consider that he is Alpha. He that is the first , must be the last . Take heed then of a narrow selfish Spirit , which never looks so far as to this end ; and that makes many so unactive for God , and his Glory . You must therefore believe more , and love more , and then you will act to this end more , etc.  

Secondly , Your love to the glory of God must extend to the Generations to come . You must not therefore limit it to the present Generation , and never be concerned that God may be glorified in future Ages , even to the World's end : But your desires herein must reach to the very end of the World. For note the words of the Apostles Paul , To God be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus , throughout all ages , world without end , Amen . His love to God's glory ran through all Ages even to Eternity . And so should your love do , or else you do not sincerely love it ; neither indeed can you love that his Glory be upheld during your own time , and not love the continuance of it to the World's end . 

And such was the love of the Saints in the Scriptures , to the praise and glory of God ; say they , We will show forth thy praise to all generations . And therefore , 

1.  They desired the continuance thereof to the World's end . 

2.  They would also endeavour it . With my mouth , saith the Psalmist , will I make known thy faithfulness to all generations : And this hath been their care still , That the people which shall be created may praise the Lord Thus you must love God's Glory both Intensively , and Extensively . 

As you must love the Glory of God , & that it may be extended to future Ages ; so likewise you must love his Kingdom , or else you will never attend this great work unto which you have been exhorted . God's Kingdom , Power , and Glory must go together in your prayers . 

And this was much upon Hezekiah's heart , when he said , The Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth . For he doth not say , I will make known thy Truth to my Children , though he purposed so to do , but the Father , that is , every Father that feareth God , not only in my time , but in the generations to come . Thus must your love be extended to the Kingdom of God , and , Thy Kingdom come , must be always in your desires and endeavours . Come ; how long ? even to the end of the world , and never cease coming , till Christ himself come . Now if this be upon your heart , and if you love that Christ should reign in the world , you will do your utmost to promote it , in your capacity , in attending to the several Particulars propounded . 

As you love God's Glory and Kingdom , so must you love his Gospel . For it is the Word of the Kingdom ; That is , The Word whereby God's Kingdom is erected , enlarged , governed , perfected . It is that in which , and by which our Lord Jesus doth reign in the world , viz. as to his Spiritual Kingdom therein , of which I now speak especially . And you see in my Text , Hezekiah's love to the Truth , and to the making of it known from Generation to Generation ; whereas the Gospel is the Truth , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the Truth with an excellency , called therefore , The Word of Truth , and The Word of the Truth of the Gospel : The Truth made known not by the Light of Nature , but by Revelation ; a mysterious Truth , and therefore a great Truth , that we use to say , As true as the Gospel . Now if you love this Truth , ( as you have cause enough so to do ) you will do any thing that may tend to the publication and propagation of it , by your prayers , pains , purses , Counsels , etc.  

Fourthly , As you must love God's Glory , Kingdom , and Gospel , so you must love Souls . The Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth . Therefore the Father must love the Souls of posterity , and have a zeal for the salvation of them that shall succeed . And this will quicken your endeavours to the service of your Age , when you shall look upon the Souls of successors as of equal value with your own , seeing the ransom given for all Souls is the same . 

And it is a blessed thing to be a lover of souls : it makes a man like unto Jesus Christ , whose love to Souls shines in his own blood , wherein the kindness and love God our Saviour towards Man appeareth . His kindness and Philanthropy , i e. love towards Man For God and our Saviour are great lovers of Men ; so should we be . And Christ's delights were with the sons of Men from eternity . We should not therefore terminate our love in Man's bodies ; we should love the Jewel far above the Cabinet , and be frequently looking upon men's Souls . 

1.  In comparison with our own , and 

2.  In the Blood of the Son of God ; and 

3.  In relation to Eternity ; especially the Souls of such as are near to us . And the enlargement of our affections this way will amplify our endeavours . In Heaven we shall love Souls that are saved , but here we must love Souls that they may be saved ; A work which determineth in Glory . 

Now all this requireth a public Spirit , and an heart carried far beyond ourselves . For a narrow Spirit acteth within a narrow compass , and is limited to private concernments ▪ And that is the reason why there is so little Generation-service performed . All Men seek their own , and not the things which are Jesus Christ's . Whereas our care should extend far beyond our own salvation ; and love to God's Glory , future Ages , Christ's Kingdom , Gospel , and precious Souls , should all have a large room in our hearts and affections . 

Thus you have had a great deal of work set before you , which will die together with you . And to quicken you to it , 

Consider , That you know not how soon you may leave this world : As Isaac said to Esau , I am old , and know not the day of my death , and yet he lived 43 years after that . Few men in Scripture knew the day of their death , so as Hezekiah here did , to whose life 15 years were added , and he resolveth to spend them for God's Glory , and the good of Posterity . So do you as for the remainder of your days , which may not be a quarter so many as his . 

Only have a care to perform better than he did . For when he was recovered , he rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him . Why ? what was the matter ? His heart was lifted up . Hezekiah saith here , The living , the living he shall praise thee , as I do this day ; Yea , but how many days did this continue : For by and by he is praising himself . ye see the deceitfulness of the Heart of Man This by the way . 

Only consider the uncertainty of the opportunity , and how soon it may be at an end , and that the dead cannot praise God , nor they that go down into silence . Now your Tongues may speak for God , and so may your Lives , and Examples too ; but shortly there will be nothing but silence . 

Oh! be not silent before death , for than you will be silent for ever . Peradventure you have spoken too little already , in order ( I mean ) to the work of your day . Speak therefore and act to God's honour , and the benefit of others , whilst you live , or for ever hold your peace . 

I have laid several particulars before you , concerning the service of this life ; & have you not been wanting in many of them ? And is not your day also far spent ? and are not the shadows of the evening stretched out ? make it up for the future , as far as your remaining days will give you leave . And to this end ▪ 

Consider the account you are to give when your opportunity is ended . What saith the Apostle ? Every one of us shall give an account of himself to God. And this is the very next thing after death ▪ It is appointed unto Men once to die , and after this the judgement . Once to die , not twice ; for there is an Emphasis in that little word , once , as appears by the next verse , So Christ was once offered , etc.  And after this the judgement . 1.  Dye . 2.  But once . 3.  Men , that is , all Men. 4.  then to judgement ; and there is a statutum est upon all this four . And the judgement will pass upon your managing your present opportunities . For when the Lord cometh , he cometh to reckon ; so when you go to the Lord , you go to reckon , viz. how you have praised him here among the living , how you have endeavoured to further his Kingdom , according to your capacity , how you have lived exemplarily , embraced and improved all opportunities to appear and speak for Christ ; how , and for whom you have prayed , how you have comforted the feeble minded , and supported the weak , supplied the outward wants of the Saints according to your ability , how you have stood for Christ in a suffering time , how you have improved those Gifs of Grace which are proper to this Life , how you have endeavoured to transmit pure Religion and undefiled to your Posterity , by recommending it especially to your Children . 

I tell you these are the great things , and all of them are the Work of the Living , and not of the Dead . How far you have attended them hitherto , you best know ; If you have been wanting , you had need to make up in repentance , what hath been lacking in duty ; and a great part of your repentance must be exercised in fruits worthy amendment of life . For so soon as ever your Soul is quit of its earthly Tabernacle , you must presently appear before God's Judgment-seat . 

Consider the greatness of the reward of good and faithful servants . They shall have as much joy as their hearts can hold . For they must enter into it , seeing it cannot enter into them . Neither the Sufferings , nor the Duties and doings of this present time are worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us . But our Eyes are too seldom upon the recompense of reward , nor do we consider what God hath prepared for them that love him : Whereas , did we seek for Glory , Honour , Immortality , we should continue patiently in well-doing . But few that fear God have Faith enough to take in the exceeding eternal weight of Glory that is prepared for them . If glorified Saints were to return to live again upon Earth , they would double and treble their duties beyond what they did in former times . For , what do they think when they are entering into the joy of their Lord ? what ? All this Glory , all this Joy , an Heart full , and a Heaven full , and to Eternity also , and that for so few imperfect services ? And must I now spend Eternity in the enjoyment of God , and do none of those services any more for him , which were proper and peculiar to my temporal life ? And must I be on the receiving hand as to all this Glory for ever and for ever ? Certainly , if it were possible , This would make the Saints repent in Heaven , that they had done no more for Jesus Christ on Earth . But if such thoughts were incident to glorified Saints , they come too late , when once they are in Heaven : Now is your time to be working for that inestimable reward . When therefore you come to God , you must have a full persuasion , not only of his Being , but Bounty , that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him , as the Apostle speaks . But remember that it must be diligently . And be you never so diligent , he will abundantly reward it . And if Saints could but look into Heaven , and see how 't is there , before they come thither , they would soon double their diligence , and work their fingers to the stumps for Christ . But many want Faith to believe so great a reward , or to apply it to themselves , as that which God will certainly bestow upon them after their work is ended . 

Consider yet further , That the good you do upon Earth may increase when you are dead ; and as that increaseth , so shall your glory still be enlarged . For though the least Glory above is unconceivable , and the words there spoken unutterable , yet there are abundance of Argumentations in Heaven , and the ywho at their first entrance , wore but single Crowns , after a while wear double ones . For it is said , God will give to every Man according to his ways , and according to he fruits of his doings . So that , if their former doings on Earth do fructify after they are dead , God will reward them according to the Fruit thereof . For not only their works , but the fruit of them also doth follow them . And so do the evil works of wicked men follow them , as Jeroboam's did for above three hundred years together after his death ; for that at last he felt a sevenfold Hell for what he did at first . Upon this account it is conceived , that Dives desired Abraham to send Lazarus to go and preach to his five brethren , that they might avoid that place of torment ; why ? is there charity in Hell ? no , it was not out of love to his brethren , but to himself , because he had corrupted them with his wicked life , and left a bad example behind him , which they followed , therefore he desired , that they might ( if not be saved , for that I think a damned Soul cannot desire , yet that ) they might not for his cause and example be brought into that place of torment , because this would be the increase of his torment too . In like manner on the other hand , the glory of the Saints receives increase as their labours and pains are fruitful , as Divines say of Paul's glory . One Heaven is too much for the best Saint that ever lived , were not the reward of Grace , and yet your Heaven shall multiply according to the fruit of your good doings which you left behind you . 

And this will be instead of doing good in Heaven , when the Saints leave that behind them , which keeps fructifying after they have left this world . 

Why ? what is that which they may thus leave behind them ? 

Their good Works and Words , and Examples , and holy Lives , their Instructions , Exhortations , Counsels , Encouragements , their remarkable Actions and Sufferings for Christ . By all which they act and speak even after death . And there is no other way that I know whereby to do good when you are in Heaven . And in this way shall the glorified Saints know in Heaven , whether the good works which they left behind them do fructify , for they shall find and feel it in their enlarged Crowns , further Augmentations , and additional Glories . And then they shall break out into new Songs of praise to God and the Lamb , for helping them to sow their Seed on Earth , which still fructifieth after they are gone to Heaven . And in this way a Father may convert his Child , or Children after his death , as ( as I doubt not , but ) many have done . And then he heareth of it in Heaven , two ways . 

1.  By his additional Glory . 

2.  By the joyful Acclamations of the Angels for the conversion of a sinner . 

wherefore let us endeavour so to live here a little while , that our good Works may live when we are dead , and act when we are at rest , and speak when we are gone down into silence , and bring forth fruit unto holiness , when we are in endless happiness ; and bring Souls to Heaven after us to tell us that our good Works , and Words , and Examples , Instructions , Exhortations , Counsels , sufferings , Graces , are yet all alive and well , and like to yield a further Crop and Harvest of Joy and Honour to them that sowed them before their death . O , it is a blessed thing , and the Wisdom of Saints to leave a stock of good Works behind them , whereby to have a Trade going here on Earth , which will afford them fresh Incomes of Glory , whilst they are already shining as the Sun in the the Kingdom of their Father . 

And thus much for the first Use of Exhortation , to do all the good we are able , during our dwelling here on Earth . 

2d Branch of Exhortation . 

Let the second Exhortation be to call upon you to value your Opportunities , & to make the best improvements of time whilst you are in the Land of the living , so as the World is often called . For Hezekiah began now to consider the price of time , who but lately was at the Gates of the Grave , and deprived ( as he thought ) of the residue of his years , that is , which he might have lived according to the ordinary course of Nature . saith he , Mine age is departed , and removed from me as a Shepherd's Tent , That is , which the Shepherd removeth from Plain to Plain , according to his occasions , as the matter shall require . 

Now I am living here , by and by my Body must lodge in the Tent of the cold Grave , and my Soul return to God that gave it . I have cut off like a Weaver my life , he ( that is , God ) will cut me off from the Thrum , Ver. 12.  I have cut off my life by my Sins , and God hath cut it off by his righteous hand upon me . saith he , I reckoned till morning , Ver. 13.  I shall be dead by the morning . And now Hezekiah begins to prise time , and cries , The living , the living he shall praise thee . Thus when once the swift Shuttle of your life is come to a Thrum , than you will see the value of Opportunity , and cry , The living , the living , etc. and reckon till the morning , and say , There is but one day more between my life and Eternity . And it may not be long ere that Morning or Evening cometh . For little did Hezekiah a few days before think that he had been so near unto death , being now but thirty nine years old , and God having wrought so wonderfully for him in his late preservation from Senacharib : For saith he , Behold , for peace I had great bitterness . God lately destroyed the Host of the King of Assyria , and gave me peace , and I said , I shall now now die in my Nest , and multiply my days as the Sand , but I little thought of such a sickness to ensue my peace . 

It seems he was surprised ; and so may you be , if you look not well to it , for God now gives fair warning of it . They that will not prise Opportunity , shall have an opportunity to prise it : If they prise it not living , they shall prise it dying . wherefore manage your seasons for the best ends while you have them , and fill up your days with duty , and be not so eager upon the World , and the things thereof . Opportunity is a golden Mattock to dig for Heavenly Treasure ; do not wear it out , as many do , in digging for Pibbls , and at your latter end become a fool . 

Beware therefore of idleness on the one side , and cumbring yourself with Worldly Occasions on the other ; but consider , wherefore hath God given you life and time , but to be serviceable in your day , and to work for him in whom you live . He did not give you time to play the Truant , and design and labour to be rich , and to grow great in the World , and to arrive at such a Revenue , and proportion of worldly Estate ; but he sent you into the World to do his work , and to improve your Time and Talon for him . 

And therefore , when the World , or the Flesh is putting such Employments upon you , which will devour much time , and divert you from the one thing necessary , tell them ; That you must give an account of your time , and you must not rob your Lord and Master of his hours , which he sent you to improve in his service , etc.  

And certainly it is an undervaluing also of Heaven , to think to go thither , and to do little or nothing for God upon Earth , though yet the recompense of reward is purely gracious , or of mere Grace , let our Labours for the Lord be never so many ; for what are all our Studies , Works , Sweated , and blood , and Spirits , and Cost ; and Care , and Time expended upon Christ , in comparison with an exceeding Eternal weight of Glory ? Prise therefore and improve your times . 

Here are several of you that are young , or in your middle age , or about Hezekiah's years . Call yourselves to an account , and inquire of your own hearts what you have done : Peradventure but little for God , and what will turn to a comfortable account . What then , if God should now lay you ( as he did Hezekiah ) upon your sick Bed , and threaten to cut off the Thrum of your lives ? Would you not with him turn your faces to the wall , and weep sore ? And yet I tell you , Hezekiah had done a great deal of Work for God , during the time of his Reign unto this sickness . He lost no time , but fell hard to the Work of Reformation in the first month of the first year of his Reign . And he did a great deal during his fourteen years before his sickness , and he did it also in Truth , and with a perfect heart . 

But still , what have you done , if you were now as near the gates of the grave , as here he was ? And to these Gates you must come at last , and pass through them also to the highest Tribunal , to answer to this Question , What hast thou done ? How hast thou improved time , occupied with thy Talon , filled up thy Relations , maintained good Works for necessary uses , been active for the highest end ? 

Peradventure you will pled your small capacity , and that you are but of mean degree , an obscure person , and ezercised in Low Employments , and of weak parts , etc.  

Yea , but still what saith Hezekiah ? The living , the living he shall praise thee . And are not you living ? Are you not alive ? For any Man or Woman living may praise the Lord , or else Hezekiah saith not well ; But it is true what he saith , for any Man living may do his his generation-work . Is your capacity than such , that you cannot praise the Lord ? what saith the Psalmist ? Praise ye the Lord ; who ? Kings of the Earth . Yea , they are in a capacity indeed . Such as Hezekiah may do much that way , they are great Men , and have great opportunities . But what followeth ? Kings of the Earth , and all people : Princes and all Judges of the Earth . Both young Men and Maidens , and old Men and Children . Let them praise the Name of the Lord Men and Maids , old and young , all may ; and all must attend the service , none excepted . 

And therefore pled not your mean capacity , but serve your age according to your Talon . For he that had but one Talon , doth not say , Lord , I had but one , and what can a Man do with one ? My fellow-servants had , one five Talents , the other two , and they might well employ and improve them . no , he saith not thus ; He was convinced that one Talon might be improved to advantage as well as five , and that every one is bound to be Trading for God with what he hath given him ; for , saith the Text , He gave to every Man according to his several ability . So that all of them had an ability , though several ● One had a fivefold ability , another a twofold , another a single . And he that had but a single capacity , was called to an account for his unprofitableness , and cast into outer darkness . The meanest therefore among you hath some ability , and woe be to him , if he doth not improve it . A young Man , a Servant , a poor Man , a mean Man , may do many things in tendency to God's Glory , and the good of others , whilst he is living , and the living , the living , he shall praise thee . 

You that are stricken in years , you have much to accounted for . For you have lived lon , and perhaps are now grown old , but have you been old Traders ? Yes , as to a worldly account : Yea , but there is another , and a better Trade , & what have you done therein ? God will call you to a reckoning for your worldly Trade , and especially for your Spiritual . You have gained thus much in the world , he will say , but what redounds to my share of all that you have done ? This is the great Question . Think ye ; O how many opportunities have you outlived , which will never have their Resurrection : If therefore you should say as John Baptist's hearers , what shall we do then ? I answer , 

First , Be humbled for your former neglects , and mispence of time , who in doing much , have hitherto done nothing ; and judge yourselves for your omissions , before your Lord and Master calleth you to accounted . For if you judge yourselves , you shall not be judged . 

Bring forth fruit mee● for Repentance . For though it is as impossiibe , that your former individual opportunities should return , as that you should grow young again , yet God may please to minister new occasions to you upon your repentance , whereby to bring forth fruit in old age . It seems , that Nicodemus was an old Man when he came to Christ by night ; For , saith he , Can a Man be born when he is old ? As much as to say , As I am . But when he is converted , he thrives apace , and comes to Christ at noon , and owns him in the place of public Judicature , and is a mean to dissolve the Session . And afterwards he owns Christ crucified , and is at much cost to embalm him , when his Disciples deserted him . The Old Man got the start of them all , and of many others that set out before him . So it is sometimes , The first are last , and the last first . 

Now therefore bestir yourselves , and redeem lost time by improving what remaineth to the utmost , and see what you can do with a little remnant of life , and whether you cannot grow as fast as Old Nicodemus did . Project improuments of life , which is a kind of Saveall , now that your light is near extinguishing . 

Make up in affection what may be wanting in action . If you cannot do much , yet love much . and you have cause enough to do so , in that God hath given you to live so long , who have done so little . If our Servants should work no better for us , than many have done for God , we should soon turn them out of doors . And therefore love the Lord the more , and that will also provoke you to do the more . 

Stir up others to work for God , that what you cannot do by your own hands , you may do by others . For you shall have a share in their good actions , who work by your incitement . What good was done by the hands of thousands in the days of the reforming Kings of Judah , is still imputed to the Reformers that set them on work , as you may see in the Reign of Asa , Jehosaphat , Hezekiah , and Josiah . And though the persons employed might act from Principles of Hypocrisy , as some ( at least ) did in Josiah's Reformation ; Yet the works were done in sincerity , as to the Reformers : They were done in Hypocricy as to the Instruments , in sincerity as to the principal Agent . 

Your time therefore is but short , and you cannot do much with your own hands , see what you cad do by others , as by your Wife , Husband , Children , Relations , Friends , Neighbours , and it shall be imputed unto them , if they do it sincerely , but to you howsoever , if you did set them on work in the uprightness of your heart . 

Pray for deathbed Grace , Faith , Hope , Patience , Peace of Conscience , composedness of Spirit , & such a frame as is fit to glorify God , and edify others at your last farewell to friends . This is that which we should all pray for , and it is that which God is pleased to grant to some , and it is a great mercy where it is vouchsafed , for it is not so eminently granted unto all that fear the Lord Had Hezekiah now died , his Distemper was so violent , that he could not have died so comfortably , I reckoned till morning , that as a Lion , so he will break all my bones : From day even to night , wilt thou make an end of me . Like a Crane , or a swallow , so did I chatter ; I did mourn as a Dove : Mine eyes fail with looking upward : O Lord , I am oppressed , undertake for me . But they that have done but little for the Lord , and are not now like to do much , had need to pray more , especially , that thus they may finish their course . 

And if God grant you this mercy , you may perhaps do as much good dying , as ever you did living . The few words of the penitent Thief have done good to thousands , though he was a Man that never did good , but much evil , till he was converted upon the Cross . And thus much for the Exhortation to value Opportunities , and to make the best improvement of time while it lasteth . 

3d Use of Exhortation . 

If there are opportunities of performing service to God in this world , which are not to be enjoyed after death , and that the Saints do that for God here , which they cannot do in Heaven ; then , be not too eager in your desires to die . It was Jobs weakness , though indeed he was then in great distress and misery . He longed for death , and digged for it more thân for hide Treasures . We must not be too forward to dig our own Graves : We may prepare them , as Joseph of Arimathea did , and also we must prepare for them ; but let us not dig them impatiently , or importunately . 

Life is a great mercy , yea , and length of days . It is annexed to the obedience of the fifth Commandment . With long life will I satisfy him , and show him my salvation . Why ? will not a Child of God be satisfied without length of days ? Yes , he is satisfied to die when God pleaseth . If God will take him away sooner or later , he he is satisfied . It is said of Abraham , Isaac , David , and Job , that they died full of days . And it was true , both passively , in that they were old Men ; and actively , in that they were well satisfied to live so long . And therefore Job left off digging for death , long before he died . Peradventure you have your exercises both outward and inward , and withal you have good hopes of a blessed state in a better world ; and now you long for death , and would fain be gone . Take heed , it is time enough to go to a glorious Eternity , and when you are there , you will never say , you came not thither soon enough . Here is , more service for you to do : Do not love your Reward beyond your Work. A lazy servant will be often listening to the Clock , or looking upon the Sun , and longing for the Evening , not minding so much his Work as his Wages . 

It is said of Jehojada also , that he was full of days , when he died , being one hundred and thirty years old . He was full of days passively , and full actively , he was satisfied with this great length of days , and very well contented and thankful to live so long . He was deep in years ( I suppose about , if not above , an hundred years old ) when his Nephew Joash came to the Crown . For he lived to see Joash married , and after that the Temple repaired . And he died not long before Joash , who reigned but forty years . But few men lived so long in those days , and yet he did a great deal of good service unto the last . And when he died , they buried him in the City of David among the Kings , because he had done good in Israel , both towards God , and towards his house . And the most of it was done in his old Age.  

4th Use of Exhortation . 

If the people of God can do more service for him on Earth than in Heaven ; Be exhorted to prise their lives pray for them , and improve them . If Hezekiah here had died of his sickness , the people of God would soon have miss him , as when ( at last ) he died , they did , for you know what came after . Consider what a deal of good ceaseth with the li●e of a good Man : It is true , his Works live , but his working is dead . Ministers shall preach no more ; Church-officers rule no more , dispense no more ; Benefactors lay out themselves no more ; public Spirits act no more . True ; their Examples , sayings , writings , Memory , Fruits of their former Works may survive : But their persons , personal acts , delightful presence , sweet fellowship , wholesome Counsels , and ready helpfulness are dead and gone . Whereas these are great mercies , and many will say so when they are gone , who made but little of them while they had them . You know how the Elders of Ephesus , and the brethren at Miletus wept at Paul's parting , sorrowing most of all , that they should see his face no more ; and yet after that he lived many years , and wrote an Excellent Epistle to the Church at Ephesus . O , how would they have wept , had he then died at Miletus ! But few precious ones are prized enough till dead , and perhaps not then neither . The Israelites did not sufficiently value Samuel when he grew old , but when they had tasted what Saul was , and that Samuel also was taken away by death , than they all lamented him . Yea , and Saul himself also wanted him , who little regarded him whilst living . Bring me up Samuel , saith he to the Witch at Endor . He that before would not go to Samuel , will now go to the Devil for him . Bring me up Samuel ; Yes , Rake him by all means out of his Grave : And , o , that Saul could but once more speak with Samuel ! 

How few are they who have a just valuation of these living mercies , or that duly lay to heart the loss of them ? For it is our duty also to bewail the death of such , as when the Church lost Stephen , devout Men carried him to his burial ; and made great lamentation over him . O know the price of living Saints , especially the most useful ones . 

You that are Children , and have godly Parents , who have made known the Truth to you , take heed you think not they have lived too long ; but know that it is your mercy , if they die full of years , and come to their Graves in a full age , like as a shock of Corn cometh in its season . Improve their lives , and lament their deaths . Sarah was an hundred twenty and seven years old when she died , and yet Isaac lamented the loss of her for the space of three years , and nothing could comfort him , but his marriage with a dear Rebekah . I beseech you love and honour your godly Parents , beg their continuance with you , and your profiting by them , and be very obedient to the first Commandment with a Promise . Joash had that benefit by his old Uncle Jehojada , who was instead of a Father to him , that it went well with him and his Kingdom whiles he lived , but miserably with both afterwards . Many Children have lost themselves together with their Parents . 

Consider what I say . And then you that have such Ministers of Jesus Christ , as labour in the Word and Doctrine , and watch for your Souls , prise them , pray for them , and improve them , for you know not the consequences of their removal . 

5th Use of Exhortation . 

Lastly , Seeing there is more service to be done on Earth than in Heaven ; how should this exalt Christ Jesus in our hearts , and enlarge them in love to him , who as he wrought so much for us on Earth , so still is he at work for us in Heaven ? He , He is the great Worker in the highest World. You know what he saith in his prayer to his Father , I have glorified thee on Earth , I have finished , the work which thou gavest me to do . Yea , but we are to understand it of his Work upon Earth , for his Work in Heaven is not as yet finished , nor will before the end of the world . 

Alas ! we can do little for Christ in Earth , and lesle in Heaven . Yet Jesus Christ , whether in Earth or Heaven , is still at work for us . It is not with him as with us . Heaven takes the work out of our hands , but it puts it into his . For thither is he gone to take and keep possession , and to prepare places for us . There he executeth his Mediatory-office , continually appears and makes intercession for us , sheds abroad his Spirit , gives Commission to the Angels , and Gifts unto Men , calleth and gathereth in his Elect ones , enableth us to work on Earth , governs the World , upholds his Church , and subdues their Enemies . All the Work of Heaven lies upon Christ's hands ; and it is well it doth , o● what would become of us on Earth ! 

And as this should raise our Esteem an● Love of Christ , so should it quicken us the more to work for him on Earth , seeing he is still at work for us in Heaven . He wrought above thirty years for us here on Earth , but in Heaven above sixteen hundred , and thus he will continue his work to the end of the world . 

To him therefore be glory , and honour , for ever and ever . Amen . 

A short Discourse OF THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF THE Gospel-day , Reaching from the Destruction of the OLD , to the erection of the NEW JERUSALEM : 

Zach. 14. 6 , 7.  

And it shall come to pass in that day , that the Light shall not be clear , nor dark . 

But it shall be one day , which shall be known to the Lord , not day nor night ; but it shall come to pass , that at evening time it shall be light . 



By W. H.  

London , Printed for John Wilkins , and are to be sold at his shop in Exchange-alley , next door to the Exchange-coffee-house , over against the Royal-exchange , 1673.  

COURTEOUS READER . 

Thou hast added a brief Treatise of the nature of the Gospel-day in its Rise , Progress , and Perfection . The Morning of which Day ( beginning in the Apostles times ) had much darkness mingled with a little light . You know what stiff and earnest contentions there were for the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies ; yea , the very Articles of Faith called in question , the Spirit of Anti-christ working even then in the Evangelical Churches , which in after Ages grew to a greater height in the exaltation of the Man of Sin. But still the Light and Purity of the Gospel prevailed , though sometimes the darkness was such , as to threaten an utter extirpation : God raising up some faithful Witnesses in all Ages to hold forth , and vindicate the Light against all that opposition made against it . The Truth had its Champions even then , when the whole World wondered after the Beast . And from them to us it is continued by an uninterrupted succession , being still of a growing and increasing Nature like the path of the Just shining more unto the perfect day . What cause have we to bless God that we see the Truth and Gospel going on conquering and to conquer all Error and Opposition ? Well , the night is far spent , and the day is at hand , and go , let us cast off the Works of Darkness , and put on the Armour of Light , and so much the more as we see the Day breaking , when Shadows shall flee away , & Light shall overspread the face of the whole Earth . Peace , Truth , Holiness , and Comfort shall then abound . In the mean time it is no wonder if Light and Darkness conflict together . Light of Peace with Trouble , of Truth with Error ; and go , let us not be secure , God may soon bring a Cloud over our Peace and Liberty . And let us also who are of the day be sober , bearing with and forbearing one another , forasmuch as yet we know but in part , and see through a Glass darkly ; but when the Evening of this Gospel-day cometh , the Lord shall be one , and his Name one ; Zech. 14. 7 , 9 ) one heart and one way , Jer. 32. 39  In the Faith and Hope hereof , Let all the Children of Zion rejoice , and endeavour to be a People prepared for the Lord  

Reader , I shall detain thee no longer from this useful and seasonable Discourse . The blessing of God go with it , and make it fruitful , so prays 

Jan. 18 th' 1673-4 . Thy Servant in the Gospel . H. J.  

ZECH. 14. 6 , 7.  

And it shall come to pass in that day , that the light shall not be clear nor dark . 

But it shall be one day , which shall be known to the Lord , not day nor night ; but it shall come to pass that at evening time it shall be light . 



This Chapter begins with the revenge of God upon Judah and Jerusalem for their crucifying the Lord of glory ( Ch. 13. 7.  ) of which vengeance Christ himself foretold , and he calls them days of vengeance , where he amply fieth what the Prophet here speaketh briefly . 

Yet God threateneth to be avenged on the Nations that dealt thus with Jerusalem and the Jews . They should have no thanks for this their service , as minding only the fulfilling of their own wills , and not Gods ; ( Ver. 3. ) But though Jerusalem should be overthrown , and the Temple burned , and the Temple-worship abolished ; yet the Lord would have a care of his Church , and make way for the conversion of the Gentiles , and expose the Truth and Way of his Worship to the open view of the Jews and Gentiles from East to West . 

For the Truth and Way of God's Worship , and of Salvation was penned up before Christ's coming , in the narrow confines of Judea , and obscured also , and darkened with shadows and Ceremonies , as Jerusalem ( the Seat of God's Worship ) was with Hills . But now all should be laid open before all the world , from East to West . And this here is signified by an Allegory of the cleaving of Mount Olivet ( one famous Hill being put for the rest ) in the midst towards the East , and towards the West , whereby the City of God ( which is the Church ) should no longer be obscured , but patent , all Shadows and Ceremonies , and Partition-walls being removed . This , I suppose is the purport of Verse . 4.  

After this followeth a very great Commotion , compared to that great Earthquake in King Uzziah's days , which made Men to flee for their lives . But it is to be understood Spiritually ( viz. ) of Christ's voice in the Gospel , shaking , not the Earth only , but also Heaven ; whereby a great change is made even in the Church , by the shaking and removing of the Ceremonial-way of Worship , and the Partition-wall , and causing both Jew and Gentile ( as many as would be saved ) to flee to the Gospel , and Gospel-way of Worship , and Christ therein , from the wrath that is to come : This , I conceive is the meaning of Ver. 5.  

Only , whereas it is said , And the Lord my God shall come , and all the Saints with thee ; This may be meant , Firstly , Of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ to set up his Gospel-kingdom , whither his Elect should be gathered unto him their Head : But lastly , and chiefly of Christ's second coming , whereof Paul makes mention , speaking of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints . For this Chapter leads us so far , that nothing remaineth but this last and great coming of Christ , unto which the Prophet cannot forbear to look , and he looketh at it with much Faith and Joy.  

1.  In that he applieth the Lord God to himself . The Lord my God shall come . 

2.  In that he turneth his speech unto him . And all the Saints with thee . 

Briefly as for the Chapter , it begins with the destruction of the Old Jerusalem , and endeth with the erection of the New.  

And whereas there is a Day spoken of , so and so described as in my Text , It is the day or the time , that lieth between these two Jerusalem's , Old and New. It is not a Natural or Artificial day , for such a day cannot suit with the scope of this Prophecy ; Nor was there ever any such day , wherein it was lighter in the Evening than in all the day before . And therefore by Day here , we must necessarily understand a large tract of time , for so Day is many times taken in the Scripture , particularly the time of the Gospel is called the Day of Salvation . And it is called that Day , sixteen times in this and the two preceding Chapters , which treat of the last times , wherein such work is to be done , as will take up many hundred years , as you may see if you consult the Chapters at leisure . 

And you see here when this day began , ( viz. ) when the Gospel was first published , viz. about the time of the destruction of the Old Jerusalem , or somewhat before it , and continueth to the setting up of the New.  

Let me then put all the description of this day together into one Point , and it is this . 

Doctrine . 

The Gospel-times , unto the conversion of the Jews , are one day intermixed with Light and Darkness , known to God , in the evening whereof it shall be light . 

First , The Day here is plainly meant of the times of the Gospel , till the days of the new Jerusalem . For you find this Day again , Verse . 8. and again , Verse . 9 & so , till you are led to the conversion of the Jews , and the New Jerusalem , Ver. 10 , 11. to the end . 

Secondly , This day is one day . 1.  A Day . 2.  One.  

A Day . And that for these Reasons . 

1.  In that it hath light in it all along . For Christ and the Gospel run through it . And these carry light with them where ever they come . It is true , there is a mixture of darkness in it , yet it is not called night ; but , because it hath light in it , therefore is called Day ; for the better part carries the denomination . 

2.  It is a Day in comparison with the dark times under the Law , especially the times immediately preceding the coming of Christ , when besides the shadows of Ceremonies , there was great darkness of ignorance . 

3.  It is such a Day , as is distinguished with remarkable periods , ( viz. ) of Seals , Trumpets , Vials , even as the Natural day is with hours , and distinct divisions . This we see at large in John's Revelation . 

4.  It is a Day , in that it hath in it a blessed opportunity of working , Luke 19 42.  Joh. 9 4.  & 12. 35.  

5.  A Day , in that it hath a Morning , and an Evening . The Morning began with the rising of the Sun of Righteousness , when the dayspring from on high did visit us , and the people that sat in darkness saw great light . And the Evening lies in my Text , immediately before the Jews conversion . Thus it is a Day . 

It is One day , i e. one and the same from Morning to Evening . And 't is so upon two accounts . 

First , In that every part of the day is mixed with light and darkness , though not equally mixed , for sometimes it is more light , sometimes more dark , but more or lesle light and dark always . And so the day is one and the same for constancy of light and darkness , though not for the equality of both . 

Secondly , One and the same , and like to itself , because there is in it but one and the same Covenant , and way of Administration according to what God hath promised , saying , Yet once more I shake not the Earth only , but also Heaven . And this word , Yet once more , signifieth the removing of those things that are made that those things which cannot be shaken may remain . The Legal Administration was shaken and removed at the coming of this day , but the Evangelical shall remain to the very end of it . And hence it is , that the Church still appears in all the Periods of this day , under the same form to the very last , viz. of four living Creatures and twenty four Elders . And thus it is unus idemque dies , One and the same day from first to last . This is the Second Branch of the point , 't is One day . 

Thirdly , It is such a Day as is intermixed with Light and Darkness , so that it is neither Day nor Night , vers . 7.  But why then is it called a Day in the same Verse ? The meaning therefore is , that it is neither perfect Day , nor perfect Night ; but yet such , as may well be called a Day for the reasons aforesaid , only with intermixtures of Light and Darkness . 

But what is the Light , and what the Darkness ? 

The Light is the light of Truth : for these two go together ; send out thy Light and thy Truth . And the Darkness is the darkness of Ignorance , Error , Heresy , Idolatry , and Superstition . And such a mixture there hath been in this Day , and will be to the very Evening of it . 

The clearest part of this Day was in the Morning thereof , when the Apostles lived ; yet even then there was a mixture of this Darkness . The Churches in Galatia were infected with the leaven of false Teachers , mingling Law and Gospel in the point of Justification . And some in the Church at Corinth denied the Resurrection of the Dead ; and others held that it was already past , ( as Hymeneus and Philetus ) and their word did eat like a Gangrene . And some such there were that turned the Grace of God into Lasciviousness , etc.  Both Peter and Judas give us a sad character of them . And in John's time , there were many Antichrists and Apostates from the Faith , and many false Prophets were then gone out into the World , who denied that Christ was come in the Flesh . And Pride and Ambition began then to appear in Diotrephes . And false Apostles we meet with several times ; and with Balaamites and Nicolaitans in the Church at Pergamus , and the woman Jezebel , a false Prophetess , and a Seducer in the Church at Thyatira . 

You see the Morning of this Day , red and lowering , presaging foul weather throughout the remainder of it . In the times succeeding the Apostles , arose the Simonians , Menandrians , Carpocratians , Cerinthians , Ebionites , Marcionites , Apollinarians , etc. which did somewhat darken the Primitive Day , wherein yet there was a comfortable mixture of Light held forth by Ireneus , Lactantius , Tertullian , Justin Martyr , Cyprian , and others . afterward arose the Arrians , ( who denied the Godhead of Christ ) greatly obscuring the Day , but were opposed by Athanasius , Hilary , and several others , and condemned by the Nicene Council . Not long after , the Heresy of Macedonius ( who denied the Personality of the Holy Ghost ) was condemned by a Council at Constantinople ; And so was the Heresy of Nestorius , ( who held that Christ had two persons , as well as two Natures ) opposed and condemned by a Council at Ephesus , not long after the same time . Opposite to this Heresy was that of the Eutychians , who held Christ to have but one Nature ; confounding his Natures , as the Nestorians had divided his Person . For thus we find most of the Primitive Heresies to be about the Natures and Person of Christ , the great Light of the World , which the Prince of Darkness endeavoured to extinguish , that so he might turn this Day into Night . But still you will find that there was Light in opposition to his Darkness . And when afterwards the Devil stirred up Pelagius to assert the Freedom of Man's Will , God raiseth up Augustine to oppose him . 

Only what shall we say about the close of the Sixth Century , when the bottomless Pit was opened , out of which there arose a smoke , as the smoke of a great Furnace , insomuch that the Sun and Air were darkened by reason of the Smoke . Where now was the Light ? and where was the One Day in my Text ? Yea , and as the Centuries increased , so did the Darkness , by a continual succession and series of Errors and Heresies , for many Hundred of years together . And you know what dark Lights the Schoolmen were in their Generations , who did rather obscure than illustrate Theology . 

These things are true ; And a man had need of a great deal of knowledge in Church-history , and the Centuriators , to give particular satisfaction in this point , and it would also require a large Discourse . 

I shall therefore give you some general grounds of Proof , that still the Light did run through the darkest Times . 

First , Christ promised that the gates of Hell should never prevail against his Church , and that he would be with it to the end of the World.  

Secondly , It is held by several Learned and Orthodox , That the Seven Churches of Asia had their Antitypes , one after another , throughout the day of the Gospel in my Text. And then , surely there was always Light in the Candlesticks . 

Thirdly , When Christ began to show John things to come , the First thing that he showed him , was God sitting upon his Throne , with the Church round about Him , and so described , as you know , Revel . 4.  For in showing John things to come , at so great and vast a Prospect , God must needs show him great and dreadful things , as . He did under the Seals , Trumpets , and Vials . And therefore at the very entrance of this Discovery , God secureth to John the safe condition of the Church in all times , and let● him see that his Eye was still upon that , as standing round about his Throne encompassed with ten thousand times ten thousand of Angels , that so what sights soever John should afterwards see , he might be assured , that the Church was safe enough . For God is before , and his Angels behind the Church . And hence it is that ever and anon the Church puts up her head in such and such periodical times , and days of danger and darkness in the Revelations . 

Fourthly , When God intended great Mutations in the World , He made provision for his Church and People ; so that the four Angels must not hurt the Earth , nor the Sea , nor the Trees , till the Servants of God were sealed in their Foreheads ; and the number of the sealed was 144000.  

And when the four first Trumpets sounded , though there followed always a sore judgement , yet still a third part escaped under every one of them ; And with this agreeth that of Zechary , Two parts shall be cut off and die , but the third part shall be left therein . 

And when again the fifth Trumpet sounded , and the mouth of the bottomless Pit was opened , out of which a dreadful smoke ascended , and Locusts out of the smoke , they had not power to hurt the grass of the Earth , nor any green thing , nor any tree , but only those men , which had not the Seal of God in their foreheads , rev. 9 4 

Fifthly , If we come to the Sixth Trumpet , which began to sound about the Year 1300. when the Ottoman Power arose , which yet continueth to this day ; it was a very dark and dismal time , yet not void of Light. For the Waldenses and their Followers were up long before that time , and Wickliff arose somewhat about the same , and ( as I take it ) Bernard . Afterwards John Huss and Hierome of Prague . But seeing the time was so doleful , and that it might well be admired , what was become of the Church , and where the Light was to be seen ; our Lord Jesus Christ cometh down from Heaven , in the form of a mighty Angel , clothed with a Cloud , and a Rainbow upon his Head , and his Face shining as it were the Sun. For this was in the dark times of the Sixth Trumpet , when although Christ was much clouded to the World , and little of him seen , yet the Sun did shine through the Cloud , even in those times ; for he was mindful of his Covenant , signified by the Rainbow . And moreover Christ had in his Hand a little Book open ; so that there was some Light shining in those very dark times . 

Sixthly , When Antichrist was at his greatest height , a little before the Light so broke forth , that some Reformation began , our Lord Jesus Christ , the Lamb of God , appeareth standing on Mount Zion , and with him an Hundred and forty four Thousand , having his Father's name written on their Foreheads : showing us , That Christ had his Church in the times of the greatest Apostasy , and that there was not wanting Light in Darkness . The sealed Number ( rev. 7 ) ran through ( about ) a thousand years , and at last lifted up their heads upon Mount Zion . 

Seven , Suppose the rise of Antichrist should commence ( as it is apprehended ) between the fourth and fifth Centuries , you know the rise of the two Witnesses contemporates therewith ; after which they continue their prophesying , during One thousand , two huudred and sixty Days , a day put for a year . And so too , upon this account , the darkest Days did not want the Light of the blessed and everlasting Gospel ; yea , so much Light , as to uphold the denomination of a Day . 

But since the Second spring of the Gospel , arising from the Light introduced by Luther , Melanchton , and the Germane Theologues , it is visible to the eyes of Adversaries , how the Darkness hath declined , and the Light shined more and more to this very day . And thus it will be light and dark , light as to Truth , and dark as to Ignorance , Error , Heresy , Idolatry , and Superstition more or lesle unto the very Evening of the Day . 

Secondly , In this day there is a mixture of Light and Darkness in another respect , viz. Trouble mingled with Tranquillity , and Persecution with Liberty . You know the sad times under the Seals , by the rage of the Roman power against Christianity . Yet some liberty was now and then enjoyed , and silence in Heaven for half an Hour . You have heard also of the Arrian Persecution under Constantius , Julian and Valens , yet all liberty was not destroyed . For though Persecution and Liberty in their height are inconsistent , as light and darkness , the one in its height expels the other , yet there was an interchange by the succession of one to the other sometims , if not an intermixture of both as to a moderate degree . For though Persecution and Liberty have not stood together in one and the same time and place in their height , yet as for the light of the Gospel , and Truth thereof , that hath sometimes shined in showers of Persecution , like as we have now and then seen the Sun to shine , and the Rain to fall at one and the same time . 

And thus you see how the Day of the Gospel hath all along hitherto been intermixed and interchanged with light and darkness . The light of Truth and the darkness of Error , the light of Liberty , and the darkness of Persecution . And thus much for the third Particular of the Point in hand . 

Fourthly , This one day thus intermixed , is known to God. In some respects it is known to us , and hath been known to others before us , ( viz. ) that there is such a day , and thus intermixed as aforesaid . But it is known to God , so as it is not known to us . 

First , It is known to him as the Efficient of it . As it is said of the Natural day , The day is his , the night also is his , he hath prepared the light of the Sun. And again , I form the Light , and create Darkness ; I make Peace , and create Evil ; I the Lord do all these things . Thus it is with this Gospel-day ; The Lord is the Former of it , who hath determined the times before appointed . 

Secondly , This day is known to God , as being wholly in his power to order all things in it after the Counsel of his own william He knew the end from the beginning , and what lieth in the Womb of this day , from the Morning to the Evening of it . He knew what light , and what darkness there would be in every period of the day , whereas we know not what a day may bring forth ; and little did we think a year ago what Light of Liberty we should now enjoy , nor do we know what darkness of trouble and confusion may arise again ere long . We look sometimes , for good , and lo , evil cometh , and we wait for Light , and there cometh darkness . For it is not for us to know the times and seasons , which the Father hath put in his own power . We cannot make a Divine Almanac , and define what day ( in this great day ) it shall be calm , & what day tempestuous , what day it shall shine , and what day rain . We know not the Ordinances of Heaven , nor can we set their Dominion in the Earth ; we cannot lift up our voices to the Clouds , that abundance of Waters may cover us ; neither do do we know the way where the Light dwelleth , and as for Darkness we know not the place thereof . Known unto God are all things . 

Thirdly , This day is known to God , in the Hebrew Phrase of knowing , which includeth also the affections . And therefore this day is so known of the Lord , that it is regarded and cared for by him . His Eyes are upon it , that nothing falls out in it , but by his special Providence . And though darkness hath sometimes increased , and far prevailed in this day , yet the Light was never extinguished , nor ever shall : He hath still preserved a Lamp , as he did in the Kingdom of David , at the lowest ebb thereof . About one hundred and fifty years ago , when darkness lay upon the face of the Earth , presently God commanded light to shine out of darkness , which hath continued and increased unto this very day . 

Fourthly , This day is known unto God , in respect of the termination of it , which we know not . For what great mistakes have there been , about the time of Antichrist's ruin , and the calling of the Jews ? 

We know in the general , that this Day shall have an Evening , and that in the Evening it shall be light : But when this Evening shall be , we know not ; we cannot take the Light and the Darkness at the bound thereof . But God doth perfectly know the Epocha of the reign of the Beast , and his Number , 666.  And thus this day is known to the Lord , and to the Lord only . 

Fifthly , In the evening of this day it shall be light . 

First then , What is this Evening ? It is the darkest part of this Day , throughout which there was still more or lesle Darkness intermixed with Light , as you have heard , but now at the Evening-time there shall be more darkness than in any of the preceding parts of the Day : How else were it an Evening ? 

But how can it be , that the Evening should be so dark , and yet that at Evening-time it should be light ? 

1.  In some respects it shall be the darkest part of the Day , for it will be a time of very sore Troubles , Wars , and rumours of Wars , and great Commotions . For I cannot tell where to fix this Evening , but under the Sixth Vial , which shall be poured out upon the great River Euphrates , That the waters thereof may be dried up , and the way of the Kings of the East prepared : In which words is held forth ( as our best Interpreters hold ) the conversion of the Jews . At what time The three unclean Spirits , like Frogs , shall go out of the mouth of the Dragon , and out of the mouth of the Beast , & out of the mouth of the false Prophet , which are the spirits of Devils , working Miracles , and going forth to the Kings of the Earth , and of the whole World , to gather them to the battle of the great Day of God Almighty . And that must needs be a very sad Evening , especially in respect of trouble , great oppositions and commotions . For there shall be as terrible Signs and Presages forerunning the erection of the New-jerusalem , as there were before the Destruction of the Old. Hinc illae Tenebrae . But how then shall it be light at this Evening time . 

Secondly , In some respect therefore , it shall be the most lightsome part of the Day hitherto . And indeed it will be the light of the Evening , that will very much occasion the Darkness of it : I mean the Light of the Truth , that shall then shine forth , shall darken the Kingdom of the Beast , and cause his Followers to gnaw their very Tongues for pain . For that is under the Fifth Vial ; and if the Kingdom be full of Darkness , it must needs be that Christ's Kingdom will then be full of Light. For the Witnesses will be ●isen long before the effusion of the Fifth and Sixth Vials , and Antichrist be greatly consumed with the breath of Christ's mouth , viz. in the Preaching of the Gospel . And therefore in this respect , it must needs be a lightsome Evening , and a time of greater Light than ever shined since the days of the Apostles . 

Thus you see what a time the Evening shall be . 

But shall this Evening then determine this Day , so that the Conversion of the Jews shall become another Day ? 

no ; But as this Day is one and the same , and constant to itself , as we have heard , so shall the Day of the Jews Conversion , and the time following be one and the same day with this . But how ? Not in respect of Light and Darkness intermixed , so as in the Day before the Evening , but in respect of one and the same Covenant , and way of Holy Administration still continued : For the Ordinances now used shall be continued to the coming of Christ . 

For it is observable ; 

First , That this dark Time is not called , The Evening ; but the Evening-time , Quo tempore advesperascere , & Nox esse solet : At what time it begins to be Evening ; or , to look like an Evening , and the Sun seems to be setting . And therefore 

Se●●ndly , Though it is called an Evening-time , yet there is no Night said to follow it . Sol occubuit , Nox nulla secuta est . It is such an Evening , wherein the Sun setteth , and no Night succeedeth . It is true , One would little expect light in the Evening , especially more light than in the Day before . But such an Evening-time is this , after which shines the greatest Light that ever was seen since the days of Jesus Christ . 

You see then what this Evening is . 

Secondly ; What is that Light , that shall shine so gloriously at the Evening-time , especially at the end of it ? 

Answ . It is the same in kind and quality with that which shined before this Evening-time , only it differeth in degrees . For now the Light shall excel , and that shall be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet ; Arise , and shine , for thy Light is come , and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon thee , etc.  Now ( as I may say ) the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun ; and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold , as the light of seven Days : Yea , The Sun shall be no more thy light by day , neither for brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee : but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting Light , and thy God thy glory . The Sun shall no more go down , neither the Moon withdraw itself , for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light . 

But wherein shall this Light consist ? 

First ; There shall be a great effusion of the Spirit of God in those times , whereof a Pledge was given in the Morning of this Gospel-day . It shall come to pass in the last days , that I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh . And the like we find in the words following my Text ; And it shall be in that Day , that living Waters shall go out from Jerusalem , etc.  And hereby is meant the Spirit of God with his Gifts and Graces , compared to living Waters . And these I take to be the same with Ezekiel's waters , which rose at last to a very great depth . 

Secondly , Hence it followeth , That there will be a very great light of Knowledge in this Day , so that there shall not be so much need , as now there is , for one to teach another ; saying , Know the Lord , for they shall all know him from the least to the greatest . And that shall be the time especially , when The Earth shall be full of the knowledge of God , as the Waters cover the Sea.  

Thirdly , This Light of Knowledge shall have a great influence into the Hearts and Lives of Men , who shall shine eminently in Holiness ; insomuch that the inscription upon the Forehead of the Highpriest shall then be put upon the bells of the Horses , and the very Pots in Jerusalem and Judah shall be Holiness to the Lord ; Even Carters , Cooks , and Kitchenmaids shall then shine in purity of life , and there shall be no more the Canaanite in the House of the Lord of Hosts . 

Fourthly , That Day shall shine with the Light of Peace , Tranquillity , and Joy , for these go together , Esth . 8. 16.  Swords shall then be turned into Ploughshares , and Spears into Pruning-hooks ; Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation , neither shall they learn War any more . 

Fifthly , In that Day there shall be the Light of Comfort ; for this will follow necessarily from all the former ; and the Consolation will be both External and Internal , viz. When the Spirit of God , the Comforter , shall be poured out so plentifully , and when the Spirit shall have his Day , as the Father and the Son had theirs . And when Knowledge , Holiness , and Peace shall abound on the Earth ; when Turk and Pope , and all that oppose the Kingdom of Christ shall be destroyed , and Satan bound and confined to the bottomless Pit , during the Thousand years . I say , This must needs be a very comfortable time . Great then shall be the peace of Zions' Children , when God shall make her an eternal Excellency , and a joy of many Generations , when violence shall no more be heard in her Land , wasting and destruction within her Borders ; but men shall call her Walls , Salvation ; and her Gates , Praise ; and when they shall come and sing in the height of Zion , and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord , who shall turn the former Mourning of his People into Joy , and comfort them , and cause them to rejoice from their sorrow , For they shall come to Zion with Songs , and everlasting Joy upon their Heads , they shall obtain joy and gladness , and sorrow and sighing shall flee away . 

And thus you see the Light that shall be at the Evening-time , and the Doctrine cleared in the several parts of it ; the Uses whereof now follow . 

Uses . 

First . What hath been here said answereth that Challenge of the Papists ; Where was your Church before the Days of Luther ? We answer , Where the Light was . For though great Darkness was introduced by Antichrist for many years before the breaking out of the Light in the days of Luther , yet there hath been always a mixture of Light in the obscurest times , and there the true Church hath been . There have been Witnesses to the Truth ever since the rise of the Man of Sin , and their testimony witnesseth to the true Church , distinct from Antichrist , in that it witnesseth to the Light where the true Church hath always dwelled , which Church still professed against the Additions and Impositions of the Man of Sin , hating and abominating his Idolatrous Corruptions and Superstitious Inventions , and held to the Faith and Truth of the Gospel . And as this Church , like the Light , did still bear witness to itself : So did the continual opposition made against the Light and Truth professed , bear witness to the same . And therefore we remit the Papists to their own oppositions and persecutions , for an Answer to their Challenge . Yea , and this true Church hath been visible at all times to them that are of the Light. ( For what can men in darkness see ? ) The Day , you hear , hath been one all along , and therefore the Sun did never set in it , and the Light hath still been , Index sui & tenebrarum , A discoverer both of itself and of darkness . All things that are reproved ( or discovered ) are made manifest by the Light : For whatsoever doth make manifest , is Light. And therefore the true Church hath always seen both herself and the false Church ; but the false ( wanting Light ) could never see the true . 

Use 2.  

The Doctrine may serve to show us the parallel between the Day of the Gospel , and the Day of them that do profess it , which is also intermixed with Light and Darkness , so that it is neither Day nor Night . For , 

First , There is Knowledge mingled with Ignorance , and Truth with Error , even in the best of God's Children , who know but in part , and prophesy in part , till that which is perfect , in another world , is come . For now we see through a glass darkly , but then face to face ; now we know in part , but then shall we know , even as we are known . Thus it is , and thus it will be , till our Sun is set , and then it will be perfect light . 

2.  There is also Trouble mingled with Tranquillity , Adversity with Prosperity , Light of inward Peace and Comfort with inward Doubts and Darkness , whiles we live here below . 

Use 3  

We are showed , That the darkest time of the Gospel-day is yet to come . For that time is to be expected in the Evening , which is the darkest part of all the Day . Only this Darkness will not be ( as I conceive ) in respect of the withdrawing of the Light of Truth , but of the Light of Peace and Tranquillity : For at the Evening of this Day , Men shall look unto the Earth , and behold Trouble , and Darkness , and Dimness of Anguish . And this will immediately precede the Conversion of the Jews , through the opposition of Turk and Pope . 

For this will be the time when the Kings of the Earth , and of the whole world shall be gathered together to the battle of the great Day of God Almighty . At what time Men shall beaten their Ploughshares into Swords , and their Pruni●● hooks into Spears . 

But though that will be the darkest part of the Day , yet we must expect gloomy times till then , though with intermixed beams of Light , wherein God will still be setting this over against that , to the end that Men should find nothing after him . And thus God will Chequer out the Gospel-day , till that be fulfilled which is spoken by the Prophet Isaiah , Arise , shine , for thy Light is come , and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee . And seeing the day shorteneth , and the shadows of the Evening begin to be stretched out , let us expect no more Days of Tranquillity and Peace , but Wars , and rumours of Wars , Nation lifting up Sword against Nation , and learning of War , the confused noise of Battle , and Garments rolled in blood ; For the Man upon the red Horse is gone forth , to whom power is given to take Peace from the Earth ; and nearer the Evening still the darker . That which concerns us , is to be in a Posture of Humiliation and Preparedness , for the reception of these dark Dispensations . Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints . 

Use 4.  

Let what hath been said be for Exhortation . 

First , To pray for the Conversion of God's ancient people , the Seed of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , for whose sakes they are beloved . Till when , the Day shall not be clear nor dark , but then the Sun shall no more go down , nor the Moon withdraw itself , but the Lord shall be an everlasting Light , & the days of mourning be ended . Therefore hold not your peace day nor night , ye that are the Lord's Remembrancers , keep not silence , and give him no rest , till he establish , and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the Earth . 

Secondly , Though you want the Light of Peace , be thankful and improve the Light of Truth . For it is a mercy that we have this part of the Light , though we want the other ; and of the two , it it is far the better , seeing we should part with Peace for Truth , but not with Truth for Peace . 

The Text saith , It shall come to pass in that day , that the Light shall not be clear nor dark ; or ( as after the Original ) not be precious nor thickness , which showeth us , that the Light of Truth is precious , and though that of Peace is so likewise , yet not of equal value ; for Christ came not to send Peace on the Earth , but the Sword , by the publication of the Truth ; which was of so great esteem with Him , that He bore witness to it to the Death , even when He witnessed a good Confession before Pontius Pilate concerning the truth of his Kingly Power and Government , which the Apostle adjureth us to attend , as of great moment , though Pilate slighted it , saying , What is Truth ? For he did not propound that question for satisfaction , in that he stayed not for an answer , but showed thereby , that he looked upon truth , and particularly that truth , concerning the Kingly Power and Government of Christ , as a pitiful Cause whereon to hazard the Life of Christ . 

Oh! The Truth there confessed by Christ , is a precious Truth , a very great Truth , and the Foundation of many Truths , which Christ sealed with his Blood , which therefore we are adjured in the sight of God , who quickeneth all things , and before Jesus Christ , who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good Confession , to keep without spot , unrebukeable until the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ . 

Let us then love the Truth , and this Truth , and improve it . 

Thirdly , Seeing the Gospel-day is not equally lightsome in all the periods of it ; how thankful should we be , that we were born in a Time and Place of Light ? For great was the Darkness , and little the Light , about Six or Sevenscore years past , when England lay under the Darkness of Antichristian Ignorance ; since when , it hath been turned from the Valley of the shadow of Death , into a Valley of Vision . This heighteneth the account of the Land we live in , for the enjoyment of so great a mercy , as no other Nation this day hath enjoyed the like , especially as to the clearness of the Light that hath shined in it . And though it will not be accompanied with outward peace , yet it will not want inward , if we keep close to the Light , and live up to it in this our Day . 

Fourthly , This Day being thus intermixed with Light and Darkness ; Let us not wonder , nor be offended , that there are such varieties of Persuasions , differing one from another , and therefore all of them cannot be of the Light , whatever is pretended by them that do profess unto them ; but the Light hath influence upon some of them , and Darkness upon some other . So that God's Heritage is unto him as a speckled Bird , which the Birds fly round about against her : But however let us not fly one against another , lest we fly against ourselves , whiles we have our several feathers and colours in this one Bird ; but let us bear with one another as to particular Light and Darkness , so long as we are all enlightened with the saving Knowledge of the Truth . 

We ought not indeed to be Sceptics in Religion , but every one to be persuaded in his own mind , yet in some things peradventure thou art in the Light , and I am in the Dark ; in others , the Day perhaps shines unto me , and not to thee . Let us yield to the Dispensation of the Day , and keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace ; and if in any thing we are differently minded , God shall reveal even this unto us : Nevertheless , whereunto we have already attained , let us walk by the same rule , let us mind the same thing . For thus there are some in the Visible Church , who are bemisted , when others are enlightened , and yet all agree in Fundamentals , who ought to live in Unity , and the Stronger to exercise Charity towards the Weaker ; that God , who hath begun to enlighten them in other things , will acquaint them in due time with those Truths , whereof at present they are ignorant : For it is God alone who revealeth the Light unto us . And He that formeth the Light , and createth Darkness , may in some things make it Day to one man , and night to another . We are all ( who truly fear the Lord ) Children of the Light , and of the Day , and not of the Night , nor of Darkness , as to our states , yet as to particular apprehensions in Truths of an inferior nature , it may be Day to one & Night to another . And thus it will be till the Evening cometh , but then there shall be one heart , and one way , one Lord , and his Name one . 

Use 5.  

Lastly , What hath been held forth , administereth a word of Comfort , That this Gospel-day is known to the Lord , from the Morning to the Evening of it . He knoweth the Light and also the Darkness , and who are in the one , and who in the other , and how far . And therefore He knoweth what is done by the Children of the Night to introduce Darkness , and to obscure the Day of the Gospel . For the Day is his , and the Night is his , He formeth Light and Darkness , and therefore he ordereth the Rulers of the Darkness of this world , that no more either of Ignorance , Error , Heresy , Superstition , and Idolatry on the one side ; or of Tribulation , Persecution , and hostile Opposition to the Truth and Peace on the other , shall prevail further than He hath determined . And whatsoever He hath appointed to be the portion of this Day , as to the darkening of it , yet it is our Comfort , that the Day is known to the Lord , and that He will have a care of it . For he seeth the Darkness as well as the Light of the Day , the darkness and the light are both alike to Him. He hath seen the Day from the Morning of it to this moment , and hath ordered and disposed of the darkeness of Ignorance , Error , Heresy , and Idolatry , and likewise of Affliction and Persecution in it , in times of Pagan , Arrian , or Antichristian opposition . And his care of this Day is no lesle towards the Evening of it , nor his love to to it , & ability to see to it , any lesle than in the Morning , or Noon of it . He that said , I have seen I have seen the Affliction of my People which are in Egypt , and have heard their cry , by reason of their Taskmasters ; for I know their sorrows ; knows all the Sorrows and Sufferings of his People in this Hour of the Gospel-day . It was a very dark Night with Israel in Egypt , when God spoke these words to Moses ; for than was fulfilled in the Truth , what was signified to Abraham in the Type , when an horror of great Darkness fell upon him . And yet , I have seen , I have seen , and I know , saith the Lord , in the midst of that horrid Darkness . 

And therefore however the Day prove , and Clouds and darkness arise , as perhaps they may do , marvel not at the matter , for he that is higher than the highest regardeth . Men and Devils may be high , but God is higher , yea , higher than the highest , which is a degree above the Superlative . God hath a care of his Church and Gospel , & of such as Preach it , and profess it , only it is our duty to be humbled for the sins of Churches , Ministers , Professors , which may otherwise the more darken and embitter the Day that we are now entering into , which calleth us to Prayer , Humiliation , Mourning , and Reformation , wherein if God assist us , it shall be well in the end ; and though weeping may endure for a time , yet joy cometh in the evening . For it shall come to pass , that at Evening-time it shall be Light.  

FINIS . 





Heb. 1 14.  John 9 4.  Heb. 12. 2.  1 Pet. 4. 14.  2 These . 1. 11 , 12.  

Psal . 89. 30 , 31 , 32.  1 King. 13 ▪ 21 , 22.  2 King. 18. 2.  2 Chron. 32. 25.  Psal . 6. 5.  2 Sam. 20. 3.  Psal . 30. 3.  Psa . 88 10 , 11.  Quest . Answ . Psal . 118. 17.  Quest . Answ . 2 Tim. 2. 2.  Deut. 31. 19  Josh . 2 last Chap.  2 Chr. 2. last . Ch.  Eph. 5. last . Psal . 102. 18.  Phil. 2. 15.  Mat. 12. 42. with 1 Cor. 6. 2.  Phil. 3. 21  Melch. Adam in vit . ejus . Matth. 25. 35 , 36.  rev. 14. 3.  John 12. 2  Acts 9 39  Job 7. 9 , 10.  1 Cor. 13. 12.  2 Cor. 5. 7.  Rom. 8. 24  Psal . 16. 9  Rom. 8. 25  1 Cor. 13. last . Ver. 8.  Mat. 5. 44.  Tit. 3. 2 , 3.  1 Cor. 13. 8.  1 Co. 14. 3.  Ver. 5.  Numb . 11. 15.  Deut. 34.  Job 6. 8 , 9  1 King. 89. 4.  Jonah 4. 3.  Luke 2 , 29.  Ver. 26.  Phil. 1. 23 , 24.  Phil. 1. 12.  ver . 13.  Quest . Answ . Job 2. 2.  2 Tim. 4. 6 , 7.  rev. 14. 13.  2 Tim. 4. 7 , 8.  Job 14. 14.  Ver. last . Job 7. 8 , 9 , 10.  1 Sam 28.  Chap.  1 Sam. 25. 1.  1 Sam. 28. 15.  2 Sam. 12. 23.  Psal . 90. 12  2 Chr. 21. last . 2 Chr. 28. last . Jer. 22. 18 , ●● . Job . 27. last  Mat. 25. 35 — end . 1 Tim 6. 18.  ● . 1  2 Tim. 2. 21.  1 Cor. 15. 58.  Eccl. 11. 1.  Act. 10. 38.  Eccles . 9 10.  Gal. 6. 9  2 King. 16. 3 , 4 , 5.  2 Chron. 29 , 30 , and 31 Chapters . Acts 2d . Acts 3d , v. — 44.  Acts 9th . Acts 10th . 2 Pet. 1. 13 , 14 , 15.  prov. 10. 7.  Psal . 112. 6.  Psal . 149. 6.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Hebr.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Sept.  Isa . 58. 1.  Psal . 72. 15  Mat. 21. 9  Psal . 67. 1 , 2.  Numb . 6. 24. 25.  Isa . 2 , 2.  Rom. 9 2 , 3.  Rom. 11. 13.  Phil , 3. 17.  2 These . 3. 7 , 8 , 9  1 Cor. 9 , 4. — 16. with 11. 1.  2 Cor. 8. 9  Acts 20. 33 , 34 , 35.  1 Sam. 12. 2 , 3.  2 Cor. 8. 23.  Mat. 26. 13  Acts. 36.  Heb. 11. 2 , 4.  ●●t . 5. 16.   Such are often recommended , Heb. 12. 1.  Jam. 5. 10.  Heb. 13. 7.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 1 Cor. 8. 10.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Exod. 32. 21.  2 Sam. 12.  1 Chron. 16. — 19 2  Gal. 2. 11.  Leu. 19 17.  Mat. 18. 15  Ephes . 5. 11.  1 Tim. 2. 1.  Jam 5. . 16.  Rom. 1. 9  Eph. 1. 16.  Col. 1. 3  Phil. 1. 3 , 4.  1 These . 1. 2 , 3.  2 Tim. 1. 3  Philem. v. 4  Rom. 15. 30 , 31.  Ephes . 5. 18 , 19  Phil. 1. 1●  Col. 4. 3.  1 These . 5. 25.  Heb. 13. 18.  Heb. 13. 3.  Acts 9 31.  Psal . 122. 6.  Numb . 27. 16 , 17.  Jer. 29. 12 , 13.  Act. 12. 5 — Psal . 102. 16 , 17.  Psal . 50. 5.  1 These . 5. 14.  Isa . 35. 3 , 4.  Job 4. 3 , 4.  prov. 12. 4 25.  Isa . 50 4.  Mat. 12. 12  Song 2. 5 , 7  Heb. 4. 15. with 5. 2.  Luke . 740.  Luke 7. 40  Phil. 2. 5.  2 Cor. 1.  ● . Rom. 12. 10.  Job 31. 16 , — 21.  Mat. 25. 35  Luke 6. 36.  Mat. 5. 7.  Deut. 22. 7.  Gal. 6. 10.  Joh. 12. 2.  Act. 9  3 Joh. v. 8.  Heb. 13. 2 ▪  Mat. 24. 40  1 Pet. 4. 14.  Rom. 8. 18.  rev. 6. 11.  rev. 7. 9  Psal . 72. 17  Isa . 53. 10.  Acts 11. 26  Heb. 2. 13.  Psal . 78. 2 , 3 , 4.  Ver. 5 , 6.  Exod. 12. 26 , 27 — 13. 14.  Deut. 4. 9  — 6. 9  Josh . 4. 6 , 7.  Act. 13. 36  Josh . 22. 22 — 30.  1 These . 2. 4  Psal . 17. 14  Psal . 49. 12  Psal . 45. ult . Psal . 72. 17  Gen. 17. 7.  1 Sam. 1. 11.  prov. 22 6.  2 Tim. 1. 5.  Psal . 44. 1.  — 78. 3. — 1 Sam. 2. 23. with 3. 13.  Judg. 13. 12.  Ezek. 16. 20 , 21.  1 Cor. 4. 15.  Gal. 4. 19  Act. 20. 27 ▪  3 John v. ●  2 Kings 5. 1. with v. 13.  2 Chron. 29. 11.  1 Tim. 5. 1.  See Leu. 19 ▪ 32.  Psal . 71. 17  ▪ 38.  Ps3l . 48. 12 , 13.  Psal . 102. 16 , 17.  rev. 4. 4.  Rom. 11. 36.  Eph. 3. 21.  Psal . 79. last . Psal 89. 1.  Ps . 102. 18.  Mat. 13. 19  Eph. 1. 13.  Col. 1. 5.  Jam. 1. 18.  Exod. 30. 13 , 15.  Tit. 3. 4.  prov. 8. 31.  Psal . 2. 21.  Consid . 1.  Gen. 27. 2.  Caution . 2 Chron. 32. 25.  Psal . 11 ▪ 5. 17.  Rom. 14. 12  Heb. 9 27.  Ver. 28.  Mat. 25 , 19  Mat. 25. 2●  Heb. 11. 6.  2.  Cor. 12. 4.  Jer. 17. 10.  rev. 14. 13  Quest . Answ . Heb. 11. 4.  Luk , 15. 10  Ver. 10.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 à peniculamento , quod Textor in extrema tela relinquit . Ver. 17.  1.  Particularly . 2 Ch. 29. 3.  Isa . 38. 3.  Observe . Sol.  Psal . 148. 11 , 12.  Matth. 25.  Ver. 15.  2ly . 1 Cor. 11. 31.  John 3d.  John 7. 50.  — 19 39  Mat. 19 30  Jer. 3. 10.  Ver. 13 , 14  Luke 23. 40 , 41 , 42.  Job 3. 21.  Ps . 91. last . 2 Chr. 24. 15.  2 Chr. 24. 3 , 4. — 1 Sam. 25. 1.  1 Sam. 28. 11.  Isa . 57 1.  Acts 8. 2.  Gen. 24.  Joh ▪ 17. 4.  

Mat. 24.  Luke 21. 22.  Psa . 25. 2.  Ver. 4.  Verse . 5.  Heb. 12. 26.  1 These . 3. last . 2.  Cor. 6. 2.  Heb. 12. 26 , 27.  rev. 4. 4. 11. 16. 14. 3. 19 4.  Qu.  Answ . 1.  Psal . 43. 3.  2 Tim. 2. 17.  1 John 2. 18 , 19  1 Joh. 4. 1 , 2.  3 Joh. 10.  rev. 2.  rev. 9 2.  Mat. 16. 18 28. last . rev. 7. 1 , 2● . rev. 7.  Zech. 13. 8.  Rev 9 4.  rev. 10. 1 , 2.  rev. 14. 1.  Psal . 74. 16  jia . 45. 7.  Job . 30. 26  Acts. 1. 7.  Ejus modiest quem curabit & conservabit Deus . Jun. Trem.  Obj.  Sol. 1.  rev. 16. 12  Revel . 16. 13 , 14.  Luke 21. 9 , 10 , 11.  rev. 16. 10  Quest . Answ . 1 Cor. 11. 26.  2 Cor. 3. 11.  Heb. 12. 28  Isai . 60. 1 , 2 , 4.  Isai . 60. 19 , 20.  Quest . Answ . Zech. 14. 8.  Joh. 4. 14. 3. 38 , 39  Ezek. 47.  1-6 . Isai . 11. 5  Zech. 14. 20 , 21.  Mic. 4. 3.  1.  Eph. 5. 13.  Use 2.  1 Cor. 13. 9 , 10-12 . 2 Cor. 6. 8 , 9 , 10.  Isai . 50. 10.  Use 3  Joel 3. 10.  Isa . 60. 1.  Use 4.  Isa . 60. 19 , 20.  Isa . 62. 6 , 7.  Phil. 3. 15 , 16.  Zech. 14. 9  Use 5.  Gen. 15. 12  