Something that lately passed in discourse between the King and r. h. published to prevent the mistakes and errors in a copy lately printed , contrary to the knowledge or intention of the party concerned : and not only so , but also misprinted and abused in several particulars , therefore it was thought convenient for the removing of errors and mistakes to be reprinted in a more true form and order for the satisfaction of others . r. h.  

London , printed by a. w. for g. c. and are to be sold at his shop at the black spread . Eagle at the West-end of Paul's , 1660.  

Something that lately passed in discourse between the King and r. h. &c.  

R. h.   Since the Lord hath called us and gathered us •o be a persons , to walk in his fear , and in his truth , we have always suffered and been persecuted by the powers that have ruled , and been made a prey of , for departing from iniquity ; and when the breach of no just law could be charged against us , than they made laws of purpose to ensnare us , and so our sufferings wert unjustly continue . 



King .  it is true , those that have ruled over you , have been cruel , and have professed much which they have not done . 



R h.   And likewise the same sufferings do now abound in more cruelty against us in many parts of this nation , as for instance , one at Thetford in Norfolk , where Henry 〈◊〉 ( Ministering unto the persons ) was taken out of the meeting and whipped , and sent out of the town from paris• to parish towards Lancashire , and the chief gro•nd of his accusation in his pass ( Which was shown to the King ) was because he denied to take the oath of allegiance and supremacy , and so because that for conscience sake we cannot swear , but have learned obedience to the doctrine of Christ , which saith , swear not at all ; hereby an occasion is taken against us to persecute us : and it is well known that we have not sworn for any , nor against any , but have kept to the truth , and and our yea hath been yea , and our nay , nay , in all things which is more than the oath of those that are out of the truth . 



King .  but why can you not swear , for an oath is a common thing amongst men to any engagement ? 



R. h.   Yes , it is manifest , and we have seen it by experience ; and it is so common amongst men to swear and engage either for or against things , that there is no regard taken to them , nor fear of an oath , that therefore which we speak of in the truth of our hearts , is more than what they swear . 



King .  but can you not promise as before the Lord ( which is the substance of the oath ) 



R. h.   Yes , what we do affirm , we can promise before the Lord , and take him to our witness in it , but our so promising hath not been accepted , but the ceremony of an oath they have stood for , without which all other things were accounted of no effect . 



King .  but how May we know from your words , that you will perform ? 



R. h.   By proving of us ; for they that swear are not known to be faithful but by proving of them ; and so we b• those that have tried us , are found to be truer in our promises than •therss by their oaths , and to those that do yet p•ove u• , we shall appear the same . 



King .  pray what is your principle ? 



R. h.   O•• principle is this , that Jesus Christ is the true light which enlighteneth every one that cometh into the wo•ld ▪ that all men through him Might believe ; and that th•y were to obey and follow this light , as they have received it , whereby they ma• be led unto God , and unto righ••o•sn•sse . and the knowl•dge of the truth , that they May be saved . 



King .  this do all Christians confess to be truth , and he is not a Christian that will deny it . 



R. h.   But many have denied it , both in words & w•itings , and opposed us in it ▪ and above an h•ndred books are put forth in opposition unto this principle . 

That some of the Lords standing by the King , said , that none would deny that every one is enlightened . 



Lord .  and one of the Lords asked , how long we had been called Quakers , or did we own that name ? 



R. h.   That name was given to us in scorn and detision about twelve years since , but there was some that lived in this truth before we had that name given unto us . 



King .  how long is it since you owned this judgement and way ? 



R.h.   It is near twelve years since i owned this truth according to the manifestation of it . 



King .  do you own the sacrament ? 



R.h.   As for the word s•crame•t , i do not read of it in the scripture ; but a• for the body and blood of Christ i own ; and that th•re is no remission without blood . 



King .  well that is it ; but do you n•t believe that every one is •ommanded to rec•ive it ? 



R. h.   This we do believe , •hat according as it is written in the scripture , that Christ at his last supper took bread and broke it , and g•ve to his disciple ; and also took the cup and blessed it , and said unto them , and as often as ye do this ( That is , as often as they broke bread ) you show forth the lo•ds' death till he come ; and this we believe they did , and they eat their bread in singleness of heart from house to house : and Christ did come again un•o them according to his promise , after which they said , we being many are one bread , for we are all partakers of this own bread . 



King's friend .  than one of the King's friends said , it is true : for as m•ny grains make one bread , so they being many members were one body . 

another of them said , if they be the bread , than they must be broken . 



R. h.   There is difference between that bread which he broke at his last supper , wherein they were to show forth , as in a sign , his death until he came : and this , whereof they speak , they being many , are one bread for herein they were come more into the substance , and to speak more mystical , as they knew it in the spirit . 



King's friends .  then they said , it is truth , and he had spoken ? nothing but truth . 



King .  how know you that you are inspired by the Lord ? 



R.h.   According as we read in the scriptures , that the inspiration of the almighty giveth understanding , so by its inspiration is an understanding given us of the things of God . 



Lord .  than one of the Lords said , how do you know that you are led by the true spirit ? 



R. . H.   This we know , because the spirit of truth it rep•oves the world of sin , and by it we were reproved of sin , and also are led from sin unto righteousness and obedience of truth , by which effects we know it is the true spirit , for the spirit of the wicked one doth not lead unto such things . 



King and Lords .  then the King and his Lords said , it was truth . 



King .  well , of this you May be assured , that you shall none of you suffer for your opinions or religion , so long as you live peaceably , and you have the word of a King for it , and i have also given forth a declaration to the same purpose , that none shall wrong you nor abuse you . 



King .  how do you own magistrates or magistracy ? 



R.h.   Thus we do own magistrates , whosoever is set up by God , whether King as supreme , or any set in authority by him , who are for the punishment of evil doers , and the praise of them that do well ; such we shall submit unto , and assist in righteous and civil things both by body and estate : and if any magistrates do that which is unrighteous , we must declare against it , only submit under it by a patient suffering , and not rebel against any by insurrections , plots and contrivances . 



King   then the King said , that is enough . 



Lord .  then on of the Lords a•ked , why do you meet together , seeing every one of you have the church in yourselves ? 



R. h.   According as it is written in the scriptures the church is in God , thes. 1.1 . and they that feared the Lord , did meet often together in the fear of the Lord , and to us it is profitable , and herein we are edified and strengthened in the life of truth . 



King .  how did you first come to believe the scriptures were truth ? 



R. h.   I have believed the scriptures from a child to be a declaration of truth , when i had but a literal knowledge , natural education and tradition : but now i know the scriptures to be true , by the manifestation and operation of the spirit of God fulfilling them in me . 



King .  in what manner do you meet , and what is the order in your meetings ? 



R· h.   We do meet in the same order as the persons of God did , waiting upon him : and if any have a word of exhortation from the Lord , he May speak it , or if any have a word of reproof or admonition , and as every one hath received the gift , so they May minister one unto another , and May be edified one by another , whereby a growth into the knowledge of the truth is administered to one another . 

One of the Lords . then you know not so much as you May know , but there is a growth then to be admitted of . 



R.h.   Yes we do grow daily into the knowledge of the truth in our exercise and obedience to it . 



King .  are any of your friends gone to Rome ? 



R. h.   Yes , there is one in prison in Rome . 



King .  why did you send him thither ? 



R. h.   We did not send him thither , but he found something upon his spirit from the Lord , whereby he was called to go to declare against superstition and idolatry , which is contrary to the will of God . 

King's friend said , there were two of them at Rome , but one was dead . 



King .  have any of your friends been with the great Turk ? 



R.h.   Some of our friends have been in that country . 

Other things were spoken concerning the liberty of the servants of the Lord , which were called of him into his service ; that to them there was no limitation to parishes or places , but as the Lord did guide them in his work and service by his spirit . 

So the King promised that we should not any ways suffer for our opinion or religion , and so in love passed away 



Finis . 

















































