Certain questions propounded to the assembly , to answer by the scriptures : whether corporal punishments May be inflicted upon such as hold errors in religion . 1.  That no man Might buy or sell , save he that had the mark , or the name of the beast , or the number of his name , rev. 13. 17.  See rev. 14. 8 , 9 , 10.  
2 , ye are bought with a price ; be not the servants of men , 1 cor. 7. 23.  
3.  Ye suffer fools gladly , 2 cor. 11. 19 and yet i May not be suffered . 
by s. r.  

London , printed anno dom. 1646.  

To the impartial reader . 

If in this life only we had hope in Christ , we are of all men most miserable : for almost every man thinks himself most happy , that can do us the most mischief : so that scarce any place can hardly be found in which we can be let alone : notwithstanding , we eat our own bread , and wear our own clothing : ( To say no more ) live quietly , & do no man wrong . We are daily unjustly accused , and liable to be stripped of outward comforts ; because we will not believe and practise that which is in our understandings a lie . And is it not strange , that some dare affirm that to be truth , and would have others compelled to believe it : notwithstanding , they cannot read it unto us out of the holy scriptures , neither can they prove themselves to be our spiritual Masters . If they can , we are content to be their spiritual servants , and believe , and practice , what and how much of any religion they please to appoint . But until they can prove to us , to have such power , it will be to no purpose for them to appoint us what to believe , &c. & that that which is truth , May more clearly appear . I desire they would give a plain and full answer ( To these questions i have propounded ) according to the scriptures ; that so if we be mistaken , we trust we shall be glad to see it , and embrace it , &c.  

Certain questions propounded to the synod . 

Quest . 1.  

Whether corporal punishments can open blind eyes , and give light to dark understandings ? 

2 whether carnal punishments can produce any more than a carnal repentance and obedience ? 

3 whether the destroying of men's bodies for errors , be not a means to prevent their conversion ; seeing some are not called until the eleventh hour : and if they should be cut off for their errors the seventh hour . how should they have come in ? mat. 20 6.  

4 whether those who would force other men's consciences , be willing to have their own forced ? 

5 whether it be wisdom and safe to make such sole judges in matte•s of religion , who are not infallible , but as liable to err as others ? 

6 if a a father , or magistrate have not power to force a virgin to marry one she cannot love ; whether they have power to force one where they cannot believe , against the light and checks of their own consciences ? 

7 whether the scripture makes the magistrate judge of our faith ? 

8 if the magistrate May determine what is truth ; whether we must not believe , and live by the Magistrotes faith , and change our religion at their pleasures ? And if nothing must be preached , nor no books of religion printed , nor be allowed to pass , unless certain men May please to approve , and give their allowance thereto , under their hands ; whether such do not by this practice , tell God , that unless he will reveal his truth first to them , they will not suffer it to be published , & so not known to be ( Even with him ) notwithstanding the magistrate May and aught to hinder the printing and publishing of that which shall be against the safety and welfare of the state . But we must distinguish between matters civil and religious : we question their power in the latter . Also , whether the licencer setting his hand to the book to licence it , ( He being a priest by his ordination and from the Pope ) be not the mark of the beast , spoken of revel. 13. 17 ? And whether all such as have gone to them to licence the truth ought not to repent of it , and do so no more ? Also whether these men be fit to be licencers of the truth , who when the truth hath been tendered them to be licenced , they have confessed the truth of it , as they have been free to licence it ; but refused , because they durst not ? And whether it can be made appear , that God hath revealed his truth first to these ministers of England , and so the first spreaders of it ? Instance , who opposed the prelates , the ministers , or the persons ; first ? And so of the rest . 

9 whether it be not the command of Christ , that the tares ( Those that walk in lies ) and the wheat ( Those that walk in the truth ) should be let alone ; and the blind ( Led in a false religion ) which are offended at the declaring of the truth , should be let alone ? mat. 13. 30. 38.  Mat. 15. 14 

10 whether he was not reproved , that would have fire from heaven to devour those that reject Christ , Luke 9 54 , 55.  

11 whether the servants of the Lord are not forbidden to strive , but to be gentle towards all ? 2 tim. 4. 2.  

12 whether the saints weapons against errors , be carnal or no ? 2 cor. 10. 4.  

13 whether it was not Christ's command , that his disciple when they were persecuted , they should pray ; and if cursed , bless ? 

14 whether the scriptures declare , that the saints should persecute others ; and whether the gentle lambs of Christ can serve the wolves so , seeing he sent his as sheep among wolves , and not as wolves among sheep , to kill and imprison , matth. 10. 16.  

15 whether Christ hath said , he will have an unwilling persons compelled to serve him ? 

16 whether ever God did plant his church by violence and bloodshed ? 

17 whether tares May not become wheat , and the blind see , and those that now oppose and resist Christ , afterwards receive him : and he that is now in the devil's snare , May get out , and come to repentance : and such as are idolaters , as the Corinthians were , May become true worshippers , as they that are strangers May become God's persons ? 

18 whether to convert an heretic , and to cast out unclean spirits , be done any other way then by the finger of God , by the mighty power of the spirit in the word ? 

19 whether he that is not conformable to Christ , May not at the same time be a good subject to the state , and as profitable to it as any ? 

20 whether men that differ in religion , May not be tolerated , seeing Abraham abode among the Canaanites along time ; yet contrary to them in religion , Genes . 13. 7.  & 16. 13. and he sojourned in Gezer , and King abimel•ch gave him leave to abide in his land , gen. 20. 21. 23. 24.  And Isaac dwelled in the same land , yet contrary in religion gen. 31.  The persons of Israel were about 430. years in Egypt , and afterwards in Babylon , all which time they differed in religion from the state , exod. 12. 2 chron. 36.  Christ and his disciple differed from the common religion of the state , Acts 19 20. and when the enemies of the truth raised up any tumults , the wisdom of the magistrate most wisely appeased them , acts 18. 14.  & 19 15.  

21 weather it be not better for us , that a patent were granted to monopolise all the corn and clothe , and to have it measured out unto us at their price and pleasure , which yet were intolerable ; as for some men to appoint and measure out unto us what and how much we shall believe and practice in matters of religion . 

22.  Whether there be not the same reason that they should be appointed by us what they shall believe and practice in religion , as for them to do so to us , seeing we can give as good grounds for what we believe and practice ( As they can do for what they would have ) if not better . 

23 whether men heretofore have not in zeal for religion , persecuted the son of God , in stead of the son of perdition ? 

24 whether it is not a burden great enough for the magistrate to govern and judge in civil causes , to preserve the subjects rights , peace and safety ? 

25 if the magistrate must judge and punish in matters of religion , the magistrate must ever be troubled with such persons and such causes : & if after his conscience be convinced , he had no such power , or see that it was truth he punished ; what horrors of conscience is he like to possess ? 

26 whether he is fit to appoint punishments , that is not fit to judge ? 

27 if the magistrate must punish errors in religion , whether it doth not impose a necessity that the magistrate is to have a certainty of knowledge in all intricate cases ? and whether God calls such to that place , whom he hath not furnished with abilities for that place ? And if a magistrate be in darkness , and spiritually blind , and dead ; be fit to judge of light , of truth and error ? and whether such be fit for the place of the magistracy ? then whether it be not a scruple to a tender conscience to submit to such in civil causes , because not appointed to that place by God ? whereas if the magistrates power be only civil , the doubt is resolved , because such as May be fit for magistrates , and men ought in conscience in civil things to submit unto them . 

28 whether there be any scripture that saith , that any man's conscience is to be constrained , and whether the magistrate can reach men's consciences ; and whether he be fit to make a law to conscience , who cannot know when conscience keeps it , and that cannot reward conscience for keeping it , nor punish the conscience for the breaking of it ? 

29 whether it be not in vain for us to have bibles in English , if against our souls persuasions from the scriptures we must believe as the church believes ? 

30 whether the magistrate be not wronged , to give him the title of civil magistrate only , if his power be spiritual ? 

31 whether laws made merely concerning spiritual things , be not spiritual also ? 

32 whether if no civil law be broken , the civil peace be hurt or no ? 

33 whether in compulsion for conscience , not only the guilty , but the innocent suffer also ? As if the husband be an heretic , his sufferings May cause the innocent wife and children shall suffer as deeply also . 

34 whether such as are spiritually dead , be capable to be spiritually infected ? 

35 whether God will accept of a painted sepulchre , a shadow , a mere compliment of obedience , when the heart is dead and rotten , and hates God , and all that is good ? God hath no need of hypocrites ; much less of forced ones : God will have those to worship him as can worship him in spirit and truth , John 4.  

36 whether the scriptures appoint any other punishment to be inflicted upon heretics , than rejection and excommunication ? tit. 3. 10.  

37 whether freedom of conscience would not join all sorts of persons to the magistrate , because each shared in the benefit ? 

38 whether those states ( As the Low-countries , ) who grant such liberty , do not live quietly , and flourish in great prosperity ? 

39 whether persecution for conscience do not harden men in their way , and make them cry out of oppression and tyranny ? 

40 whether some corporal punishments would not make thousands in England face about to popery , as it did in Queen Mary's time . 

41 whether laws made concerning religion , have not always catched the most holy men ; witness Daniel and the three children : the rest will be of what religion you will . 

42 whether the saints crave the help of the powers of this world to bring Christ to them , or fear their powers to keep him from them ? 

43 if no religion is to be practised , but that which the commonwealth shall approve on : what if they will approve of no religion ? shall men have no religion at all ? 

44 whether the saints ought not to continue their assemblies of their worship of God , without , or against the consent of the magistrates ; they being commanded to do so , mal. 28. 18 , 19 , 20.  Heb. 10. 25.  By an angel from God , Acts 5. 20.  It was the apostles practice ( Who were not rebellious nor seditious ) act. 4. 18 , 19 , 20 , 23. and 5. 22 , 28.  

45 whether uniformity in religion in the state , do not oppress million of souls , and impoverish the saints bodies . 

46 whether God's persons have not disputed and taught a religion new and worship , contrary to the state they lived in , and spread it in travelling and open places ; as appears act. 17. 2. 17. and 18. 48. yet no origancy and impetuousness . Yea , contrary to public authority in the nations uniformity , in false worship , dan. 3. the three children ; so the apostle , act. 4 , 5.  The saints have openly witnessed , that in matters spiritual , Jesus was King , act. 17 7. and for this Christ suffered ; as appears by his accusation , John 9 19  Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews , psal. 2. 6.  Act. 2. 36.  God's persons have seemed the disturbers of the civil state , upon the apostles preaching , there followed uproars , and tumults , and uproars , at Iconium , at Ephesus , at Jerusalem , act. 14. 4. act. 19 29 , 40 , act. 21 , 30 , 31.  

47 whether Jesus Christ , appointed any material prisons for blasphemers of him ? Whether notwithstanding the confidence of the truth they have , to which they would force others , whether the Bishops , their fathers , &c. have not been as deeply mistaken ; for now they , are found to be Antichristian . 

48 whether it be not a natural law for every man that liveth , to worship that which he thinketh is God , & as he thinketh he ought to worship ; and to force otherwise , will be concluded an oppression of those persons so forced . Whether it be best for us to put out our eyes , and see by the eyes of others who are as dim-sighted ? In my judgement , your judgement is a lie : will ye compel me to believe a lie ? compel ye a man to be present at a worship which he loathes ? 

49 either the civil , or the spiritual state must be supreme : which of these must judge the other in spiritual matters ? if the magistrate , than he is above the church , and so the head of the church ; and he hath his power from the persons : ( To govern the church ) whether it will not follow , that the persons , as a persons , have originally as men a power to govern the church , to see her do her duty , to reform & correct her ; and so the spouse of Christ , the wife of Christ must be corrected according to the pleasure of the world , who lie in wickedness ? 1 John 5.  

What power a church hath over a magistrate , if he be a member of the church : if members , they May be excommunicated , if so discerning . 

reason 1.  because magistrates must be subject to Christ , but Christ censures all offenders , 1 cor. 5. 4 , 5.  

2.  Every brother must be subject to Christ's censure , mat. 18. 15 , 16 , 17. but magistrates are brethren , deut. 17. 15.  

3.  They May censure all within the church , 1 cor. 5. 12.  

4.  The church hath a charge of all the souls of the church , and must give account of it , heb. 13. 17.  

5.  Christ's censures are for the good of souls 1 cor. 5. 6. but magistrates must not be denied any privilege for their souls , else they by being magistrates , should lose a privilege of Christ's . 

6.  In which privileges , Christians are all one , gal. 2. 28.  Col. 3. 11.  

Sins of magistrates are hateful and condemned , Esay 10. 1. mich. 3. 1.  it 's a paradox , that a magistrate May be punished by the church , and yet that they are judges of the church . 

50 whether every man upon that religion , which in his conscience he is persuaded is true , whether he doth not upon the truth thereof venture his soul . 

If that religion the magistrate , be persuaded be true , he owes a threefold duty . 

First , approbation , esa 49.  Rev. 21. with a tender respect to the truth , and the professors of it . 

Secondly , personal submission of his soul to the power of Jesus his government , matth. 18. 1 cor. 5.  

Thirdly , protection of them , and their estates from violence and injury , rom. 13. to a false religion he owes . 

1.  Permission ( For approbation he owes not to what is evil ) as mat. 13. 30. for public peace and quietness . 

2.  Protection of the persons of his subjects ( Though of a false worship ) that no injury be offered to the persons or goods of any , rom. 13.  

object . the Kings of Inda compelled men to serve the Lord . ergo , Kings May now compel , &c.  

answ . they who lived under the Jewish worship only were compelled , strangers were not . 

Secondly , they were not compelled to any thing , but what they knew and confessed was their duty , 2 chron. 16. 12 , 13 , 14 , 15.  

Thirdly , if they did compel , their actions were not moral to oblige other Kings to do so . May not the prelates by the same reason allege the order of the priesthood for their episcopacy , as you for the kingly . 

Fourthly , the Kings of Israel did not imprison schismatics , pharices' , Herodians , &c.  

Fifthly , the Kings of Israel had extraordinary profits to direct them what to do infallibly ; these Kings have none such to direct them . 

Sixthly , if the law be moral ; where is it set down in Christ's testament ( Which is to be our rule ) that the magistrate shall compel all to his religion : for to another he will not . 

object . then every man May live as he list . 

answ . had not he as good live as he list ; as live as you list ? 

object . then it seems errors May be suffered . 

answ . if truth May be suffered also , it will prevail against errors . it 's no more in their power to hinder errors , than it was in the power of the prelates to hinder mens preaching writing , and speaking against them . If you can hinder Satan's suggestions , and the vain imaginations of men's hearts , and expel the darkness in men , and place light in stead thereof , and hinder men from speaking each to other ; than you can suppress erors' ▪ else not , the Lord only can surprise errors by the mighty power of his spirit with his word , and we believe he will certainly do it in his time to his glory , and the comfort of his persons amen . 

One thing more i desire to know why the priests of England assume to themselves the title of a ( Divine ) is it because they are exercised in divine truths , or because they partake of the divine nature , or both , if so , than many tradesmen May as well have the title of divine given them as well as they because they partake of the divine nature , and are as much exercised in matters divine , as the most of them , but it is a question to me , whether the title divine is to be given to any man , but only to God alone ; whose being , is only divine . 

Finis 





cor. 1. 9  










