THE Best Bargain . A SERMON preached to the Court at Theobalds' , on Sunday , Sept. 21 , 1623.  

By jos. HALL. D.D.  

LONDON , Printed by J. Haviland for Nath. Butter . 1623.  



TO THE RIGHT Honourable WILLIAM Earl of Pembroke , Lord High Chamberlain ; CHANCELLOUR of the University of Oxford ; One of his MAJESTY'S most Honourable Privy Counsel . 

RIGHT HONOURABLE , 

Let it please you to receive from the Press what you vouchsafed to require from my pen : Unworthy I confess either of the public light , or the beams of your Honours judicious eyes ; yet such as ( besides the motive of common importunity ) I easily apprehended might be not a little us full for the times ; which , if ever , require quickening : Neither is it to no purpose that the world should see in what stile we speak to the Court , not without acceptation . This , and what ever service I may be capable of , are justly devoted to your Lordship , whom all good hearts follow with true Honour , as the great Patron of learning , the sincere friend of Religion , and rich purchaser of Truth . The God of Heaven add to the number of such Peers , and to the measure of your Lo : graces and happiness . 

Your Honours in all humble and faithful observance , jos : Hall.  

THE BEST Bargain . 

PROV . 23.23 . 

Buy the Truth , and sell it not . 

The subject of my Text is a Bargain , and Sale. A bargain enjoined , a sale forbidden : and the subject of both bargain and sale , is Truth ; A bargain able to make us all rich ; a sale able to make any of us miserable ; Buy the Truth , and sell it not ; A sentence of short sound , but large extent ; the words are but seven syllables , an easy load for our memories , the matter is a world of work ; a long task for our lives . And first , let me call you to this Mart , which holds both now , and ever ; If ye love yourselves be ye customers at this shop of heaven ; Buy the Truth . 

In every bargain there is merx , and mercatura ; the commodity , and the match ; The commodity to be bought is the Truth ; the match made for this commodity , is Buying , Buy the Truth . An ill judge may put a good Interrogatory ; yet it was a question too good for the mouth of a Pilate , What is Truth ? The schools have wearied themselves in the solution ; To what purpose should I read a Metaphysical Lecture to Courtiers ? Truth is as Time , one in all ; yet , as Time , though but one , is distinguished into past , present , future , and every thing hath a Time of it own ; so is Truth variously distinguished , according to the subjects wherein it is ; This is Anselmes' , cited by Aquinas ; I had rather say , Truth is as light : ( send forth thy Truth , and thy light , saith the Psalmist ) which ( though but one in all ) yet there is one light of the Sun , another of the Moon , another of the Stars , another of this lower air : There is an essential , and causal Truth in the Divine understanding , which the schools call Primo-primam ; This will not be sold , cannot be bought ; God will not part with it , the world is not worth it ; This Truth is as the Light in the body of the Sun . There is an intrinsical or formal truth in things truly existing ; For , Being and True are convertible ; and Saint Austen rightly defines Verum est illud quod est ; All this created Truth in things , is derived exemplarily , and causally , from that increated Truth of God ; this the schools call Secundo-primam ; and it is as the light of the Sunbeams , cast upon the Moon , and Stars . There is an extrinsecall , or secondary truth of propositions following upon , and conformable to the truth of the things expressed : thus , Verum is no other than Esse declaratiwm , as Hilary ; And this Truth , being in the thing itself subiectively , in words expressively , in the mind of man terminatively , presupposeth a double conformity or adequation ; Both of the understanding to the matter conceived ; and of the words to the understanding ; so as Truth is when we speak as we think , and think as it is ; And this Truth is as the light diffused from those heavenly bodies , to the Region of this lower air ; This is the Truth we are called to Buy : But this derivative and relative Truth , whether in the mind , or in the mouth , hath much multiplicity , according to the matter either conceived , or uttered ; There is a Theological Truth , there is a natural , there is a moral , there is a civil ; All these must be dear bought ; but the best at the highest rate , which is Theological , or divine ; whether in the principles , or necessary conclusions ; The principles of divine Truth are Scriptura veritatis , Dan. 10.  The Law of Truth , Mal. 2.  The word of Truth , 2.  Cor. 6.  The necessary conclusions are they , which upon irrefragable inferences are deduced from those holy grounds : Shortly then , every parcel of Divine Truth , whether laid down in Scripture , or drawn necessarily from Scripture , is this Mercimonium sacrum , which we are bidden to Buy ; Buy the Truth . 

This is the commodity ; The match is , Buy ; that is , Beaten the price , and pay it . Buy it ; Of whom ? For what ? Of whom , but of the owner , of the Maker ? 

The owner ; It is Veritas Domini , God's Truth , Psal. 117.  His stile is , the Lord God of Truth , Psal. 31.  The Maker ; The works of his hand are truth , and judgement , Psal. 111.  And if any usurping spirit of error shall have made a free-bootie of Truth , and shall withhold it in unrighteousness , we must redeem it out of his hands with the highest ransom . 

What is the price ? That is the main thing in buying ; For , Buying is no other than pactio pretij : Elsewhere God proclaims ; Ho , every one that thirsteth , come , buy wine and milk without money , and without price , Esa. 55.  This is a Donation , in form of sale : But , here must be a price in the hand ; God will give mercy , and not sell it ; He will sell Truth , and not give it : For what will he sell it ? First , for Labour ; The Heathen Poet could say , his gods sold learning for sweat ; The original word here used is ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) Compara ; Get it any way , either labour , or precio ; yea labour , ut precio . This great foreman of God's shop tells us we cannot have it , under . Prou. 2.4 . We must seek for her as silver , and search for her , as for hide Treasures ; The vein of Truth lies low , it must be digged , and delved for to the very centre . If Truth could be bought with ease and pleasure , many a lazy Christian would bid fair for it , who now resolve rather upon want , than toil . The slothful worldling will rather take up a falsehood for Truth , than beaten his brain to discern Truth from falsehood ; an error of freecost is better than an high-rated Verity ; Labour for Truth is turned over for the task of Churchmen ; no life savours to these phlegmatic Spirits , but that of the Lilies , Neque laborant , neque nent ; They neither labour nor spin ; This dull resolution is unworthy of a Christian , yea of a reasonable soul ; and if we should take up no other for the body , we should be fed with hunger , and clothed with nakedness , the earth should be our featherbed , and the sky our Canopy , we should abound with want , live savagely , and die miserably . It was the just Canon of the Apostle , He that labour's not , let him not eat ; Certainly , he can never eat of the heavenly Manna of Truth , that will not step forth to gather it : Hear this ye delicate Courtiers , that would hear a Sermon if ye could rise out of your beds ; that would lend God an hour , if ye could spare it from your pleasures ; the God of heaven scorns to have his precious Truth so basely underualued ; if ye bid God less than labour for Truth , I can give you no comfort , but that ye may go to hell with ease . 

The markets of Truth as of all other commodities vary : It is the rule of Casuists , justitia pretij non consistit in individuo ; The justice of the Price doth not pitch ever upon a point ; Sometimes the price of Truth hath risen , it would not be bought but for danger , sometimes , not under loss , not under disgrace , not under imprisonment , not under exile , sometimes yet dearer , not under pain , yea sometimes it hath not gone for less than blood . It did cost Elias danger , Michaiah disgrace , jeremie imprisonment , the Disciples loss , john and Athanasius exile , the holy Confessors pain , the holy Martyr's death ; Even the highest of these is pretium legitimum , if God call for it , how ever nature may tax it as rigorous , yea such as the frank hearts of faithful Christians have bidden at the first word for Truth ; What do ye weeping , and breaking my heart ; For I am ready not to be bound only , but to die for the name of the Lord jesus , saith S. Paul , Act. 21.  Skin for skin , yea all that a man hath will he give for his life , saith Satan ; but skin , & life , & all must a man give for Truth , & not think it an hard pennyworth ; Neither count I my life dear unto me that I may finish my course with joy , saith the chosen vessel , to his Ephesians . O the heroical spirits of our blessed forefathers , that stuck not to give their dearest heartblood for but some corollaries of sacred Truth ; whose burning zeal to Truth consumed them before those fires of Martyrdom , and sent up their pure and glorious souls , like Manoah's Angel , to heaven , in the flame . Blessed be God ; Blessed be his Anointed , under whose gracious Sceptre we have enjoyed days as much more happy than theirs , as their hearts were more fervent than ours : We may now buy Truth at a better hand ; stake but our labour , we carry it with thanks ; I fear there want not those that would be glad to mar the market ; It can be only known to heaven what treacheries the malice of hell may be a brewing . Had but that powder once taken , nothing had been abated of the highest price of our predecessors ; We had paid for every dram of Truth , as many ounces of blood , as ever it cost the frankest Martyr ; should the Devil have been suffered to do his worst , we might not have grudged at this price of Truth , Non est delicata in Deum , & secura confessio ; qui in me credit , debet suum sanguinem fundere , saith jerome . Christian profession is no secure or delicate matter , he that believes must be no niggard of his blood . But why thus dear ? Not without good reason : Monopolies use to enhance the price : Ye can buy Truth at no shop but one , In coelo praeparata est Veritas tua , Psal. 89.2 . Thy truth is prepared in heaven . And it is a just Rule of Law , Quisque in rebus suis est moderator , & arbyter : Every man may rate his own : Neither is this only the sole commodity of God , but besides , dear to the owner . Dilexisti veritatem ; thou hast loved Truth , saith the Psalmist . And it is a true rule in the Cases of Commerce , Affectus aestimari potest , Our love may be valued in the price . Yea , OH God , thy love to Truth cannot be valued ; It is thyself , thou that art Truth itself hast said so , I am the Way , the Truth , and the Life ; we cannot therefore know how much thou lovest thy Truth , because as thyself is infinite , so is thy love to thyself : What should we hunt for comparisons ? If all the earth were gold , what were it ? when even very heaven itself is trash to thee in respect of Truth : no marvel if thou set it at an high rate ; It is not more precious to thee , than beneficial to us. It frees us , joh. 8.32 . It renews us , jam. 1.18 . It confirms us , prov. 12.19 . It sanctifies us , joh. 17.17 . It defends us , Psal. 91.4 . Shortly , it doth all for us that God doth , for God works by his Almighty word , and his word is Truth , joh. 17.  Therefore buy the Truth . And if Truth be thus precious , thus beneficial ; how comes it to pass that it is neglected , contemned ? Some pass by it , and do not so much as cheapen it ; Others cheapen it , but bid nothing ; Others bid something , but under foot ; Others bid well , but stake it not ; others last stake down , but revoke it . The first that pass by and cheapen it not , are careless unbelievers ; The next that cheapen it , and bid nothing , are formal Christians ; The third that bid something but not enough , are worldly semi-christians ; The fourth that bid well and stake it nor , are glorious hypocrites ; The last that stake down and revoke it , are damnable Apostats . Take all these out of the society of men ; and how many customers hath God that care to buy the Truth ? If Truth were some rich chattel , it would be bought ; If Truth were some goodly Lordship , or the reversion of some good Office , it would be bought ; If Truth were some Benefice ; or spiritual promotion ( O times ! ) it would be bought ; Yea , how dear are we content to pay for our filthy lusts ; we will needs purchase them ( too oft ) with shame , beggary , disease , damnation ; Only the saving Truth of God will not off hand . What is the reason of this ? First of all ; It is but bare , simple , plain , honest , homely Truth , without welt , without guard ; It will abide none but native colours , it scorneth to woo favour with farthing , and licking , and counterfaisance ; it hate's either bought , or borrowed beauty ; and therefore , like some native face among the painted , looks course , and rusty . There are two shops that get away all the custom from Truth , The shop of Vanity , the shop of Error ; The one sells knacks and gewgaws , the other false wares , and adulterate ; both of their commodities are so gilded , and gaudy , and glittering , that all fools throng thither , and complain to want elbowroom , and strive who shall be first served ; whereas the secret work of artless , and unpolisht Truth can win no eye to view it , no tongue to ask so much , as , What will it cost me ? O ye sons of men , how long will ye love vanity , and seek after lies ? 

Secondly , though Truth in itself be always excellent , yet the issue of it is not seldom distasteful ; Veritas odium : There is one Michaiah whom I hate : am I become your enemy , because I tell you the truth ? And this is the cause that Friar Menot alleges , why Truth in this Time was so unwelcome to the Court. But if Truth be the mother of Hatred , she is the daughter of Time , and Truth hath learned this of Time , to devour her own brood ; So that , in Time , Truth shall consume hatred ; and at the last , a galling Truth shall have more thanks , than a smoothing supparisitation . In the mean time , Veritas nihil erubescit praeterquam abscondi ; Truth blusheth at nothing but secrecy , as Tertullian . 

How ever then fond , or false hearts value the Truth , let us , that should be wise Christians , esteem it as the pearl hid in the field , which the man sold all that ever he had to purchase . Would it not set any heart on fire with an holy anger , to see what the enemies of Truth bid , and give for falsehood , for faction ? Their liberty , their country , the life of their Sovereign , the eternal state of their souls hath not seemed too dear to cast away upon an ill bargain of mis-religion ; and shall not we bid so much as our zealous well-wishes , our effectual endeavours , our careful observances for the undoubted Truth of our Maker and Redeemer ? What shall I say to the miserable and stupid carelessness of these thriftless and godless times ; wherein every thing is apprised , every thing is bought , save that which is most precious , most beneficial , Truth . Ye great ones are made for precedents to the inferior world ; your example is able to bring either good or evil into fashion ; For God's sake , for your soul's sake , what ever transactions ye make for the world , lay your plots for the blessed purchase of Truth ; O let not your fickle honours , your unsatisfying pleasures , your worthless profits , yea your momentanie lives seem dear to you in comparison of heavenly Truth . It is no shame in other parts for great Peers to be Merchants ; Mercatores tui erant principes , saith the Angel concerning Babylon , Revel . 18.  Thy Merchants were the Princes of the earth ; And why should not ye great ones be the Merchants of Truth ? Blessed be the God of Truth , ye are so . It is no proud word to say , That no Court under heaven hath so rich a stock of Truth , as this of Great Britain ; yet let me tell you , the very Angels knew not so much , but they desired to know more , Ephes. 3.10 . And if ye had already that vespertine knowledge of the Saints , which ye shall once have in heaven , yet know that this bargain stands not more in the judgement , than in the affections : What ever our speculations may be , if our hearts be not set upon Truth , we may be Brokers , we are not Merchants ; Brokers for others , not Merchants for ourselves . As our Saviour then , when he bids us sell all , forsake all , holds it done , when in preparation of mind we are ready to abdicate all for his name , though we do it not ; so doth God hold us to buy Truth , when we bestow our best thoughts , our dearest well-wishes upon it , though we have it already . O stir up your languishing zeal , ye noble Courtiers , rouse up your drooping love to divine Truth ; Give your hearts to it , ye cannot but give all for it ; And if ye do not find the sweet gain of this bargain , in this lower Region of error ; and confusion , ye shall once find it in those eternal , and empireall habitations of Truth , where the God of Truth shall make up the Truth of his promises , with the everlasting truth of his glorious performances ; where Mercy , and Truth shall so meet , and embrace one another , that both of them shall embrace the faithful soul , for ever and ever . 

This for the Bargain of Truth ; The forbidden sale followeth ▪ : sell it not . Commonly what we buy , we may sell. Alexander , not the Great , but the Good , sold Mitres , Keys , Altars ; the verse gives the reason ; Emerat ille prius , He bought them . So Saint Austen of Simon Magus , Volebat emere spiritum Sanctum , quia vendere volebat spiritum Sanctum ; He would buy the Holy Ghost , because he meant to sell it . Give me a man that buys a Seat of judicature ; I dare not trust him for not selling of justice ; he that sits in the chair of Simony , will not give Orders ; will not stick to sell souls . Some things we may buy to sell , as joseph did the Egyptian corn ; some things we must sell , if we buy , as an Israelites Inheritance , Levit. 25.  But here we are charged to buy what it is a sin to sell ; Buy the Truth , and sell it not ; There is many a good thing ill sold ; Esau sells his birthright for pottage ; Hanun and Shechem sell their Country for love ; Dalilah sells her lover for a bribe ; The Patriarches sell their Brother for twenty silver rings ; Haman sells the jews for naught . The Gentiles sell the jewish girls for wine , joel 3.3 . Israel sells the righteous for silver , and the poor for shoes , Amos 2.6 . Their judges sell sins or innocence for rewards , Esa. 5.23 . Abab sells himself to wickedness ; judas sells his master ; Demas sells the Truth ; All these make an ill market ; And in all it is a surerule , the better the commodity is , the more pernicious is the sale . The indefinitenesse of the charge implies a generality . Buy it at any price ; At no price sell it . It is the savour of God that it may be bought for any rate ; It is the justice of God , that upon any rate it should not be sold : As buying and selling are opposites in relation ; So that for which we must not sell Truth is opposite to that for which we may buy it . We must buy it with labour , therefore we may not sell it for ease ; If need be we must buy it with loss , therefore we may not sell it for gain ; we must buy it with disgrace , we may not sell it for honour ; we must buy it with exile or imprisonment ; we may not sell it for liberty ; we must buy it with pain , we may not sell it for pleasure ; We must buy it with death , we may not sell it for life ; Not for any , not for all of these may we sell Truth ; this were damnosa mercatio , as Chrysostome : In every bargain and sale there must be a proportion ; now ease , gain , honour , liberty , pleasure , life , yea worlds of all these are no way counteruaileable to Truth ; For what shall it profit a man to win the whole world , and lose his own soul ? And he cannot sell Truth , but his soul is lost : And if any thing in the world may seem a due price of Truth , it is Peace . O sweet and dear name of Peace , the good news of Angels , the joy of good men ! who can but affect thee , who can but magnify thee ? The God of heaven before whom I stand , from whom I speak , knows how oft , how deeply I have mourned for the divisions of his Church , how earnestly I have set my hand on work upon such poor thoughts of reunion , as my meanness could reach ; But when all is done , I still found we may not offer to sell Truth for Peace . It is true that there be some Scholastical and immaterial Truths ( the infinite subdivisions whereof have rather troubled than informed Christendom ) which for the purchase of peace might be kept in , and returned into such safe generalities as minds not unreasonable might rest in ; but sold out they may not be ; If some Truths may be contracted into a narrower room , none may be contracted for ; Qui divinis innutriti sunt eloquijs , as that Father said ; Those that are trained up in divine Truths may not change a syllable for a world . Tene quod habes , Hold that thou hast , is a good rule in all things ; which if in temporalties it were well observed , we should not have so many gallants squander away their inheritances to live Chameleonlike upon the air of favour ; But how ever this be too well observed in these earthly things by frugal hands , which take as if they were quick , hold as if they were dead , yet in spiritual graces it can never be observed enough ; We get Truth , we buy it as jacob did his birthright , to keep , to enjoy , not to sell again : If therefore the world , if Satan shall offer to grease us in the fist for Truth , let us answer him as Simon Peter did Simon the Sorcerer , Thy money perish with thee , because thou hast thought the Truth of God may be purchased with money . 

What shall we say then to those peddling petty-chapmen which we meet withal in every market , that will be bartering away the Truth of God for trifles ? Surely the form of our spiritual market is contrary to the civil ; In our civil markets there are more buyers than sellers ; there would be but poor take , if many did not buy of one ; but in the spiritual , there are more Sellers of Truth , than Buyers . 

Many a one sells that he never had , that he should have had , the Truth of God ; Here one chaps away the Truth for Fear or Ambition ; There another let's it go for the old shoes of a Gebeonitish pretence of Antiquity ; here one parts with it for a painted , gilded hobby-horse of an outwardly pompous magnificence of the Church ; there another for the babbles of childish superstition ; One for the fancies of hope , another for the breath of a colloguing Impostor ; amongst them all , Diminutae sunt veritates à filijs hominum , Psal. 12.  Truth is failed from the children of men : Yea as esay complained in his time , Corruit in platea veritas , Esa. 59.14 . Truth is fallen in the streets . What a shame it is to see , that in this clear and glorious Sunshine of the Gospel , under the pious government of the True Defender of the Faith , there should not want some souls that should truck for the Truth of God , as if it were some Cheapside , or some Smithfield-commoditie . Commutaverunt veritatem Dei ; They have changed the Truth of God into a lie , Rom. 1.25 . And all their care is , that they may be deceived good cheap . 

Whose heart cannot bleed to see so many well-rigged and hopeful Barks of our young Gentry , laden with the most precious Merchandises of Nature and Grace , halled in every day to these deceitful Ports of Error , the owners partly cheated , partly robbed of Truth , despoiled of their rich freight , and at last turned overboard into a sea of Desperation . O foolish Galatians , who hath bewitched you , that you should not obey , that ye should not hold fast the Truth ; Where shall I lay the fault of this miscarriage ? Me thinks I could ask the Disciples question , Nunquid ego Domine , Is it we Lord ? Are there of us that preach ourselves and not Christ ? Are there that preach Christ , and live him not ? Woe to the world because of offences . It must needs be that offences should come , but woe to the man by whom the offence cometh : God forbid that we should be so bad that the seven-hils should not justify us ; But what ever we be , the Truth is still , and ever itself , neither the better for our innocence , nor worse for our guilt . If men be faulty , what hath Truth offended ? Except the sacred word of the everliving God can misguide you , we have set you right . We are but Dust and Ashes , yet , OH God , give us thine humble vassals leave in an awful confidence so far to contest with thee , the Lord of heaven and earth , as to say , If we be deceived , thou hast deceived us. It is thou that hast spoken by us to thy people ; Let God be True , and every man a Liar ; whither should we go from thee , thou hast the words of eternal life . Dear Christians , our forefathers transmitted to us the entire inheritance of the glorious Gospel of jesus Christ , repurchased by the blood of their martyrdom ; O let not our ill husbandry impair it ; Let not posterity once say , they might have been happy , but for the unthriftines of us their progenitors ; Let it not be said , that the coldness of us the teachers , and professors of Truth hath dealt with Religion as Rehoboam did with his shields , which he found of Gold , but left of Brass . If Truth had no friends , we should pled for it , but now that we have before our eyes so powerful an 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 of Christian faith , that with his very pen hath so laid error upon the back , that all the world cannot raise it , what a shame were it to be wanting to him , to Truth , to ourselves ? 

But perhaps now , I know some of your thoughts ; you would buy Truth ( ye think ) you would hold it , if ye could be sure to know it ; There are many slips amongst the true coin ; Either of the mothers pleaded the living child to be hers , with equal protestations , oaths , tears . True ; Yet a Salomon's sword can divide Truth from falsehood ; and there is a test , and fire that can discern true metals from adulterate ; In spite of all counterfeiting there are certain infallible marks , to know Truth from Error ; Take but a few of many ; whether in the originals , in the natures , in the ends of both . In the first , Truth is divine , Error is human ; what is grounded upon the divine word must needs be irrefragably true ; that which upon human Traditions , either must , or may be erroneous . In the second , Truth is one , conform ever to itself , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , as one said ; Omne verum omni vero consonat , All truth accords with every Truth , as Gerson ; and as it is pure , so peaceable ; Error is full of dissonance , of cruelty : no particulars of ours descent from the written verity of God ; We teach no man to equivocate ; Our practice is not bloody with treasons , and massacres . In the third , Truth , as it came from God , so is referred to him ; neither hath any other end , than the glory of the God of Truth ; Error hath ever some self-respects ; either 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , or 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , filthy lucre or vainglory ; profit , or pride ; We do not prank up nature ; we aim not , either to fill the coffers , or feed the ambition of men ; Let your Wisdoms apply and infer , and now ( if ye can ) shut your eyes , that you should not see the Truth ; and , if ye care not for your souls , when ye see it , sell it : Let no false tongue persuade you there is no danger in this sale : How charitably so ever we think of poor blinded souls , that live in the forced , and invincible darkness of error , certainly Apostasy is deadly ; How ever those speed that are robbed of Truth , you cannot sell Truth , and be saved . Have mercy therefore on your own souls , for their sakes , for the sake of him that bought them , with the dear ransom of his precious blood ; And as God hath blessed you with the invaluable treasure of Truth ; so hoard it up in your hearts , and menage it in your lives ; O let us be Gens iusta custodiens veritatem , Es. 26.  A just nation keeping fast the Truth ; So whiles ye keep the Truth , the Truth shall keep you , both in Life , in Death , in judgement ; In life unto death , in death and judgement unto the consummation of that endless and incomprehensible glory which the God of Truth hath prepared for them that overcome . 

To the happy possession whereof he that hath ordained , in his good time as mercifully bring us ; and that for the sake of the Son of his Love , JESUS CHRIST the Righteous ; To whom with thee OH Father , & thy blessed Spirit , one infinite God , be given all praise , honour , and glory , now and for ever . Amen . 

