die mercurii 27.  July . 1642.  

It is this day ordered by the house of Commons now assembled in parliament , that Sir Christoper Yeluerton do return thanks to Mr. Hill from this house , for the great pains he took in his sermon this day , preached at the entreaty of this house , being the day of public fast , at saint Margaret's Westminster ; and that he do likewise entreat him from this house to print his sermon and that no man presume to print it , till the house shall take further order , but whom he shall appoint . 

H. Elsing cler. parl. dom. com.  

I appoint John Bellamy , Philemon Stephens , and Ralph Smith , to print my sermon . 

Thomas Hill . 

The trade of truth advanced . In a sermon preached to the honourable house of Commons , at their solemn fast , July 27. 1642.  By Thomas Hill , b. d. pastor of the church at Tychmersh in the county of Northampton . published by order of that house . 

John 17. 17.  

sanctify them through thy truth ; thy word is truth . 

2 cor. 13. 8.  

for we can do nothing against the truth , but for the truth . 

London , printed by i. l. for John Bellamy , Philemon Stephens , and Ralph Smith . 1642.  

To the honourable house of Commons , now assembled in parliament . 

When i first heard that i was designed for this solemn service , being conscious of my own insufficiency to preach to so awful an assembly , i couldnot entertain it without trouble ; yet resolved with Luther , rather to undergo others censures , then to be reproved for ungodly silence , in such times when the Lord suffereth . and now i have as much reason to be full of blushings , to think that this plain discourse should be exposed to more public view ; but herein i must resign up myself unto your disposings , to whom i owe , & quod possum , & quod non possum , much more than my meanness can perform . 

This sermon , such an one as it is , i humbly tender to your gracious acceptance , who have adopted it ; i put it into your honourable protection , who have listed it ; i commend it to your practical observation , for whom i intended it ; heartily desiring God's blessing upon your spirits in the perusal of it ; that you May read and act it , turning words into works , that you May repeat it over in your lives , which is the best repetition of sermons . 

Our present breaches , call for a contribution from every one , for the repairing of them ; but much is expected from you , who are called to be public counsellors , and thereby obliged to express a public frame of spirit ( Which is the beauty and strength of a great council ) , swallowing up your private interests , in the public welfare . Not with Baruch , seeking great things for yourselves , which is most incongruous to stormy times , but rather resembling Melancthon , who professed , though he had many domestical troubles , yet the public wounds of the church most deeply afflicted him . England is more bemoaned , by many with that language in Austin over the poor man . quomodo huc cecidisti ? alas how camest thou into these distractions ? She May answer as the poor man there , standing in more need of relief than discourse . obsecro cogita quomodo hinc me liberes . think how i May be rescued out of th•se troubles . Towards this blessed work , i have cast in my two mites , moving in the proper sphere of a divine , as an agent for the truth , persuading you , who are betrusted by others , and have far engaged yourselves in the reformation of religion , that with all your might , you would promote the trade of truth . 

It is not for me to suggest a method in the execution of your counsels . He whose name is counsellor guide you ; yet i shall still pray that in your intention , the purging , the settling , the advancing of true religion May be most dear unto you . It is one main end , and a precious fruit of government , that we May lead peaceable and quiet lives in all godliness and honesty . This is well worth people's wrestling prayers , and your most active endeavours . the stability of all our blessings must come by the true religion , God's presence is the best security , who is most powerfully present where there is most power and purity of religion . Would you have a flourishing kingdom , advance the kingdom of Christ in it . Let the state maintain religion , and religion will bless the state , could you settle all our state liberties , yet if the ark of truth be taken from us , our glory is departed , we May write these mourning characters upon all our comforts , Ichabod , where is the glory ? 

It is too high a compliment in the Lord Cordes , a French commander , who often said , that he would willingly lie seven years in hell , so that Callice were in the possession of the French again . we bless God for that real self-denial and activity ye have expressed , abating so many personal and family contentments , in your long attendance upon public affairs . be not weary of well doing , in due season ye shall reap if you faint not . 

Never had any parliament more work to do ; Ireland still bleeds , the affairs thereof find unhappy obstructions . To subdue rebellion , to plant religion there , are great matters . England is very much out of frame . The church calls for truth ; the state cries for peace , they who sowed in hope , reap in fear , out sickles are turning into swords . Now to effect an happy correspondence betwixt our sovereign and his persons , a blessed compliance betwixt England and religion , here 's work for the strongest shoulders . 

Never had any parliament greater opposition . As nehem. 4. 17. our builders work with one hand , and hold a weapon with the other . Achitophel's plot , Rabshekahs's rail , Sanballats mock . Yea since counsels of reformation , there is a more malignant antipathy appears against truth in many places . As 2 tim. 3. 13. evil men and seducers wax worse and worse , deceiving and being deceived . yet be encouraged worthy Sirs . Never had any parliament so many thundering legions of praying Christians , to assist them . when others insult and blaspheme , Jacobs' posterity are wrestling with God for you , resolving not to let him go till he bless you . and whilst you are pursuing peace , allow this plain sermon that humble boldness as to whisper you in the ear , beseeching you still to maintain your former zeal in the cause of truth . When did your counsels prosper more , than when you were most active about religion . When you were building the Lord's house . for he builded yours as hag. 2. 19 from this day i will bless you . 

Be pleased therefore more and more to engage yourselves for the truth , so shall you engage God for you ; let your cause be his cause then his attributes will be yours , his providence will work for you , his spirit will work in you ; then will you have more with you then against you , though the devil and the Pope combine . Do your own work , trust God with his ; duty is ours , events , success are his . commit the keeping of your souls , of the church , of the state , to him in well doing as unto a faithful creator . truth will yet triumph , Babylon and all her crutches must down ; the fight of faith is a good fight , because such soldiers are sure of the victory . the kingdom of Christ shall prevail , though second causes be impotent , yet the zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this . Isa. 9 7.  

When Jerusalem is restored it will be a city of truth zach. 8. 3.  Oh that all our parliament worthies , Might be so valiant for the truth that England Might become a kingdom of truth ; following chronicles will then give you a share in that honour of being the church's saviours , as Obad . v. 21. and God will put Zerubbabel's high dignity upon you , making you as signets . hag. 2. 23.  

The good Lord guide , unite , act and bless your counsels , and think upon you for good , according to all you have done , or shall do for his persons . 

So prays he who desires to be found , your faithful servant for the truth : Thomas Hill . 

A sermon preached at the fast before the honourable house of Commons . 

proverbs 23. 23.  

buy the truth , and sell it not . 

The eternal happiness of our immortal souls is to be found only in union and communion with Jesus Christ ; religion is that which gathers and binds up the spirit to close fellowship with him ; this bond is twisted out of those materials , which the several penmen of holy scriptures have prepared ; wise Solomon hath contributed a good share to this blessed work in his three books , proverbs , Ecclesiastes , canticles . 

I will not confidently with Hierome and others , entitle Salomon's three books , to his three names ; as he was Solomon peaceable ( Say they ) he scattered proverbial sentences among young men , to discipline them in ways of righteousness and peace ; as he was {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , Ecclesiastes , the preacher , he wrote the book of Ecclesiastes , a pithy sermon , teaching men of riper years , the vanity of vanities in all worldly excellencies . As he was Jedidiah , 2 sam. 12. 25.  beloved of the Lord , he acquainted greatest proficients , with the sweet communion betwixt Christ and his spouse in the song of songs . 

But of this i am sure ; the book of proverbs is suitable to its title , worthy of wise Solomon the son of David King of Israel , prov. 1. 1.  In the first book of Kings , chap. 3. vers. 9 11.  Solomon was an earnest suitor unto God for understanding ; and because he sought it from God and for God , ( So much doth the Lord love to see a public spirit in our private prayers . ) he gave him a large portion of wisdom , with an overplus of other rich advantages ; he obtained both the wisdom of a prophet and of a King , whereby he spoke both prophetical and kingly sentences . so much the original word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} rendered , proverbs seems to import ; raiguing commanding sentences , being so full of wisdom gravity and authority ; and that style of being Master of the sentences , May well be translated from Peter Lombard , unto King Solomon , who was the author of so many master-sentences . 

Much of the wisdom of a nation , is oft found in their proverbs ; and much of Salomon's in this book of his proverbs , it being a cabinet of such jewels , as is fit for the closet , of so wise a King , full of short and pithy sentences , like jewels indeed , containing magnum in parvo , much value , virtue , and lustre in a little room . 

And for the better discovery of their excellency , it is observable , that herein they differ from most other scripture ; their harmony is in discord , their beauty in a kind of contrariety . if you would understand our saviour's parables , mind the scope ; if you would reach many other places of scripture , attend the dependence , but if you desire distinctly to apprehend the proverbs in them , consider the opposition ; which though it appear not so full in this my text , as in many other of these proverbial sentences , yet here you May find two disagreeing parts . 

First an injunction , buy the truth . 
Secondly , a prohibition , sell it not . 
This opposition , such as it is , begets two propositions . 

1.  All the sons of wisdom , must be careful to buy the truth . 
2.  Though all must be buying , yet none May sell the truth . 
I will follow the method of the words , beginning with the first proposition . 

all the sons of wisdom , must be careful to buy the truth . 

Herein by God's gracious assistance , i will take a view of several branches , enquiring by way of explication and confirmation . 

1.  What is the commodity itself , this truth that must be bought ? 
2.  Into the nature of the purchase , with the price of it . 
3.  What reasons May engage us to trade in this commodity . 
And then jointly shake them altogether in the application , trying what seasonable fruit they will afford this grave assembly on this solemn day . 

Every one will be euquisitive concerning the commodity itself : what is this truth ? I answer , not a metaphysical truth , that 's for speculation only , not a logical truth , that 's chiefly for disputation ; nor a moral ethical truth , that 's but one sprig of speaking ; [ veracitas rather than veritas ] Salomon's truth here must needs be theological . and that not veritas 1o prima , God himself , no creature can compass so great a purchase , if God were willing to sell it , but veritas 2o prima , derived from that first truth , this May , and must be bought . This is veritas objectiva , as it lies in the scriptures , both in the principles of it , and conclusions deduced from it ; truth original and truth derived . and veritas subjectiva seated in us , which we suck from the word of truth . Indeed truth of religion in us , grounded upon the holy scriptures the rule of truth ; which compriseth truth in our judgements , when soundly informed ; truth in our wills and affections , when obedientially conformed ; truth in our conversation , when seriously reform according to the word of truth . 

There are things in truth well worth our buying , first liberty of truth , that the true religion May have free passage , and not be imprisoned in corners or clogged with difficulties . veritas nihil erubescit praeterquam abscondi . Truth blusheth at nothing so much as to be concealed . Paul desireth the Thessalonians to pray for him , Sylvanus and Timotheus , that the word of God May run and be glorified . it is a disparagement to Christ and his gospel , when that hath so much ado to creep , which should run and ride in triumph from congregation to congregation , from kingdom to kingdom . But a most beautiful and honourable sight to see Christ at the opening of the first seal , with a bow and a crown , going forth conquering and to conquer , subduing the heathenish world to the obedience of his gospel by the preaching of the apostles . What though a river be full of good water , yet if frozen , if not an open passage , men May die for thirst . 

It is the motion of the sun of righteousness , that disperses both light and heat . Liberty of the gospel makes it a gospel to us . The church in the acts knew how to value this liberty of truth , and therefore when Peter was imprisoned instant and earnest prayer was made ; the answer was as effectual . Peter released , Herod confounded , and truth set at liberty . Of all famines , the soul-famine , gospel-famine is the most grievous , threatened as an heavy judgement , Amos 8. 11 , 12.  But a most sweet mercy to feel and taste the accomplishment of that promise , isa. 30. 20.  though the Lord give you the bread of adversity , and the water of affliction , yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more , but thine eyes shall see thy teachers . 

Secondly , purity of true religion , is a good purchase as well as liberty . that we May have an incorrupt religion , without sinful , without guileful mixtures ; not a linsey-woolsey religion . All new born babes will desire {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , 1 pet. 2. 2.  Word-milk , sermon-milk without guile , without adulterating sophistication of it , of which Paul glories , 2 cor. 2. 17.  for we are not as many , which corrupt the word of God : but as of sincerity , but as of God , in the sight of God speak we in Christ . whose zealous care it was , 2 cor. 11. 2. to espouse the church of Corinth to one husband ( No polygamy in the second marriage ) that he Might present them as a chaste virgin unto Christ . this he endeavoured by pure gospel means , and by persuading to purity and singleness of heart in the use of those means . The devil is as busy vers. 3. to corrupt people's minds from the simplicity that is in Christ ; well knowing the simplicity that is in Christ , is the best rule for the church's conformity , to this we May subscribe without any check of conscience . 

And indeed , what are false religions , but human compositions . the Alcoran compounds Mahomet's fond devices with some fragments of God's word . 

popery compounds unwritten traditions most presumptuously with holy scripture ; yea it rakes up heathenish customs , revives old Jewish ceremonies which are now mortuae & mortiferae dead and deadly , compounding them with the institutions of Christ . 

You May discern such mixtures in many errors , about the great mysteries of the gospel , even in every link of the golden chain of salvation , rom. 8. 30.  Arminians in the decree of election compound foreseen faith , with the sovereignty of God's will . In vocation , so compounding man's freewill with God's free grace , that with them in the act of conversion prima causa depends upon secunda , the power of God's grace must wait upon the concurrence of our good nature . 

popish doctors do strangely compound works with faith in the act of justification ; and in glorification , so compound the merits of the saints with the merits of Christ , that by a condignity they become meritorious of eternal life ▪ let the devil affect vain compositions ; the whore of Babylon must paint her wrinkled face with some borrowed beauty , to cover her inward deformities ; Christ and his truth , will glory in no varnish so much as native simplicity and purity . 

Thirdly , truth must be purchased as well in the power , as in the liberty and purity of it . There should be such a stream as runs purely without mud , and that in a strong torrent . hypocrites will swerve in the last age , when most gospel-light breaks out , many painted professions will borrow some lustre from it ; this Paul foretells , 2 tim. 3. 5.  In the last days together with many streams of wickedness , there will be a generation of men having a form of godliness , but denying the power of it ; a good description of hypocrisy . but the Lord bespeaks power , both in the dispensing and the professing of truth . Paul desired to preach in the demonstration of the spirit , and of power , 1 cor. 2. 4. as well knowing that the kingdom of God is not in word , but in power , 1 cor. 4. 20.  It is not wording , but working the power , that will evidence to speaker or hearers , that they are subjects in the kingdom of grace and heirs to the kingdom of glory . this Paul made an argument of their election , 1 thess. 1. 5. that the gospel came not to them in word only , but in power and in the holy ghost ; much power appearing in the dispensation of it , and the Thessalonians hearts so fully possessed with the power of the truth , that their carnal principles were confuted , their passions moderated , their lusts mortified , and their self-ends confounded . 

Most men affect in religion , either a dull moderation , or an outside pomp , both enemies to the power of truth . Moderation doth better in other things , then in the practice of religion , where there cannot be a nimium . God requires totum cor and totum cordis , the whole heart , and the totality of it ; that we should love him with all our heart , with all our soul , and with our strength , luk. 10. 27.  Indeed moderation hath its season , but with Calvin's caution ; i confess ( Saith he ) there ought to be moderation , yet this i constantly affirm , care must be had , that under pretence of moderation , nothing be tolerated , which proceedeth from the devil or Antichrist . 

Neither must we so affect the outward pomp of religion , as to neglect the power of it . Hilary his counsel was good , who writing against Auxentius Bishop of Milan , complained that the Arian faction had confounded all , and therefore admonished all men to take heed , how they suffered themselves to be led with outward appearances . it is not well ( Saith he ) that you are in love with walls , that you esteem the church in respect of houses and buildings , and in , and under those shows and appearances pretend and urge the name of peace . Is there any doubt of antichrists sitting in these places ? this makes popery such a religion as pleases men's eyes , and humours their ears , rather than rectify their minds , and heal their hearts , because they seek not so much to purchase the power , as the pomp of religion . 

Having laid open before you the commodity itself to be purchased ; truth in the liberty , purity , and power of it ; it 's necessary further to inquire into the nature of the purchase , with its price . 

As all other markets , ordinarily begin at home ; so indeed our trading for truth . the spirit of God , having convinced the heart , how far it is come short of the glory of God by sin , rom. 3. 23. and that men are alienated from the life of God , through the ignorance that is in them , ephes. 4. 18. withal , giving the soul an hint and taste of the excellency and sweetness of divine truth , the only sovereign means of its recovery , it groans most seriously , and pants most affectionately after acquaintance with the truth and possession of it . And that not only by some cold velleity , by some dull wishing and woulding ; but by a peremptory choice ; not by wand'ring and flashy , but constant and fixed desires ; not by lazy and slothful , but operative and busy desires ; truth i would have , yea truth i must have , else i am everlastingly undone . 

Affectionate desires , as they live and move in opinions ; so they produce actions , inclining us to take pains for the obtaining of that we would possess . They add wings to the soul , making us to fly like busy bees from flower to flower , from ordinance to ordinance , that we May suck the sweetness of truth , which is sweeter than honey , and the droppings of honey combs . the purchase of truth , is carried on by such an active disposition , as the spouse in the canticles had to enjoy her beloved ; i will rise now and go about the streets , and in the broad ways , i will seek him whom my soul loveth . every buyer of truth , must be willing with little Zacheus to get up into any sycomare tree , to take all gospel advantages , to gain a sight of his saviour , to behold Christ who is truth itself . Truth is an hidden treasure , matth. 13. 44. sometimes hidden from us by the difficulty of scripture wherein it is contained , God thereby putting a value upon it , and an edge upon our studies and prayers ; sometimes hidden by differences amongst learned men . law May be clouded by a multitude of book cases ; and divinity obscured by a multitude of school utrums . 

Many times truth is hidden by the scandalous lives of such as profess it . Carnal spectators being much more quick-sighted to apprehend the deformity of religious men , than the beauty of religion itself . And too often hidden under great disgrace in the world , being styled , heresy , schism , faction . yea religion itself accounted the greatest crime . this treasure lies often so deep , you must be content to sweat in digging for it before you can obtain it . 

All they who would purchase truth , must not only be like merchant men seeking goodly pearls ; matth. 13. 45. but withal , be able to discern when they have found a pearl of great price , vers. 46. to know whether it be a pearl or pebble ; that it is not dross , but gold bearing the stamp of truth . 

There is much doubtless in that of the apostle Paul , col. 4. 5.  walk in wisdom toward them that are without , redeeming the time . all good merchants must be redeeming time , improving all hints of doing good , of enjoying God's ordinances , wherein you May trade for truth . Observe the connexion ; walk wisely towards them that are without , redeeming the time . The church was then under persecuting governors , and vexed with bad neighbours , both enemies to the trade of truth ; yet you must be purchasing ; only wherein walk so wisely towards them without . 1.  That you violate not the peace and purity of your own conscience . 2.  That you deface not the stamp of divinity upon authothority . 3.  That by a rigid austerity you alienate not others from truth . 4.  Nor by a complying familiarity with them in their sins , harden them against the truth . 

The soul that thirsts after truth , having taken pains , how according to the rules of godly providence , it May be possessed of that it so dearly loves , is now willing to conclude the bargain by paying the price . Solomon here mentions no price , because he would have us buy it at any price . sometimes it May cost us credit , and liberty , as it did the apostles , acts 5. 41.  Sometimes it May cost us the loss of goods , as it did those Christians , hebr. 10. 34.  Yea , sometimes life itself , must be the price of truth . we must be content to follow that cloud of witnesses , which appears in that little book of martyrs , the 11th chapter to the Hebrews , we must write after that heroical copy which our own worthies have set us , who sacrificed their dearest lives , to the cruelty of Bonner's flames , that they Might possess the truth . 

Truth is so precious a jewel , you must never expect to have the markets cheap . the devil at first laid siege against the truths , which were most fundamental , that so he Might have ruined all the buildings ; he would by the subtlety of ancient heretics have huckstered up those truths , which concerned the natures and person of Christ , this cost very dear , before the four first counsels could settle truth against the heretics of those times . Afterwards , when popery invaded all the offices of Christ ( Such a dangerous gangreen is it ) undermining him , as the prophet , as the priest , and as the King of his church , it cost no little blood in England and Germany , to vindicate the doctrine of divine worship , and of the holy sacraments , from such errors as opposed the prophetical and priestly office of Christ . That branch of truth about church government and discipline , so much concerning the kingly office of Christ , is of rich value , if the markets should rise , we must drive on the bargain what ever it cost . No price too great for the obtaining such a purchase , to see our dear saviour advanced in all his offices ; as the church's prophet , without being beholden to unwritten traditions ; as the priest of his church , without the satisfactions of any meritmangers , without any purgatory , any Bridewell of the Popes making ; as the King of his church , above mitres , above canon-laws , or any church usurpations whatsoever . 

After the discovery of the nature of this purchase and the price of truth , its fit to consider what reasons May engage you all to trade herein ; which are divers , according to the various reference ▪ truth hath to things of high concernment . 

Never expect to have the spiritual and eternal good of your own immortal souls effectually promoted , unless you buy and be possessed of truth . 

1.  The word of truth , is the seed by which we are begotten again , iam. 1. 18.  yea incorruptible seed , which liveth and abideth for ever , 1 Peter 1. 23. until the truth hath delivered us , what are we poor sinners , but an heap of dry bones , so many dead carcases rotting in the grave of corruption . 

2.  It is the milk , by which new born babes are nourished , 1 Peter 2. 2. by this they grow in the habits , in the degrees , in the exercise of grace . Strangers to the truth , like the prodigal , live upon husks , and lay out their money for that which is not bread , isa. 55. 2.  

3.  Naturally , as the sons and daughters of Adam , we are stained with many spots , steeped in corruption , polluted with filthiness of flesh and spirit , 2 Corinth . 7. 1.  truth is the water by which we are cleansed , ioh. 15. 3.  

4.  When we go groping up and down in in the dark , exposed to errors , besieged with terrors , truth affords us direction and consolation , psal. 119. 105.  

5.  truth is the armour , by which you are defended against your spiritual enemies , and enabled for offensive war . Amongst the six pieces of our spiritual armour , three of these have special dependence upon the truth . you must have the girdle of truth , ephes. 6. vers. 14. beshod with the preparation of the gospel of peace , vers. 15. and take the sword of the spirit , vers. 17.  

6.  And indeed the word of truth , is the gospel of your salvation , Ephesian 1. 13.  The charter by which the corporation of saints , challengeth such rich privileges ; the articles of that covenant , which doth entitle them to such blessed hopes . 

You cannot hope to find God's gracious acceptance of your service , nor enjoy any soul-refreshing communion with him in the duties of his worship , unless truth direct and animate your spirits therein . When David was engaged in a pious and plausible service , in fetching the ark from Kiriath-jearim , 1 chronicles 13. he consulted , vers. 1 , 2. the persons consented , vers. 3 , 4. there was much confluence and triumph , vers. 8.  The oxen stumbling , Uzzah upon a fair pretence , put forth his hand to uphold the ark , yet God would not accept of his fair intention , but smote him that he died , vers. 10. the reason is rendered , 1 chronicles 15. vers. 13. because God was not sought after the due order , his truth was not observed , in the carrying of the ark , as vers. 14. with reference to this story , Peter Martyr commends it , to the care of Queen Elizabeth , that church governors endeavour not to carry the ark of the gospel into England , upon the cart of needless ceremonies . 

There are two flies which mar the most precious pots of ointment . Hypocrisy and superstition , as Isaiah 29. 13.  wherefore the Lord said , forasmuch as this persons draw near to me with their mouth , and with their lips do honour me , but have remooved their heart far from me , and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men . in both a great defect of truth . hypocrisy is lip-labour , and lip-labour is lost labour ; no duty acceptable without truth of heart in it ; superstitious worship , taught by men's precepts , May be devout enough , yet because it wants the authority of God's truth to steer it , how marvellously doth God curse it , vers. 14.  therefore behold , i proceed to do a marvellous work amongst this persons , a marvellous work and a wonder : the wisdom of their wise men shall perish , and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hide . when the devil hath made men superstitious , God will make them foolish , he takes no pleasure in them . 

The best of our practical Christianity , even our most solemn addresses to God ( Upon such a day as this ) joose their vigour and blessing , if custom only or formality act us herein , and not conscience to God's truth . what are good Christians , but rules of truth , become examples , yea living , walking pictures of divine truth . when the wantonness of human wisdom , will multiply will-worship , and wit-worship , thinking to please God with better devises then his own , it turns to gross folly , and ends in much mischief , rather than acceptation . Witness Gideon's ephod , judges 8. vers. 27.  Yea , such men take much pains to loose their labour , and Matthew 15. vers. 9  in vain do they worship God , teaching for doctrine , the commandments of men . 

Never expect the gracious presence of Christ in his churches , unless you purchase truth , and set it upon the throne , revel. 2. 1.  he walketh in the midst of the golden candlesticks , whose office it is to hold forth the truth . 

The beauty and efficacy of church government and discipline , depend upon their conformity unto divine truth . It must regulate church power , and discipline church administrations , else they will soon loose their lustre and authority ; degenerating either into empty formality , or into church tyranny , which of all other is most grievous , because so oppressive to the conscience . Hence such uncouth catalogues of church officers amongst the Papists : Pope , Cardinals , &c. hence such swelling volumes of their canon law , because not divine truth , but carnal wisdom drew the platform . Hence so many of our temples , made houses of merchandise , wherein , as in the darkness of popery , indulgences were , absolutions are bought and sold . Yea , hence the sword of excommunication which was wont to be formidable , because drawn with so much solemnity , is now made contemptible , because so familiarly abused upon trifles ; and all this , because divine truth hath had no more power in our consistories . And this doubtless doth much foment the present distractions of the church , that either fancy or affection should put such high claims upon things , as suddenly to style them institutions of Christ , or usurpations of Antichrist , not sufficiently consulting with divine truth . If our prelatical power , and cathedral pomp , be of divine right , let us see a divine word for it ; what need we such violent arguments to maintain them , oath upon oath , subscription upon subscription ? 

Let Christ himself be acknowledged as King in his church , as Lord in his house , let the word of truth be our book of canons , our books of discipline , and then if . Paul were our visitor , he would rejoice to behold our order , as Colossians 2. vers. 5.  

Yea , than we shall undoubtedly find the broad-seal of heaven , confirming what is done , when we follow the guidance of Christ in his own truth , matth. 18. 15 , 16 , 17 , 18.  

The best way to promote the most public good of all the churches , is by advancing the trade of truth . this public counsel should move in the most public sphere , seeking good for themselves and others , both at home and abroad . The eyes of all the three kingdoms , yea , of the Protestant world are now upon you , expecting much from your influence . You can never contribute fully to the work , of reformation here , unless you set truth at liberty ; neither shall you be so effectually helpful to all the Protestant churches , though you should recover their lands and regain their territories , unless you re-establish their religion , by opening a free trade of truth amongst them . 

truth's advancement is one of God's great designs ; kingdoms are for churches , and churches golden candlesticks to hold forth truth , that therein Christ May appear in his most glorious lustre ; when the banners of truth are universally and victoriously displayed , the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of our Lord , and of his Christ , and he shall reign for ever and ever , revel. 11. 15.  

How came popery to be advanced to so great height , but by suppressing truth ; the mystery of iniquity wrought in the apostles times ; it went on by steps ; the Pope was first Antichrist nascent , than Antichrist crescent , after Antichrist regnant , but when he was made Lord of the Catholic faith , so that none must believe more , nor less , nor otherwise then he prescribed , he became Autichrist triumphant . the Pope is guilty of the grossest thievery , he robs the sacrament of the cup , the scriptures of their authority , and the church of the scriptures ; as thieves blow out the candles , the better to conceal themselves , and carry on their designs ; so he suppresseth , as much as he can , the light of truth , that with more advantage , he May play his pranks , and creep undiscerned in the dark . 

If you would lay siege to the devil or Pope's kingdom , and undermine all the crutches and supporters of it , set truth at liberty . Zachary 4. vers. 6. the great mountain of opposition must be moved , not by human power and might , but by the spirit of the Lord of hosts , not only by his power but by his spirit , because church works must be carried on in a way of enlightening and revealing the truth . thus the wise providence of God wrought formerly , when a general council ( Though by many groaned after ) could not be obtained with the consent of the clergy and court of Rome , to whom reformation would be a certain ruin , he stirred up divers heroical worthies , Waldus in France , Wickliff in England , Luther in Germany , Knox in Scotland , to despise the light of truth ; and revel. 14. vers. 6.  After the flying angel , having the everlasting gospel to preach unto all that dwell on the earth , than verse . 8. there follows another angel saying , Babylon is fallen . doubtless the Pope must fall not only by the sword of Princes , but by the sword of the spirit , 2 Thessalonians 2. vers. 8.  That wicked one must be revealed , and consumed with the spirit of the Lord's mouth . if you would have the mystery of iniquity unmasked , see the Pope's triple crown tumble , and the thick mist of popery vanish , help forward the bright sunshine of God's word , promote the liberty , purity , and power of truth . 

You have had a discovery of some few sprigs , growing upon this first proposition , let us in the application , gather the wholesome fruit which hangs upon them . 

It is the good hand of God upon us , when so many of our brethren in Ireland , are still bleeding under their enemy's cruelty , that we are at liberty in this solemn ordinance , to plead with our God for mercy . Oh that this day of self-humbling , Might be to us in the use of it , according to its nature , a self-searching , or soul-purging day . 

My commission is , to hold forth the glass of God's truth before your eyes , that you May May discover your spots and defects . Let it be your work , to read over yourselves , as well as your bibles ; to speak and write retractations of your former errors , and confessions of your miscarriages ( I wish we could all be Augustine's herein . ) The Lord knoweth what volumes many of us Might fill , if we were but well studied in ourselves . And together with the long catalogue of all our other sins , our neglect of truth must come in , as having a great influence into the rest : for this we May blush and bleed , yea rivers of tears are too little to bewail this , that in all our designs , we have so little minded to purchase the liberty , the purity and power of true religion . 

Adam and Eve began to make very bad markets , to sell themselves and posterity , for the forbidden fruit . profane Esau , sold his birthright for a mess of pottage , heb. 12. 16.  How many with Absalon , to humour their vainglory , will set the peace of a kingdom to sale ? How many with Haman , to gratify proud revenge , will set a whole church to sale ? Some with Judas , will set up their saviour to sale for thirty pieces . Others with Diotrephes ( The first cock of the game ) that they May fill their sails with church-pomp , and church-power , will set the keys of church and ordinances of Christ to sale . Lay your hands upon your hearts . To be purveyors for your lusts , as the profane , Romans 13. vers. 14.  To be merchants for the Pope , as the superstitious innovators . to be proctors for the devil , as gospell-opposers , what saith conscience ? Is this to buy the truth . 

Give me leave ( Honourable and beloved ) to come nearer you , with three plain queres . I study not alta but apta proferre . 

Have you gotten your own hearts possessed with the power of the truth ? hath God's word a throne in your consciences , Colossians 3. 16.  let the word of God dwell richly in you . if it dwell there . First , it must intrare , then residere : it must dwell and abide there , exercising a sovereignty over you , ever drawing open into an humble familiarity with it . What fruitful knowledge have you gotten in the mystery of doctrinal and practical godliness . They who know the grace of God in truth , will bring forth fruit , Colossians 1. vers. 6.  Doth the truth of your religion appear in your relations , in the uniformity of a gospel conversation ? as phil. 1. vers. 27.  Ask your hearts , whether in all your undertakings you move upon religious grounds , and for religious ends . God doth not only number , but weigh our actions , and observes not only what is done , but why it is done . The the word of truth must be our judge ; therefore now let it be our counsellor . It is Philpot's gloss upon John 12. vers. 48 ( the word that i have spoken shall judge him in the last day ) if the word shall judge us , then much more ought it to be a judge of our doings now . 

Have you set up truth in your own families ? it is most odious for a minister of Christ to flatter , to daub with untempered mortar at any time ; but most abominable upon a day of humiliation . You reckon your house , your little commonwealth ; by what law is it governed ? Doth the word of truth , the sceptre of righteousness bear sway there ? Whence then so much licentiousness tolerated in the servants ? so much dissoluteness in the children ? so much oppression , tyranny , and ( Too often ) other wickedness in yourselves , and such distempers in family relations ? psal. 101. vers. 2.  David would walk in his house with a perfect heart . such as served him , he would either find them , or make them God's servants . You would have others think your houses are churches . What thy house a church to God , and thou a covetous idolater ? thy house a church to God , and thou an unclean son of Belial ? what concord hath Christ with Belial ? what agreement hath the temple of God with idols ? the argument is as strong for magistrates as for ministers , 1 tim. 3. 5.  if a man know not how to rule his own house , how shall he take care of the church of God ? how can you be good reformers both of state and church , unless you be first reformers of yourselves , and your own families ? Light is a great advantage to an house , especially the light of truth . the father of lights , is not pleased to dwell in a dark habitation , such a corner is fit for Satan , the Prince of darkness . It was a very honourable report , which Melancthon giveth of Prince Anhalt , cubiculum ejus erat , academia , curia , templum ; his bedchamber was an academy , a court , a temple . The Lord gives you a share in this honour . Let not your chambers be academies only , for the advanocment of learning ; or courts , for the daily dispatch of public affairs ; but temples for the worship of God , and calling upon his name . Give the persons not only rules , but examples of reformation . Let religion be first advanced in you , it will the sooner be settled by you . 

Have you employed and improved your public interests to help forward the trade of truth , to promote religion in the liberty , purity , and power of it ? Never was any parliament the son of so many prayers and tears . never had any a larger share in that blessing of the Lord upon Joseph , deut. 33. vers. 16. feeling the good will of him that dwelled in the bush , so often burning , yet not consumed . what reciprocal real love have you expressed unto God , and the cause of his truth . 

When Moses proposed that question , exod. 32. vers. 26.  who is on the Lord's side ? The sons of Levi gathered themselves together , vers. 27. and by their zeal , obtained a blessing in Moses his catalogue , when their brother Simeon was left out , deut. 33. vers. 9  We live in shedding , discriminating times , it is a frequent question , quarum partium ? on what side are you ? If this be the question , who is on truth's side , what echo , what answer will you return , oh you great counsellors ? Suppose this day , God and thy conscience held a closet committee , the Lord saith , i have put such a rich price into thy hand ; i have betrusted thee with an influence in the grand affairs of the church ? what saith conscience ? what hast thou done ? what wilt thou do , by speaking , voting , by hand , heart , purse , for the truth ? David's question is most seasonable , 1 chron. 29. vers. 5.  who is willing to consecrate his service this day unto the Lord ? oh that you Might return the same pious answer , with the chief of the fathers , and Princes of the tribes ; who all offered willingly , vers. 6.  Could you find this fruit upon your self-examination , doubtless though you May serve this day in sorrow ( As you ought to do upon a soul-afflicting day ( In sighs , in groans , in tears ) yet you shall reap in joy . 

To engage and quicken your utmost endeavours for the happy purchase of truth . 

You May please to look upon yourselves ( Honourable and beloved ) in a double capacity . 

First , as merchants , trading for your own everlasting good . 

Then as public factors , betrusted with the best good of many hundred thousands . 

In a merchant or factor there are some special requisites , 1.  Wisdom . 
2.  Activity . 
3.  Resolution . 


First , wisdom , to discern both the commodities themselves , and opportunities of trading . 

The first use of wisdom is to discern the commodities themselves . Religion must not be taken upon trust . Faith is God's way to save us , credulity the devil's method to undo us . 1 thess. 5. 21.  try all things , hold fast that which is good . and by sound knowledge possess yourselves most carefully of such truths , as are most necessary . Those that are fundamentalia in fide , or in praxi , buy them at any rate , but sell them at no rate . there are magnalia , and minutula legis . it will argue much hypocrisy to be substantial in circumstantial truths , and circumstantial in the substantials of faith and repentance . let us wisely proportion our zeal , according to the nature of the truths themselves . This counsel Paul giveth his Titus . matters of consequence , he must affirm constantly , but , avoid needless questions , tit. 3. 8.  

It were a seasonable improvement of your wisdom and power , to hinder the devils or Pope's chapmen , from opening their packs of adulterate wares , and to put an high value upon such precious parcels of truth , as have a great influence both into doctrinal and practical religion . give me leave here in the behalf of truth , to suggest some brief hints . 

First , put in caveats against Arminian errors , which do so extenuate original sin , and magnify the power of nature , that they feed our hereditary disease of pride , and eclipse the glory of God's grace . oh trade for the doctrine of free grace . Maintain the King of heaven's prerogative . In the spiritual building , grace laid the first foundation , in God's free , eternal purpose . Grace erecteth the walls , yea and addeth the top-stone . Eternity will be little enough to admire , to adore , to cry grace , grace ; therefore carefully possess yourselves of this truth against the enemies of grace . 

Secondly , mind the promoting of those truths which justify the purity of divine worship , according to God's own will , against popish and superstitious innovators . There is a bewitching pomp in the out side of popery , which entangleth some . Ancient writers used many wanton metaphors , and such a liberty of expression , before the mystery of iniquity was discovered , which deluded others . There is a disposition in all corrupt natures , no less to spiritual then bodily fornication . Vindicate therefore the second commandment , which Papists have expunged , and others so much clouded . Where God hath professed himself jealous , let us be zealous , of trading for such truths . 

Thirdly , put a value upon such truths as discover the dangerous errors of Socinianism , which is no better than a complication of many ancient heresies , condemned by ancient counsels . A doctrine that undermineth the merit and satisfaction of our saviour's death ; that will scarce allow faith to swim , where reason cannot wade ; that will so far bring down religion to reason , that we must believe little more in divinity , than we can see in reason . Arminianism gratifieth the pride of will ; popery the pride of outward sense , and Socinianism the pride of carnal reason . 

Fourthly , let truths for the sanctification of the Lord's day , be precious truths . God's institution of that day , bringeth with it a special character of holiness , and an influence of a peculiar blessing , God hath sanctified and blessed it . yea , in the primitive times it was a badge of Christianity . When the question was propounded , servasti dominicum ? Hast thou kept the Lord's day ? the answer was , christianus sum , intermittere non possum ; i am a Christian , i cannot neglect it . there was no little danger in the Anti-sabbatarian doctrine ; seeing upon God's own day , we profess publicly our communion with God in his ordinances . Then we expect to enjoy the richest influence from him . And if men could dispute away our Christian Sabbath , we should soon lose the vigour of our practical religion . God having made it holy by institution , by ordination , let us keep it holy by observation . 

The second use of wisdom in factors , is to know and consider their opportunities . ephes. 5. 15 , 16.  see that ye walk circumspectly not as fools but as wise , redeeming the time . Jerusalem in this was , as unwise , as unhappy , that she knew not the day of her visitation , luk. 19 41 , 42.  Who did expect such nutus providentiae , hints of divine providence , as God hath afforded to unworthy England in these two last years , to repossess her of that truth which many thought departing ? The Philistines had almost taken our ark . Our friends , our enemies , ourselves , our own guiltiness passed a sentence of death upon us . We discovered so many leaks in ships of church and state , as if both were sinking . The tempest was great , our saviour seemed to be asleep , our only refuge was to cry , Lord save us , we perish , mat. 8. 25.  The sword hath rid circuit for above twenty years in Germany ; many candlesticks of truth thence removed ; that paradise almost turned into a wilderness . Poor Ireland is in danger to lose that religion they had , with their estates and lives , preachers hanged , professors murdered , bibles burned , and all with prodigious cruelty and blasphemy , &c.  Yet sinful England , like Gideon's fleece , dry in comparison , when others sleeped in their own blood . Observe , i beseech you , like wise factors , the seasons to trade for the settling true religion . It is true , we are now full of sad distractions ; black and bloody clouds begin to gather ; yet , May not faith ( Through them ) spy out the sun of righteousness shining graciously upon unworthy England ? as hag. 2. 7.  i will shake all nations , and the desire of all nations shall come ; and i will fill this house with glory , saith the Lord of hosts . historians report , that about the year 1517. when leò the tenth was making some thirty Cardinals , there was such a terrible tempest in the church , that shaked the babe out of the virgin Mary's arms , and the keys out of saint Peter's hands , which they interpreted as ominous , and indeed so it proved ; shortly after Luther arose , who so much battered the Pope's power . The sword is already shaken out of our great churchmen's hand , by parliamental power , the keys do not hang so fast under their girdle , as they did , &c.  We dare not but hope , these are engaging providences of God , earnest-pennies of some great payment yet behind . Oh therefore know , and redeem your opportunities to trade for truth . 

activity , to pursue occasions , and follow all advantages . if you would be fully possessed of the knowledge of the truth ; you must seek for her as for silver , and search for her as for hide treasure , prov. 2. 4.  By a most unwearyed industry , search every mine . Plato calleth merchants , planets , that wander from city to city . You will never trade for truth in good earnest , till you express an inquisitive , active disposition , in the cause of religion , knocking at every door , plying every m••ket , where you May purchase any acquaintance with the truth . 

First , go not only to the shop of nature , or the school of philosophy . The candle which nature affordeth us , is good ; but it will be burned out before we come to our journeys end . Philosophy May seek truth , theology findeth it , religion doth possess it . Philosophy is not the field wherein the pearl of truth lieth , but rather a hedge and ditch about the field , to defend it , from the invasion of subtle disputants . 

Secondly , neither must we seek truth , only in the decrees of counsels , in the traditions and testimonies of the church . counsels are like rivers of water , very profitable , so long as they hold themselves within the compass of the banks , but if they swell and overflow ( As too often they have done ) they prove very hurtful to the field of the church , even to truth itself . The council of Constance cometh in with a non obstante against Christ's institution , withholding the cup from the sacrament . 

Our faith and truth was at first delivered to the saints , Jude ver. 3.  And we hold it still per ecclesiam , though not propter ecclesiam ; by the ministry of the church , though not for the authority of the church , John 4. 42.  All they who are genuine children of the church , not only by the mother's side , but by the fathers also , will not only believe as the church believeth , but as their heavenly father teacheth them , and because he teacheth them . 

Thirdly , but in searching out for the truth , go to Christ himself , who is truth itself , John 14. 6.  Jesus saith unto him , i am the way , the truth , and the life . attend upon Christ in the use of his word , which is a word of truth , prov. 8. 34.  Blessed is the man that heaneth me , watching daily at my gates , waiting at the posts of my doors . 

If ever God ripen your counsels about a synod , we hope to receive the same direction from you , that Constantine the great gave the council of nice . take the resolution of things in question , out of divinely inspired writings . do not only bid us inquire what reformation was in our ▪ Josiah's time , King Edward the sixth ; nor what in our Deborah's days , Queen Elizabeth's , ( Though we must for ever bless God for the light that appeared in those times ) do not only put us upon inquiry what Ignatius said , or what Cyprian did ; they must be very wise children who know their father's faces and writings , after so many of their adversaries scratches . Rather bid us give you an account , what Luke holdeth forth in his story of the acts of the apostles , what Paul intimates in his epistles , that so divine truth May triumph , and we enjoy a scripture reformation . In divine things we May attribute somewhat to antiquity , yet in matters that concern church pomp , and church power , we must be jealous how we trust the ancient fathers , because ( Good men ) they saw the mystery of iniquity but darkly , and at a distance , which wrought strongly , not only in corrupting doctrine with errors , but divine worship with ceremonies and church government with tyrannical usurpations . then , and then only , is truth like to triumph in church-assemblies , when God's word is there advanced . Cyrill saith , in a synod at Ephesus , upon a high throne in the temple , there lay , sanctum evangelium , the holy gospel , to show that Christ was both present and precedent there . 

resolution , to backe a public factors wise activity ▪ this would make you willing to grapple with difficulties , to expose yourselves to troubles and hazards , and to be at any cost and charges , that you May possess yourselves and the kingdom of the true religion . 

Poor England hath long been in a travelling condition , felt many bitterpangs , findeth now twins in her womb , Jacobs and Esau's , wrestling for the birthright , high contestations betwixt Eliah and Baalls priests ; now it is a day of trouble and astonishment : great things are come to the birth , only there wanteth strength to bring forth . What will you resolve to lay out to possess this disjointed kingdom of the truth ? Imagine the casting of the balance , the composing of all church difference depended upon thee alone , what wouldst thou contribute to purchase truth ? Nazianzen put this price upon his Athenian , learning ( Wherein he was very famous ) that he had something of value to part withal for Christ ; oh that you could say the same of your honours and estates , reckoning this the goodness of all your good things , that you are enabled to do good with them in the cause of Christ and his truth . It was heroical zeal in Basill , who for his constant and bold defending of the truth against the Arian heresy , being threatened death by Valens the Emperor , answered , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , oh that i Might die for the truth ! 

I beseech you ( Noble worthies ) by the many petitions you have had from men , by the solemn protestations you have made to God , by his wonder-working providence about you , and by the dependence the Protestant cause abroad hath upon you , stir up your resolution in the behalf of truth . Would you have the name of this parliament embalmed with everlasting perfume ? Improve your power for the true religion . Justify our magna charta , the grand charter of scripture truths , that doth entitle us to salvation . Confirm unto us our petition of right , establish upon pastors and churches , so much interest in the power and use of the keys , as the word of truth doth allow them . Maintain amongst us a free course of trading for eternal happiness , set and keep open those shops , such pulpits , such mouths , as any prelatical usurpations have , or would have , shut up . Secure to us not only liberty of person and estate , but also liberty of conscience from church tyranny , that we be not pinched with ensnaring oaths , clogged with multiplied subscriptions , or needless impositions , which will rather increase then compose distractions . Together with privileges of parliament , let us have church-privileges vindicated , help us to purge out that old leaven , whether of doctrine , of disposition , or persons , that we May have sacraments more purely administered , according to the rule of truth ; let us be sure of this militia , inviolably settled , the sword of the spirit , which is the word of God , ephes. 6. 17.  Guard that magazine , wherein are laid up the weapons of our warfare , that are mighty through God , to the pulling down of strong holds , 2 cor. 10. 4.  So shall we be put into a good posture for reformation . 

act undaunted resolution , in the prosecution of these religious designs , then May you confidently expect Christ's glorious and gracious presence amongst you . Luther would assure you thereof , where the word of Christ doth reign , saith he , there are the eyes of Christ fixed on the holy professors of truth , but where the word of man reigneth , although there were as many Popes , as there be leaves in the wood , and as many card•nalss , as grains of corn , &c.  as many Bishops , as drops of water in the sea , and all of them glittering in gold and jewels , gemmati , purpurati , mulati , & asinati , to maintain their own laws , yet are Christ's eyes turned away from them . 

truth , though it must be bought ; yet it May not be sold . 

The wisdom of scripture directs us to several purchases , isai. 55. 1.  Every thirsty soul is invited to come and buy waters , wine , and milk ; seek to Christ upon his terms , for variety of sweet soulmercies ; rev. 3. 18.  We are counselled to buy of Christ , gold tried in the fire , the pure graces of God's spirit , and the purity of ordinances ; ephes. 5. 16.  we must be redeeming the time , not only taking opportunities of doing and receiving good when they are offered , and seeking them when they are wanting , but buying them at any price . And indeed Christians should be chapmen to buy , rather than salemen to sell . We are commanded to buy , that we May possess , the end of this possession is use ; what spiritual commodities we have purchased , we must improve for God and our souls , but not alienate them from ourselves . 

There are three sorts of hucksters will be ready to engross the truth from you , if you be willing to sell it . 

malignant persecutors , are engrossing Huckesters' , who watch to interrupt the liberty of the truth . These , even as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses , resist the truth , men of corrupt minds , reprobates concerning the faith , 2 tim. 3. 8.  And indeed , therefore resist the truth , because their minds are so corrupt . Such the apostle calls {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , absurd , men , 2 thess. 3. 2.  Men compact of mere incongruities , solaecising in opinion , speeches , actions , and whole life , yea unreasonable men , for all men have not faith , ver. 2.  religion is the highest reason , nothing more irrational than irreligion . From such spirits arose those conspiracies against the apostle , endeavouring to scotch the charriot-wheeles of truth , when they began first to move . No sooner did Steven plead for truth , but some were suborned against him ▪ act. 6. 11.  No sooner did Saul begin to preach the truth , but opposers began to consult to kill him , act. 9 23.  Though not long before he had been a busy apparitor and pursuivant , to arrest the saints , and drag them to their high-commission , act. 9 1.  [ a strange and sudden change in them , as well as in him . ] Origen saith of the devils ; no greater torment to them , then to see men addicted to the scriptures . the same temper of spirit appears in the devil's agents upon the killing of the witnesses , rev. 11. 10.  they that dwelled upon the earth shall rejoice over them , and make merry , and shall send gifts one to another , because these two prophets tormented them that dwell on the earth ; and therefore they will adventure peace of conscience , and hope of heaven , yea , the whole stock upon it , that they May buy up truth out of the churches hands ; and sometimes malice rises to such an height , that even in England the bible must be burned , as strange doctrine . 

seducing heretics , whose endeavour is to corrupt the purity of truth . The great apostasy from the faith , 1 tim. 4. 1. is brought about by giving heed to seducing spirits . the Pope hath many emissaries abroad , who join with the devil , studying a method of soule-deceiving , and truth-betraying . Compare ephe. 4. 14.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , with ephes. 6. 11.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , you shall find the devil and deceivers artificially methodizing their snares to draw us from the truth , 2 pet. 2. 1  ▪ false teachers have always practised to bring in damnable heresies . the beginnings of gross errors May be modest ; yea , the foulest heresies May at first appear with fair faces . The serpent creeps into the paradise of the church by degrees : as 2 cor. 11. 3. his plot is to corrupt people's minds , from the simplicity that is in Christ ; first , he will puzzle them with a question , as he did Eve , put a command of God , a known truth to be disputed , then help them to mint some distinctions , ( Which are not always so happy in divinity as in philosophy ) thereby to relieve and help in an error . 

And here it May be observed , though these men have the same design with malignant persecutors , to engross the truth , yet cunningly they will buy it up by parcels , that they May be the less discerned . They will trade first in names , than in things , first habituate us to call our ministers priests , our communion tables , altars , before they impose superstitious gestures . This was the Rhemists strain of policy . let us keep our old words , and we shall easily keep our old faith . 

This gradual huckstering up the purity of truth , is most clear in image worship . At first , images and pictures of saints were used in private , for memory , history , or ornament only ; afterwards with like colour of pretence brought into the church in Gregory's days , yet with express prohibition of worshipping them ; afterward the second synod of nice enjoins it , though more modestly , and respectively only in regard of that which they represent ; but since the council of Trent , it 's risen to gross idolatry . 

neutral politicians , who will be buying truth out of our hands , by formalizing and enervating the power of it , till at last they leave us an heartless and sapless religion . Among the laws of Solon , there was one which thundered against such , who in a civil uproar amongst the citizens , sit still as neutral spectators . It were happy for the church , if there were a more strict course taken against all lukewarm Machivillians , who by their neutrality undermine religion ; of this strain was Jeroboam , that grand politician , who create to himself a state religion ; out of love to his crown , he set up golden calves , he hindered the persons from going to worship God at Jerusalem , lest they should turn again unto their Lord , unto Rehoboam King of Judah . worldly wise men , as they are time-servers , so they are self-server , and whatsoever become of Christ and his truth , self shall be advanced into the throne ; such men's heads over-match their hearts , their policy out-runneth their religion ; when the glory of Christ and his gospel come in competition with their self-ends , self shall first be gratified ; most unlike to Paul , who phil. 1. 20.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , stood as it were on up-to , looking earnestly after the magnifying of Christ , whatever became of himself , whether in his life , or in 〈◊〉 death . 

I May produce three reasons to fortify you against felling truth to any hucksters . 

Truth is in itself a precious jewel , of most incomparable worth , gained into the possession of the churches , not without much difficulty ; and therefore cannot without great disparagement to its excellency , and to the zeal of others , be alienated and chaffered away . 

Gospel truth at first cost the blood of Christ , then watered with the blood of many martyrs , which made it throng up so plentifully . It is observable , the church hath been seldom fully possessed of any grand truth , without much debate , without some bloody sufferings . How dear did it cost Athanasius to justify the divinity of Christ , against the Arians ? and shall we suffer any of that kindred to buy it again out of our hands ▪ how courageously did Augustine rescue the doctrine of grace , from the Pelagians hands , whom he calls the enemies of grace ? and shall we suffer it to be betrayed to their brethren the Arminians ! 

How far did Luther hazard himself , to advance justification by faith in Christ ? it is a gross shame that sweet truth should be lost in the language of any innovators , who will have works to concur in eodem genere cause , to share equally with faith in the very act of justifying . 

Many of our ancient worthies , like wisdom's children , matth. 11. 19 set themselves to justify wisdom ; they have endeavoured with much sweat , and many tears , yea , with their dearest lives , to settle the church's landmarks by evidence of scripture arguments , and to bound the truth by decrees of counsels ; we must not prodigally dispossess ourselves of such a treasure . 

We reap the fruit of our reformers zeal , who bestirred themselves so much against popish altars , and other church usurpations for the purging of religion in England . 

God forbid , that we should sell for trifles , what they possessed us of with so much difficulty . It concerns us rather to concur with them , yea , to promote their beginnings with all our might , that we May have such churches , such officers , such election and ordination , such jurisdiction , such exercise of church power , and all such administrations as are most agreeable to the truth . 

Truth is the church's talon ; committed to her trust , and therefore must not be sold . Trust being a strong obligation to fidelity . Upon this ground the apostle , Jude ver. 3.  Exhorts Christians to contend earnestly for the faith , once delivered to the saints . you must never expect another edition of the faith , ( God reserved that solemn change from Jewish to Evangelical worship , for the inauguration of his son ) zealously strive for this faith you have , against all opposition . In that known place , so much abused by Papists , 1 tim. 3. 15.  The church of Ephesus ( This cannot be appropriated to the church of Rome ) is the pillar and ground of truth . not a pillar to uphold , but to hold forth truth , not so much {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the seat of truth ; every pure church being a depository of truth , where it is to be found , as the candle in the candlestick . All the fonnes of wisdom have a share in that of Paul to Timothy , 1 tim. 6. 20.  oh Timothy keep that which is committed to thy trust . 

This made the primitive worthies so conscientiously zealous in the cause of truth ; and that not only of many truths , but even of forms of speeches , of syllables , yea of letters . The difference betwixt the council of nice and Arius , was but in a letter , whether {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . The controversy whereupon the Greek and Latin churches broke , touching the proceeding of the holy ghost , depended upon two prepositions , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} and {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . The monstrous heresy of Nestorius lay but in one poor letter , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , when he would not gratify the church therein , as Cyrill desired him , many Bishops rose up against him , so religious were they , that that they would not exchange a letter , or syllable of the faith , wherewith their saviour had betrusted them . 

Selling truth is the worst , the most undoing trade ; it sets to sale both God's glory , and your own salvation , being it opens a door to both extremes in religion , to profaneness , and to superstition . 

The school of Christ is indeed a school of affection , and of action , but first of knowledge ; we must have science before we shall make conscience of our ways . This makes the god of this world , the devil , bestir himself to blind people's minds , lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ should shine into them : he well knew that darkness of mind , betrays us to works of darkness . When men walk in the dark , they know not at what they stumble , prov. 4. 19  They will stumble at Christ himself , at the strictness and purity of his ways , and soon plunge themselves into the grossest wickedness . 

in a synod at London Anselm forbade priests marriage in England , and in the next year were discovered a great company of sodomites amongst them . such is the woeful fruit of selling truth , which would be a spur , quickening to good , and a bridle restraining from evil . It is no wonder to find such treacherous practices amongst the Papists , their erroneous doctrines open the sluices unto them . Upon a slight confession of sin , they May receive a cheap absolution , and thereby are emboldened to renew the commission of it . That taxa poenitentiaria , amongst the Papists , that low rate which is put upon the greatest sins in the Pope's custom house ; so contrary to the word of truth , rom. 6. 23.  the wages of sin is death , encourages persons to the greatest profaneness . 

Ignorance of the truth is a fruitful mother and helpful nurse , both to profaneness of practice , and to superstition in devotion . See it at Athens , act. 17. 22 , 23.  There they were fondly superstitious , where their altar had this inscription , to the unknown God . Aquinas attributes the inchoation of idolatry itself , to the inordi•acy of our affection , and our ignorance of the true God . whence came superstition so much to swarm in the dark ages of the church ? because they neglected the word of truth , and followed tradi•ionss . Hence it is observed that learning and religion have fallen and risen together . When the light of truth hath been eclipsed , by the decay of learning ; the heat of religion hath much declined . The weeds of superstition , sponte nascuntur , will grow of their own accord in dark corners ; as having advantage of the soil , so much connaturalness to people's corrupt hearts . The Pope's chaplains need not take much pains to teach ignorant souls to be superstitious ; if orthodox preachers of the truth be but suspended , we shall soon have reason to complain with that great man in the council of Lateran ; piety is almost sunk into superstition . 

Beware of expressing any indulgence unto such , or holding any compliance with them that sell the truth . The whole tribe of Benjamin came to be extinguished , except about six hundred , only for countenancing a few sons of Belial in Gibeah , who had abused a Levites wife , judg. 19 and 20. chap. Christ was angry with some of the churches , not only for being active in evil , but passive of evil , rev. 2. 14. 20.  The wisdom of this great council hath been inquisitive after monopolists , or any that encroach upon the commonwealth . Give me leave to discover an unhappy church-confederacy , whereby truth hath been shamefully sold in many places . 

There are four sorts of persons , herein deeply engaged . 

First , scandalous apostate professors of the truth , who alienate the truth from themselves , and alienate the minds of others from the truth . They make the word of God blasphemed , tit. 3. 5.  Such are described with black characters by Jude verse 12 , 13.  these are spots in your feasts of charity , when they feast with you , feeding themselves without fear ; clouds they are without water , carried about of winds ; trees whose fruit withereth , without fruit , twice dead , plucked up by the roots ; raging waves of the sea , foaming out their own shame , wand'ring stars , to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever . they are employed in evil works , and they receive answerable wages . What unhappy markets such carnal gospelers make for the truth , you May read in many stories ; amongst the rest , an American nobleman , being persuaded to embrace the Christian religion , demanded , first , what place was ordained for such as were baptised ? answer was made , heaven , and its joys . secondly , what place for them who were not baptised ; answer was returned , hell , and its torments . thirdly , which of these places was allotted for the Spaniards , it was answered heaven ; whereupon he renounced his intended baptism , protesting he would rather go to hell with the unbaptised , then be in heaven with the Spaniards . many fall out implacably with the truth , because they find many professors such unsavoury salt . 

Secondly , ignorant and vicious ministers . some even idol priests , like the idols of the heathen , the work of men's hands , they have mouths but they speak not ; eyes have they but they see not ; they have ears but they hear not , neither is there any breath in their mouths ; they that make them are like unto them , so is every one that trusteth in them , psalm . 135. 15 , 16 , 17 , 18.  And indeed it is too often true , like priest , like persons , ier. 5. 31.  Such a creature is not to be found in Christ's catalogue , who gave some apostles , prophets , evangelists , pastors , teachers . No Prince ever sent dumb ambassadors . Bernard reckoneth up these four as strange things , speculator caecus , praecursor claudus , praeco mutus , doctor inscius ; a blind watchman , a lame harbinger , a dumb crier , an ignorant teacher ; and indeed a minister of a vicious life , though not grossly ignorant , is as dangerous an enemy to true religion , if not sometimes worse , as not barely withholding , but corrupting and perverting truth , like Elymas the sorcerer , act. 13. 10.  Yea like Eli his sons , 1 sam. 2. 17. who made the offerings of the Lord to be abhorred ; their ungodly lives are often such confutations of their own and other men's sermons , that many thereby are hardened against the truth , ezek. 9 6. the destroying angel was to begin at the sanctuary , and there , too often , begins profaneness . There hath been long expectation , as there is indeed great need , of a parliament visitation ; to find out those chapmen , who will sell God's truth , people's souls , church-purity with state-liberty , for the satisfaction of their lusts . 

Thirdly , such prelates as ordain or support these ignorant and vicious ministers , i appeal to you , what gross betrayers of truth they are . How happy had it been for the church in England , if they who pretend to succeed Timothy , had walked by that rule which Paul commended to him , 1 tim. 5. 22.  lay hands suddenly on no man ? but alas ! many are aposcopi , rather than episcopi , as Espencaeas , by-seers , rather than overseers ; hence such swarms in the church of backe-friends unto truth . 

If you inquire when so many gross deformities crept into the church , Damasus will tell you ; even than when the Bishops put over the care and performance of church affairs to others , that they Might take their own ease ; like harlots that put out their own children to be nursed by others , that themselves in the mean time Might satisfy their lusts ; by such remissness truth was much smothered , with a multitude of weeds , that overgrew the church . 

Fourthly , self-seeking patrons are many times deeply accessary to the betraying of truth , in presenting most unworthy ministers . The Lord knoweth how many are so far from considering the concurring consent of judicious Christians ( Which was much valued in primitive times ) that they neglect their trust for the good of others , and their own souls . They will obtrude , too often , one of jeroboam's priests , one of the lowest of the persons , 1 Kings 13. 33.  They would not choose a cook to dress their meat , that were like to poison them ; nor a physician ( Though a kinsman ) which would probably kill them ; but , too often , prefer a daubing chaplain , that will comply with their covetous , or licentious humour , though in the mean time the persons be betrayed , and the truth be sold . Will you please to consider what a sad meeting this unhappy fraternity will have at the day of judgement , if still they persist in truth-betraying . scandalous professors , will curse their wicked ministers , whose examples poisoned them . wicked ministers , will cry woe , wo upon such prelates , who were indulgent to their unworthiness ; and doubtless the prelates will be as ready to complain of many patrons , who first made the livings scandalous by withholding maintenance , and then by importunity thrust a scandalous minister upon them . 

Oh let it now appear , that you will not suffer religion to be betrayed by the least indulgence to any of these evils . Consider what Sigismond the Emperor said in the council of Constance , where the council pretended to make a reformation ; one stood up and said the reformation must begin at the friar minorites ; no , said the Emperor , non à minoritis , sed à majoritis incipiendum est , let reformation reach patron , and prelate , as well as minister and persons . 

If you would discourage scandalous livers , suppress scandalous ministers ; if you would prevent a succession of them , regulate the power of the keys , took to ordination and jurisdiction : though your bill against scandalous ministers were ripened and executed , yet if the door of admission into the church , continue as large as now it is , the next age will swarm again with the like drones . And for the truths sake , that you May silence all clamours , as if reformation would discourage learning , and undo the church , make good your own orders . For the support of an able ministry ; let patrons and others deny themselves , to raise a sufficient and certain maintenance , at least open a vent to others piety and charity , who will concur with you , to afford oil for burning and shining lamps , by reviving the hopeful design of the Feoff•eses , or what other ways , your zealous wisdom shall suggest . A great civilian telleth us how church-maintenance came to be appropriated to the cloisters of monks , and how such lands as they held , in sundry parishes , were freed from the payment of tithes to the ministers thereof ; namely , it sprang from this root , they insinuated that preaching was not so necessary for the salvation of men's souls , as their praying , in their religious houses ; preaching , they said , breedeth schism , disputes in religion , &c.  it lieth as a blot upon them , that by their undervaluing preaching , many congregations were robbed of their ministers maintenance , let it be your honour , who have expressed such a high esteem of preaching , to endeavour the re-endowing those places with such means , as May encourage faithful witnesses unto the truth . 

To awaken your compassionate affection towards many persons and places , where truth is chaffered away ; religion is a riddle , a paradox , yea , a reproach among them . We should appear this day , as public mourners , laying to heart , not only personal , but state evils , even parliament sins . Is not this just matter of grief , that in so many former parliaments , the liberty , the purity , and the power of religion hath been so much neglected ? ancient laws have established church pomp , power , dignity , and revenues ; these are twisted into the several statutes , as if they would put in a politic caveat against after alterations , without shaking the very foundation , which is now one of the great objections against reformation . Yea , how much hath truth suffered by the indulgence that old parliament laws have expressed to nonresidency , pluralities , and insufficiency of ministers . It hath been enough if legit ut , clericus ; if he can say the confession in Latin , he must be betrusted with souls . Allow something to the necessity of these darker times ; yet now the very reason of such being altered , God forbid that truth should any longer be betrayed by an unwarrantable latitude . oh pity your many thousands of expecting petitioners , who have had many years of sad Sabbaths , and sit down still in much sorrow , complaining for want of truth . You May hear their groanings in the words of the prophet Jeremiah , chap. 8. 22.  is there no balm in Gilead ? Is there no physician there ? Why then is not the health of the daughter of my persons recovered ? what ? cannot , will not , the parliament heal us ? 

It was a strange and doleful vision that Ezekiel had from God at Jerusalem , when he saw so many sinful spectacles ; an image of jealousy , Baal's idol , ezek. 8. v. 5. then , a company of grave ancient men , every one in the chamber of his imagery , ver. 11 , 12. the Jewish high-commission , according to some , in those times deeply corrupted ; poor women weeping for Tammuz , ver. 14. weeping for the death of Osiris , King of Egypt , and idolatrously adoring his image , which Isis his wife had advanced ; and worships towards the sun , ver. 16.  Would it please you in your serious thoughts , to run over this church , this kingdom , you Might see in many places such objects , that your eyes would much affect your hearts . though in all abominations , we do not run parallel with Jerusalem , in Ezekiel's vision , yet such woeful fruits of truth-selling , and truth-betraying , as May stir up your affection , and awaken your parliament actions . 

First , cast your compassionate eyes upon the schools of the prophets , the church's nurseries . do not petitions inform you that divers have there chaffered away truth for errors ; were Whitaker and Reinolds then in vivis , doubtless they would blush to see Bellarmine and Arminius justified by many , rather than confuted . If no chambers of imagery be there , yet are there not some chapels , polluted rather then adorned with images , altars , and crucifixes . if no worshipping of the sun there , yet do not too many plead for , and practise , an ungrounded worshipping toward the East ? It cannot be thought unnaturalness in a son to represent the distempers of his mother , to a college of physicians especially when the experience of the deep infection , which some of your beloved sons got there , of the corruption of judgements , profaneness and superstition of practice , which many of your ministers brought thence , will witness the same , that truth hath been shamefully betrayed , by too many in the universities . 

Munster reporteth , that the Jews were banished out of many countries of Christendom , principally for poisoning springs and fountains . all friends to truth had need pray that God would either remove or heal such as have poisoned the schools of the prophets , the fountains of the land . Our hopes are that God will put upon you ( Noble senators ) the spirit of Elisha , and help you to cast into those waters , such salt , that the waters be healed , that there be not from thence any more barrenness , or causing to miscarry , 2 king. 2. 19 , 20.  In exod. 15. 23 , 24 , 25. when the persons were come to Marah , they could not drink the waters , for they were bitter , and murmured aga•nst Moses , saying , what shall we drink ? ver. 25.  the Lord showed him a tree , which when he had cast into the waters , the waters were made sweet , plant , and uphold wholesome lectures , in the pulpit , as well as in the chair , ( a service worthy of the wisdom and power of a parliament . ) such trees will sweeten the waters there , and drop such fruit , as will much promote the trade of truth abroad . How many living stones , yea how many builders did famous Perkins hew , by preaching a lecture in Cambridge ? many children and fathers begotten by his ministry in a few years , to the great advancement of the truth . 

Secondly , behold with the same compassion , cathedral churches , and the woeful effects of selling the truth in too many of them ; the strange vestures and gestures , images , &c. in some of their quires , intimating too much affinity with those chambers of imagery , in their abominations , mentioned ezek. 8. 10 , 11 , 12.  Former reformations left such nettles growing there , that have since unhappily seeded many other churches ; yea , left so much dust , not only behind the door , but even in the very choir , as hath been easily blown about into many corners . They glory in being called the mother churches , but they have too often proved stepdames to their daughters , engrossing the maintenance , that should provide the word of truth for their souls . What pity is it that cathedral societies , which Might have been colleges of learned presbyters , for the feeding and ruling city churches , and petty academies , to prepare pastors for neighbour places , should be so often sanctuaries for non-residents , and be made nurseries to many such drones , who can neither preach nor pray , otherwise then read , say , or sing their prayers ; and in the mean time truth much obscured in a non-edifying pomp of ceremonious service . it was a notable design of those Bishops at Bononia , that gave Pope Julius the third this very counsel , how to establish the Roman religion ; let the persons ( Say they ) have pompous prayers , images , tapers , organs , and divers musical instruments in their temples ; these are things with which the persons are much delighted , and being taken up with these , they almost forget that doctrine which is so destructive to us . Let your compassion move you to counter-work all such plots ; as church-deformers sought to corrupt cities , and places of confluence ; so let those that profess themselves church-reformers , when the harvest is greatest , express the greatest care to send forth most faithful labourers for the truth , matth. 9 36 , 37.  This were to resemble your saviour . 

Thirdly , behold with weeping eyes the many hundred of congregations , in the kingdom , where million of souls are like to perish for want of vision ; truth is sold from amongst them , either by soule-betraying-non-residents , soule-poysoning-innovators , or soule-pining-dry-nurses . in too many places the very image of jealousy , the idol of the mass is set up , yea , the comedy of the mass acted , because there wanteth the light of truth to discover the wickedness and folly of it . 

Do not some of you that live on the Welsh coasts ; cry out with your neighbours , woe is me that i sojourn in Meseck , and that i dwell in the tents of Kedar , psalm . 120. 5.  Do not some of you inhabit the North parts , where you May complain ( In the word of Nicholas Clemang . pag. 15. ) How many priests came to their benefices , not from the schools , and their study , but from the ploughs , and servile occupations , which could neither read , nor understand Latin ? where in many miles , not a minister that can {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , and {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , preach , and live , sermons . i wish every parliament-man had a map of the soul-misery of the most of the ten thousand churches and chapels in England ; i hope it would draw forth your compassions , and stir up your endeavours to rescue truth out of their hands , who would sell it , and set up the trade of truth in poor dark countries . 

Had i the favour to prefer a petition unto you in the name of universities , chief cities , country congregations , yea , the whole kingdom , and were sure of a propitious ear from you , i would sum up all in this clause , in this one breath : improve your power to help forward the word of truth , that it May run and be glorified . This would maintain love and loyalty to our sovereign . where hath he most hearty prayers , but where truth most prevails ? this would teach men to justify the power , and comply with the authority of parliaments . who have more undermined and maligned parliaments , than such ministers as first betrayed truth ? this is the way ( If any ) to reduce seduced Papists . human laws will pinch their purses . Send divine truth amongst them , that May satisfy their consciences . This is the most sovereign means to compose church-differences . Why do we contend ? ( Saith Augustine ) are we not brethren ? our father died not intestate , let his will be publicly produced , and all men will be quiet . this is the best way to make the reformation thorough and lasting , because this would engage the people's hearts . 2 chron. 20. 32 , 33.  Jehosaphat did that which was right in the sight of the Lord ; howbeit the high places were not taken away ; for as yet the persons had not prepared their hearts unto the god of their fathers . Josiah , a good King , did much , yet because the people's spirits were not wrought to concur with him , the work soon vanished , and God's judgements broke in upon them . Go on , therefore ( Honourable worthies ) improving your influence to prevent the selling of truth . 

First , provide that every congregation May have an able trumpet of truth . 

Secondly , especially let great towns , places of confluence , have lectures , markets of truth . 

Thirdly , afford any faithful Paul and Barnabas encouragement , yea , power , if Sergius Paulus desire to hear the word of God , to go and preach , though Elymas the sorcerer should be unwilling ; such ambulatory exercises have brought both light and heat into dark and cold corners . 

Fourthly , what if there were some Evangelical , itinerant preachers , sent abroad upon a public stock to enlighten dark countries ? Thus Might you reap glorious fruits of all your counsels , tears , prayers , and pains , in seeing Dagon fall down before the ark of truth . 

I have endeavoured , ( Though in much weakness ) with words of truth and soberness , to plead the cause of truth . i must end as an importunate solicitor : oh sell not the true religion upon any terms . much of my rhetoric to persuade you is within you . I speak to your self-love , as you are men ; to your conscience , as you are Christians ; to your wisdom , as you are statesmen ; to your honours , as you are noble : be always buying , but never selling the truth . England hath had an happy taste of your zeal for truth , and against the corrupters and betrayers of the true religion . The Lord from heaven hath appeared mightily for you , when you appeared much for him in the cause of truth . God forbid that ever this parliament should lose any of its first love to religion , and the reformation of it , then May you expect to drink of Solomon's bitter cup , the Lord was angry with Solomon , because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel , which had appeared to him twice . God forbid that rhehum the chancellor and Shimshai the scribe , should outstrip Zerubbabel ; that Tobiah and Sanballat , should outbid Nehemiah in any cause of God . Rather let the malignancy of malignant opposers inflame your zeal for the truth . Oh that we could now all close this day of humiliation , with the proper work of the day , covenanting with our God , making it our sealing day ; nehem. 9 38.  At a solemn fast , Princes , priests and Levites , did make a sure covenant , write and seal unto it . let us this day , not only give earnest , for the purchasing of truth , by the fixed purposes of our hearts , but even give as it were hands and seals , that we will never sell the liberty , purity , or power , of religion upon any terms . 

W•ll you please to these particulars ? 

First , that you will not sell truth out of carnal fears ; you have a good  it , rev. 21. 7 , 8. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , he that is overcoming , not he that hath overcome , shall inherit all things , and i will be his God , and he shall be my son , but the fearful and unbelieving shall have their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone . read over the story of Francis Spira with trembling , who out of such fear betrayed the truth . after he had gone to Venice to the Pope's legate , with whom , out of carnal fear , he complied , craving pardon of him , and yielding to recant that religion he had publicly processed ; when he returned to his house , he could not rest an hour , no not a minute , nor feel any ease of his continual anguish ; from that night he was much terrified with horror , and as he confesseth , he saw plainly before his eyes all the torments of hell and the damned ; and in his foul did hear the fearful sentence , being drawn before the judgement seat of Christ . hold fast the truth , let faith triumph over fears . If Peter will deny and forswear his Master , at best he must return by weeping cross : many are irrecoverably smitten with that thunderbolt from the Lord , heb. 10. 38.  if any one draw backe , my soul shall have no pleasure in him . 

Secondly , that you will not sell truth for your own private advantages . it was a wretched carriage in Demetrius , and his fraternity , who out of love to their own gain , did combine and consult how they Might undermine and betray the truth . Sirs , ye know that by this craft we have our wealth ; this made them so zealous for their Diana ; and so fierce against the gospel ; if truth do prevail , Diana must down , and then farewell their profit . Resolve rather to resemble Moses then Demetrius , who , heb. 11. 25.  chose rather to suffer affliction with the persons of God , then enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season . his faith did so rightly inform his judgement , that he Counted the reproaches of Christ , ( Which seem the bitterest thing in Christianity ) greater riches than the treasures in Egypt , ver. 26.  How much did he then prefer the consolations , which come by religion , before all worldly excellencies ? Such a spirit was in Luther , who when he was offered to be Cardinal , if he would be quiet , replied , no , not if i Might be Pope . he had an holy scorn to be put off from his religious designs , by such withering petty things . 

Thirdly , sell not truth for politic state ends . 

When you come to settle religion do not deal only like politicians , but like Christians . worldly wisdom in the things of God is a rule too short , too crooked , too partial , yea foolishness with God . Jeroboam would play the politician in religion , he sold the true worship of God for his state ends , and for ever inherits this as a blot upon his name , 1 king. 15. 30.  because of the sins of Jerohoam which he sinned , and which he made Israel to sin , by his provocation wherewith he provoked the Lord God of Israel to anger . most renowned was the zeal of King Edward the sixth for the truth , when upon reasons of state he was pressed by Cranmer and Ridley , to give way to the mass ; he refused it with so much resolution , with so many tears , that they acknowledged he had more divinity in his little finger then both they . In things about meum & tuum , that concern our own interest , we May be more liberal , but in church affairs the word of truth must guide us . It is not in our power quicquam hic aliis dare , aut in aliorum gratiam deflectere ; we May not therein gratify one another . 

Fourthly , sell not truth for pretences of church peace ▪ i confess the name of peace smells very sweet ; and now especially ( In the midst of such church distractions and such wantonness of opinions ) were to be purchased at any rate , except with the loss of truth ; it is a most lovely sight to see unity of peace embrace unity of faith ; to behold the household of faith , the family of love ; oh that we could all observe the present breaches with the same affections that Augustine did the differences betwixt Hierome and ruffian . Woe is me that i cannot find you both together , i would fall down at your feet , with much love and many tears i would beseech you for yourselves , and for one another , and for weak Christians for whom Christ died , that you suffer not these dissensions to spread , &c.  But , in the mean time , we must not be such reconcilers , as to bring in a Samaritan religion , an interim , an uncomfortable mixture . We must not receive Babylonish inmates into the Lord's house . Light and darkness , truth and error , will never long dwell quietly together . 

Fifthly , sell not truth for the pomp of human ceremonies . admit that ceremonies were first let into the church , with the fair intention of the guiders and leaders ; and entertained by the credulity of well-meaning persons , before the mystery of iniquity was much known ; yet since , being so superstitiously abused by the Pope and his party , and so rigidly pressed , for the upholding the pomp of prelacy , with no small disadvantage to the truth ; let us part with them , rather than sell any spark of truth for them . 

Never say they are ancient . Jesus Christ is my antiquity , saith Ignatius . we must look for antiquity of institution not only of custom . Never say , they are indifferent . If indifferent only , and not expedient , they May the better be spared . Others will say , our doctrine takes off the scandal of the ceremonies . However , better have the stumbling block removed out of the way , then to have a monitor appointed to give you warning of it , he May fall asleep , and then you are in danger . Many tender consciences wish the same success about our ceremonies , that was in King Edward the sixth his days , about the images . Some persons contending for one image , others for another , gave occasion , that the King took down all . who knoweth whether God hath called you to this parliament to accomplish this amongst other services ? 

If you do fully come off , to give in your hands , your hearts , yoursealing actions , that you will not upon any terms sell the truth , as you tread in good Hezekiah's steps , i doubt not but the Lord will crown your piety and pains with his diadem , 2 chron. 31. 20 , 21.  Thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah , and wrought that which was good and right , and truth before the Lord his God , and in every work that he began in the service of the house of God , and in the law , and in the commandments to seek his god , he did it with all his heart and prospered . 

Finis . 





inveniar sanè suberbus &c. modò impit silcutii non arguar dum dominus patititur . luth. ep. ad staup.  ier. 45 ▪ 5.  aug. ep. 129.  isa. 9 6.  1 tim. 2. 2.  1 sam. 4. 21 , 22.  hollinsh . in hen. 7.  gal. 6. 9  2 king. 6. 16.  1 pet. 4. 19  1 tim. 6. 12.  

hierom. in eccles. cornel. a l•p . in prov. argum.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , sive dignitates , hae doctrinae quae suo merito vitae nostrae veluti dominae & moderatrices esse debent , cartwr . parts of the text . 1.  Proposition . explication . 1.  Liberty of truth must be bought . 2 thess. 3. 1.  revel. 6. 2.  Acts 12. 5.  2.  Purity of truth must be bought . purum est plenum sui & immixtum alieni . quot supererunt mixturae ex hominum ingenio prolatae , toridem extabunt pollutiones quae homines distrabant à certo eorum usu , quae dominus in corum salutem instituerat . Calv. ep. prot. angl. totalis & adaequata regula est scriptura & traditio simul . Traditio parem habet autoritatem scripturae , Becan . 3.  Power of truth must be bought . hypocrisis est signum sine signato . fateor quidem moderation •ocum esse oportere , sed non mi•us constanter offirmo videndum esse ne sub illo praetextu toleretur q••cquam quod à satanâ vel antichristo prefectum sit . Calv. ep. prot. angl.  Hilarius contra aux•ntium . male vos parietum amor cepit ; malè ecclesiam dei in tectis aedificusque veneramini ; malè sub his pacis nomen ingeatur ; annè ambiguum est in iis antichristum sessurum ? purchase of truth . 1.  Begins in desires after it . scientia visut , and gustus . isa. 55. 1. . luk. 18. 1. 7.  prov. 26. 15.  2.  Promoted by diligence . psal. 19 10.  cant. 3. 2.  luk. 19 3 , 4.  c. sej•s bonus vir , sed christianus . 3.  Managed by prudence . 4.  Transacted by paction . haec optima commutatio , da res tuas ut acquiras veritatem ; non alienabis à te veritatem , ut acquiras res altas . cajet. truth seldom bought upon cheap terms . confirmation . 1.  reason . 2.  reason . p. martyr . Ep. 36.  regni . Eliz.  3.  reason . gladius ecclesiae venerandâ raritate formidabilis . petr. de alliaco . 4.  reason . 2 thess. 2. 7.  see Crakanthorp of the fift general council , chap. 13.  application . 1.  Use . Self-examination . 1.  Quere . Concerning the persons . 2.  Quere . Concerning your families . ephes. 5. 5.  2 cor. 6. 15 , 16.  delicata res est spiritus dei . 3.  Quaere . Concerning the public . use 2.  exhortation . three requisites in a factor  1 requisite , wisdom . 1.  maximis dissidiis non sunt minores istae redimendae veritates . Acontius de St.  Sat.  1.  2.  3.  4.  exod. 20. 11.  ezek. 20. 10.  2.  opportunitas est maximum talentum . judg. 6. 40.  2 requisite , activity . veritatem philosophia quaerit , theologia invenit , religio possidet . P. mirand. clem. alexand. licet christus post caenam institue rit & suis discipulis administraverit sub utraque specie panis et vini hoc venerabile sacramentum ; tamen hoc non obstante sacrorum canonum autoritas , & approbata consuetudo ecclesiae servavit & servat . Caranza sum . Concil. sess. 13.  autoritas ecclesiae est autoritas numeris , non jurisdictionis . Camer. ego sum via , quae ad veritatem duco ; ego sum veritas , quae vitam promitto ; ego sum vita , quam do . Bernard . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} 3 requisite , resolution . 2 chron. 29. 8.  lu•her de abrog. . miss . private . 2 proposition . three sorts of of hucksters . 1.  Sort of hucksters of truth . qui {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} faciunt , quae minime conventunt . Pisc. Acts 4.  & 5. ch. Origen , num. home 27. in hoc corum omnis flamma est , in hoc uruntur incendio . Tanquan doctrina peregrina . 2 sort of hucksters of truth . rhem. test . 1 tim. 6. 20.  bellarm. de imag. sanct. l. 2. c. 21.  3 sort of hucksters of truth . plut. in vita Solon 1 king. 12. 27 28.  1.  reason . niltam certum quam quod post dubium certum . 2 reason . rom. 3. 2.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} not sensu architectonico but forensi . 3 reason . selling truth opens a door , 1 to profaneness . Alsted . A•n• . 1102.  2 to superstition . traditiones pontificiorum sunt pandectae errorum et superstitionum . Chemnit . 1 u•e of caution . 4 sorts accessary to the selling of truth . 1 scandalous professors . 2 ignorant and vicious ministe•  ephe. 4. 11.  Bernard . 3 prelates supporting ignorant & vicious ministers . Field . on chap. l. 5. c. •9 . 4 self-seeking pations . plebs ipsa maxime habet potestatem , vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes , vel recusandi indignos : quod & ipsum videmus de divina autoritate descendere . cyp. ep. 63  Sir tho. rid. view of civil law . part 3. c. 4. sect. 3.  2 use of direction . ezek.  . Polan in locum . 1.  multitudine levissimarum seremoniarum pene est extincta pietas et vis spiritus sancti . Gerson . hae••uus quibus vulgus praecipue del•ctatus , et quo••• gratia doctrinam •llam quae •ol•s 〈◊〉 est fere obliv••itu• . p. 4.  3.  missae comoedia in p. martyr . 2 thes. 3. 1.  contra pontificies pa•um ••gibus aut libris profici , quousque firmum etidoneum ministerium in ecclesiis constitutum fuerit . Whitak . 1.  2.  3.  act. 13. 7. 8  4.  3 use of dehortation . 1 Kings . 11 9  matth. 26. 74 , act. 19 24 , 25.  1 cor. 3. 19  calv. epist. prot . Angl.  eph 4 3. 13.  he••nth• , qui vos 〈◊〉 simul inventre non possum . Aug. ep. 15.  2 king. 17 33.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . ignat. epi. ad philad. quid si vel pigri vel non satis attenti sint monitores , vel frustra plerosque moneant ? Beza , ep. 8.  Grindal . Anno 1548.  Ester 4. 14 ▪  


































































