A sermon preached to the honourable house of Commons , at their late solemn fast , Wednesday , Feb . 26. 1644.  

By John Maynard , minister of the word of God at Mayfield in Sussex , and a member of the assembly of divines . 

London , printed by George Bishop , for Samuel Gellibrand , at the brazen serpent in Paul's churchyard . 1645.  

A sermon preached to the honourable house of Commons , at their late solemn fast , febr. 26. 1644.  

prov. 23. 23.  

Buy the truth and sell it not . 



Truth is the great business of these stirring times ; inquiries after truth , discoveries of truth , contending for truth . this ( I suppose ) all parties pretend to , though never so contrary each to other . And among those who do really aim at truth , and meet in the main ; no wonder though there be differences in judgement , and conflicts about some particulars , the parts of truth being so exceeding numerous , the conceptions of men so various , the eye of the inner man so dim-sighted , and apt to mistake , whilst it looketh but through a glass . and indeed that the cause of truth is of a transcendent nature , and exceeding high concernment , the wiseman here showeth , so advancing the worth of it , as to be bought at any rate , so heightening the price of it , as not to be sold upon any terms . buy the truth , &c.  

This being one of those entire portions of scripture ( As i conceive ) which have no necessary connexion with that which goeth before or followeth , some time May be spared , which otherwise should have been spent , in showing the coherence . 

Neither do i discern any such difficulty in the words as needeth much to retard our progress . 

[ buy ] the original word May signify either to buy or to possess , to get or keep possession : and so the exhortation May suit all sorts , thou that wantest the truth , buy it : thou that hast it , keep it : but the latter is manifestly included in the negative , sell it not . 

[ the truth ] the Hebrew note used for emphasis , demonstration , specification , is not in the text , and therefore i think our English particle [ the ] ( Which answereth it ) May be omitted , and we May read it , buy truth , as afterward wisdom , &c.  Not the wisdom : and so leave the word truth in its just latitude . 

Here then is a point of heavenly negotiation or spiritual traffic which the holy ghost commendeth to all who desire to make a wise improvement of that short span of time allotted them in this world , and to give up their account with joy . 

That sense which one expositor giveth ▪ maketh this place parallel to that , gal. 6.  let him that is taught in the word communicate , &c. though it be a truth clearly held forth in scripture , and May be either included in this text as a part of the sense , or inferred from it as a consequent , yet i conceive it is far short of the full and direct meaning of the place . 

i concur with those who understand it thus , get possession of the truth whatsoever pains it cost thee , whatever hazard it May lead thee into , whatsoever loss or suffering it May bring upon thee . Sell it not : do not part with it to gain a world , leave it not , lose it not , for the greatest advantage under heaven . 

In the words ye May easily see two propositions , 1.  An affirmative , or precept , buy truth . secondly , a negative , or prohibition , sell it not . in these observe 1.  The acts. 2.  The object : the act enjoined in the precept or affirmative is , to buy , the act forbidden in the negative or prohibition , is , to sell . the object is the same in both , truth . 

The precept and prohibition of these two acts in reference to the same object , are both of them absolute and peremptory , we are absolutely commanded to buy truth , peremptorily forbidden to sell it : and so the parts of the text mutually give light each to other , showing that truth must be so bought as never to be sold : that he who buyeth it , cannot overbuy it , that he who selleth it , shall be sure to underfell it . It can never be bought too dear , it can never be sold at the true value . He that buyeth it at the highest rate shall be an happy gainer , he that selleth it to the best advantage , putteth it off with loss , he maketh a miserable bargain . 

object . but it May be said , the parts of the text seem rather to cross than to clear each other : for if there be no seller , there can be no buyers . If the prohibition be observed , forbidding all to sell , the precept cannot be performed , commanding all to buy . answer . i answer , the precept and prohibition are of the same extent : all men are commanded to buy , all men are forbidden to sell : but they are not commanded to buy of men , who are forbidden to sell , but of God , who is the only proprietary of this rich treasure , and doth not impose this law of not selling upon himself . and therefore Christ saith to the angel of the church of Laodicea , i counsel thee to buy of me , gold tried in the fire , &c.  

But the wise virgins though they had oil for their own lamps , yet they had none to fell or give . 

From the precept or affirmative part , to which at present i intend to confine myself , give me leave to offer unto you this one point of doctrine , that 

doctrine . the purchase of truth is of absolute necessity to all who will be wise for their souls . 

In trading for things of the world there is a latitude , merchants have their liberty : they are not limited to one port , nor restrained to one mart , or to deal in one commodity : so they make a good return , it mattereth not much what kind of wares they bring home . But they who approve themselves free of that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} that glorious corporation in heaven , & trade to purpose for the things above , and not prove bankrupts in the great day of account , a necessity lieth upon them , and woe unto them if they buy not truth . let their ships seem never so well freighted , their shops and warehouse never so richly furnished , yet if they want this pearl of great price , they are broken and undone for ever . The foolish virgins had their lamps , and it May be for a time made as fair a blaze in show as those of the wise : but they wanted truth : their oil was spent , their lamps were extinguished , they went to buy when market was done , they called and knocked when it was too late , the door was shut . 

For the clearing and proof of the point , and our more orderly proceeding , i desire you to consider with me these four things . 

1.  What this truth is , which we are required to buy ? 
2.  What it is to buy truth ? 
3.  Of whom it must be bought ? 
4.  The necessity of making this purchase . 
For the 1.  Of these , what this truth is which we must buy , 1.  There is veritas rei , or veritas in essendo , the truth of things , the truth of their essence or being : and so all things that are , are truly the same which they are , so gold is true gold , opposed to that which is false and counterfeit , but pretended to be gold . And this truth of things , is the conformity of things to the divine intellect or knowledge of God . And therefore ( By the way ) i conceive that those lies are untruths which are called mendacia iocosa or officiosa , officiouslies , or lies in jest , if they be such as in no regard tend to our neighbour's prejudice , are not so fitly ranked under the 9  Command . as reduced to the first : because they contradict that truth which is in the mind of God : for the Lord in his infinite knowledge comprehendeth , and ( As it were ) asserteth all truth : and every untruth uttered by men is either a denial of some truth which God affirmeth , or an affirming of some falsehood which God denyeth : and so no man can utter any falsehood ( Though concerning matters of small moment ) but in so doing he giveth God the lie . God his knowledge is the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} or original truth : and the truth of things is their correspondency thereunto , as the truth of a copy is its correspondency with the original . For truth carrieth a respect to knowledge , omne verum est intelligibile , every truth is in a capacity to be understood , and the truth of things is their conformity to a right understanding . 

Now the truth of things May come under a twofold consideration , 1.  Metaphysical , 2.  Moral : and in both of these it still holdeth good , their truth is their conformity to the knowledge of God . For 1.  God knoweth what every person , action or thing is , and such it truly is , as God knoweth it to be , and no other : and this i call a metaphysical consideration . Secondly , God knoweth what every person , action or thing ought to be , and so far as any of these cross this knowledge of God , they are false in a moral consideration . They are true in a metaphysical apprehension , because they are such as God knoweth them to be , but they are false in a moral notion , because they are not such as God knoweth they ought to be . the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous , how ? with approbation . This is true : but i think there is more in it : the Lord knoweth what is that good way wherein men are to walk : and the way of the righteous is suitable to this knowledge of God , and so the Lord knoweth it , that is , looketh upon it as an object conformable to this knowledge of his ; on the other side , he saith to the wicked , i know you not . i know what manner of persons ye ought to be , but ye are men of another shape , ye are not objects conformed to this knowledge of mine . 

Secondly , there is veritas scientiae , or veritas in cognoscendo , truth of knowledge , and that in the creature is twofold , 1.  Speculative , which is a conformity of the understanding to the nature of things , when the understanding of man so judgeth of things as they are , and the notions or conceptions of his mind are the very images of those things , this conformity of his understanding to the nature of things apprehend by him , is truth . Things are true , as they agree with the knowledge of God : because his knowledge is the fountain of all truth , as his essence is the fountain of all being : but the knowledge of man is true because it agreeth with the nature of things . Secondly , the practical truth of man's knowledge is when together with a right apprehension of the true nature of things in the understanding , there is a frame of heart and affections toward those things , suitable to that apprehension , when the understanding rightly judgeth of things good or evil , and the will and affections are regularly guided by such a right apprehension , loving , embracing , desiring , delighting in that which the understanding rightly judgeth to be lovely , desirable , &c.  Hating , abhorring , shunning , &c.  According to that true intelligence which the understanding giveth in of the nature of things or actions ; then there is a practical truth in that man's knowledge . But when the understanding rightly apprehendeth , and yet giveth way to the perverseness of the will and distempers of the affections , this knowledge though speculatively true , is practically false . 

Thirdly , there is veritas signi , truth of expression , speeches , writings , gestures , actions , when truth possesseth the mind and heart within and shineth out at the windows ( As it were ) when a man's words and conversation are the very image and characters of that truth which dwelleth in him , when he knoweth and loveth the truth , and speaketh and walketh according to that truth which he knoweth and loveth . 

Now than what is that truth which we must buy ? 1.  The true knowledge of those things which serve for the perfecting of the inner , and for the ordering of the outward man : the true knowledge of God , of Christ , of the mysteries of grace , of the ways of God , of the power of godliness , of the will of God in things concerning the matter and manner of his worship , and in those things that belong to our places , callings , relations , in ordinary and extraordinary occasions . Secondly , the practical truth of these things , such a frame of heart as suiteth with the nature of these things rightly apprehend : which cannot be without the possession of the things themselves . Thou must have God dwelling in thee , thou must possess Christ and be made one with him , thy body and soul must become a temple of the holy ghost , otherwise thou hast not this practical , through , and effectual knowledge of God and Christ : thou hast a shadow of the truth rather than the truth itself . Thou must have the truth of all saving graces in thee , otherwise thou canst not have an heart suited to a right apprehension of divine truth . Lastly , thou must be so possessed of the truth as to speak the truth from the heart , and to walk in the truth . 

The second thing to be enquired , is , what it is to buy truth . 

To buy in general , is , for a considerable value with consent of the owner , to get the propriety and possession of something which formerly was not our own . he then that will buy truth , 1.  Must look upon it as none of his own . A man doth not buy that which he is born to . That which he hath by inheritance he needeth not purchase . the simple inherit folly . such silly ones we are all by nature : and our inheritance is folly & falsehood . This inheritance we have by descent : our first parents changed the truth of God into a lie , forfeited their possession of truth , and left us lies to inherit after them : and now if we will enjoy any of these forfeited and confiscated goods , which the Lord hath justly seized into his own hands , we must , buy them as things which are no longer our own . He that is not convinced of this , is never likely to buy . He that will buy truth indeed must be of such a poor and humble spirit as Agur was , surely i am more brutish than any man : so the translation : but ( As ye see ) the word [ any ] is in a smaller character , not being in the original : neither do i think it ought to be supplied , but we are to read it thus , i am more brutish than man , according to that of the psalmist , man being in honour abideth not : he is like the beasts that perish . man being honoured with the image of God in wisdom and holiness , his spirit shining with the beauty and glory of divine truth , did not abide in this condition , but lost the truth , yielding himself to be seduced by the father of lies , and so no longer had the wisdom of man in him , but degraded himself from his create dignity , debased himself to the rank of brute creatures , enthralled his immortal soul , and intellectual nature to his brutish senses and affections : and the next words of Agur confirm this sense , and have not the understanding of Adam in me : that understanding and knowledge of holy truth which was in Adam , and was properly belonging to the nature of man . He that knoweth not thus much of himself , knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know , and is no fit merchant to trade for truth . Christ first informeth the Laodicean of his wants , thou art wretched , and miserable , and poor , and blind , and naked : and then counselleth him to buy , vers. 18.  Secondly , he that buyeth giveth a considerable value . But alas , what have we to give that is considerable ? If we offer gold , or silver , what can we expect but such an answer as Simon Magus had ? thy money perish with thee , because thou hast thought that the gift of God May be purchased with money . and Solomon telleth us , this wisdom of divine truth is better than rubies : and all the things that May be desired , are not to be compared to it ; which maketh good what i said before , we cannot buy truth too dear : all outward things that can be desired , are not to be compared to it . And therefore , we May conclude , this buying is not of the nature of common contracts , in which there is a just proportion between the price and the purchase , but rather such as hath some remote analogy or resemblance to it : such as that , where the Lord by solemn proclamation offereth a free and open market , h• , every one that thirsteth , come ye to the waters , and he that hath no money : come ye , buy and eat ; yea come , buy wine and milk without money and without price . and indeed whosoever getteth possession of saving truth , he hath it by a free gift of mere grace : yet so that we must give up whatsoever is necessary for the obtaining of truth , and cast away whatever May hinder us in the receiving or retaining of truth , or is inconsistent with it . 1.  We must give up ourselves , our hearts , spirits , souls , bodies to the god of truth . we must be content to part with any outward things for the procuring and promoting of truth , for the supporting and maintaining of truth : we must account ourselves gainers by every loss which we can possibly suffer for truth . 2.  On the other side we must renounce and cast away our lusts , our own corrupt reason , blind , carnal notions and prejudices : in a word , we must out ourselves of ourselves , and yield up ourselves into the entire possession of the truth : and in all this we give nothing unto God : for whatsoever we give up to him for truth , is his own already , and cannot be withheld from him , without wrong and robbery , what we cast away is worse than nothing , and if we leave it not , we keep it to our loss and utter undoing . It remaineth then , that though we are said in some sort to buy , yet truth is a most free gift of God , and conveyed to man by a mere act of grace . 

thirdly , if we will buy truth , we must get the propriety of it , we must make it our own , get it into our possession , have a sure interest in it and title to it . for the truths sake which dwelleth in us , and shall be with us for ever . then hath a man bought the truth , when he hath so owned it , and given it such possession of his heart , that it is in him , as in an everlasting mansion , so as to dwell in him and be in him for ever : when he is so possessed of the truth , and the truth hath such possession of him , as to denominate and characterise him : according to that , hereby we know that we are of the truth , and shall assure our hearts before him . as great persons are denominated from their seats , manor-houses , &c.  Such a Lord of such a place : so he that will buy truth must get such possession of it and propriety in it , as that he May by good right take a title of honour from the truth , his own conscience bearing him witness in the holy ghost , that he is of the truth . 

thirdly , of whom must we buy truth ? 

This hath been intimated before , even of him who is the god of truth , who is the first , the highest truth , the fountain of all truth , who calleth himself [ i am ] because he is in and of himself , the only infinite perfection of being , and so the infinite perfection of truth . He seeth and knoweth his own essence infinitely perfect and glorious , with a most exact knowledge of infinite perfection : and some have conceived that this contemplation of God the father reflecting upon his own majesty and glory is the eternal and unspeakable generation of the son . But we are to speak soberly of these mysteries so far above us : howsoever when we use scripture-language , we are warranted by the highest authority , which calleth Christ the brightness of his father's glory , and the express image of his person : and the son of God saith of himself , i am the truth . and the spirit proceeding from the father and the son , is called the spirit of truth . to this fountain we must bring our empty pitchers if we would be filled with these living waters , and take in these pure streams of truth . John being in the spirit saw before the throne of God in heaven , a sea of glass like unto crystal . the saints May have their vials filled with truth : but here is veritatis plenitudo , an ocean and full sea of truth , and that without mud or mixture , clear as crystal , wherein the faithful soul May see the glory of God shining in the face of Christ . Here is the springhead of truth : and they which come not to God , and are not inwardly acquainted with him in Christ , are strangers to the truth , they never looked into this sea of crystal , which is before the throne of God . 

And so i come to the fourth and last particular , to show the necessity of making this purchase , ye see it is absolutely commanded in the text : and because a threefold cord is not easily broken , observe how Solomon strongly twisteth together a threefold charge in a quick and pressing stile . 1.  take fast hold of instruction , 2.  Let her not go . 3.  Keep her : and fasteneth all with this knot , for she is thy life . if thou lose her , it is more than thy life is worth : it were better to part with thy dearest heartblood : if thou get and keep the truth , it will keep thee alive in the very jaws of death : if thou lose it , thou art dead whilst thou livest , and in the road-way to everlasting death . What need we any farther witness ? yet if ye please to hear an argument or two , take these briefly . 

reason 1 1.  Whilst we are travailing here in this world toward our long home , our way lieth through a wilderness , wherein are many bypaths , multitude of passengers wand'ring out of the right way , abundance of snares and dangers , and above all we are woefully benighted with the natural darkness and blindness of our minds : now truth is that pillar of fire which should guide us in the way wherein we must walk , and direct us to the promised rest . And though this truth be never so clearly held forth unto us in the ministry of the gospel , yet unless we buy it and get possession of it , so as to make it our own , and to have it dwelling in us , we are not able to follow it . It is not enough to have the light of the sun , except withal there be a light in the eye to meet with that light without , and take it in : so that lumen externum , that external light of truth which shineth forth in the word , will never lead us to that rest which remaineth for the persons of God , except there be also lumen internum , an inward light of truth , and principle of saving knowledge set up in the heart . 

The apostle having notably magnified his office , as in other respects , so in regard of that lustre and brightness of divine truth which shined in his ministry , 2 cor. 3. proceedeth in the next chapter , and saith that he had not handled the word of God deceitfully , but by manifestation of the truth &c.  It must be objected , what is the cause then that your gospel is hidden to many thousands ? his answer is ready : if our gospel be hide , it is hide to them that are lost , in whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not , lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ , who is the image of God should shine unto them . they want inward light , Satan the Prince of darkness hath filled them with darkness within , they will not buy the truth , and so the gospel of Christ , though it shineth out never so gloriously in itself , yet it shineth not at all to them : as the sun when it giveth the greatest light , shineth not to the blind . 

2.  If we do not buy truth , the truth will witness against us and condemn us . 

A necessity lieth upon us , either we must make the truth our own , or else we shall be sure to have it our enemy . Consider that weighty speech of Christ , he that rejecteth me , and receiveth not my words , hath one that judgeth him , the word that i have spoken , the same shall judge him in the last day : who is he that rejecteth Christ ? he that doth not receive his words , he that doth not buy truth , but shutteth his eyes or heart against that light of truth which shineth from the face of this sun of righteousness . These men perhaps May think in their hearts , we will have nothing to do with this , which they call truth , for which there is so much contention , nor with the way wherein it leadeth those that receive it , we will neither embrace nor oppose it . Nay , but saith Christ , this will not serve thy turn , either thou must receive it , or be judged by it ; if thou dost not buy this truth and embrace it with thine whole heart , it will condemn thee at the last day . If men could apprehend with what majesty and authority that truth of God which now they cast behind their backs will appear against them in the day of Christ , how would their souls tremble to despise it ? How would they yield themselves convinced that the purchase of truth is of absolute necessity , whatsoever it May cost them ? The proudest spirits which now May think to outface the truth of God , shall then not be able to hold up their faces before it . 

So much for the proof and opening of this point : let us see the use of it : and that May be , 1.  For reproof , 2.  For exhortation . 

use 1 1.  For reproof . 1. of those who are so far from buying truth , that they labour to stop the trade : such were those expounders of the law , to whom the Lord Christ saith , ye have taken away the key of knowledge , ye entered not in yourselves , and them that were entering in ye hindered : they kept the store-house of truth locked up , and carried away the key . How many have we had of late in this land led by such a spirit , who when the truth had many buyers beheld it with an evil eye , like the Pharisees complaining of the multitudes that followed Christ ? the world is gone after him , it was a vexation to their false hearts to see the stream of trade bend towards the coasts of truth : and especially when any upon whose habitations was a famine of the word , travailed abroad to buy themselves a little food . but how are we bound to bless God who hath stirred up your spirits , like so many Joseph's , already to open many , & to endeavour to open all the storehouses of truth in the land , that none May complain of want , who have hearts to buy ? No wonder if the enemies of truth oppose you in this work . It crosseth their main design . he that doth evil hateth the light , and cometh not to the light , lest his deeds should be reproved . Can the Blackmore change his skin , or the leopard his spots ? do we expect a reconcilement between light and darkness ? Let all tremble to give them the right hand of fellowship in stopping the course of the word of truth , and hindering the work of reformation . 

2.  of those that are ashamed of the truth : what hope is there that such will buy it ? He that will buy it must look upon it as his crown . the church was presented to John in a vision , clothed with the sun , and the moon under her foot , and upon her head a crown of twelve stars . the church's clothing and her crown is light and truth : can any trueborn child of the church account that his shame which is his mother's glory ? Let such weigh those words of him who is not ashamed to call himself the truth , whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation , of him also shall the son of man be ashamed , when he cometh in the glory of his father with the holy angels . 3.  Of those who will not take so much pains as to resort to the market though it be near their own doors : who grossly neglect precious opportunities of hearing the word upon slight pretences . Did they know the worth of truth , and look upon it as their life , they would not think every petty inconvenience a just excuse . A little change of weather or distemper of body will not keep those within doors , who are necessitated to seek out for that without which they cannot live . Those that followed Christ sometimes three days together , having nothing to eat , Might have had a fair plea in appearance to shift off their attendance . Such as will suffer nothing in this case , but make the hearing of the word a mere recreation , when they can do it with ease and at pleasure , are not likely to go to the price of truth . 4.  Of those that come only as mere spectators rather than buyers , who view many glorious gospel-truths openly proposed and freely tendered to all , but are content to look on whilst others buy . Such are our common sort of ignorant hearers , compared to the way side , who hear the word and understand it not . the seed lieth above ground : then cometh the wicked one and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart . the father of lies easily robbeth such a one of the word of truth . 5.  Of such as seem to cheapen , but do not buy : those who are somewhat affected with the truth , and think it worth the carrying home if they Might have it at their own price : they hear it , perhaps talk of it , repeat it , &c.  And of these there are two sorts : the one compared to the stony , the other to the thorny ground : the former would own the truth , were it not accompanied with the cross : but when persecution ariseth because of the word , by and by they are offended . they never gave the truth rooting in their hearts , and so when the sun ariseth it is scorched and withered . The latter suffer it to be overgrown and choked with thorns : there May be some stirrings in their spirits , some springings of their affections upon the receiving of the seed of truth , but then their unmortified lusts , the care of this world , and the deceitfulness of riches and pleasures of this life draw away the strength of their hearts from the truth , and it becometh unfruitful : they will not renounce their earthly-mindedness or their voluptuous , ambitious , corrupt affections to make a full purchase of truth . Herod did many things and heard John gladly , but would not yield so far to the commands of truth , as to forsake his Herodias : there was a thorny lust which choked all . the young man also seemed willing to buy , what good thing shall i do that i May have eternal life ? what shall i give to buy truth ? again , all these have i kept from my youth ; what lack i yet ? thus much i have offered if this be not enough , i am willing to give more . I believe he thought he offered like a chapman : but when he heard Christ raise his demands so high , go and sell all that thou hast and give to the poor , he broke off , went away sorrowful , as if the price had been unreasonable . I fear , many who countenance the cause of truth , some who are great actors in it , yea some who May venture their lives in the prosecution of it May deceive themselves . There May be some thorns not rooted up , some root of bitterness not killed , some corrupt principle which May carry men far this way , some by-end which May poison all . if i give my body to be burned and have not love , it profiteth me nothing . a man May seem to die for the truth , and yet never buy it . 

use 2 2.  This is for for exhortation : 1.  In general to us all : 2.  In special to those whom the Lord hath honoured above others for the patronage and promoting of the great cause of his truth . and 1. let me stir up you and myself by all means to make this purchase . 2.  Not to think any cost too much for that purpose : concerning the former , 1.  Get a clear and solid understanding of all the main and most necessary truths . learn to be thoroughly acquainted with the fundamentals of faith . great is the mystery of godliness : and the knowledge of it is of great concernment : it is a great mystery , and requireth a deep search . An overly , slight , and superficial view of those great secrets which the angels desired to look into , must not satisfy them who will indeed buy truth . labour for a right understanding of the alsufficiency and infinite excellency of God in all his attributes , as he hath revealed himself in his word : of the person , natures , offices of Christ , of the covenant of grace , of the fountain of all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ , the eternal love and good purpose of God toward his , and those glorious ways and means whereby the Lord is pleased to bring poor lost souls to glory , reconciling them to himself by the death of his son , calling them by his word and spirit , uniting them to Christ , adopting them for his children and heirs , justifying them freely by his grace , sanctifying , quickening , and keeping them by his mighty power through faith unto salvation . These and the like are especially to be studied , and we are to take heed lest Satan entangling us in doubtful disputes about things of an inferior nature , should cunningly divert our thoughts from searching into these hide treasures . I confess the rents and divisions which follow upon contrariety of opinions are sad , and such as we have cause to lament : but i am persuaded this is not the only , nor the greatest mischief . I fear Satan gaineth much advantage by engaging young beginners and wanton wits in the agitation of controversies ere they have laid the foundation , much more before themselves have taken root in Christ , or so much as proved themselves to be in Christ , and Christ to be in them . 2.  Let us labour to make those truths which we understand , our own : 1.  By mixing them with faith . the word preached did not profit the unbelieving Israelites , not being mixed with faith in them that heard it : they did but view , not buy the truth ; we cannot make the truth our own , nor truly say , we have bought it , unless we so mix and temper it with faith as that it becometh one with our souls , or rather our souls become one with it , faith strongly closing with the word , digesting it , and so leavening all the powers of the soul with the truth , and causing them to relish of it . 2.  By receiving the truth in sincere love . No man buyeth truth , who doth not truly love it . So much truth as thou lovest is thine own . Some May hastily conclude from hence , then all the promises of pardon are mine : for these i love from my heart , though not those precepts of obedience , and qualifications of repentance , morification and holiness . But know this , it is easy to mistake lies of our own coining , for God his holy truth : for those promises carry a respect to their qualifications , and are true in relation to them : if thou seperatest what God hath joined together , thou huggest an idol of thine own brain and dost not embrace the truth of God , as the devil in his temptations mangleth the truth of God , promissionem objicit , conditionem abjicit : he objecteth the promise , rejecteth the condition . But this is rather to profane the truth then to buy it . He that will buy , must take the commodity with all the appurtenances . This not receiving the truth in love was the root of that great apostasy of the world . this beggared and undid them , they played with the light , and dallied with the truth of God : and did not buy it and enrich themselves with it , by receiving the love of the truth , that they Might be saved . 3.  Labour to abound in the knowledge of the truth . a merchant who hath made a good voyage , finding such a commodity advantageous , is encouraged to new adventures : that man never bought any saving truth , who sitteth down and thinketh he hath enough . If once thou wert possessed of the truth indeed , thy desires would be more and more enlarged toward it ; many seem to think they have got truth enough already , more than they know what to do with , so much that they are troubled with it , it disturbeth their slumbering spirits , disquieteth their consciences : these men are far from buying the truth ; rather some truths have surprised them against their wills , and are as welcome to them as Elijah to Ahab , hast thou found me , oh mine enemy ? but all that will buy truth let them hearken to the apostles counsel , let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom . 4.  They that will buy truth must subject themselves to the power and command of it . A man must not buy truth as he purchaseth outward things , to dispose of it at his pleasure : thou must not buy it as men were wont to buy slaves , to keep it in bondage , to make it serve thy lusts and ends , or to fetter it and imprison it by withholding the truth in unrighteousness : but as a man would buy an office at court , a place of service and attendance upon a Prince : in buying truth thou must sell thyself a servant to the truth , give up thyself to be ruled & guided by the truth . some ( I believe ) are troubled that they have more of the truth than they can well rule : it meeteth and faceth them in many of their crooked bypaths , it is as a lighted torch to them when they are most of all retired in acting their works of darkness : it is apt to interpose , yea and to control , it will not suffer them to be private when they would : these would have truth enslaved , and lust predominant . But to pretend to truth and not to allow it that sovereignty which belongeth to its place and dignity , is indeed to reject it . Let truth rule thy judgement , will , and affections in all things . 5.  Do not rest in mere notions of truth , but endeavour to have the truth of God realized to thy soul . Labour to have thy heart possessed with the substance and reality of divine truth , to furnish thyself with those very things which thou findest clothed with the truth of God in scripture . saith the apostle , ye were sometime in darkness : but now are ye light in the Lord . he doth not say , ye have light , but ye are light , the light is realized in you , ye are transformed into the light , ye are become such indeed and in truth as the light discovereth those to be who are children of light . The word and truth of God hath many beams of light in it , and we must seek to take them in so , as to find the real effects of them in ourselves . Believe , and thou shalt be saved : there is a beam of truth : and then do we buy this truth indeed , when we get that precious faith of God his elect , that faith unfeigned which really uniteth the soul to Christ , taketh root in him , draweth life and spirit from him , conformeth and subjecteth the soul unto him . Take heed of Satan's juggling , lest he sell thee a counterfeit stone instead of this precious pearl : a false faith , a vain fancy , an empty shadow of faith : how many content themselves with this , because it is of a low price , or rather May be had for nothing ? But if ever that caution be needful , it is in this case , caveat emptor , let him that would buy truth , beware . It is not in this case , as when a man would buy a thing to please a child , a slight toy of small value will serve as well as a better : but it is as if a man were to buy a ship to transport himself , his whole family and all his goods into a far-country : were it not the extremity of folly to venture all in a rotten vessel for saving of charges , rather than with greater cost to provide a substantial bottom ? Oh let us tremble to embark our souls ( More precious than the world ) together with all our eternal hopes in a leaking ship of a rotten faith , being to make so great a voyage , among so many dangerous rocks and sands , through so many storms and waves , which were too much for the soundest faith to break through were it not kept by the power of God unto salvation . again , except ye repent ye shall all perish . do not think thou hast bought this truth , so soon as thy judgement is informed that this grace of repentance is necessary to salvation , thou hast but viewed it yet , thou hast not purchased it . If thou wilt buy it indeed , thou must have a through change wrought in thy heart & soul , repentance from dead works , repentance unto life : thou must look upon thy sweetest sins as thy bitterest enemies , and feel them as they heaviest burdens , fleeing from them as from a serpent , inwardly loathing , outwardly leaving them . Thou must labour for the truth of mortification , the real destruction of thy lusts : as it is said of Cassius Chaerea , a Praetorian colonel or tribune , when he and others conspired the death of that cruel tyrant Caligula , the signal word agreed upon was repete , strike again : so thou must not content thyself to make some faint attempts against thy sins , or a light skirmish as soldiers , at a muster , but thou must do it with all thy might : hast thou wounded them , and do they yet resist ? repete , strike again and again , hate them , pursue them to the death , give them no quarter , spare them not so long as thou findest them stir or breath . Again , the apostle saith , the kingdom of God is righteousness , peace , joy in the holy ghost . this is a most sweet and precious truth : wouldst thou buy it ? If thou dost , thou buyest a kingdom , yea a kingdom more worth than all the kingdoms of the world . But if thou wilt buy it , indeed , thou must have this kingdom set up in thy heart . Righteousness must reign there , or Christ must reign there in righteousness , and thou must have a soul subdued to his sceptre . the peace of God must rule in thy heart : and that is peace in truth : when sin reigneth , the soul hath no peace with God , it May be in a dead sleep . Then hast thou this truth of peace with God , when the peace of God ruleth within thee , suppresseth mutinous affections , subdueth rebellious lusts , when the winds and sea obey it , and it hath power to calm all the turbulencies and disorders of thy spirit . So concerning joy in the holy ghost , thou must have thy heart possessed with this joy , if thou wilt purchase this truth . how many read and hear of joy in the holy ghost unspeakable & full of glory , but yet content themselves with such joys and delights as are full of shame , at least full of vanity , and end in mourning and misery ? these are false joys , as one saith , voluptates animi febres , earthly joys are soul-feavers , carnal , sensual , sinful delights are even the agues of the inner man . For what is the condition of a soul given up to pleasures of this nature but to be in a continual agitation between hot paroxysms or burning fits of lust , and cold shaking fits of shame and horror . Now as there is a great difference between that unnatural inflammation of a feverish body , drinking up the radical moisture , & wasting the spirits , and that kindly wel-tempered heat of an healthy body : so there is a vast distance between those vain and earthly or impure and sinful delights , which waste the conscience , and those soul-ravishing , sweet , serene and heavenly joys which flow from the bosom of Christ into the breasts of believers . I Might add many other instances , but i forbear . 

lastly , if ye will buy truth , ye must improve it . It is none of those commodities which a man May buy , and then suffer it to lie dead by him : no man buyeth the truth , but he that buyeth it for use . i rejoiced greatly that i found of thy children walking in truth : as we have received a commandment from the father . it is no arbitrary thing or matter of indifferency , but one of the great commandments of God , that we should walk in truth : and Paul having told the Ephesians , ye are light in the Lord , he inferreth , walk as children of light . then a man hath bought the truth , when he walketh in the light , and power of divine truth , when he prayeth , humbleth his soul , heareth the word , and performeth every act of divine worship in spirit and truth , out of such true principles , in such a manner , with such a frame of heart and such aims as the truth of God his word requireth , when in his place and calling he improveth the truth of God to all purposes . Those things which men buy at high rates , they desire to make the most of . The truth of God being so exceeding precious and costly , those that buy it should labour to improve it to the uttermost . It is none of those things ▪ which are the worse for wearing . 

2.  let us be persuaded not to think any cost too much that we May buy truth . and first , consider ( I beseech you ) what we must cast away , which otherwise Might hinder us either in getting or keeping truth . 2.  What we must be content to resign and yield up into the Lord his hands , that we May buy truth . the former are such things as are better cast away then kept , the very loss of them will be our gain . 

1.  in general our lusts and sins . blessed are the pure in heart : for they shall see God : an heart cleansed from the filthiness of flesh and spirit , is like a clear glass fittest to give a reflection of those beams of truth , which shine from the face of God in Christ . the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him , and he will show them his covenant . they that will see clearly , must do away these scales from the eyes of the inner man . 2.  In special , let us renounce our carnal and natural wisdom . 1.  if any man among you seemeth to be wise , let him become a fool , that he May be wise : for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God . a spirit emptied of all self-sufficiency , and self-conceitedness is best fitted to receive the wisdom of God , and to purchase his truth . 2.  Lay aside all prejudices against the truth : and first quit all prejudices against the dignity of truth . Take heed of thinking any truth of God to be below thee , too mean for thee to stoop to ▪ do not think thyself , thy place or parts too high for the least of God his holy truths . preach the word , be instant in season , out of season , is a truth of God which once was given in charge to Timothy : but ( Some i believe ) who pretended to be of Timothy his rank , looked upon this truth as a thing below their places . On the other side when a cause of religion was brought before Galli• , he cared for none of these things , he had no leisure to spend time about words and names , his place engaged him in realities , state-matters , such as were worthy of a proconsul's cognizance . 2.  Take heed of prejudices against the necessity of truth , look not upon it as a matter of indifferency . Regard it as that one thing necessary . 3.  Renounce all prejudicated opinions of dangers or inconveniences , which seem to attend or follow truth , such as divisions and commotions : these ( Though accidental to truth ) do ordinarily throng in after it . suppose ye that i am come to send peace on earth ? i tell you , nay , but rather division : and that between those of near relations , as it followeth there . Hereupon some seem to be as much afraid of the truth , as of a ball of wildfire , they dare not buy it : they would rather banish it out of their coasts : whereas truth is no way the cause , though the corruptions of some men and their malignity against it , and the weakness and mistakes of others , often make it an occasion of those ruptures . That there are oppositions between the friends and enemies of truth , is not strange : but that there are dissensions among some of those , who unfeignedly love and seek truth , and agree in the most and principal parts of it , is sad : yet let not this prejudice hinder us from buying and embracing truth . Amongst those who in the apostles days received the gospel , and with joint consent acknowledged the Lord Jesus to be the Christ , there were differences about the observation of Mosaical rites , and ceremonies : this prejudice did not keep the faithful from embracing and holding fast the truth of the gospel . in Luther's time there were controversies between those who were newly come out of Babylon : this prejudice did not so far prevail with the godly , as to make them prefer their slavery under Antichrist above the sweet yoke of Christ . let the unanimous and full consent of the godly in many , and those the most substantial parts of truth , encourage thee to buy the truth : let not their differences about few and less material things discourage thee . 4.  Cast off that prejudice which Satan May suggest unto thee , in regard of the meanness of those persons who hold forth the truth , either as the Lord his agents , whom he maketh use of to invite buyers , the ministers of the gospel , or as purchasers , who having bought the truth , desire to commend their pennyworths to others , as Philip did to Nathanael , we have found him , of whom Moses and the prophets did write , Jesus of Nazareth : come and see . if any such be contemptible in the eye of the world , as those were who followed Christ , whom the proud Pharisees overlooked with so much scorn , this persons who knoweth not the law are cursed : let not this seem any disparagement to the truth of God which needeth not borrow any thing from man : it 's own sovereign authority is enough to command all , its native beauty and proper worth is sufficient to commend it to all . When King Amaziah had set up and worshipped the idols of the same persons , whom himself had lately overcome in battle : the Lord sent him this message by a prophet , why hast thou sought after the gods of the persons , which could not deliver their own persons out of thine hand ? this was a truth which carried so much strength and evidence of reason in it , that it seemeth to preclude all contradiction : yet see how pride and prejudice against the person that held it forth , prevailed ! saith the King , art thou made of the King's council ? forbear , why shouldst thou be smitten ? art thou a fit person to reprove a King ? thou art none of the privy council : mark how the prophet replieth , and twice descanteth upon the King's words ; i know that God hath counselled to destroy thee , because thou hast done this , and hast not harkened to my counsel dost thou despise my message because i am not made of thy council ? Know this , that in this particular , the King of Kings hath made me of his council , and the word which i brought is the very truth and counsel of the great God , as thou shalt find to thy ruin , inasmuch as thou hast despised it . The truth of God needeth not receive any reputation from rotchets or scarlets , if thou despisest it for the meanness of those that bring it , thou despisest him that sendeth it . 

2.  Let us consider what we must give up or lay out for truth when the Lord calleth for it . And here observe that although truth be always alike precious in itself , yet at some time the purchase of it is more costly than at other . Bread-corn it is as good in itself , and as necessary for the life of man at one time as at another , yet ye know in some time of scarcity one bushel May cost as much as three or four in times of plenty ; but whatever it cost it must be had , men must live : so truth hath its dear years , when those that will buy it , must give greater rates than ordinary : but whatsoever it cost , it must be had , we must buy it , or else we perish : now we must always give up ourselves to God , that we May buy truth , our understandings , wills , affections , our souls and bodies to his guidance , sovereign command and disposing . And as it is said concerning God , he that spared not his own son , but delivered him up for us all : how shall he not with him also freely give us all things ? so on our part , he that sincerely giveth up himself to the Lord , to be wholly his , how can he think any thing too dear when the Lord requireth it ? why did not the young man give up his possessions upon Christ's demand ? because he had not given up himself . When the Lord told Peter what he should suffer for the truth , and by what death he should glorify God , he questioneth about his fellow-disciple , ( Whether out of curiosity , or some spice of envy , i know not ) and what shall this man do ? Jesus saith unto him , if i will that he tarry till i come , what is that to thee ? if i will that he live till i come , and call him in an ordinary way of visitation , and that the truth of the gospel shall prove more costly to thee than to him , what doth that concern thee ? If both of ye give up your hearts to me and my truth , it is no great matter , whether it cost you more or less in other regards . 2.  Then ye must buy truth though it cost ye never so much of your treasures , either to procure the means , or to maintain the cause , or to retain the profession and practice of truth . All these things must be looked upon as loss and dung in comparison of the excellency of Christ's truth . what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world , and lose his soul ? and if he leave the truth , he loseth his soul . It May seem the times are come upon us , wherein the Lord will make discoveries , who they are that prize this earthly dross above those rich treasures of his kingdom . Let us not say in our hearts , we could willingly purchase truth , if it Might be had at such easy rates as our fathers bought it . No , if we will not buy it now at such a price as it May be had , whatsoever it be , neither would we have bought it then , though at a lower rate . And those who lived and died in those times , and purchased truth indeed , would have bought it at a far higher rate , had it been exacted of them . He that giveth up his heart to God for truth , will never break off for the price : he that doth not yield up his heart , doth never truly buy , though he liveth in the cheapest times . 3.  Be content to lay out your strength for truth , to take any pains , to undergo any labour . What if any of you be forced to travel more miles than others ? such a reason doth not keep persons from fairs and markets : although the English merchant hath a longer voyage to the East Indies than the Portugals by many leagues , this doth not make them give over trading . Though it cost thee more pains in reading , studying , meditation , by reason of the slowness of thy apprehension , weakness of judgement or memory ; more striving in prayers , more fears , more labouring with thine own heart to bring it in subjection unto truth , than it doth some other , let nothing beat thee off , buy it whatsoever it May cost thee . 4.  Be content to engage all the credit which thou hast with the world for the purchase of truth : buy it with the hazard , and ( If need be ) the loss of thy reputation . among the chief rulers many believed •n Christ , but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him , lest they should be put out of the synagogue ; for they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God . they valued their credit with men above the truth of God : miserable folly ! though the way of truth should be called heresy ( As in Paul's time ) though the truth be scorned , reproached , evil spoken of , though the wise men of the world think no better of those that buy truth than of such as pay dear for a trifle , and say of them in their hearts , a fool and his money are soon parted , though thou must be Counted a fool and a mad man , as Festus termed Paul , yet buy it howsoever . 5.  Be content to buy truth with expense of time , though that be very precious , esteem that time well bestowed , which is laid out for truth . do not say , wherefore is this waste ? though time cannot be bought with gold , yet it is well spent for the purchase of truth . Apelles beholding a curious picture drawn by Protogenes , admired the workmanship : but understanding that it had been seven years in hand , he said the grace of the work was not answerable to the time and pains bestowed upon it . But if those whom the Lord in his providence hath called together , shall be able by the good hand of their god upon them , to draw to the life that glorious body of truth in all its lineaments for matter of doctrine , worship , government , discipline , i doubt not but in conclusion it would be found time well employed , though it should cost more months than some expected . And as in this more public enquiry after truth , so in particular searchings after it , be careful to redeem time from other occasions , that thou Mayest spare it for buying of truth . it is part of the blessed man's description , his delight is in the law of the Lord , and in that law , he doth meditate day and night . 6.  Peace is one of the great blessings of God upon a persons , and yet if need be we must part with this also to purchase truth . if peace May be hadwith truth , it is exceedingly to be desired , as in toher respects , so for truth's sake , to which ( If well improved ) it May be very serviceable and useful towards the opening of a free trade for truth , which is many ways obstructed and interrupted by war . But when truth cannot be secured but by the sword , and all ways are tried which are consistent with the purity , safety , and honour of truth , and recourse is had to war as the last remedy , in such a case peace itself must be broken , that truth May be preserved and purchased . object . some May say , there is no sufficient cause at this day in relation to truth , answ . and the business of religion , to ground a necessary war upon . I answer , 1.  I do not take upon me to assert that this war was primarily and originally a war of religion . But secondly , if that were granted , i desire that case between the tribes of Israel May be considered : the two tribes and an half beyond Jordan built an altar by the river : tidings came to the rest of Israel , who apprehend this as an act tending to the falsifying and corrupting of the truth of God , and the ordinances of his worship . This was conceived a just ground for a war : for the whole congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shilo to go up to war against them . but yet desiring a peaceable accommodation , if it Might be had without prejudice to truth , they resolve to treat with them , and send Phineas a man of great eminency , and ten Princes with him . These deal thoroughly in the business , and press it home upon them : the defendants make a free and candid declaration of their intentions , showing that this altar was not erected for burned offering nor for sacrifice , but only for a monument of their interest in the god of Israel : whereupon both the ambassadors and ( At their return ) the persons were fully satisfied . Now suppose this altar had been built for sacrifice , as was suspected , and compare with this the many hundred altars ( I believe ) lately erected in this land , to the darkening at least of those great truths of the gospel , that Christ is the only altar which sanctifyeth all the offerings of the faithful , that his sacrifice of himself once offered by himself is the only propitiation : add hereunto the idolatrous bowings and cringings , the crucifixes and images set up in many places , the endeavours to corrupt the truth and doctrine of Christ in divers points of great importance , the plots laid to stop the course of the gospel & propagating of the truth , the obstinate resistance against such a reformation as the truth of God clearly revealed in his word , requireth . &c. and see whether there were not many causes for a war against the enemies of the truth in England , for one which Israel had , though that had been such as was surmised . Oh , that the Lord would deliver our King from those that are adversaries of his truth , and make him an instrument to execute his wrath upon the great whore , that so the truth of God Might have a free passage through the several regions of the world . I have read of some mariners who being tossed on the sea in a tempest , were so superstitiously slavish , as to vow or promise at least upon their safe arrival on the shore , to build a temple , the mortar whereof should be tempered with malmsey : i desire it May be considered whether those be not more lavishly profane , who being terrified with the storms of war , could be content to make the sacred truth of God ( More precious than all the golden veins in the bowels of the earth ) to serve in stead of mortar for the cementing or rather daubing up an unsound peace with men . object . but it May be said , the loss of peace implieth by consequence the loss of life , the expense of blood : and precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints . answ . i answer , it is true , and doubtless the Lord will make inquisition for their blood . and yet in the last place , even this precious blood of God his persons is not too precious to be adventured or spent in the necessary defence of God's truth . Did not Christ himself shed his most precious blood ( Worth more than all the best blood under heaven ) to seal the truth of the gospel , the truth of all the promises of the new covenant ? none of all which had been true , if Christ had not shed his blood to verify them . for all the promises of God in him are yea , and in him amen . the law is true , in itself : but the truth of the gospel and word of promise dependeth wholly upon Christ . The law hath an intrinsical and native truth : cursed is he that continueth not in all things written in the book of the law to do them . but the truth of the promise is borrowed : the promise of the pardon of sin , of justifying the ungodly , of being merciful to unrighteousness , passing by iniquity , blotting out transgressions , &c. seemeth to cross the truth of God , his justice and holiness , if ye consider it without reference to Christ : it is true then only in Christ : the truth of this testament dependeth wholly upon the death of the testator . to this end ( Saith he ) was i born , and for this cause came i into the world , that i should bear witness to the truth . how many thousands of God his saints have drunk of the same cup in several ages ? it is appointed to all men once to die : and that is a blessed improvement of death , when a man dyeth not only in the Lord , but for the Lord and his truth : he that loseth his life shall find it : he shall find mortality swallowed up of life : his life is hide with Christ in God , far above the reach of any weapons of war , and when Christ who is his life shall appear , then shall he also appear with him in glory . 

And now give me leave , much honoured worthies , to bespeak yourselves in the name of the god of truth : whom i look upon as precious instruments ▪ of the Lord , for the advancing and promoting of his truth , truth of doctrine , of worship , of discipline , truth and power of godliness . Ye are far engaged in this cause of truth already , and it concerneth you to go on , both in conscience and in point of honour , but chiefly for the honour of your God , who hath so highly dignified and so many ways encouraged you by notable testimonies of his presence . Let it appear that ye are so possessed with the truth , so overpowered by the truth , that ye May justly apply that of the apostle to yourselves , we can do nothing against the truth , but for the truth : and then Christ will not fail to make good that title , which he hath assumed to himself : the amen , the faithful and true witness . the persons of God have reposed a great trust in you ▪ and they expect truth from you . And ( Blessed be God ) they have had their desires in great measure already answered : and the work is yet in your hands , these first-fruits seem to be pledges of a full harvest , if our sins do not blast our hopes . One of the clearest evidences ( I conceive ) which ye can give of the truth of your hearts to the public cause , is self-denial and quitting of private interests . of this ye have given real demonstration in your readiness to divest yourselves of military and civil dignities , that ye Might reserve yourselves for your proper work . Hereupon ye May with greater authority exact truth from those whom ye shall employ , a true account of the public service , and for the future ( At least ) a true account of the public treasure , though perhaps for the time past it May be difficult , if not impossible , in regard of those many sudden exigents , confusions , unexpected occurrences which have happened : yea , inasmuch as ye have made yourselves such eminent precedents of self-denial , how can others in modesty refuse , if you require them not to seek great things for themselves , in making over much advantage of the public miseries : especially such whose service is attended with no hazard , and very little labour ? some redress in these things Might encourage the well affected to more cheerfulness in assisting the common cause , and stop the mouths of others . 

More particularly , let me beseech you in the first place to examine every man the truth and sincerity of his own heart in managing the great business which ye have in hand . to profess a man's self engaged in the cause of truth , and yet to be half-hearted toward it , and to harbour treacherous aims against it , is not only contrary to the duty of a Christian , but a thing far below the spirit and ingenuity of a gentleman : it suiteth better with the baseness of common cheaters , then with men of place and worth . A man who by his corrupt principles is led out of the way , and put into a posture of defiance and open hostility against the truth , is less odious by many degrees than a false brother . I am persuaded there was more of the devil in one Judas , then in all the high priests cavaliers , and that Christ resented more hellish malignity in that one traitors kiss , than in all their swords and staffs . Wherefore , let every man prove his own work , and then shall he have rejoicing in himself , and not in another . For every man shall bear his own burden . it is not enough to join with those who are sincere in the work of the Lord , but every man must prove his own work , with what heart , out of what inward principles , to what end . upon what grounds and motives , in what manner he doth it , that he May have rejoicing in himself , and not in those with whom he joineth in a good cause , nor by comparing himself with those who either directly oppose , or basely desert it . For in the great day of account every man shall bear his own burden : men shall not be ranked on the right hand by whole companies , corporations , regiments , brigades , armies , houses of parliament , but as in that search which was made in Achan his case , they shall be singled out man by man , and every man's work shall be tried in particular . 

2.  Be united among yourselves in the great cause of truth : according to that of the apostle , stand fast in one spirit , with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel . the expressions are strong : he speaketh to them as to champions of the truth , as the original word importeth : and to whom May it be applied if not to such •oble champions as yourselves ? stand fast , keep your ground , servate gradum ( As Beza . ) maintain your station , and that in one spirit , in the power and strength of that holy spirit of truth , with one mind or one soul , wrestling or striving together , as if ye were a combination of many bodies associated and concentred together by one soul , as one man with joint forces contending for the truth of the gospel , and for the cause of truth : so should ye be able to strengthen your spirits with that encouragement following , in nothing terrified by your adversaries , which is to them an evident token of perdition , but to you of salvation , and that of God . your uniting would be a terror to the adversaries , a strengthening to yourselves , an encouragement to those who are friends to the truth , and your friends and servants for the truths sake . If a noble heathen out of a moral bravery of spirit , could privatas inimicitias reipublicae condonare , pass by private quarrels for the commonwealths sake : far be it from any member of a Christian parliament not to lay down all private grudges and cross designs at the feet of this afflicted church and state , far be it from them not to quit them for the truth's sake , lest the cause of truth should miscarry through their default . If the greatest persons who will approve their hearts to God , must throw down their crowns at the footstool of Christ , how much more their corruptions ? But especially let every one take heed of raising or fomenting divisions out of a secret desire to hinder the carrying on of the great work . Differences in judgement about things directly relating to conscience are to be pitied in contemplation of the common imbecility of man's understanding . But when men for sinister ends delight to make rents or cherish factions , this is fearful : let none such deceive themselves , God is not mocked . In extraordinary times , such as these upon which the providence of God hath cast us , men have extraordinary opportunities of doing god more than ordinary service : and on the other side they have extraordinary occasion of bringing more than ordinary guilt upon themselves , and wrath upon their posterity . This is a time when those who have hearts to improve it , May wonderfully further their account : and a time when men May exceedingly aggravate their condemnation . 3.  Let me beseech you to go on , as you have begun , in opening a free passage and procuring a free trade and open market for the truth of God , that all May have liberty and be encouraged to buy and furnish themselves . And for this end to remove of obstructions , in restraining the spreading of gross and dangerous errors and heresies . I am confident in your wisdom and piety , that ye are far from entertaining those motions for an unlimited and prodigious licentiousness , which some have seemed to plead for . what were this but to make port-sale of the truth , if not rather to give over the protection of truth , and to expose it to be spoilt , sacked , and plundered in a promiscuous way by all sorts of enemies ? Let it be free for all sorts to buy any truth of God , but let not Satan's factors and pedlars have liberty to vent his falsehoods . 

object . object . but some May say , either ye must give liberty to all , or else show no indulgence to any , who do not in every point comply with that which is established by authority . answ . i answer , i was never yet able to understand this logic , the consequence seemeth very strange ; i am sure it will not be admitted in surgery : if a man be constrained to cut off a limb desperately infected with a gangrene , must he therefore part with an useful member for every little inflammation and distemper ? that famous Emperor Theodosius did not only bear with the Novatians , but countenance and familiarly consult with some of them about church-affairs ( Though differing in matter of discipline ) being sound in the faith and having pastors of eminent gifts and godliness . And it is recorded of Constantine , that though he made a law in terrorem which was so comprehensive that these were obnoxious to it , yet in point of execution he spared them . And the apostle maketh a clear difference : of one sort he saith , a man that is an heretic , after the first and second admonition reject , knowing that he that is such , is subverted , and sinneth being condemned of himself . of the other he writeth in a far different strain , him that is weak in the faith receive ye , but not to doubtful disputations . For one believeth that he May eat all things ; another who is weak eateth herbs . Let not him that eateth , despise him that eateth not : and let not him which eateth not , judge him that eateth : and the reason is very observable : for God hath received him . surely much respect is to be had to those who give forth strong convincing evidences that God hath received them , and that they have received his truth in love . If those are to be tenderly dealt with in whom there is aliquid christi , something of Christ , how much more they in whom there is plurimum christi , very much of Christ , much of that unction wherewith he was anointed above his fellows , much of those graces which serve for the edifying of his mystical body , and much of those which accompany salvation . there is a passage recorded , which happened between Anthony of Bourbon King of navari• and the ambassador of Denmark : the King being a peer of France and first Prince of the blood , challenged the regency of that kingdom during the French King's minority , and told the Danish ambassador that he hoped in short time to procure a free passage for the gospel throughout the kingdom of France : the ambassador showed himself pleased with this , but withal admonished him to take care that Luther's doctrine , not Calvin's might pass for current : the King replied , Luther and Calvin agree in forty points against the Pope , and differ from each other but in one : let those then who follow the several tenants of these two , join their strength against the common enemy , and at better leisure , in a more convenient season compound their own differences . I am persuaded , it is far from your Christian wisdom and moderation to esteem alike of those who obstinately shut their eyes against the bright beams of truth where it shineth out with full rays , & those who vary from you in lesser things , wherein scripture-light is not so clear , but that good eyes May judge diversely , and hearts cordially affected to the truth , May for a time dissent . I grant much prudence and many cautions are needful : as 1.  That the persons be known to be modest , pious and peaceable , lest some of another spirit for evil ends should make claim to , and so abuse such a liberty . 2.  That all bitterness , insolency , turbulence of spirit , all reproachful language and tumultuous carriages be forborn : for these ( I am sure ) are no parts of liberty of conscience 3.  That no church-meetings for worship be allowed but in places known , that there May be free access for any : in which respect i have often commended both the wisdom and ingenuity of the French Protestant's , who in one of their treaties of peace ( I take it ) made this motion , that some officer of the King Might be deputed to be present at their assemblies , for preventing of state-jealousies and vulgar calumnies . for he that doth truth cometh to the light , that his deeds May be made manifest that they are wrought in God . many other means the Lord May suggest unto you , for the ordering of things in such a way , that some men's privilege May not be other men's prejudice , but that brethren May walk together in love , so far as they have attained , until the Lord May please to give farther light . 

4.  It is a business worthy of your care to encourage the ministers of the gospel with a competent and comfortable maintenance , that they May attend upon their calling without distraction , and that their hands May be strengthened in the work of the Lord : in so doing ye shall be fellowe-helpers to the truth : for these are persons entrusted by the Lord , as his agents , to call in men to buy his truth . and for the same cause be pleased also to vindicate them from the foul reproaches of those , who have the poison of asps under their lips . a faithful minister May say with the apostle , with me it is a very small ( Or the least ) thing that i should be judged of you , or of man's judgement . but let it be considered whether the truth be not concerned in it , if any through their own weakness shall be discouraged from buying , when they hear those whom the Lord employeth as his trustees and factors to be cried down and stigmatised for Baal's priests , limbs of the beast , ministers of Antichrist . the way to bring a shop out of custom , is first to bring it out of credit . 

5.  Procced in that work ( Wherein ye have already made so good a progress ) in removing those who are either unskilful or unfaithful dispensers of the truth , or whose fingers are so foul that they fully the truth by handling it , causing the word and way of truth to be evil spoken of , and discouraging men from buying . The very heathens May shame those who censure you in this : who seem to have been very tender of the honour of their idol-gods in this kind . Livy ( As i remember ) hath a story to this purpose : a vestal virgin was suspected of incontinency because of her neatness in apparel , courtly deportment or some such thing , but being called in question no such crime appeared upon examination , yet was she sent away with a check or admonition , & willed to remember , sancte magis quam scite colendas esse religiones . that the services of their gods required rather sanctity in those that were actors in them , than any such curious dress as Might carry an appearance of evil . And Sozomen inserteth the copy of a letter written by Julian the apostate to Arsacius archpriest of Galatia , requiring him to charge those heathenish priests under his superintendency , neither to haunt theaters , or ( According to our times ) stageplays , nor to frequent taverns , and that upon pain of deprivation . Seneca in his controversies hath such a case as this . A virgin being taken captive by pirates , was sold to a pandour , prostituted in a stews , yet preserved her virginity , and at last slew a man in defence of her chastity : whereupon she was arraigned , and upon hearing of her cause , acquitted : after this she sueth to be admitted as a priest to attend on one of their goddesses : this bar was put in against her plea by way of supposition : tres petunt sacerdotium : capta , prestituta , rea : suppose three several virgins should come in competition for the priesthood , whereof one had been captivated , the second prostituted , the third arraigned , omnibus nego : i reject them all : much more when all these meet in one : and yet in all these three was nothing criminal , but rather something of disparagement . How much more when the question is concerning the admission of men to the ministry of the gospel , or retaining those that were formerly admitted ? suppose one of them a drunkard , another a swearer , a third superstitious , a fourth an ignorant person , a fift idle , &c.  omnibus nego : none of them shall have my voice , and what shall we say of them in whom many of these meet ? It was further pressed in behalf of that virgin , that her suit should be regarded out of compassion to her sufferings , it was answered , non facimus miserandos sacerdote• : in choosing priests we must respect the honour of our gods , not the miseries of those who desire the office : the wants and necessities of persons and families in this case are not to be looked at , but the glory of Christ and the wants and miseries of poor souls : yet i desire from my heart that mercy May be showed them in other kinds , that they May have means of subsistence , and those who are known to be learned and studious May not be deprived of their libraries . Lastly , i beseech you , show yourselves tender of the honour of truth itself , in bridling those who cast foul aspersions upon it : rich wares trodden under feel , and spoilt , May lie by neglected : buyers are nice , and will hardly come off , unless that which is tendered to them be sightly . This the devil knoweth , and therefore stirreth up his instruments to throw dirt upon the beautiful face of truth , not only in blind corners , but also in pulpits and printed pamphlets . And , if it belong to a court martial to do right to a man of quality in point of honour , surely it well becometh the supreme court of parliament to vindicate the honour of God his everlasting truth . 

Many motives Might be used to set on the exhortation both general and special , exciting us to this great purchase of truth , and to the promoting of the cause of truth . Much Might be said of the glory , riches , majesty , beauty and divine excellency of truth and heavenly wisdom , for which i refer you as to other scriptures , so in particularly to the eighth chapter of this book of proverbs . Give me leave for the present in few words to touch upon these three things , and so conclude , 1.  The power of truth , 2.  The special engagements obliging us of this age and nation to purchase and promote it , 3.  A serious consideration of what value the truth will be at the last . Admirable is the power and strength of truth , for all that buy and possess it , against all that either oppose or neglect it . All the most unlikely prophecies of scripture , have been or shall be accomplished by the power of divine truth : all the exceeding great and precious promises of the gospel have been or shall be performed by it : all the dreadful threats verified . The power of truth raised a seed of the vanquished woman , to bruise the head of the serpent and god of the world . It brought the son of God to descend from his throne of supreme majesty , to clothe himself with flesh , subject himself to the guilt of sin and curse of the law , to the death and shame of the cross , to drink the bitter cup of his father's wrath , and for that end to suspend the excrcise of his authority in calling down legions of angels from heaven to rescue him out of the hands of his enemies . The power of truth , which is the power of Christ himself , raised him from the dead , and advanced him to the right hand of the throne of the majesty on high , &c.  

Yea this power of truth what wonderful alterations hath it wrought in the world ? how hath it dissolved the several minerals whereof that image was composed , the gold , silver , brass , and iron ? broken in pieces famous monarchies and empires of the world , blasted , and in great part already consumed the power of that man of sin , enfeebled the strength of that beast whom the world worshipped and wondered at ? It is admirable to consider , how the strength of divine truth breaketh through all opposition , beareth down all resistance , pulleth down the mighty from their seats , exalteth the humble and meek : witness a late and notable example in this land , the ruin of the prelacy : truth had long since spoken it , i will spew thee out of my mouth : yea , such is the power of truth that it maketh its very enemies serve its ends , and in the midst of the most perplexed concurrence of second causes , cross interferings and overthwart interposings of inferior agents , holdeth a steady course towards its full accomplishment , and moveth on in a straight line to its final period : where it arriveth most exactly in its own proper point of time . The power of God his truth brought Israel out of Egypt , at the end of the four hundred and thirty years , even the selfsame day it came to pass . all Pharaoh's oppositions , all his tergiversations could not prorogue the term of Israel's bondage one day beyond that term which truth had prefixed : nay , these served rather to spin out that interim , to fill up that void space of time , that the truth Might take place in its own time . Woe to them , who stand up against the power of truth at such a time when any of its great works are to be accomplished for the Israel of God . Those persons or what degree soever , mean men , nobles , peers , Princes , who happen to stand up as adversaries against the truth at such a time , seem to have been born in an evil hour . Pharaoh ( I am persuaded ) Might have gone to his grave with a great deal less guilt upon his conscience , had he lived and reigned in another age , and not at that time when the power of truth was to be put forth in . Israel's deliverance : some of his ancestors ( Perhaps ) had hearts as bad , but had no such occasion in so high a degree to treasure up wrath against their own souls : the like May be said of his courtiers and persons , that joined with him in that design . When the Lord by visible and glorious signs of the times and extraordinary dispensations of providence , owneth the cause of his persons in bondage , and saith again and again , let my persons go , let my persons go , that they May serve me according to mine own mind and direction , then let men tremble to hearden their hearts and oppose God , lest in the issue it appear that for this cause they were set up , that the Lord Might make his power known upon them . on the other side the power of truth is strong for all that embrace it , and labour to promote it . It will carry them through all dangers and difficulties , and in the end crown them with glory . In a word , this power of truth is sufficient to deliver poor slaves and captives out of the power of Satan , and to make them free . then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him , if ye continue in my word , then are ye my disciple indeed : and ye shall know the truth , and the truth shall make ye free . in a sea-fight between the Spaniards and Hollanders , it is said that a poor captive in one of the Spanish galleys , had his chain wherewith he was fastened , broken asunder by a cannon shot , himself not hurt , and perceiving that he was loose , leapt into the sea with a piece of his chain and escaped to the other ship , by this strange providence regaining his liberty : many seem afraid of the truth , especially when it cometh thundering like a cannon shot from the mouth of some Boanerges , but if thou receive it , yield and subject thyself to it , it will never hurt thee : no , it will break thy chain , those chains of death and darkness whereby Satan holdeth thee captive , and make thee free , and though thou Mayest carry a piece of thy chain with thee to thy dying day , yet it will wholly free thee in the end . Buy truth , and walk in the power of the spirit of truth , and ye shall be mighty in the strength of Christ to overcome , and shall sit down with him in his throne , even as he overcame and is set down with his father in his throne . 

2.  Many and great engagements lie upon us of this nation , and in particular upon us of this generation , to make us buy truth and stand for truth to the uttermost . Wonderfully hath the Lord wrought for the bringing in , the restoring , preserving and propagating of the truth among us . To say nothing of the first introduction of the light , in or near the apostles times , how graciously did the Lord visit this nation about 200. years before Luther's days , by the ministry of Wickliff and others , raising up a succession of faithful witnesses to seal the truth with their blood in the several reigns of our Kings , who according to the blindness of those times gave their power to the beast . Then followed that strange act of Henry the eighth , in abolishing the Pope's supremacy : next , the wonderful workings of our god upon the heart and by the hands of our English Josias King ew•r• 6.  In whose reign it is very observable , that by an admirable conjuncture of providence , the churches of Germany should be under persecution , and the churches in this land should enjoy a short breathing time of peace , that so England which had need to borrow light from foreign parts , Might be supplied ; from Germany divines were called , both such as were orthodox , and such ( It seemeth ) who were tainted with the Lutheran error , one at least , viz : Brentius a man noted to be much infected aswell with that great error of ubiquity , as that of the corporal presence in the sacrament , a person of eminent authority for his learning and manifold accomplishments , and one who had he accepted of the call , Might have sowed such seed in one or other of our universities as Might have overspread the land , & perhaps those weeds which Might have sprang from it , would not have been rooted out unto this day , especially if that be considered that our leading men Cramner , Ridley , &c. were supposed not to be well informed in that point at that time . I conceive there was a gracious overruling providence of God in it , diverting him , and moving him to decline so fair an offer , though ( It seemeth ) he was troubled to find a place wherein to hide his head with safety . On the other side the Lord was pleased to incline the hearts of martyr , Bucer and Phagius , three pious and orthodox divines to accept the call . What were all our multiplied deliverances in the reign of Queen Elizabeth , among the rest that of 88  And since her time from the powder-treason , and now of late a wonderful series or large catalogue of extraordinary events brought about by the mighty hand of God ; what are all these ( I say ) but the glorious workings of our god for the procuring and continuing unto us these precious opportunities of buying truth ? and therefore they ought to be mighty provocations to our spirits not to neglect such a price put into our hands , unless we will show ourselves of all persons upon the earth most unthankful , and so most unexcusable . Let me name one of the last sort : that as in the days of josh. the Lord harkened to the voice of a man , saying , sun stand thou still upon Gibeon , and thou moon in the valley of Aialon , and the sun stood still in the midst of heaven , and hasted not to go down about an whole day : so whereas our parliaments have formerly been made like fleeting meteors or falling stars , giving some glimpse of light and suddenly vanishing , the Lord should now hearken to the cries of his persons , and give us a fixed parliament , like the sun standing still in the midst of heaven , that so there Might be time for the discovery and establishment of truth and for the scattering of the enemies of truth . 

3.  and lastly consider what will be the value and price of truth at the last on the deathbed , in the day of judgement . How many thousands of gold and silver , yea of worlds ( If they had them ) would the greatest enemies or contemners of truth give at that day , if then it Might be had , if then they could purchase the saving knowledge of God , of Christ , of the gospel , the truth of faith , repentance , sanctification ? then a whole world for a lamp full of this precious oil . Certainly truth is always of the same value , every whit as much worth now as it will be then : but now men look upon truth as they do upon rich wares in a dark-shop , and so undervalue it , whereas they take a full view of the things of the world , and look upon them in the open sun . But then the truth shall be fully discovered , men shall see such a light as they never saw , a glorious irradiation , and divine brightness from the face of Christ , and truth shall be exhibited sub dio , in the broad daylight in the clear light of that great day , to which the light which now we see by , is but as a twilight or evening light . Then the worth of truth shall be fully known : they that would not go to the price of it shall know their loss . oh ye that prize your wealth above the truth , ye will be of another mind when the pillars of the earth are trembling , the heavens gathering together as a scroll , and passing away with a great or hideous noise , the elements dropping or melting , the earth and the works in it burned up , if ye will seek for that wealth which now ye value above the truth , ye must seek it in that heap of ashes : and ye that prefer your pleasures above it , as they are but shadows now when they are at best , so than they will be torments , and ye that esteem your honours , credit , reputation and the praise of men above the truth , ye will then see that this was but a blast , an empty breath when ye enjoyed it , and then it will be nothing , yea , it will turn into shame and confusion of face for ever . On the contrary , the beauty and glory of truth will then shine forth in perfection , & they that bought it at the highest rate shall clearly understand what a blessed advantage they have made . Oh that now we could be wise for our souls ! Let us be content to beggar ourselves ( If need be ) that we May be rich . Give any thing to buy truth . The time is short ( As the apostle saith ) it remaineth then that those which buy the things of this world be as if they possessed not , as men ready to part with them at any time , looking upon them as things that little concern them , carrying their hearts above them , keeping their spirits weaned from them : but that those who buy truth , be as those that possess and improve it to the best advantage : for the fashion of this world passeth away : but the word and truth of God , and the fruit , comfort and benefit of it endureth for ever . 

Finis . 





1 cor. 13 12.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} pelican . mercerus . Junius . Jansenius . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Rev. 3. 18.  Mat. 25. 9  phil. 3. 20.  1.  Veritas rei . psal. 1. 6.  mat. 25. 12  2.  Veritas . Scientiae . 3.  Veritas signi . 2.  What it is to buy truth . pro. 14. 18.  pro . 30. 2 , 3  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} psa. 49. 12  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} revel. 3. 17 , 18.  Acts 8. 10  pro. 8. 11.  isai. 55. 1.  2 John 2.  1 ioh. 3. 19  deus est sum & maxima veritas . Snarez . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Hebr. 1. 3.  ioh. 14. 6. 17.  rev. 4. 6.  pro. 4. 13.  2 cor. 3.  & 4. 2 , 3.  ioh. 12. 48.  reproof . Luke 11. 52.  ioh. 12. 19  gen. 41. 56.  rev. 12.   . mar. 8. 38.  mat. 15. 32  mat. 13. 19  mat. 13. 22.  Luke 8. 14.  mat. 19 16.  1 cor. 13. 3  exhortation . 1. general  1. to make this purchase . 1 tim 3. 16.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} heb. 4. 2.  math. 4.  jun. in parallel : res transit cum onere . 2 thes. 2. 10.  1 Kings 21. 20.  col. 3. 16.  eph. 5. 8  caveat emptor . Luke 13.  suet : in Calig . rom. 14. 17.  col. 3. 15.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 2 John . 4.  2.  Part of the general exhortation  mat. 5. 8.  1. cor. 3. 18 &c. intus •xiflens prohibet 〈◊〉 . 2 tim. 4. 2  Luke 12. 51.  joh. 1. 45.  joh. 7. 49.  2 chro. 25. 16.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} rom. 8. 32  joh. 21. 21 , 22.  mat. 16. 26.  mat. 12. 42 43.  act. 26. 24  Aelian : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} josh. 22. 10. &c.  psal. 119. 15.  2 cor. 1. 20.  ioh. 18. 37  2.  A more special exhortation . 2 cor. 13. 8.  Rev. 3. 14.  gal. 6. 4 , 5.  phil. 1. 27.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . i•de athleta . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . verse 28.  ve•itatem sub hasta vendere : vel potius praedae et direptioni exponere . Agelius , Sisinnius . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} soz. lib. 7. cap. 12.  Socr. lib. 3. cap 10.  Soz. lib. 2. cap. 30.  tit. 3. 10.  rom. 14. 1 , 2.  comment. de statu reipub. et relig. sub 9  An : 1561 : Osiand cent. 16  joh. 3. 21.  rom. 3. 13. 1 cor. 4 3.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Livy . as they worshipped goddesses or female gods , so they had female priests . soz l. 5. 15  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Senec.  motives . dan. 2.  rev. 3.  exo. 12. 41  John 8. 31. 32.  triumphs of Nassau . motive . vocatus a rege angliae edvardo amplissimis promissionibus . Mel : ad : in vita , brontii . josh. 10. 12  motive . 2. pet. 3. 10  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 1 cor. 7. 30  
































