New VERSES concerning the PLOT , London's Fire , & Godfrey's Murder . 

Given into his Majesty's hand , the second of September last , by E. R 

Whereto is added the Papists Attempts upon Justice Arnold , Mr. Thomkins , and lately on Sr. William Waller . Which also may be Sung to the Tune , Stone Walls cannot a Prison make , etc.  

The Plot.  

GIVE ear , OH King , and Nobles all , to this my new true Song , 
The Living God is all in all , his Truth is very strong , 
Truth will defend , world without end , those that are Innocent . 
The Man that walketh in the Truth hath no cause to repent . 
A mighty Wonder hath been wrought by God in fair England , 
He hath delivered the King by his almighty Hand , 
Traitors did seek to take away his LIFE , as is made known , 
But their damned Treason is found out , GOD hath them overthrown . 
Their dark design is brought to light , for all Traitors must fall ; 
Their is no Treason in the Truth , for truth is Lord of All : 
It's Truth that maketh Treason fly , truth is a noble thing , 
The devil 's in that man indeed that would destroy a King.  
OH Charles ! rejoice , & praise the Lord for your Deliverance , 
He made you King of fair England , I see your life advance : 
Your secret Foes God will beaten down , and break them all asunder : 
Your preservation stands in God , who will bring traitors under . 
How often hath the Lord been pleased your Body to deliver : 
then praise the living God , o King , that you may live for ever : 
Great hath his Kindness been to you , he is your strong Defender , 
Give up your Mind unto the Lord , that Kingdom he doth tender . 
When you was compassed about with Fiery Enemies , 
The Lord appeared in great power , and did their Host surprise . 
He led you by a gentle hand , sent you out of their way , 
And at his pleasure brought you home , remember such a day ! 
The Kindness of the Lord to you is not to be forgot , 
Remember this my Sovereign , how fair hath been your Lot. 
The hand of Divine Providence , hath guided you along , 
then blame me not , my Sovereign , to greet you with a Song . 
True men , of old , were very bold they sung with heart and hand , 
They lived and walked in the Truth , the pearl of every Land : 
They praised God , and loved the King bearing the Truth within , 
They had no Treason in their hearts , but in true Love did spring . 
Fire of London . 

no Man that ever yet knew God : was known for to conspire , 
To kill a King , or set a Land in burning flames of Fire . 
OH dreadful Treason , God will be thy everlasting Death : 
Those that are Found to walk therein , the Lord will stop their breath . 
Charles by the Grace of GOD , I say , lift up your Heart to GOD : 
then he 'll give Traitors unto you : and you shall be their Rod ; 
By you God will chastise them all , they shall become your Prey , 
Give glory to the living God , he is your strength and stay . 
Godfrey's Murder . 

The King is safe , but Godfrey's slain , now Traitors look about ye ; 
You are afraid of every Bush , the Truth of God will rout ye . 
Your safeguard you have lost indeed , your Salt hath lost its favour ; 
You seek for holes to hide you in , for want of the King's favour . 
Come , Traitors come , with shame sit down , destruction is your lot : 
Be sorry now with all your Hearts , for this your cursed Plot ; 
Had not your Market been forestald , and you brought into Chains , 
The Devil had bewitched you all , it 's he that in you Reigns . 
Justice Arnold . 

Another Justice was beset , they thought him for to Murder : 
The Lion he is in a Net , he cannot go no further : 
His Kingdom it is numbered , and now it shall be finished : 
They are all Traitors to their Head , that have the Truth diminished . 
Mr. Thomkins , Esq Arnold's friend . 

A Lawyer that in Monmouth shire , did live , hath been assaulted , 
By one that will go to the Church , but yet belike he halted : 
He knew not God to be his God , for Baal's Priest they do blind them , 
All Murderer's shall feel the Rod , with Judgements God will find them . 
Sir William Waller . 

Sir William Waller he is fled , for fear that he should follow 
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey , dead , the Huntsmen they do hollow , 
And closely follow on their Game , over all Hills and Mountains , 
But yet they shall not hurt the Lambs , that feedeth by the Fountains . 
then keep Christ's new Commandment , and truly love each other , 
And then you never shall be shent , for he that hate's his Brother : 
He is a Murderer I know , and walks not in the Spirit , 
Which is the free gift of the Lord , that none can ever Merit . 
Therefore OH King , show mercy then , to me a Worm in Prison : 
I am your Prisoner God doth know , in this I speak no Treason : 
Might I enjoy my Liberty , I let you understand , 
I could not hurt , nor yet disturb , no person in your land  
OH King , you can command the Press , it standeth good with reason : 
OH King , let this be put in Print , in truth , here is no Treason . 
They are the Dictates of my Mind : the Lord , he gave them me , 
And I do freely give them to your Royal Majesty . 
OH blame me not , my Sovereign , for this poor drop of water : 
It is exceeding good indeed , and from the Divine Nature . 
Charity is a noble spring , in Love there is no Treason , 
For Charity doth guide the mind , a long in Divine reason . 
Farewell , farewel , my Master dear ; consider me at leisure : 
Hear I must lie asuredly , until it be your Pleasure , 
To set me free , than it would be , to us a great refreshing , 
To see you enter into Love , and so receive God's blessing . 
Written by J. Taylor , a Singer of Israel , Prisoner in the King's Bench.  LONDON , Printed in the Year 1680.  

