A SERMON DISCURSING THE true meaning of these words : The 1.  Epistle of Timothy , the 2. chapt . vers . the 4.  

Who will have all men to be saved , and to come to the knowledge of the truth , etc.  



Preached by the reverend Mr. john Forbes , Pastor to the Company of Merchant Adventurers residing in Delft . Anno 1632.  

Imprinted at Delft , Anno 1632.  

A SERMON DISCURSING THE true meaning of these words : The 1.  Epistle of Timothy , the 2. chapt . vers . the 4.  

Who will have all men to be saved , and to come to the knowledge of the truth , etc.  



The reasons ( beloved in the Lord ) why the Apostle in the former verses will have , us to pray unto God for all men , and in particular for all that are in authority are carefully to be considered of us.  

The first ( whereof we have already heard ) is taken from the great benefit , which by our prayers to God for kings , & such as are in authority it pleaseth the Lord to grant to his Church : For our prayers are an effectual means to procure from God , that by his blessing upon the Governors and their Government , his church may live a quiet , and a peaceable life , in all Godliness , and honesty . 

The second reason , ( where of also we have heard ) is from the nature of the thing in God's sight , before whom it is a good , and acceptable thing , to pray for all men : and especially for Kings , and those that are in authority . And this we have shown you to be a special motive to move us to do any duty , but especially to pray for others , to wit , when we know that it is a good thing not so much in man's sight , as in God's sight , and a thing acceptable in God's sight , and that even according as he is our Saviour , which is a matter , ( as we have shown you ) of singular moment to be considered of us , for we are carefully to look to this , what is acceptable in God's sight , not simply as we consider God in himself in his nature , power , goodness etc. but as we consider him in reference to ourselves , as he is our God , our Saviour , and Redeemer . 

It followeth now , that we speak of the third reason , ( where upon the exhortation of the Apostle , to this duty is grounded ) and by which all to this last reason , is made good unto us , and clearly confirmed . And it is taken from this will of God touching the salvation of men , whose will ( as saith the Apostle ) is to have all men to be saved , and to come to the knowledge of the truth . Generally hence we gather , that the will of God touching men , should be the rule of our praying for them , and how largely soever God's will is extended to save men , so largely should our prayers be extended to God , for their salvation : It were a wretched thing , if we should not will the salvation of such as God will have saved , or that we should desire them to die in ignorance , whom God would have to come to the knowledge of his truth , as all our other actions , so especially our prayers , should have this will of God for their foundation , for the knowledge of it , is that which must rule us in our life , and order us in all our actions , & perticularlie in this in our mutual praying one for another : For he that is ignorant of Gods will , can make no acceptable prayer to God , seeing nothing can be acceptable to him that is not done according to his will : We know , that the promise of Christ in the Gospel is this , that what soever we shall ask the Father according to his will , it shall be granted unto us. Thus we see God hath graciously bound himself to hear us , and grant our petitions if they be according to his will . 

This Argument of the Apostle is enlarged by three other grounds , all manifesting the truth of this point , to wit , that God will have all men to be saved , and opening the true meaning of the same . 

The first ground is taken from the unity of God himself , & the unity of the mediator between God , and man  

The second ground where by this is confirmed , is taken from the ransom made by Christ , which was for all men , therefore prayer is to be made for all men . 

The last ground is set down in the 7. vers . and that is this , that God hath ordained Pastors to preach this redemption to all men : All these grounds make this point good , that God will have all men to be saved , and this will of God being laid down for the ground why we should pray for all men we are carefully to examine the true meaning thereof . 

This point is that , which most disturbs the peace of God's Church this day , for the greatest controversy is concerning the true meaning of this place . For certainly , it is an undoubted truth , That according to the extent of God's will , touching the salvation of men , so is the extent of his Decree , of his Election , and of Christ's redemption , for the limits , and extents of God's will , are the limits , and extents of God's Decree unto salvation , and the lymi●tss of his Decree , are the limits of his Election , and the limits of his Election , are the limits of the redemption made by Christ jesus , for all these must of necessity be of like extent , none of them can be made either of straighter , or larger extent , than other , where by it is manifest : that the salvation of mankind , must be as large , as Gods will is to save mankind : Therefore by consequence it must follow , that if these words , ( God will have all men to be saved , ) be so to be understood , that every particular man should be saved , then also God's Decree must be that every particular man should be saved , and if the Decree of God be such , then certainly , Christ must have died for every particular man , aswell for Cain , as for Abel : for Esau , as for jacob : for judas , as for Peter , etc.  And the Covenant of grace made by God in Christ , with mankind , must include all , and every particular man , but if so be that neither God's Decree , nor Christ's redemption , nor the Covenant of grace be made , with all , and every one , nor for all , and every one , then certainly these words , ( God will have all men to be saved , ) cannot be meant of every particular man , let us come therefore to search by the light of God's truth , the true meaning of God's mind in these words . 

For your clearer understanding , we will first consider , the diverse sorts of meanings , that are given of this sentence , and afterwards , try which is the trust . 

Some do interpret these words , after this manner they restrain the word ( all ) to such only as are really saved , as if the meaning were this , that as many of mankind as are saved , it is Gods will to save them , and certainly it is true , that whosoever is saved , it must be God's will that he is saved but although this meaning be tolerable , yet it is needless , in deciding this controversy , besides that it opens a gap to some absurdities , whereof we are not to speak at this time , It is an evasion for want if better light in God's truth to manifest God's mind . 

The second meaning of these words , is when the words ( all men , about which , all our question is ) are interpreted of every particular man , without exception secluding none . 

The third meaning is when these words ( all men ) are not taken for every particular man , but as the scripture oftentimes uses this word ( all ) for all sorts , and kinds of men , of all nations , people , and tongues , of what state or condition soever they be , and so the meaning will be this , that no sort , nor estate , nor condition of mankind , no nation , nor kindred , tongue , or sex is excluded , but that God will have men of all sorts , degrees , and qualities , Countries , and conditions to be saved . 

There is yet a fourth meaning , & interpretation of this place , which might yield us a commodious of these words , & that ariseth from the consideration of God's will , either as we refer it to that , which God himself willeth of men , or as we refer it to that , which is Gods will in us , towards men , to make this more plain : you are to consider Gods will either as we take it for that , which is in God himself , touching the salvation of men , or as we refer it to that which God willeth to be in us , & especially in such as preach the Gospel touching the salvation of mankind . 

How these words are to be understood in the first respect , must be gathered out of one of the former meanings , but if we consider them in the second respect of God's will , than the meaning will be this , That it is God's will , that we , and every one of us , that are Christians , & especially those , that are dispensers of the mysteries of God , should labour both by prayer , & preaching for the salvation of every man under the sun . And surely this interpretation might stand without any offence because , the Apostle brings this as a reason why we should pray for all men , to wit , even because it is Gods will , that we should without exception seek to save all men , and in this respect , this sense may stand for every particular man , for it is the will of God , that we should pray for the salvation of every man , & that we should preach the Gospel to every man , & so this will of God is to be considered , of that which God will have to be in our practice , but not of that which is in his own purpose , and yet even in this sense , there is an exception manifest in Gods own word , for it is not lawful to pray for any , that commits the since against the holy Ghost , as is clear in the 1.  Epis . of john 5. chap. 16. vers . So that the most commodious sense that we can give to these words , it cannot hold for every particular man , without some manifest exception . 

These be the four interpretations of any moment , that are applied to these words , where of this last as it might probably seem to be the Apostles meaning , so it might satisfy every man , if the newnesses of it as not being yet set abroad in the world , were not a let , and hindrance to the embracing and receaveing of it , therefore not standing upon it but leaving it to be of weight according as it shall affect the mind of the hearer . We come to speak of the second , and third interpretations , in which stands the whole controversy . 

To find out which of these two interpretations contain the true meaning of these words we are carefully to weigh , if any of them cannot stand without notable inconvenience , and great absurdities yea blasphemies against God's truth , and such other properties of God , without which God is not God at all , and which do directly contradict the nature of God's Covenant , and truth of Gods practise according to that which is revealed in the scriptures , for that sense which doth infer these absurdities cannot possible be God's meaning in these words , so that we must reject it as impious , and take that other which excludes all the former absurdities , & fully agreeth with the truth of God else where , and justifies God in his nature providence , power , and truth . 

Now concerning the taking these words for Gods will touching the salvation of every particular man , do necessarily infer the former absurdities , whereas taking them in the second sense , that is for all sorts , & kinds of men , no inconvenience doth follow upon it , nor shall there any contradiction be found in it , to the rest of God's truth revealed in the Scriptures , but shall be found sound to agree with it in all things . To make this manifest , we will come to the proof of this wherein that we may give the greater satisfaction to all men , We will examine the truth of this will of God touching the salvation of men , first as the Scriptures reveal it unto us , before the coming of Christ in the flesh , and second , as it is manifested since his coming in the flesh . Before Christ's coming in the flesh , it is most clear , and evident , that neither of these interpretations can stand : for the will of God before Christ , was so far from saving every particular man in the world , that it was not his will to save every nation , or people , or kindred , etc. seeing that it is plain in the Scriptures , that from Abraham to Christ , salvation only did belong unto the jews , and God did expresselie seclude all the nations of the Gentiles from his Covenant , & hope of life , setting up a partition brickwall betwixt them , & his own people the jews , which behoowed to be first broken down by Christ at his coming , before any nation of the Gentiles could be made Citizens with the saints , & of the household of God , as is manifest , by the Apost . speech in the 2.  Ephes . 12. where he shows us , that all the Gentiles before that time , were without Christ , and alliants from the common wealth of Israel , and strangers from the Covenant of promise , and were without hope , and without God in the world , who now in Christ are made near by breaking down the stop of the partition wall , so that first by his blood shed , and the reconciliation of the Gentiles unto God by his cross aswell as the jews , an entrance , and access was made unto both jew , and gentile , to the Father in such sort , as the Apostle saith in the 19 ver . of the 2. to the Ephes . We that are Gentiles , are no more strangers , and foreigners as we were before : The same is plain by the words of the Apostle in the 14. of the Act. the 16. where he saith , that in the times past , God suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own ways . In which words , we are carefully to mark the particle , all , when he saith he suffered all the Gentiles , whereby he witnesseth plainly , that there was not any one nation , of the Gentiles , that was not excluded from the Covenant before Christ , so that before Christ's coming the question is clear , and manifest , for if all the nations of the Gentiles were excluded , & no nation except one only of the jews included within the Covenant of God , no man without manifest blasphemy can say , that at that time God's will was , that every particular man should be saved , & this difference between , jew , and gentile at that time , is justified by Christ's own speech to the Cananitish woman , where he tried her faith , saying , that it was not good to take the children's bread , & give it unto dogs , as likewise by the speech of the Apost . to the Gal. where he saith , we that are jews by nature , and not sinners of the Gentiles , etc.  By which two places it is manifest , that the Gentiles in respect of the jews , were in Christ's own account , but as dogs , and not as Children . This is yet further manifest by the Description of the mystery of Godliness set down by the Apost . in the 3. to the Ephe. ver . 4. 5. 6. saying : When you read you may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ , which in other ages was not made known to the sons of men , as it is now revealed unto his holy Apostles , & Prophets by the spirit , that the Gentiles should be fellow-heires , and of the same body , and partakers of the promise in Christ by the Gospel . Let us consider these words , that the Apost . placeth the mystery of Christ , in this , that the Gentiles should be fellow-heires etc.  A mystery indeed , which the Apostles themselves after Christ's ascension never dreamt of , till by special revelation from Heaven , God did make it manifest to Peter Act. the 11. vers . 18. who for his preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles , was accused by the jews , when he came to jerusalem , and upon his apology in expounding to them the matter in order as it fell , they all held their peace , and glorified God , saying , Even ( with wonder ) then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life which witnesses sufficiently , that the lews did not imag●ine , that the Gentiles had any part , or portion in salvation together with the lews . And that we may see , that it was Gods own will , and purpose to seclude them from salvation , till Christ's coming in the flesh . Let us mark the description of the mystery of God's will in his eternal purpose in himself , as it is set down by the Apost . in the Epis . to the Ephes . chap. 1. vers . 9 10.  In these words , making known to us the mystery of his will , according to his good pleasure , which he had purposed in himself , that in the dispensation of the fullness of times he would gather together in one , all things in Christ. This fullness of times was the very time of Christ's coming in the flesh , unto which time , as the words do bear , he purposed not , in himself , neither was it the good pleasure of his will to gather the Gentiles unto the number of his Saints , but till that time , the Law of Commandments , and ceremonies did stand up , as a partition brickwall to keep out the Gentiles from the grace of salvation bestowed upon the lews , the breaking down of which brickwall by the death of Christ was declared by the renting of the veil of the temple from the top to the bottom , and therefore it is not without great , & weighty cause , that the Apostle Paul amongst the heads , and points of the mysteries of Godliness , reckoneth this for one , that Christ was preached unto the Gentiles 1. tim . 3. 16.  Thus we trust , that it is sufficiently clear to all men , that those who maintain , that it was Gods will from the beginning , that every particular man should be saved , do directly speak against the purpose of God as it is revealed by himself in his truth , seeing it was not his will , that any nation should be saved , except the lews only , before Christ's coming in the flesh . Besides , to come more closely to the point , and examine this will of God before Christ's coming in the flesh , we will lay aside the rest , of the nations , & only speak of that nation , which was chosen of God to salvation , namely , the jews , to see if this opinion for every particular man's salvation , can stand with the troth of God's will , and purpose amongst them , & to clear this point , First , let us consider the speech of God himself , by the Prophet Isaiah chap. 14. ver . 24. where he saith : The Lord of hosts hath sworn , saying , surely as I have thought , so shall it come to pass , & as I have purposed , so shall it stand . By this sentence it must necessarily follow , that if this be the sense of these words , to wit , that God will have every man without exception to be saved , that either no man ever shall be damned , or else God must be perjured , ( which is blasphemy to think ) the reason is manifest , seeing God hath sworn , that as he hath thought , it shall come to pass , and as he hath purposed so it shall stand , even as likewise he sayeth , in the 46. of Isaiah vers . 10.  My Council shall stand , and I will do whatsoever I will . If then it be true , that the Lord doth whatsoever he will , and that his purpose cannot fail , than it is impossible , that any one man should ever be damned , if his will be ( as they say ) that every particular man should be saved , or then if so be that ever any man be damned , God must be perjured , seeing he hath sworn , that his purpose shall stand : But if it be true , which else where psalms . 33. vers . 10. 11. is said , to wit , that the Council of the Lord standeth for ever , and the thoughts of his heart to all generations , & again psa . 115. ver . 3.  Our God is in heaven , he doth whatsoever he will : then it must follow , that it was never Gods will , that every particular man should be saved , even amongst the lews , seeing it is manifest , even by the Scriptures that God did not save every man among them , if it were by no other evidence , yet even by that oath of God , set down in the psa . 95. saying , wherefore I swear in my wrath , surely they shall not enter into my rest : according to that which God speaks to Moses , Num. 14. chap. ver . 28. 29.  etc. and 32. chap. ver . 10. 11. the true meaning whereof is expounded clearelie by the Apostle to the Hebre. chap. 3. and 4. where he plainly affirmeth , that they to whom the Gospel was first preached amongst them entered not into God's rest for unbeleifes sake , Chap : 4. ver . 6. we might allege likewise for clearing this troth , the rejection of Ishmael from the Covenant , the hatred of God against Esau , the wrath of God against Saul , the Prophetical curse of David against his enemies , the perdition of judas the traitor , and more instanccs , but we conclude with two proofs for all , the first of jeremiah , Chap. 7. ver . 16. & chap. 11. ver . 11. 14.  & chap. 14. ver . 11. and 12. & chap. 15. ver . 1. & in the Prophet Ezekiell chap. 14. ver . 20. where God expressly forbids the Prophet jeremiah to pray for that people any more , and shows that though Moses , and Samuel did stand before him for them , yet his affection could not be towards them , yea , that though Noah , Daniel , and job , were amongst them , that they should deliver neither sons , nor daughters , but only their own souls , by their righteousness . We can not think , that God could intend the salvation of those men , for whom he would not suffer his Prophets to pray , how can it possible be , that he should will the greater ( that is their salvation ) when he prohibits the lesser , that is , the Prophets praying for them , second , to end this argument , let us lay before us the History , and complaint of Elijah the Prophet , and Gods answer unto him , in the 1. kings . 19  Rom. 11. where the Prophet complaineth , that Ahab , and Gods enemies , 〈◊〉 left none alive , that served God , but himself alone , and God answeres him , that he had reserved seven thousand , that had not bowed their knee to Baal . Which History according to the Apostle own interpretation , shows us , that a remnant according to the election of grace were saved , and the rest in God's justice were hardened , and proves this by the Scriptures to have been done by God himself , by the words of the Prophet Esaie cham . 29.  God hath given them the spirit of slumber , eyes , that they should not see , and ears , that they should not heart , unto this day , and from the 69.  Psal . Let their table be made a snare , and a net , and a stumbling block even for a recompense unto them , let their eyes be darkened , that they sce not , and bow down their back always . Thus we trust it is plain , that howsoever God had tied salvation to the lews , before the coming of Christ , yet it was not his will among them to save every particular man , as for that which may be objected , touching their unwillingnes in resisting . God's will , we shall answer it hereafter , only now let us conclude this way , seeing God doth whatsoever he will , and seeing that his purpose must stand , then either God never , willeth these men's salvation , or else he must have saved them , which the scripture denies , & certain it is according to the former grounds , that God doth whatsoever he will , and therefore , that God never willed such a thing , seeing it is manifest he never did it : Which is manifestly confirmed by the Apostle Paul , Rom. the 11.  Where he shows us , that there was a remnant according to the election of grace , and that among the jews , the elect had obtained mercy unto salvation , but that the rest of Israel , had not obtained , vers 5. 7.  Where also he plainly witnesseth , that God had cast away the jews , and had broken of many branches , from the root through unbelief , so that even in that only people , which belong to God , it is evident that it was not Gods will to save every particular man amongst them . Now let us come to try the truth of this matter since the coming of Christ in the flesh , at which time , the difference between jew , and Gentile was taken away , and the grace of Salvation by Christ's own command was to be prached by the Apostle to all nations math . 28. 19 according to that which Christ himself fore told math . 24. 14. saying , and this Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in the whole world , for a testimony unto all nations . If ever in any time of the world it was Gods will , that every particular man should be saved , it must needs be in this time , wherein the Covenant of grace is extended to all nations and all exception of persons taken away before God , for certain it is which , the Scripture tells us , that in Christ jesus , there is neither lieu , nor Grecian , there is neither bond , nor free , neither male , nor female , for we are all one in him , gall . ● 28. and as the same Apostle saith to the Coll. There is neither Grecian , nor jew , Circumcision , nor uncircumcision bond , nor free , but Christ is all , and in all things : By which words it is most plain , that no kind of nation , or people , or person , is excluded from the grace of salvation , and so these words ( that God will have all men to be saved ) are taken truly , when they are taken in that sense , even according to the testimony of the church itself , and all the redeemed ones of God , Reu. the 5. 9 where they sing this new song , saying , thou art worthy to take the book , and to open the seals thereof because thou waste killed and hath redeemed us to God by thy blood , out of every kindred , tongue , & people , and nation , and hath made us to our God , Kings , and Priests , and wce shall reign on the earth : Out of these words , we have a most strong argument , to prove that salvation is universal , in regard of nations , kindreds , or tongues , kinds , of men , but no way universal in respect of every particular person , built upon the testimony of them themselves who are saved , and this argument is such , as it leaves no exception against it , to the maintainers of that opinion , ( that Gods will is , that every particular man should be saved ) for it is manifest , that they make the redemption wrought by Christ , to have been for every particular man , and so as universal as they make Gods will , to have measured , which is true indeed though not in their sense , as this place plainly proveth , seeing they who are redeemed by Christ do confess , that he had redeemed them , out of every kindred tongue , people , and nation . Now if Christ have redeemed some out of every people , and nation , etc. then certainly he hath not redeemed all of every people , nor every particular man of every nation : & if this redemption of Christ be not of every particular man as this place doth plainly show , then undoubtedlie , it cannot be Gods will , that every particular man should be saved , for no Christian man was ever yet so blasphemous , as to make Gods will to save men , to be of larger extent , than Christ's redemption of men , neither certainly can it be , both in respect , that Christ came in the world to do the will of the Father that sent him , and this is the father's will which sent him , that of all which he hath given him he should lose nothing john . 6. 38. 39  & also because it is God himself who hath reconciled us to himself by lesus Christ , for God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself , as the Apostle saith , 2.  Cor. 5. 18. 19  Seeing them both that Christ the redeemer came to work redemption according to will of his father that sent him , and seeing it was God himfelfe , who in Christ reconciled the world unto himself , it must necessarily follow , that seeing Christ redeemed not every one of every nation , that it was never God's will , to reconcile to himself in Christ every particular man of every nation , an● so consequently it could never be his will , to save every particular man of every nation , for as we hau● said before , if God do whatsoever he will , it must follow , that if i● was his will to save every particular man , that of necessity he do this , else he were not God , seeing neither inconstancy , nor impotency can be fall him that is God. Besides , if this had been his will , it behoved likewise to have been his will , that Christ should both have saved , & redeemed , every particular man , and yet Christ doth plainly witness concerning judas in particular , that he was the Child of perdition , and that he was lost , & that to this end , that the scriptures might befulfilled , john 17. 12. which speech of Christ , himself , is carefully to be marked , for the overthrowing of those who hold this blasphemous opinion , even from their own strongest hold , that is from the very will of God , as it is revealed in the scriptures , seeing judas must perish , that the scriptures might be fulfilled , whereof it must follow , that even according to Gods will revealed in the scriptures , God doth not will , that every man should be saved else there was no necessity , that judas must perish , that the scriptures might be fulfilled . 

Moreover the same Christ witnesseth plainly , that he laid down his life for his sheep john . 10 15. and in that same chapter witnesseth plainly touching the jews to whom he spoke , that they were not of his sheep , verse . 26. whereupon it followeth necessarily , that it was never God's will , that every particular man should be saved . If we compare the words of Christ in this 10.  Chapter with the words of the same Christ in the 6. chap. ver . 39 where he saith , this is the father's will which hath sent me , that of all which he hath given me , I should lose nothing , for the will of God touching man's salvation is to be extended no further , then according to the commission given to Christ the mediator , for the saving of men , now it is plain by Christ himself , that he was to save none , but such as the Father had given him , but that all men were not given to Christ of the Father is plain by the words of the same Christ : john 17. verse . 6. where he saith , I declared thy name to the men thou gavest me out of the world , and again , ver . the 9  I pray for them , I pray not for the world , but for them thouh hast given me . Besides that , God hath not given every particular man unto Christ , It is evident by the words of Christ john , the 6. ver . 37.  All that the Father hath given to me , shall come to me . But no man is so shameless as to deny , but that there be many men , that never came to Christ , nor ever shall come , and so by consequence were never given by God the father unto Christ , & if never given by him to Christ , than it could never be his will , that Christ should save them , seeing this was the will of the Father that sent Christ , that of all which he had given him , he should lose nothing , and this agrees well with Christ's own speech , ( mentioned before ) john the 10.  Where he showeth the reason , why the jews to whom he spoke , did not believe , saying , It was , because they were not of his sheep , which the father had given him , whom only he did reconcile to the Father , seeing he laid down his life for them only , & so by consequent saved none but them only . By this it is manifest , that it was never God's will , to have every particular man to be saved , seeing he hath not given every particular man unto Christ , neither are all men of the sheep of Christ , and therefore he neither did lay down his life for every man , nor was it the will of the Father to save every man To come yet to demonstrate more manifestly , that this will of God , touching the salvation of all men , is to be understood only of all sorts of men , and in no wise of every particular man , We have 3. strong arguments laid down in this same place by the Apos . to Tim. The first is in these words , that God will have all men to come to the acknowledging of the truth , Which words are to be taken in the same sense , with the former : for the Apost . joins them this way , God will , that all men should be saved , & come to the acknowledging of the truth . Whereby it is clear , that Gods will touching the salvation of all men , can be no larger extended , than Gods will touching the coming of all men to the knowledge of the truth , Now that it is not God's will , that every particular man should come to the knowledge of the truth , is manifest by the words of Christ himself Mat. 13. 11. where he gives the reason to his Apostles , why he speak to the people in parables , saying , it was because , it was not given to them to know the secrets of the kindgdome of heaven , If then there be some , to whom it is not given by God to know the troth . It cannot be Gods will , that every man should come to the knowledge of the truth , for other wise certainly , he would give every man to know it , seeing he doth whatsoever he will , therefore they must speak against Gods own mind , set down by Christ himself , & by the Apostle in this place , who doth affirm , that it is God's will , that every particular man should be saved , seeing it is not his will , that every particular man should come to the knowledge of the truth , and his will touching the salvation of all men is no larger , than his will is touching their coming to the troth . 

To make it yet further manifest , that it is not God's will , that every man should come to the knowledge of the truth , but his elect alone the Apost . s hews it in the. 11. to the Rom. whe●e he shows us , that the elect had obtained this , and the rest were hardened , and shows this their hardening to be the work of God himself , out of Isaiah , saying , God hath given them the spirit of slumber , eyes , that they should not see , and ears , that they should not hear unto this day , how then is it possible , that it can be God's will , that every man should come to the knowledge of the truth , If God himself blind the eyes of men , that they see not , and harden the hearts of many , that they understand not , for these two cannot stand together , except we make God a direct enemy to his own will , and a worker against his own purpose , ( which is blasphemous to think , and so consequently it cannot be agreeable to God's truth , that God will have , that every particular man to be saved , seeing it is not his will , that every particular man should come to the knowledge of his troth , without which knowledge it is impossible , that any man can be saved . The second Argument is in these words , where the Apo. saith , that Christ gave himself a ransom for all men , where the word ( all ) is to be taken in the same sense , in which it is to be taken , in these that God will have ( all ) men to be saved . Now we have shown you before , that I Christ did not lay down his life for every particular man , but for his sheep only , which the Father did give him , there being many other who were not of his she epe , as himself doth witness , and the testimony of the redeemed ones ( cited before ) out of the Revel . proves this point evidentlie , whereas they witness , that Christ had redeemed them by his blood , out of every tribe , people , and nation , declaring an universality of redemption in respect of kinds of men , but denying universality concerning every particular man  

The third Argument is set down in the 7. ver . where the Apos . lays down the third ground , whereby he confirmeth the former saying to wit , that God will have all men to be saved , which is , that he is ordained a preacher of salvation to the Gentiles , that is not unto the jews only who before Christ's coming had the promises , but also to the Gentiles , who before Christ's coming were excluded from the Covenant and promise . In these words we have first to gather , that which the adversary takes for their advantage , that is the universal publication of the promise , and salvation to all nations , which notwithstanding makes much against them , for thus far we will grant , that as largely as the Gospel , and promise of salvation is extended by God , in the ministry thereof : so far it is Gods will to extend likewise his salvation , to some , though not to every one in every place , where the Gospel is preached : But out of the Apo. words to the Heb. 4. ver . 1. 2. we gather strong argument , against that sort of the universality of God's wil● and grace , whereby it is extended to every particular person , for the Apostle : shows us plainly in that place , that the promise of entering into God's rest is not left in any place to any people , but where the gospel is preached , If therefore the gospel be not preached unto all , then certainly the promise of entering into God's rest , is not universal , nor made to all , in that sense of universality formerly alleged , and if the promise be not made to all , and every one universallie , then certainly it cannot be Gods will to save all , and every one universallie . Now that the gospel is not preached to all , is plain , both by experience , and scripture . Are there not now many nations , that never yet heard the gospel ? be there not many people in Africa , America , and other places , who never yet heard of Christ , but lie in ignorance , and blindness without the word of God. Besides the scriptures do show us , that when Christ sent out his Apostles to preach the gospel , he did then command them , not to go into the way of the Gentiles , and not enter into the Cities of the Samiritans , matt . 10. 5. and the spirit plainly forbids Paul , and Barnabas , to preach in certain country's of Asia , Act. cham . 1● . ver . 6. 7.  If men object against this , that God did this upon fore knowledge , that they would not receive the Gospel , & therefore did forbid to preach unto them , this is answered out of the mouth of Christ himself . Mat. 11 ver . 21. 23. where he saith , Woe be to thee Corazin , woe be to thee Bethsaida , for if the mighty works , which were done in you had been done in Tirus , & Sidon , they would have repent long ago in sackcloth , & ashes . And thou Capernaum , which art exalted unto heaven , shall be brought down to hell , for if the mighty works , which have been done i● thee , had been done in Sidon , it should have remained until this day . By which speech of Christ it is evident , that God did deny the means o● salvation to those whom he did know would not so have abused them , as they that had them : he did see that the Gospel , & the works of Christ would have wrought upon the Sodomites to the preservation from that destruction which did fall upon them , and upon them of Tirus and Sidon , to humiliation in sackcloth , and ashes , and yet he denies these means unto both . How can then this stand as a truth , that God only doth deny the means of salvation unto them whom he foresees will abuse them , these men that maintain this opinion see not , how their vain , and blind cureositie , & carnal wisdom makes them fall into such difficulties whereunto they are never able to answer , besides that they overthrew by this assertion one many points of God's eternal truth set down in the 9 and 11.  Chapters to the Rom. in both which the truth of God , doth plainly witness , and prove unto us , that God's decree , his election , and his calling , are grounded , not upon man's will but upon Gods , from whence comes it that even by the publication of the Covenant , some are saved , and some are not , is it o● their will or of Gods will ? the Apo. in the .9 . of the Rom. saith plainly , that it is not in him that willeth , nor in him that runneth , but in God that showeth mercy , for he will have mercy , on whom he will have mercy , and whom he will he● hardeneth . It must therefore be a monstrous untroath , to say , that God wi● have every particular man to be● saved , neither can any thing , tha● can be said touching the rebellion of man's will against God's wi●● avayle to the contrary : for God● own will by the testimony of th● Apostle : ( yea of God himself Exo. 33. 19  & not man's is the ground of God's mercy , if therefore it were his will , that every one should be saved , then certainly he would show mercy to every one seeing he shows mercy to whom he will : Besides , how could God be said to harden whom he will , even as his will is revealed , & published in the gospel . If that were true , that it was his will , that every man should be saved , how can it be possible , that towards one , and the self same person , God should have one will to save him , and another will to harden him , as if the fruit , and efficacy of Gods calling depended upon man's will , and not upon Gods , how could it be possible that God could show mercy to whom he will , or yet harden whom he will ? doth not I saiah , & the Apost . doth tell us , that except the Lord reserved a seed , no man should be saved , but it should be with us , as it was with Sodom , and Gomarra : so that it is not men , that reserve themselves , but only God who reserves a seed unto himself . Let men out of these things judge whether our interpretation of this sentence be not the soundest agreeing with Gods own interpretation , of his own mind , whereby his power will , and God head are maintained , or whether that other sense be not to be abhorred , which makes man's will to over rule God● will , and man to be a faviour , a●● so a God to himself . 

But yet to clear this point som● what more , let us grant this saying to be true , that God will not sau● us , without us , whereupon it might seem to follow , that although Go● will every man to be saved , yet 〈◊〉 man himself will not embrace salvation , it is not the default of God will , but of man's will , that he 〈◊〉 not saved , for albeit , that God will that a man be saved , yet he willeth not that he be saved against his own will , therefore his damnation coming by reason of his own backwardness , and rebellion , and rejection of God's offer , seems to make nothing against this point , that God will have him saved . 

Surely we cannot deny , but it is a sound truth , that God saves no man , against man's own will , for those that come to Christ , must come willingly unto him , neither is this the point of Controversy , but this is the question , to wit , whence proceeds man's willingness to embrace Christ , and the promise of salvation ? is it of man himself ? or is it Gods gracious gift ? if it be God's gift , then how can any man's own will hinder his salvation if God will it , It being true which she Apost . saith Phil. 2. chap. ver . 13. to wit , that it is God that worketh effectually in us , both to will , and to perform , the resistance then of a man's own will cannot hinder his salvation , if it be God's will that he be saved , seeing it is in Gods to make him to will , although in himself he be never so unwilling , yea it is certain that there is not any man , that hath this power to will the things , that belong to his peace , & salvation , till God work it in him . If therefore God will that every man be saved , and if God have it in his hand , & power , to work in every man to will that which he willeth , why doth not God give to every man to will so , or if he do not work this will in every man , how can it be true that he willeth every man to be saved , seeing it is not from man himself but from God , that man hath this will , for man's own unwillingnes could not hinder God's willingness , who hath the will of man in his power to make it willing . Seeing then , God will not save us without us , and seeing we cannot will without him , how can he be said to will that man's salvation , in whom he worketh not to will , without which God willeth not to save him . Now that God worketh not this will in every man , the adversaries themselves are not so shameless , as to call it into question , seeing they contrary to the scriptures , would make God to work it none , how then is it possible , that God willeth the salvation of every man , for if he willeth not that which is the less , and without which I cannot be saved , how can he be thought to will my salvation which is the greater , and yet depends upon the lesser , which I cannot have but by his working . To Conclude this point , if God willeth the salvation of every man , but yet so , as not without man's willingness , and if every man's willingness , and also working of his own salvation dependeth upon the same will of God , how can it be that any man in the world should be destitut of that willingness , without which he cannot be saved , or frustrate of salvation , for if upon the same will & good pleasure of God , whereby he willeth the salvation of a man , the gift of that man's willing nes , and working of his salvation doth depend . It is a wonder that any man should be either without willing or working for what can hinder Gods will , when the unwillingnes of man's own will cannot do it , God having it in his will to make man's will willing , and man not being able to will except God work it in him , It being true which john saith , that Christ giveth this prerogative to be the sons of God to those who are born , not of blood , nor of the will of the flesh , nor of the will of man , but of God : john . 1. 13.  

FINIS . 

