The saints security , against seducing spirits or , the anointing from the holy one the best teaching . 

Delivered in a sermon at Paul's before the Lord Major , aldermen , and commonalty of the city of London , upon the fifth of November , 1651.  

by William Ames . m. a.  

Sonus verborum aures percutit , magister intús est 
Cathedram in caelo habet qui corda docet . 


aug.  

London , printed by m. Simmons , for William Adderton , and are to be sold at his shop at the three golden falcons in Duck-lane , 1652.  

To the right honourable , John Kendrick , Lord Major , and the right worshipful the aldermen of the city of London . 

Honourable and beloved . 

Some who have been judicious spectators of those uncharitable quarrels , which have broken forth in these latter days , amongst professors , have been ready to conclude , that either men have not understood that thing which religion signifies , or else they have abused the name of religion , making it serve to advance themselves , and promote some worldly design : and if they shall consider the power of unmortified lusts in the hearts of wicked men emboldened by the advantage of such general dissensions , it will not be so great a wonder to see many cast off God and holiness , as to see any keeping the faith , and cleaving unto Christ in such an hour of temptation . One great snare , that the devil hath laid to entangle souls , hath been , to put them upon it to call every thing into question ; which hath been the more dangerous , because such inquiry doth pretend to ingenuity , and is like that tree of knowledge , a tree to be desired to make one wise , and certainly it is far better to be humbly and modestly inquisitive , then popishly and sottishly ignorant , for the wise man's eyes are in his head , but the fool destroys himself by a strange implicit faith , and blind obedience : but when a proud and deboyst spirit shall become one of those {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} those haesitating questionists , how will he vaunt and triumph in his conceits , as if he had posed and nonplussed truth itself : when such a one is gotten into this strong hold , what will not his bold confidence dare to question ? And although he Might consider that a fool May ask more questions than ten wise men can answer , yet still he persisteth in vain interrogatories ; and such is the disturbance of his mind occasioned by the pride and wickedness of his heart , that let the most clear and pertinent reply be made to his demands ; yet is he wholly indisposed to receive satisfaction . Thus is the poor , but proud and insulting sceptic , at once really the devil's bondslave , and conceitedly his own freeman . 

When i was , by your order , called to this public service , many things of this kind did press in upon me , and the greatest impression that i could perceive 〈◊〉 my spirit was , to speak something , that 〈◊〉 , by the blessing of God , tend to the vindication of the truth of religion , from the malicious , but frivolous affronts of profane , yet cunning men ; and i could not find out a more direct means to this end , then by an appeal to the common sense of all regenerate souls , which i have done in the following discourse , according to the measure of the gift received , the effects whereof i heartily desire May be these two , 

first , for ever to silence that Machiavilian blasphemy , that religion is nothing but a politic engine , and that there is no such thing indeed anywhere to be found . There are those in the world , who in a true spiritual sense , have heard with their ears , and seen with their eyes , and handled with their hands of the word of life ; and it is to be feared , that those souls , which deny , that there is any religion abroad , are wholly devoid of it within themselves . Religion is not a chimaera or notion , but a real thing in the hearts and lives of good men . 

secondly , to stir up and awaken professors , that they rest not satisfied in any outward form , without the inward life and power of religion . Oh! be not contented to serve in the oldness of the letter , but in the newness of the spirit . We have raised such a dust by our disputes in lesser matters , and by our espousing such trivial quarrels , that we have almost lost our Christ , and alienated our affections from our first husband . It is time for us now to call forth that primitive spirit of love and purity , if by any means we Might remove the scandal of our contentions , and exhort one another so much the more , as we see the day approaching . 

After you had patiently given this sermon the hearing , you were pleased to importune the publication thereof , whereby yourselves and others Might the better perpend , and truly examine what is therein contained ; which request of your honours i could not easily deny , but have accordingly performed , and do here tender it to your Christian acceptance , with hopeful confidence , that seeing for the truth's sake , it found such unexpected entertainment at your ear , it shall not be despised at the more severe tribunal of your eye . now , that good spirit of Jesus Christ open the eyes of your minds , that you May see and approve things that are excellent , and persuade your hearts to receive the truth in the love of it , and direct your steps to walk in the paths of mercy and truth , that you May be saved . 

So prayeth , Yours and the church's servant in the gospel . William Ames . 

Imprimatur 

December 4. 1651.  Joseph Caryl . 

1 John 2. 20.  

but ye have an unction from the holy one , and ye know all things . 

There hath been of old an irreconcilable feud between light and darkness , between good and evil , and wheresoever truth hath had its dwelling there error and falsehood have endeavoured to intrude themselves ; so that no sooner was truth incarnate in the person of our Lord Jesus , but Antichrist , yea many antichrists did arise and set themselves against it ; sed magna fuit veritas & praevalebat , truth was great and did prevail . but when error and falsehood did perceive that truth remained invulnerable in the person of Christ , they betake themselves to his posterity , and the seed of the serpent doth conflict and try it out with the seed of the woman ; yet still the victory hath been given on the saints side . But such was the malice of truths great adversary , the Prince of darkness , that he would not only not lay down the tucklers , but that he Might appear to deserve the name of Apollyon and Abaddon , he hath left no means unattempted , and hath more curiously sought out and invented how he Might yet ( If possible ) carry the day against the truth ; and to carry on his undertaking hath projected two ways eminently , whereby either to banish truth wholly out of the world , or to stop her growth and progress in the world . The one hath been by open force and violence , to persecute the persons of those who have professed themselves to be truth's subjects ; whereby he Might at once make them weary of their profession , and deter and affright others from entertaining that truth which was thus persecuted in those that did profess it . 

The other way hath been by secret subtlety and cunning sophistry to undermine and embase the truth , to mix his poison with God's wine , whereby he Might with less difficulty either cheat the professors , and owners of it , or at least hinder the genuine and natural effect which pure truth should have upon the minds of men . But upon all the glory there hath been a protection and defence , and this defence hath been the munition of rocks . 

first , that there have been violent assaults upon the persons of the saints for the truth's sake , i need not fetch an argument from far to demonstrate unto you : every one that we meet withal is able to tell us of those primitive persecutions , and to relate unto us rueful stories of the bloody massacres that have been abroad . Who amongst us is ignorant of those Smithfield butcheries , and those whole-burnt-offerings of holy men , which the bloody priests of Rome did offer to their great idol ? what shall we say to this day's rehearsal of those not invincible armadas , those powder-plots and conspiracies , those armies and insurrections , those wars and tumults , which have threatened as with open mouth , to swallow up and devour whole nations , and commonwealths , where Jesus Christ hath had his worshippers ? Certainly nothing herein is so wonderful as this , that Christ hath yet a name in the world , that he hath yet a name in England . and that which hath secured truth and her subjects from the mischief of these designs hath been the powerful providence of the almighty . He that holdeth the reins of government in his hand , who is the great and supteam moderator of this world hath taken to himself his great power , and hath reigned . behold , God hath been to his churches , and holy ones as a refuge from the storm , and as a shadow from the heat of their persecuting adversaries , whilst the blast of the terrible ones hath been as a storm against the wall ; so that , as we have cause this day , in our anniversary commemoration of these never to be forgotten deliverances , we May take up that angelical doxology , and say , blessing , honour , glory and power , be given to him that sits upon the throne , and to the lamb for ever , amen , hallelujah . 

secondly , that there hath been deceit and sophistry used to steal away truth from the professors of it , nothing is more clear and manifest . The scripture speaketh expressly , that there were false prophets amongst the persons , and there shall false teachers creep in , who shall bring in damnable heresies , even denying the Lord that bought them . And these agents or factors for truth's adversary , are either those tenebriones & lucifugae , those owls and night birds , who do secretly blaspheme the truth , but dare not come into the light , lest their works of darkness should be revealed and made manifest . Or else they are those whom the father calls meridiani daemones , those noonday devils , who with an impudent forehead dare set themselves to cry down , and with most devilish confidence to oppose that truth which must prevail and conquer . And these May be those white devils that would appear in the shape of angels of light , whilst indeed secretly and inwardly they are nothing else but fiends of darkness . But against all these hath our Lord Jesus secured his church and persons ; and hath brought off his truth without loss or prejudice ; and that by the powerful working of his own spirit living in the hearts of holy men . Now as we have cause every way to bless God for truth's safety , so from a godly jealousy and holy fear we May admonish and call upon the professors of truth , that they be not led away with the error of the wicked , or ensnared with the craft and subtlety of Antichristian seducers ; and this was the occasion of that discourse which the apostle falls upon in this chapter , as May be gathered from the 26.  verse , these things have i written unto you concerning them that seduce you . 

The aged apostle in the beginning of his discourse doth well consult the condition of believers to whom this epistle should come , and writes unto them as unto little children . in vers. 18.  little children , you , whose attainment it is to know the father , even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ , and in him your god and father . My little children , it is hora novissima , the last hour , and therefore you had need to stir up yourselves , and seriously to consider , how to save yourselves from that great inundation of the mystery of iniquity , which will endeavour to suppress the mystery of godliness . my little children , it is the last hour , and as you have heard formerly by those who instructed you in the truth , that Antichrist should come , so now already there be many antichrists , for this is the last time : and the danger is greater , forasmuch as those antichrists who are abroad were sometimes pretenders to the truth of the gospel , sometimes they professed themselves subject unto that truth , which now they endeavour to oppose and vilify . Yet let me inform you in this , that they went out from us , but they were not of us , for if they had been of us , no doubt , they would have continue with us ; but they went out , that it Might be made manifest they were not all of us . Now after he had given this alarm to believers , concerning the approach of the Antichristian adversary ; he gives himself and them a cordial and encouragement in the words which i have read , but ye have an unction from the holy one , and ye know all things . which words you May please to look upon as the saints security in evil times , or the best protection of holy men against the impudent assaults of brazen-faced error , and Antichristian falsehood . 

In these words be pleased to observe these three things . 

first , a glorious title given to Jesus Christ , the King of saints . He is called the holy one . You have an anointing from the holy one . the spirits of Antichrist they are unclean spirits , they are profane , debauched , polluted , and polluting spirits , but the spirit of our Lord Jesus , which is in you , proceedeth from one that is holy , harmless , and separated from sinners . This is a title often given in the old testament to the eternal majesty , that increated being , God himself : and our Lord Jesus , as the eternal son of the everlasting father , is dignified with the same title , and called the holy child , the holy thing , the holy one ; yea in dan. 9 24. he is called the sanctum sanctorum , the great saint , or the most holy of all : there the angel tells Daniel that after seventy weeks there should be a reconciliation made for iniquity , and everlasting righteousness brought in , and the most holy should be anointed : that is , our Lord Jesus Christ , the true Messiah , should come in the flesh and be inaugurated , and installed into that great office of an high priest , which had been for so many years past typified and shadowed out in their priest that served in the temple . Now this is worth our consideration , that if our Lord Jesus , who is the fountain from whence we receive this spirit be so holy and pure , then surely the effects and operations that this spirit doth produce in those who receive it , must be holy and pure also . Impurity , uncleanness , and sinful defilements cannot possibly proceed from so pure a spirit as the spirit of Jesus Christ is , whose name is , the holy one . 

secondly , another thing considerable in the words is , an effusion of the holy ghost from Jesus Christ upon his persons . ye have an unction , or ye have received the anointing . The custom of anointing was anciently used either to separate and consecrate to an holy use , or to install and inaugurate to some office and service , or to endow with gifts suitable to some notable and eminent employment . And we find in the scriptures , that the anointing past upon some of their prophets , their priests , and their Kings . it is also further observed , that in the second temple , the anointing , or the holy ointment was wanting , which Might signify to the Jews that then were , that their ceremonial rites were beginning to waste , they should therefore long for , and earnestly desire the Messiahs coming , by whom that anointing and other things should be supplied and restored in a more singular and eminent way . Our Lord Jesus as our high priest was anointed ; and from him do all his persons as so many inferior priests , receive and participate of that anointing : for as it is observed , the high priest of old had most oil poured upon his head , and the other priests were but sprinkled with that holy oil . So than the meaning of this anointing which is poured out from Christ upon his persons must needs signify a communication of the same spirit , of the same life , of the same grace and nature , that Jesus Christ , as the chief priest , was anointed withal from the father : so that the same disposition and goodness of mind doth flow out from Christ to a gracious soul . 

thirdly , here is the great benefit that believers do receive by this holy anointing , which they have from the holy one , and that is , that they know all things . you have an unction from the holy one , and ye know all things . there is some difference in the reading of these words ; the Syriack translator reads them thus , ye know all men ; and in that sense they May refer to that which the apostle Paul speaks of in 1 corint . 12. 10. where , amongst the gifts of the spirit , which he reckoneth up , this is one , namely {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the discerning of spirits . and the truth is , this great gift of discerning men's spirits was more especially given to some then unto others in the primitive times , and they were able not only probably to conjecture , but also to give a judgement concerning many with whom they conversed , and did thereby discover divers hollow and false-hearted hypocrites : which gift May , peradventure , though in a smaller measure and lower degree , live even to this day in the hearts of holy men ; for verily , they many times do give a very shrewd conjecture , not to say judgement , concerning professors amongst whom they live ; but this they do with a sober , modest and compassionate spirit . As for profane monsters , and notorious sinners , their condition is obvious , and easily to be discerned , by men whose eyes are in their heads , who are not blinded with a bride of favour , or prejudiced with some fond and passionate affection . But all the Greek copies , as is observed , do read the words as we translate them . ye know all things ; that is , all those main , necessary , and fundamental truths , which Jesus Christ came to declare , as from the father to the world ; or ye know all things , that is , all those truths of the gospel which those antichrists that now are , or that great Antichrist which shall come , will set themselves to oppose and contradict . You , who have this anointing do most certainly and assuredly know , and are well established in these principal and capital truths which you have received by virtue of this anointing . Thus we have a brief account of these words presented to us : and the point that i shall discourse upon , with your Christian patience is this . 

That the most certain and assured knowledge of Christian doctrine is attained unto by a participation of the anointing of Jesus Christ . ye have received such an unction , and thereby it is that ye know all things . Every man almost , in these days , thinks himself well instructed in his profession that he makes , and in the articles of faith whereunto he declareth himself to be a servant : who is there , that doth not judge himself to be as a Master of Israel ; well understood in all points of theology , who yet , like Nicodemus , remaineth in the very darkness of ignorance , as not knowing what regeneration and the new birth Might signify : for we shall find that there is no such certain and infallible way to come to the knowledge of heavenly truths , as by receving an unction from Jesus Christ . 

When Job's three friends had spent much time in arguing and redarguing the case with Job , Elihu standeth up and speaketh after this manner . I did expect that days should have taught wisdom , and that i should have found understanding in the multitude of years , but now i find , there is a spirit in man , and the inspiration of the almighty giveth him understanding ; great men are not always wise , neither do the aged understand judgement ; i find a great difference between the judgement that these men , though grave seniors , give concerning Job's case , and the judgement that the spirit of God giveth : the censure of these men proceedeth from the peevish , angry spirits of men , but the judgement of the divine spirit in this case is according to truth . 

But that notable scripture which i shall briefly speak unto is in 1 Corinth . 2. 13 , 14. &c. where the apostle speaking of this very subject , telleth us of many things : that which is the substratum , the main business of his discourse , are {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the things of the spirit ; then he tells us of a natural man and a spiritual man ; then he speaks of the spirit of the world , the spirit of God , and the mind of Christ ; and then he compares all these together , and bringeth forth thus much , namely , that the spirit of the world , the spirit of a natural man , which is a mundane , worldly spirit , cannot receive the things of the spirit of God , for they are spiritually discerned , and only they can know them , who have the same spirit living and dwelling in their souls , which Jesus Christ had dwelling in him having received it from the father ; we have the mind , and spirit of God , and hereby do we know the things of the spirit . 

That i May the more clearly manifest , to this great assembly , what my understanding is in this weighty matter , give me leave to preface four particulars , which May prevent mistakes , as if any private or particular design were aimed at in such a doctrine as this . 

First , man as a reasonable creature is the subject of Christian doctrine . man doth not throw away his mind and understanding when he comes to be proselited into the truths of Christ . When God undertaketh to inform a man with heavenly doctrine , he doth not deal with him as he would deal with a stone which he would raise up to be a child to Abraham , for he findeth man already endowed with a mind and will , upon which account he is capable to hear further from his god . Man's understanding is of very good use in Christian religion ; for by that is man able to communicate much of his sense in heavenly things unto others , as also to plead for , and by argument to back the truth received , against the cavils and contradictions of such as oppose themselves . I must confess freely what i apprehend , that , in the moment of a man's conversion , when the grace of God powerfully seizeth upon his spirit to turn him from darkness to light , and from the power of Satan unto God , those acts that he doth then perform , are the most rational acts that ever he did perform in all his life . The acts of repentance , faith and self-denial , the act of turning from sin unto God , which are the acts that appear in the first motion of the soul unto God , these are in themselves and to the soul , most reasonable , equitable , just and right ; yea , in the further progress of the grace of God in man's mind , when it grows up into sanctification and holiness , the understanding of a man doth act and acteth understandingly . the truth is , this mind and understanding of a man is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as the great philosopher calls it , the very flower of a man's soul , which is not blasted and withered by the truths of the gospel , but it is thereby reform , rectified , repaired and restored to its primaeve perfection , with great advantage . So that i think , in a sober sense , what the apostle speaks of the law , that it is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a schoolmaster to Christ , May be said of man's natural knowledge , and understanding : in which sense one of the ancients calleth true philosophy {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , an inferior school , or a fore-teaching to Christ , as it is that which renders a man capable and fit to receive the impressions of a divine spirit : for certainly a man in his wits , and not a mad , distracted man , is the subject of God's grace , of his converting and sanctifying grace . 

secondly , the written word of God , in the scriptures of truth , is the only outward rule of faith and manners . This is the norma fidei & morum ; according to this rule must every man order his conversation , isai. 8. 20.  To the law and to the testimony , if they speak not according to this word , it is because they have not so much as morning-light in them . This is the royal standard of truth , unto which we must bring all men's dogmata , their assertions , and opinions , which are vended for truth in the world : hereby May we examine , and judge of all that , which men would obtrude upon us . I recommend , to every one that hearts me , the constant studying of the holy scriptures , as being the oracles of God . It was that , for which , the holy ghost doth so highly commend the Beraean Christians , that they received the word with all readiness of mind , and searched the scriptures daily , whether those things were so ; and upon this account they were called {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , more noble , as being better born , better bred ; better educated than those of Thessalonica . i will only add this , that the letter of the scriptures is but dead without a divine power joined with it , and a spirit , moving man's mind , without a word , is very questionable and dangerous . 

thirdly , the holy spirit , which is understood by this anointing , is no private spirit , or particular impulse , no singular persuasion or extraordinary inspiration , but a general and universal sense in all regenerate minds . holy men do all agree , by common consent , in those truths , which the new creature doth chiefly resent and relish . The apostle to this purpose useth two expressions , 1 cor. 12. 13. and 2 cor. 4. 13.  By one spirit are we all baptised into one body , and have been all made to drink into one spirit : and we have the same spirit of faith . Where the apostle considers the community of Christians , under the notion of a body made up of several members , which must have a soul and spirit to inform , animate , quicken and enliven it : this is that spirit of Jesus Christ which doth live in the souls of holy men ; and distinguish them from the common herd of infidels and beastly sinners . Although we May be ignorant of that which the philosophers meant by their anima mundi ; the soul of the world , yet methinks every gracious heart should easily apprehend what is that spirit and soul of the regenerate world . But here i must acknowledge also , that the eternal spirit of God doth sometimes come down as from heaven , and particularly move upon a regenerate mind , whereby it doth {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , blow off the ashes and stir up those heavenly sparks , which lay in the soul as buried under some clouds of sadness , and hereby the frozen and benumined spirit of a precious saint doth find itself thawed into a vivacious fitness for any service . This is that which the spouse calls for in song 4. 16.  Awake oh North wind , and come thou South , blow upon my garden , that the spices thereof May flow out . this discourse , i conceive , May show us the difference between the good spirit of God , which sober minds converse withal , and that fanatic and eecstatic spirit , which vain men pretend unto , and are deluded with . this spirit , in both the senses that we have spoken of , May not be condemned as a groundless enthusiasm , for as the learned Cameron observes , enthusiasmus est , ubi quis est merum organum , sine omni usurationis & judicij . then is a man acted by such a spirit , when he uttereth revelations without the use of his understanding and reason , as sometimes the prophets of old did , who were but as a trunk or instrument through which the spirit conveyed those secrets , which God would declare unto the world . 

fourthly , the spirit of Christ signified by this anointing , is first received in the way of his ordinances , and is thereby maintained and carried on , and doth live with great delight in the use of those ordinances where it was first received . he who hath received the anointing from the holy one , knows where he hath received it , and he knows also , that the same spirit can breathe nowhere so freely , as in such holy air . the new creature was born under the ordinances of the gospel , and is nursed and brought up under them . faith came first by hearing , and faith groweth and receiveth strength , being nourished by the same doctrine , by which it was at first planted . they who have heard and learned of the father come unto Christ , and know not whether to go from him , because he hath the words of eternal life . The apostle in 2 cor. 3. 8. calleth the ministration of the gospel the ministration of the spirit , as being that by which the soul doth receive , and grow up in this divine and heavenly life . Therefore the author of this epistle writing to anointed ones , tells them that as they had heard so it should be that Antichrist would come , and that they should abide in the truth ; whereby he doth commend them and their teachers for their great care and diligence in searching out and receiving the truth . I need not spend time in showing the lawfulness , conveniency , and necessity of gospel ordinances , such as are , hearing the word , prayer , breaking of bread , to show forth the Lord's death , and the rest which are of the like institution . Only this i would speak by way of admonition , as it is a serious and general observation which holy men have made , that no sooner do men cast off the use of the ordinances and appointments of Jesus Christ , but at the same time they do cast off God and godliness , and laying the reins upon their own necks , they set the foot upon the holy law , running desperately upon further mischief . Thus hath divine justice branded those who would not humbly submit to such sacred institutions . such is the majesty and authority of these things , that almost every man in the use of them doth find an awe upon his conscience , and feel himself commanded into a moderate and sober modesty , a modest sobriety and moderation . 

Having thus laid down these four particulars by way of prevention , give me leave to explain the sense of the doctrine in these seven following propositions . 

first , the Lord Jesus as head of his church was first anointed with the divine spirit . here began this holy unction ; Jesus Christ was the first receiver of the spirit . The eternal spirit poured forth an abundance of this ointment upon the person of our Lord Jesus , he was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows . In the ancient anointings , God had appointed certain measures of this oil to be spent upon the persons anointed : Saul was anointed with a Cruise of oil , as not like to continue in the throne long ; David was anointed with a horn of oil , his kingdom being to remain longer ; but it pleased the father that in Jesus Christ should all fullness dwell , so that in isai. 10. he is called the anointing ; and such is the savour of his good ointments that his name is as ointment poured forth , therefore do the virgins love him . The Lord Jesus did receive this fullness for our sakes , that from it we Might receive , and grace for grace . He was to be the head of his church , propter eminentiam & influentiam , not only for superiority , but also for influence and conveyance , so that upon this account he was first considered in the business of anointing , that he Might be useful for conveyance of this spirit to his persons . The ointment poured upon the head of the high priest , run down upon his beard , and to the skirts of his clothing , leaving a sweet fragrancy and savour behind it : so doth this spirit of our Lord Jesus , flow from him , down to all his saints , and perfumes them with his own sweetness . And as the prophet Elijah , when he went to heaven , let his mantle and spirit fall upon Elisha : so did our blessed Lord and saviour , after his ascension , send forth his own spirit to dwell with his disciple , as their solace , and comfort , in his necessary absence . 

secondly , Jesus Christ as a second Adam doth beget children after his own image . the first Adam brought forth children in his own likeness , deriving to them the same natural spirit which was in himself : so doth the second Adam propagate his posterity , and give unto them his own spirit which is supernatural and heavenly ; the picture doth not so exactly resemble the face , as the regenerate soul doth resemble her everlasting father . This notion lieth very obvious in the 5. of the Romans . where the apostle discourseth of the two Adam's and their two posterities , with their several advantages , or prejudices that they received from their head : as by one man sin entered into the world , and death by sin , and death passed upon all , for asmuch as all have sinned : which words refer to the whole posterity of the first Adam : so by one man came life , by one came forgiveness , by one came such a universal reparation ; that as in Adam all died , so in Christ all are made alive ; all the posterity of the second Adam are as much , yea more advantaged by their head Jesus Christ ; then all the posterity of the first Adam were damnified by his apostasy , and the influence that it had upon them . The Lord Jesus finds the children of the first Adam in their natural capacity , and maketh them the subjects of his grace , but he bringeth forth upon their minds and spirits a new creation , which he did not find in them , no not in semine , not in the seeds or root of it : he cometh by his spirit to do some thing in man , which could not be done by the sublimation or improvement of those rudera naturae , those relics and remainders of shipwrecked nature , for if so , than what meaneth that bitter cup , what meant that pomp of bloody sufferings , which Jesus Christ did undergo ? What need was there that he should come endowed with so much spirit ? If natural principles , which yet remain in the broken posterity of the first Adam , could have brought forth that which now is the great design and undertaking of Christ in the world ; he seemeth to have come in the flesh , and to have suffered such contradction of sinners , and so shameful , accursed death upon the cross upon too small and too inferior account . doth Jesus Christ , after all this , effect no more upon men , than what the scattered pieces of decayed nature being gathered together , could effect upon them ? Surely , brethren , he doth more than so , for he begets children unto himself as a father , and uniteth members unto himself as an head , he transplanteth souls into an other soil , and they live in him , deriving sap and spirit from him as from their better soil , their new root . the apostle in gal. 4. doth thus express it , my little children , with whom i travail in birth , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , until Christ be form in you ; that is , until the spirit of our Lord Jesus comes to be that to your souls , which your souls are unto your bodies ; the reasonable soul in man is the principle of life , and that by which he is denominated to be a man , and distinguished from a beast ; so doth the spirit of Christ working itself into the soul of man , transform him into his own image , and this new creature hath the same spirit , nature and disposition with Jesus Christ , whereby he is denominated a Christian , and distinguished from other men . The person of Jesus Christ was that original copy , according to which all his posterity should be made conformable . This is that which the apostle speaks to in 1 cor. 15. where he saith , as we have born the image of the earthly , so must we bear the image of the heavenly Adam ; which is not only to be understood in a corporeal sense , that our bodies in the resurrection shall be called out of their dust into the likeness of Christ's glorified body , but in a spiritual sense also , for our minds and souls having received the first fruits of the resurrection within themselves already , they also shall in union with their bodies rise up in a complete similitude and likeness to our Lord Jesus , having limb for limb , grace for grace . 

thirdly , the spirit and life of Christ communicated to his persons , doth make them capable and able to understand his will . when the spirit of regeneration is past upon the soul , then doth a man become fit to understand heavenly truths . It is true , there is a kind of rational assent to heavenly truths before conversion , and the natural man doth understand the letter of the spirit , but not the spirit of the letter ; yet no man hath so clear , so full and undoubted understanding of those things as he whose mind is defecated and purged from the dregss of worldly lusts , which are like a fog and mist upon the face of the soul . The souls of men are like so many glasses , which reflect the image of things presented before them , now if there be a steam breathed upon the glass , the reflection is very little , or none at all ; or if the light , which should convey the species from the object to the glass , be but a dim twilight , a weak and insufficient light , there is no reflection neither ; so it is with the souls of men , whilst our worldly affections , and adulterate love to sin and wickedness , do boil and bubble up within us , sending up their steams into our minds , the things of God cannot be seen , according to the greatness of that beauty and excellency which is upon them ; he that caused the light to shine out of darkness , must shine in our hearts , to give that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , that light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ ; for as the psalmist speaks in tuo lumine lumen videbimus , in thy light we shall see light . The holy nature of Jesus Christ is the true collyrium , the true eyesalve , whereby the soul must be cured of its blindness ; and the apostle speaks in col. 3. 10 of putting on the new man {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , which is renewed into knowledge , according to the image of him that create him : until we be renewed in the spirit of our minds , and taken off from the love of this world , and the things thereof , we cannot attain to a right new testament knowledge of those things , which Christ hath revealed from the bosom of the father . There is a praeputium cordis , a foreskin of the heart , a pride and insolency of the natural spirit , which must be circumcised and destroyed , before the soul can attain unto a full view of that excellent and glorious truth , which Jesus Christ doth present us withal . 

fourthly , the knowledge of Christian doctrine grounded only upon argument is but doubtful & uncertain knowledge . i conceive , that syllogisms and arguments are only for this world , and the things of this world , but not for the things of God & of the other world . The natural philosopher attains to his natural knowledge by observations and experiments in several particulars , by antecedents and consequents , & most of his knowledge in those things is very feeble , crazy and questionable , which made that great philosopher after all his inquiry for knowledge , profess , that he only attained to this , that he knew himself to be ignorant , hoc tantum scio quod nihil scio , this only do i know , that i know nothing . But God hath ordained a better way to convey his truth into our hearts , and that is by a renovation of our minds , and by the communication of a divine nature . God hath not left his persons at uncertainties in those things which are material and necessary , but hath given them more than the certainty of a demonstration . whatsoever i do receive for truth upon the account of argumentative conclusions , that i am bound to lay aside and disowne for error upon the like account , when a more probable argument comes : and truly friends , if all the ground of our entertaining Christ and truth , or Christian doctrine , be , because such an argument conveyed it unto us , what shall become of us and the truth , when we meet with a subtle sophister and Antichristian head , who shall frame an argument against the truth , unanswerable by our logic ? Where shall a man ever consist , if he must live upon these terms in the world ? Besides , every one to whom the gospel of Christ is preached , hath not an head strong enough to grapple with the bigness and depth of some kind of arguments , who yet May have their hearts truly mortified to this world , and carried out in love to the person and nature of our Lord Jesus . The ground of that ancient scepticism , and that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , of the academics , whereby they did assert that nothing could be comprehended , Might be this ; all their knowledge was derived unto them by probable conclusions , so that no thing was certainly and eternally true and infallible , but conjectural and probable only , and to be entertained according to the retinue and pomp of well dressed arguments . He that is but an argumentative Christian , is rather a sceptic , than a true Christian : he is a Christian at the greatest uncertainty in the world : i must confess , many notions which are obtruded upon men as orthodoxal , and contended for by others as principal pieces of theology , must be soberly examined by scripture and reason , for they are not per senota , they are not seen by their own light , & in such opinions , modesty and sobriety are highly commendable . Yea , i confess further , that the heavenly principles of the new creature May be backed and strengthened by rational arguments , and many times , the soul is constrained by a practical syllogism to be less disquieted within itself ; but yet , the most clear evidence , and assurance of the truth and goodness in these holy things of Christ and the new creature , ariseth out of themselves , as light floweth from the body of the sun , without the contusion or compulsion of an harsh argument ; yea , and a regenerate heart doth by an holy sympathy , entertain with infinite delight these precious and holy truths . Arguments and syllogisms do make a great noise in the world ; me think , they are not unlike to that appearance in Horeb unto the prophet Elijah , when the great and strong wind rept the mountains , and broke in pieces the rocks , but it is said , the Lord was not in the wind , nor in the earthquake , nor in the fire , but he was in the still , small voice . Lux spiritus sancti est lenis lux , perfundens se mentibus . the holy spirit doth gently hover over the soul , and brood upon it ; heavenly doctrine falleth down upon the spirits of men , not like a mighty violent rain , but like a shower of oil , like a sweet honey-dew . 

fifthly , the inward sense of a regenerate mind , doth easily judge between Christ and Antichrist . such holy souls are well resolved about the things of God , they do not halt between God and Baal , arguing themselves out of all religion and modesty ; but they have a natural tendency towards these things , and they feel a magnetic virtue secretly overpower them : this is the natural working of the new creature , whereby the soul doth inwardly savour and relish , difference and distinguish between the doctrines of Christ , and the impostures of Antichrist . Jesus Christ tells us in John 10.  That his sheep do hear his voice ; but they will not follow a stranger , for they know not the voice of strangers . Whereby he would have us to understand , that all his disciple , who are truly taught of him , do carry within themselves the lapis Lydius , the touchstone of truth , and such is the present touch or taste that some things do make upon their spirits , that they do easily discern from whence they come , although they do not bring them to an external judicatory . The divine nature whereof we are made partakers , doth put a difference between that which is really and truly heavenly , and that which is only counterfeit stuff , as the touchstone doth between gold and copper . It is worthy of our observation , that every life doth attract and concoct that which is suitable to its nature , and the most inferior life hath such a faculty . The plants of the earth do draw unto themselves that sap and juice which is proper for them , and do digest it into nourishment ; the beasts of the field do naturally move towards those things which will maintain their lives , and turn aside from that which is poisonous and destructive to them , and what is by them received , they turn , in succum & sanguinem , into food and nourishment , and do grow thereby . The rational life in a natural man doth by observation , argument , and dispute , gather up natural truths , whereby the man becomes well polished in his understanding , and May deserve the name of an instructed philosopher ; so doth that spiritual and heavenly life , which we call the new creature , and divine nature in a Christian , it , being endued with such an attractive and digestive faculty , doth know what is suitable or unsuitable to itself , and doth accordingly affect or dis-rellish it . The needle touched with a loadstone doth not more naturally move towards the pole , than a soul touched with a divine spirit , doth move towards and freely embrace the truths of Christ ; it cannot rest at any point in the compass until it be centred there . Men in whom the spirit of this world lives , and is predominant , do naturally affect worldly things , the lusts of the flesh , the lusts of the eye , and the pride of life . He that loveth profit , is wholly taken up in getting wealth ; he that loveth honour and popular applause , doth set himself to please men ; he that loveth pleasures , studieth excess , riot , wantonness , and dalliance ; and all these do find their spirits move with a kind of naturalness towards such things , and take wonderful contentment in them ; so that as the apostle speaks , these men are {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , lovers of pleasure , lovers of money , rather than lovers of God . The spirit of Jesus Christ , in the hearts of holy men , doth , with savour and relish , entertain the things of God , whilst other men that have but common spirits , cannot take any delight or complacency in them . Such was the hearty & sincere affection of Timothy towards the Philippians , that saint Paul saith , there was none like him , who did {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , naturally take care of their affairs . And it is much more true of a regenerate heart ; for none attain to such a discretion in heavenly truths as itself attaineth unto , for unto a man void of such a life , those precious truths are like the white of an egg , without any savour . 

sixthly , the true knowledge of heavenly things increaseth according to the measure of sanctification . i do not speak of knowledge falsely so called , as the apostle somewhere terms it , but of true knowledge , that is , inward , experimental understanding , and this grows up as holiness doth enlarge itself in the soul . The clearer the glass , the more perfect is the reflection that it makes ; the more pure and spotless the soul is , the better doth it receive and judge of heavenly things . If it be but daybreak , or a dim and dusky twilight , we have a more doubtful appearance of things that are before us : but if it grows to a morning-light , and once increaseth into a noonday brightness , then have we a more exact and judicious vision of them . When the soul begins at first to turn unto God , it hath some taste or smattering of these spiritual dainties , and it is like that taste , which newborn babes have of the milk which they suck from the breasts ; but when the Christian follows on to know the Lord , whose going forth is prepared as the morning , and when he doth resolvedly , and strongly carry on the work of sanctification in his heart and life , than doth he come to a more mature and ripened judgement of these things ; he was a child before , but now he is grown up to a strong man in Christ . The great apostle tells us , when he was a child , he thought as a child , he understood as a child , but when he became a man , he put away childish things , his apprehensions of truth were but low and weak , because his capacity was not great , but now he looks upon the brighter face of truth with greater complacency than he did before . Our Lord Jesus tells us in John 7. 17.  If any man will do his will , he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God . The best way to know assuredly and impregnably the truth of those things which God speaketh in his word , is to observe and obey those things which God enjoins . The holy ghost , which is the best witness of Jesus Christ & his doctrine , is given to them that obey him , act. 5. 32. and these men do sweetly rest in an assurance of the truth , whilst others who are of impure spirits do quarrel and snarl against it . He that would grow in the knowledge of our Lord and saviour Jesus Christ , let him grow in grace , as the apostle exhorts in 2 pet. 3. 18.  One that is newly entered into the school of Christ , doth find it a hard and difficult task , to subdue every corruption : the sins of education , custom , and natural tendency , are not easily Mastered ; hence it comes to pass , that upon any laps , or fall into any particular sin , the soul begins to be haunted with scrupulosities , doubts , and fears , yea , it doth upon such occasions fall to question the truth of grace , and the certainty of the gospel , whereas , in case of a constant and close walking with God , there be no such clouds arising , but a constant serenity upon the face of the soul . The truth is , all those secret suspicions , and jealousies concerning the certainty of the ways of Christ , or of the work of his grace upon our hearts , do proceed from some guilt contracted by acts of violence against the light and principles of the new creature . Would you then be perfect in , and assured of the truths of the gospel , take the apostles counsel , put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ and make no provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof . 

Seventhly , the holy anointing in a regenerate soul will remain without pollution by Antichristian falsehood . This anointing which ye have received abideth in you , and as it hath taught you , ye shall abide in him ; so saith our apostle , in 1 ioh. 2. 27.  & Paul in 2 cor. 1. 21. shows the ground of a souls establishment in the truth to be this holy unction , this participation of the divine nature from God , he that establisheth us with you in Christ , and hath anointed us , is God . Such a soul can do nothing against the truth , but for the truth . They who are persuaded into an orthodox opinion , or article of faith , by an human argument , May again be easily cheated of that opinion by that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , that dice-play of men , when some cunning antagonist shall cog an argument which May seem to import a fairer probability . But he , that hath this inward light of the life of Christ , as his guide into the knowledge of holy things , is not easily removed from the truth , or much affrighted with the terror of arguments , but shall hold his own for ever . Children and fools May exchange their gold for counters , but the wise man's eyes are in his head , and he will not part with his most precious faith upon such easy terms . This true knowledge of God , and spirit of Christ in the soul , is that immortal seed , that eternal life , which shall never die ; he that hath said , touch not mine anointed , will suffer none to lay violent hands upon his tender offspring ; and in case of any impudent assault or bold affront offered to his sacred image , it shall appear , that he who is in a renewed mind is greater than he that is in the world . This holy anointing , this new creation in the soul , is a principle of recovery in case of some particular apostasy , and May be signified by that voice behind one , which the prophet Isaiah speaks of , which shall say , this is the way , walk in it , when he turneth to the right hand , and when he turneth to the left . Suppose a man having received this anointing , should , at any time , by a sudden temptation , defile himself with sin , whereby his glory is stained , his spirit disquieted , his conscience wounded , and his peace interrupted , he shall find such secret strugglings and strivings within himself , that he is never quiet until his filthiness be washed off , and the new creature within him restored to former freedom . Upon this account the spirit of Christ is an holy unction ; for as oil will not easily mix with other liquors , or incorporate with other bodies , so this divine spirit will preserve itself pure , and hate the very garment spotted with the flesh . An holy soul is like a fountain , or well spring of water , into which there May be thrown dirt and trash , but the fountain will still be cleansing itself , and purging out that filth which was cast into it ; the spirit of Jesus Christ dwelling thus in the soul , will continually be working out of all darkness , and leading it on from light to light . 

Thus have we opened the doctrine unto you , and made it manifest , that the most certain knowledge of heavenly truths , ariseth from the anointing of Christ's spirit within the soul , and not from outward arguments . The spirit of God doth convey these truths into the soul , the new creature doth resent them , and this anointing doth establish the soul in a certain assurance of them . Now by way of application , give me leave to speak briefly to some few corollaries or deductions which flow naturally from this notion which hath been thus explained . 

first , if the new creature brought forth in the soul , by the spirit of regeneration , be that which teacheth the certain knowledge of Christian doctrine , then here we May see what is the true meaning of that spirit of Christ , which he hath so universally promised to bestow upon his persons . the old and new testament is full of promises in this kind . All thy persons shall be {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , taught of God ; a new heart will i give you , and a new spirit will i put within you , i will put my spirit within you , and cause you to walk in my statutes ; i will make a new covenant with the house of Israel , i will put my laws into their mind , and write them upon their hearts , and they shall not teach every man his neighbour , and every man his brother , saying , know the Lord , as if they were ignorant of him , or unacquainted with him , for they shall all know me , from the least to the greatest , & this spirit , which i will pour out upon my servants , and mine handmaids , shall lead them into all truth . Now all these , and the like glorious promises , do signify unto us that experimental knowledge of God and truth , which is the proper effect of this renovation of mind which hath been set before us . When the soul is born again of that incorruptible seed , and transplanted into our Lord Jesus , as into a new root , partaking of his sap and spirit , than doth it attain to a more clear understanding of the will of God , and hath a more perfect savour , and relish of Christ and his ways . This holy spirit is that true Shechenah , that indwelling of God in the soul , which was anciently shadowed out by that cloud of presence , which sat between the cherubims wings , in Solomon's temple . Then are we indeed taught of God , when this spirit dwells within us ; then are we under the fulfilling of these promises , when we have received the truth , not as it comes from Paul , or as it is delivered by Apollo , but the truth as it is in Jesus : when the spirit of truth doth make us to know not the word but the power of it , implanting the mind of Christ in our minds , and turning of us from the ways of sin , into the love of God . I do not here determine what those larger measures , or higher degrees of this teaching May be , in the latter days , when the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth , as the waters do the sea . 

secondly , if the best way to a certainty of knowledge in heavenly things be by a spiritual anointing , then proud man must be humbled and be willing to be taught by a divine spirit . flesh and blood cannot reveal unto man the things of the spirit , neither can any man call Jesus the Lord , but by the holy ghost , for the flesh profiteth nothing , it is the spirit that quickeneth , and these things they are spirit , and they are life . all things that Jesus Christ spoke , and did , they were spoken in parables , and done in parables to those that are without ; that hearing they Might hear and not understand , and seeing they Might see and not perceive : but to his disciple he saith , unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom , unto you , these things are revealed from the father . The apostle tells us in 2 cor. 10. 5  That the weapons of our warfare are not carnal , but mighty through God to the pulling down of those {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , those strong holds , and reasonings , those insulting notions that lift up themselves against Jesus Christ . After all the inquisition that our carnal reason can make into the scriptures of truth , to find out articles of faith : we shall still remain unsatisfied , and May perceive that we are still ready secretly to ask the same question that Pilate did , what is truth ? many men do sometimes think that they thoroughly understand spiritual truths , when , alas ! all their knowledge amounteth to nothing more , than a zealous or passionate arguing for them . The whole bible to a reasonable man , not regenerated , will be , as that book was which the prophet speaks of when it was delivered to the learned to read it , he returns it , and saith , i cannot , for it is sealed ; and when it was delivered into the hands of the unlearned to read it , he saith , i am not learned . We carry bibles in our hands ; and say , we study the word of God , we do well , but until we have a spirit from God teaching of us inwardly , and reforming us according to the tenor of that word , we shall be no great proficients in that knowledge . Hence it is that in the 19  Verse of the epistle of Jude , one that hath not the spirit , and one that is sensual , are accounted to be the same person , sensual , not having the spirit . the truth is , vain man would be wise , though he be like a wild ass' colt : men would not only be Masters of reason , and natural knowledge , but would also have dominion over other men's faith , and would subdue the spiritual sense of the new creature to the sovereignty and supremacy of human arguments . But as the apostle speaks {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , where is the wise ? where is the disputer of this world ? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world ? These men indeed , be those {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , that would seem to be wise ; but is it not with them as the apostle speaks in rom. 1. 21.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , are they not become dark , and vain in their imaginations ; yea , do they not cum ratione insanire , even run mad with that , which they call their reason , though it be nothing better than a corrupt enmity against the honesty and simplicity of Christ . Give me leave to speak freely in this point ; when the great mysteries of the kingdom of heaven , such are self-denial , reliance upon the grace of God revealed by the Messiah , living by faith in another , and deriving strength from Christ through a promise ; i say , when these things and the like are propounded to a natural understanding , and un unmortified heart , will it not say , that you do lapides loqui , speak stones unto it , and offer that which is too hard to be received ? Me thinks , when i offer such spiritual truths to be judged at the tribunal of natural understanding , which i call argumentative knowledge , it is as when that which belongeth to one sense , is presented to an other , which cannot give a perfect judgement of it . He that would make me to understand what music is , and the excellency of it , must not bring me to one that can with eloquence relate a story thereof , and tell me in words , what ravishing harmony , and rare delights it doth entertain one withal , and then bid me imagine how every note exceeded the other ; for this is not to touch upon the right string , but he must bring me to a consort , where mine ear May receive a true impression from such musical delights . It is not enough to paint out the beauty of a rose in the most lively colours , and set it before mine eyes , but i must smell to the rose itself , and thereby come to know the sweetness of it . We May think to make ourselves great doctors of the law by a {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a form of knowledge , but thereby we deceive ourselves , attaining only to a poor and beggarly understanding of the truths therein contained ; for the best way to know them , is to obey and practise them . He that hath his heart truly mortified to this world , & is crucified with Christ , being made alive again by that spirit of regeneration , he alone , doth attain to the most quick and lively apprehensions of those truths , that are revealed by Christ in his gospel . 

thirdly , if they alone do truly know the things of Christ , who have received his anointing , then certainly , wicked men are no competent judges of Christian doctrine . whatsoever their parts are , or their acquired learing in arts and sciences , yet , as to heavenly things , they are very dark and ignorant . Perhaps , this inference , May provoke the great wits of the world , to say as those Pharises did to Christ , are we blind also ? But i am sure the apostle tells us , he that hath not the spirit of Christ is none of his , and he that is not one of Christ's flock , i do not know how he should understand Christ's voice . The profaner Jews had the magnalia legis , the great things of the law delivered to them , and they accounted them as a strange thing , for , as the apostle speaks , Moses hath a veil lying upon his face , and when that persons shall be converted unto the Lord , this veil shall be taken away . There is the flesh of Christ covering his spirit , there is the letter and shell of the word of Christ as it is printed in our bibles , which doth , like a masque , cloud and hide the beautiful face of truth , so that a carnal heart cannot discern the beauty , or judge aright of the excellency thereof , so that the preaching of Christ crucified , is , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , an offence to the Jew , and to the Greeks foolishness ; but unto them that are called , both Jews and Greeks , it is the power of God , and the wisdom of God . great men are not always wise men , and the men of the world are not fit to advise withal in the things of God . some there be whom God hath given up {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , to a reprobate mind , to an injudicious mind , which hath no true judgement in heavenly things . Would any one make a mad man his counsellor ? No , he would choose one that is compos mentis , one that is of a sober and discreet reason & advise with him in a matter of difficulty . He that is of a ranting spirit , and given to the love of fleshly pleasures , May verba conari , May , like a parrot , speak words which he understands not , but he is crazed in his intellectuals , and knows not the way of the spirit in the soul . Let me hear one speak concerning the work of grace , the actings of faith , the drawings of the spirit ; whose eyes have been opened , as Baalam said of himself , in another case , one who hath had an internal sense and feeling of these things within himself , for he is best able to unfold such hidden mysteries . but let us cease from man , for wherein is he to be accounted of ? The day-dawning and the daystar arising in our hearts , will give us better light into that more sure word , of the prophets and apostles , than all the learned schoolmen , or voluminous commentators , who have not ploughed with God's heifer . 

fourthly , if knowledge of Christian doctrine must be received by spiritual anointing , then to be instructed in the letter of the scriptures , is not enough to make a Christian . a man May by natural understanding , exercised upon the letter of the bible , attain to very great orthodoxy in articles of faith , and several points of religion , for that which is true in divinity , is true also in reason ; but notwithstanding all this literal knowledge , his soul May be like Pharaoh's lean kine , a starved and ill-favoured soul . The generality of men in the world are exceedingly mistaken in this business ; for they have thought it to be reformation enough , if they Might but purge their articles of faith , and set forth in print that which Might vindicate the truth of their opinions , and ways , from the prejudice that they lie under in the world , whereas in the midst of such reformation , men shall be as carnal and devilish as they were before , they shall inwardly be as full of pride , and covetousness , of envy and malice , of hatred and revenge as ever ; and they shall have leave to study mischief , and conceive evil will against their neighbour , notwithstanding all the elaborate niceness of a reform system . brethren , we must not only reform our books , though that be very good , but we must reform our hearts , and our lives ; the power of this anointing must eat out the proud flesh of our distempered hearts , and quicken us also into a more pure and refined spirit . Professors do think they attain to a great measure of heavenly skill , if they are but so well read in the bible , as to turn from one scripture to anoother , and compare one place with another , whereby they May more strongly back that opinion which they would defend , whereas all this while , the scripture is a thing without them , and the mind of God is in their bibles , not in their hearts , but the true Christian hath the word of God transcribed into himself , and can say in his measure , as Jesus Christ did , i delight to do thy will , oh my God , yea , thy law is within my heart . Eunapius in the life of Porphyry , speaking of his Master Longinus saith , he was such an excellent scholar , that he was {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a living library , a walking study ; all his books were so well digested , and their notions concocted in his mind , that he did ( As it were ) give life & motion to his books , in a requital for that learning which he had received from them . He is a Christian to purpose , who hath the bible transpirited into his mind , who hath digested the sense of scripture into practice and vital blood . he is not a Jew which is one outwardly , neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh , but he is a Jew who is one inwardly , and circumcision is that of the heart , in the spirit , whose praise is not of men but of God . 

fifthly . doth the apostle bring in this anointing of the spirit , as that which secures holy men from Antichristian impostures , than here May we see the ground of those great apostasies that are abroad . do we at any time see some eminent professor come tumbling down like Lucifer from the height of his profession , and immerd himself in the dung of worldly wickedness , let us know , the reason is , because he had no root in himself . they went out from us ; saith our apostle , for they were not of us , they were leviter tincti , sed non penitus imbuti , they have had perhaps some sudden and transient tastes of sweetness in the ways of God , but never did feed upon them with savour , nor digest them . They went out from us , that it Might be manifest that they were not all of us ; there be some men in the world , who have much of that which we call light in their understandings , but have no grace nor honesty in their hearts , and it is no wonder if they turn away from the truth in a time of temptation , and day of trial ; it is the good ground that bringeth forth fruit , and it is the honest heart that stands in a tempest , being well bottomed and grounded upon a rock . he that is hurried into any profession , by the impulse of his worldly affections , can not be settled and established in that profession , but must turn about when those affections give the word ; he is like a ship whose sails are open to every gale of wind , but hath neither ballast nor rudder to keep it steady in its motion . Many persons think themselves so good Protestant's , that they should never turn Papists ; who yet , i fear , would fall from their own steadfastness into the error of the wicked ; and casting off the Protestant articles , would easily entertain for faith the dogmata of Rome ; the reason whereof is , their souls are not converted to that faith which they profess . To an unregenerate man who gives up himself to licentiousness , all religion is alike , for religion doth oblige and command the soul into a diligent obedience to some rule , but such an unmortified heart cannot endure the beautiful bands of a religious law . But where the gospel of Christ cometh , as it did to the Thessalonians , not in word only , but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , in power and much full assurance , where the word of truth is made manifest , in men's consciences , and becometh an engrafted word , there we May be persuaded with the apostle , that he who hath begun a good work , will perfect it unto the coming of Christ . This i must confess , that men by the improvement of their natural understandings , and by observing the dictates of natural conscience , May reform some external enormities and scandalous vices of their lives , and proceed further in profession upon account of some worldly considerations , but from all this reformation , though improved and carried on very high , they May again revolt , and apostatise , because the principles thereof were external and political , not internal and genuine : such men as these are not like Timothy , whom Paul calleth his natural son in the faith , they are not natural , but artificial Christians . But he that is , not in appearance only , but in truth also transformed into the image of Christ , hath the seed of God remaining in him . and eternal life implanted , which shall never wither ; he shall never drown himself in sensuality , or fall away from the holiness of a godly life , into the filth and baseness of a degenerate spirit . The apostle saith , oportet esse haereses , there must be heresies , that they which are approved May be made manifest . The understanding merchant knows which is the pearl of price , when one that is ignorant May be cheated with a counterfeit . this is the excellency and glory of a spirit taught of God , that when others fall away from the truth of doctrine and integrity of life , that will still adhere and cleave unto him ; when the whole world shall lie in wickedness , that will preserve itself unspotted and blameless , unto the coming of Christ . Hence it was that the martyrs of old , though they could not dispute , yet they could die for Christ . He that is alive in God , shall not be religious only when he hath the times with him , for that is easy , the dead fish can swim down the stream ; but when the wickedness of the times , and places where he lives draweth other men into a dissolute looseness , he shall stand like mount Zion , and never be removed . 

sixthly , if the spirit of Christ be such a teaching spirit , whereby we know him aright , than it concerns every regenerate soul to deal kindly with that spirit . oh! be very tender of the good spirit of Jesus Christ . I mean not only that gentle spirit , which sometimes breathes upon the garden of our souls , and makes the spices thereof flow out and give their scent , but that spirit of Christ also which is united unto and implanted in our spirits , that new creature which is form within us . Oh! take heed of grieving , tempting , or quenching this spirit ; spiritus sanctus est res delicata , the divine spirit is a very tender thing , let none dare to cast water upon it , whereby to cool or damp it , but let it act according to its own natural tendency . It was the great request of David's heart in psal. 51. 11.  Cast me not away from thy presence , and take not thy holy spirit from me . Oh Lord , whatsoever thou takest away , do not take this away : this spirit is that which puts me upon observance of thy will , and doth many times recover and bring me back again , when i have forgotten myself and thee . Christians ! would you know what you are most of all beholding to in the world ? It is the good spirit and life of Jesus Christ ; this is the life of your lives , and the soul of your souls ; without this spirit you were but as other men , yea , you were unto God , but as dead carcases and stinking carryons . now if this spirit be our life , and if by this men live , oh! then be kind and tender towards it ; take heed least by any means you do offend it . Then doth a soul deal harshly and unkindly with this spirit , when it opposeth , resisteth and endeavoureth to stifle the motions of it , when the will of Christ in the soul is gain-sayd . take heed , Christians , that you be not so rude as to offer violence , and to force this holy spirit ; when that moves you towards God , do not you turn away from God . What the apostle begs for patience , i would beg for the spirit of Christ , let the nature , spirit , and life of Christ have its perfect work in you , let it act according to its own freedom and latitude . the holy ghost that dwells in you , doth advise you not only to be Christians , pro hic & nunc , by fits and starts , so as May serve your own turns , but also to be enduring , and universal Christians : this divine spirit is not satisfied if you be only moved by it in your public assemblies , unless you be moved by it also in your closets , your shops , and in all your relations : for the sphere of the new creature , is , a sober , righteous , and godly life . where this holy spirit dwells , it will prompt the soul to something which is transcendent , and above the strain of vulgar spirits . Now suppose i should propound to this great assembly the question that Christ propounded to his disciple in matth. 5. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , what singular thing do you more than others ? Yea , let me but propound it to those who are called the holy ones of the most high , wherein do you excel the spirits of worldly men ? What is there that May speak you to be anointed with this divine spirit ? Are you not as proud , as covetous , as vain in your conversations , as other men ? Oh! then let me commend this unto you , as seasonable and wholesome counsel , take heed how you use the spirit of Christ which dwelleth in you , and suffer it to act like itself . 

seventhly , and lastly . If holy souls know heavenly things by virtue of the anointing from the holy one , which teacheth so sweetly and clearly , then from hence we May guess at the glory of heaven . we May stand upon this truth as Moses did upon the top of Pisgah , and from thence view the land of promise . If the dignity of Christian in this world , be such as to have his mind enlightened with the pure spirit of Christ , whereby he knoweth the mind of God with infallible certainty , then what shall his glory be in the world to come ? the scriptures call that spirit which believers receive here , the seal , the earnest and first-fruits of that which they shall receive hereafter . And although this present knowledge which they have of heavenly truths , doth so far exceed and transcend all the literal knowledge of other men ; yet the apostle accounts it dark and enigmatical in comparison of that knowledge which he expects at the revelation of Jesus Christ ; for in this mixture of flesh and spirit the soul doth use glasses and perspectives , but than it shall see {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , face to face , then shall it know even as it is known . Oh! what infinite serenity and surpassing brightness shall then encompass holy souls , when they shall see all truth in him who is truth itself ? Here we May often meet with vexations disputes from contentious spirits , but in heaven there shall be altum silentium , a deep silence and everlasting rest , where our souls shall wade into a sea of light and enter into a vast eternity of truth . There shall be no spots , nor blemishes , no doubts nor scruples arising in our spirits , for it shall be all day , even a day without clouds . We shall never more be troubled with the importunity of busy arguments , there shall be no room for the disputer of this world , but the immaculate lamb our Lord Jesus shall be the light of that new Jerusalem , and he shall enlighten our souls with his own light and glory for ever . amen . 

Finis . 





truth and error at enmity . antichrists double design . 1 open violence . 2 secret craft . the context . the text opened . 1 Christ the holy one . Christ's spirit 〈◊〉 anointing . 3 knowledge the benefit of anointing . doct. the anointing best teacheth the doctrine of Christ . four propositions preventive . 1 rational man the subject of Christ's doctrine . 2 the written word the outward rule . 3 the unction of the spirit a universal sense . 4 the spirit of Christ lives in his ordinances . the doctrine ••ened in 7 pro••sitionss . Christ as •ead first anoin••d . 2 Christ as a second Adam hath his offspring . 3 Christ's spirit fitteth the soul to know his truth . argumentative knowledge doubtful and ••certaine . 5 inward sense judgeth between Christ and Antichrist . 6 heavenly knowledge proportionable to sanctification . knowledge by ••e anointing ••maineth . 1 use . the promises of the spirit expounded . 2 use . proud man must be humbled . 3 use . ••cked men not judge a•• of hea••ly truth . 4 use . literal knowledge doth not make a Christian . 5 use . want of anointing the ground of apostasy . 6 use . deal kindly with the spirit of Christ . 7 use . a guess at heavenly glory . 








































































