The cause of stumbling removed from all that will receive the truth ; and from before the eyes of the wise men of London : in a treatise showing the difference between the spirit of a man which is the candle of the Lord , and the light which hath enlightened every man that cometh into the world . 

Also showing , that though there be diversity of administrations , yet there is not diversity of lights and spirits , by which they are ministered : and showing by clear testimony what the more sure word of prophecy is , which the apostle Peter exhorts the persons to take heed unto , until the day did dawn , and the daystar arise in their hearts . 

Herein also is a false hosanna , and a false testimony reproved ; and a false witness is rejected , and an untimely birth cast out , though for the time of travel it Might have been a monster , being above two years ; but in the end is brought forth for destruction ; the name of him which hath so long traveled to bring forth wind and confusion , is one known in the city of London by the name of John Jackson ; being by the truth of this following made manifest : that so by every motion of the spirit of truth , and every testimony given from it , understanding and knowledge of the truth May be increased , in those that follow on to know the Lord . 

Given forth from the Lord's servant , Richard Hubberthorne . 

for this end was i born , and for this end came i into the world , to bear witness unto the truth , 

joh. 18. 37.  



Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice . 

Spoilers shall come up out of the North , which shall spoil Babylon , 

jer. 51. 48.  



London , printed for Thomas Simmons at the bull and mouth near Aldersgate , 1657.  

The light is broken forth as the morning , and the health of the nations is in it , and is springing forth speedily , and the righteousness of the righteous seed is going forth before them , and the glory of the Lord is revealed to his seed , which now calleth , and the Lord doth answer , here am i ; and the Lord hath made , and is making his seed as a watered garden , and like a spring of water , whose waters fail not ; and is raising up the foundations of many generations , that persons May come to build again upon that ▪ foundation which they have been driven from , especially by their pastors : for saith the Lord , many pastors have destroyed my vineyard , they have trodden my portion under foot , and made my pleasant portion a desolate wilderness , and have made God's heritage as a speckled bird , the birds round about are against her , and all the beasts of the field come to devour , jer. 12. 9 , 10.  and now is the Lord come forth against these devourers , even as a lion bereaved of her young ones : for the Lord will not suffer the spoil of his heritage no longer , but will dress his vineyard that it May bring forth fruit unto him : and now is the Lord casting out the blind vatchmen , and the foolish prophets which have followed their own spirit , and have seen nothing , and all such is the Lord casting out , and his everlasting fire is he kindling amongst them : and now i hear a cry of torment going through the nation : can any kindle a fire among serpents , and they not be offended and shut their stings ? Can any touch the vipers but they will smell with venom ? and when scorpions are trodden upon , will they not show forth their strength ? Can that nature suffer death patiently ? nay patience proceedeth from that seed which slayeth the enmity , and destroyeth the man of sin ; and therefor• as we have one seed to witness for , so there is one to witness against ; and as it is the work of the spirit of God to approve the things that are of God , so it is iis work also to reprove those things which is contrary to sound doctrine , to the end that every one May know as well what to reject and deny as error , as what to own for truth and sound doctrine ; therefore of necessity must every one be turned to the light which Christ hath enlightened them withal , that they May discern what they are to approve , and what they are to reprove ; and that judgement is true which stands in the light , and in the measure of the spirit of truth . 

To the reader 

Men of low degree are vanity , and men of high degree are a lie ; and the heart of man is desperately wicked and deceitful above all things . Hear this ye wise men and foolish ; the more ye strive against the Lord , the more is your wound made incurable ; and the higher you rise in envy , always the deeper is your fall in confusion . And now Christian reader , whose heart God hath opened to see and behold the things that be eternal , and can truly discern of different causes , and between the good and the evil , and between the light and the darkness . This book is sent forth in the pursuit , and after a book called , hosanna to the son of David , &c. by a nameless author , whose work indeed was hardly worthy of an honest man's name , though very subtly & craftily he prosecutes his purpose , & traverses his steps full cunningly , as this world's wisdom could guide him , in which wisdom he cannot know or receive the things of God ; & therefore it cannot be expected that the things of God should be received from that wisdom ; and though he hath confounded in his words his description of the light of Christ , sometimes speaking well of it , and sometimes otherwise , and not knowing hardly whereof he hath affirmed ; his words are so counfounded and mixed in his corrupt reason , in giving forth his knowledge of the things of God , which he seems to be ignorant of , but only as he hath the knowledge of them from the letter , by which no man can come to the knowledge of God , nor of the things of his kingdom without the revelation of the spirit of Jesus , and the operation of the same spirit : but friends , the testimony of God stands sure for ever , though men would confound it in their own reason : and this is the testimony , that Christ lighteth every man that cometh into the world , which light is sufficient to lead every man to God , or else to condemn every man from God ; and this testimony is true , notwithstanding all the opposition against it ; and it shall abide sure for ever , though men strive never so much in the gainsaying of it : and this is the testimony which we have born and shall bear to the end , and who believes it , and who believes it not , this is the hand of the Lord according to his pleasure , and to him we leave it , and so we do , and must clear our consciences from time to time , while the Lord gives us a being : and herein we are a good savour to God , and our reward is with him , whether Israel be gathered or no , isa. 49.  And also this nameless author , which is supposed to be one John Jackson , known in this city , hath taken some seeming occasion against us by searching our books , and ( As he saith ) hath found some contradictions in them , which May appear to be so to his dark mind ; yet in the sight of the spirit of the Lord that is truth which he sees to be no other than error : however , this is sent forth for the true information of people's minds , that they May know that truth is bold and confident , and that it is armour which defendeth from all enemies , and giveth strength to answer the craftiness of men . And this same John Jackson hath showed himself now to be one with the common priests of the world , for as they have done , so hath he ; opposed the way and persons of God , and with the very same arguments , showing that he is of the very same spirit with them , his discourse and arguments being of the same nature as theirs are ; yea , he hath showed himself to be of the very same spirit with all the open profane wretches which doth revile , and scorn , and abuse , in every town and country the Lord's persons ; and as they do so , so hath he written with subtle arguments , to the very same end as they reproach and scorn , ( To wit ) in a derision , and despising the way and servants of the Lord ; so that his self-separation is now seen what it is , to be a very cheat and hypocrisy , who while he professeth a separation from the world , doth practice the very same wickedness , and is not changed from them in nature , though he be in appearance : but what a poor work hath he brought forth in two years' time ? which he saith his work hath been as Embres raked up in ashes , yet a work that gains no praise of God , nor very little of the praise of any man : it seems he hath hatched mischief upon his bed , and brought it forth in the morning : who would have thought but a wise man in that time would have brought forth a larger piece , and more to purpose ▪ i am sure he Might have made better use of his time in another exercise , then to have writ against the servants of the Lord : it had been more honest for him to have set his pen to paper , and studied to have given his testimony against the pride , and drunkenness , and oppression , and whoredoms , and wickedness in this great city . I say , it had been more honest , and liker a saint , to have sought the reforming of profaneness and wickedness that greatly abounds in this city , then to have studied two years to bring forth his invented stuff against a harmless and innocent persons , which he , nor any , can justly charge with evil , but as he hath digged deep by his imaginations , in recollecting a seeming-contradiction out of our writings , which is no contradiction , no more than Christ's words are , who saith , except ye eat my flesh , and drink my blood , ye have no life in you ; and yet in the same discourse saith , the flesh profits nothing : and for Isaiah to go with the word of the Lord to Hezekiah , to tell him he should die and not live ; yet in the same instant of time , told him he should live and not die : would not John Jackson have Counted these contradictions ? But what he hath done in this , in sending forth a book against the Quakers , he hath been so far from beating down sin , drunkards , and rude scorners , and abusive men that he hath fully strengthened their hands , and the wickedest persons in this nation are very glad of his work : he hath given them matter to oppose truth withal ; but his reward and theirs shall be both with one hand , and he shall drink his portion in the same lake with such whose : hands he hath strengthened ; and let him know , and themall , God hath established us upon a sure mountain , which the gates of hell and death cannot prevail against . So his work i• Counted of us , and cast by as our spoilt prey of Babylon's treasure , only this is sent abroad after it , in the pursuit of it , which is not done with multitudes of words of man's wisdom , but in the plain nakedness of innocent truth , which is more strength than all his arguments of guile , whereby he would deceive the persons , but he can deceive none but such as are deceived already ; for all that are in the light , and in the truth , sees beyond all that he can say , and are established where his word ; can never reach them , to take away their peace , or disquiet them ; sor as i said , we are established upon a sure foundation , and are tried and proved , and cannot be blown away with any windy doctrines of men , which begets into st•ffe , and not into true sincerity of heart ; but woe unto that man that works offence , and doth cast stumbling-blocks in the way of the simple : and though the Lord's persons be a suffering persons , yet woe unto them that causeth them to suffer : and though he and some others in their spirits were elevated , thinking thereby to trample upon the innocent by that occasion happening concerning i. n. which was not suffered of the Lord to be as an occasion to destroy his persons , but as an occasion to try them , and to prove them , and thereby are they tried and proved , and the more settled rather then confounded ; and John Jackson , and such like , May glory in such things for a moment because the appearance of it seems evil , yet the Lord will make their glorying void , for the Lord hath ways enough to preserve his persons , and this we have found in many needful times ; and as concerning this thing which was looked upon as a breach among us by many , yet it 's over , and truth stands a top of it , & the beauty of truth appears through it all , and truth is more lovely when it is proved and purged : what if the Lord suffer his to be lead and tempted for a season , let not the wicked boast of this ; sor though the righteous fall , he shall rise again ; but the wicked fall into mischief : but yet we learn something by this , what a great use the devil hath made hereof , and how many books and lying scribbles hath been sent forth about it concerning us , which are all Counted by us no better than the worst corrupted treasure that ever grew in Babylon ; and the best of it is but baubles to please vain minds , for men of sound understandings can take no pleasure therein . And we see how by all means the devil and his persons seeks occasion against the ways and persons of God , & how glad are the wicked when they get an occasion against the Lord's persons ? and how do they glory in it , and boast in it for a time , thinking that their hands are strengthened in a greater boldness to do mischief ? and John Jackson is one of those that takes pleasure in these things , and he hath managed his business with a great deal of craft , but there is none that will praise him for it , except such whose wicked hands he strengthens , & such as he must have stumblings after the way of the Lord hath been so fully manifested , and they receive it not , and they must fall and be broken . And seeing that the wicked doth take occasion , and seeks occasion against the innocent , this will make many more watchful , and more circumspect , and more to walk in God's wisdom , and to deny their own ways , least offences come by them : and let him put off his armour , and lay down his weapon , and i wish he May spend the next two years to come , better than he hath done these last ; and that the little fire in the Embres May kindle , to the burning of his corruptions , rather than into a blind zeal against the innocent persons ; and what in this book is written , is not to contend or strive for mastery , but to clear the truth , and to remove all cause of stumblings from before the face of all the upright in heart . 

A friend to all persons e. b.  London , the third day of the nineth month , 1657.  

The cause of stumbling removed , from all that will receive the truth , and from before the eyes of the wise men of London . 

Many untimely births in ages past and present hath been brought forth , and the work of such hath always been to destroy the heir , the seed which the Lord hath blessed , that so the inheritance Might be theirs , & so would thrust themselves into the kingdom ; but they know while the seed of the promise is alive , it keeps them out , and will not let them meddle with those things which they are not born unto : for they are sons of bondage , and children of falsehood , and must not be heirs with the son of the free , &c.  David out of whose root the righteous seed did arise , the bright and morning star , he saw that seed in his days and was aware of them , and gave his testimony concerning them , saying , in heart ye work wickedness , you weigh the violency of your hands in the earth , the wicked are estranged from the womb , they go astray as soon as they be born , speaking lies ; their poison is like the poison of a serpent , they are like the deaf adder that stoppeth her ear , charming never so wisely : break their teeth oh God in their mouth , break out the teeth of the young lions , oh Lord let them melt away as waters , that run continualy , when he bendeth his bow to shoot his arrows ; let them be as cut in pieces , as a snail which melteth ; let every one of them pass away like the untimely birth of a woman , that they May not see the sun , &c. psalm . 58. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.  And again he saith , behold he traveleth with iniquity , and hath conceived mischief and brought forth falsehood , psalm . 7. 14. and so there was a travelling and labouring before they could get their iniquity brought forth ; as we have true declarations concerning the ages past , how many have traveled and brought forth wind and confusion ; so likewise in this age by experience can we give testimony of the like births which hath been brought forth to the slaughter amongst Babylon's children , and here is one of the same birth born and brought forth in this city of London , to which i shall speak some thing at present , although he conceal his name , yet the seed you shall know by its fruits ; it is one that would be reckoned amongst those children that in the temple cried hosanna to the son of David mat. 12. 15.  But the seed which David called Lord is risen , and hath rebuked the false voice , for it is not every one that cryeth Lord , Lord , nor every one that cryeth hosanna , that enters into the kingdom , but such as heareth the word of God and doth it . 

Now the testimony which this author gives to that which after a long travel is come forth , is this , that it hath been in his breast two years and upwards , while it at length is come forth as an untimely birth , or as that which is born out of due time , labouring under the burden of being both unnecessary and unseasonable . 

Such a testimony as this seems to beget a wonder in the airy spirits of men , as if a monster were to be seen ( What two years travel , and yet an untimely birth ! ) & many such false cries is in this city , which enters into the sensual part of men , and begets into the affections ; but there is a seed risen which hath received from the father the spirit of judgement , and understanding , and it doth not own things according to the report , nor judge of things according to their names in outward appearance , but hath a measuring line given unto it , and a true balance whereby voices , ways , worships , and testimonies is tried before they be approved , and therewith shall this spirit be tried , and voice which is come forth crying , hosanna to the son of David , or a testimony to the Lord's Christ ; which being truly weighted & searched , May prove a testimony against the Lord's Christ , which hath enlightened every man that cometh into the world , in setting up man's spirit to be the light , instead of the Lord's Christ : but first let us consider , the burden under which this man hath laboured , which is as he saith , that which is both unnecessary and unseasonable ; first unnecessary , because the same hath been before by better hands ; so it is not to be admired as a monster , because it hath already been , and effected nothing : secondly unseasonable , because those are already resolved ; that Jesus Christ is the true light which hath enlightened every man that cometh into the world , which he would resolve , that the spirit in every man is that light , and so according to this , every man must follow his own spirit , instead of following the light which Christ hath enlightened him withal : now this burden thus considered , which is both unnecessary & unseasonable , having been in his breast above two years ; all that have received the spirit of judgement , and knows the workings of the mystery of iniquity , and can truly read the state of those which are filled with unrighteousness , knows that this birth is cursed before ever it came forth , and it had been better that it had never been born , nor brought forth into the world ; for it will be to the great agravation of his sorrow and misery which did conceive it , and so long travel in it , & at last brought it forth ; but among the untimely births shall we reckon it , which never saw the •un , nor never received blessing from the father , and happy shall he be that rewardeth thee as thou hast rewarded us ; and happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy untimely birth against the stones , psalm . 137. 8. 9  Against this birth hath the Lord ••reched forth his everlasting arm to dash in pieces , and this is not the first of Babylon's children which in this age , and in this city hath been brought forth to the spoil , nor the first which this man hath brought forth , for he hath brought forth another without a name , which is both as unnecessary and as unseasonable as this : and so from experience he May say , that it is both unnecessary and unseasonable either to conceive , or bring forth any such thing against the seed which the Lord hath blessed ; for there was never any as yet which did strive against the Lord , or his anointed ones which did prosper ; neither shall to the ends of the earth . 

So the burden of this man is searched , & judged , and found not to be the burden of the word of the Lord , though he thought it to be so , when in him he felt the fire of enmity , boiling and bubbling up within him , as in his epistle ; but we have found it to be such a burden as the false ▪ prophets in Jerusalem did see for the persons , which was false burdens , and causes of banishment , lam. 2. 14.  But if the fire of the Lord had been kindled in him , it would have consumed this birth in the womb , before ever it had been brought forth . 

But the hour is coming and now is , in which the Lord is fulfilling his promise according to the scriptures , which saith , that he will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all persons , all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces , though all the persons upon the earth be gathered together against it , zac. 12. 3.  And as this was spoken , so it is fulfilled , and fulfilling , that the testimony of God May be sealed up among his children : for now is the light risen with which the Lord Christ is gathering into the new Jerusalem , the city of the living God , and now hath many burdened themselves with it : and so burdened , that they cannot tell how to unburthen themselves of it : but to ease themselves of that burden which is ready to press them down , they break forth into revileing terms , and un•avory speeches , and false assertions against the light , and those that walk in it , and will deny both the light and children of light to be spiritual : some calling it natural light , some calling it natural conscience , some create light , some the light of reason and understanding ; some old creation light , some a dim light , some the spirit of man , and so burden themselves with it : & when they have both spoken and printed such things to ease them of their burden , their burden grows again ; and so they do not cease to vex and grieve the holy spirit of God from day to day , and when they have burdened themselves with the enmity against the light , and the works of righteousness , proceeding forth from it to the father , than they cry the burden of the Lord ▪ the fire of the Lord within them : but saith the Lord to such , i will destroy that man and his house , and the burden of the Lord shall ye mention no more , for every man's word shall be his burden : for ye have perverted the words of the living God , of the Lord of hosts our God , ier. 23. 36.  Theref•re is the measureing line gone forth to measure the false burdens , whereby they pervert the words of the living God , with their own words and imaginations ; and unto those which ever were reproachers of the way and persons of God , the Lord saith i will bring an everlasting reproach upon you , and a perpetual shame which shall not be forgotten ▪ ier. 13. 40.  So this is written that no man should any more burden themselves with the burdensome stone , whereby they will be broken to pieces if they fall upon it : but that every one May come to it , that with it they May see their false burdens , and the sin which doth so easily beset them , and May cease grieving of the spirit of the Lord , while his spirit striveth with them ; & May come to know every man his own word which will become his burden , when it returns again unto him : but the word of the Lord goeth forth & returns not empty , neither doth it burden him which it goes forth from , when it returns again unto him : although the true burden of the word of the Lord be known in many before it go forth from them . 

Therefore then seeing that it is an untimely birth , and not that which is born of the spirit which is come forth from him to whom i now am to speak . Now least others being in the same blindness with him , think as he doth , that it is a true voice , or Hosana to the son of David , or a true testimony to the Lord's Christ , i shall weigh his testimony , seeing that the true voice is gone forth both in the days of his flesh , and since , in which days he was truly declared to be the light of the world , and the true light which lighteneth every one that cometh into the world , ioh. 1. 9  Ioh. 8.  Now seeing that this author hath set up another thing to be the light which hath enlightened every man , than Christ , viz. the spirit of man ; i shall try this testimony according to the scriptures , whether it be a testimony of the Lord's Christ , or a testimony against him , in these things following , which are the heads of his doctrine conc•rning the light . 

Concerning the light , what it is . 

it is the spirit of every man which is in him , and without which he cannot •e a man , and is the candle of the Lord , prov. 20. 27.  This spirit of a man is the reason of a man , or the understanding of a man : what this light doth , it gives him to know his creator , and the end of his creation , ( viz. ) who made him , and why he was made , also how he should answer the end of him that made him ; and that God set up this light in man to see by , both whom he is to serve , and how he is to serve him , together with the reason thereof , because God made him . And with this light God hath s•• up a law , which law is called light , prov. 6. 23. whereby the will and mind of his creator is made known unto him , and he sufficiently qualified to see it ▪ understand it , &c. p. 7.  it searcheth the inward parts of the belly : at first it moved upward , and it could look God in the face and serve him : but now since the fall the thief is got into this candle , and hath dimed the light ; and covered the aspiring ascendan• quality , and now it burn• downward , and discovers the things beneath , pag. 6.  that it is all eye ; it sees all that is done , but doth nothing , it neither likes , nor dislikes ; approves , nor disproves , but as it is in conjunction with a law , pag. 10.  

that it is the property of light to make manifest , eph. 5. 13.  Pag. 29.  

that it is not in the power of the light , as it is in every man , so much as to call any thing that is done either good , or •vil , pag. 32.  

that the light did drive Adam from the voice and presence of God , so far is the light from leading up to God , that i• drives ••e soul from God , and keeps him in the fall , pag. 53.  

that it doth not lead into all truth such as love it , and obey it , pag. 54.  

not doth it reveal all truth to them that love it , and obey it : and that neither the light , nor the law doth convince of the sin of unbelief . 

that the lamp and the light are convertable terms ; thy word is as a lamp , psal. 119. 105. and that the light and the law is one , pag. 30.  So by this , the light , which is the spirit of man , or man's reason ; and the law , & the word which of that which is called a testimony of the Lord's Christ , we shall try it with the former testimony of the Lord's Christ , as it is written in the scriptures , which was given forth from those which were true witnesses . 

First , as in answer to these things , there is not one testimony in the scriptures , neither from prophet nor apostle , that ever said the spirit of man , or man's reason or understanding was the light which every one that cometh into the world is enlightened withal : but the testimony of truth concerning those which followed their own spirits , is this , the Lord sent his prophet Ezekiel to cry woe unto the fooli•h prophets that followed their own spirits , and had seen nothing , ezek. 13. 3.  Now they were not without the spirit of a man , for than they could not be a man , as he saith : now if they had the spirit of man , and reason , and if this was all eye , how was it that they saw nothing , when he saith , it sees all things ? so it is not a true testimony of the light , nor of the Lord's Christ : but the spirit of man is the candle of the Lord , and the Lord having lighted it , than it searcheth the inward parts of the belly : and David , who knew what the spirit of man was , and what a candle was without light , and what it was when it was lighted , he said , for thou wilt light my candle , the Lord my god will enlighten my darkness , psal. 1• . 28.  So if the spirit of man be the candle of the Lord , then whether doth not Christ enlighten every man which cometh into the world ? and whether is not that light Christ , seeing the spirit is but the candle , and that it must be lighted ? 

Another testimony of his is this , that it is the property of light to make manifest , eph. 5. 13. but all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light , for whatsoever doth make manifest is light , pag. 29.  And again in pag. 3• . saith , that it is not in the power of the light , as it is in every man , so much as •o call any thing which is done either good or •vil . 

answ. whether of these two contraries must men believe , whether the light is able to make manifest whatsoever is reprovable ; or , that there is no• power in i• to call any thing good or evil ? but by this all men May see that this is not a true testimony to the Lord's Christ , nor to his light , never was there any such doctrine preached by any that cried Hosana to the son of David , no• that did give testimony to the Lord's Christ , that there is not power in the light to call any thing done good or evil . now let all who have received the measuring-line , and the equal balance , weigh and consider , seeing the scripture saith , whatsoever things is reprovable is made manifest by ••e light : is evil deeds reprovable then ? they are •ade manifest , than you see them to be evil deeds , lying to be an evil deed , swearing to be an evil deed , drunkenness to be an evil deed , covetousness to be an evil deed , pride to be an evil deed , whoredom to be an evil deed , false accusing to be an evil deed , gainsaying the truth to be an evil deed , anger and wrath to be evil deeds , and these things are reprovable , and as the light doth make them manifest , so it reproves them , and such are convinced of sin because they believe not in Christ , so that unbelief is reprovable , and is made manifest by the light . And whereas some say that the light doth not reprove for the s•n of unbelief , that is false , for unbelief is reprovable , and whatsoever things are r•proveable is made manifest by the light ▪ but he that doth evil hateth the light , and will not bring his deeds to the light , lest the light should reprove him , ioh. 3. 20.  And Jesus said unto certain Greeks and persons which stood by him , which objected against his words , which was no saints nor believers , while y•• have the light , believe in the light , that ye May be the children of light , ioh. 12. 36.  Now he did not bid them believe in that which could not reprove unbelief ▪ i am come a light into the world , that whosoever believeth in me should not abide in darkness . And Jesus cried , and said , he that believeth on me , believeth on him that sent me . also ioh. 12. 44 , 46.  This light was not man's reason nor understanding , neither was it man's spirit that was the true light which lighteneth every one that cometh into the world , ioh. 1. 9  

Again , another false testimony concerning the light , is this , that the light did drive Adam from the voice and presence of God ; and so far is the light from leading up to God , that it drives the soul from God ▪ and keeps him in the fall , pag. 53.  

answ. this doctrine is to turn the truth of God into a lie , and to call light darkness , and darkness light , for there is no such testimony in the scriptures that the light did drive Adam from the voice and presence of God ; but Adam saith , i was afraid because i was naked , and i hide myself : it was because he had disobeyed God's voice , not because he was enlightened ; for the scripture saith , it is your sins that hath s•parated you from God , it doth not say that it is the light which hath separated you from God , or driven you from him ; this May well be called a damnable doctrine , or doctrine of devils : hath God sent his son  light into the world to drive the souls from God , and keep them in the fall . Now let all consider and judge that ever knew the light , whether it be darkness , or it be light which drives the soul from God , and keeps it in the fall . Now this doctrine being compared with the scriptures , is utterly false ; and there is few that profess godliness in this nation that can bear it , or approve of it ; and for such as account themselves the highest profession , and above forms , under the name of seekers , to publish such a thing in print , here it appears that the best of men is but as a briar , and the most upright is sharper than a thorn-hedge ; for the day of thy watchmen , and thy visitation cometh , now shall be their perplexity , Mi• . 7 4.  Now here is a day for trial , that they which can May try the spirits and doctrines whether they be of God . Now i shall lay it to that of God in all , is it not the work of the devil to drive the soul from God , and to keep persons in the fall ? If so , than it is not the work of the light which lighteneth every man that cometh into the world , is not this to call light darkness , to say that the light is so far from leading up to God , that it drives the soul from God , and keeps him in the fall : what is that which leads man out of the fall , if the light keep man in it ? As this is contrary to scripture ▪ and to truth , so it is contrary to his own words , as in pag. 7. there saying , that by the light is the will and mind of the creator made known unto man , and he sufficiently qualified to see it , and understand it . 

answ. how can these two stand together , that the light drives man from God , and keeps him in the fall ; and again , that it makes known the will and mind of the creator unto him , and sufficiently qualifies him to see and understand it ? this cannot truly be called Hosana to the son of David , No•a testimony to the Lord's Christ , but a line of confusion which is stretched out , wherein darkness is come forth as a cloud , and spreads itself over the earth , to darken people's minds from the knowledge and understanding of truth , by words without knowledge ; but his folly shall proceed no further unreproved and made manifest . 

Another false testimony concerning the light is this , that at first it moved upward , and man could look God in the face , and serve him ; but now since the fall the thief is got into the candle , and now the spirit burns downward , and discovers the things beneath . 

ans. what is the nature of the light cha•ged ? or is the spirit so changed , that before it ascended upward , and now downward ? We shall try this according to the scripture , which saith , who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward , and the spirit of a beast which goeth downward to the earth , eccles. 3. 21. so than if it goes downward it is the spirit of a beast , and not the spirit of a man : and here it is plainly evident that he knows not the spirit of a man from the spirit of a beast ▪ so unfit to cry Hosana to the son of David , or bear testimony to the Lord's Christ . but as for the light which hath enlightened man that cometh into the world , the fall did not change the quality of the light , for the light is the same ▪ as it was , but darkness cannot comprehend •t , neither knows how to give a true testimony of it , but confusedly speaks of two lights , the one springing up with man in his natural birth , suitable to his natural birth ; and another light suitable to the new birth that is born of the spirit . 

This is a testimony which is not to be found in scripture , to be two lights suitable to the two births , for he that is born of the flesh persecutes him that is born of the spirit , and God hath put enmity between the two seeds ; but to say that there is two lights suitable , and so the one natural , and the other spiritual ; the one of the earth , earthly , and the other of the Lord , from heaven , as the two births are , this is not a testimony according to truth , for the light is but one , and the spirit of truth is but one ; and the same spirit which led the saints which believed , into all truth , the same did convince the world of sin because they did not believe in Christ , ioh. 16.   . And that light which is the condemnation of the world , who love the darkness rather than Christ , the same is the saviour of all them that believe ; and one man loves it , and another hates it , yet it is the same light , ioh.   . 19 ▪ but the scriptures bears no such testimony as that there is two lights in man , the one spiritual , and the other natural ; and for any man to say that the light of Christ is natural , is blasphemy against the son of God , and is a sin not easily forgiven , and it is hard for such to find the place of repentance ; for every one that comes to repentance , must first come to the light which Christ hath enlightened them withal , and must know it to be spiritual , and confess it so , and with this light come to discern the two births , the one from the other , and their several natures ; and how that the one birth is guided by the light , it being as the eye , giving them to see what to speak , before they speak , and so keeps them out of the world's line , which is confusion ▪ and as a teacher , giving them to understand what to do , before they do it , and so keeps them out of the condemnation , bringing their works beforehand to judgement ; and so their works are wrought in God , who answer the light which they be enlightened withal ; but the light is not suitable , no• according to that birth which is born after the flesh , but condemns that in all its ways and actions , and is given to lead the creature out of that nature , and out of that birth , into the regeneration , to lead out of the deeds of darkness , and out of the shadow of death , into the living inheritance , among those that are sanctified in Christ Jesus . 

Another testimony concerning the light , relating to the two covenants is this , that as there was a new covenant diverse from the former , the old , so there must of necessity be another light to accompany it , diverse from the former ; that is , as than man's spirit , so now the spirit of the Lord , &c. page 35.  

answ. ther• are diversities of gifts , but the same spirit ; and there are differences of administrations , but the same Lord ; and there are diversities of operations , but it is the same god which worketh all in all , 1 cor. 12 ▪ 4 , 5 , 6.  Now all persons is to know that there was a ministration different from the administration of the gospel , the new covenant a different administration from the old ; but there is no necessity that it be ministered from another spirit , nor from another Lord , nor from another light ; therefore to say , that because the covenants or admini••ration• are diverse one from another , that therefore it must not be the same spirit , but the one by the spirit of man , the other the spirit of God , and that the light• is to be diverse the one from the other , this is a false testimony ; •o•••• same spirit in which the law was administered , ( The first covenant )  the same was the second administered , which doth make perfect according to the conscience . Now as all persons is brought o•• of their o•• inventions and imaginations , and from following their own spirits , to own the light of Christ which hath enlightened them , they shall know the diversities of administrations , and the diversity of operations , and yet but one light , and one power , and one spirit , and not as many lights as births , nor as many spirits as operations , not every administration to have a diverse light to accompany it ? for though there be that are called gods , whether in heaven , •r in earth , as there be gods many , and Lords many , but to us there is but one God the father , of whom are all things , and we in him ; and one Lord Jesus Christ , by whom are all things , and we by him ; howbeit there is not in •very man that knowledge , 1 cor. 8. 5 , 6 , 7. and though there be in the world many lights , yet to us there is but one , him by whom all things was made , which doth enlighten every man that cometh into the world , that in him all men Might believe ; and as every one believes in this light , they shall know that man's reason and understanding is not the light which every man is enlightened withal , for some are unreasonable men , and some are void of understanding : neither is the spirit of man the light of the world , which doth enlighten every man that cometh into the world ; neither is any thing called the light of the world ( In the scripture ) but Christ ; for saith Christ , i am come a light into the world , that whosoever believeth on me should not abide in darkness , ioh. 12. 46.  Then spoke Jesus again unto them , saying , i am the light of the world ;  that followeth me shall not walk in darkness , bu• shall have the light of life , joh. 8. 12. and again , i am the light of the world , joh ▪ 9 5.  And the messenger which was sent before his face to prepare the way of the Lord , and to bear witness to the truth , said , in him was life , and the life was the light of men , and that was the true light which enlighteneth every man that cometh into the world , ioh. 1. 4 , 9  And this is the light which in all ages , generations , and under all administrations the sain•ss did bear their testimony in ; and this light did never change nor alter , though ages and generations have changed , and men have changed , and do change , and the minds of men change , and their ways change , and their worships change , and forms and religions , which are not according to the light which Christ hath enlightened them withal , which changeth not , which as it is followed , will lead them out of those ways which do change ▪ which is not the living way , for the new and living way is one with the light which every man is enlightened withal , which is every man's way to the father who follow it , and every man's condemnation who disobey it . 

Another testimony concerning the first man Adam in his first estate without sin , the sum of it is this , that as h• was at first , that is , at his beginning made s• , that is , without sin , for so was he made , eccles. 7. 29. upright , without crookedness , without invention , that this man , yea in his purest naturals , •annot receive nor discern the things of the spirit of God ▪ until •e i• born of the spirit , or from above , according ▪ to ioh. •13 . & 8. 3  ▪ 6. 1 cor. 2. 14 ▪ 

answ. this testimony is false , for the first Adam before the fall , was the son of God , luk. 3. 38. and did know and perceive God's voice and power , and he knew God's command , that he should not eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil , which if he did he should die the death ; for he was in God's image , and the Lord spoke unto him , and he perceived it , and he had right to eat of the tree of life which was in the midst of the garden ; and if Adam had continue in that state there needed no law have been added because of transgression , neither had there needed any precept upon precept , nor line upon line , neither any teacher nor instructor of the ignorant , for there had no death passed over to separate God from his creature which he had made in his own image , and given him power over all creatures ; but to say the son of God , in the image of God , without sin , in uprightness and power , to say that he is sensual , having not the spirit ; or to say that he is the natural man that cannot receive nor discern the things of the spirit of God , this is greater blasphemy than that which the apostle reproved , rev. 2. 9 in those which said they were Jews , and were not , but were the synagogue of Satan ; and all such whi•• brings forth such mists of darkness and and ignorance to blind the eye in persons which should see the things of God in clearness , are to be reprourd sharply , that they May be ashamed , and no more bring forth that which is both unnecessary and unseasonable , and contrary to truth , as John Jackson hath done . 

And further he adds , that the natural man which Paul speaks of 1 cor. 2. 14. and compares it with 1 cor. 15. 44 , 45. is not to be taken for the carnal sinful man , but for a man in puris naturalibus , merely natural , pag. 37.  

Let all therefore consider Paul's words , which things also we speak , no• in the words which man's wisdom teacheth , but which the holy ghost teacheth , comparing spiritual things with spiritual : but the natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God , for they are foolishness unto him , neither can he know them , because they are spiritually discerned , 1 cor. 2. 13 , 14 , but he that is spiritual judgeth all things , yet he himself is judged of no man , ver. 15.  Now whether any man that hath the spirit of God can judge that this is not spoken of carnal & sinful men , or whether any by the spirit of God can judge that this was spoken of a man in the pure nature , without sin ; and let all who have the spirit of judgement judge whether Adam in the image of God without sin , did account the things of God as foolishness unto him ; and if any so judge , let them prove it , that in Adam's innocency , without sin , the things of God were foolishness unto him ; or whether the cross of Christ which Paul preached was foolishness unto any but unto carnal and sinful men . So every man i exhort to come to that of God in you , to know the salt in yourselves to savour withal , that you May know that doctrine that stands in the devised words of man's wisdom , and not in the power of God , which would turn the truth of God into a lie , and pervert the minds from the right understanding of the things of God : but the day is come which hath brought forth light , and knowledge , and understanding to the simple , whereby they see the deeps which are covered with darkness , and they come to see and comprehend men's wisdom , and their fountain what it brings forth , for how should that which is unclean bring forth that which is clean : so that now we do not only know the words of those which have set themselves against the truth , but the spirit and power from whence they speak , and so in faithfulness bear our testimony against it , that the folly of those May be made manifest unto all men who wilfully oppose the truth , and their own selves through wilful blindness , and so Count themselves unworthy of eternal life , exercising their strength , wisdom , and knowledge to shut up the kingdom of God against themselves , and others , labouring to keep all persons from the light in the darkness , as is made manifest in this generation : how many have set themselves to preach and print against the light which Christ the way to the father hath enlightened every man that cometh into the world withal ? But now hath God the father raised up his own seed according to his promise out of the North to spoil Babylon , jer. 51. 48.  i have raised up one from the North , saith the Lord , and he shall come : from the rising of the sun shall he call upon my name , and he shall come upon Princes as upon mortar , and as the potter treadeth clay . isa. 41. 25.  The promised seed of the Lord is come forth , and is spreading over the nations as the morning over the mountains , and blessed are they that receive their testimony , for from the wrath of the almighty shall they be delivered , their bread shall not fail them , and their waters shall be sure , and their fountain shall never be empty , but plenteous redemption shall they daily witness , and waters of life shall their thirst be satisfied with , and all the noise of the bruits shall not hurt them , for the Lord is with them , therefore can they not be afraid , nor dismayed at that which cometh to pass upon the earth ; now because light is risen , therefore is the evil eyes offended , and have now turned their testimonies against the light , to make persons believe that it doth the same works that darkness , sin , and Satan doth , which is to drive the soul from God , and keep it in the fall , and that it is not able to show the good or the evil of an action , to approve nor disapprove , which is true of the darkness , but not of the light ; for there is nothing that doth make manifest those things which are reprovable but the light , neither is there any thing which doth bring man from that estate where he is driven from God , and lead him out of the fall but the light , and so it is time to come out from among all such , for all persons that desire to know God's ways , lest they be partakers of their plagues , and there be none to deliver , for many are hardening their hearts , in this day of God's tender love and mercy , and so evil do they requite the Lord , that instead of turning at his reproofs , that they May find mercy , they are in their wisdom devising evil words , and reproachful terms against the light , by which the Lord doth reprove man for his iniquity , and are exercising all their abilities to make the light even as darkness , and would exclude the power of God from it : when as there is no man that doth receive power , nor wisdom from God , but in the light which Christ ha•h enlightened him withal , therefore is Christ now preached as he declared himself to be the light of the world , ioh 8. and as his messenger declared him to have enlightened every man that cometh into the world , and this light is now preached and witnessed to be sufficient to lead unto God all that obey it , and to let them see that their works are wrought in God , joh. 3. and is sufficient to be the condemnation of all the world that ha•• it , according to joh.   . 19  And for our thus bearing witness of the sufficiency of the light , many are •isen up against us , even sl•nderous tongues , such as the poison of asps is under ; but the Lord hath delivered us from them , and will manifest his strength unto us , in bearing testimony to his light , and the power of it , against all the powers of darkness , and overcome them ; for God hath given his power to his own seed , the children of light , and those that rise up against them , it is but that they May be broken to pieces , for whosoever falleth on •hiss stone , they shall be broken to pieces , and on whomsoever it falls , it will grind them to powder . 

object . but some men say ; that the light is not sufficient to lead unto God those that obey and follow it ; and for a proof , saith , that Paul did not disobey , but follow the light which was in him : and yet saith , that he obtained mercy because he did it ignorantly , which if he had disobeyed the light , he had sinned against knowledge , so the light in him was either not sufficient to discover to him the error of his way , or at least it did suspend its act of enlightening him in the knowledge thereof ; it checked him not , it convinced him not , &c.  

answ. to say that Paul did not disobey , but follow the light within him , that is false ; for he followed his zeal in madness , and pers•cu•ing the saints , and followed his thoughts which were fals• , thinking that he did God service , and thinking that he ought to do that which is contra•y to the light , and so kicked against the pricks , instead of following th•t which did prick him ; and as for him in that condition , and the rest which persecuted Steven to death , though they did it ignorantly , yet it was not because they were not enlightened , nor because the light was not sufficient to have given them the knowledge of him whom they did persecute , but because they did resist that which was sufficient to have given them the knowledge . As Steven , a man •ull of the holy ghost , did bear witness , saying unto Saul , and the rest , ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in hearts and ears , ye do always resist the holy ghost , as your fathers did , so do ye ; which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted , and they have slain them which showed before of the coming of the just one , of whom ye have been now the betrayers , and murderers , who have received the law by the disposition of angels , and have not kept it : when they heard these things , they were cut to the heart . So here is little ground in those for any to say they follow the light within them , and to say that they was not enlightened , which had received the law , which is light , by the disposition of angels , and did not keep it . Here they disobeyed that which they had received , which was the light , and did always resist the holy ghost which was able to have led them from the•r disobedience , and stiffneckedness , and if they did persecute to death for lack of knowledge , and so did it ignorantly , it was because they rejected knowledge , and forgot the law of their God which they had received , as the priests did in Hosea 4 ▪ 6. and because they did forget the Lord , as those did in jer. 18. so it was not because they were never convinced , nor never reproved , but because they would have none of his reproofs , for they would not walk in his ways , neither were obedient to his law : but i say , did not Israel know ? To Israel he saith ▪ all day long i have stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying persons , rom. 10. 21.  Therefore let no more such clamorous speeches come forth , as to say such have obeyed , and followed the light within them ; which if they had , than when God had called they would have answered , and it could not have been said , they had been disobedient , which when Stephen told them of their resisting of the holy ghost , and their disobedience to the law , which was light , his words did answer something of God within them , wh•n they were cut to the heart , and that which had disobeyed the holy ghost , and the law which they had received , that did stone him to death , and th•rein they did kick against that which did prick them : but the light of Christ is sufficient to lead all unto God which do obey and follow it ; and there was never any in all generations from Abel u•to this generation , that ever in such ignorance , and wilful impudence , preach and print against the sufficiency of the light of Christ as in this age is brought forth ; for as others did reject the lesser , so these the greater ; others did disobey that which they had received from the disposition of angels , and those , that which is given by the son of God , who saith , i am the light of the world : he doth not say that the spirit of man is the light of the world , nor that man's reason is the light of the world , as some have said ; neither did ever Christ say , that his light was insufficient , but did bid those which were of the world , believe in the light , that they Might be the children of light , joh. 12. 36. and did tell such which were of the world , that the kingdom of God was within them , so there was something in them which was of power ; but such a doctrine is now hated in the world , to preach any thing within man to be of power or ability to guide or lead man to God , or sufficient to believe in : but the scripture saith , the word of faith is in thy heart , ( Which was the word the apostles preached ) to obey and to do it , and faith comes by hearing , and hearing by the word of God : but how shall they hear without a preacher ? But i say , have they not all heard ? Yes verily , their sound went out into all the earth , and their words unto the ends of the world , but they have not all obeyed . 

But again it is said in the false hosanna , that the discovery of sin and iniquity May be where the sound of Christ , as a door , as the l•ght , as the way May not have been ; and for proof saith , it was so in the first man , that measure and degree of light which discovered sin to him , was the law written in him . 

answ. he who is the light of the world , in him was life , and this life was the light of m•n , and he is before all th•ngss , and by him all things consist ; and the first man Adam who was made a living soul , and wa• the son of God , the light that was in him , was the light of the son of God , while he remained in God's image , and when he was fallen from God's image into transgression , that which made manifest his transgression was the light which he was fallen from , and God did never write his law in man's heart but there was a measure of Christ : but men in ignorance and blindness pretend to be ministers of distinctions between the law and Christ , whenas they neither know what they say , nor whereof they affirm , nor seeing how it was added because of transgression , till the seed should come ordained by angels in the hands of a mediator , gal. 3. 19 and as well ministered forth in the light of the mediator ; for though there was , and is diversity of administrations , and of operations , yet the same Lord , and the same light , that light in which the prophets saw Christ , and prophesied beforehand of the coming of the just ; was the same in which the apostles witnessed him come ; and the same light which lets men see their sins , is that which lets them see their saviour , and leads them from their sins to Christ , as they are obedient to it . But to say there is the discovery of sin and iniquity where the sound of Christ as a door , the light the way hath not been , this remains to be proved , seeing the apostle saith , that the sound is gone into all the earth , and the words to the end of the world : have they not all heard ? Yes verily : that which makes manifest is light ; is there light making sin manifest , and is there nothing of Christ , seeing that his life is the light of men , and that men have no light but what proceeds from his life ? When was ever Christ and the light , which discovers sin , separated ? and where is that scripture which saith , that the sound of Christ , as a light , hath never been heard where sin and iniquity is discovered ; but that which hath brought forth these things May well be called an untimely birth , which never saw the son , nor never knew the light which Christ hath enlightened every man withal which cometh into the world , for a little of this fruit doth manifest that tree from whence it springs , and so we shall judge the tree by its fruits : another fruit from this tree is to give his testimony of the law of faith , which is this : 

how far the law of faith May be said to be written upon every man's heart , is not given unto me to understand , only this glimpse i have of it , that it appears to have had an influence upon the heart of man , by those sacrifices which were offered up to God before the publication of the positive law , wherein as well Cain as Abel offered sacrifices , gen. 4. 4.  

answ. this testimony doth not proc•ed from the word of faith in thy heart , for that would give an understanding how the law of faith is written in the hear• , as well as how the law of works is written , and this thy glimpse which thou says thou sees from the proposing of the promise , and the influence which thou says thou seest upon the heart of man by the sacrifices of Cain , as well as Abel , offered unto God ; if this thy pretended light and glimpse , which is so far of Christ , be truly weighed and t•yed , it May prove but a vain vision , and a divination of thy own heart ; as all , who consider thy testimony of the law of faith , in saying , that the discovery thereof ariseth from what is without ; and that it had never been known , nor never thought of , nor never would it , or could it rationally have come into the heart of man to have conceived such a thing , but from the declaration of God in his promise : here it doth appear faith is a mystery to thee , and thy eye have not seen it , nor the ear heard , neither hath it entered into thy heart to conceive faith in the working and operation of it : and in that thou sayest well , that it was not given thee to understand how it is written upon every man's heart ; and thou had done well if thou had not stretched thyself beyond the line of thy knowledge and understanding , for thou thyself confessest that unto those first believers , Abel , Enoch , Noah , Abraham , Isaac , Jacob , Moses , David , Daniel , and the rest , there was communicated unto them a spirit of faith , and a light suitable and proportionable , whereby they were enabled to behold Christ , who was the object of their faith : then if it did arise from the spirit of faith within them , and the light of Christ , who was the author of their faith , it did not arise from the declaration of God in the promise without , so that the mystery of faith which is held in a pure conscience is yet to be learned , which was witnessed amongst the saints : so when thou writes again of the law of works , or the law of faith , or the discovery which the Lord maketh to his creature , under the diversities of these administrations , keep back to the measure of the gift of God , and then will thy testimony be no larger than thy knowledge , which is a guilt hath spread over many in these days ; but this i say , blessed is the man which doth not condemn himself in the thing which he alloweth , and which doth not destroy himself with the breath of his own mouth . But there is a generation which their own breath as fire shall devour them . 

Again , concerning the light which every man is enlightened withal , which is thy stumbling block , and rock of offence , as it is unto all the rest whose deeds are evil ; thou sayeth , God hath not anointed it to that work , nor laid the weight of eternal salvation upon the shoulders thereof , it being too weak for that service . 

answ. him hath God anointed who is the light of the world , and hath enlightened every man that cometh into the world , and there is no work of eternal salvation wrought but in the light which every man is enlightened withal , and this light is of him and from him which bears the sins in his own body , and is not too weak for that service which the father hath given him to do , and this light is Christ ( And whereas some say , hath every man Christ ) every man hath Christ to save , or to condemn him , & Christ is as truly the condemnation of those whose deeds are evil , as he is the saviour of them that believe ; and as those that believe in the light are already saved by Christ , so also those that believe not in his light which he hath enlightened them withal , are already condemned ; and so Christ is near unto every one , to answer every man's work according to the nature of it , whether he serve sin unto death , or be found in the obedience of truth unto eternal life ; for now is the day appeared to try every man's work of what sort it is ; and now is many offended because the light is broken forth , and their eye is evil , because the Lords is good . But woe unto the world because of offences ; if any have the spirit of a King , let them search out the cause of the offence which is now broken forth amongst the children of men , that the enmity which is in all sorts of persons , of all professions , should rise up together , and become a body , the wicked joining hand in hand , preaching , and printing , and crying for unity , which they are making up of enmity , that they May be strong against that which the Lord hath now brought forth in his light and power to be witnesses unto him in every place wheresoever he doth call them , witnessing forth his mercy and truth , by which iniquity is purged out ; and preaching the gospel freely to every creature , whereby they May come to the knowledge of the truth , that they May be saved : but in the world it is so come to pass in these days , that he that can but give reviling terms and hard speeches against the light which Christ hath enlightened every man withal , calling it natural , or insufficient ; and if they do but revile those which they call Quakers , and put this in the beginning of his book , than it passeth with toleration , and have as good approbation from the world as any of the priests have for their ministry : but if any man begin to speak of the light within , and the anointing within , and the word of faith in the heart , and of the mystery of faith in a pure conscience , and of the sprinkling of the heart from an evil conscience , and of believing in the light , as Christ said , such a one speaking of these things , and not directing his speech in open reproach against them called Quakers , the people's hearts will be filled with jealousy , lest he be one . So that even the light is become a reproach unto them , and their derision daily , but the Lord's hand is turned against all such , and he is turning the wise men backward , and making their wisdom become foolishness ; for once there was a seeking after light in many , that it Might rise , and open the things of God unto them , and reveal the mysteries of his life , whereby their souls Might be satisfied ; and now when it is risen in many , and hath brought forth its powerful effects ; now the man of sin hath his time , and doth prevail in many to make them believe , that it is not the light which is able to save the souls of them which believe in it , and doth beget a spirit of jealousy in them which is stronger than death ; and begetteth a fear in them , which worketh torment : and many now doth fear , and are jealous , that that light is not the Christ which hath enlightened them , and every one which cometh into the world , and this is the work of Satan in the hearts of the disobedient , which as every one comes to obey his light , and to answer his perfect love to them which is manifest in the light , that fear will be cast out , and life will be given to that witness of God which once did breath after his life , without which the soul cannot rest , nor be satisfied ; and this shall many come to witness , as the man of sin comes to be revealed , which letteth , and will let , until he be taken out of the way ; and then shall they see at what they have stumbled , and by what they have been overcome , and then they will know that it had been good for them if they had walked i• the light of the Lord , instead of setting themselves against it , and as the light itself by such before mentioned is denied , so the testimony which the children of light give of it , is also despised , and contended against , as if it were not to be owned for a doctrine of truth , which doctrine of truth hath been laid often before persons , and is yet once more , that they May consider , prove , and try , and so believe , and so be able to give a testimony from the witness of God in themselves . 

First , we say that Christ is the light of the world , according to his own words , ioh. 8. 12.  And again we say , that he hath enlightened every man that cometh into the world , according to his words who was sent a messenger before his face to bear witness to the truth , and his witness is true , ioh. 2. 9  And as Christ hath enlightened every man that cometh into the world , so we say to every man , warning both small and great to believe in the light , that they May be the children of light , which was Christ's doctrine to the world , ioh. 12. 36.  And now what Christ doth and effecteth by it in those that believe in his light , and followeth it , which effects and operations by the world is denied , and by us is affirmed : some of the effects of it i shall mention , which is opposed : as first , that it will not let those that are guided by it take God's name in vain , but will draw th•m out of the worships of the world , and keep them in the fear of God , and to stand still in it is the first step to peace . That it discovers things that are contrary to it . That it is their teacher that love it , and their condemnation that hate it , according to Christ's words , ioh. 3. 19  That waiting in it will guide them to God , and show them the way to the father , as Christ saith , no man cometh unto the father but by me , ioh. 14. 6. and no man cometh unto the father by Christ but as they are led and guided by his light within them . That it op•nss all the scriptures , and leads man out of the fall , up to God ; for him hath the fath•r given to be a leader and commander unto the persons , and he leadeth them by his light . Another effect is , that it convinceth of all ungodliness and worldly lusts , and is a teacher and director , teaching and directing in righteousness , purity , and holiness , &c.  and that the light is but one in him that loves it , and in him that hates it , leading the one to God , from whence it comes , to receive eternal life , and condemning the other from God because he obeyeth not the truth , that he Might be saved . And this is the testimony of truth which is now held forth , never to be denied : but who hath believed our report ? even they to whom the arm of the Lord is revealed : and this is the way by which persons May come to know the truth of this testimony , by obeying the light which Christ hath enlightened them withal , thereby shall they know whether this doctrine be of God , or whether we speak of ourselves , and whether all those effects is not brought forth by the working of Christ's light in them ; and then they shall not believe only because of our words , nor be envious against it because of others words , but will find the testimony in themselves , which is according to the record which God hath given of his son , and according to the testimony which we have given of the light ; and he that believeth shall be established . 

Now that which opposeth this , is that which beareth a testimony contrary to Christ , who saith , for this end was i born , and for this end came i into the world , to bear witness unto the truth ; and every one that is of the truth heareth my voice , ioh. 18. 37.  And this was his witness , and his messengers witness , that he was the light of the world , and , that this is the true light which hath enlightened every man that cometh into the world , ioh. 8. 12.  Ioh. 1. 9  And this contrary testimony which is brought forth is this , that it is the spirit of man that is the light which hath enlightened every man ; and so going about to prove the spirit of man not to be sufficient , under this would destroy the sufficiency of the light of Christ . But the scriptures never did give testimony that the spirit of man was the light of the world ; neither did we ever say that this light was the spirit of every man , nor a natural light : and therefore this man which hath writ a volume in proving a natural light , or man's reason insufficient , let all persons take notice what he contradicts , or disproves by it ; he doth not by it contradict nor disprove any thing that we have said , for we never did affirm that man's reason was the light ; but he hath laboured to contradict himself : he hath set up an image , and then glories in breaking of it down , & from our words draws a false inference , and glories in confounding it : and this is the general course of our opposers , to raise a false proposition or conclusion from their own imaginations , and then contradict it , and then cry , the Quakers contradicted , or confuted , and their doctrine disproved , and they irrecoverably slain ; and many such cries is gone forth in the world among persons , like the noise of many waters . 

To which i answer , nay , they are not of such a birth that they are so easily slain , nor of such a doctrine that they are so easily disproved ; for the immortal birth is brought forth , unto which God hath given wisdom and understanding to be as wise as serpents , and in their innocency is their wisdom brought forth , which seed inheriteth the strength of the almighty : so though they be permitted to fight and contend against the truth , yet to prevail is not given them : therefore in vain is the net spread in the sight of any bird , and in vain do they exercise their strength against the Lord's anointed ; for this which they have brought forth is but as setting of briars and thorns in battle against the Lord or as if the untimely birth should strive against that birth which is brought forth without deformity , to slay it , as those in former ages , who were wiser in their generation then the children of light , sought to slay the heir , that the inheritance Might be theirs . In like manner do men now also rise up against the life of the same seed which is risen in the hearts of the children of men , to slay it , that so they May profess the scriptures in their high swelling words of vanity , having men's persons in admiration because of advantage : for if this seed doth live which the Lord hath not only brought to the birth , but also brought forth , it will stop that profession which stands in the hypocrisy , and will quench that violence of fire in which that zeal flames out , which is not according to knowledge : but the seed is risen which inherits the strength of the almighty , which can bear all things , and suffer all things , and will come to reign over all gainsayers ; for all the high swelling words of vanity shall come to naught , and truth shall be exalted over all , in the power of the eternal spirit , when blackness of darkness will cover all those spirits , which have spent their strength against the appearance and manifestation of truth ; and those that now boast themselves in their presumption against the servants of the Lord , and testimony of truth , shall come to be a servant of servants , even to the least in the kingdom of God ▪ before they have right unto that which they now profess , or before they be Counted worthy to cry hosanna to the son of David , or to bear a testimony to the Lord's Christ ; for he will have none such to be his witnesses , as deny his light which he hath enlightened every man withal : for the true witnesses bear this testimony of Christ , that he is the true light , and is the light of the world , which hath enlightened every man that cometh into the world , that every man through him Might bel•eve , and every one in whom this witness is found true , is justified of God . 

Another accusation is against Richard Farnsworth , for saying , that Christ did break the Passeover with his disciple , and herein he is charged to want light ; or , that the light in him was not sufficient in him to open this , and that he did not discern between the Passeover , and the supper of the Lord : and likewise is accused , for calling that a shadow , which the scripture saith was but to show the Lord's death till he came . 

answ. to call the supper the Passeover , doth not demonstrate that he wants light , neither that the light is insufficient , for the disciple called it the Passeover which they prepared for him : and Christ called it the Passeover which he eat with his disciple , Mark . 14. 12. 14.  Matth. 26. 20 , 21 , 22. and that which they eat he broke : but it doth not say , that he broke his bones , nor eat his bones ; yet he eat the Passeover with his disciple . And whereas he is accused for calling that a shadow , and many now , in imitation , take bread and wine , and call that the Lord's supper , opposing those that are come to the substance , and witness the substance , eating that which is meat indeed , and drinking that which is drink indeed ; but this man which doth oppose Richard Farnsworth , and others , in these things , he ha•h the least reason to mention this supper , or the breaking of bread of any , for others do call their breaking of bread , and drinking of wine , the Lord's supper , because they practise it : but this man doth neither practice that as the Lord's supper , nor witness the substance , so that this is the greatest hypocrisy , to contend about that , or to accuse others , in denying of that which he himself denies the practice of : so that this accuser's doctrine and accusations wants both light and reason . 

another accusation is against these two writers , Richard Farnsworth , and Francis Howgill , as if they should be in an unreconciled difference ; because the one hath affirmed , that the light of Christ is sufficient to open all the scriptures : and the other saith , thou that tells of opening chapters or verses by meanings , thou never heard a word of Christ . 

answ. these are not differences ; for the light of Christ and man's meanings are contrary : so for the one to say , the light doth open ; and the other to say , man's meanings doth not open , this is not contrary : so the confusion is turned again to the accuser , and doth not belong to these two writers : so the ignorance of this accuser is to be taken notice of , which would make persons believe things that is not : for if he write his book for those that can neither read , see , nor hear , his labour is in vain : and if he write it to those that can read , see , hear , and understand , they will account it foolishness , especially in this day , when the light of life is broken forth among the children of men , to give them an understanding according to truth , for in this day , he that keepeth silence is reputed wise ; and better is he that keepeth silence , than he that speaks , unless the spirit of the Lord give him utterance . 

another accusation is against w. d. he speaking so such a one as is guided by the lamb , &c. saying , the light in thy conscience , the righteous law , cries through thy earthly heart , and brings it into judgement , &c.  And then speaking of the parable of the little leaven hide in three measures of me•l , that it changeth the whole lump into the nature of itself ▪ so the little light that shines in thy dark heart , is the powerful word of faith , and that the light is the sure word of prophecy , whereunto ye do well to take heed until the day dawn , and the daystar arise in your hearts : and for these things he is accused . 

answ. those that are guided by the lamb , do witness that the •ight , the righteous law , cries through the earthly heart , and brings it into judgement , and will not accuse one for saying so ; and as for speaking of the little light , as Christ spoke of the little leaven ; was it no offence in the days of the son of man to preach that the kingdom of heaven was like unto a grain of mustard seed , or like unto a little leaven ? And is it an offence now •o preach the word of faith to be as a little light , or to preach the anointing to be as a little light , in those in whom the light is little , doth this also offend you ? What then if we should say , that Christ is the light of life , the son of righteousness , and the glory and express figure of the father's substance in some , and but as a little light , o• daystar in others , or in others as a light before the daystar arise in their hearts : is not the light great in some , and little in others ? And is not Christ the same ? May that only be called Christ which takes away the sins ? And May not that also be called Christ which pierceth through the soul , and revealeth the thoughts of many hearts , Luke ▪ 2. 35.  May he only be called Christ unto whom the father hath given the heathen for his inheritance , and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession , who reigneth , and hath all his enemies under his feet , and is not he the same as he is descended into the lower parts of the earth , and which took upon him the form of a servant ? So therefore that none May err in their judgments concerning the testimony which is given of Christ , and of his light , his light is more or less according to his manifestation in every one , there being given to every one a manifestation of the spirit to profit withal , and every one is to be turned to the measure of their manifestation , to know and witness Christ in it , though in many it be but as a little light , yet they are to be turned unto it , while it is so , which as it doth increase , and is enlarged , it May be called , or declared under another name than little , as the kingdom of heaven is not always like unto a grain of mustardseed , nor as a little leaven , but comes to rule in the children of men : and whereas the accuser replieth against the light , and against Christ to be the word of faith ; saying , Christ is called the word of God , rev. 19 13. but not the word of faith ; and yet saith in page 45.  That Christ is the author and finisher of faith . 

answ. if Christ be the word of God , and faith come by hearing , and hearing by the word of God , then how is it that he is not the word of faith , being that word by which faith comes when it is heard , and he being the author of it ? May he not then as well be called the word of it , as the author of it , seeing he is the word by which it comes : but that all May understand what this word of faith was which the apostle preached , this was Christ , rom. 10. and they preached no other word to be the word of faith but Christ , that whosoever believed on him should not be ashamed : so that if the ignorance of Christ , and of the apostles words , were blotted out of the hearts of our accusers , they would be silent , and the daily reproach would cease . 

And whereas it is affirmed by us , that the light , or a measure of Christ within , is a sure word of prophecy , or a more sure word of prophecy , as Peter saith , 2 pe•. 1. 19  And whereas many are offended at this , and labours to make persons believe that this is the writings of the prophets which is the more sure word of prophecy the apostle speaks of , because he saith , knowing this first , that no prophecy of the scriptures is of any private interpretation ; for the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man , but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by she holy ghost , &c.  

ans. now i shall make it appear that it was not the writings of the prophets which was that more sure word ; as first , concerning that , here is one thing held out to be a sure word , and another thing held out to be more sure , as unto those to whom it was spoken : and as concerning the first : 

that which is held out to be a sure word , is that which •ame from the father , the voice which cam• from the excellent glory , saying , this is my beloved son , in whom i am w•ll pleased ; and this voice which came from heaven the disciple heard when they were with him in the holy mount . This was a sure word when it was spoken , and when it was written it was a sure testimony , as sure as any of the prophets writings ; for the prophets did see that he was to come , and that he that was to come was the well-b•loved son of the father , and they wrote this down , and it was a sure testimony of Christ ; and Peter , and the rest saw that he was come , and did hear the voice from the excellent glory proclaiming him to be the son of God , and when they had seen it ▪ they wrote it down ; and this was as sure a testimony , yea a surer than the prophets , and that which the apostles were eye-witnesses of , and did write down for truth , was as much  be taken heed unto as that which the prophets declared ; and this will all men of understanding judge , that the apostle Peter did not direct the persons to the prophet's words , to take heed to them because they were more sure th•n his own , and more to be believed : but although the apostles words and writings was confirmed with more power and witness of the spirit than the prophets , and both true , yet the apostles ministry unto those which did not see those things which the prophets saw , much less those things the apostles saw , no , not so far as the dawning of the day , nor to the daystar risen in their hearts , therefore Peter dividing the word of God aright , saith unto them , we have a more sure word of prophecy , whereunto ye do well that ye take heed , as unto a light that shineth in a dark place , until the day dawn , and the daystar aris• in your hearts , 2 pet. 1. 19  it was more sure for them to •ake heed unto that which was as a light shining in a dark place , till the daystar did arise , and the day dawn in their hearts , than the declarations from others without them , decla•rd in words & writings ; as thus for example , by experience ; to such i shall direct my speech , who canno• witness the day dawned , nor the daystar risen in their hearts , nor hath heard the voice from the excellent glory , to such i say , that which i have seen and heard , the visions , power , and glory , wherein i am an eye witness of his glory , and of his appearance , this i May declare and write unto you , and you May believe it , but to such i say , it is more sure for them to take heed to the light that shines in the dark place , till they come to witness in •hemselvess the day dawned , and daystar risen , and the son of God made manifest in them , then to take heed to the words which i have declared , though it be a true testimony ; for the apostle did not write to himself , nor say that it was more sure unto him , bu• unto them unto whom he wrote his epistle ; for unto him no word of prophecy was more sure than that which he had seen and heard when he was with Christ in the holy mount . So this May inform your understandings who have more desir• to know the truth , then to oppose it , and May put to silence the vain disputings by men of corrupt minds , who are destitute of the truth , always corrupting the words of truth to oppose the life of it , as many such there are in these days , which the Lord hath , and will rebuke sharply , that they May be asham•d ; but all who are led and guided by the light of Christ shall know the anointing in them , and the word of faith , yea the son of God : he that can receive it without offenc• , let him . 

5. obj. but he that hath opposed us saith in pag. 25. of his book , in the second part , that the dawning of the day is rather an evening than a morning . 

ans. now let all which have but known a day and a night in the creation , judge , whether the evening or the morning be the dawnings of the day ; or , whether the daystar be a forerunner of the day , or of the night ; then it will not be incredible which i have said before , that he calls darkness light , and light darkness ; but in such things our opposers will not receive a good report from those which can give true judgement , and to such it is left to judge of those things . 

obj. again he saith in pag. 35.  that the spirit of truth was not a comforter to the apostles , nor a reprover to the world before Christ was ascended ; and yet himself , to contradict himself , saith , that he was in them before , and dwelled in them , the same spirit , but not the same measure . 

ans. here is Babylon at the height , fit to be pulled down , but needs little answering , seeing that i• answereth itself , and for such reasons as these he Might well conceal his name : and if he could have put this off by hiding his name , for an hosanna to the son of David , or a testimony to the Lord's Christ , than he Might well have boasted , and have gloried in his shame , as if there had been no spirit of discerning in those he calls Quakers , nor others ; but the eye of truth is not yet so blind , but we know an evening from a morning , a night from a day , and a lie from truth ; and we know also that the disciple had a measure of the spirit of truth while he was with them upon earth , and this spirit did both comfort them , and did carry them on in obedience to his will , and in the power of this spirit went forth into the world , and reproved the world of sin because they did not believe in Christ , and the devils was subject unto them by the spirit of truth that was in them , before Christ ascended , and to this there is a cloud of witnesses : so that this from him , filling his book with such things as these , is as if a man should fill a ba•n with chaff instead of corn , and deceive others with selling i• for corn . 

Another contradiction of the same nature , is this , that the manifestation of the spirit is given ( to no man for himself , but ) to every man to profit withal , to edi•ie , and build up , and do service in the body , as an hand , foot , or eye , or some other member of the body , &c. and to contradict this , in the next words saith , not that the spirit , or the manifestation of the spirit , is given to every man , ( I. e. ) to every individual person , forasmuch as some men are sensual , having not the spirit , therefore no manifestation thereof , pag. 17.  

ans. this is like the former , and so to be cast out with it , for his distinction of words ▪ between every man , and every individual person , will not cover him ; for where the scripture saith every man without distinction , that is , every individual man and woman : and the apostle saith , but the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal , he doth not say , not to every individual person : and this also i say , and affirm , that to every man is given a manifestation of the spirit to profit withal , and he that profits with it , by it shall be justified ; and he that doth not profit with it , by it shall be condemned , because he is an unprofitable servant , and this truth shall stand when all confusion shall have an end , yet some are sensual , having not the spirit . 

obj. again , in despising the testimony from the measure of the gift of the spirit of God , when they have spoken according to the measure , & could not boast themselves above their measure , but in their measure witnessing the work of God as it was fulfilled in them , such he scornfully reproacheth , saying , what means those cracks and crannes in their knowledge , knowing but in part ? there is no pieces , nor parts , nor measures , nor degrees in absolute perfection , but whosoever says he knows in part , he is short of perfection ; and whosoever saith he knoweth perfectly , he knows not how perfect his knowledge is , and the first of these is called a vain man , boasting of that which is not , and of a false gift , and is like clouds , and wind without rain . 

ans. herein is Paul's doctrine ( As well as ours ) declared against , to be but as cracks and crannes , and a vain boasting of a false gift ; for Paul saith , we dare not make ourselves of the number , or compare ourselves with some that commend themselves , but they measuring themselves by themselves , and comparing themselves with themselves , are not wise : but we will not boast of things without our measure , but according to the measure of the rule which God hath distributed unto us , a measure to reach even unto you ; for we stretch not ourselves beyond our measure , not boasting of things without our measure , that is of other men's labours . now this measure of which he thus spoke , was in Christ , so in perfection ; and there is parts and degrees in Christ , and so in absolute perfection ; for so far as every man is in the measure of the gift of God , so far he is in Christ , and so far his knowledge is perfect , and abiding in this he abideth in that which is perfect ; and as he glories in this , he glories in a true gift , and none shall make this glorying void . 

obj. and whereas John Jackson saith of those that say they have but attained in measure , he calleth that the bleeting of the sheep , and the lowing of the oxen , which declares plainly that they are not at home , they are not in the city , but have certain miles to travel before they arrive . 

ans. this is a false interptetation , as i shall leave it unto all of understanding to judge ; for the bleeting of the sheep , and the lowing of the oxen , did signify Saul's disobedience unto the commandment of God , for which the Lord did reject him : but when Paul said he knew in part , and prophesied in part , and would not boast above his measure , this did not signify his disobedience to the Lord , but contrariwise his obedience , and that he was in Christ Jesus : so this was not as the bleeting of the sheep , and lowing of the oxen , neither did it show that they were not in the city ; for Paul testifieth of the holy brethren which he was a minister unto , that they were come unto mount Zion , and unto the city of the living God , the heavenly Jerusalem , and to an innumerable company of angels , to the general assembly , and church of the first-born , which are written in heaven ; and t• God the judge of all , and to the spirits of just men made perfect , and to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant , & to the blood of sprinkling . now let him that have thus accused , show how many miles these had to travel before they came to the city ; & whether was any parts , measures , or degrees in these : or whether there was absolute perfection without any measure or degrees of it ? and whether Paul was not come so far as these unto whom he preached wisdom , even among those that were perfect : and Might he not in that estate say that he would not stretch himself beyond his measure ? But this i say , none are true witnesses of perfection but those who know their measure , and abide in it : and likewise , those that call the witnessing of the truth in a measure of the spirit , the bleeting of the sheep , or the lowing of the oxen , such never knew perfection , neither yet presseth after it , but would keep all others from it , by despiteful terms against the measure of the spirit which leadeth unto it : but the day is come , and the light is risen , which hath found out and discovered all the cunning craftiness of men , in which they go about to deceive the hearts of the simple , and beguile unstable souls ; but the elect seed is risen which it is impossible to deceive ; for it is not the scripture-words which men May take and speak in the hypocrisy , which can darken our knowledge , no• any way hinder the testimony of truth in those which have received it in the power of God , only with such things the blind May lead the blind , and with such things they May strive to keep others out of the kingdom which have not tasted of the good word of God , neither are brought to know a measure of God in themselves , whereunto to be obedient ; but i see the Lord is opening a way for such to come out of the pits which they have been led into , in opening their eyes , and letting them see that their watchmen is blind , and that understanding is departed from them , even from their leaders , and the counsels of God is departed , even from the ancient ▪ and the persons is even like to perish for want of vision , because they have not seen for themselves , but their teachers have seen for them vain visions , and lying divinations , and prophesied lies , causing the ignorant to believe them ; but the Lord's hand is stretched out against such , and is stretched out to gather his own seed from such , to bring them into the fear of the Lord , which is the beginning of wisdom , and into the knowledge of the holy , which is understanding , prov. 9 10. which understanding is a wellspring of life . 

Another seeming strength risen up against us , is the conceit of the discovery of a schism in the body , as if the band or girdle which bound up the body were broken , and as if there were now a character brought forth amongst us , showing a variety of persons , doctrines , and practices , and as if the testimony of our being of the body of Christ , from the unity in the body were ceased , and as if the heads were divided , and a• for proof , instances g. f. to i. n. i n. to g. f. i. b. to i. n. and as if it were not person , but party , which some wonder at , admiring and waiting to see the Lord's counsel and pleasure in it . 

ans. all those that wait to see the Lord's counsel and pleasure , and his wisdom in this thing , shall see it , and be satisfied , and it will for the time to come be more for the confounding of those that watch for iniquity , than any way for confirming them in iniquity , and by that which God hath done , and is doing , shall the girdle and band of our love be made stronger , and in this shall the sight of our enemies fail , and become blindness , for their thoughts is not as God's thoughts in these things , neither their eye as his eye , for he saw a better thing for us in these things than they have imagined , for that which they thought wrought for evil , hath wrought together for good unto those that stand in God's counsel , who always waits to see those works which stands in his wisdom , contrary to man's reason ; for that which they thought did break , that hath bound ; and that which they thought did separate , that hath united together ; so that there is not a difference nor dividing of heads , not in persons , nor in parties , nor in doctrines , nor in practices , but the same unity in the body , in the faith , in the seed , in the covenant , in one heart , and one soul , one way and worship of God in the spirit is now as much , or more than ever before witnessed , so that God hath cut off occasion from those that seek occasion , and hath taken away the cornerstone that the wicked thought to build upon ; and hereby hath God tried , and discovered , and brought to light that which lay in the bottom of the deepest pits ; for God hath brought in this his day , many things forth , to try and prove those who said they were his persons ; and those that a few days since seemed to be like lambs , do now manifest themselves to be in the nature of lions , and ravening wolves ; and those that pretend to wait for the coming of Christ in power , and had the name of seekers , they are now found to reject his coming , and to be such as watch for iniquity in those among whom Christ is come ; and now they are turned backward , and now drink up that which they had vomited up ; for now if they could but find any iniquity among such as God hath made known the glory of his power among ; or if they can but suppose or imagine any such thing from false conceptions and conclusions , this would be a sufficient ground to them to print a book upon , and publish it abroad , and but that the Lord hath been on our sides , well May we say , when all sorts of men and religions hath risen up against us , by their violence had we been consumed , for the powers of darkness , and all the divers worships of the beast , are now more joined together then ever , and the deepest subtlety of the serpent is now at work in his members , to device ways , and change the laws and times , whereby the spirit Might be quenched which God hath raised up in his children , whereby a mighty cry is gone forth through the nations against the mystery of iniquity , where it worketh , both in the root and the branches of it ; and now is the burden of the beasts of the South felt as truly as in the prophet's days , isa. 30. 6. from whence cometh the young and old lion , the viper , and fiery flying serpent , and now doth the mighty and terrible cry of the spirit of the Lord go forth to the men of this generation , as it went forth before time to the Egyptians , concerning this which the Lord hath wrought , ( Your strength is to stand still ) and if this counsel of the Lord be by you received , you shall know more of the ways and workings of the Lord with his children , and that all things which the Lord hath done is for the furtherance of the gospel , and that those which are approved May be made manifest ; what a strong ground of occasion would the envious one have thought he had , if he had come among the babes in Christ who were met together at Corinth , hearing Paul say that there was divisions among them , and said that there must be heresies among them , that they which are approved May be made manifest , 1 cor. 18. 19 and this was no character that God had broken them without hands , no• that he had made their profession of unity of no force , but through this manifestation he did work schism out of the body , that so there should be no schism , rent , heresy , nor any such thing in the body ; and this thing was not that the enemies of God Might glory against the truth ; and if any labour to seek occasion against the holy brethren , and say they are divided into heads because two eminent men of them withstood one another , as concerning eating with the gentiles , viz. Paul and Peter ; to such i say , he that gathered at first into unity , is the healer and repairer of such breaches ; and they May profess and witness as much unity after this as ever before . 

and th•se three which the envious one hath mentioned to be at difference in doctrine and practice , viz. g. f. i ▪ N. and j. b. the unity in the life and power of God in them , and in their doctrine and practice shall stand for a witness , and for a condemnation against all the accusers : and now seeing that their occasion is taken away , their accusations May cease ; and if such prophe•ss be deceived , then let them consider who hath deceived them , i the Lord hath deceived that prophet . Therefore what would such a prophet think of the apostles words when he saith , there must come a falling away first , that the man of sin May be revealed ? Would he , or could he judge this a •haracter that the day of of Christ were at hand , or that through such things the power of it should be made more manifest ? or that those among whom these things were wrought , should be thereby the more united ? To believe this will bring men even to their wi•ss end , it being so contrary to their thoughts and conceivings , and this May w•ll con•ound their wisdom , and turn them backward , and bring them to question the truth of all that which ever they have written , spoken , o• acted against th•se whom the Lord hath manifested his power and work among , contrary to their judgement and discerning ; for the ways and workings of the Lord is deep , and his secrets are with those that fear him , and not with those that despise his appearance , and speak evil of that they know not ; and the Lord will yet work greater things in the earth , that such May be confounded . 

And what will such say , if the words of Daniel the prophet be fulfilled in these days , saying , and some of them of understanding shall fall to try them , and to purge , and to make them white , •ven to the time of the •nd , &c. dan. 11. •5 . Doth not God he•eby try men , and try their spirits , and try their discernings ; should any in such cases judge before the time the Lord make it manifest , for this cause will God bring such into judgement ▪ therefore i say unto you , that your strength is to sit still and let the Lord alone , and let his persons alone , and let him work his own work in his own way , and presume not to be his counsellor , for who have known the mind of the Lord ? let such as have , dwell in it , and preserve knowledge , so shall they always abide in strength , and power , and union with the Lord , and one with another ; and men shall yet know for all that hath been , that we are his disciple , because we love one another ; and none shall make our glorying and rejoicing in the unity of the spirit , and in the love of God , void ; but it shall abound more and more to torment the spirit of enmity which would break it , or accuse us for professing of it , but over that spirit we are in the Lord . 

But what if some should rise up , even from among ourselves , speaking perverse things , and draw disciple after them , and go out from us , as they did from among the apostles , that it Might be made manifest , that they were not all of us : ought this to be laid to our charge ? Or , ought the way of God to be accused ; because of such things , to be heresy , or schism ? If this seem to you an evident token of perdition and of error , yet to us of salvation , and that of God . And we are assured that we are of God , having the witness in ourselves , yet not bearing witness of ourselves , for there is one that beareth witness of us , even the father which is in heaven , and his witness is true , being unto us a seal of assurance . 

Therefore from henceforth this is a warning to small and great , that they no further proceed in that which is both unnecessary and unseasonable : for this i say unto all such , that it is unnecessary and unseasonable , to seek to persuade us , that the truth is error , or that the light , which every man is enlightened withal , is the spirit of every man , for that is not according to the record which God hath given of his son , nor which the son hath given of the light ; but blessed be that day , and blessed for ever be that power in which a seed is brought forth , unto which the father ha•• given •••u• testimony in which they shall never be confounded , which abide faithful , for great is the mystery of godliness , God manifest in the flesh , and against this manifestation is the power of darkness risen up , and all the messengers and ministers of Satan under all forms and professions , hath joined themselves together to make their arm strong against the son of righteousness ; his righteous life , and righteous ways , which now he is bringing forth , among his children ; but out of the mouth of babes , hath God ordained strength , against which all the powers of darkness cannot prevail ; and unto which strength all our enemies must bend , and bow , and come for salvation ; for that which now the leaders of the persons , have set themselves against , when they have finished their course , and the anguish comes over their souls , then will they confess , that it had been well if they had loved the light , and walked in it , which they have so long hated , and despised , with those that walk in it ; and all those which have exercised their strength , to shut others out of the kingdom of God , by their preaching , printing , and false accusations , they shall know that while they serve sin , they are free from righteousness , and do keep others from it ; but the time is coming , that their mouths must be stopped , and the Lord w•ll cause his everlasting righteousness to spread abroad , as broad rivers , and streams , unquenchable , and nothing shall hinder it ; and this is the day in which the Lord will try those that dwell upon the earth , as he hath tried many , and measured them by a true line , and hath found them deceitful , although they have made profession of his name , and of his words , for a cloak for their iniquity ; but now the light is come into the world , and there remain• no more cloak for their sins , nor hiding place for their iniquity . 

The end . 
























































































































































































