The nature of truth its union and unity with the soul , which is one in its essence , faculties , acts ; one with truth . 

Discussed by the right honourable Robert Lord Brook , in a letter to a private friend . 

By whom it is now published for the public good . 

London , printed by r. Bishop , for Samuel Cartwright , at the bible in Duck-lane , 1641.  

The preface to the reader , showing what first gave birth to this discourse of truth . 

Reader , 

Without an epithet : for , you must expect no compliments . I am now a pleader , and so am forbid {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} or {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : yet , with submission to that severe court * , i hope 't will be no offence , by breaking their first injunction , to keep their second . One word then by way of preface , May perhaps not seem unseasonable , unnecessary , and so not {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

This divine discourse of truth , coming to me , from so noble an hand ; i could not envy it the public light : for , what heart could endure to stifle such a beauty , at its first birth , at its first breath ? Nay , though cruelty should scorn to take a check , yet power itself , Might plead impotent , for such an act. for , where , or who is he , that can resist the strugglings of divine truth , forcing its way out from the womb of eternity ? Where , or who is he that by a viperous wrea•he * , or other assault , can smother Hercules , though yet but sprawling in his cradle ? View then this newborn beauty ; mark its feature , proportion , lineaments ; tell me now , was its birth an object of pity ? or rather of envy ? at least admiration ; for , envy finds no place in noble spirits . 

One thing yet , i must excuse ( Which yet indeed needs no excuse ) a second conception is here first born ; yet not abortive ; no , but by mature thoughts , 't is again decreed , the elder shall serve the younger . For , that was meant the act , this but the prologue , ushering in that yet more curious concept ( If such be possible ) which was an embryo before this , but is yet unborn . 

The truth is , this noble Lord ( The author of this following discourse ) having dived deep in those prophetic mysteries ( At which his first lines glance , in this ) was even forced ( By that occasion ) upon a more exact and abstract speculation of truth itself ; naked truth , as in herself , without her gown , without her crown . 

At first view , he saw her sparkle with most glorious luster ; but her rays dazzled his eyes , so that he durst not , he could not , enough behold , admire , and adore , her perfect beauty , exact proportion , divine harmony ; yet though dazzled , he viewed still ; remembering that of the Ar•opagite , earthly bodies are best seen in , and by , light ; but spiritual beauties , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , in , and by , divine clouds , divine darkness ? This , this is the best perspective to divine objects ; and the brightest stars shine best , sparkle most , in the darkest , the blackest night . 

That which ravished his soul most , and most enforced him more to pry , to adore more , was , the experience of that which Plato speaks : when our souls ( Saith he ) glance first upon divine light , they are soon ravished , and cannot but pry more and more , because in it they see {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , somewhat of kin to themselves . and this kindred , if i mistake not , is the nearest possible ; more than consanguinity ; i had almost said more than identity itself . For , alas , that corporal union in materials , which we miscall sometimes identity , is at best but a cold touch in a point or two ; a most disdainful embrace ( At greatest distance ) in those beings which have much {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , and but little {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as Plato's mastet taught him long ago . But in spiritual beings , and in these only , is true harmony , exact convenience , entire identity , perfect union , to be found . 

Such , even such , is that near relation , that near kindred between the soul and truth ; as will fully appear in this following discourse of truth ; ( Which was never meant , nor now published , but as a prodromus to a future treatise about prophetic truth revealed now in scripture : ) of which i shall only add this ; read it ; if it displease , read it again , and yet again ; and then judge . It needs not my apology ; if so , i Might truly say , when 't was first Wrot , 't was intended but a letter to a private friend , ( Not a critic ; ) and since its first writing , and sending , 't was never so much as perused , much less , refined , by its noble author . 

One word more i must speak , and so have done . If any ingenuous reader shall dissent ( In any particular of consequence ) and freely , yet ingenuously , manifest the reasons of his dissent : nothing can be more grateful to this noble Lord , who promiseth the fairest answer ; for , his aim is only search of truth ; which , his lordship well knows , is oft best found , as sparks in the flint , by much contusion . 

Yet , if any shall wrangle , not dispute : rudely thrust , or strike not like a gentleman ; his return will be , only a rational neglect . 

I. s 

Recensui tractatum hunc , qui inscribitur , ( the nature of truth , ) per illustrissimum piissimumque dominum . robertum d. Brooke editum : apprimè sanè doctum , profundisque conceptibus insignitum : quapropter dignissimum arbitror qui in summam utilitatem typis mandetur . 

novemb. 19 1640.  Johannes Hansley , r. p. episc. lond. Capell . domest. 

The nature of truth . Discussed in a letter to a private friend . 

Sir , 

I have according to my poor talon , essayed to find out the true sense of the spirit in these * two chapters , and in this inquest , have improved the labours of the piously learned ; from whom i have received little other favour than this , that they have not seduced me ; they not having approached so near to the truth , as to dazzle it . I confess , that reverend , that bright man , Master Brightman , hath clothed his opinion , with such a Sirenian glory , that he had almost been to me an ignis fatuus . i had almost , in following the old , lost the young , lost the nest of lapwings . But , with all respect to his worth , ( If i am not mightily mistaken ) i have escaped that Syrtis ; and yet dare i not with the philosopher cry out {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; for , * who is fit for these things ? 

Every truth is * a myste•y ; what must that be then , which is purposely veiled by the spirit ? Jesus Christ , who is styled in scripture , the * way , truth , life , light , ( And these things are apprehend by sense , and are common ) is to * the Jews a stumbling block , and to the Greeks' foolishness . 

May we not then justly say of him that dares pry into the ark , with hopes and thoughts clearly to unfold the mysterious , the prophetical part of Jesus Christ , to unknit the Gordian knot ; May we not say of him , what God saith of Job ; who is this that darkeneth wisdom with counsel ? 

Alas , are we not all since Adam's lapse buried under the shadow of death , and lost in the region of darkness ? Who is there that knoweth truth ? * he that thinketh he knoweth any thing , knoweth nothing as he should . 

Moral truth , which ( As some think ) is yet more within our reach , than those sacred mysteries , is unknown to us , both in the universal nature , and in the particular actings of it ; difficilia quae pulchra . 

Indeed truth is that golden apple , which though it hath ( In some sense ) been offered to the fairest ; yet the most refined wits , the most high-raised fancies of the world , have courted her in vain , these many ages : for whilst they have sought , with a palsy hand , this glorious star , through the perspective of thick reason , they have either mounted too high , and confounding the creator with the creature , made her god ; or descending too low , and deserting the universal nature , have confined their thoughts to some individual truth , and restrained her birth to several parcels within the chaos . 

The nature of truth . it 's union and unity with the soul . 

Chap. i. the understanding and the truth-understood , are one . 

Truth is indeed of the seed royal , of progeny divine : yet so , as to be ( For i May say of her , what the spirit saith of faith ) * near us , to be in us . And when she is pleased to descend into our valleys , and to converse with us , she erects her own pavilion , and doth fix it in whatsoever is lovely in us . 

The understanding is her throne , there she reigneth , and as she is there seated , as she shineth in that part of the soul ; she appeareth to me under two notions , which are also her measure through the whole sphere of being ; as will be discovered more hereafter , when these lesser streams shall have emptied themselves by progress into a larger river . 

First , that very being , which immediately floweth from above , and is the rise or the first and uniform groundwork in this particular being which we now treat of , and which under this notion we call the form or substance . 

Secondly , those workings which breathe from thence , as all actions and sayings , which are ( In our phrase ) the effects of a reasonable soul . 

I shall first in few words treat of the first , and then very briefly conclude with a word or two upon the second part of truth . 

This first truth is the understanding in its essence : for what is the understanding other than a ray of the divine nature , warming and enlivening the creature , conforming it to the likeness of the creator ? And is not truth the same ? For the beauty of truth's character is , that she is a shadow , a resemblance of the first , the best form ; that she is light , the species , the sparkling of primitive light ; that she is life , the sublimation of light , that she May reflect upon herself . 

That she is light , none will deny ; that light in reasonable creatures is the fountain of life , is manifest . For the form of a reasonable soul is light , and therefore when the soul informeth and giveth life to animal rationale , it enableth the creature to work according to light , and upon her accesses the organs can entertain light , as the eye than beholds the light of the sun ; upon her retirements they are dark and useless . Thus whilst life is light , and light is truth , and truth is conformity to God ; and the understanding as we yet discourse of it , is this light to the soul , the understanding and truth can be but one . 

Chap. ii the second argument , proving that truth is the nature of the understanding . 

I know the learned choose rather to style the understanding , a faculty ; and so institute a soul recipient ; a being ( scil. truth ) received ; and a faculty , which is the understanding , whereby the soul receiveth and acteth according to what it doth entertain . 

But with submission to their better judgement , i should crave leave to make one quaere . 

are there not to the constitution of every being three notions requisite ? 

First , the fountain communicating . 

Secondly , the channel entertaining . 

Thirdly , the waters imparted . 

I confess , we must not in metaphysical beings expect physical subsistencies ; yet {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} all learning doth allow of . But where shall we find these in the understanding ? whilst the intellect passeth under the notion of a faculty . indeed we May discern the last ( scil. ) those sweet beams of light which beat upon us continually . 

But where is the second which entertaineth them ? if it be the understanding , than the light which differenceth us from the vegetative and sensitive creatures , lieth in the understanding , and not in the soul ; and the soul ( Which all men hold to be a spiritual being ) is but a theca to the intellect , as the body is the tabernacle of the soul . Or , if the soul hath light as well as the understanding , then are there two enlightened beings in one reasonable creature : non belle quaedam faciunt duo , sufficit unus huic operi . two reasonable beings in one compositum , is too unreasonable a thing . 

Thirdly , who is it that communicateth this light ? It is conveyed to the understanding either from the soul , or some other way . 

if from the soul , than the soul doth not find the defect of the understanding . for , if the soul can communicate light , than hath it light already ; the same , or more excellent ; then can it work , diffuse light , and enjoy itself ; and so this faculty , the understanding , shall be in vain . 

If in any other way , it must either be immediately from God , or mediante creatura . 

If from a creature , and not from the soul , it must be by some other faculty intervenient . For , if the soul ( Which by their consent is a more noble agent than the understanding ) cannot , according to their doctrine , act without a faculty ; how shall an inferior being work , without some such like subservient help ? And thus May you excurrere in infinitum , which , according to the philosophers , May not be done ; for , entia non sunt multiplicanda , nisi necessariò . 

If the truth come from God , then why is it not immediately , intrinsically , infused into the soul itself ? But however the understanding be enriched with this treasure of truth , if it be imparted to it , than is it , itself that truth , that light which i contend for . For God doth not communicate light ( By light ( Which i take in a metaphorical sense ) i understand some spiritual excellency ) and such light ( I say ) God doth not offer but to light . for , quicquid recipitur , recipitur ad modum recipientis . Cleopatra her dissolved union would have been to Esop's cock of less value than a barley corn . And if the understanding have not light , it cannot take it , unless by being turned into the nature of it . For what giving and receiving can here be , besides that which maketh both to become one and the self same ? light came into the world , but it was refused by darkness . Ignoti nulla cupido . 

Thus the understanding and light are different in names , May be different in degrees , but not in nature . For what that reverend man i doctor twist saith most acutely of a spiritual gift , i May say of spiritual light . the soul cannot refuse a spiritual gift ( I now speak in his phrase . ) The soul and any spiritual being do not , as corporeal things , greet each other by the help of the loco-motive faculty ; but when grace is given by God to the soul , there is , as it were ( da veniam voci ) an hypostatical union betwixt the gift and the soul ; and the soul cannot reject it , because they are no more . Two but one . so to be in the capacity or act of receiving light , is to be light . 

Lastly , how passeth this light from the understanding to the soul ? Will not here be left as vast a gulf , as they make between the understanding and the will , which make them divers ; whence grow those inextricable disputes , how the the will is made to understand , what the understanding judgeth fit to be willed ? 

Chap. iii a prosecution of the second argument , wherein these three notions are applied to the understanding , being made one with the truth . 

All these rubs are easily taken out of the way , if you make that which you call the understanding , truth . for then have you , 

First , the father of mercies , dispencing light and truth . 

Secondly , light and truth dispensed . 

Thirdly , the totum existens , consisting of matter and form , of material and immaterial beings ( As we distinguish them ) called a reasonable creature thus informed or constituted , which we name the recipient of this light and truth . 

Do not tell me , that i thus make the recipient and thing received all one ; that is not strange in emanation divine . In scripture you have a parallel of this . 1 the fourth vial is poured out upon the sun ( scil. ) the scriptures , and the scriptures are the vial itself ; the scripture is emptied upon itself , it is agent and patient , receiver and received . I know learned Mede to prevent this , which to him is a difficulty , imagineth the Emperor to be the sun ; but in two words that is thus disproved . 

First , the Emperor is nowhere called the sun in this book ; when he receiveth a metaphorical typical title , he is called the dragon . 

Secondly the scriptures are in the revelation divers times set forth to us by the sun . So that if you refuse the sense which i fix upon , than you do not only forsake , but oppose the scripture-phrase . 

But were not this truth mounted in a celestial chariot , reason itself would evince it . For , consider any individual being you please , vegetative or rational , or what you will , who is it that entertaineth this being , but the being itself which is entertained ? Who is it that receiveth from the womb of eternity that reasonable creature , but the creature received ? 

the ignorance of this point , hath raised that empty question , whether the soul or the body be contentum ? For if every being be its own contentum , this question will seem to be no more a difficulty . And if there happen any near union betwixt two beings , as the body and the soul , the first is not continens , the other contentum ; but as husband and wife , each bringeth his part towards the making up of the compositum . 

Thus without any violalation of reasons right , i seem justly to conclude , that the totum existens , consisting of matter and form , the reasonable creature , is the recipient of this truth . 

Chap. iiii. this argument further cleared by more objections propounded and answered . 

But still it is demanded , why May not the understanding supply the third place ? why May it not be this recipient ? 

To whom i give this answer ; that if they make the understanding but a quality , and depending upon some other being , it cannot , as i have proved in this discourse , course , be the recipient : but if they look upon it as this light , this truth itself , than the dispute is reconciled . 

some conceive , all these difficulties are cured , if you make the understanding only virtus quâ , concluding with the philosopher , that ibi subsistendum est , without inquiry after a further progress . I could jurare in verbamagistri , i could acquiesce here , but that i desire to be convinced by reason and not by terms . I shall therefore humbly ask this question . 

what difference is there betwixt virtus quâ and a faculty ? as in a knife , the cutting ariseth from the sharpness , and this sharpness is virtus quâ , or the faculty whereby the knife doth cut . 

If it be but a faculty , than i repair to my former answer : but if something else than a faculty , it must either be a nominal being , or real existence . 

If the first , it beareth no weight . 

If the second , than i say , it must entertain species ( For all spiritual glories do operate by the communication of their divine species ) and then will you be cast upon the former rock . 

Yet still they say , the understanding , being a spiritual being , receiveth light in some way which we know not ; and so they proceed to obscure distinctions and voluminous discourses , concerning intellectus agens & intellectus patiens or passibilis . but the wiser sort of them , perceiving the thinness , aerialness and craziness of this spider's web , have with greater probability made God to be intellectus agens , by his influence upon the understanding . 

respon. is not this the Athenian altar , which groaned under that superscription , * to the unknown God ? i would i could discover with s. Paul to them this light , this truth , which they know not , that they Might love it and embrace it . But secondly , i dispute not against things i know not : they know not this . I know that i May better maintain the other , that the understanding is not the recipient of this light , than they aver that it is , in a way whereof they never hope to find any footsteps . 

Chap. v. the soul and truth in the soul are one . 

I May yet be pressed with this objection : all these difficulties May be urged against the soul , which have been produced against the understanding . 

resp. are not these like the untrue mother , who will kill the child , because she cannot call it her own ? If these inconveniences be justly urged against the soul , it will not deliver the understanding . but i will deal ingenuously , and confess that if you take the soul under any other notion than truth ; if you deem it , first to be a being , and then to be light , as God made Adam first ( I mean the body ) and then breathed life into him ; if , i say , there be first a being , and then an infusion of light , you will be pressed with the former arguments . But if you make the understanding , the soul , light , truth , one , then are you quite delivered out of all these straitss , and then is it true which i aver , that , that degree of light , which we enjoy in the inward man , is the specifical difference , which distinguisheth between us and brutes , deservedly called reason , that ample sphere of truth , which is the all in us , and besides which we are wholly nothing . 

Are not we said to be made after the image of God ? and if in any thing we are honoured with this inscription , it is in the most noble part ? Now God is unus , purus , simplex actus . for ( With submission to his better learning and judgement ) i cannot subscribe to d• Ames his manner of expression , who saith , first there is God , and then his attributes are in him , * tanquam in esse secundo . if then we do bear his impress , quanquam non passibus aequis , it must be in that which is ( As far as we can judge ) dei formalis ratio , which is to be purus , simplex actus . 

In this our shadowy resemblance of the deity , i shall not challenge perfection ; for though the scripture say , * we shall hereafter be perfect as he is perfect , and doth here style us , partakers of divine nature ; yet all this is to be understood according to our little model . Unity is that wherein we carry some touches , some lineaments of his majesty . Unity is God's essence . Unity is all what we are . For division being the birth of nothing , can be nothing . And thus May we raise from our microcosm , a passable hieroglyphic of the trinity . 

truth as it is in the breast of eternity intended to the sons of men , resembles patrem intelligentem ; as it descends from above , filium intellectum ; as it informeth the soul , enjoyeth and reflecteth upon itself , spiritum dilectum . we must not then expect , first , a being of the soul : secondly , a faculty whereby it worketh . God and his attributes , are but one ; mercy and justice kiss each other in him ; he and they are ens necessarium ; and so the soul and the faculty is one , that divine light and truth . 

Chap. vi . All things are this one light or truth , shining from God . 

But if the intellect , the soul , light and truth are ( From the reasons alleged ) all but one , this argument will press all things that are ; then will all being fall under the same predicament . 

This is that which i aimed at ; and why not ? Seeing that ▪ first , all being is derived from the same fountain , scil. from him who is uniform , in all like himself . 

Secondly , all being is the same in nature , ( scil. ) a beam of that excellent light , and therefore in metaphysics * truth and being are one . 

Thirdly , all being is entertained in the same manner by every individual existence , which is the subject receiving this light from above : and all real true reception is alone by similitude and union of nature . 

Yet i shall not agree to confound the names of particular beings , though i do conjoin their natures . For , all being May be compared to light ; in such a body it is styled the sun ; in another it is called the moon ; in the third it beareth the name of a star , and under various shapes , the names of various stars , as Syrius , Canopus , &c. but all is light , and it is but light . the body of waters is by us called seas ; when they beat upon such a coast , it beareth one name ; when it coasteth upon another soil , it receiveth a several denomination . All being is this light , this truth ; but contained within those circles , it appeareth to us under this name ; and again , it hath another style when it beateth upon a various object . 

All being is but light , communicating itself to us through several crannies , some greater , some less , whilst all is light . 

* Plato most excellently , most acutely , most truly hath madé all being of terminus and infinitum . : the first being appearing to us in several bounds and measures amid the vast infinity of darkness or nothing . 

The Platonic philosophers do not err , who reduce all beings to number , making one all and the chief , and the other more or less glorious , as they have two , three , or four , more or less numbers or degrees . 

Whence they had this maxim , i know not ; this i know , Satan , that old serpent , is very learned , and can sometimes ( As he doth , when he calls Jesus the Christ and son of God ) can , i say , sometimes , tell true , that so he May even by truth entail to himself a certain interest in such disciple as refuse any other allurement than that of golden truth : and it is to be feared , that they have had too great and free converse with him . For even this sweet point of learning have they shamefully abused to charms and spells , as that of the poet , r numero deus impair s gaudet . two was cursed , because it first departed from unity ; three whereby unity again returned into itself , became sacred . 

But it May be ( & spero meliora ) that they received it from the Egyptians , and the Egyptians from the Hebrews . 

Now , if this be true , ( Which i submit to the judgement of the wise ) than all being is but one , and all things are more or less excellent , as they partake more or less of this first being . 

This doctrine of Platonists will not be so unfavory , if we pay unto unity its due tribute . I confess , according to true philosophy , time is but mensura motus vel ordinis , which both are the same ; number , calculus temporis ; one is principium tantùm numeri , and so it is hardly a part of that which is but the handmaid of circumstance . 

Chap. vii . How unity is all in all things . 

But i should desire that we Might consider whether it doth not carry something in it , in nature more glorious , something that May seem to inform a being . If i cannot tell what it is , you will excuse me , knowing how hard a thing it is to find out the form of any being , and how much more hard to discover the being of a form . 

But from this reason i do seem to collect some glimmering light of what i now propound . 

All being seemeth to breath and catch after unity . Gravia do not more naturally incline downward , than all being doth naturally seek for unity . 

Of beings there are but two sorts . 

Uncreated . 

Create . 

Uncreated , is God only . 

Create , is 

Spiritual . 
Moral . 
Physical . 
Mathematical . 
In all these you will find unity as it were the form of their being . 

My thoughts , my ignorance , my no thoughts of the first , incomprehensible , inaccessible majesty , i desire to propound with fear , trembling and reverence . 

If John in the midst of revelation , being overcome with nothing but the glitterings and sparklings of the creature , did mistake , and worshipped one of his fellow-servants ; if the Jews refused to trample upon any contemptible scroll , fearing lest , in them , the nameless name of God Might be included : surely we in the midst of darkness , having to do , not with the name , but with the nature of eternity , aught to clothe our spirits with much modesty . 

I shall therefore humbly propound this to consideration , whether unity be not all in God . 

I confess there are three persons in one godhead ( And that is the mystery ) and yet but one God . And more there could not have been ; for this God is infinite , eternal , &c. and only one can be so ; there cannot be two infinites , two eternity's . 

And again , this one cannot not be otherwise , for if he could have been something else , he had not been infinite . 

If then unity be such a necessary ( Give us leave to speak as we can ) accident , as , without which God could not have been what he is : May it not be said that unity is coessential to him , seeing that the deity admits of no accidents ? And if of his essence , than unity is in him all , for the essence of God is all in God , and God in his essence is but one divinity . 

ob. but so , infinity , power , &c. all attributes are in God his essence , as well as unity ? 

answ. all other attributes are at length resolved into this of unity . Of this , can be given no account , but only negative . All explications flow from this , return to this , that God is one . 

what is it to be infinite ? Ficinus answers , to have nothing of privation mixed , to be plenus sui ; which is to be one . 

The power of God is the unity of all being in one point . what is this , i am that i am ; but this , i am one ? the same we May say of all other the names of God . 

when we survey the nature of spiritual beings , we shall find them in scripture styled one . for God reduceth all the commandments to love . and the saints , who are , quatenus saints , spiritual beings , ( For their saintship is a spiritual excellency ) are styled , rom. 12.5 . one body ; and , gal. 3.16 . they are all one in Jesus Christ . 

Christ and his church are but one body . Now , this union carrieth certainly something with it more essential than a figure . 

When the three persons are united in one deity , the union is more close than a figurative union . the conjunction of the human nature , and the second person in the trinity , is a very entire conjunction ; and so is that of the saints with Christ . There is the union of the whole human nature with one person . Here is the union of divers persons to the whole divine nature . And we May easily allow a near union to these metaphysical beings : seeing even in natural things , there is as it were an unity , even of two physical existences . For God saith , you two shall be one flesh ; he saith not one , but one flesh . But these are aenigmata , while we see through glasses of flesh . 

seeing moral beings are , by general consent , of fraternal alliance to spiritual , both in nature and operation ; i shall not say any thing of them , but only what is said by all , that virtutes sunt concatenatae . 

I shall therefore mind you but of this , how in physical beings , every thing doth delight in unity . And this is very plain in the stillicids of water , which , if there be water enough to follow , will draw themselves into a small thread , because they will not sever : and when they must disunite , than they cast themselves into round drops , as the figure most resembling unity . 

Whence is that sympathy in nature between the earth and the adamant , but from hence , that they being of one nature , desire to improve their unity by mutual embraces ? 

When have the sunbeams their vigour and efficacy , beating upon the burning glass , but when the glass hath gathered them all into one ? 

Where is the power of our five senses , which are in their nature so honourable , that nihil cadit in intellectum , quod non prius cadit in sensum ? where is their virtue , but in communis sensus ? nay ( If i durst be so bold ) but this i May not now dispute : i conceive all the senses are but one , and that is * Tactus . for their energy is nothing till the ray from the object to the organ , and from the organ to the object touch in one . 

It is most happily expressed by Sir John Suckling ; [ who having drawn the breasts of wit and fancy dry , 
May justly now write man , must not a suckling die . ] 




When he saith , The circumambient air doth make us all 
To be but one bare individual . 




What are the mathematical sciences , but unity turning itself into several forms of numbers and figures , yet still remaining entire ? Harmony , proportion , proportionality , which are the subject , the soul of all knowledge here , are so many several names of the same unity . Beauty is but one act of grace and sweetness , which seems to us composed of various parcels . * music is one form resulting from many different sounds . This is that mystery , which unknown , hath confounded the schools in that question , whether quantity be divisibilis in semper divisibile . all things are certainly at last reduced to an unity ; yea , all things appear to us clothed with one form ; yet are we never able to search out the perfection of this , when we most accurately pursue it . The glory and majesty thereof is such , that it rendereth our minds uncapable of any more than a gross view , like that of the sun in his splendour . 

Democritus his definition of being , is very considerable , * est aliquid differens à se , quod sibi convenit : and indeed , all being is but one , taking various shapes , sometimes discovering itself under one , sometimes under another , whereas it is but one being : and this is light , truth , that ( As i said before ) beam of divine glory , which is the spring of all beings . 

To close this discourse , give me leave thus to set forth that majesty , whereby unity wrappeth up all things within itself . There can be no recedence from unity , unless by addition of a new , distinct , unity . But where will you find this ? A simple unity must be entirely one with the first ; if you add any thing to unity , whereby it May differ , it remains no more one , but becomes a duality . 

yet do i in no wise reject that division of being left us by our Masters , when they teach us , that there is first a being which is known to be , but itself in its being is insensible . 

Secondly , another that is sensible , but knoweth not its own excellency . 

Thirdly , that which knowing its own excellency , can reflect upon itself . For , i say , this which is called vegetative , sensitive , and rational , is all of one nature . 

Chap. viii . The nature of habits . 

And whilst i affirm that the soul is nothing but this truth , i do not refuse the doctrine of habits , either Infused or acquisite . 




For when the soul by virtue of its being , is clear in such a truth , it is said to be an infused habit . When by frequent action , such a truth is connatural to the soul , it May be styled an habit acquisite : though indeed all is but light more or less glorious , discovering itself frequently or rarely , and by divine appointment , at such a conjunction of time , and not any other , not that the soul is informed by its own action ; for what hath the stream which it derives not from the source ? What can those workings added to that , from which they receive themselves ? 

And therefore i wholly subscribe to the Platonists , who make all scientia nothing but reminiscentia ; for when it appeareth not , it is not ; the soul being but an activity , it must be no more than it acteth : and though we seem by frequent actings to help the soul , and so to create in it acquisite habits , yet these are but a Phaenomenon . this is but the way which God discloseth to our eye , whereas all the actings are only new discoveries . 

Our philosophers affirm thus boldly of the unreasonable creature , attributing it all to the instinct , or a new influence . 

Why May not , why must not we conclude the same of man , seeing it is a received truth , that acti agimus , and we are in our strength in regard of God no better than the most abject creature ? 

But if all be one ; ( Soul , understanding , habits , all the same : ) then neither do faith and reason differ . 

Surely they differ only in degrees , not in nature . 

That reverend holy man , that dexterous cominus-pugnator , seemeth to aver the same or more in historical and saving faith * . 

Mr Huit in his anatomy of conscience , clearly affirmeth it . * 

The first degree is reason . 
A second , historical . 
A third , temporary . 
A fourth , saving faith . 
A fift , plerophory . 
A sixt , * beatifica visio , that light whereby we shall see as we are seen ; these are of the same nature with that light which a reprobate is partaker of . 
And if any man question the truth of this , let him but consider , that the donor is the same , our good God . 

The efficient , instrumental , and formal cause , is Jesus Christ . 

The subject recipient , the totum existens . 

And the gift itself is light or truth , a spiritual being . 

How can it choose then , but to be one and the same , seeing ( As i said before ) such a recipient cannot entertain any other guest ? 

neither do i at all abet that unhappy opinion of falling away from grace . 

There is in the opinion a liquid nefasti , and therefore i study to shun it . The propugnators of it are unhappy ; for they have not only made a rent amongst us , but strengthened a common adversary . 

The oppugnators also are unhappy ; for they have so managed the cause , that their adversaries lie almost under invincible darkness : for the oppugnators fearing to speak plain , have called spontaneitatem , liberam voluntatem , and it is impossible to distinguish between libera voluntas contra-remonstrantium , & liberum arbitrium remonstrantium . 

And whilst the remonstrants find no difference in this main tenet , they weigh all the rest in the same scale , and judge accordingly . For an argument often alleged by many learned men , if it confuteth not , it doth confirm an error ; and thus are they out of the reach of truth . 

That learned , that pious man , the first fruit of our church her resurrection , famous Calvin , styled it spontaneitatem , and not liberam voluntatem : for , deus and libera voluntas are incompatible , not to be cemented by that distinction without difference , libera à necessitate , sed non ab infallibilitate . and therefore mighty * Rutterfort affirmeth , that posito dei decreto absoluto ( And all things are under such a decree ) insulse quaeritur an potentia libera sub eo decreto sit indifferens . 

But here i am not to , i cannot , dispute this question . Only i say thus much , it is so unhappy an opinion , that i hope i shall not at all abet it . 

For though reason and faith be one in nature : yet is not reason that degree of light , of which the spirit hath said , my seed is in you , and you cannot sin . and therefore men cannot lose that which they never had . And this will be a little more clear , by the answer to the next objection , which is this . 

If faith and reason , if knowledge and grace be all but one light , how cometh it to pass , that some who have less light , have more faith ? and those again , who are for knowledge , as angels of light , are not partakers of that which is called saving faith ? 

This difficulty is rather mazy , than strong ; i shall therefore hope to bring the Ariadnean thread . 

And at first aboard , i deny the proposition . I conceive it a mistake . For i do verily believe , that the weakest saint knoweth more of God , than the most intelligent of those spirits , who though once in heaven , are now in intolerable flames . 

All men confess thus much , that even the meanest Christian , hath more experimental knowledge of God , than Beelzebub the Prince of the air . And doth not this convince them of what i affirm ? For what ( To speak in their language ) is experiment , but the daughter of light , gathered by frequent observation ? If experiment be but light , and their experience is more than that of the greatest wits ; then ( If i mistake not ) by necessary consequence , their light is more and greater . 

But i suppose , the error May be cleared by this simile . 

The one is as the man who hath studied the theory , the other the practice of any art of science . 

The first May know more in appearance ; but the other indeed knoweth more . 

You shall find two unequally learned , the first is a gnosticke , a helluo literarum ▪ the other hath not read so much , but hath concocted , Mastered and subdued all before him . Which now is said to know more ? 

the fool hath said ( Not , as some expound it , wished ) in his heart , there is no God . it is true , now and then he hath some glimmering light of a deity , but anon again all is shaken , and he faith , there is no god . 

Doth not the persons of Israel say , we are our own Lords , who shall control us ? we have made a covenant with death and hell , and none shall reach us . Can these men , these beings be said to know God ? 

If you object the devil's age and experience , it cannot help ; it is but , as you call it , a collection of his own lights , and all the stars shining together make not day . 

I should only ask this one question , can the devils believe or know God to be all mercy ? it is impossible , because they cannot believe him so to themselves . 

ob. but some say , neither do the best men believe him so to the wicked . 

resp. yes , we do , we know him in his nature to be merciful to them . 

Besides , mercy and justice are all but one thing in God ; and this those miserable creatures cannot consent to , that their ruin is the effect of supreme perfection , infinite sweetness . 

To the confirmation of this , i shall but press this one consideration . 

if they did know more than the saints , they must needs love more ; and in this i shall have all those my abettors , who hold that the will doth necessarily follow the understanding ; which whilst Aristotle denieth in broad and open disputes , he doth in tacit terms closely yield to . 

I do apprehend it an undeniable truth , that what good soever i know to be good , i must love . And therefore if wicked men did know more of God , they must know him needs under the notion of good : and so seeing goodness in his nature , they must love him more . i Might add , what good we know , we are : our act of understanding being an act of union , which ( As before ) being metaphysical in the soul , must be entire . 

Chap. ix. . The difference betwixt knowledge and affection , discussed . 

It May be that what hath been disputed , will be granted : but there is yet an objection which requireth solution . 

Ob.   If all being differeth only in degrees , not nature ; if knowledge , affection , light , activity , be all one ; whence is it that even amongst Christian men , holy , spiritual men , men of largest affections , ( And the affections are the activity , the main of the soul ) i say men of the largest affections are esteemed to know least of God ? And others , whose affections are as it were benumbed , and all activity is placed in their brain , understand more of the divine nature ? 

Doth it not appear from hence , say they , that all being is not one , differing only in degrees : but that there are even different natures , amongst which one May excel , whilst the other is depressed ? 



Sol.   I could tell these men , who start the objection , that they deem the light in the head , more than the love in the heart : and then i shall say , that with them the head is the higher degree , the heart the lower degree of light , and so all is but a different light ; from whence , affection , being judgement in its infancy , ceaseth , when knowledge groweth mature : as the heat and blaze of fire , is but its labouring towards purity and perfection , which therefore are no more when the clear flame reacheth its element . But other men think otherwise , and they do pitch all in the affections , and the meaner light in the understanding ; and so turning the table , still one shall be a parcel of , or a step to the other , and each carry along both in equal measure according to reality : how much true affection , so much knowledge , & vice versa : as i shall show in other two answers , on which i fix the strength of my thoughts in this point . And therefore 



secondly , i affirm confidently , and , i hope , truly , that he , who soars upon the wings of affection , and layeth himself in the arms of Jesus Christ , though he amuse not his head with the mystical nature of the trinity , with the procession of the spirit , with the incarnation of Jesus Christ , attempting to make that holy oil ; touching the ark , this glory which is too high for him ; losing himself , while he laboureth to see how human nature can be raised so high ; divine condescend so low , as to bring forth the hypostatical union : i say , such a one knoweth more of God , than the other . 

It is often seen , a working head is like an overhot liver , burneth up the heart , and so ruineth both : whereas sweet humble affections , are the only way to keep the poor creature in a constancy of spiritual health . And in this care the apostle to Titus forbids foolish questions , endless genealogies , contentions , and brawlings about the law . 

This law is the rule of life ; and if we know not the law , we cannot keep the law , and so we must perish ; and yet we find the search of this forbidden . 

object . some will say , here is meant the ceremonial law . 

answ. i will allow it ; but is not the ceremonial included under the second precept ? the persons upon Christ his sermon , wherein he taught , that he that looketh on a woman to lust after her , hath committed adultery with her in his heart ( And so he gave the law its full latitude ) say , he speaketh as one that hath authority , and not as the scribes and Pharises : conceiving it their duty and happiness to know the law in its utmost limits ; and yet we are restrained from any brainsick , heady , nice inquiry , even into the law , scil. not to busy our heads with the knowing part , in overgreat proportion , but labour to bring our knowledge to practise . 

If then all such knowledge ( I mean all knowledge of this nature ) be forbidden , it is because it is not good ; it is not knowledge , but a vain tumour in stead of real greatness or growth : and that other of the affection , hath certainly more of God in it , and so more of truth . 

The apostle is so great an enemy to this kind of knowledge , that having disputed such a point in disdain of gainsayers , he concludeth , if any man lust to be contentious , we have no such custom , nor the churches of God . 

— demonstrate quaelibet herba deum . he who refreshed with the sweet odours , pleased with the various comely shapes of a flower , can say , this is sweet , this is lovely , lovely indeed ; yet Jesus Christ is a bed of spices , as the lily of the field , the rose of Sharon , sweeter , much sweeter , ten thousand times more lovely . this man knoweth God , this man loveth God , this man knoweth him indeed ; and this knowledge , as it is the most pleasant here , so it will certainly prove the most profitable hereafter , and always declare itself most real . 

Doth not the apostle , doth not he most truly , most pathetically cry out ; though i had the gift of prophecy , and knew all secrets , all knowledge , yea , if i had all faith , so that i could remove mountains , i were nothing ; i were as sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal , if i have not charity . when all these excellencies meet in a Christian , as haply they May , yet it is charity that maketh him what he is , and the other beings are but as phalerae , as trappings which give a handsome set-off , but not a being to a Christian . 

Love is lovely in God's eye , he is styled the god of love , the God love . and in another place , the scripture affirmeth that in this we have fulfilled the will of God , if we love one another ; for by this we are made one with God , and so dwell in true light . 

The two tables are reduced to love of God and our neighbour . So that sweet affections do make the most sweet harmony in God's ears . of the chorus of saints , the greatest number will be found amongst the feminine sex , because these are most naturally capable of affection , and so most apt to make knowledge real . It is true , i confess , these affections misguided , led them first into transgression ; but these same affections after , carried them first to the grave , then to the sight of a saviour , gave them the enwombing of Christ , who ( In some sense ) Might have entertained our nature in another way ( If he had so pleased ; ) and these affections will one day raise many of them into the sweet embraces of everlasting joy . 

Amongst the church-officers , the pastor and the doctor , according to Timothy , are more eminent than the rest , because they labour in the word and doctrine . of these two , the doctor is always to have his sword always gird about his thigh , he must enter into the lists with every uncircumcised Goliath . he must stand continual sentinel , that no herefies be forced upon the church . He must beat his brains in dissolving difficilia , and clearing obscura . he must sometimes faint away in watery cold fits , by picking up , and throwing out witless , sapless sophisms , which though they cannot hurt the strong , May seduce the weak . In the mean time , the pastor leadeth the flock into the sweet and pleasant meadows , feeding them by the little brooks of seemingly shallow affections ; and yet this man shall not only receive equal honour with the doctor , but be preferred before him ; as appeareth clearly in eph. 4.11 . 1 cor. 12.26 . As it was with the Israelites , so it is here ; those who keep the stuff , receive equal reward with the combatants . I do therefore conclude , he who hath the largest affections , hath most of God , most of his image , which is renewed in knowledge . 

Thirdly , sometimes it happeneth , that those who have the largest knowledge , have the most enlarged affections , even to our eye ; and this is happiness indeed . I confess , it doth not so seem to an eye that would read it running ; but if it be exactly looked on , if it be presented to our view in the portrait of an example , i think it will be very clear . 

David and Solomon compared with Paul , will be as a thousand witnesses . The two first do seem to outstrip all men in affection , they are brimful , running over . 

For , David is styled the sweet singer of Israel ; in his psalms he is ever magnifying the rich mercies of God , singing forth the praises of God , choosing rather to be a doorkeeper in the house of God , than to dwell in the tents of Mesech : making his word to be a light unto his feet , and a lantern unto his paths , placing all his delight in the law of the Lord . 

Solomon is the happy penman of that hymn , which by the spirit is styled the song of songs . Yet for all this , even in this , they are both exceeded by saint Paul . 

But some , it May be , will imagine those worthies to be endowed with higher gifts of nature and art , than s. Paul : and then they will give all the glory to their understanding , and not to their affections . 

If it be so , i confess i have not fitly chosen my opposites ; but the truth will then appear in them , without comparison distinctly . 

For , if in affection they exceed all , and in abilities are as Saul , taller than their brethren by head and shoulders , than is it manifest in them , that eftsoon men of the most raised parts , of highest abilities , do superabound in love . 

But , if , in things which are not directly of faith , i could cease to be a sceptic , i should with that most reverend worthy , Thomas Goodwin , give saint Paul for head and heart , that throne in heaven which is placed next to Jesus Christ . But secret things belong to God ; let us only compare their eminency here below . I think it will be out of question , that saint Paul was the most excellent . For , though Solomon ( There i suppose will be the difficulty ) be said to be the wisest of men , that ever were , that ever should be ; yet that is to be applied only to government , and ( If it May reach so far ) to his excellent skill in natural philosophy . 

View but saint Paul , and see whether he doth not excel in every thing . He had gathered up vast learning at the feet of Gamaliel ; for his parts he was advanced to eminent power in church and commonwealth . He saith of himself , i profited in the Jews religion above many my equals in my own nation , being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers . and after his conversion , he was judged the only man fit to contend with the philosophers at Athens . For they who seemed to be somewhat , in conference added nothing to him . And therefore to him was committed the unravelling of all the difficult knots . It is he that disputes about meats , long hair , divorces , irregular partings of husband and wife . It is he that openeth the nature of prophecy , evinceth the resurrection from the dead , maintaineth justification by faith . And that he May be perfect in knowledge , God is pleased ( Whether in the flesh or spirit , he knoweth not ) to take him into the third heavens : and there he was so filled with revelation , that God was forced to put the philomela-thorn under his breast , that he Might not fall into the sleep of sin , and so give himself up ( As Samson ) into the hands of Philistine enemies . And yet this man exceeds all men in affections , and in his affections surpasseth all his other excellencies . It is he that is often in journeys , in perils of waters , in perils of robbers , in perils by his own nation , in perils amongst the gentiles , in perils in the city , in perils in the wilderness , in perils in the sea , in perils amongst false brethren , in weariness and painfulness , in watchings often , in hunger and thirst , in fastings often , in cold & nakedness . And as he saith of himself , who was weak and i was not weak ? who was offended and i did not burn ? it is he that fought with the beasts at Ephesus . He is content not only to be bound , but to die for Christ . 

Good saint Paul was so tender over his kinsmen according to the flesh , that for their sakes he could willingly be content to be separated from the love of the Lord Jesus Christ . And this is greater love than that which Christ mentioneth ; for no man had then showed greater love than to die ; but this holy saint will go one step further , he will suffer an eternal death for his friend . 

Thus , if suffering either for the head , or members , for the church , or Christ , will discover affection , i suppose he will merit the garland . 

And as a compliment and crown of all , if to live be most for God's glory , though death be his advantage , he is resolved to submit , making obedience to Christ in life and death , his gain and triumph . 

I confess , when he traveleth through those briery disputes , he cannot display such sparkling vivid affections : but when he hath gotten but a little above those lime-twigs , how doth he mount on high , and there , upon even wings , disdain all things below , triumphing in the embraces of his saviour , who is to him more choice than the choicest of ten thousand ? 

If what i have attempted to prove , be true , as i hope it is , then consider , 

Either those who are eminent in affection , and otherwise know little ; or those who , as they abound in one , are also Masters in the other : distinguish appearances from truth ; reading , memory , discourses , effects of sense or complexion , from that which entereth the soul , becometh real there , acteth , floweth from thence as a spring : and then will you conclude , that all knowledglieth in the affection ; that all knowledge is but one , differing only in degrees . 

And lastly , that all , whether knowledge or affection , is but the truth , that spiritual ray of heavenly light which God is pleased to present to our view under several shapes , yet is but one and the same being , scil. light and truth . 

Chap. x. that all the several and particular actings of the soul , are this one light and truth . 

Thus have i dispatched the first discourse of the general form and nature of the understanding . now concerning the particular and various workings thereof , in conclusions , simple apprehensions , negations and affirmations , &c. which seem to be the offspring of the first and original being ; even these , i hope to prove all one and the same , as with themselves , so with the former , all conjoined in one being of light and truth . That is truth in the fountain , this in the streams ; and no man will deny the fountain and stream to make one river . Only , sometimes it appeareth in such a shape , sometimes in another , but is still the same soul . 

this will appear if we compare the nature of the soul or understanding ( For we have proved them both one ) with their irradiations , actings and several emanations . res enim dignoscendae sunt ex causis . now , we conceive the first being to be no other thing , than activity , so confessed by all . And if you would know what an activity is , you shall find it to be either potentia agendi , or ipsa actio , or rather actus primus & actus secundus . 

If it be actus , either primus or secundus ( For primus and secundus are to me differenced only by time , and so not differenced at all , ( Of which i will presently speak a little more ) it must be still in work , and is no longer than it acts . Now , what can this act be in this subject , whereof we discourse , but the reasonable working of the soul in this or that conclusion ? If it be any other than a work of reason , how can it constitute , or become the form of a rational soul and human understanding ? If it be such , how differs it from thought , ratiocination or positions in the mind ? 

whilst then these conclusions , sayings , actions , are the form of that truth , of that universal first truth , they must be that truth . For , forma quae dat esse , est esse , and whatsoever is the form of any thing , that is the being of it . For , being and form are but one . 

If the form of this activity be not these reasonable workings , it must be something either of a base allay , or of a higher stamp . 

if the latter ; than you speak of angels or some other spiritual being , if there be any which is more noble than the soul . And then how doth this excellency discover itself ? Where or what is it ? How is it said that action is the perfection of all things ? 

If the former ; then first you descend to some lower degree of existency ; for , all being is but an activity ; and according to the glory or baseness of that activity , doth the being receive denomination . 

Or secondly ; shall the cause be more ignoble than the effects ? What then ? If it be neither more excellent , nor lower , is it various , hath it less or more of action ? still you fall at the same stone . 

But they who approve of the distinction of actus primus and actus secundus , think they salve all by the distinction of substance and accident ; so , with them , actus primus is the being , the substance itself : and actus secundus is the product of that being or accident belonging to that which they make a soul ; and thus forgetting this , that omnis virtus consistit in actione , they make the soul a mere virtual being . 

but , besides that the former reasons are not thus everted , of these men i should ask this question . 

What is this their actus primus ? what is the form of it ? What is with them the form of a reasonable soul ? 

Is not reason ? can there then be a soul , till there be reason ? And this reason is not potentia ratiocinandi , but ratio . for , if you distinguish between the act and power , the act must ever be first in order , dignity , and nature . 

So then , what is the form of this primus actus ? is not some act ? if it be , it must exist ; else you will allow it but a bare notional being , which lieth in the apprehension . And if it doth exist , must it not be this which you call actus secundus ? 

If it be not an act , they make it nothing but a power , a faculty depending upon something else . And if this be the nature of the first , what can the second being ( Which is the effect , and so lower ) be , but a bare notion ? 

if here were fit place , i Might perhaps set upon the rack that long-famous distinction of substance and accident , whereby it should be forced to confess itself an aged imposture , at least in the general and frequent acceptance . 

But the activity consisting in the action , that and it shall both be proved but one ; and so , actus primus and actus secundus are this same truth , this light which i plead for . 

Chap. xi . An objection answered , in which the nature of time and place are touched . 

Yet this doth exceedingly stumble men's thoughts ; we see various actings of the soul , distinguished by the circumstances of time and place ; there are several distinct actings ; are there then so many several souls ? 

First , i could justly give this answer ; when these men can tell me what time and place is , i do hope i shall find both time and place to dissolve the difficulties . 

Secondly , i shall , i suppose , both by reason and their own assertions in the like case , prove that time and place are nothing , or alter nothing in this point ; and that , these similes will a little irradiate . 

beauty ( If i bring not the exact description of the learned , yet i shall remember so much as concerneth the point in hand ) consists in complexion , in lineaments , and in harmony . 

Complexion draweth his being from colour , from the subject wherein colour is seated , the spirits which give a being to this colour , &c. and these are differenced by many circumstances . Lineaments as they are adorned by , so are they the ornaments of this complexion . And these again are divers from themselves , and divers from harmony . And yet , by harmony , these make up one sweet , one pleasant being , which we call beauty . 

A flame rising from divers thorns , is not many , is but one flame . A stream filled with various springs , is not various , is but one stream . So is it in our case . 

Those circumstances of time and place , differencing these various beings , are something , or nothing . 

If nothing , the objection is answered . 

If something , they are a piece of the whole , they serve to make up that harmony , which we call beauty , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Thus time and place , with all beings of the like nature , are either nothing , or else they have a share in the being , and make up the totum compositum . 

the soul is but one act distinguished to our notion by several apparitions ; and these intervals , with all variations , either are nothing , or are of the nature of the soul , and serve to make up that comfort , that truth , that life that we now discourse of . 

And that this is so , i hope by this clear ratiocination to leave you assured . 

Time and place seem to me nothing but an extrinsical modification of a thing . I cannot find that the learned have made anything at all of them . Let us survey them , as they define them , when they treat of them ; as they esteem them , when they meet them occasionally . 

How hath Aristotle defined place ? est superficies concava corporis ambientis ; where is the truth of this in the highest heaven which incompasseth all the rest ? hath Ramus any whit advanced the cause in his definition ? est subjectum rei locatae ; idem per idem ! are not those who propound , and they who entertain such a definition , justly compared to the constable and the country-justice ? The first having received from some higher power a warrant , wherein in was this hard word , invasion , repaired to his rabbi for solution : he , that the question Might seem somewhat obscure , paused a little , that it Might not shame him ; after he had consulted , in a stroke or two with his grave-learned beard , replied ; the sense of this word is very plain , it is invasion , it signifieth invasion ; with which the constable being fully satisfied , gave him many thanks and departed . locus and spatium corporis locati , is little better ; what have we in this definition , of the intrinsical nature of place ? So that , if i be not wholly blind , they , whilst they treat of it as scholars , make it nothing : when they make use of it by the by , it is the same . As , the soul , they say , is tota in toto , and tota in qualibet parte ; whilst they spread and diffuse the soul over the whole body , from one extremity to the other , place maketh no division in the soul ; it is but one soul , yet extended quite through the body . Angels are definitivè in loco ; that place which is within the circumference so limited , doth not at all cause them to make two in this angelical being . 

I May affirm the same of time , tempus est mensura motus ; what do i know of time by this ? how can i from hence guess time to have so considerable a being , as that it shall make two of that with otherwise would be but one ? In the deity we are sure it can have no such effect . In the deity we have creation , preservation , redemption , decree , and execution of that decree . All these to our apprehension are distinguished by time : and yet no man will say , that in God they are two : for God is purus actus , nulla potentia . 

But you will say , this is obscurum per obscurius , and not to unmask and unveil difficulties : which no simile taken from the divinity can do , because that is all mystical . 

To which i answer , si magnis licet componere parva , we shall find the same in ourselves , we shall find that time doth not at all difference , or any way act . I suppose it is clear , that place hath lost all place and credit in this argumentation . Why May not i say the same of time , seeing by all men's confessions they are twins of the same womb ? But secondly , i affirm this , ( And i hope truly ) that if you make time any thing , you annihilate all the act of the creation ; that is , you will admit of no one perfect action . A thought , i confess , passeth in a moment ; and yet , in this moment , under this moment , are many subdivisions of time . We have in an hour , an half , a quarter , a minute , a second , ( The 60 part of a minute : ) & how many subdivisions will a scruple admit of ? For aught i know , time and punctum physicum agree in this , that they are divisibilia in insinitum . if then you will make so many thoughts in a thought , as you have divisions under a scruple , you will have no perfect thought , no complete act . To shun this , you will confess that time doth not divide one act alone : but one act or thought comprehendeth many times . Why May not i say , that if time doth not parcel out one act , it cannot act upon two , when the duality ariseth only from time ? This not being well weighed , hath cast our wits upon strange rocks , hath raised this question , 

how doth God see things ? if in their existencies , than all things are coeternal with God : if in their causes only , than all things are not present with God ; but you must admit of succession , a former and a latter , to eye divine ; which is blasphemy . This dilemma seemeth strong ; but it is because we make time something : whereas indeed all things did exist in their beings with God ab omni aeterno . for , aeternum & tempus are all one in eternity : and this succession is but to our apprehension . 

Thus , if time and place be nothing , i hope the weight of this objection is is taken off . 

But i foresee another objection . 

object . if time and place be nothing , if all our actions are but one : how can there be evil and good ? 

answ. i fully conclude with Aristotle's adversaries Anaxagoras , Democritus , etc that contradictions May be simul & semel in the same subject , same instant , same notion ( Not only in two distinct respects , or notions , as one thing May be causa & effectum , pater & filius , respectu diversi ; but even in the same respect , under one and the same notion . ) For , non ens is nothing ; and so , the being which it hath , May subsist with that which contradicts it . I speak in their terms . 

Now , let us view our actions , either 

As many , in pieces , or , one entire act . 

As many ; impute transgression to what you please , either to the effects in the body , or the will , and its workings : all these , so far as they have being , are good ; for , all being is good . Where then is the sin ? Certainly , sin lieth in this , that there is not so full a goodness as there should . Sin is only a privation , a nonentity : but , a privation , a nonentity May subsist ( According to the subsistence it hath ) with being . Such a coexistence of entity and nonentity , was in his faith , who cried , Lord , i believe , help my unbelief . This contradiction ( Of entity , nonentity ) must be in the selfsame act , ( And not in two distinct acts : ) else the act is perfect , ( Having complete entity , goodness , without admixture of nonentity : ) and so is only the creator : or else it is more imperfect than Beelzebub ; for , it is bad , and no good , nonentity wholly , and no entity , and so no action . 

Thus we see good and evil May coexist in several , in particular actions ; why then not so , if all acts should be but one entire act , undistinguished by time or place ? If the members composing the body , have matter and form , why then not the whole body ? Sin in itself is nothing , only a nonconformity to God's law . 

The twilight hath not so much light and so much positive darkness : only it hath not so much light as noon in clear day . here 's the defect : and by this defect , light and darkness coexist in the same point of air . 

So , though our acts be but one , undivided by time and place : yet , to our grief , are not free from sin . 

Thus the soul , truth , light , is always and continually one , though it appeareth otherwise to me : and this appearance ought not to dazzle the sight of the truth ; for , as they say of honour , honour est in honorante : so May i say of apprehension , apprehensio est in apprehendente : the thing is still the same , let my apprehension be what it will be . 

i do not reject the phrases of several truths , and several actings of this truth : for , loquendum cum vulgo ; yet , phrases must not mislead us . For whilst i confess loquendum esse cum vulgo , i profess that sapiendum est cum paucis . for , to our apprehension , that truth which is but one , doth variegate itself , and take divers shapes . 

as that sun which is one and the same , is ruddy in the morning , clear at noonday ; of a moderate heat early , and at midday rather torrid . 

Various colours meeting in the same point , to make up one indivisible act of sense , are by it judged divers beings , whereas they all make up but one being ; they are but one and the same object of sense . Reason , which is exalted above sense , telleth us it must be so ; because that act of life is but one , and the sense is not an ubiquitary ; it cannot act upon any more than one at once . 

The trigonall glass paints out to us more , and more lively colours in every object ( Which as a medium it presents to the eye ) than are in the Iris ; yet , this object , May be but some duskish sad thing , in which there is no change of colours at all . 

the three leading senses have confuted Copernicus these many years ; for the eye seeth the circulations of the heavens ; we feel ourselves upon a stable and firm foundation ; and our ears hear not from the volutations of the earth such a black cant as her heavy rollings would rumble forth : and yet now if we will believe our * new Masters , sense hath done as sense will do , misguided our reason . 

When the nimble jugglers play their pranks , you see and hear , yet neither see nor hear . So your sense is no good judge . Thus let the soul be raised to its supreme height of power , and it will clearly see , that all the actings of reason which seem several ( Be they , as we think , distinguished by time and place ) are but one , a fixed entire unity . 

Chap. xii . Another objection is answered , drawn from the falsehood in the workings of the soul . 

But if these particular actings of truth , are truth ; then when this being , which we have so long discoursed of , acteth not truth , it ceafeth to be : and so , where the soul entertaineth or pronounceth a false position , the soul is no more itself . 

Grant that it is with the soul in this moment of time , when it acts upon falsehood , as when it acts not , and so is not ; yet you will advance nothing , till you can prove the succession of moments to have a real being . By former discourse , i hope it is clear , that time is but a nominal being , and then this cessation depending on that distinct moment , which is not , is likewise itself an imagination . 

but secondly , i will allow it , when any man can show me that falsehood is a real being , which the soul or truth can work upon ; for , in every apprehension two things are to be weighed ; the agent itself , and the subject acted upon , ( I speak now in other men's language ; for i conceive the agent together with the subject to be one in the act . ) Truth is always truth , nemine dubitante ; and so it must be true , whilst it acteth on a truth . If that be true , which it acts upon , than all is well ; if it be false , it is a vanity , a lie , a nothing . For , if falsehood have a being , than we must either with the manichees , make two sources of being , or else God must be the author of it ; which no man will affirm . 

If then it have no being , the soul cannot act in it , and so it cannot be the act of the soul ; for , how shall the soul or truth act upon nothing ? 

but the soul doth act , when it pronounceth a false position ? 

he that in the twilight , mistaketh a man for a tree , acteth right in what he seeth ; and when he raiseth a false conclusion upon the premises , he acteth not . For , how is it possible , that a man should act falsehood , a vanity , nothing ? 

In this action , there are two things ; there is the seeing a being , and the seeing it under a confused notion . Or , which is the same , 

You May observe , first , the opining ; secondly , the opining uncertainly or falsely . 

The opining , is a good act , none will deny ; to think , let it be what it will be , is good . 

But secondly , the so-thinking , is that which is obscure . Now certainly , the formalis ratio of this so-thinking , lieth in thinking of error , which is nothing ; and in thinking of nothing , the the soul cannot act ; for , nothing produceth nothing . 

A man , who catcheth at the shadow of a hornet , acteth rightly in catching , and stingeth not himself ; because he apprehendeth only the shadow ; because so far he doth not act ; for to catch a shadow , to catch nothing , and not to act , are idem . and thus , whilst the soul catcheth at a false position , it graspeth but the shadow , which can be nothing , seeing evil is , nothing ; ergo , it loseth not truth ; for it pronounceth nothing but the truth of the position . 

the same May be said for pain . i conceive , it cannot act upon the soul , nor the soul upon it , because , it is but a bare privation of spirit and strength . And upon this ground , i shall subscribe to that opinion propounded by that reverend , worthy , that quick-sighted balearian-jaculator , mr dr Twisse : whether it be not better to be in perpetual pain , than not to be at all . If pain be but a bare privation , certainly any being is more desirable , than , for fear of a privation ( A not-being ) to become no-being . 

hîc rogo , non furor est , ne moriare , mori ? if any man shall tell me i speak against sense , i shall modestly ask him this question : whether it be not impar congressus betwixt sense and reason : and whether , in that case , sense be an equal judge . Reason telleth us , that pain must either be something , or nothing ; if nothing , than it is but a privation ; if something , it must be either good , or evil ; if good , it cannot ( As hath , and will yet appear more in this pamphlet ) hurt us ; if evil , it is either a nominal evil , or real ; if it be named an evil , and is not , it will not be disputed ; but if it be a real evil , than it is nothing ; for , evil , by consent of all , is nothing but privation of good . In this case shall reason or sense guide , judge you.  

Chap. xiii . Discovering the consequences of this position , that all things are one truth . 

Sir , 

When you collect your thoughts , and pass sentence upon these unsheaved gleanings , your gentleness ( Though the papers merit no such favour ) will smile upon them ; and say , here our eyes indeed are pleased with the curiosity of Pallas her needle : but , what hath reason to work upon ? what is the usefulness of this more than Arachne's web ? more than to entangle empty wits withal ? What fruit doth it yield better than the silkworm , which is worn only for ostentation ? Give me leave to plead for my own . Our own ( You know , though black ) is comely to ourselves . 

If this were well weighed , that all things are but one emanation from power divine : if this were taken fully into the understanding , that we Might be said to live upon , to live in this truth ; we should live more christianly , more cheerfully . non est vivere , sed valere , vita . 


I say more cheerfully , more christianly , in a few moments , than we do now in the whole course of our distracted time . And you will more easily consent to this , if you do consider that our happiness is compounded of two simples only , which are so entertwined , as that they May seem one , The first is to know . 
The second , to do what is right and good . 


Of the former , the theoretical part , i shall speak hereafter . In the practic , two things are considerable , 

first , that , action dependeth wholly upon knowledge . And , of knowledge , this is the wellspring and rule , that , unity is all . the spirit saith , how can you love whom you do not know ? and i May say , how can you do what you know not ? 

The not-knowledge of of what is right , with-holdeth from , and wearieth in action ; if perchance we ever have any glimmering of light . for , ignorance bringeth this double evil with it . 

First , it leadeth into error ; and error ( Simply in the view of it ) giveth no content . 

Seconly , in the progress it wearieth and distracteth . One who is lost in a wood , suffereth as much in seeking as losing the way . Whereas , if we knew aright , how even and smooth would be the way of action , and how great our contents therein ? 

secondly , not only all our actions turn upon this hinge ; but out of this treasury issueth forth the whole complacency that we gather from , or receive in action . For , if we knew this truth , that all things are one ; how cheerfully , with what modest courage should we undertake any action , reincounter any occurrence , knowing that that distinction of misery and happiness , which now so perplexeth us , hath no being , except in the brain ? We should not need to check and raise ourselves with David's outcries , why art thou cast down my soul , why art thou disquieted within me ? our spirits could with him wait upon God ; make him our only rock , and then we should not be moved . We should not call for Epictetus nor Boëtius de consolatione philosophica ; we Might fetch our cures from our own bosoms , if from this one truth of unity we could conclude these two things . 

First , that misery is nothing , and so cannot hurt . 

Secondly , that every thing that is , is good , and good to me : then we Might sing with a joyful spirit , oh nimium , nimiumque beati ; and upon sure ground ; for , whilst i being a being , am good , and that other being is good , and these two goods can fall under no other difference , but of degrees ; good & good , cannot but agree , and so must be good to me . 

if any man shall say , that the overflowing of another man's good , May be my evil ; they mistake ; for , such a though is a falsehood ; and , as i have already proved , falsehood is nothing , and so cannot hurt . 

That such a thought is falsehood , i suppose this will clear it . 

The philosopher's fancy to themselves animam mundi , and say every parcel is as a simple contributing to the existence of that compositum . but Christians know , and i have ( If i mistake not ) evinced , that , all being is but one emanation from above , diversified only in our apprehension . How can then one piece of that being impeach the other , one part of the soul quarrel with the other ? As the will ( Speaking in their terms ) with the sensitive faculty ; or the eye with the belly : the vanity whereof Aesop hath taught us long ago . So , of necessity , if either my envy , or another's folly , lay me low , because my brother is exalted , this must be a lie , and so cannot hurt . e contrario , the good of another , being the perfection of the whole , is my advantage . If with this eye you view that scripture , you will see it in its glory , is thine eye evil , because thy brother's good increaseth ? 

The rule , you see is , that i should rejoice at the welfare of another . Now what is the reason of the rule ? philosophy teacheth us , that it is not only {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , that is , lovely . if then i must rejoice , i rejoice because of some propriety , and this propriety ariseth from unity ; this alkerme of unity , cheereth the drooping spirit , cureth the atra bilis of melancholy . The same potion easeth the heart of envyings , censurings and whisperings . So he , who knoweth that injuries , because they are nothing , cannot hurt ; and good things , though another's , do serve him ; cannot cherish such viperous starvelings in his thoughts . 

Chap. xiiii . The benefit which knowledge and all sciences receive from this assertion . 

I have in a word shown how unity untyeth all difficulties , unites all happiness in practical things . Permit me to discover what influence it hath upon that other simple , which maketh up the compound of our happiness , ( scil. ) Theory . 

Tully saith of Epicurus , frangit , non dividit ; the breaking of learning into so many sciences , is but making so many miles , that so the Master May have more hire for his post-horse . They forget , that , vita est brevis , whilst ars est longae . it were much better if all learning were like the chain fastened at Jupiter's throne , all of a piece : or the beam , which from the sun by a continual tract of irradiation toucheth the treasures of the earth . 

To the effecting of this , that learned , that mighty man Comenius doth happily and rationally endeavour to reduce all into one . why do we make philosophy and divinity two sciences ? What is true philosophy but divinity ? and if it be not true , it is not philosophy . 

do but see a little in particulars , the fruit of such like divisions . 

In the knowledge of beings , we must observe 

First , being is : 

Secondly , what it is . 

There is the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , and the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . What a tedious work doth this very division lay upon us ? alas , the very first , the easiest part of it , will take up all our time ; and to ascend to causes before we know that there are effects , is to mount the highest round , before we ascend the first . And therefore that learned wit , Sir Francis Bacon , in his natural philosophy , bringeth only experiments , leaving the search of causes to those , who are content , with Icarus , to burn their wings at a fire too hot for them . Indeed , sometimes as an embellishment of his discourse , that he May please stirring fancy , he interlaceth some causes , yet gently and modestly propoundeth them , but as for entertainment . If now our humble spirits could be content to see all things , as they are , but one , only bearing different shapes , we should according to that rule , noli altum sapere , improve in what we know , and there sit down . But our spirits are mighty Nimrodes , hunting after knowledge , venturing all , to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil . Which curiosity of ours , is wittily reproved by Sir John Davies ; Why did my parents send me to the schools , 
that i with knowledge Might enrich my mind : 
When the desire to know , first made men fools . 
And did corrupt the root of all mankind . 


and for this reason we lose with Esop's dog , the substance , and get not the shadow . 

Causes we cannot , neither shall ever find out : the knowledge of existencies we omit ; they are too voluminous , if we did attempt ; and so much doubted of by men , that what to think , we know not . View all learning , and see how the very being of things , is questioned in natural philosophy . Amongst the quadrupedes , we question the existence of the unicorn : inter volatilia , the phoenix , and the bird of paradise : amongst fish , the mermaid . When we seek into minerals , we find not ebur fossil ; the incomparable virtues of it we meet with in all physicians : but the subject of so many excellencies , we doubtfully hope for . Of herbs and plants , books name many which gardens , meadows , rivers afford not : if they ever were , we May give them to Pancirolla , that he May reckon them with perpetuum mobile , the philosopher's stone , cum multis alijs , inter inventa perdita : for every age interreth old things , and is again fertile of new births . 

If we were mighty men , as Adam , that all the creatures would come and present themselves to our view : yet ( Which is the second part of this first question ) we could not give them their names according to their natures . For when we do know that any being doth exist , we do not know what their forms , their several qualities and temperaments are . We altogether are ignorant of herbs and plants ; which are hot and cold , in how many degrees they are so . For in these , how many , how eternal are the debates ? Some deny the healing virtue to Dictamnum . some question the nature of that killing-saving Indian herb , hen-man-bane , tobacco : whose insolence is such , as to make that part of man a chimney , an outlet of her smoky birth ( Expressed happily by doctor Thory in these words , inque tubo genitas haurire & reddere nubes : ) i say , to make that an outlet of her smoky birth , by which the old Romans ( In this their proverb , est homo nasutus ) discovered their judgements of gifts and wit . some say it is hot , and some say it is cold . Few of the learned , consent about the degrees of heat and cold in any simple , and so are forced to palliate all with the gaudy mantle of occulta qualitas ; yet what are all these but matter of observation ? manifest effects , which sense teacheth the ploughman , the countryman , yea the bruits themselves , as familiarly , as warmth in the sunshine , and wet in the rain . I could name many questions in * politics , economics , ethics , &c. the very subject whereof are in dispute . But they will more happily fall in , when i discover our ignorance in causes . 

Thus you see in what a maze you are meandred , if you admit of any division . The very knowledge of the being of things , is more than we are capable of . And as yet that is necessary , so we keep ourselves still to this principle , that those things are all of one nature , variegated only in our apprehension : and this knowledge i must consent to . 

But if men once seek into the causes of subsistencies , i see no reason but they should suffer as rei laesae majestatis . for these are arcana imperii , which to meddle with , is no less than high treason . 

Chap. xv . Confusion in the knowledge of causes , discovered , and redressed by this unity . 

If we are thus at a stand , in these very beginnings , what shall we be , when we inquire after causes ? two lie open to our view . first , our great and good God , the fountain of all being , and this the ancients styled fatum . 

secondly , there is that emanation from him , which is the first create cause of all being , and this was Aristotle's materia prima , so far as sensible things extend . Which because it is the substance of all things , and the variations of it make all forms ; therefore in itself , he described it to be neither quid , quale , nor quantum . 

All other causes are better known by name , than in the natures of them . They make many , as efficient , final , material , formal ; with divers subdistinctions ; as instrumental , exemplary , &c.  All these have matter and form . for , there is a matter , and form of a material cause , and form and matter of formal causes . For in a table of of wood , the material cause is not the matter , wood : wood is the subject , upon which this material cause bringeth forth that effect , a table . It May be the material cause shall not be physical matter ; we shall by and by find it another name . 

Of the form of a material cause , i shall say nothing , and so for formal causes . 

Faith is said to be the form of a Christian , and faith hath its form . The soul is by many deemed ( Which i understand not ) the form of the reasonable creature , and it hath a particular individual form . And thus both material and formal causes have matter and form . 

Matter again , is either physical and substantial , or metaphorical and metaphysical . and this is the name i promised even now . 

Forms are either intrinsical , or extrinsical : the intrinsical are logical , metaphysical , &c.  

Now have you various and several kinds of forms ; but who knoweth the least considerable part of matter or form ? Who will not clearly lose himself in such an inquest ? May we not say of these , what one saith wittily of the soul ? 

For , her true form , how can my spark discern , 
Which dim by nature , art did never clear : 
When the great wits , of whom all skill we learn , 
Are ignorant , both what she is , and where ? 


Do but survey the physical beings of our philosophers , with what impossible , with what unnecessary scrutinies of causes , do they weary themselves , and their disciple ? 

Till numeri platonici cease to be a proverb , i must remain a sceptic , although one undertake to teach me , how and whence it is , that various rollings of the tongue , shall send forth so many articulate voices , and so many several languages . 

Till it be known , how all numbers gather themselves into an unity , i must not give credence to another , who promiseth an account of the estuation of the sea . 

I know some surrender Neptune's trident to the moon , and there six the reason of Thetis her uncertain ebbings . Others * give the world a good pair of lungs , and from these bellowss expect the causes of what they inquire for . Others take a dish of water , and shaking it up and down , think to clear this difficulty . But these their ratiocinations discover clearly , that with Noah's dove , through overmuch water , they can find no ground for footing . For veritas non quaerit angulos . and if the reason were ready , they would not have disputed ; and yet they are very confident ; and why May not they be so , who dare venture to give ( Before they prove any orbs ) the government of the orbs to a band of celestial intelligences ? 

I shall not wonder , if these men everywhere find an Euripus , and at its banks imitate their Grandy's outcry , quia ego non possum te capere , tu me capias . 

How doth the spirit befool these men ? First he telleth them , that they are so far from finding out the causes , that they are ignorant of the effects : knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth ? or canst thou mark when the hinds do calve ? Canst thou number the months that they fulfil , or knowest thou the time when they bring forth ? 

Solomon saith , there are three things too wonderful for me ; yea , four which i know not . the way of an eagle in the air , the way of a serpent upon a rock , the way of a ship in the midst of the sea , and the way of a man with a maid . 

how doth our great Master perplex himself in the inquiry of causes ? Sometimes he makes the principia of natural things , to be contraria : whereas , neither the heavens , nor the stars , nor anything that is by univocal generation , is that way produced . Sometimes he allows three principia , privatio , materia , & forma ; forgetting his own principle , that ex nihilo nihil fit , not remembering that when he hath matter and form , he is yet to seek for the rock and pit , out of which matter and form are digged and hewed ; and therefore instituteth two several authors , one of matter , another of form . 

I confess , his commentators do file of some rust from these tenets , but not so clearly as to make him give the right cause of being . 

romances and New-atlantides , i shall gladly embrace as pleasant and glorious entertainments from specious and ambrosian wits . but for true knowledge of causes , having no cause to expect , i will not hope . 

Sis Walter Raleigh saith exceeding well , that the cheese-wife knoweth that runnet curdleth cheese , but the Philosoher knoweth not how . 

All this while i do not reject an industrious search after wisdom , though the wisest of men saith , he that increaseth wisdom , increaseth grief . 

i do only , with Sir Francis Bacon , condemn doctrinam phantasticam , litigiosam , fucatam , & mollem ; a nice , unnecessary , prying into those things which profit not . 

Too great exactness in this learning , hath caused our meteorologists to blush when their confidence hath proved but a vapour . Too great hopes of discovering the mystery of nature , hath caused some , contrary to the authority of scripture contrary to the opinion of Julius Caesar , Picus Mirandula , Cornelius à lapide , Joan . Barclaius , cum multis aliis , to attribute an unwarranted power to the stars over our bodies . 

But this ensueth , while we follow , for learning , what is not . And so , that noble comprehensive activity , the soul of man , is hindered from entertaining in its place more generous , more useful , and sublimated truths . 

How would the soul improve , if all Aristotle's materia prima , Plato's mens platonica , Hermes Trismegistus his {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , were converted into some spiritual light ? the soul Might soar and raise itself up to universal being , bathe itself in those stately , deep , and glorious streams of of unity , see God in Jesus Christ , the first , chief , and sole cause of all being : it would not then contain itself within particular rivulets , in whose shallow waters it can encounter nothing but sand or pebbles , seeing it May fully delight itself in the first rise of all delight , Jesus Christ . 

Thus , when you see the face of beauty , you will perfectly be assured how many the several pieces which make it up , must be , what their nature , and their several proportions . So shall you with certainty descend to knowledge of existences , essences , when you shall rest in one universal cause : and metaphysics , mathematics , and logic will happily prove one , while they teach the variations of unity through several numbers . All particular sciences will be subordinate , and particular applications of these . So all shall be , according to Ficinus , circulus boni per bonum in bonum rediens ; and the face of divine beauty shall be unveiled through all . 

Chap. xvi . The unhappy fruits of division , in other parts of learning , made manifest . 

Cast your eye on moral philosophy , and see how the truth is darkened by distinctions and divisions ; how our Masters have set up in the same soul , two fountains of reason , the will , and the understanding . have they not virtutes intellectuales & morales ? is it not a great question , vtrum prudentia sit virtus moralis ? Vtrum summum bonum sit in intellectu , an voluntate ? Vtrum prudentia possit separari à virtute morali ? Vtrum virtus moralis sita sit in appetitu rationali , an sensitivo ? 

I say , these questions , especially the dividing of the soul into so many faculties enthrones many reasonable beings in the soul . for , when the will entertaineth or rejecteth the proposition of the understanding , she must do it one of these three ways : either by an instinct ; and this men will not have ; for , hoc est brutum . or by chance ; and this many reject ; for than she hath no liberty . or by discourse ; and this most pitch upon ; for than she doth exercise vim illam imperatricem , which i read of amongst them , but understand not . 

Now , if they conclude upon this third way . What is this discourse , but the work of an understanding ? if the will act that way , which is , or aught to be to the understanding proprium quarto modo ; is not then the will an understanding ? 

Thus like an unskillful artist , they mince with distinctions ; they whet , till there be no more steel : and whilst they would sharpen , they annihilate : whilst they would enlarge , they overthrow the soul . They create names , and say , with Ajax , they are Ulysses , and so fight with them . They do , as one faith very well , giving passion eyes , make reason blind ; raising the will , they ruin the understanding . Termini nullos habent terminos . the poor soul oppressed with black melancholy , believeth some part of his body as big as a house : and no man can , in his thought , pass , unless he remove it : even so do those men . 

But what May not be expected from that happy inventor , and bold abetter of errors , who with much confidence maintaineth the eternity of the world , against Hermes , museus , Orpheus , Anaxagoras , Linus , &c.  yet that they May insanire cum ratione , they say , that if you raise not up some faculty to contend with the understanding , the understanding seeing right , must ever do right , and that we by woeful experience know to be otherwise . 

I confess , whilst the understanding seeth light and right ( I now discourse of the understanding , will , affections , &c. in their terms ) it doth right ; for , seeing and doing is all one ; for the act of the soul is but seeing or discerning . But that understanding , which now did see right perfectly , at the same instant is blind , even in a gross , absurd thing : and so the effect and birth of it is but darkness and folly . 

in metaphysics , with what curious nets do they entangle their hearers ? certainly , that should be styled the art or science of disputes and quaere's for the very being and subjectum Metaphysices , is strongly disputed . Some will have ens taniùm , the universal nature of being : others , substances abstract from matter , as angels , spirits , souls of men , to be the subject of this learning ; and as it beginneth ▪ so it groweth into thousands of disputes . 

As , vtrum differentiae possunt esse sub eodem genere cum illo quod differre faciunt ? Vtrum universale sit aliquid reale , •n notionale tantùm ? Vnde rerum individuatio exoriatur ? 

If i should go through logic , mediocrem artem , mathematical sciences : i should but weary you with variety of opinions . 

Even divinity itself is darkened with mists of inextricable questions . the questions about faith and love , are sufficient to fill the world with perpetual quarrels ; as , whether faith precedeth repentance ? which learned Master Pemble hath sweetly determined by making both faith and repentance fruits of semen vivisicum . whether faith be a particular application of Christ to myself , or only a bare spiritual belief , that Christ is the son of God ? Which reverend , holy , learned Master Cotton , hath most acutely , most truly cleared , by proving that faith can be nothing but a laying hold of that promise which God hath made . now , that promise is , that , he that believeth that Christ is the son of God , shall be saved . 

Whether faith be a believing that i am saved , or depending upon God for salvation ? And here Bellarmine hath with mighty wit assaulted our side ; for , faith he , if belief be to believe i am saved , i was saved without faith . If belief be to believe that God will give me grace to be saved , i believe before i have grace , before i have faith . Which knot , i know not how to dissolve , but by opening with reverend Mr.  Cotton that ( And this is another quaere . ) 

we are saved by faith , only declarativè . i am saved , not only in the eternal decree , without faith , by God's free gift ( That all consent to ) but even in the execution . And when God hath pleased to take me out of eternal darkness ; then faith discovereth to me that i am to be saved ; and so , making faith to be a manifestation of that to me , that i am saved , Bellarmine's objection is answered . 

There are many other questions , but i dare not so much as mention them . 

If we should but survey the disciplinable part of divinity , we should be confounded with Chiliads of disputes , all which i will wrap up in one , scil. 

Whether there be a prescript form of church-government ? 

Are not the two testaments expositors of the two tables ? Do they leave us any latitude in any other of the commandments ? why should we then think , that that commandment which God hath honoured in the second place , should be forgotten ? Truly , had the learned Papists so done , they would never have expunged it . 

Are not we as unable to prescribe the manner as the matter of God's worship ? If we were left to ourselves , should we not institute cringings , crouchings , all those ceremonies of will-worship , which carry a voluntary outward visible show of humility , but give the heart leave to play the truant ? if ever distinctions did harm , here they have been deadly poison : for , doctrine and discipline are all one . For , what is discipline but that doctrine of the manner of God's worship ? wherein we ought to be as faithful , as in any point of divinity : and this will certainly appear one day , when God shall with pittylesse holy scorn , ask some , who hath required these things at your hands ? 

but , to conclude ; give me leave to show you how these exorbitant wits have raised a Babel , have cast Pelion upon Ossa ; and from thence discharged the balistae of their ignorance , against the throne of eternity , against God himself . 

The schools for many ages , have looked upon the way of God's knowledge of things , under two notions ; simplicis intelligentiae , & purae visionis . i confess , i see not the end of this distinction . For , if God's power and will be all one , ( Which i think no man dispureth ) all the ways of knowledge , that can be in God , must be confined in that one notion of simplicis intelligentiae . 

I do seem ( If i mistake not ) to maintain this position by an evident demonstration , thus ; 

Is there any that denyeth God to be purus actus ? doth not every say , that in God there is no potentia ? if God then be actus , and not potentia , all things were , that ever shall be , ab aeterno under a decree ; and so , what he could do , he did do , and can do no more . 

Yet , that truths May come more clearly and easily to our apprehension , i shall allow the use of the distinction , so that they improve it only for memory , and do not expectany reality from it . 

But some , not content with this distinction , have found out another , which discovereth a mean parentage , by the very name , it is called media scientia . i will not contend with it in the power of those arguments , whereby our divines have so often left it spiritless and helpless . I shall only from this point of unity , show the vanity of it . 

If this sciencia be one with that which we allow , than is it but nominal and vain . If it be different , you make two in God : for , if i overvalue not my former ratiocination , i have proved it clearly that scientia simplicis intelligentiae carrieth forth as much of God as is discernible to our darkness ; and making two in God , you exalt two gods ; and whilst you find two gods , you lose the true God , which is but only one , an eternal unity . And thus whilst men gaze continually in search of causes , they blind themselves , and know not effects . 

Chap. xvii . A recapitulation of former instances , with some additions of a question or two more . 

i confess there is a secondary intermediate being , which you May call a cause ; which in our language , doth precede and produce another ; the observation of which , is very fitting , so that we search and puzzle not ourselves with the grounds and reasons of this precedency . 

As , apply fire to combustible matter , and it will burn ; and if you call ( Which in some sense you May call ) this application , the cause of burning : i dispute not only the search into the nature of wood and fire , and how the fire doth work upon the wood , and how the wood can be both passive and active , Simul & semel ; for , they say , nulla est actio quin sit reactio , this is that i desire to shun ; for , intus exstens prohibet alienum ; whilst we entertain ourselves with these poor sophisms of wit , we lose that glory which the immortal soul thirsts after . 

But if our spirits , and the light of our reason be dim ; let us go to the forge of the Philistines , and sharpen our inventions , our apprehensions there ; let us learn from the Prince of the air , who ( Knowing well , that , dissolve the fasciculus , and Jugurtha his prophecy to his children will prove true ) taught his scholars this lesson for these many ages , divide & impera ; divisions and distractions , being the great road of all error . 

And if you long , with the Israelites , to have a King , as your neighbours have ; and you desire to speak in their language : when the soul entertaineth light , say it doth understand . when it doth exercise any moral virtue , say it willeth . when you see some things precede others , call the one a cause , the other an effect : but travel not far in the search of the source of this cause . Do not make the will and the understanding two faculties , fratrum concordia rara ; Jacob will supplant Esau in the womb . Make therefore the several actings of the soul , as rays of this one soul ; make these rays , and the soul sending forth these rays , a perpetual emanation divine : and so by these degrees of truth , mount up into the arms of eternity , and he will take care of you , that you shall not dash your feet against the stone of free will : that you shall not overthrow all faith , by starting so many nice questions in the point of faith . 

If you follow this rule , and see all things in the glass of unity , you will not lose all arts and sciences in the wood of divisions and subdivisions in infinitum ; you shall be more substantial , than to make substance and accidents two ; neither will it ever happen , that you maintain transubstantiation , by affirming that accidents can haerere in nullo subjecto . 

You shall not make to yourself a god of contradiction , dividing the will and power of God . Both which in God , is God ; and so but one . you will not maintain two covenants , one of works , another of grace , seeing grace is graceless without works , and works worthless without grace . 

If God shall give you to walk by this light , practical questions will be laid aside , as well as theoretical : you will not dispute whether you ought to be more holy on one day ( As at a sacrament ) then at other times ; for , you will then know , that these scriptures express fully the rule you must walk by ; pray continually ; rejoice evermore : blessed is he that feareth always : be ye holy [ not by fits and starts , but ] as i am holy ; serving me always , with all your heart , your might , your affections . so that every day , every duty , is to you an holy day , an ordinance divine . 

and if any man shall say , why doth God add this parcel , remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day , &c. and this strict injunction , before you approach the table of the Lord , let every man examine himself , and so let him eat ? 

You will be able to answer , that you ought not to be more holy in one day , in one duty , than in another ; for , you must be all one , semper idem . 

And secondly , you will be able to prove , that the weight of this injunction , is not to add any other holiness to the day , or the ordinance , than a holiness of separation . 

For , a holiness of inherence , cannot fall anywhere , but upon a reasonable creature . The temple had no more . 

For , with the leave of learned and holy Master Cawdry , time & place are incapable of any other sanctification . 

But the stress of these and the like precepts , lieth here . We ought indeed always to keep a Sabbath . every bread and every water , aught to be a confirmation of our faith and of our graces . 

But God considering that we are lower than the angels ( And them he hath charged with folly ; ) that we are infirm ; that we cannot always keep the bow bent : if we cannot be holy all the week , if we cannot be pure at our own tables ; as who can ? yet , if we will remember the Sabbath , and if we will come to that feast of marrow and fatness with a wedding-garment , and at other times do our best ( Though weak ) endeavours , he will behold no iniquity in us . 

We shall not be perplexed , how far we ought to mourn for the sins of others , the sins of the times , or our own lives . [ and these are entangling questions to many sweet spirits . ] For , drawing all things to an unity , we shall know that sorrow and joy May meet in the same subject at once ; they must be both in the actings of faith . We must not sorrow as without hope ; we May not lose our faith in our tears ; our tears must be tears of joy ; we May think , that we have sinned , and so sigh ; but at the same instant , we must know we have a saviour , and so triumph . And if i were now all gore blood , would i not now go to the chirurgeons ? Truly the greater my sin , the sooner ought to be my return , the higher my faith . But great and enlarged faith , cannot be without exultation and magnificats . 

Thus could we lay aside foolish questions , could we seek into our hearts , according to the poet's advice , ne te quaesiveris extra , and not into the causes , and the being of causes , things too high for us ; we Might have an heaven here , we Might see how Christ is one with God , and we one with Christ ; so we in Christ , one with God . 

If we cannot reach the perfection of this knowledge , yet let us come as near it as we can , for the true knowledge of God in Christ , is life everlasting . ⸪ 

A postscript . 

And now , Sir , i have with what brevity i can , run through , what i never intended to speak of . I had prepared a little in lieu of this , upon the nature of prophecy , which i now shall reserve for a discourse upon the fourteenth chapter of the second to Corinth : but it was with me in this case , as it is with the soul , prostrating itself at the throne of grace . It designs to breathe itself out in confession , but is suddenly raised up into to sweet exultation . It intends a magnificat , but by some unexpected irresistible power , it is dissolved into tears ; which never did , nor ever can happen in a form , as Might appear by ventilating the opposite arguments , if opportunity prevailed as well as reason . 

I had nothing in my resolution , but , by a word or two , to mediate in the behalf of these lines , a free and a friendly access , to your more serious and useful studies . But ( quo fato nescio ) i have let fall my plummet into waters too deep , that if you lend not your favourable construction in the perusal , i must suffer . I confess my confidence in your gentleness is great ; i shall therefore , without any further plea , after this long parenthesis , give you a short account of what these papers bear . 

You have here my poor thoughts upon the twenty-fourth chap. of matth. that i was forced to , because i quote it , more than once , in sense differing from our commentators : yea , i was necessitated to run through the whole chapter . It will appear in costly robes , adorned with lofty and glorious language , sweetened by many a pleasant and clear simile , quickened by divers acute and learned criticisms : these , none of these are mine : my cabinet enshrineth no such treasure . I confess , to save the labour of contending with Pareus , and others , i delivered to a friend of yours , and mine , only the substratum of the discourse , desiring him , from those principles to undertake my adversaries . In lieu of this , he returned me the chapter * , embellished with so much wit and learning , that i durst not call it mine , and so thought to have suppressed it ; and had done so , but that from the law of friendship , you May challenge a share in what is his ; and from that reason it liveth now , and is presented to your view , hoping ( For his sake , not for mine ) to find grace in your eyes . 

You have also , my thoughts , upon the twentieth of revelations , because therein i have done two things . 

first , according to my model , answered your three queries . 

secondly , discovered my opinion concerning the millenaries . i find that point entertained by many learned and pious men , under various and different notions . 

The first who were of that opinion , lived immediately after St. John , as Papias , Irenaeus , and so on ; in after ages , Tertullian , Cyprian , Augustine , cum multis alijs : these men did a little alcoranize ; for , with Mahomet , they cast all the glory of it , into the outward pomp the church should then enjoy : which is but as the body of that other spiritual beauty , wherein the church of God shall at that time be more than exceedingly resplendent . Yet these men have happily fixed upon the due season , expecting them at the pouring out of the seventh vial , a thousand years before the end of the world . 

of latter days , most famous and glorious lights , as Calvin , Beza , Junius , tremelius , Broughton , &c. have wrapped up all the glory under a spiritual notion , robbing both it and other scriptures , of that sweetness ; whereon even our souls , but especially our children shall feed as upon marrow and fatness ; wherewith we shall be refreshed as with wine refined upon the lees . contraries May sometimes ( In some sense ) be errors ; the others erred because they have not the spiritual ; and these have mistaken , not observing the temporal glory of this thousand years . 

These last men are succeeded by a generation of worthies , who have come nearer to the truth ; yet ( If i mistake not ) have missed it ; and some of these are Alstedius , ( Who justly meriteth the anagram of sedulitas ) Mede , and some others ; who indeed expect a time of glory , confuting the first men , because they made theirs too carnal . Yet do they fail themselves , by placing the time after the burning of the world with material fire , spoken of in Peter ; and joining with it their opinion , of the resurrection of the martyrs , which i do not wholly condemn , though therein i am not yet so clear . 

Lastly , we have the reverend man Mr. Brightman , against whom i will not now dispute , whose opinion , seeing i must oppose it , when i mention it , i will not now name . For he ought always à me non sine honore nominari . Pliny saith venerabilis catonis  ebrietas , and so say i of Brightman , the very errors ( If errors ) of Brightman have their beauty : i must confess , if God hath been pleased to discover light to me , i have borrowed from him . If there be any thing of sweet , i have gathered it from the strong . And i do seriously protest i have not with Scaliger the soldier ; undertaken Cardan , that his ruins May be my rise . 

No , no , i honour his very urn , and do believe that one day i shall see the Jews very zealous in raising to him some stately mausoleum , who hath been the first means of quickening the affections of Christians to pray for their return . 

Sir , i have overtired your gentleness , and your patience , therefore now give me leave to refresh your spirits ; let me in a word say here , what i prove more amply elsewhere ; the days are at hand ; we shall see the laying of the first stone , if not the rearing of the structure to some good height . 

I know there is a great reader , who , though he hath Lynx his eyes , yet using overmuch the septuagenary spectacles of antiquate antiquity , loseth to himself , and , by his justly-merited authority , robbeth others of , this sweet truth , of the church her approaching glory , which is in my apprehension , as blood to the veins , as life to the blood , as spirit to the life , as all to the spirit . But certainly , while he thinketh the witnesses , to be yet unburied , he doth bury two witnesses , which are as able to bring Christ to his espousals , as the two post-knights were to nail him to the cross . 

I know there is another worthy , who hath for many years stayed Christ's sainting spouse with flagons of generous and good wine , who adjourneth our happiness by expecting the sad downfull of the two witnesses . but ( As i have , i hope , clearly proved elsewhere ) that is past . macte ergo gaudio , tune up your ten-stringed instrument : let us hear that pleasant melody of a Christian Hymen ; oh hymenaee ! let your sweet spirit sing , and we will dance : for certainly ere long , all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes , and perfect fruition of love will cast out fear . 

and now , i commit you , and your hopeful , flourishing studies , to the expectation , and advancement of these glories which make way for the coming of our saviour . 



And to him alone be the glory 

Finis . 

The contents of the several chapters handled in this treatise of truth . 

chap. i. the understanding , and the truth-understood , are one . page 1.  
chap. ii the second argument , proving that truth is the nature of the understanding . p. 5.  
chap. iii a prosecution of the second argument , wherein all requisites to a being are applied to the understanding , being made one with the truth . p. 13.  
chap. iiii. this argument further cleared by more objections propounded and answered . p. 17.  
chap. v. the whole soul and truth in the soul are one . p. 21.  
chap. vi . all things are this one light or truth , shining from God . p. 26.  
chap. vii . how unity is all in all things . p. 31.  
chhp. viii . the nature of habits . p. 45.  
chap. ix. . the difference betwixt knowledge and affection , discussed . p. 59  
chap. x. that all the several and particular actings of the soul , are this one light and truth . p. 81.  
chap. xi . an objection answered , in which the nature of time and place are touched . p. 88 
chap. xii . another objection is answered , drawn from the falsehood in the working of the soul . p. 109 
chap. xiii . discovering the consequences of this position , that all things are one truth . p. 114 
chap. xiiii . the benefit which knowledge and all sciences receive from this assertion . p. 123 
chap. xv . confusion in the knowledge of causes , discovered , and redressed by this unity . p. 133 
chap. xvi . the unhappy fruits of division , in other parts of learning , made manifest . p. 146 
chap. xvii . a recapitulation of former instances , with some additions of a question or two more . p. 160 
Finis . 





* Ariopaguses : for , such were the orders for all pleaders there : Aristotel . rhet. lib. 1 Lucian . in Anachars . * with such , Juno assayed to kill Hercules in his cradle , as the poets say . matth. 24.  Apocal. 20  dionys. de divinis neminib . epist. ad dionys.  see Plato's parmenid . & Timeus . 

* mat. 24.  Rev. 20.  Expounded , in another treatise . * 2 cor. 2.16 . * veritas in sundo putei . Democr . * ioh. 14.6 . * 1 cor. 1.23 . Job 38.2 . * 1 cor. 8.2  a double error in searching of truth . 

* rom 10.8  the understanding or truth there , under two notions . an argument proving the nature of the understanding to be truth . vitaest in se reflectio . Sen. epist. life a higher degree of light . the eye by the presence of the soul made able to see light . most call the understanding a faculty . three notions requisite to the constitution of every being . the understanding as a faculty affordeth not these 3. notions . the understanding is not the subject of truth . marti . l. 5. epi. 53.  the understanding receiveth not truth from the soul . not from any creature  not from God . deus agit á centro in circumserentiam . in spiritual giving and receiving there must be a metaphysical union  John 1.5 . i doct. of syn. dort. p. 25. lin. 12 neither a quality permanent , nor an act immanent , unless they be made inherent in the soul , and the latter also produced by it , can be said to be given to the soul . to receive light is to be light . if you make the understanding light , you have the three notions which make up every being . 1 the 4. vial mentioned rev. 16.8 . is the thing emptying and emptied upon itself . nay in all things agent and patient must be one to him that considers . no being but it is the thing receiving & received  the vanity of that question , whether the soul be continens or contentum , discovered  the understanding cannot be the recipient . some call the intellect virtus quâ . the intellect cannot be virtus quâ . as the Arabians , Zabarell , &c.  the last objection answered . * act. 17. vers. 23.  the soul , understanding , truth , all but one . an argument proving the soul and truth to be one . God and his attributes are not two . * deo insunt quasi in esse secundo , ab essentiâ & inter se distinguuntur non solùm ratione rationante , sed etiam rationatâ , ita ut fundamentum distinctionis sit in ipso deo.  Theo. lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 27.28 . * 1 ioh. 3. vers. 2.  truth as it hath been described , resembleth the trinity . * vnum , verum , bonum , ens , terminiconvertibiles . all being is this truth . * vide platonem in Phile . in Timaeo . terminus , insinitum , prima elementa , unde quin . que genera teru• . ficin. come . in tim•o . Vide platonem ubique . omnes numeri in unitate . r virg. in {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . s quia numerus impar , numerus indivisibilis . ficin. comment. in plat. timae . the excellency of unity . rev. 22.9 . unity all in God . fie . comment. in plat. sympos . unity in spiritual beings . gen. 2.24 . 1 cor. 13.12 . moral . unity in physical beings . * i am informed that my Lord castle . I stand in his book de veritate , affirmeth that there is but one sense : but i am not so happy as to have that book by me , nor do i remember it since my last reading it , so that i dare not say it confidently . Sir John Suckling in his play , act 2 , scene 1.  ficin. comment. in sympos . Plat.  * ficin. comment. in tim. plat.  * Plato in symp. in orat. Erixym . nominal division of being requisite for our converse . habits infused , acquisite . the difference between natural and supernatural habits . * mr Ball . Divers sorts of faith . page 3.  Faith signifying belief , is used to note , first an ordinary knowledge and bare assent to the historical truth of the speaker , though sometimes holpen by experiments , and other inducements and probabilities of the things : and this is called faith historical , that is , a naked , imperfect , dead assent , without trust or confidence in the mercies of God , or adherence to the commandments . Howbeit we must not imagine , that faith is reputed unsound or not salvifical , because historical ( rather it is oftentimes unsufficient to save , because it is not so fully historical as Might be ) but the name of historical faith arose hence , that some are said to believe , who did never embrace Christ as their only saviour with all their hearts , nor confidently rely upon the promises of mercy ; otherwise , justifying faith doth more certainly believe the truth of the history of the gospel , and so is more historical than the faith called historical . * these means teach us further to make much of the least beginnings of grace , even those which divines commonly call repressing , since they prepare the heart to conversion , and in some sense be called the inchoation thereof : seeing temporary and living faith differ not in form , but degrees of perfection ; there is a faith in the true convert , of no better perfection than that in the temporary , though he stay not there , as the other ( being an unwise son ) doth . huit anat. conscience pag. 214.  * 1 ioh. 3. vers. 2.  the controversy about falling from grace . * deo enim , sive scientiam ejus spectemus , quippe omnia scit ; sive voluntatem , quae ad nihil creatum vel creabile est suspensa , sed ab aeterno determinata , nulla 〈◊〉 potentia disjunctiva : considerari quidem potest potentia creata , non considerato divino decreto , & in signo rationis decretum dei antecedente . Said in tali Chimar••• consideratione , adversary nobis litem vitiosâ nuce ha•• emptitandam srustraserunt . Ac verò actu , non est ulla potentia creata , nisi quae subest aeterno dei decreto , nisi qu•• {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} divinae providentiae renuntiare velit , &c. Rutter exerc. apolog. exerc. 1. c. 1. sect. 8.  1 ioh. 3.9 . Difference betwixt knowledge and faith . object . experience , collection of particular lights . knowledge , real . apparent . psal. 14.1 . psal. 12.4 . God , mercy and sweetness to the devils . as we know , we love . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Arist. eth. lib 3 . c.6 . vide & c. 7 . ci•ca finem . what we know , we are . affection handmaid to knowledge according to some . knowledge a step to affection , according to others . Knowledge & affection names of different degrees in the same nature . affection perfection of knowledge . knowledge often no knowledge , but a vain swelling . tit. 3.6 . knowledge without power , even in the law forbidden . ceremonial law included in the moral . mat. 5.28 . mat. 7.29 . 1 cor. 11.16 . cant. 2.1 . 2 cor. 13.2 . God , from whom all light cometh , is stil•d love 1 ioh 4 16.  women in greatest number truly gracious , because most affectionate . 1 tim. 5.17  the pastor preferred before the teacher , because the truth of truth in the heart lieth in the affection . knowledge , where it is eminent in truth as well as appearance , there affection is equally eminent . David and Solomon compared with Paul . Solomon's preeminence in knowledge extended to politics , and natural philosophy only . 2 cor. 12.3  2 cor. 11.26 . true knowledge , true affection , separated from all appearances or outward advantages of the body , or the like , are one . apprehensions , conclusions , affirmations , &c. all one truth in the soul . the operations of the soul are proved one with the essence thereof . the activity which is the form of the soul , not different from the actions thereof . not of a higher strain . nor of a lower . neither can it be various . the distinction between actus primus and actus secundus , examined . the distinction between substance and accident called into question . the nature of beauty illustrating time and place . time and place nothing different from the essence of the soul . the definitions of time and place rejected . place . time . all actions nothing , if time be any thing . the difficulty untied , how God seeth things . the same truth taking varicus shapes in our apprehensions . set forth by a similitude taken from the sun . the same act of sense perfectly one , yet varied unto many forms . a similitude from the trigonall glass . sense confuted by Copernicus . * capernic . Kepler . Gallilaeus de Galil : object . succession of moments , apparent , not real . the school never acts falsely . object . resp. in false propositions of the soul , so far as it acts , it acts truly : where it is deceived , it is by not acting . pain hath no real being . mart. lib. 2. epigr. 80.  the happiness of our lives advanced by this opinion . mart. li . 6.  ep. 70.  this unity the fountain of knowledge . action wholly depends on knowledge . ob.  resp.  all things one piece . mat. 20.15  propriety maketh lovely . the vanity of dividing knowledge into many sciences . confusions from division in knowledge . knowledge double , of beings , & of their causes . knowledge of beings twofold , of their existencies , and their natures . knowledge of existencies necessary , but altogether uncertain . knowledge of the natures more uncertain than the existencies . * as all those laws concerning slaves , whereas a slave indeed is non ens , for if any man have given away , with Esau , his birth ▪ right , yet he hath not lost it ; because manhood and religion are not mei juris ; they are talents which God hath entrusted me with , and are no more deputable , than places of jud catu•e . Et sic de caeteris . in what sense knowledge of beings is to be wished . two only causes received , God , and emanation from God . Aristotle's materia prima brought to light . matter & form have their matter and form , both of which meet in the emanation . the vain search of causes in physics . * platonici ; who make the world animal magnum . Vide gal. in system . Ptolem . & co. pernic . Kepler's harmo . aristot.  prov. 30. 18.19 . see aristot. de mundo , de coelo &c.  like Plato's and Sir Francis Bacon's . Verulan : augment . Scient. many reasonable beings , placed by philosophy in the soul . eurip. Tragaed . seeing and doing one in the soul as knowing and willing . vanity of dispures in metaphysics . darkness in divinity through the ignorance of unity . faith and repentance coevall . the general promise , the object of faith . declaratiuè the ill consequence of the division between doctrine and discipline . doctrine of mater inworship ; discipline of manner , both are doctrine , both prescribed by the same God . the monstrous effects of division made manifest in other pieces of divinity . the weakness of the distinction scientia simplicis intelligentiae , & purae visionis . scientia maedia discussed . in what sense intermediate causes May be allowed . division the policy of the Prince of darkness . recapitulation of all . the sense of the Sabbath's command . all things ordinances . the intention of special ordinances . mourning and joy reconciled . 

* matth. 24  various sorts of millenaries . the first too earnall . the second only spiritual . a third sort , in some things too literal . 



































































