THE SPRING OF Strengthening Grace In the ROCK of AGES , CHRIST JESUS . DEMONSTRATED In a plain and short SERMON Preached at Twickenham in Middlesex , near Hampton-court , April 16. 1648.  By Thomas Hill D.D. Master of Trinity College in Cambridge . 

PHIL. 2. 12 , 13.  

Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling : for God worketh in you , both to will and to do , of his own good pleasure . 

De ipsis hominum voluntatibus facit , quod vult , & quando vult , habens humanorum cordium , quo voluerit , inclinandorum omnipotentissimam potestatem . 

Aug. de corrept . & Grat. cap. 14.  

Christus meus & omnia . 

London , Printed for Peter Cole , at the Printing-press in Cornhill , near the Royal Exchange , 1648.  

TRUTH and LOVE Happily Married in the SAINTS , And in the Churches of Christ.  

Ephesians 4.15 . 

But speaking the truth in love , may grow up into him in all things , which is the head , even Christ.  

Pauls' chains and tears have had a prevailing rhetoric ; he hath wept as well as sweat over his hearers with good success : when he was to preach to Felix , though a Prisoner , though with a Chain , he made him tremble ; and here in the first Verse , he comes as a Prisoner for their sakes to beseech them ; and a further and special Emphasis , he comes to persuade them to that which is most pleasing , namely , To Unity ; to which purpose he uses four several Arguments ; 

First , There is a common engagement of all Saints to Unity : I beseech you walk worthy of your Vocation , whereunto you are called , with all lowliness and meekness , forbearing one another in love ; there is one body , one spirit , even as you are all called in one hope of your calling , one Lord , one Faith , one Baptism , one God and Father of all , who is above all , and through all , and in you all ; here is a whole bundle of Arguments , in this first consider your Vocation , those Privileges to which you are advanced thereby ; and they leave a very great obligation upon you , as Saints to study Unity . 

Secondly , There is an Argument from the Equity of the thing , in the 7.  Verse . Unto every one of us is given grace , according to the measure of the gift of Christ : unto every one of us ; every one hath some gift , as it pleases jesus Christ to proportion out such a measure to this Saint , and such a measure to that Saint ; the little finger in the mystical body , so much as is fit for him , in the hand , so much as is fit for him , and this with a common respect , that there might be a mutual use of all those , with subserviency to the whole ; in reference to the mystical body of Christ , there is an equity in it . 

Thirdly , There is a very great congruity ; and that argument you shall find in the 8 , 9 , and 11 , Verses : Jesus Christ when he did ascend , he gave gifts to men ; all the gifts that are in the Churches , and graces , they are derived from the same efficient cause , and therefore it is most incongruous , that they should be distracted and divided , so as to reflect dishonourably upon him that is the sole efficient cause of them , and that with common intents and purposes , for good of the mystical body . 

But then fourthly and lastly , You have here another Argument from the necessity of it , till we all come to the Unity of Faith , and that we be no more tossed to and from as children , and carried up and down with every wind of Doctrine ; but that we speak the truth in love , and so grow up into Jesus Christ in all things , who is the head ; here is the necessity of it , you 'll never grow up to intimate communion and fellowship with Jesus Christ , you 'll never make a wise improvement of him , as members of the mystical body , unless you learn this heavenly skill , namely , How to advance Unity ; and so I come to show you what propositions this last Argument , drawn from the necessity of the thing , will afford us ; in the 15.  Verse , which by God's assistance , according as the weak measure of strength I have will bear , I shall insist upon at this time , But speaking or following the Truth in Love , grow up into Christ in all things , which is the head : where first , its clear , 

Jesus Christ is the head of Saints , the head of the Church . 

2.  The Lord Jesus Christ when he ascended and gave gifts to men , did intend , did expect , that there should be such an entertainment of the gospel , that we should grow up into Christ in all things , who is the head . 

3.  Thinking , speaking , following the truth in love , is the Gospel method to our Spiritual welfare ; I 'll begin with the first , 

Christ is the head of particular Saints , & the head of the Church : In the state of innocency , Adam was the head of the great family of the world , when he forfeited his headship , and all that he did enjoy , by eating the forbidden fruit , that family was dissolved , he was turned out of Paradise , all was scattered abroad , and we with him , were then cast into a desperate condition , unless God would be pleased to find out a second Head ; and to that purpose , out of the riches of his Grace , and the infiniteness of his Wisdom , that which Angels could not reach , which men had not so much as any thoughts of , or desire's after , God pitched upon , namely , Christ , and designed him the Head of the Corporation of his Church , of a certain number given unto him in his eternal Counsel , for whom he should undertake ; and this learned Expositors conceive to be the meaning of that place , where he speaks of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 there in Ephesians 1.10 . That he might gather together all things , that all things might be headed under one ; headed under Jesus Christ : Now before the fall , all were headed under the old Adam ; now when they were in a shattered condition , they should be reconciled and collected , headed under Jesus Christ ; for the better opening of this , you may be pleased to take notice of three particulars : 

First , Here is the Headship itself . 

Secondly , Here is the Appropriation of this Headship , to whom he is a Head.  

Thirdly , Here is the Title to this Headship . 

First , For the Headship itself ; he is a Head , 

1.  In regard of his pre-eminence ; it is an expression in 1 Col. 17.18 . In all things having the pre-eminence , he is the Head ; every member in the mystical body hath a Dignity , and is advanced to an excellency , to some degree of it , but he that is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 that hath the preeminency , he is the Head , that is Christ ; but this is not all , if you look upon a Picture , there the head of a man hath a pre-eminence , therefore we must have more than this : He is head , 

2.  In regard of Direction , and in regard of Power , being a wise head , able to advice , and guide , and govern the body ; as the Apostle Peter speaks of him in 1 Pet , 3.22 . Who is gone into heaven , and is on the right hand of God , Angels , Authorities and Powers being made subject to him ; he hath a universal , and absolute regiment over all things in heaven and earth , over men and Devils : but then 

3.  In regard of that Influence that he doth convey to the bodies : Sense and Motion is derived from Christ as the spring ; it is true , that in the natural body , there the heart is primum vivens , but in the mystical body , the head is primum vivens , and he gives life to us , and we derive our life from Jesus Christ , the head ; he hath life , and he hath it abundantly in himself , and he life's , that we may live ; as I remember there is such an expression in John 10.10 . 

4.  In regard of Union , he doth tie altogether ; the nerves and sinews would not unite the members of the mystical body , unless Jesus Christ were the Head ; As he is the Foundation stone , and so supports the building , so he is the Corner stone , both the beauty , and strength , and union of the building , Fundatio fundatissima , as Junius renders it , in Isa 28.16 . a most sure foundation , and the Corner stone , as Peter hath it , in 1 Pet. 2.7 , 8. with reference to that place ; and so in these four particulars Jesus Christ hath a Headship : the next thing is now , The appropriation of this Headship , to whom is he a head ? He is an external Head to all the members of the visible Church , to all professors as he is a vine , and doth communicate some sap to those that are in him , no way but by an external profession , as you have it intimated in John 15.2 . Every branch in me that bears not fruit , shall be cut down and cast into the fire ; and therefore there are some branches in him externally , as he is an external Head to the Church , as he is a vine ; but indeed , he is properly the Head of his body , the Saviour of his body ; he is a Head to those , to whom he is a Saviour , in Ephesians 5.23 . As the King hath a common relation to all his Subjects , but a more pecular relation to the Queen , who is a Subject and a Spouse , and so hath Jesus Christ to his Church ; and the reason is this , because there is a full commensuration betwixt all the three glorious persons in the Trinity ; they are grossly mistaken that will make Jesus Christ to die for all , and yet will not in their sense , so as to make them Salvabiles if they will , and yet cannot say , That either God hath given Christ to all , or given all to Christ , or that the Spirit of God will apply that Redemption to all , for there is a commensuration , there is an adaequation , betwixt the three glorious persons in the Trinity , and their workings for the Salvation of the Saints : Jesus Christ dies for those whom God hath given to him , with purposes of Salvation ; I do not deny , but all the wicked in the world , may have some benefit by the death of Christ , as all have some common pledges of the bounty of God , and all may have some common operations of the Spirit of God ; but if you 'll speak of any thing as to Salvation , there is a commensuration betwixt the three persons in the Trinity , and their workings ; Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father , Sanctification of the Spirit , and the sprinkling of the blood of Christ , in 1 Pet. 1.2 . indeed in 1 John 2.2 . He is a propitiation for our sins , and not for ours only , but for the sins of the whole world : to whom did John write that Epistle ? to the Jews ; and therefore to show that they had not all Religion now engrossed amongst them , and that the Election of God did not still run amongst them , only he speaks in that dialect , he did not intend every particular man in the world , for than he must intend men that sin against the Holy Ghost , which is impossible that they should be saved : no man will say that understands any thing , even in Catechistical Divinity , that Jesus Christ died to save them , which he must do , if he died for every man in the world , with such purposes to save them ; and so in 1 Tim. 1.4 , 5 , 6.  He is given a ransom for all ; why all ? There is one God , and one Mediator , now Jews and Gentiles ; as Jesus Christ did take our nature upon him , both Jews and Gentiles , all estates shall have the common privilege , and benefit , and advantage of being in a capacity to receive blessings from him , spiritual saving blessings , that is , all conditions , whether Kings , and all in Authority , or Servants , or others , not every particular person , but as in one place Jews or Gentiles , so in another place , not this or that condition , but all estates , and all relations , and all conditions ; but still the Appropriation is to the Church , as here he saith , from whom the whole body is joined together in the 16.  Vers. from whom , from Christ the whole body is joined together , so it is the body that hath this influence from him ; but then 

3.  What is his Title to his Headship ? it is threefold ; 

First , The designation of God and the Father : God the Father hath sealed him , he gave him to be a Head to the Church over all things , in Ephe. 1.22 , 23. and then 

Secondly ; His personal fitness : Of his fullness we all receive grace for grace , In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom ; and then 

Thirdly , His own propitious readiness : We were not in any degree so willing to be saved , as he is to save us ; He came down to seek and to save that which is lost ; the Spirit of the Lord was upon him , and anointed him to preach the Gospel , it was his business ; and as he had a Commission from his Father , and came under the Broad-seal of Heaven , so he had a strong inclination●●●m ●●●m his own bowels , to engage him to it ; there is his Title : the use of this , 

1.  To try the title of the Pope's Headship to the Church ; how comes he by it ? for a Church to have two Heads , one body to have two heads , it is a Monster , you 'll make it Monstrous ; we do allow in a good sense , That the Supreme Magistrate is , Caput politicum in the Church , to command good things according to the Word of God , and to restrain evil according to that Word ; we hold forth confidently , that Jesus Christ , he is the only proper Head of the Church , that doth convey all saving spiritual blessings ; life , nourishment , direction , and all those admirable advantages to the body ; we cannot allow a Caput Vicarium , a Ministerial Head , there is no need of that ; Jesus Christ is the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the Head ; here is an Article that gives an Emphasis , what needs it any other ? Jesus Christ is present always in his Church ; when he withdrew his Corporal presence , he would then requite his Church with his Spiritual presence ; and that presence of his Spirit , it should accompany them to the end of the World : But the Pope as great as he is , cannot be present in every place ; we need not spend any more time in crying down that that is so prodigious : so many several Saints , and so many several Churches , in several parts of the world , how is it possible that a Pope can be Head of them all ? but then 

2.  Beware of being injurious to the least member of Jesus Christ : If Christ be the Head of the body , surely his body is dear to him ; never think to ruin the body , or to drown the body , as long as the Head is able to keep itself above wat●● ; never think to hurt the body , as long as the head is able to secure it , and protect it , and defend it ; there are very notable expressions in several of the Prophets , as in Daniel , There are four great Monarchies , than came a little stone hewn out of the mountain , and breaks them all , one after another ; All opposite powers to the Kingdom , and Headship of Jesus Christ , shall be confounded , in despite of the Pope , and Turks , and Devil and all : All the Kingdoms of the earth shall at last become the Lords , and his Christ's , and then in the 12. of Zachary , you shall find there in the 5.  Verse , Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls numerously , for I , saith the Lord , will be ●nto her a wall of fire round about , and will be the glory in the midst of her ; a wall of fire to burn up the Enemy , and I will be the glory in the midst of her , for the comfort of his people , the presence of God is the glory of any place , and therefore he saith , He will create a defence upon the glory ; an admirable place in the 4. of Isaiah , Pour upon them a Spirit of burning and judgement , to direct them , and consume the Enemies , and he will create a defence upon all the glory , upon his Saints which are the glory , so he is pleased to count them , though there be no preparations in them to raise a defence , he will create it ; yea in Zach. 12.2 . Behold , I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling to all people round about : And in that day I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people , all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces , though all the people of the earth shall be gathered together against it ; OH what encouragement is here for the poor Saints , the Citizens of Jerusalem ! let all the desperate Atheists , and profane opposites , combine against the people of God and plot , although they may have it may be some particular advantages , as it is said of the Romans , they were Pralio victi , but not Bello , it may be now and then they may get an advantage in this combat against the Church , but yet they shall never totally and finally overcome them , though they be all gathered together ; God will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone to all that burden themselves with it : There will a time come , when the Lord will grind to pieces , all those that have any Antipathy against Jerusalem , when God will trample Satan and all other Enemies under the feet of his Jerusalem , when God will call for all them forth , that would not have him to rule over them , Bring forth mine Enemies that would not I should reign over them , and slay them before me , in Luke 19.27 . there is the second Use.  

3.  If Jesus Christ be the Head of the Church , then surely he must have a body ; an head without a body were prodigious , and therefore that Doctrine of the Arminians must needs prove false , That would have Jesus Christ come into the world upon these terms , and to die upon such considerations , that all things should be left so far to man's Freewill , that it was in their power , unless they would be so good natured as to believe , when Jesus Christ called upon them , that he should not have one Member , no body at all : This is the erroneous Doctrine of Arminius and his Followers , that go upon his principles ; is it impossible that Jesus Christ should not have one Member , for he gives only posse , he gives not velle , if you will not believe , and improve your Freewill , you may choose whether ever you will believe or no ; they will not allow , that Jesus Christ by an invinciable , by an almighty power , shall carry men , and overcome men so far , as to make them of unwilling , to be willing to believe ; yea , where Arminius hath four decrees concerning the Salvation of men , you may be within the compass of all those four decrees , and yet not be saved , a miserable condition ; he tells you , God hath decreed to give Christ , and means , and that all who believe shall be preserved and saved , but he tells you not that he hath decreed to give faith and repentance to any one man , to enable him to believe , and therefore it is a most dishonourable Doctrine to the Headship of Christ ; blessed be God that it so much discovered , and we are so far delivered from it , though it is most unhappily of late in some parts of it , got into too many Popular hands . But then 

4.  Take heed ( I beseech you ) of any obstructions that might hinder a sweet communion betwixt the Head and the Members , that might hinder an intercourse betwixt Jesus Christ and your souls ; let this rather be your care , to gain that heavenly skill , how you may make use of Jesus Christ as the Head.  

1.  Give him the glory of his Sovereignty , let him be all in all ; the Sovereignty of his Grace , and the Sovereignty of his Independency , to save whom he pleaseth , and to do what he pleases with men , to have mercy on whom he will have mercy , and because he will have mercy . 

2.  Give him the glory of his Wisdom as a Prophet , seek wisdom from God , and it shall be given you , in James 1.5 . as you should give him the honour of his Sovereignty , allowing him this , that as the Potter , he may make some vessels to honour , and some to dishonour , as he pleaseth . 

3.  Give him the honour of his riches and Fullness , seek supplies from him , do not live upon yourselves , nor upon your duties , nor upon ordinances only , but live upon Jesus Christ in all , so give Christ the honour of being the spring of your Supplies ; in him are fresh springs . 

4.  Give him the honour of being the best friend in the world , and labour for such an intimacy with him , that he and you may be acquainted , for he saith , If ye love him , and keep his commandments , he and his Father will come and take up his abode with you , and he will manifest himself to you , in John 14.23 . OH how much of heaven will that soul have upon earth , that he should have Jesus Christ come and dwell with him ! and when he goes to Prayer , manifest himself , when he goes to read the Scriptures , paraphrase upon the Bible , and suggest sweet hints to him ; when he is in any straits , overpower him with a Divine instinct , though he hath not an express revealed will to walk with , as we have not in every particular circumstance of an action ; OH that then Jesus Christ should particularise some general Scripture to you , or bring something to your mind that you have heard in a Sermon , it may be a dozen years ago ; give him the glory of this , and improve him to this blessed purpose . 

The Lord Jesus Christ did intend , and doth expect , that upon his ascension and giving gifts ▪ there should be such an entertainment of the Gospel , that we might grow up into him in all things , who is the Head : It is the perfection of a Christian , to improve all the three persons in the Trinity ; when you look upon God and his attributes , to find proportionable impressions upon your souls , by his greatness , to learn to fear him , by his godness to love him ; when you look upon the Spirit of God , and his working , then likewise to feel some stamps answerable thereunto , that you may have an inclination to comply with him in all things ; so likewise when ye behold Jesus Christ in the passages of his redemption , to make use of all , that there may be some proportionable correspondency betwixt his dispensations towards you , and your improvement of them . And here I shall briefly desire you to consider under this point , these three particulars : 

First , The intention itself , and the expectation of Jesus Christ.  

Secondly , The grounds of it : and 

Thirdly , The ends of it . 

1.  For the intention and expectation of Jesus Christ himself , when he did ascend and gave gifts , it is this , in three particulars : 

That there should be a growth . 

That there should be a growing up into Christ.  

That there should be a growing up into Christ in all things : I beseech you mark these three particulars . 

First , That there should be a growth ; how a growth ? so as to complete the number of all the Saints , that not one of them be lost : Jesus Christ hath undertaken , that he will not lose one that God the Father hath given him , and therefore all those must be called in ; and it is conceived by learned Expositors , that that is the meaning of this place , Christ hath given gifts , for the perfecting of the Saints ; that is , for the completing the number ; 

To fill up the number of persons , that so many as were elected from eternity , so many might be called in : and then 

For the completing of the graces of those Saints , both in the degrees , and in the activity of them , for Jesus Christ ( it is an admirable condescending expression ) reckoneth not himself complete , till all his members be complete ; I beseech you take notice of that first Chap. and the last verse of the Ephesians , Which is his body , the fullness of him that filleth all in all : Jesus Christ fills all in all , and yet ( he saith ) his body is the fullness of him ; he is pleased not to accounted himself complete as head of the Church , till his members be completed , as to the number of them , and till their graces likewise be complete to such a degree as he intended : but than 

Secondly , There must be a growing up , there must be the manner , grow up into Christ ; not only a concorporating with Jews , as the gentile Churches did , in the 3. of the Ephesians , not only an incorporating into Jesus Christ , though that is very much , into the body of Christ , but a transforming into Christ , that you may be moulded in Christ ; I would not be too bold with those expressions of Nazianzen , because I see they are abused , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 It is an admirable one that Athanasius hath , That Jesus Christ took the nature of man upon him , that so we might have the nature of God conveyed to us , the divine nature ; there is a ground for that expression , in 2 Pet. 1.4 . and a delivering up into Christ , into his word , in Rom. 6.17 . the form of doctrine into which you were delivered ; here is an admirable improvement of Christ , when a Sermon is delivered to you , the mind of Jesus Christ discovered , for you to be delivered up to it , that you may go out of the assembly under the power of that truth , and moulded in it ; and then withal , that Christ might be in you , and you might be in Christ , that there might be a mutual indwelling , as in that place in John , yea , that we may come to live in the Spirit , and walk in the Spirit , in Gal. 5.25 . yea , and that the very life of Faith , the life that we live , may be by faith in the Son of God , in Gal. 2.20 . not only now and then to pray in faith , but to live by faith , to act all in faith ; here is a growing up into Christ , not only a growing to some knowledge of Christ , or to some profession of Christ , or to make towards Christ , but to be moulded , to be transformed into Christ ; here is the entertainment and improvement of the Gospel that Christ expects : but than 

Thirdly , Growing up in all things unto Christ ; There is the proportion , or the dimension , as a Head , Our growth must be as large as his Headship ; now as he is a Prophet , so we must grow up into him , that we may have wisdom , and all those supplies from him ; as he is a Priest grow up in him , that we may have Righteousness from him , for the covering of all our sins ; as he is a King grow up in him , that we may have a Redemption from all our snares , bondages and enthralments ; for our being and well being , having our subsistence in him , in God the Father , and in Christ Jesus , as in 1 Thess. 1.1 . when we are converted , we come to have a new subsistence in Christ : for Truth , and for Degrees of Grace grow up into him , for habits and acts , for the velle , as well as for the posse , for converting and renewing grace , for it is he that works in you the will and the deed , of his own good pleasure , as in Phil. 2.13 . for comforts , and for hopes , in 1 Pet. 1.8 . That you may have joy through believing , and the God of peace fill you with hope , in Rom. 15.13 . all our strength and comfort lies in union with Christ , and influence from him : It is an easy matter to sprout in hypocrisy , and in self-love , and in earthliness , and so in a formal external profession , and to have a bulk of outward performances ; but it 's an hard matter to grow into an inward communion and intimacy with Jesus Christ , to be transformed into him . So I have done now with the first thing , the sum of the expectation ; the next is , 

The ground , why Jesus Christ expects this ; for very good reasons , 

1.  This is the grand purpose and effect of Christ's ascension ; he did ascend to give gifts , he did ascend to give his Spirit , and that is the great promise of the New Testament ; he promised to give his Spirit , and shall he give his Spirit which he purchased at so dear a rate , and shall the Spirit give gifts to men , and those gifts be actuated , and exercised , and prepared for you , and shall not we improve them ? OH what an ill requital is here ! 

2.  He hath a vehement desire of union and communion with all those that God the Father hath given to him , Behold I stand and knock at the door , if any will hear my voice , than I will come in to him , and sup with him , and he with me ; that is a melting place , a winning place , in rev. 3.20 . Jesus Christ is impatient ( as it were , I may speak it with reverence ) to want communion with them who are his in Gods eternal counsels . But than thirdly , Christ may well expect this , 

Because attaining the intended stature and measure of the fullness of Christ , we are fit for heaven , as in Ephe. 4.13 . Till we all come to the unity of faith , and to the perfect stature of the fullness of the age in Christ , therefore there is such a pitch , and Jesus Christ expects it ; you will never be fit for him , till you come to your pitch : there is a minimum quod sic , as Philosophers speak about natural bodies , so about every member of the mystical body , you must come to such a degree of grace before you are fit for heaven ; now God hath designed you that , that you may be meet to be partakers of the inheritance with the Saints in light : it is not slipping out of a drunkard's habit , and to desire to be dissolved , or to receive the communion , or to give such and such legacies , or to send for a Minister , and say , Lord have mercy on me : no ; thou hast been a drunkard and an Atheist all thy days , thou art not meet to go to heaven ; Paul blesseth God that hath made him meet : Heaven is a holy place , and God is a holy God , and thou hast a very cursed sinful nature , very unfit for heaven , till thou be polished , fashioned and framed ; now Jesus Christ expects this : The third particular follows ; I shall not dispatch all , you 'll give me leave to consult for my own health . As you have had the expectation itself , and the grounds of it , so you shall have 

The end : Now the ends of it are two , why Christ intended this , and expects this : 

First , For your stability in Christ : and 

Secondly , For your improvement of Christ.  

1.  Your stability in Christ.  

2.  Stability in judgement ; OH that is an admirable thing : Health of body is a great matter , but truly soundness of faith , especially in these unstable times , is much greater : It is a good thing to have the heart established with grace ; that is , with the doctrine of grace , and not with meats , not to be carried up and down with this wanton opinion , and that wanton opinion , in Heb. 13.9 . A good thing to have the heart established in grace . 

To have a stability in affection ; that thy affections may centre upon Christ , as thy love , and thy desire , and thy hope , and thy joy ; thou mayest desire other things , yet thou mayest be able to say , I have none in heaven but thee , and none in earth that I desire in comparison of thee ; you may love other things , but you may be able to say , I love Jesus Christ for himself , and love myself and all other things in reference to him ; I value power , and estate , learning , and all outward thing , nothing , but with reference and subservience to Jesus Christ : OH here is a sweet stability of affection ! and that Jesus Christ may not only be thy joy , but the exceeding gladness of thy joy , a triumph of joy , to joy more in knowledge of Christ , and communion with Christ , than you do in all outward comforts and advantages whatsoever : here is a sweet stability of affection ; these people will not be carried up and down so much with either crosses or comforts , as very many are . But then 

There is a stability of conversation , that is , a blessed stability , in James 1.8 . A double minded man is unconstant in all his ways ; as long as you have an end and an end , a heart and a heart , a mind and a mind , you 'll never be constant ; you know not where to find any men in the world , but godly men , because they have fixed principles , they make conscience ; but come to a covetous man , when you speak of his covetousness , there you have him , when you speak against his earthliness , there you loose him ; he hath a double mind , something for God , and something for the world , hath no more Religion than suits with his worldly designs ; he will hear a Sermon because it is cheap , yet he will ( it may be ) deceive you in his shop , because there is his interest ; and he will ( it may be ) be jolly and frolic , and scoff over a cup of sack at the people of God soon after Sermon , though he hath expressed ( it may be ) a great deal of zeal to the Minister ; why , there lies his interest , he is a jolly man , a professor at large , & he must be bold : OH here is no stability . It is a blessed thing , and a sweet advantage ▪ and Jesus Christ intends this , that you should be grounded in Christ , being rooted , and grounded , and established in the faith , in Colosians 2.7 . Now the next end is this , 

Your improvement of Christ : An improvement of him , for what purpose ? 

Why , for all necessary gifts ; as a Magistrate , as a Minister in any place of trust , he hath variety of gifts , in 1 Cor. 12.  

For all graces ; he hath variety of graces , he hath abundance of Spirit , that you may be filled with all the fullness of God , as I remember in Eph. 3.19 . 

In all conditions and relations ; that you may know how to be sick , and how to be poor ; how to be Magistrates , how to be Ministers ; I have learned to want and abound , I can do all things through Christ enabling me ( saith Paul ) in Philippians 4.13 . And then , 

In all duties ; you can do nothing without Christ , but as he gives in , as he communicates himself , and vouchsafes to assist you ; when he withdraws , you flag , you whither . 

I 'll be bold to say a word to my brethren of the Ministry : OH that Ministers would chiefly study and mind this work , this is proper Pulpit-work , to put people upon such an entertainment of the Gospel , that they might improve Jesus Christ , and grow up to a stability in him ; Paul was sent , had a Commission , according to the faith of Gods elect , in Tit. 1.1 . and Gal. 4.19 . I travel in birth with you ( saith Paul ) till Christ be form in you : OH what pain it cost him every Sermon . It was a great speech , yet I have heard it as a certain truth concerning Reverend Mr. Bains , That every Sermon cost him as much in his sense ( as he thought ) as it did ordinarily cost a woman to bring a child into the world ; I travel in birth , till I see Jesus Christ form in you ; Pulpits are not for News only , and to lead people this way , and that way , upon politic designs , and sometimes upon our own carnal interest ; Pulpits were never intended for passionate invectives , to cry up this party , or cry down that party , in a vehement passionate manor ; let us rather use hard reasons , and soft words : If we conceive they be in an Error , undermine their Error , and avoid any exasperating provoking names , which rather alienates them , & hardens them , than recovers them : This is not the method to preach men unto Christ , but rather to preach away the most and best of our hearers . 

Is it thus , that Jesus Christ intendeth this entertainment of-the Ministry , that we may grow up into him in all things ; then I beseech you give me leave to call upon you , & I do not know where I could speak more fitly in any place of the world , then in this famous City , and never more seasonably , then when the Representative of the City is met , namely , that you would consider , What means you enjoy , what Gospel-light the Lord hath entrusted you with , and what he expects from you ; will it not be much easier for Sodom and Gomorrah , then for London another day ? you that have been lifted up with Capernaum to heaven , if you improve not the means , make account , if one place in hell be hotter than another , to be thrown down into it : And all I have to say , is this , Let it be your care so to improve the Gospel , that you may derive more from Christ , and live more in Christ , and express more of Christ ▪ that you may be inclined and enabled to do more for Christ : Here accept these two short hints ; 

1.  Growth must be proportionable to the means you do enjoy : brethren , let me confidently say it , That measure of growth that might please God in some parts of England , will not satisfy God from you that live in London ; why ? because as you have higher food , and more spiritual and more glorious Gospel-discoveries , the Lord expects proportionable improvements : And let me say this , 

2.  There must be a growth of all the members of the body ; that is a rule Philosophers give , Augmentation is of all the parts , and therefore to grow upwards and downward ; to grow more humble , more in faith , more in love to the Saints , more in activity for God ; this it is the Lord expects , 2 Pet. 3.18 . 

This may rectify our judgements concerning the Ministry of the Gospel , and that in two great points : 

First , Behold it in its Original , it is the Ordinance of Christ , and it is the fruit of the ascension of Jesus Christ ; they are to be instructed and pitied ( I believe many of them may go according to their present apprehensions , and therefore it were happy if they might be with a spirit of meakness reduced ) that will cry down all our Ministry as Antichristian ; why ? because there were or are some defects in Ordination by Bishops , or whoever ; admit that to be true , but I beseech you , what is the Original ? from Christ ; and if any man will ask an able godly Minister in England , where had you your Ministry ? you 'll say from the Prelates , he will say from Jesus Christ , though it is true , the manner of conveying the power of exercising the Ministry be by men , for Paul saith , He was an Apostle neither of men , nor by men ; not of men , so he differed from false Apostles , not by men , so he differed from ordinary Ministers : Now suppose I , or any other Minister of the Gospel , have had our Ministry conveyed to us from Christ by men , and there hath been some defects in the manner , will you say , that that defect in the manner , destroys the thing ? I think not any body would say , the Marriage was null , because they were not so rightly married in every particular , as to the manner , or to say , that a Magistrate is no Magistrate , because in every particular , it may be he received not his Magistracy , in the due form according to the Statutes , etc. there is a great deal of difference ( my brethren ) betwixt the grounds of nullifying , and reforming a thing ; we are all sensible of it , and desire God to pardon what hath been amiss , and to heal what is still out of frame ; there hath been defects in the manner of conveying our Ministry , or else why do we desire to reform it , but we confidently affirm our Ministry is from Jesus Christ ; Christ gave gifts , with the office and Authority , but what ? not only Prophets and Apostles , but Pastors and Teachers : then 

2.  Behold the Ministry , in Christ's intention in giving it : Why did he give it ? it were a sweet thing to consider , and I am persuaded it were a good method to cure some of London distempers ; no marvel , if you that have such admirable gifts , be still so lean and crazy in spirit : what will cure that distemper ? look at the Ministry of the Gospel , as the Ordinance of Christ , and the fruit of the ascension of Christ ; therefore when you go to a Sermon , say not , I 'll not hear this man or that man , because he is a fierce Independent , I 'll not hear that man , because he is a rigid Presbyterian , nor such a man , because he is a vehement Independent , away with all such unseasonable words ; but say this , I 'll go and attend upon the Ordinance of of Christ , and I 'll go and attend upon that which is a fruit of the ascension of Christ ; and withal let me add this , and I desire it may be remembered , I wish I had more strength to insist upon it , because it is a most dangerous opinion , and doth undermine the very foundation of the Gospel , namely , to hold as some do , and vent it with much boldness , That the Ordinances and the Ministry cease , and because that Popery did once overspread the world ; now we have no Ordinances , and now we have no Ministry : and what place do they bring , it is a most strange confidence , and it is in Print , and many of you know the Book , it is cried up sufficiently : One interprets this place of Scripture ( I beseech you let us consider it in the fear of God , and with the spirit of meekness ) Christ promises he will be with them , he gives his Apostles commission to go abroad , and saith , He will be with them to the end of the world , Mat. 28.20 . ( the Lord pardon and heal all wresting of Scripture , if it be his will , and prevent it for time to come ) To the end of the world , saith he in print , that is , to the end of this age of Ministration , they are his own words , to the end of this dispensation : Now he makes account that this Gospel-dispensation is ended , and now we are come under a third Dispensation or Administration ; we were all under low Administrations , the Gospel is in a manner at an end , and God is all in all immediately in his Saints . OH that Scripture should be made to serve our purposes ! weigh the place meekly , I desire not to meddle with men's persons , but I must be faithful to Jesus Christ , and the souls of his people ; and according to the light he hath given me , I shall endeavour to make it appear , that Interpretation is not consistent with the Text : 

Jesus Christ in the 18.  Verse of the 28. of Matthew saith , All power is given to me in heaven and earth , go therefore and teach all nations . 

Teach all nations ; surely if this Dispensation be now ended , if the Ministry be at an end , all nations cannot be taught , and so Jesus Christ will lose some of his elect , for they cannot be called in , for there must be no Teaching ( it seems ) no Ministry . 

2.  Teaching them to observe all things , whatsoever I commanded you : All nations will never be taught all things , whatsoever Jesus Christ commands them , and the Apostles and Ministers cannot fulfil their commission if the Ministry be ceased , and we must have no Ministry , and no Ordinances to instruct them in all these things . 

And lo ( lo , Christ would have you take notice of it ) I am with you , not only I will be with you , but am with you , and that every day , he is with you always , always even to the end of the world . 

4.  The end of the world : What , to the end of this Dispensation , and for the age of this Ministration only ? brethren , I could fetch it out of the very Original itself ; whereas he saith , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Signifies an Age , I grant it doth , but it signifies Eternity many times in Scripture , For thine is the Kingdom , Power and Glory , for ever and ever , I am sure of it , there it is not a Dispensation only . And then for the end , 

I could fetch it not only out of Plato , but also out of the Septuagint , and out of other places , where that Greek word signifies Consummation , therefore there must be an end ; but let us go on further . 

I 'll ask any man that will say these words , that I am with you to the end of the World , That is , to the end of this Dispensation ; When did this Dispensation begin ? in what year did it begin ? Let any man tell me that Jesus Christ will be with his Disciples or Ministers , to this hundred year , or to this age , and then he forbears : Is it to all persons , or to these persons only ? then who are they ? I would very fain have these plain Questions resolved : OH you 'll say , it is till the Spirit comes ; the Spirit comes ! Why , the Spirit was coming ever since Jesus Christ ascended , and doth come with new lights daily , and the Spirit will be coming , till Jesus Christ come again the second time . 

6.  And I would ask further , I beseech you , unless there be a Ministry , how shall we have Popery confuted ? You say , because Popery hath defiled the Ministry , there is no Ministry ; I say , Popery must be confuted by the Ministry : you may burn an Arrian on the head , but Arrianism must be confounded by the Ministry ; you may hang a Papist , but we know that you can never confute Popery , but by the light of the Ministry ; and Paul hath said this , The Pope shall be destroyed by the brightness of Christ's coming , viz. in the ministry of the Gospel . 

7.  I would know this also , If the faith were once delivered to the Saints , that is , Once for all , as Interpreters have expounded it ; What , shall we have a new Edition , or a new Gospel ? had we not an everlasting Gospel before ? Nay further , Jesus Christ will give up all things to the Father , When ? when he hath conquered all his Enemies , and after the Resurrection , and then God will be all in all : Well , they say , they are Goded and Christed , and God is immediately in them , and they are under the third Dispensation , and we are still under these low Administrations , than they must make us believe , the Resurrection is past ; for God shall never come to be all in all , and Jesus Christ never give up his Kingdom , till the Resurrection be past ; and then further , go now to the neighbour words of my Text , He gave gifts to men , that all might come to the Unity of the faith , and to a perfect stature . All come , and therefore be confident , I dare venture my soul upon it ( which is a great word ) that Jesus Christ will have a Ministry more or lesle , till he have brought in all the Elect , and I have this ground for it out of the word , He gave gifts , Pastors and Teachers , till all come to the Unity of the faith , and to the acknowledgement of the Son of God , and to a perfect stature : Now if they say there is no Ministry , than they must make us believe , that all the Saints are come in , and that there is a perfect number , etc. and their graces completed ; but I must spare myself , the time is past , I have had late and sad experience , what it is to spend too much upon weak Spirits , not recovered ; though I confess I intended most upon the third point , Following the truth in love . 

What is this Truth ? Why , as God's glory is the Constellation of his Attributes , as God's happiness is the absoluteness of his self-sufficency , as God's holiness is the impression of his image , as comfort from God is the glimpse of his loving countenance , as the learning we receive , is a beam of his wisdom falling upon us , so indeed Truth is the issue , the representation , and the discovery of his revealed will , and of his mind to us concerning Doctrine and Worship , What we should know , and what we should practise . 

What is Love ? not only a Love to the Truth , that is good , not only a love to Christ the head , that is as good , and the proper genius of Saints , carries them to both these , but indeed a love to the Saints , to the Members , love the brethren , love the corporation of Saints , in 1 Pet. 2. v. 7.  

What is it to follow or speak the Truth here ? 

For Explication , where three things considerable ; The Greek word here signifies , sometimes , 

To speak the Truth , in Gal. 4.16 . 

To do the Truth , in John 3.21 . and in Eph. 4.24 . 

To follow the Truth with a sincere constancy ; so learned men interpret it , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 doth answer to an Hebrew word , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 in Niphal , that signifies to be firm , and to be constant ; and so doubtless it is a great part of the meaning here , by the opposition , That you may be no more as children tossed to and from , but following the Truth in Love , that is , following it with constancy , and firmness , and cleaving to it . 

I humbly conceive , To speak the Truth here , is too strait , as will appear , if you please to compare the Context . I choose rather to take the largest sense ( adoring the deep and mysterious fullness of holy Scripture ) so to seek , follow and embrace the Truth with that firm constancy , that we should be ready to speak and do the Truth upon all occasions . Indeed , Truthing it in love , which were an admirable Motto for Saints , and most seasonable in these unsound and censorious times , Truthing it in love . 

Truthing it in love , seeking and following the Truth with constancy , is the Gospel method of our spiritual welfare ; This was John's counsel to the Elect , and his comfort concerning the Lady ( a practice worthy it seems of great persons : ) This was John's joy concerning her and her children , and concerning his Gaius too , in the beginning of his third Epistle , That they walked in the Truth , and the Truth dwelled in them , and they in Truth , loving one another ; Here is Truthing it in Love : now in short , what reasons why this is the Gospel method to our welfare ; first , considered , 

Singly , Truth and Love , as they are in themselves , contribute much . 

Secondly , Jointly , consider the happy marriage of Truth and Love , they operate much to advance this Gospel-design . 

First , For Truth , It hath a sovereign virtue to prevent and to cure those spiritual maladies , which are most obstructive to the good of persons and Churches : Truth keeps from Ignorance , from Superstition , from Errors , from Heresies , yea from profaneness . 

Love keeps from Strife , from Schism ( although there be some differences amongst Saints , all men see not by the same Light ) if there be Love , it will keep them from making a difference in affection ; or keep them from all unwarrantableness , disclaiming communion with their brethren ; It is want of Love that doth that . 

Secondly , Truth , if there be differences in judgement ( as there may be ) yet it hath this power , that it will teach men to hold their Christian liberty , by satisfying their conscieriees in the lawful use of it . 

Love will teach them not to use their Liberty unseasonably to the offence of their brethren ; the Truth makes you free , if you know the Truth , in John 8.32 . Truth will give us a Freedom , that we shall not suffer ourselves to be under unnecessary and unwarrantable human impositions , but shall see our Freedom ; and in the use of indifferent things , Love will make me so tender , and so Indulgent to the Conscience of my Brother , that I 'll rather deny myself , then offend him ; here is Love and Truth singly , as to the preventing of evil . And then 

Secondly , Here is Truth and Love , that have a direct Subservience to promote the best good of Saints in their Communion with Christ ; now Truth enlightens the mind concerning the whole Council of God , concerning agenda , and credenda ; teaching us , that like as Usurpers , not as Libertines , we encroach upon the Headship of Christ ; and Love inflames us , and inclines to embrace Truth , and reject Falsehood , and what ever is profane , Psal. 119.127 , 128.  I hate every false way , I love thy statutes , etc.  Truth will not only inform us , but engage us to inform others , to teach and instruct them , that they should know what they should do , and Love will teach us to do it with Meekness ; Exhort them that are contrary minded with meekness ; oftentimes we preach smart Sermons , give hot reproofs , like as when Physicians give Potions scalding hot , they will spit them out again , and cannot endure them , and they go away prejudiced ; I cannot endure to hear such a man , he is so hot and furious , and vents his own spirit : OH its Love and meekness cause's us to deal tenderly , and softly , meekly with our Brother , and this is indeed the Spirit of the Gospel ; There is no more diabolical Spirit , than a furious Spirit , and no more Gospel Spirit , than a meek and calm Spirit : But I must contract . The next thing is , 

Love and Truth jointly , when they are married jointly together , and go hand in hand , and Saints by them joyn-heads and hearts , OH then , and then only they operate fruitfully : Truth without Love , breeds only empty dry Speculations , which puff up ; Love without Truth , is a blind , if not a Popish , yet an unwarrantable devotion amongst formal protestants ; What is the reason ? you shall see now amongst many of your dull and cold protestants , more zeal about Christmas day , than the Lords day , about hearing a Passion Sermon upon that they call Good Friday , then upon any other day : Here is Love without Truth , now Truth and Love joined together , would keep the people from being too fond about these unwarrantable practices ; But will some say , what , do ye blame us about Easter , and a Communion at Easter ? etc. Have we it not in Scripture ? See what Scripture they have for it , I would this secret were declared to all the world , it would break many snares with which diverse are entangled : 

In the Acts , there is the word Easter indeed , in the twelfth Chapter , When he had apprehended him , he put him in Prison , and delivered him to four quaternions of Soldiers to keep him , intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people : There is Easter , but will you hear now , how it came in first ? you 'd easily believe that it must be jumbled in one way or other , if you understand the Original ; There was the word Passover , but no Easter , the word Easter was not found out in many hundred years after this was spoken of Peter : But here was a secret . 

It was a glorious work of King James , he set diverse Oxford men , and Cambridge men , and City Ministers , with others to Translate the Bible , a glorious work , how ever Translations may be slighted amongst us , yet Bugenhagius and other Divines , when they had the Bible Translated into the Dutch language , they kept that day of the year a Feast of Thanksgiving for the Translation of the Bible , they were so affected with the mercy , but it 's a great unhappiness , when the Translation of the Bible shall be brought to serve our purposes . 

I have it from certain hands , such as lived in those times , that when the Bible had been Translated by the Translators appointed , the New Testament was looked over by some of the great Prelates , ( men I could name some of their persons ) to bring it to speak Prelatical Language , and they did alter ( as I am informed by the means of one that was a great observer in those times , and lived then ) Fourteen places in the New Testament , to make them speak the Language of the Church of England , that was so cried up : and I 'll tell you some of them . 

First , In the first of the Acts , speaking of Judas , Let another man take his Bishopric ; it is forced , it signifies Charge or Inspection : but that you may believe that the Bishops are the Apostles Successors , let another man take his Bishopric . 

Again , In the second of the Acts , it is Not suffer my Soul to lie in Hell ; this is clear , Former Translations have it , not suffer my Soul to lie in the Grave ; But it was learned Bilsons Opinion , and thrust into the Thirty nine Articles , that Christ did Locally descend into hell ; and to make that Translation agree with the Articles , they must change Grave into Hell.  

Also the Fourteenth of the Acts , They ordained them Elders , they loved to cry up Consecration of Churches , and Dedication , and such kind of things , and Episcopal Ordination too ( for these all advanced the power of the Priests and the Bishops , which brought in Transubstantiation amongst Papists ) and therefore in the Geneva Translation , that was rendered , chosen by suffrages , by lifting up of hands , the word Primarily imports that , it may be in some of the Fathers it includes both , they will tell you , because afterwards having chosen Elders by Suffrages or Voices , they did Ordain them . 

Next , I come to the first of the Corinthians , 12.28 . An abominable violence offered to the Original , God hath set in the Church , Apostles , Teachers , Helps , Governments , and you shall find here a great imposture , it may be now altered , appearing so gross , but I have seen it , and read it in some Translations , Helps in Government ; which is a most horrible prodigious violence to the Greek words , for they are both the Accusative case , Helps ; there are Elders , Government , there are Deacons ; now to obscure these , you must put it , helps in Government . 

I had it related since the delivery of this plain Sermon , by one who most confidently affirmed it , That the learned man to whom it belonged to Translate the first Book of Samuel , having rendered that which Samuel from God spoke concerning Saul , 1 Sam. 8.11 . This shall be the manner of the King that shall reign over you , He will take your sons , etc.  He was sent for to Lambeth , and there persuaded to make the words Will take your sons , etc.  Shall take ; which he conscientiously refused , well knowing it was not spoken by Samuel to Saul , by way of direction for duty what he should do , but Prophetically and Eventually what he would do . 



And then lastly , for Easter ; this was another place that was altered ( as you have heard ) to keep up that holy time of Easter , as they would think it , for herein was the innocency ( though unhappiness unto us ) of the Primitive Worthies , and other Christians ; these had fair intentions in bringing in many things , they thought to win upon the Heathen , and therefore would not wholly annul , but change things , change some of their great Feasts into Christmas-time , change now ( it may be ) Pentecost into Whitsuntide , and the Passover into Easter ; it had a good intent : but minding their own intentions , more than God's Word , their Rule , you see how these constitutions of men are degenerated . Now I beseech you , let us not suffer ourselves to be abused , when a word Easter shall be thrust in ( for it was diverse hundred years after Peter , that the word Easter came in ) shall we therefore go and keep up an Easter Communion above all times else , for such pretences as these are ? brethren , the more you join Truth and Love together , the more you 'll be free from these fond kind of Devotions : And let me say this , It is Blind Devotion indeed ; and many men that are so zealous for these , and women too , they think to get protection for other courses . 

It may be many a Lady that paints and spots , and trifles away precious time , if she be but zealous at an Easter Communion , she thinks to get a protection for all vanities else : A Citizen , if he be a Patron to such a Minister , frequent Lectures , than he may be frolic , and vain , and loose , etc.  Here is Love without Truth . 

Let me add this , Truth without Love makes many swell , and contemn others ; and Love without Truth edifies to Superstition and to Idolatry sometimes ; What brought in Praying to Saints , but Love without Truth ? But you 'll allow me to be so indulgent to myself , as that if either the ordinary place , or the ordinary time be not observed , to pity a man that hath seven months laboured under a quartane Ague , and had a fit late last night . I might make three Uses : and the first should have been this , 

To show you , why many Professors are so barren , and many Christians so dry , and unstable amongst you , because they have not minded this conjunction of Truth and Love ; which is the Gospel method to grow up into Christ , and so to our Spiritual thriving : For upon him all our fruit is found , Host 14.8 . 

Take this as a Use of Caution , I beseech you , would to God I knew what language to speak to win upon you : I would beseech you , this Honourable Representative City , who have so great an influence , have been so much concerned , and are still so much interested , to beware that you suffer not yourselves , by any policies of men , or cunning undermining whatsoever , to be cheated of your Truth and Love , lest you loose yourselves , and Religion , and City , and Estates , and indeed the Kingdom . brethren , there are desperate Designs on foot ; and as so much good hath been brought to this Kingdom heretofore by the City , and their Zeal , and their Purses , and their Courage , and their Fidelity ; so now there hath been of late great trying of conclusions , how to work upon the City so far , to make them instrumental for the destruction of all , and the Devil hath many active Soldiers abroad . 

First , There is indeed one unhappy Regiment of those that are Erroneous though diverse of them very honest-hearted , and of those that are not such friends to love as they should be ; and certainly , much hath been our misery , by reason of uncharitable mistakes , of Errors in matter of Faith , and Schisms in point of Love.  

Secondly , There is another Jesuitical , Atheistical , Profane Party , that take advantage of these Errors , and these Divisions , as he saith , They do fish in troubled waters , that know how to improve all these Errors and Divisions , to drive on their own Design ; and nothing more ordinary then for some Malignants ( though I love not names ) or disaffected persons , call them what you will , those that are no friends to Truth and Love , nor Parliament , nor Army , nor any Scripture-reformation , they will come in one company , and aggravate the Miscarriages of the Parliament and Army , Now what is their plot ? to keep open the Breach , that so at last Episcopacy and the old Common-service-book may come in again : Who sees not this ? And I confidently say , and pray God it may be considered in time , that you , out of any Discontent , or out of any passionate Animosities ( I hope the Lord will keep so wise a City from it ) suffer not yourselves to be ridden by them : Do you not remember first they would have divided Army and Parliament ? there was a time God prevented that : Do you not remember there was a time they would have divided City and Army ? the Lord keep you from that evil : And now their last conclusion is , to divide those that are Friends , and engaged in one Covenant , to try if they can set England and Scotland at variance , and engage them in Blood again : And this is their Plot , and how shall they bring this about ? OH , by that malignant Jesuit Contzens Rules ( there is a little Book called Look about you , Translated out of his Works ) and he gives you Eight Rules to cheat people of their Religion , and to serve in Popery by Art : I would you could all get that little Book , and you should see that very Contzens Spirit is amongst Malignants , and they walk by the same Rule , Come by Degrees , and come by Compulsions , and such politic strains he hath there : Take notice of your ways ; and ( my brethren ) it is most clear , your Friends grieve for it , your Enemies begin to triumph in it , that they can have such a Power in the City , and with several well-affected people in the Land , who are friends to Truth , to Peace , and to the Government of Christ : They will come and tell you , What , no Government ; Can ye believe they are friends to Government ? What , Drunkards , and Atheists , and Profane wretches friends to Government ? They that cannot endure a personal Reformation , would they have an Ecclesiastical Reformation ? Will you trust them with a Government ? and a Government of their own settling ? what Government think you we should have ? Now so many of the well-affected both of Ministers , and Gentlemen , and Noblemen in Scotland are against an Engagement in War , and so are they in England , who are they that are forward to engage ? I 'll put no Character upon them , you know who in England are , and you have heard who in Scotland , and what Government think you they would settle ? God keep us from a Government of such men's settling ; for we should have Profaneness , and looseness , they would make such a latitude in Government , that all should return to the old tract again ; We must have as grossly mixed Communions as ever , and their old Ceremonies , their zeal for Christmas-day , and their Good-friday ( more zeal this year than last , for these things , and more last then before ) And what do these men aim at , I beseech you ? The Lord God of Heaven inform us aright , if I be mistaken , I wish I might see my Error ; If any of you may through discontent , be transported , the Lord discover it to you ; And let us take heed of this , that while we are jarring one with another , we do not betray ourselves and all to a third Party , to a Common Party , that would destroy both : It may be here may be the advantage , which is but a poor one , first destroy Independents , and then destroy Presbyterians , and set up Profaneness and Looseness as much as ever . Now the Lord cause you to join Faith , and Love , and Truth so together , that you may not be cheated by such men . The third Use : And truly , I have one word more to say , and if I thought I should die the next Fit , I should desire to speak to this City , and that is this : 

I come hither this day , ( and though I do it cheerfully to observe your pleasures , yet not without some hazard to my health ) that I may say a few things to you , and the Lord help me , that I may deliver what I did intend , and that you may entertain it with the same affection I tender it to you : My business should be , if I had power this day , as a poor unworthy friend to the Bridegroom , to draw a Contract between Truth and Love , in all you Citizens of London , that all you , though you may have some different Opinions , yet I would have Truth and Love matched and married happily together in you . brethren , I confess that there are many Errors , but take heed you be not more offended then needs , or at least thereby perverted by the politic Designs of those that serve themselves in these Divisions , and upon you . 

First , I do not think all Opinions are Errors , that some men call Errors . 

Secondly , All Errors are not alike , not equally opposite to the Faith.  

Thirdly , Clubbing , and Imprisoning , and Compelling , is not the proper way to cure Errors , though there may be some course taken to restrain erroneous persons , when they are opposite to the peace and welfare of the State , etc.  But that I would say , is this , That Errors , they must be reduced and confuted by Truth ; and then withal , it is most certain , That Errors abound not by reason of a Reformation ( and therefore to charge it upon a Reformation , is very gross ) but there is a defect in our Reformation which gives occasion to them . 

And as for Love , they cry for Love , for Love , and it is a wonder , men that are against the very Substantials of the Gospel , yet they will cry out against any little Heterodox Opinion , and for Love : How can they ever expect that godly and wicked men should join together in Love ? What Churches then should we have ? indeed we will love the most carnal men in the world with a love of pity , but not with a love of complacency and delight : And Jesus Christ expects it not , but that we should love as he love's . But then further , what love should we have ? such a love as indeed doth tend to Edification , and doth tend to Reformation , and such a love as is Soul-love , and such a love as is a love to the Head , as well as to the Members ; such love as is not complimental , and frothy , and flattering . OH therefore let it be your care still , not to suffer yourselves to be any ways misled , because there are some defects , and want of Truth and Love , it hath always been so : In Origens time and Chrysostoms' , they came to them , complaining , that there are Divisions amongst Saints ; they answered , And Divisions will be : Are all Philosophers of a mind ? Are all Physicians of a mind ? and if all Saints be not of a mind , it is no marvel ; only let them have a care to preserve Affection , though they differ in Opinion . But to close up all . 

That great Oracle of the Law , learned Sir Edward Cook in his Institutes , gives five properties of a Parliament-man , and I think they will as well agree to an Alderman , to a Common-councel-man : I desire they may be considered ; 

First , saith he , He must be wise , and constant , so able to discern and know things aright , persons , circumstances , that he be inflexible . 

Secondly , He should have a good Memory , so to remember past evils , that he labour to prevent future dangers . The other three he takes from the Elephant : First , saith he , 

Thirdly , An Elephant is without gall , that gall that he hath doth transire in nutrimentum corporis ; if he have heat he will use it , not out of a selfish passionate respect , but rather guide and direct it to a zeal for the good of the whole Body the Commonwealth . And then secondly , for that too he draws from the Elephants ; 

Fourthly , The Elephants they never go alone , but they go gregatim ; and those creatures that go alone , Bears and Foxes , they are hurtful ; those creatures that are most innocent , they go together : If you 'll show you are most useful , and innocent creatures , like sheep , OH keep together . And then the third is , 

Fifthly , The Elephant is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , he saith , that the Elephant love's men : I would have all these properties meet in every one of these Worthy Citizens , that are any way betrusted with the Government of the City : The God of Heaven give you wisdom , and give you to remember all Providential Dispensations that are past , and deliver you from passion , and gall , and make you flock together , and head together , and teach you to love men ; All this would still engage you against a common Enemy : Love men as men , love the bodies of men ; and you have given a most glorious account of that this year , to your praise I must report it , here is this year , etc. why , here is a glorious proof of your love to men ; Love their bodies , love their souls , love them as Christians , especially love them as Saints , have a care to breed them up in Callings , train them up in some degree of learning ; this is most honourable , and , I hope , being done with an honest heart , it will further your account at the great Day . 

I yet dare take the boldness to add the Rules , which I chiefly intended : Some Rules now for your pursuance of Truth , and some for the pursuance of Love , that they may be happily married this day . 

For Truth , let the Word of God be Rule and Judge ; when you inquire after Truth , study the revealed will of God , and make use of revelations in concurrence with the Word of God ; but do not set up revelations against the Word of God. It was a desperate expression from Valde , in a Book of his in great request now adays ; it is true , he had many things good in him , considering the darkness of the times wherein he lived , a Spaniard ; saith he , We must use the Scriptures , as we use Pictures ( he was a Papist ) use Pictures for a while , till we get apprehension of the thing or person realized to us , then throw them away , because now we can pray without Pictures : So , use the Scriptures till we have got our minds raised and elevated , and then we need no Scriptures . The Lord deliver us from this Opinion , which tends to undermine the very Word of Christ.  

Far be it from me to say any thing against New-light , properly so called , though there is some so called , which is , I doubt , Darkness ; nor against all Revelations , for there is a Spirit of Revelation : but I desire it may be wisely considered , how the Spirit of Revelation discovers itself ; Thus chiefly , not in bringing in a New Gospel , and such New Dispensations to us , as many talk of ; but in Discovering that Word which he hath revealed , and we have by us , in raising our minds to understand that word more fully , and those works of God that are in it more clearly : I would heartily bless God for it in myself , or in others , if it were such a Spirit of Revelation , as should help me to see any Word of God , or any Work of God in me more clearly : This is the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation the Apostle to the Ephesians speaks of ; but if you 'll talk of Revelations , that you have Revelations beyond the Word , and it may be sometimes in a manner contrary to the Word ; surely this is not the way of truth . There is a poor old man Hero in Cassianus , that thought he had a Revelation , that when he was in the bottom of a pit , he should get out ; but for all his Revelation , he was deceived . I desire such things may be considered . The next thing is this , 

Mind Truth wisely : I would say under this head , 

1.  Be sure it be Truth that you contend for ; not for unwarranted Ceremonies , not for trifles , for those things that deserve not the name of Divine Truth : And then 

2.  Proportion your zeal to the nature of Truth : There are some Truth's de fide , circa fidem , and in some sense praeter fidem ; I must not allow the like zeal for all ; I will have the Substantial part of my zeal for Substantial Truths , and for other Truths , so much zeal as the nature of them calls for : This is to mind Truth wisely , this is that that becomes you . And then withal , 

Mind Truths according to the directions of Truth : 

1.  Meddle not with things too high , be sober ; A Spirit of Sobriety in Divine things , and Modesty in Secret things , is most suitable to a Saint , Rom. 12.3 . 

2.  Mind not Curiosities , with neglect of those things that are necessary : Affirm constantly ( saith Paul to Titus ) that those that are believers maintain good ▪ works , but as for fables , let them go , Tit. 3.8 . 

3.  If you 'll do what becomes you concerning Truth , Do not clap a Jus Divinum rashly upon every one of your Opinions : OH that brings us into a great deal of bondage ; diverse things may be very good , and yet better , and more safely settled as Prudentials , as Human Constitutions , then as Divine Constitutions , unless we be sure we are upon Scripture-grounds , than I say nothing against it . What is the reason now that the Pope cannot alter ? I have heard it from some that have spoken with learned sober Papists , ask them , What think you of Transubstantiation , or the like Opinions ? they profess , Though we would , yet we cannot alter them , the Pope having asserted them , who is infallible ; so that if we change one Point of our Religion , we spoil all . Truly , if we clap a Jus Divinum , we cannot alter it , for we are engaged to hold it , though we were mistaken : I had rather settle too little , then too much , than we leave room for New Discoveries ; We may better add then diminish : I cannot take away a Jus ` Divinum , without a great deal of disparagement . 

Do not presently obtrude with confidence your own conceits upon others , but rather mistrust them : Learned men have had their Errors , the wisest men have been deceived ; and do not rashly run from one Extremity to another . Chrysostom he would , and others they would run from the Manichees so far , that they went too far towards Pelagius : Many of us run so far from Popery and Prelacy , that we run into other Extremities , very dangerous and unhappy . OH take heed , let me add this further , as you would be friends to truth , 

Know that you have to deal with those men , that will bring in Errors , sensim sine sensu ; as the Devil dealt with Adam and Eve at first , how did he beguile them ? he corrupted their minds by degrees ( take heed of his methods ) from the simplicity that is in Christ : You shall first have a little step , and something like a Truth , and that may be disputed at first , then comes another , and then comes another , and so at last you are involved in inextricable Errors . But the sixth and last thing I shall say under this head ; 

Take heed of being too far engaged in a party ; it is the way to sell a man's judgement : for if I be one of a party , I must strain hard to say as they say , and subscribe as they subscribe , else I shall be an Apostate ; this is dangerous , than all must be proclaimed Heretical that differ . Many a man hath broke his Conscience , violated his peace , by this Engagement , because he must not break with his Party . 

It is a notable rule Politicians have , He that inclines to neither Party , is master of both : And I profess , I know not any generation in England that sleep so quietly , as those that are unengaged to this or that Party : What there is good in Episcopacy , they will not decline it , because the Bishops had it ; What there is good amongst the Independents , they will close with it ; What there is good in Presbytery , they will entertain that : And these are the men that Preach with Freedom , that converse with Freedom . I do desire and hope there may be a good Moderate Presbytery settled amongst us ; yet I 'll profess to the world , I 'll not be so engaged to own every thing in it , that I will not embrace any thing that is good in another way : The Lord keep us from being engaged to such Parties , that will make as slaves in our Consciences to them . 

In your contending for Truth , let there not be an abatement of Love : Think it not enough to be an Orthodox , unless you be a loving christian too , that all things may be done in love , that there you may walk in love , and be clothed with love ; three places are to that purpose . Let me add this then further , that you may advance this happy Union and Marriage betwixt Truth and Love , 

Love men more for the work of God you see in them , than you slight them for any such defects or mistakes , as are consistent with godliness and with Saintship , Eph. 4.1 , 2 , 3 , 4.  

Do not think ever to recover men with passionate invectives ; Do not think to confute their Opinions with vehement reproachful speeches : It is Love that melts , that wins upon them : And I desire that you , and I , and all Ministers might practise this , That when we deliver the most sharp reproofs , it might be Scripture-language , and with a Scripture-spirit , that may be the way to recover them , whereas the other hardens them it may be they will never hear you more , and then what have you got by it ? you may preach against them absent , and that prejudices them still , till at last it may be you have preached away almost all your hearers . Further , that you may advance this happy Union of Truth and Love , 

Study to please , every one your godly Neighbour , for his good to edification ; and such as are strong , must bear the infirmities of the weak , and not to please ourselves , saith Paul It argues a great deal of proud fondness of thy own conceit , and want of love to thy Brother , when thou wilt contemn every one who attains not thy measure . There must be a Christian personal Toleration , forbearing one another in love ; though there may not be a State - Toleration of all Religions . 

Do not delight in affixing reproachful Names ; to cry down people under this or that Name , never any good comes by it : for there is this inconvenience , You wrap in all , that it may be do not deserve it , not going so far as others : As to cry down all men under the name of Anabaptiss , though it may be some of them do only scruple about the Baptising of Infants , and are far from the opinions of the Germane Anabaptiss , who deny Magistracy , etc. and so , many such like instances I might give . Let me add this : If you would indeed get a Spirit of love , and advance it , let this be your care , 

That in the midst of all differences of Judgement , you maintain a sweet harmony of affection , and labour to study a sweet compliance : What if thy Brother be not come up to thy Light , wilt thou therefore renounce him , and reject him ? It may be God intends not to all men the same proportion : Shall I contemn my Brother , because I have more grace ? If another man should renounce me , that hath more grace than I , what would become of me : These and many such Rules I might give . I have but this one word , and that is as a means by way of direction , how to marry these , Truth and Love together : OH that the Lord would help us to enter into Covenant to complete the Marriage , seriously to resolve now , That for time to come we labour more to Truth it in love , and more to love with Truth ; labour lovingly to embrace the Truth , and sincerely to pursue Love : The very Heathen could say this , and it is a good Rule , I wish we Christians might learn it too . If you would be too hard for the common Enemy , and not suffer him to gain advantage against you , agree , otherwise he will prevail over both Parties of honest-hearted Christians ( for so I am confident there are amongst those that differ in Church-matters ) God forbid either of them should be destroyed : I say , if you would keep a third Party from destroying both , let there be Concord ; your union will be strength ▪ it will engage the presence of God ; whereas your Divisions alienate and estrange God from you . And here let me tell you a Story out of Livy , There was one Packuvius , that if he had not been so vicious , had been happy , and more worthy of our imitation , but his practice herein is commodious for you , There being a great difference betwixt the Commons and the Senators , and nothing would satisfy the Commons , but the Senators death ; he gets all the Senators once by a stratagem into the Senate-house , and locks them in , and comes to the Commons , Well , I have now got them at your mercy ; and then they were frolic , and would be revenged ; he resolves to give them out one by one , and they had the first out : But I pray you Gentlemen , said he , let us consider , if we destroy all the Senators , who shall we have in the place of them to govern the City ? Who shall come in the stead of them to rule ? Why , one man would have this Governor , another man would have that ; so at last they fell all to pieces , and they were glad to let the Senators alone : then he quieted the Commoners , and fetched off the Senators , because they could not agree upon a Successo ; you have discontents in the City and Country too too many , and if it be the Lords blessed will , I would they might be healed : and some would have the Army destroyed , and a great many care not what becomes of the Parliament , and I fear , many care not what becomes of the City ; but suppose this , That either Parliament or Army should for present be destroyed ( I speak to wise Citizens ) before you would have either of them destroyed , consider who should come in their places : If Malignants should come into their Power , and destroy you and the Kingdom too , better the Commons had spared the lives of the Senators . Remember this Story , and make this use of it . I have said enough to wise men , and I 'll end all with that Prayer of John in his second Epistle to the elect Lady , and her Children , Grace be with with you , mercy and peace from God the Father , and from the Lord Jesus Christ , the Son of the Father , in truth and Love : And hope you 'll all say Amen to it . 

FINIS . 

To his very worthy Friend , JOHN BROWN Esq One of His Majesty's Justices of Peace for Middlesex , and Clerk to the Right Honourable the House of Peers , more intimacy with Jesus Christ.  

Most worthy Gaius , 

AS there are some Capital Sins for which we must abase ourselves all our days ; such as have broken our Consciences ▪ should often break our hearts : As there are some Cardinal Virtues ( to speak in the Moralists language ) which must be our every-days work , as being the Essentials of Christianity ; so are there some Providential Dispensations in the course of our lives , which must be acknowledged even to Eternity ; amongst which we may well reckon loving and faithful friends , constant men's affections being of themselves mere weathercocks , very mutable , which are Gods Vials by which he pours his favours upon us . And here , Sir , I must rank you with those , for whose acquaintance I have much cause to bless God , having received in few years more real love from you , then diverse do from some of their friends in many years : Your hearty kindness hath made so deep an impression upon me , that I cannot satisfy myself without some public Acknowledgement of that whereof so many have been witnesses . 

I can confidently ( and indeed have very much reason ) speak to you in the language of John , 

The Elder unto the well-beloved Gaius , whom I love in the Truth : far be it from be in a glorying way only to compliment with him who hath expressed so much affectionate reality unto me . 

And without flattery I do pray , That you may prospero and be in health , even as your soul prospers , through the rich mercy of God in Christ to you . 

Pray let me add this by way of thankfulness to God ( it being a return of weak Prayers ) I rejoice greatly to hear so many of the deserving brethren testify of the truth that is in you ; and that not only in your tongue or outside profession only , but that you walk in the truth , making the truth your path , which leads to Christ , who is the Way , the Truth , and the life , Joh. 14.6 . 

And I trust ( through the goodness of your God ) I may have occasion in his time ( which is always the best ) to rejoice , as John also did , that yours walk in the truth . 

But your love to me , together with your dear and gracious Consorts , puts so much the stronger obligation upon me , it being not only personal , both in my former health and time of present sickness , but indeed to my dear Mother , the University of Cambridge ; which I must ever love and honour , whose welfare you have ( in your Sphere ) most happily promoted , and that with such laborious and bountiful respect , as stands upon Record with thankful Acknowledgement amongst us . 

Go on , beloved Sir , to love Jesus Christ , in and for himself ; love him in his Ordinances , and in his Saints ; value all the outward comforts with reference to him and his glory : Ride on prosperously in your Zeal for Truth , and in the exercise of meekness and moderation of Spirit , which is a Scripture expression of the Spirit of Jesus Christ , and for want of which , many ( great pretenders to Reformation ) look too too much like as if they were acted by a Diabolical Spirit therein : The Lord multiply his Graces in you and yours , and his Blessings upon you all . 

Accept this from him , 

Who desire's as a faithful friend to serve you in love , Thomas Hill.  From your own house in Westminster , Apr. 28 , 1648.  

The SPRING of Strengthening Grace IN THE ROCK of AGES , Christ Jesus . 

2 TIM . 2.1 . 

thou therefore , my son , be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus . 

Well might Solomon , among other of his Divine Oracles , publish this in the 30. verse of the 11. of the Proverbs , The righteous is as a tree of life , and he that wins souls is wise ; and Daniel , who in Ezekiel was ranked amongst the chiefest of wise men , They that be wise , and they that turn many to God , ( in Dan. 12.3 . ) they shall shine like stars : Paul likewise is a most glorious instance of this , who took a great deal of pains ( though he met with many crosses ) in fishing for souls , he became all to all ; ( that is , in the use of indifferent things , not to venture upon any thing which is unlawful , as many wrest the place , to gratify their own lusts ) that he might save some ; Paul himself it seems did not expect to gain all he preached unto : doubtless this is a very high point of wisdom ; for hereby they trade most for God's glory , and best for their own Eternal good , being glorified with him and by him : And I do not believe there is any that was a mere man , to say no more , that will bring more Troops , more Regiments of Children , such as have been victorious Soldiers over the Devil and his Agents , at the day of Judgement , than Paul will ; he will have a large flock , as Behold , here am I , and the children thou hast given me ; and none of the meanest of these will be his Son Timothy , which leads me to the first part of the words , The persons Exhorting and Exhorted ; Paul the Father , and Timothy the Son : it may be a Son , not so much because he beg at him to the Faith ; it is probable he found him a Disciple , for aught appears , in Acts 16.1 . there the first time that I can remember that Paul met with Timothy , and there he calls him a Disciple ; and you find in 2 Tim. 1.5 . how Paul blesseth God for the Faith that is in Timothy , which dwelled first in thy Grandmother Lois , and thy mother Eunice ; therefore he may be his Son rather in regard of his Spiritual Education , then by being begotten : As a Master or a Tutor is a Father , though he did not beget his Children , his Pupils , or his Scholars , but only train them up . 

2.  Here is the Exhortation : The substance of it , Be strong , as becomes a Soldier of Jesus Christ.  

3.  Here is the Rock of this strength , Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus : It is not by any intrinsical strength , but in the grace that is in thy Head Christ Jesus . 

4.  Here is the Engaging illation ; the particle , that compriseth an Argument , that engageth him to it : thou therefore , my son ; Therefore , Why ? because thou hast so great a trust committed to thee , Hold fast the form of sound words , which thou hast heard of me , in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus : and That good thing which was committed to thee ( ver . 14 ) keep , by the holy Ghost that dwelleth in us : Still he leads him to seek strength from above , Keep , by the holy Ghost . 

Be strong ] 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , get something within , that may strengthen and enable thee to do thy work : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , be strong , be strengthened , passively , expect it from another ; Strength is that which men glory in , and therefore very desirable . 

But what strength ? 

In the grace ] Hercules doth not only say , Be thou strong in the Lord , and in the power of his might , as Ephes. 6.10 . But in grace : indeed he ultimately intends a participation of strength , but withal intimates the original of that strength to be Grace ; as if he should say , thou standest in need of strengthening virtue in thee ; all that strength must be derived from Grace , expect it from no external motive , without God himself ( we have no arguments to move him to bestow strength upon us ) it is his Prerogative Royal , peculiar to himself , to act independently , to have mercy on whom he will have mercy , and Because he will have mercy , Rom. 9.15 . Ephes. 1.4 , 6 , 9  All derived from grace , and resolved into grace . 

And where lies this strengthening grace ? 

In the grace that is in Christ Jesus : very significantly , in the Original by the Article , indigitating Christ to be the Spring of thy strengthening grace . ] God will not trust thee with grace in thy own keeping , lest thou prove a Bankrupt , as Adam did ; and thou wouldst soon grow intolerable proud , if thou wast able to act by thy own strength independently upon God ( very hard to keep down that weed even now in thy most depending condition ) therefore thy strength shall lie in Christ's hands , and thou be at his disposal for the communication of it ; so that thou shalt always have occasion to say , Lord , I cannot mortify pride by the strength of my own humility , that often fails me : Lord , I cannot confute my unbelief by the strongest arguments my Faith can produce ; I shall never be able to trample upon Satan , or keep up under his Temptations from sinking , without the strength and sufficiency of that grace which is in my Head Christ jesus : Lord , make me strong by that Almighty grace which is in him . 

That there is such a Spring of quickening grace in our Rock Christ Jesus , is evident ; Isa. 9.6 . The Government is upon his shoulders , for the perfection of his Church , and many other good purposes , which require strength , which is hinted in the expression , On his shoulders . 

Paul had a Commission to Preach the unsearchable riches of Christ , Ephes. 3.8 . to display his grace , which is like a Sea , you can find no bounds , like a Spring , you cannot reach the bottom : The Sea of Christ's grace ( as in nature ) flows from the Spring , and the Spring from the Sea ; so there is no reason of grace , but grace itself . 

This is to be acknowledged by all to be the deep mystery of God , and of the Father , and of the Son , in whom are hid all the tresures of wisdom and knowledge : The same blessed Apostle , Col. 2.2 , 3. treasures therefore 1.  Abundance , 2. of things of price , of wisdom and knowledge , which being directive as well as operative , impart strength : hid , sometimes we hide things for secrecy , and so the life of a Saint may be hid from carnal , from godly spectators , yea from himself , and they droop under doubts : So other things we hide for safety , so chiefly ( though secrecy not excluded ) Col. 3.2 , 3. the life is hid with Christ in God , and here is security of the Saints , when Christ who is our life shall appear , then shall ye also appear with him in glory ; Shall , let Beelzebub and all his Angels do their worst , appear with him in glory . 

Upon the same account doth this man of God , so intimately acquainted with Christ jesus , in his Epistle to Philemon , ver . 6. pray for him , That the communication of his Faith might become effectual ; there is his Faith , with the strength , and the efficacy of it , by the acknowledgement of every good thing which is in you in Christ jesus : there 's grace in Christ , and therefore derivatively in you , because originally in him . 

I might hence gather several Observations ; the first whereof might be this : 

1.  Doct The Spring of a Christians strength is in the Rock jesus Christ.  

Exp●ic . Here you have three particulars , conducing to Explication of this Gospel-truth . 

1.  The nature and proportion of this strengthening grace in Christ Jesus . 

2.  His title to it , and possession of it . 

3.  The sweet variety , and various sweetness of this strengthening grace in Christ.  

First , for the nature and proportion of it , two things will clear it . 

1.  There is in Jesus Christ the fullness of grace . 

2.  The redundancy of this fullness of grace . 

He is a full fountain , and likewise an overflowing fountain : The more you contemplate Christ in the glorious glass of the Gospel , the sooner you will discover in him a Prophetical fullness of strengthening grace ; and that both in regard of the strength of his Word , and in regard of the power of his Spirit ; both which are of great strength . 

If you cast your eye upon the second Epistle of Paul to Timothy , Chap. 3. ver . 15 , 17. you shall find that the holy Scripture is able to make a man wise unto salvation , through faith which is in Christ jesus ( there must be still an improvement of that strengthening grace which is in him ) and likewise it is profitable , that the man of God may be perfect , thoroughly furnished unto all good works . There is that in the word of Jesus Christ , which is able to complete men as Saints , and as Ministers , and therefore doubtless full of glorious strength . 

And so likewise in regard of the Spirit , hear what the Prophet Micah saith , Chap. 3. ver . 8.  But truly I am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord , and of judgement , and of might , to declare unto jacob his transgression , and to Israel his sin . And when Jesus Christ did appear to Paul , Acts 26.13 . to make him a Minister and a Witness , both of these things which he had seen , and in those things in the which he would appear to him , ver . 16. doubtless there was a powerful presence of the Spirit of Jesus Christ , abundance of strengthening grace to be conveyed by him , otherwise how could he possibly open their eyes to whom he was sent , ver . 18. to turn them from darkness to light , and from the power of Satan to God , that they may receive forgiveness of sins , and an inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me ( still they are led to the Spring of grace in Christ ) now all these speak no lesle than an Almighty power . 

You may perceive a fullness of strengthening grace in Christ , as he is the Church's Priest ; otherwise he could never make full satisfaction to his Father's Justice : He could never so prevailingly intercede for the Saints in Heaven , which are the two Branches of his Priestly Office , when all the sins of his people met upon him ( so it is in the Original ) Isa. ●3 . 6 . they would have sunk him , had he not had more than the strength of a man : Therefore that he might be a perfect Mediator between God and man , he was God-man , taking Human nature into the fellowship of the Deity , and communicating Divine nature unto those which he did intend to save : Hence Paul saith , Rom. 3.24 , 25.  We are justified freely by God's grace , through the Redemption which is in Christ jesus , whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood . 

Hence he further saith , Acts 20.28 . that God did purchase the Church with his own blood : So that in this part of the Priestly Office of Jesus Christ there was the power of God himself put forth . 

Neither is there lesle strengthening grace manifested , when he comes to appear for his people in heaven , in the presence of God , as Heb. 7.24 . This man , because he continueth ever , hath an unchangeable Priesthood , which passeth not from one to another ; ( certainly here was wonderful strength ) that Christ being once offered , should bear the sins of many , and unto them that looked for him , he should appear the second time without sin unto salvation , as in Heb. 9.28 . That his having done away all their sins , should advance them to Salvation , which still shows the strength of his grace . Therefore well might Paul annex that , Heb. 7.25 . wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto him , seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them : This is the ground of Paul's triumph , not only for himself , but in the name of all the Saints , in that admirable place , Rom. 8. from the 34 , to the 39 ver . Who is he that condemneth ? It is Christ that died , yea , rather that is risen again , who is even at the right hand of God , who also maketh intercession for us . Who shall separate us from the love of Christ ? shall tribulation , or distress , or persecution , or famine , or nakedness , or peril , or sword ? ( As it is written , For thy sake we are killed all the day long , we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter ) Nay , in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us : For I am persuaded , that neither death , nor life , nor Angels , nor principalities , nor powers , nor things present , nor things to come , nor height , nor depth , nor any other creature , shall be able to separate us from the love of God , which is in Christ jesus our Lord  

Here is strengthening grace of Almighty and everlasting efficacy . 

As Jesus Christ is the Church's King , he hath a proportionable inexhaust stock of strengthening grace , without such a power he could never suppress the numerous and potent adversaries of the Church , which was the the solemn agreement betwixt him and his Father : Psal. 110.1 . The Lord said unto my Lord , ( God the Father said unto God the Son , David's Lord ) sit thou at my right hand , until I make thine enemies thy footstool ; He will bring them to the lowest and most abject condition , though for the present they look never so high and big upon the poor members of Christ.  

And accordingly he is still acting in heaven , whereas he doth appear for his people ; so doubtless against his enemies , as is most clear in Heb. 10.12 , 13.  But this man , after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever ( so much strength of grace , in that it need be but one ) sat down on the right hand of God , from henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool . 

We may with much encouragement wrestle with God , and wait upon him , both for the discovering and confounding of the great Impostors , Mahomet and the Pope , and the removing all the Crutches of Babylon in any of the King's Dominions , or elsewhere : for this work is carried on with so much power , that in God's time all the Kingdoms of the earth will become the Lords , and his Christ's . To the same purpose you shall find an Angel come down from heaven , having great power , and the earth was lightened with his glory , and he cried mightily with a strong voice , Babylon is fallen ( all suitable to the powerful design of Christ ) rev. 18.2 . And she shall be utterly burned with fire , in whom was found the blood of Prophets , and of Saints , of all that were slain upon the earth ( some way reducible to her , or her adherents ) for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her , ver . 8.  

Neither could Jesus Christ be a Resurrection to any sinners , nor quicken with Spiritual life whom he would , as joh. 5.20 . unless that were true ver . 26.  As the Father hath life in himself , so hath he given the Son to have life in himself ; and that to be able to raise his own unto eternal life , ver . 29.  All which argues abundance of strengthening grace in him : This was the foundation of Paul's Prayer for his Ephesians , chap. 1. ver . 18.  That the eyes of their understanding being enlightened ( here is powerful grace still ) they might know what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward , who believe according to the working of his mighty power . 

Here is a great heap of Emphatical expressions , to show the accumulative power of the grace that is in Jesus Christ : Were he not so strong , that he were able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think , according to the power that worketh in us , Eph. 3.20 . Paul would never have used such an expression , That ye may be able to comprehend with all Saints , what is the breadth , and length , and depth , and height ; there must ( it seems ) be a power in us to enable us to fathom and comprehend the vast dimensions of that strengthening grace that is in our Head ) here is the breadth of this grace , covering all the sins of every one of his ele●t , even from Adam to the end of the world : Here is the length of this grace , it extends from everlasting to everlasting : Here is the depth of it , it lists up poor creatures from the very pit of hell : And the height of it , it advances them to sit by him in his own throne in Heaven . 

After the intrinsical fullness of the grace of Christ , follows the Redundancy thereof : for there is in him not only plenitudo vasis , but also plenitudo fontis ; there is the original fullness of a living fountain in him , which he delights to communicate for the supplies of his people . This discovers itself in four particulars : 

There is a Redundancy into all the faculties of our souls , he fills the Mind with gracious principles , the Conscience with a holy tenderness , the Will with flexibleness and compliance with his Will , and sways the Affections to act regularly upon their objects . Doubtless Christ Jesus the second Adam will do as much for all those that have Union with him , as the first Adam did against those that were in him : And therefore whereas by his fall there was not only a total deprivation of original righteousness , but a universal depravation of all the faculties ( a general disharmony being wrought in them ) accordingly Jesus Christ , by the infusion of gracious habits , will reduce them to an holy complexion and constitution ; as 1 Thess. 5.23 . The very God of peace sanctify you wholly , and I pray God your whole Spirit , soul and body , be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ : You see he takes care for the restitution of the whole man Let the Arminians as falsely as confidently suggest , that for our Conversion there needs only a wakening of the Understanding , and a rectifying of the Affections , the Will ( according to them ) being left as Illibato virgo , for freedom to good being never ravished by Adam's fall : Jesus Christ teacheth other Doctrine , who knowing the corruption of the Will , tells you what the tenor of The Covenant of Grace is , Ezek. 36.26 , 27.  The Lord saith , He will take away the stony heart of Flesh , and put a new Spirit within them , and cause them to walk in his statutes : There is the redundancy of Christ's fullness for the supplying of the Will , as well as other faculties with holy dispositions . 

Christ's fullness is redundant into all the graces of the Saints , increasing them where they are little , strengthening them where they are feeble and languishing , acting and animating them where they are dull and dead . Hence it is that some of the Servants of Christ , who though they have but a little stock of grace , yet keeping in with him , and holding communion with him , do thrive much more in the Spiritual trading , both for the magnifying of Christ , and for the good of their own souls , then diverse others who make a greater show , and it may be have a larger portion of habitual grace . Hence it is that Paul hath recourse to this fountain by prayer , Phil. 1.9 . And this I pray , that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all sense ; that you may approve things that are excellent , that ye may be sincere , and without offence till the day of Christ , being filled with the fruits of righteousness , which are by Jesus Christ , unto the glory and praise of God. Unto this purpose the Spouse invites her beloved to send forth his influence , Cant. 4.16 . Awake , OH North wind , and come thou South , blow upon my Garden , that the spices thereof may flow out : It is the presence of Jesus Christ who makes the spices ; that is , the graces of his Spirit which grow in the Garden of his Church , to cast a sweet perfume : whereas he being absent , the Saints will seem to wither , at least comparatively , even as the Trees , they will have an Autumn , yea a Winter , not only send forth no pleesant fruit , but even the leaves fall off , and the sap retire into the root ; there will be a winter of their graces , till the Sun of Righteousness return with healing and quickening in his wings ; that is , by the gracious beams of his Word and Spirit : then and never till then , shall they go forth and grow up as Calves of the stall , Mal. 4.2 . be fat and flourishing . 

Christ's fullness is redundant into all their Duties , wherein they exercise those several Graces ▪ that they may with Spiritual vigour , and powerful activity , perform those services to which the Lord calls them , as Paul saith , With my mind I myself serve the Law of God , Rom. 7. ult . and Rom. 8.26 . Likewise the Spirit helpeth our infirmities ; for we know not how to pray as we ought . 

OH what heartless and sapless Performances do we multiply when Jesus Christ withdraws ; then , and then only we pray with life , when the Spirit of Jesus Christ doth help our infirmities : A word in the Original is very Emphatical , when the Spirit takes us into his arms , and carries us on powerfully against those infirmities that would clog , and cloud , and depress our Spirits in duty : then they do duties not only materially good , but formally well in a Spiritual manner , from Evangelical principles , upon Evangelical motives , and for Evangelical ends , when there is a redundancy of the grace of Christ into them , upon whom all our fruit is found , Host 14.8 . 

There is a redundancy of the fullness of Christ into all their various estates ; As when they are called to suffer , that they may do it with cheerfulness , not sinking under carnal discouragements , but rather chide their souls out of it ; as the Psalmist on the 42.  Psal. ver . ult . Why art thou cast down , OH my soul ? and why art thou disquieted within me ? Hope thou in God , for I shall yet praise him , who is the health of my countenance , and my God : When they are advanced to a prosperous condition , that they may have a victorious Faith , triumphing over , not only the frowns , but the favours of the world , 1 Joh. 5.4 . For want of this , Solomon and Hezekiah did so miserably lose themselves in a Springtide of prosperity : It was Paul's great advantage , that he had learned how to walk unchangeably with God in great changes , Phil. 4.11 , 12 , 13.  Not that I speak in respect of want : for I have learned , in whatsoever state I am , therewith to be content . I know both how to be abased , and how to abound : Every where and in all things , I am instructed both to be full , and to be hungry , both to abound , and suffer need . I can do all things through Christ that strengtheneth me , Phil. 4.13 . the same Original word with that in the Text.  

We are apt to overgrieve or undergrieve at crosses ; therefore Solomon gives that wise counsel , prov. 3.11 . My son , despise not the chastening of the Lord , it should not be slighted , neither be weary of his correction ; we should not faint under it : And his father David before him spoke as seasonably , If riches increase , set not your hearts upon them : There is a danger as our Estates are greatned , so our Affections should swell to an inordinate cleaving to them . None of these evils can be prevented , but by the strengthening grace of Jesus Christ.  

In the next place I shall endeavour to discover , as God enables , Christ's Title to , and possession of this strengthening grace , which he hath by a threefold Claim : 

He hath a grace of Union , so learned Divines call it , by virtue of the Hypostatical Union , our nature being so highly advanced into such a near fellowship with the Divine Nature ; all his Saints ( though never so unworthy ) are brought into a capacity of receiving strengthening grace from him , as Joh. 1.14 . And the word was made flesh , and dwelled among us , and we beheld his glory , the glory as of the only begotten of the Father , full of grace and truth : where you see clearly , when the Word was made flesh , there follows in him a fullness of grace and truth . And as express to this purpose is that of Paul Col. 2.9 , 10.  For in him dwelleth all the fullness of the Godhead bodily . 

First , There is fullness in him , that he might be able to empty and communicate himself , according to the various necessities of his Saints . 

Secondly , There is fullness of the Godhead in him , not only of some Godlike dispositions , and of the Image of God , which may be in Saints . 

Thirdly , All the fullness of the Godhead , the whole Divine Nature . 

Fourthly , All this fullness of the Godhead dwells in Christ , he is there not as a Guest , not as a Friend , but as an Inhabitant , to fix his constant abode there . 

Fifthly , And all this bodily , personally , ( most mysteriously ) and not transciently , virtually , and by participation only , as in a good degree it may be in the Saints . And for this happy purpose hath Jesus Christ such a Spring of good in himself , who is the Head of all Principalities and Powers in that ninth verse , which is added because they should see they need not go to the Angels as their head , verse 18.  

He hath this fountain of strengthening Grace in himself , by the Grace of Unction , the unction of the holy Spirit , which God giveth to him , not by measure , Joh. 3.34 . not by drops , and measure of the gift of Christ , as to us , Eph. 4.7 . The Father loveth the Son , and hath given all things into his hand , ver . 35. of Joh. 3.  And amongst other good things , the Holy Spirit , the great New Testament Promise was the Promise of the Spirit , as the Messiah was the grand Promise in the Old Testament : And this he pours , not drops out , and that much more generally than before ; as Acts 2.17 . And it shall come to pass in the last days ( saith God ) I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh : And by virtue of this Unction of the Spirit , you may see what glorious things Jesus Christ communicated unto poor sinners , if you please to compare Isa. 61.1 . with Luke 4.18 . 

He hath it in him by the Grace of Office , you will allow the expression , being designed by the Father as a public person , for the advantage of all those whose Names are written in the Book of life , and for those whom the Father had given to the Son.  

He was appointed by Commission under the Broad Seal of Heaven , to be The grand Lord Treasurer for his Church , the common Storehouse of their strengthening provision . 

This he doth signanter declare , and that most fully , Joh. 6.27 . when he bids them , Labour not for the meat that perishes , but for that which endureth to everlasting life . 

Here is the ground which the Son of man shall give unto you , never doubt it , for him hath God the Father sealed . 

This is the Doctrine that John the Baptist published concerning Christ , Joh. 1.16 . And of his fullness have all we received , and grace for grace . It seems there is an overflowing fountain of grace in him , which was fully opened when he came into the world , Joh. 7.38 , 39 else how could all Believers , with John , receive of his fullness , had there not been a full fountain , it would not have been drawn dry , though communicated to so many , and grace for grace : 

1.  Whether it be by way of accumulation ( as some interpret it : or 

2.  Whether by way of additional supplement , we receiving the grace of the New Testament , instead of the grace of the Old Testament : or 

3.  Whether by way of correspondency , there being such proportionable impressions of that grace that is in Christ , so far as we are capable ( for there was that in Christ as Mediator , wherein we cannot resemble him ) made upon us , that as the print upon the wax answers to the Seal , as the characters upon the Son answer to the Father ; so there are such visible stamps of the grace of Christ upon the Saints , that in the language of Peter they are expressly said to be partakers of the Divine Nature , having such Divine dispositions so incorporated , so naturalised into them , that what good they do , spring's not from external motives only , as in Hypocrites , but from an inward principle of new Nature : And therefore acting from this new Divine Nature , they do good with more constancy and delight then others : And upon the same account doth John tell you , 1 Joh. 17. v. The Law was given by Moses , but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ : In Moses Law there were shadowing Types , in the Gospel of Christ there is the substantial Truth of them ; there were Predictions and Prophecies , here fulfilling grace . 

Hence Christ saith in the 10.  Chapter of the Evangelist John , ver . 10.  I am come , that they might have life , and that they might have it more abundantly , that he might be a perfect Saviour , to answer the greatest exigencies of all his poor sheep , maintaining their lives in despite of all their Wolvish enemies . 

The third particular follows ; to wit , The various sweetness , and sweet variety of that strengthening grace that is in Christ : This may be made appear , to the great comfort , and strong encouragement of the Saints ; and that in a fivefold Stream , flowing from this living Spring of grace in Christ.  

First , Here is strength from the electing grace of God in Christ , where there is a great deal of strength , and indeed the fundamental Stone , which is the strength and support of the house : The foundation of all the Spiritual and Eternal building lies there , Ephes. 1.45 . He hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world , that we should be holy , and without blame before him in love , having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself , according to the good pleasure of his will : Grace and his good pleasure is the Spring of all . 

Secondly , Here is strength from the transacting grace of Christ ; when there was an agreement betwixt God the Father and God the Son , God had given so many to him , he would undertake for those many , God did accept his undertaking , then Christ went on , there was a great deal of strength in this transaction ; as 2 Tim. 1.9 . According to his purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began : how possibly given us before the world began ? why ? it was given us in Christ Jesus in his negotiating with God for us . 

Thirdly , Here is a great deal of strength also in the converting grace of Christ ; He hath saved us , and called us with an holy calling , not according to our works , but according to his own purpose and grace , What purpose and grace ? That which was in Christ Jesus , 2 Tim. 1.9 . He did graciously purpose it , therefore it should be infallibly effected . A place that in the Synod of Palestina 1200 years ago , and above , the learned Divines made excellent use of , to cut asunder the sinews of Pelagianism , as indeed it doth , and so still of Arminianism , which is but that weed revived , as learned Dr. Featly makes it most clearly appear in his Pelagius Redivivus . 

Fourthly , There is a great deal of strength likewise in the assisting grace of Christ , when there shall be new supplies communicated from his Spirit , to enable us to perform every duty , and to order our sharpest sufferings to the best good of our souls ; as Paul assures himself , Phil. 1.19 . For I know that this shall turn to my salvation , through your prayer , and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.  

Fifthly and lastly , There is a rich proportion of strength in Christ , for our crowning and persevering in him ; even so much that the very ' Devil himself shall not be able to rend us off , we standing by a Covenant of Grace , being kept by the power of God ( not only through our Faith ) to salvation : The father will hold the child , though the poor child through weakness let go his hold . 

Now follows the Spiritual improvement of all this in a seasonable and short Application . 

A serious and seasonable invitation , to all such who are yet strangers unto Jesus Christ , that they would seek acquaintance with him , and interest in him . 

It is most wholesome counsel , Job 22.21 . Acquaint now thyself with him , and be at peace , thereby good shall come unto thee . This will be the world's condemnation with a witness , yea with a vengeance , That light came into the world , and men loved darkness better than light , because their deeds were evil . 

OH most unhappy mistake , when Sin the worst of evils hinders them from Jesus Christ the best of good : This , this if there were no more , will fully justify him in their eternal condemnation , being that he so seriously sought unto them , to wit , in the way of his outward Ministry , Mat. 23.37 . OH Jerusalem , Jerusalem , thou that killest the Prophets , and stonest them which are sent unto thee , how often would I have gathered thy children together , even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings , and ye would not ! by those Prophets which thou didst kill . 

Themistocles ( as Story reports ) in his lower condition , was much in love with a young Gentleman , which scorned him ; when he grew to his greatness , which was soon after , he sought to him , but Themistocles said , We are both both grown wise , but too late . If when Jesus Christ in the course of his Ministry , in an humble manner stands and knocks at the door of thy heart , speaking this melting language unto thee , as he did to those great sinners the Laodiceans , rev. 3.20 . If any will hear my voice , and open the door , I will come into him , and will sup with him , and he with me : If you shall then deny him entertainment when he thus condescends to seek to you , that you might seek to him , for your own Spiritual and eternal welfare ; wonder not , if afterwards you see you are wise too late , when the Master of the house shall have shut the door , and ye begin to stand without knocking , and crying , Lord , Lord , open to us , and he shall repulse you with this doleful answer , I know you not whence you are ; it may be ye will compliment with him , beginning to say , We have eaten and drunk in thy presence , and thou hast taught in our streets : but he will resolutely persist to proceed against them , who have so wilfully rejected him , and say , to their eternal confusion , I tell you , I know not whence ye are , departed from me all ye workers of iniquity . OH all ye who have tasted the sweetness of this grace which flows from the Rock Christ Jesus , do what you can to rescue poor deluded , seduced souls from under their prejudices , and any other temptations , which alienate them from him who is their only happiness . OH that you would tread in their steps , Joh. 1 40 , 41. when Andrew had found Christ , presently he finds his brother Simon , and saith unto him , We have found the messias , which is , being interpreted , the Christ ; and he brought him to Jesus : at least endeavour to bring them to Jesus in Gospel means ; and v. 44 , 45.  Philip having found Christ , findeth Nathanael , and saith unto him , We have found him of whom Moses in the Law , and the Prophets did write , Jesus of Nazareth . Observe , they speak great and good things of Christ , that they may persuade them to seek him ; a good copy for you , how to deal with your carnal friends : Thus the Samaritan woman , Joh. 4. though in her parley with Christ she had been very carnal , ver . 9 , 11. yet being convinced , and perceiving that he was a Prophet , ver . 19 upon this she bears her waterpot , and goes into the City to the men , ver . 28. saying , Come and see a man which hath told me all things that ever I did : Is not this the Christ ? ver . 29.  Her invitation was so effectual , that the men went out of the City , and came to see him v. 30. many of the City believed on him for the saying of the woman , she won them to a credulity ; so may you , if you endeavour to gain a good opinion of him in their minds : But many more believed because of his own word , ver . 41.  How would this woman rejoice in their acceptance of her invitation ? How will they eternally bless God for it ? Why will not you endeavour , that you and your carnal friends should have the same occasion of everlasting triumphing mutually in one another in heaven ? 

FINIS . 

Behold , what convincing reason all you Saints ▪ here have to put an high value upon Jesus Christ : He is called by the Prophet , The Rock of Ages , Isa. 26.3 . And therefore upon the strongest grounds called by the Psalmist , Psal. 73.26 . The Rock of his Heart , and his Portion for ever ; and that after he had been in the Sanctuary of God beholding his glory , ver . 17. coming from the North ( so Chaldea lay in regard of Judea ) Hereupon to the same purpose , when Habakuk saw a bitter and hasty Nation , as he calls the Chaldeans , Hab. 1.6 . threatening , and indeed beginning to ruin Judah ( its probable the Captivity was then begun ) appeals to God , in this language , ver . 12.  Art not thou from everlasting , OH Lord my God , OH Rock God. This is the Prophet Micahs' Dialect ( its sweet to observe the harmonious breathe of the Spirit in several Prophets ) chap. 5.2 . who speaking of Christ as the Ruler in Israel ( there 's his strength ) adds , Whose goings forth have been from of old , from the days of Eternity . 

Where is your Faith in this Eternal Rock , that should be emboldened to frequent acts upon for all new supplies ; as in Romans 1.17 . Paul tells us , The righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith ; that is , righteousness enough for one act of faith after another : So in Christ , grace upon grace ' though the acts of faith be never so often repeated , which indeed is very pleasing to him . OH remember , I beseech you , where your strength lieth ; and know , that unless you do learn this Art of Memory , it may cost you very dear , many a smarting whipping : The want of this provokes God to be sometimes severe with his beloved children . 

Here is a double method of his proceedings : 

1.  He whips them unto Christ , and to the dependence upon his grace , by Spiritual desertions : A most sharp remedy , the sting of other afflictions . His gracious presence doth sweeten every thing , his absence will embitter any thing . David found this by woeful experience , which made him groan so sadly , Psal. 51.8 . Make me to hear joy and gladness , that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoice : When he had broke his conscience by sinning , God would break his bones for sin ; And again ver . 12.  Restore to me the joy of thy salvation ; and ver . 10.  create in me a clean heart , and renew a right Spirit within me . it 's true , the Lord had so far deserted him , in regard of sensible comforts , that he may desire their restoring ; and , which may be observed by the way , let the proud Arminian say what he can , David was not become silius irae , but only silius sub ira , still a beloved son , he begs indeed the cleansing of his heart , but only the renewing of a right spirit within him . 

2.  The Lord whips his children to an improvement of the grace of Christ , by suffering them in his holy and wise providence , to fall into some great , and it may be some scandalous sin , which shall draw on a sharp affliction . This is to a Saint a most sharp cure ; yet God makes it often effectual to that happy end : for , though we be the only proper authors of sin , yet God's permission is not otiosa , but eff●cax permissio ; He knows how to govern its subserviency to the Covenant of Grace , and to bring good out of evil , otherwise he would neither suffer evil of sin or punishment to be ; David too clear an instance of this Rule : Hereby the Lord whipped him out of himself , to seek mercy from his Saviour , Psal. 51.1 . Have mercy upon me , OH God , according to thy loving kindness , according to the multitude of thy tender mercies , blot out my transgressions . 

FINIS . 





Acts 24 , 25 ▪  The Apostle useth four Arguments to Unity . Endeavouring to keep the Unity of the spirit in the bond of 〈◊〉 ▪  Verse 7.  Vers. 11 , 12.  Vers. 13 , 14.  Verse 15.  Doctr. 1.  Doctr. 2.  Doctr. 3  Doctr. 1.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . The Headship itself o● Christ.  1.  Respectu Dignitatis . 2.  Respectu Regiminis . 3.  Respectu Influxui . 4.  Respectu Vnionis . The appropriation of Christ's Headship . Note . Note . Christ's Title to this Headship of his Church . Luke 19.10  Use . 1.  Pope no vicarious Head of the Church . v. Polau Sputag . p. 3351.  v. B●d●l . Use 2.  Caution . it 's dangerous to be injurious to any of Christ's members . Dan. 2.45 . Verse 4 , 5.  Strong encouragement for all Christ's members . Rom. 16.28 . Use 3  Contrary to Pau●s' Doctrine . Phil. 2.13 . Note . To believe is man's act but faith is God's gift . Use 4.  Caution . Rom. 9.15 . 2.  Tim. 2.20 ▪  2.  Doctr.  Christ's intention and expectation in giving gifts . 1.  That there should be a growth . Eph. 1. last . 2.  A growing up . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 3 Growing up to Christ in all things . Note . The grounds  Reason 1.  Reason 2.  Reason 3.  Note . The end . The stability in Christ. Stability in judgement . Stability of affection . Psal. 73.25 . Psal. 11.  Stability of conversation . Note . Improvement of Christ.  In all conditions and relations . In all duties . Use . 1.  That is , to preach the Gospel for the working faith in Gods elect . Note . Use 2.  For Citizens chiefly , who enjoy such rich Gospel-advantage . Mat. 11.22 . Growth must be proportionable to the means you enjoy . Growth must be of all parts . Use 3  For information concerning the Ministry . Consider the Original of the Ministry . Gal. 1.1 . Note . Doubtless it is a great and provoking evil , to cry down the whole Ministry , because some seek themselves , or others of the Ministers affect too much power , hereby the devil carries on his design  Behold the Ministry , in Christ's intention in the giving of it . That Ordinances and Ministry now cease , and we are under another new Administration . A most dangerous and most unsound opinion . See Mr. Saltmarsh his Book called , Beams of the bright morning Star. p. 134 etc.  What another Administration then that of the Father through the Son by the Spirit . Reasons against this Interpretation of Mat. 28 20 for his third Administration . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 2 Thess. 8.9 . jude ver . 3.  1 Cor. 15.9 , 24 , 28.  Eph. 4.11 . 1.  What is Truth ? 2.  What is this love ? 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 3.  What is it to speak or follow the Truth in the Text.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Vers. 14.  Scripturae plenitudinem adoro . Truthing it in Love , a good motto for Saints . Doctr. 3  2 joh. 2.4 , 5.  Verse 2 , 3.  Reasons , why Truthing it in love so useful . What Truth and Love do to prevent evils , singly considered . ● Tim. 4.3 , 4 1 Cor. 10.28 , 29 , 30.  1 Cor. 8.13 . What Truth & Love do to promote the best good of Saints , being jointly considered . 2 Tim. 2.25 . What Truth and Love being jointly considered . 1 Cor. 8.1 . Note . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 after the Passover , not after Easter , if truly translated , Acts 12.4 . vid. Minshul●s Dict.  Note . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Acts 1.20 . Acts 2.27 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . There was both 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 & 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , yet sometime the former included in the latter . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Helps , Deacons , Governments , Elders . No●e this grand Imposture . 1.  Use of Instruction . 2.  Use of Caution . Two dangerous Regiments . Captare impacata & inquieta tempora . A little book in quarto , called Look about you . Note . 3 Use of Exhortation . Note . Some Errors are 1.  Contrafidem . 
2.  Infide . 
3.  Praeterfidem . 


In Elephante melancholia transit in nutrimentum corporis . Though the Elephants be maximae virtutis & maximi intellectus , yet gregatim semper in cedunt , and so not vociva as solivaga are . Homini erranti viam ostendit . Rules concerning Truth , and the pursuance of it . 1.  Rule about Truth . Ezek. 13.2 . Eph 4.17 . Cassianus his Collat. 2. de discretione , cap 5.  2.  Rule about Truth . 3.  Rule about Truth . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Jus Divinum nititur verbo Divino . Ames . Note . 4.  Rule about Truth . Note . 5.  Rule about Truth . 2 Cor. 11.3 . 6.  Rule about Truth . Note . Inclinus ad neutram partem sit Dominis ●●rius● . 1.  Rule about Love. 1 Cor. 16.14 . Eph 5.2 . Col. 3.12 , 13.  2.  Rule about Love.  3.  Rule about Love.  4.  Rule about Love.  Rom. 5.1 , 2.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Basil. Eph 5 2 ▪  5.  Rule about Love.  6.  Rule about Love.  Phil. 1.27 . & 3.15 , 16.  Concordi● communa periculum ●oll●t●r . Livy , l. 28.  Note . 

3 Epist. ver . 1.  Verse 2.  Verse 3.  Non vis errare ? ego sum via ; non vis falli ? ego sum veritas ; non vis mori ? ego sum vita ; non habes quam eas nisi per Christum ; non habes quò eas nisi ad Christum . 

Ezek. 28.3 . Sermo Dei est sicut hamus non capit nisi capiatur . Aug. 1 Cor. 9.19 , to 22. four times together . Isa. 8.18 . Division . 1. part . 1. persons Exhorting 
Exhorted . 
2. part . substance of Exhortation Be strong . 3. part . The rock of thy strength , 3.  The grace that is in Christ Jesus Explic.  Note . Note . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Non satis babuit humerorun was said of one who wanted strength proportionable to his work . Some copies read 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , others 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , both will come to one purpose , though the last more full and indeed more probable . In Christ Fullness Redundancy of grace . 1.  A Prophetical fullness of grace in Christ.  1.  Strength in his word  1 joh. 2.14 . 2.  Strength of his Spirit . 2.  A priestly fullness of grace in Christ.  1.  Christ's gracious satisfaction  2.  Christ's gracious intercession . 3.  Christ's Kingly fullness of grace . 1.  Christ's powerful suppressing his enemies  Chap 18. last verse . 2.  Christ's powerful advancing his people . Col. 2.13 . Psal 103.  Mat 16 18.  rev. 3.21 . 2.  The redundancy of grace that is in Christ Jesus . 1 Redundancy of his grace into all their faculties . Rom. 5.12 , 15.  2.  Redundancy of the grace in Christ into all the graces of the Saints . 3.  Redundancy of the grace that is in Christ jesus into all their duties  4.  Redundancy of the grace in Christ Jesus into the various estates of his Saints . Psa. 62.10 . 1. part . Christ's title unto , & possession of this strengthening grace , which is threefold ▪ 1.  By the grace of Union . 2.  By the grace of Unction . Note . 3.  By the grace of Office.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Camer . 2 Pet. 1.4 . Note . 3 part . The various sweetness & sweet variety of the strengthening grace in Christ jesus . Note . Applic.  A serious invitation for all strangers to seek acquaintance with , and interest in jesus Christ. joh. 3.19 . Vid L. Verulans Apothegms , 26.  Note . 1 Use . Note . See in Arminius his Works , a notable Discourse about God's Providence in men's sins . Deus non permittit peccatum tanquam otiosus spectator , sed eff●●aci quadam permissione , quamvis nullo modo sit Author peccati . 