A just and necessary apology against an unjust invective , published by mr Henry Burton in a late book of his , entitled , truth still truth , though shut out of doors . 

By Edmund Calamy b.d. and pastor of Aldermanburic . 

exod. 20.  

thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour . 

mat. 5.22 . 

but i say unto you , that whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause , shall be in danger of the judgement : and whosoever shall say unto his brother , Racha , shall be in danger of the council : but whosoever shall say , thou fool , shall be in danger of hell fire . 

London , printed for Christopher Meredith at the sign of the crane in Paul's churchyard , 1646.  

Truth , no longer truth , but turned into gall and wormwood : or , an answer to a late pamphlet written by m. Burton , and entitled , truth , still truth , though shut out of doors . 

It was the law of the Areopagite judges , that those that pleaded before them , should plead without prefacing , and without passion . m. Burton quite contrary to this law , first begins with a preface , and then writes a book so full of passion , as that whosoever reads it will acknowledge , that at least when he wrote it , he was not only {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , ( As he confesseth of himself , pa. 2. ) but ( If i May invent a word to express that which cannot be expressed by any word now in use ) {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a man , not only of like passions with others , but made up all of passion ; and that whosoever will contend with him , shall be loaded with dirt , rather than with arguments , and forced not so much to answer objections , as to wipe off aspersions . for my part , i will not defile myself , nor my answer with reckoning up all the opprobries and calumnies that are cast upon me , not only collaterally and obliquely ( As the supposed penman of the pamphlet , as he calls it , to which he frames his reply ) but directly and by name . Only i crave leave to present this true , but short character of his book . His words are swords and spears , rather than words . he fights with his heels , rather than with his head , and kicks , rather than argues , and whips , rather than answers . scarce any man since Montague's appeal hath written with more bitterness . I May say of him , as d. Rivet doth of Bishop Montague , this man cannot mention a man from whom be differs , though but in slight matters , without a reproach . and as Plato said to Diogenes , when he trod upon the pride of Plato , thou treadest upon my pride with greater pride : so doth m. Burton tread upon me , and whatsoever is blame worthy in me , with a pride more than episcopal . and surely , if to be railed upon and reviled be sufficient to bring a man into discredit , then must i be esteemed as {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as the dung , offscouring , and filth of the world . but to all his bitter invectives , i will return the same answer that Austin did , who when he was told that his adversary was too hard for him in railing , he said . It was an easy thing that way to conquer Austin ; but the reader should perceive it was , clamore , non veritate , by loud crying , not by truth . And what Hierom said against Helvidius , arbitror te verita•e convictum ad maledicta converti . it is a sign of a man not able to stand before the truth , when he betakes himself to reproachful language . 

non eget veritas mauri jaculis , nec arcu . 

non taliclypeo , non defensoribus isti• . 



Neither is it my purpose to meddle with the controversy between m. Burton and Aldermanburic ; i say , between m. Burton and Aldermanburic . for though m. Burton saith , that his quarrel is only with four men in Aldermanburic , yet , if the reader will lose so much time , as to look into his narrative , he will find that he calls upon all Aldermanburic to be ashamed and confounded for shutting him out of doors , as he phraseth it . But i will not make this quarrel mine . for as i was never thought worthy by m. Burton to be desired to give leave to his first admission ; so also i was not at all made acquainted with his dismission , and therefore am not at all concerned in the business . and although i shall be willing to open , not only the doors of the church , but the door of my heart , in admitting m. Burton in a brotherly and Christian compliance ; yet , notwithstanding i shall for ever shut the door of my lips from speaking any more about t•is controversy . And the rather , because that whereas in the book to which he answers , there are these words , and that all men May be fully convinced of Aldermanburies' love and good affection towards m. Burton , we do here profess to all that read these lines , that if m. Burton will be pleased to forbear preaching his congregational way amongst us , and preach such things , wherein both sides agree , we will readmit him with all readiness and cheerfulness , and will promise to endeavour upon all occasions to come and hear him ; which offer , if m. Burton refuseth , let the worldjudge , whether m. Burton shuts himself , or be shut-out of the church-doors of Aldermanburic . to this friendly invitement , he answers not a word ; which makes me for ever despair of his brotherly correspondency with us in our churches . And truly , if m. Burton will not only refuse to take a pastoral charge in our congregations , but condemneth our churches , as having inseparable corruptions in them ( For so he saith , p. 13. and repeats it twice ) i say inseparable , till the very frame of them be made new ; wherein he sideth directly with the brownis• , and denieth our churches to be true churches , as wanting a right foundation , and constitution , pag. 14. in which , i am assured our dissenting brethren will be dissenting brethren from him also ) and refuseth to give us the right hand of fellowship , as it is , p. 13. and saith , that persons cannot with a safe conscience communicate with us , as it is , p. 23. nor acknowledge our ministers to be their pastors truly , as it is , p. 23. and will not forbear to preach those dangerous errors in our churches , no wonder that any conscientious Presbyterian should be shy of admitting him to preach to their persons . 

Neither is it my design to answer this book of 33. pages , in all the particulars , nam quis leget hac ? as one said to a philosopher , that in a great tempest at sea fell a asking many trifling questions , are we perishing , and dost thou trifle ? so say i to m. Burton , is the ship of England a sinking , and are there truths of the highest concernment now in agitation , and shall i stand trifling away my precious time in long replies ? i cannot do this , if i would ; neither would i , if i could . And besides ; this truth is now grown stale and threadbare , especially to this new-truth-itching age , and by this last book is so drowned in gall and wormwood , as that it May well lose : its name , and be called gall and wormwood , as that star is , which fell from heaven , revel. 8.11 . and as clothes when died receive the name of those colours into which they were died . And therefore i will not abuse either myself , or the patience of the reader , or an Athenian eye so much as to frame an answer to every particular . 

But that which makes me put pen to paper , though most unwillingly , is , because i am in this bitter pamphlet painted out to the world in all my worst apparel , and rendered as blackamore-like , and as odious as the pen of an angry scribe could make me . Now although , i thank God , i can say with the apostle , non aesti•o humanum diem , with me it is  small thing to be judged of men ; and no new thing to be misreported and misrepresented : yet notwithstanding , because this report comes from so reverend a man as m. Burton , and some May possibly believe it for the authors sake : i am bound in conscience not to be so cruel to my good name , as to see it murdered in my life time , and by my silence to consent to the murdering of it , or to suffer such a picture to go uncensured , when a few words will discover the maliciousness and falseness of it . And besides , i am twice challenged by name to answer him , and throughout his whole book he speaks very undervaluingly of the reformation begun in our churches , and layeth stumbling blocks in our people's way , which necessity calls to remove . All which i shall {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , in few words endeavour to do . 

To begin first with his index expurgatorius of my life . I read of a painter , that being to paint King Antigonus that wanted an eye , painted that side of his face only that had an eye , that so his deformity Might not appear . But m. Burton quite contrary labours to set me out in all my deformity . 

Page 5.  He saith , i have not under pretence of enjoying my ministry , abased myself to the superstitious innovations of the prelates , and thereby caused many both ministers and persons thorough my example to fall into the same snare . Let the guilty apply it . And let some of Aldermanburic remember Edmundsbury , i say no more , verbum sapienti . here m. Burton sets out himself in all his embroidery , that so my picture Might be the more ugly . but m. Burton May remember that there was a time when he did abase himself to the superstitions of the Bishops , as hundred in this city can witness . And when he was appointed by a prelate to satisfy the consciences of some that did scruple that wicked oath , ex officio , which he did endeavour to do , as i am credibly informed . All which i relate to show that that which he saith of himself is not true , and what little cause he hath to accuse others for things done 12. years ago , that not many years before was guilty of as bad things himself . 

And whereas he bids some of Aldermanburic remember Edmundsbury , i would have him to know , that if it were lawful to boast , i could tell him , that for 10. years i preached at Edmundsbury faithfully and painfully thrice a week . And that there are many now in heaven blessing God for my ministry there ; and that i can have the testimony of all the godly persons and ministry in Bury , and thereabouts , in a larger manner than is fit for me to desire ; and that i refused offers of 400lb per annum to tarry with them ; and that i have been often called to return to them , with expressions of their unhappiness in my departure : but i am a fool in thus boasting , let the reader pardon me , since i am constrained unto it . One thing more i will add , that had not Bishop Wren put in his foul feet , to defile those clear waters , i should have lived and died with that persons , whom i still love and bear in my heart , and am assured that if m. Burton's book come amongst them , they will abominate it , because it makes use of Edmundsbury to make me odious to Aldermanburic . 

But m. Burton , pag. 7.  bids the scribe put m. Calamy in mind how one at Edmundsbury or Rochford , that he Might not suffer for the truth , did prostitute his ministry to all those superstitious and idolatrous innovations of the prelates in those days , whereby he became a snare in Mispeh , both to ministers and persons : and that for so doing , according to divine canon , he was to be barred from his ministry as ezek. 44.13 . and he bids him tell me the example of Origen , &c.  

The reader May perceive by these words , and those that follow , pag. 7. and pag. 8.  That the indictment is drawn in very high language , and that i am charged as guilty , not only of superstition , but idolatry , and idolatry as bad as that of Origen , when he offered incense to idol-gods ; and that for so doing , i am for ever to be debarred from my ministry : which accusation is so high , as that i cannot but say as the archangel faith , Jude v. 9  the Lord rebuke thee . 

In answer to this black bill of indictment , i say , that so far as it holds forth to the world any thing that is true , i shall be willing to own it . Of all Austin's works , there are two books of his which i have ever most prized , and desire most to imitate , his book of confessions , and his book of retractations . who doth not admire David in his psalms , which we call penitential , or psalms of spiritual restitution , wherein he labours to satisfy the church for the scandal he had given ? And Solomon also for his Ecclesiastes , or his book of his spiritual retractations ? Chrysostom observes it of Paul , as his greatest honour , that although he had obtained pardon of God for his sins , yet he is not ashamed to reckon them up to the world , 1 tim. 1.13 . And therefore , i hope , none shall show more willingness in confessing or retracting any thing wherein i have erred . And if i have wanted the fore-wit of innocency , i will not be wanting in the afterwit of godly sorrow and true repentance . thus much i answer in general . 

But in particular to m. Burton i answer . 

1.  That whereas he calls himself , pag. 11. my elder brother ; he deals in this , not as a brother , much less as an elder-brother , that should have less passion , and more discretion . and whereas he calls me , pag. 9 a Christian , he deals with me in this , not as with a Christian . for suppose i were guilty of all he writes , yet i would answer him , as Beza did the Papists ( Who , because they could not answer his arguments upbraided him with the vices of his youth ) hihomires invident mihi gratiam christi , these men envy me ▪ the free grace of God that hath pardoned these in me . and as Austin answered the donatist ( That separated from all the Christian churches in the world , and affirmed , that there were no true churches to be communicated withal but theirs , and were also divided amongst themselves in minutula frustula , as Austin saith ) who not being able to confute his arguments , reproached him for his former life , when he was a Manichee , the more ( Faith Austin ) you blazon my sins and spiritual diseases to the world , the more will i commend my physician that hath healed them all . 

2.  But i answer in the second place , that this indictment is drawn with a blacker coal t••n the truth will bear , and is as false as odio• . and herein m. Burton deals with me , just as Christopher Dow dealt with him . This Christopher Dow was one that undertook to answer m. Burton's book , called an apology , or an appeal , and spends all his second chapter in •ipping up the life of m. Burton ; he tells us that . But i will not off•r s• much injury to m. Burton , or discover so much malice in myself , as to copy out that foul picture that is there drawn of m. Burton : i abhor such dealing . I believe not the things to be true : because i soppose them spoken out of malice , to render his adversary odious . •re•ate the story , only to manifest to the indifferent reader , that m. Burton takes just the same course with me , raking up from the dead what he conceives was done by me 12 years ago at least : which things , though they should all prove true , yet , i hope , the impartial Christian will no more justify m. Burton's practice against me , than they did Christopher Dows against m. Burton . but when they shall perceive the charge to be false , they will conclude , that m. Burton hath committed such a fault , which a sea of water will hardly wash off . 

First , he saith , let the scribe put m. Calamy in mind , how one  Edmundsbury or Rochford , &c.  it shows than he cannot tell at which of these two places this idolatry was committed , whereby the reader May perceive upon what slender information he builds his heavy accusation . But let m. Burton take notice of that , which thousands will attest beside myself , that i left Bury ( A place for situation and wholesomeness of air , so excellent , that Camden saith , sol no• vidit •rbem s•t• elegantiorem ) to go to Rochford , where i got a quartan ague that continue many years , and s•ffered as much misery , i dare say , as any of our dissenting brethren did in their banishment into the unwholesome air of the Low-countries , merely and only to be free from conformity to Bishop Wren's innovations . 

He saith , that at Edmundsbury or Rochford , i did prostitute my ministry to all •hose superstitious and idola•rous innovations of the prelates in those days ; and i did this , that i Might not suffer for the truth , and that by this i became a snare in Mispeh to ministers and persons , and that for so doing i am to be debarred from my ministry , and that in this i did as bad as Origen , or the Christian soldiers in Julian's days , that offered incense to idol-gods . to all which , let not m. Burton be offended , if i answer in his own words , p. 1.  find me a man that hath sharp teeth , &c.  But i will not answer railing with railing . Only , i say , this is a high breach of the ninth commandment : for can m. Burton prove that i did prostitute my ministry to all those superstitious and idolatrous innovations , &c.  I say , to all , &c.  Surely , i never bowed to ; or towards the altar , to , or towards the East . i never read that wicked book of liberty for sports upon the Lord's day . i never read prayers at the high altar , placed at the upper end of the church , where the persons could not hear . I have often preached against innovations , and once i did it at a public visitation , and was called in question for my labour , and should have been sent for to the high commission , had not God raised up a special friend to prevent it . I never justified the oath ex officio , nor ever prosecuted any man or woman at the high commission . i never ( To my best remembrance ) at any time preached for the justification of any of the innovations . in some few things i did , i confess , conform according to the light i then had , out of the uprightness of my heart , not to avoid suffering for the truth ( The Lord knoweth ) though m. Burton sitting as Lord over my conscience is not ashamed to judge of my intentions , as well as my actions , and to say , i did it that i Might not suffer for the truth : which cannot but be a rash , if not a most unjust censure . and for those particular things wherein i yielded , i had the consent of the godly persons in Bury , who did profess unto me , that if my conscience would give me leave to yield to those things , they would not be offended with what i did , nor like my ministry any whit the worse ; and how then could that that i did be such a snare to ministers and persons ? but how will m. Burton prove that that which i did was idolatry , and to be paralleled with the idolatry to the heathenish gods , like that of Origens , and of the Christian soldiers in Julian's time , and for which i am to be debarred from my ministry ? surely , when he wrote these words he consulted more with machivil , then with his bible : i will answer in his own words , pag. 16 calumniate boldly , and some reproach will stick , by this time our stomach being accustomed to the poison under his tongue , hath learned to digest all . but let m. Burton ask his own conscience how far in former times he hath been guilty of that which he accuseth others . and if i should be so wicked , i could name some of his brethren of the congregational-way , that have yielded far more to the prelates innovations than i have done . But i abhor to practise that which i condemn in others . 

But that which followeth is ( If any thing can be ) more oftensive and scandalous , and renders me more odious and abominable . 

Pag. 7.  but you will say , you have repent : would God it were a repentance not to be repent of . For were it so , how could the old spirit of bondage still remain , only turned into the spirit of domination ? Or how could there be such an Antichristian spirit in man to oppose the kingly government of Jesus Christ over consciences and churches , and to persecute all those of this way ? Or how could men be still so ignorant of the ways of Christ , and stand out so stiffly against them , had they truly bewailed their former superstitious abominations ? They clamour on us to show them a model , a pattern of what we hold . We call upon them for sound repentance for their superstitious practices , in subjection to an Antichristian hierarchy , according to that , e•ek , 43.10 , 11.  if they be ashamed for all their iniquities , then show them the pattern of the house . thus far m. Burton . 

The plain English of these words is this , that none ever repent of their conformity to prelatical innovations , but independents . and that there is a spirit of domination in all ministers that are not of his way : and that the government which he m•intains is the kingly office of Jesus Christ ; and that they are all of an Antichristian spirit that oppose it : which words savour so much of that spirit of domination and Antichristianism , which he condemns in others , as that i wonder M Burton is so blind as not to see it . But i perceive by this very pass•ge , that let the Presbyterian ministers meet never so often to humble themselves by prayer and fasting for their former conformity ( As they have of•en done ) yet , if they will not turn independents they must still be accounted amongst the number of those , that as m. Burton saith , pag. 7. have been vassals to Antichrist , and defiled themselves with doing the drudgeries of Lording prelates , and without any more ado , when occasion is offered , with dry eyes to pretend for Christ in a way of reformation . surely such kind of language will never gain proselytes to the congregational-way . 

For my own particular i crave leave to declare to all that shall read these lines what i have done to manifest my repentance , and let m. Burton then judge whether it be a repentance to be repent on , or no . 

First , i went to bury , and there made in a sermon , a recantation and retractation of what i had done , in the hearing of thousands . And this i did before the times turned against episcopacy , not out of discontent , nor because i was disappointed of my expected preferment at court . 

Secondly , after my coming to London at the beginning of this parliament i was one of those that did join in making Smectymnuus , which was the first deadly blow to episcopacy in England of late years . 

Thirdly , my house was a receptacle for godly ministers in the worst of times : here was the remonstrance framed against the prelates : here were all meetings . I was the f••st that openly before a committee of parliament did defend that our Bishops were not only not an order distinct from presbyters , but that in scripture a Bishop and presbyter were all one . I blush to sp•ak of these things , but the judicious reader will consider how i am provoked to it , and will pardon me . The Lord knoweth i did these things to make reparation to the church of God , for what wrong i had done her . For my conscience was at last fully satisfied , that the bringing in of those innovations was but a shoing-horn to draw in , if not the Pope , yet popery , and it was the grief of my soul that i had had the least hand in ushering in either the one or the other . 

But what is all this , as long as i turn not independent ? this will not satisfy m. Burton . and therefore he brings that plac• , ezek. 43.10 , 11.  if they be ashamed for all their iniquities , then show them the pat•rn of the house . but May we not be ash•med of our iniquities , and yet continue to hold the discipline of the reform churches ? hath God showed the pattern of his house to none of the reform churches in Geneva , fr•nce , Scotland , & c ? This is a bold assertion : m•st we comply with m. Burton in his model ( Which i perceive by what is in his book , is far different from the judgements of his brethren ) or else we shall never see the pattern of God's house ? but what will m. Burton say to those Presbyterian ministers that never conformed either to the old or new ceremonies of the prelates ? What will be say to old m. Dod , m. Hildersham , m. Ball , &c.  m. Rathbane , and many others ? Did not those reverend ministers see the pattern of God's house ? And yet it is well known that they wrote many books against those that refused communion with our churches , and were their greatest enemies . 

But m. Burton goeth on to cast abroad his wildfire , and addeth , that all the reformation here and there pretended to be set up in parishes , hath rather cam•lion-like received its form from the fashion of the times , then from a real , intrins•cal change wrought in the heart by the spirit of Christ . the best way of answering this pass•ge would be to rake a little , and but a little in m. Burton's dunghill , and to bestrew him with two or three of his own dirty flowers , that he May tell others how sweet they smell , but i dare not , nobis non licet esse tam disertis , i mu•t follow the apostles rule , rom. 12.21 . be not overcome of evil , but overcome evil with good . but how dares m. Burton say , that all the reformation set up here and there is but pretended to be set up , and that it hath no real , intrinsical change , & c ? The Lord give him a heart seriously to consider the rashness and uncharitableness of this speech . 

But he adds , pag. 8.  that such as now glory most in their new reformation , were they not among the very last that held up the service-book , a• loath to lay it down , till very shame left it ? here the reader May perceive that m. Burton doth antiquum obtinere , and resolves to like no reformation , but what ends in separation . And why May we not glory in our new reformation , which in some places hath as much scripture purity , as the best of theirs , and is joined with unity also , which theirs want ? And what is m. Burton's church , and his new reformation , that it must lift up itself above all other churches , and other reformations ? If i May believe reports , there are divisions not a few among his persons , and — but i must not believe reports : yet notwithstanding , if m. Burton takes leave in a bitter manner to s•y , pag. 13.  doth he not bewray his gross or wilful ignorance , if not insolence , in asking what defilements are still in their churches ? i hope he will give me leave in a mild manner to demand of him , whether there be no defilements in his church ? and whether his church be purified according to the purification of the sanctuary ? and whether , if a church be not purified in every thing according to the purification of the sanctuary , a man cannot with the comfort of a good conscience communicate in that church ? for so he seems to say , pag. 23. which is a doctrine , as fa•re from truth , as it is from peace and unity . as for the service-book , let m. Burton know , that at a meeting at my house , it was resolved by above a hundred ministers , after a long debate upon divers weighty considerations , that all that could in their judgements submit to the reading of some part of it , should be entreated for a while to continue so to do . To this our dissenting brethren , then present did agree , and one of them made a speech to manifest his concordance . This is enough to give any man satisfaction for the late laying of it down . And if m. Burton means that Aldermanburic was among the last that held up the service book , he is exceedingly mistaken in this ; as he is in many other things , as hundred can witness for me . 

And thus i have endeavoured to answer so much of the book , as relates to my former life and conversation . As for my answer to the other particulars , which amounteth to another sheet , i will condemn it to perpetual silence ; and the rather , because as Jacob's cattle by looking upon the rods , when they did conceive , brought forth cattle speckled and spotted , gen. 30.41 . So my fear is , left by conversing too much with his bitter invectives , i should also bring forth as angry a pamphlet as his is , contrary to my genius , and natural temper . For as the painter engraved his named so artificially into the picture of Min•rva , that whosoever should undertake to deface his name should be forced to deface the goddess also : so hath m. Burton so interlaced and interwoven his scoffing and railing speeches throughout his whole book , that it is impossible to answer one , but i shall be necessitated to answer the other also , which will ill become a Presbyterian , nor well become an independent ; and therefore i draw a vail over the rest . only i will put m. Burton in mind of a saying that Hi•rom relates of Domitius an orator , cur ego te , inquit , habeam at principem , cum tu me non habeas ut senator•m ? if he exp••ts that i should account him as a brother , and as an elder brother , let him not account me as an heathen , and as a publican ; let him not so bitterly inveigh against our assemblies , if he looks to preach in our assemblies . and if he would be accounted as a confessor and martyr , let him not expose my good name to martyrdom , and therein make me a martyr , and himself a persecutor : for it will always be accounted as great a persecution to be branded in our good names , and stigmatised for idolaters and time-servers , &c. to all posterity by m. Burton's pen , as to be pillored and lose our ears by an episcopal hand . 

Finis . 





{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} non potest vir ille s•ne con•iti•• quenquam a quo dissentit vel in levissimi••o minare . Rivet . apol.  Aulus G•llius , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ? epist ad nepotianum , 





























































