
Mobile Website Use and Advanced 
Researchers: Understanding Library 
Users at a University Marine 
Sciences Branch Campus 

 
 

Mary J. Markland, 
Hannah Gascho Rempel, 

and Laurie Bridges 

 
 

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND LIBRARIES | DECEMBER 2017  

   

7 

ABSTRACT 

This exploratory study examined the use of the Oregon State University Libraries website via mobile 

devices by advanced researchers at an off-campus branch location. Branch campus–affiliated faculty, 

staff, and graduate students were invited to participate in a survey to determine what their research 

behaviors are via mobile devices, including frequency of their mobile library website use and the 

tasks they were attempting to complete. Findings showed that while these advanced researchers do 

periodically use the library website via mobile devices, mobile devices are not the primary mode of 

searching for articles and books or for reading scholarly sources. Mobile devices are most frequently 

used for viewing the library website when these advanced researchers are at home or in transit. 

Results of this survey will be used to address knowledge gaps around library resources and research 

tools and to generate more ways to study advanced researchers’ use of library services via mobile 

devices.  

INTRODUCTION 

As use of mobile devices has expanded in the academic environment, so has the practice of 

gathering data from multiple sources about what mobile resources are and are not being used. 

This data informs the design decisions and resource investments libraries make in mobile tools. 

Web analytics is one tool that allows researchers to discover which devices patrons use to access 

library webpages. But web analytics data do not show what patrons want to do and what hurdles 

they face when using the library website via a mobile device. Web analytics also lacks nuance in 

that it cannot distinguish user characteristics, such as whether users are novice or advanced 

researchers, which may affect how these users interact with a mobile device. User surveys are 

another tool for gathering data on mobile behaviors. User surveys help overcome some of the 

limitations of web analytics data by directly asking users about their perceived research skills and 

the resources they use on a mobile device. 

As is the case at most libraries, Oregon State University Libraries serves a diverse range of users. 
We were interested in learning whether advanced researchers—particularly advanced 
researchers who work at a branch campus—use the library’s resources differently than main 

 

Mary J. Markland (mary.markland@oregonstate.edu), is Head, Guin Library; Hannah Gascho 
Rempel (hannah.rempel@oregonstate.edu) is Science Librarian and Coordinator of Graduate 
Student Success Services; and Laurie Bridges (laurie.bridges@oregonstate.edu) is Instruction 
and Outreach Librarian, Oregon State University Libraries and Press.  

mailto:mary.markland@oregonstate.edu
mailto:hannah.rempel@oregonstate.edu
mailto:laurie.bridges@oregonstate.edu


 

MOBILE WEBSITE USE AND ADVANCED RESEARCHERS | MARKLAND, REMPEL, AND BRIDGES 
doi:10.6017/ital.v36i4.9953 

8 

campus users. We were chiefly interested in these advanced researchers because of the mobile 

nature of their work. They are graduate students and faculty in the field of marine science who 

work in a variety of locations, including their offices, labs, and in the field (which can include 

rivers, lakes, and the ocean). We focused on the use of the library website via mobile devices as 

one way to determine whether specific library services should be adapted to best meet the needs 

of this targeted user community. 

Oregon State University (OSU) is Oregon’s land-grant university; its home campus is in Corvallis, 

Oregon. Hatfield Marine Science Center (HMSC) in Newport is a branch campus that includes a 

branch library. Guin Library at HMSC serves OSU students and faculty from across the OSU 

colleges along with the co-located federal and state agencies of the National Oceanic and 

Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), US Fish and Wildlife Service, Environmental Protection 

Agency (EPA), United States Geological Survey (USGS), United States Department of Agriculture 

(USDA), and the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. The Guin Library is in Newport, which is 

forty-five miles from the main campus. Like many other branch libraries, Guin Library was 

established at a time when providing a print collection close to where researchers and students 

work was paramount, but today it must adapt its services to meet the changing information needs 

of its user base.  

Branch libraries are typically designed to serve a clientele or subject area, which can create a 

different institutional culture from the main library. Guin Library serves advanced 

undergraduates, graduate students, and scientific researchers. HMSC’s distance from Corvallis, the 

small size of the researcher community, and the shared focus on a research area—marine 

sciences—create a distinct culture. While Guin Library is often referred to as the “heart of HMSC,” 

the number of in-person library users is decreasing. This decline is not unexpected as numerous 

studies have shown that faculty and graduate students have fewer needs that require an in-person 

trip to the library.1 Studies have also shown that faculty and graduate students can be unaware of 

the services and resources that libraries provide, thereby continuing the cycle of underuse.2  

To learn more about the needs of HMSC’s advanced researchers, this exploratory study examined 

their research behaviors via mobile devices. The goals of this study were to  

• determine if and with what frequency advanced researchers at HMSC use the OSU Libraries 

website via mobile devices;  

• gather a list of tasks advanced users attempt to accomplish when they visit the OSU 

Libraries website on a mobile device; and 

• determine whether the mobile behaviors of these advanced researchers are different from 

those of researchers from the main OSU campus (including undergraduate students), and if 

so, whether these differences warrant alternative modes of design or service delivery.  

  



 

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND LIBRARIES | DECEMBER 2017 

 

9 

LITERATURE REVIEW 

The conversation about how best to design mobile library websites has shifted over the past 

decade. Early in the mobile-adoption process some libraries focused on creating special websites 

or apps that worked with mobile devices.3 While libraries globally might still be creating mobile-

specific websites and apps,4 US libraries are trending toward responsively designed websites as a 

more user-friendly option and a simpler solution for most libraries with limited staff and budgets.5 

Most of the literature on mobile-device use in higher education is focused on undergraduates 

across a wide range of majors who are using a standard academic library.6 To help provide context 

for how libraries have designed their websites for mobile users, some of those specific findings 

will be shared later. But because our study focused on graduate students and faculty in a science-

focused branch library, we will begin with a discussion of what is known about more advanced 

researchers’ use of library services and their mobile-device habits.  

Several themes emerged from the literature on graduate students’ relationships with libraries. In 

an ironic twist, faculty think graduate students are being assisted by the library while librarians 

think faculty are providing graduate students with the help they need to be successful.7 This 

results in many graduate students end up using their library’s resources in an entirely 

disintermediated way. Graduate students, especially those in the sciences, visit the physical library 

less often and use online resources more than undergraduate students.8 Most graduate students 

start their research process with assistance from academic staff, such as advisors and committee 

members,9 and are unaware of many library services and resources.10 As frequent virtual-library 

users who receive little guidance on how to use the library’s tools, graduate students need a 

library website that is clear in scope and purpose, offers help, and has targeted services.11  

Compared to reports on undergraduate use of mobile devices to access their library’s website, 

relatively few studies have focused on graduate-student or faculty mobile behaviors. A recent 

survey of Japanese Library and Information Science (LIS) students compared and undergraduate 

graduate students’ usage of mobile devices to access library services and found slight differences. 

However, both groups reported accessing libraries as last on their list of preferred smartphone 

uses.12 Aharony examined the mobile use behaviors of Israeli LIS graduate students and found 

approximately half of these graduate students used smartphones and perceived them to be useful 

and easy tools for use in their everyday life, and could transfer those habits to library searching 

behaviors.13 When looking specifically at how patrons use library services via a mobile device, 

Rempel and Bridges found the top reason graduate students at their main campus used the OSU 

Libraries website via mobile devices was to find information on library hours, followed by finding 

a book and researching a topic.14 Barnett-Ellis and Vann surveyed their small university and found 

that both undergraduate and graduate students were more than twice as likely to use mobile 

devices as are their faculty and staff; a majority of students also indicated they were likely to use 

mobile devices to conduct research.15 Finally, survey results showed graduate students in Hofstra 

University’s College of Education reported accessing library materials via a mobile device twice as 

often as other student groups. In addition, these graduate students reported being comfortable 



 

MOBILE WEBSITE USE AND ADVANCED RESEARCHERS | MARKLAND, REMPEL, AND BRIDGES 
doi:10.6017/ital.v36i4.9953 

10 

reading articles up to five pages long on their mobile devices. Graduate students were also more 

likely to be at home when using their mobile device to access the library, a finding the authors 

attributed to education graduate students frequently being employed as full-time teachers.16  

Research on how faculty members use library resources characterizes a population that is 

confident in their literature-searching skills, prefers to search on their own, and has little direct 

contact with the library.17 Faculty researchers highly value convenience;18 they rely primarily on 

electronic access to journal articles but prefer print access to monographs.19 Faculty tend to be 

self-trained at using search tools, such as PubMed or other online databases, and therefore are not 

always aware of the more in-depth functionality of these tools.20  

In contrast to graduate students, Rempel and Bridges found that faculty using the library website 

via mobile devices were less interested in information about the physical library, such as library 

hours, and were more likely to be researching a topic.21 Medical faculty are one of the few faculty 

groups whose mobile-research behaviors have been specifically examined. A survey administered 

by Bushhousen et al. at a medical university revealed that a third of respondents used mobile apps 

for research-related activities.22 Findings by Boruff and Storie indicate that one of the biggest 

barriers to mobile use in health-related academic settings was wireless access.23 Thus apps that 

did not require the user to be connected to the internet were highly desired. Faculty and graduate 

students in health-related academic settings saw a role for the library in advocating for better 

wireless infrastructure, providing access to a targeted set of heavily used resources, and providing 

online guides or in-person tutorials on mobile apps or procedures specific to their institution.24 

According to the literature, most design decisions for library mobile sites have been made on the 

basis of information collected about undergraduate students’ behavior at main-branch campuses. 

To help inform our understanding of how recent decisions have been made, the remainder of the 

literature review focuses on what is known about undergraduate students’ mobile behavior. 

Undergraduate students are very comfortable using mobile technologies and perceive themselves 

to be skilled with these devices. According to the 2015 EDUCAUSE Center for Research and 

Analysis’ (ECAR) study of undergraduate students and information technology, most 

undergraduate students consider themselves sophisticated technology users who are engaged 

with information technologies.25 Undergraduate students mainly use their smartphones for non-

class activities. But students indicate they could be more effective technology users if they were 

more skilled at tools such as the learning management system, online collaboration tools, e-books, 

or laptops and smartphones in class. Of interest to libraries is the ECAR participants’ top area of 

reported interest, “search tools to find reference or other information online for class work.”26  

However, when a mobile library site is in place, usage rates have been found to be lower than 

anticipated. In a study of undergraduate science students, Salisbury et al. found only 2 percent of 

respondents reported using their cell phones to access library databases or the library’s catalog 

every hour or daily, despite 66 percent of the students browsing the internet using their mobile 



 

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND LIBRARIES | DECEMBER 2017 

 

11 

phone hourly or daily. Salisbury et al. speculated that users need to be told about mobile-

optimized library resources if libraries want to increase usage. 27 

Rempel and Bridges used a pop-up interrupt survey while users were accessing the OSU Libraries 

mobile site.28 This approach allowed a larger cross-section of library users to be surveyed. It also 

reduced memory errors by capturing their activities in real time. Activities that had been included 

in the mobile site because of their perceived usefulness in a mobile environment, such as 

directions, asking a librarian a question, and the coffee shop webcam, were rarely cited as a reason 

for visiting the mobile site.  

The OSU Libraries branch at HMSC is entering a new era. A Marine Studies Initiative will result in 

the building of a new multidisciplinary research campus at HMSC that aims to serve five hundred 

undergraduate students. The change in demographics and the increase in students who will need 

to be served has prompted Guin Library staff to explore how the current population of advanced 

researchers interact with library resources. In addition, examining the ways undergraduate 

students at the main campus use these tools will help with planning for the upcoming changes in 

the user community. 

METHODS 

This study used an online Qualtrics survey to gather information about how frequently advanced 

researchers (graduate students, faculty, and affiliated scientists at a branch library for marine 

science) use the OSU Libraries website via mobile devices, what they search for, and other ways 

they use mobile devices to support their research behaviors.  

A recruitment email with a link to the survey was sent to three discussion lists used by HMSC 

community in Spring 2016. The survey was available for four weeks, and a reminder email was 

sent one week before the survey closed. The invitation email included a link to an informed-

consent document. Once the consent document had been reviewed, users were taken to the survey 

via a second link. Respondents could provide an email address to receive a three-dollar coffee card 

for participating in the study, but their email address was recorded in a separate survey location 

to preserve their anonymity. The invitation email indicated that this survey was about using the 

website via a mobile device, and the first survey question asked users if they had ever accessed the 

library website on a mobile device. If they answered “no,” they were immediately taken to the end 

of the survey and were not recorded as a participant in the study.  

A similar survey was conducted with users from OSU’s main campus in 2012–13 and again in 

2015. The results from 2012–13 have been published previously,29 but the results from 2015 have 

not. While the focus of the present study is on the mobile behaviors of advanced researchers in the 

HMSC community, data from the 2015 main-campus study is used to provide a comparison to the 

broader OSU community. OSU main-campus respondents in 2015 and HMSC participants in 2016 

both answered closed- and open-ended questions that explored participants’ general mobile-

device behaviors and behaviors specific to using the OSU Libraries website via mobile devices. 



 

MOBILE WEBSITE USE AND ADVANCED RESEARCHERS | MARKLAND, REMPEL, AND BRIDGES 
doi:10.6017/ital.v36i4.9953 

12 

However, the HMSC survey also asked questions about behaviors related to using the OSU 

(nonlibrary) website via a mobile device and participants’ mobile scholarly reading and writing 

behaviors. The survey concluded with several demographic questions. The survey data was 

analyzed using Qualtrics’ cross-tab functionality and Microsoft Excel to observe trends and 

potential differences between user groups. Open-ended responses were examined for common 

themes.  

Twenty-three members of the HMSC community completed the survey, whereas one hundred 

participants responded to the 2015 main campus survey. Participation in the 2015 survey was 

capped at one hundred respondents because limited incentives were available. The participation 

difference between the two surveys reflects several differences between the two sampled 

communities. The most obvious difference is size. The OSU community comprises more than 

thirty-six thousand students, faculty, and staff; the HMSC community is approximately five 

hundred students, researchers, and faculty—some of whom are also included as part of the larger 

OSU community. The second factor influencing response rates relates to the difference in size 

between the two communities, but is more striking in the HMSC community: the survey relied on a 

self-selected group of users who indicated they had a history using the library website via a 

mobile device. Therefore, it is not possible to estimate the population size of mobile-device 

library-website users specific to the branch library or the main campus library. This limitation 

means that the results from this study cannot be used to generalize findings to all users who visit a 

library website via mobile devices; instead the results are intended to present a case that other 

libraries may compare with behaviors observed on their own campuses. Sharing the behaviors of 

advanced researchers at a branch campus is particularly valuable as this population has 

historically been understudied. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Participant Demographics and Devices Used 

Of the twenty-three respondents to the HMSC mobile behaviors survey, 13 (62 percent) were 

graduate students, 7 (34 percent) were faculty (this category includes faculty researchers and 

courtesy faculty), and one respondent was an NOAA employee. Two participants declined to 

declare their affiliation. Of the 97 respondents to the 2015 OSU main-campus survey who shared 

their affiliation, 16 (16 percent) were graduate students, 5 (5 percent) were faculty members, and 

69 (71 percent) were undergraduates. 

Respondents varied in the types of mobile devices they used when doing library research. 

Smartphones were used by 78 percent (18 respondents) and 22 percent (5 respondents) used a 

tablet. Apple (15 respondents) was the most common device brand used, although six of the 

respondents used an Android phone or tablet. Compared to the general population’s device 

ownership, these respondents are more likely to own Apple devices, but the two major device 

types owned (Apple and Android) match market trends.30  



 

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND LIBRARIES | DECEMBER 2017 

 

13 

Frequency of Library Site Use on Mobile Devices 

Most of the HMSC respondents are infrequent users of the library website via mobile devices: 50 

percent (11 respondents) did so less than once a month; 41 percent (9 respondents) did so at least 

once a month; and 9 percent (2 respondents) did so at least once a week. The low level of library 

website usage via mobile devices was especially notable as this population reports being heavy 

users of the library website via laptops or desktop computers, with 82 percent (18 respondents) 

visiting the library website via those tools at least once a week.  

Researchers at HMSC used the library website via mobile devices much less often than the 2015 

main-campus respondents (undergraduates, graduate students, and faculty). No HMSC 

respondents visited the mobile site daily compared to 10 percent of main-campus users, and only 

9 percent of HMSC respondents visited weekly compared to 28 percent of main-campus users (see 

Figure 1). 

 

Figure 1. 2016 HMSC participants vs. 2015 OSU main-campus participants reported frequency of 

library website visits via a mobile device by percent of responses. 

While HMSC advanced researchers share some mobile behaviors with main-campus students, this 

exploratory study demonstrates they do not use the library website via mobile devices as 

frequently. Some possible reasons for this are researchers rarely spend time coming and going to 

and from classes and therefore do not have small gaps of time to fill throughout their day. Instead, 

their daily schedule involves being in the field or in the lab collecting and analyzing data. 

0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60%

This is my first time

Less often than once a month

At least once a month

At least once a week

Every day or almost every day

Branch 2016 Main 2015



 

MOBILE WEBSITE USE AND ADVANCED RESEARCHERS | MARKLAND, REMPEL, AND BRIDGES 
doi:10.6017/ital.v36i4.9953 

14 

Alternatively, they are frequently involved in writing-intensive projects such as drafting journal 

articles or grant proposals. They carve out specific periods to do research and do not appear to be 

filling time with short bursts of literature searching. They can work on laptops and do not need to 

multitask on a phone or tablet between classes or in other situations. Mobile-device ownership 

among HMSC graduate students might also be limited because of personal budgets that do not 

allow for owning multiple mobile devices or for having the most recent model. In addition, this 

group of scientists may not be on the front edge of personal technologies, especially compared to 

medical researchers, because few mobile apps are designed specifically for the research needs of 

marine scientists.  

Where Researchers Are When Using Mobile Devices for Library Tasks 

Because mobile devices facilitate connecting to resources from many locations, and because 

advanced researchers conduct research in a range of settings—including the field, the office, and 

home—we asked respondents where they were most likely to use the library website via a mobile 

device. Thirty-two percent were most likely to be at home, 27 percent in transit; 18 percent at 

work; and 9 percent in the field. The popularity of using the library website via mobile devices 

while in transit was somewhat unexpected, but perhaps should not have been because many 

people try to maximize their travel time by multitasking on mobile devices. The distance from the 

main campus might explain this finding because a local bus service provides an easy way to travel 

to and from the main campus, and the hour-long trip would provide opportunities for multitasking 

via a mobile device. 

Relatively few respondents used mobile devices to access the library website while at work. 

Previous studies show that a lack of reliable campus wireless internet access can affect students’ 

ability to use mobile technology.31 HMSC also struggles to provide consistent wireless access, and 

signals are spotty in many areas of our campus. Despite signal boosters in Guin Library, wireless 

access is still limited at times. In addition, cell phone service is equally spotty both at HMSC and up 

and down the coast of Oregon. It is much less frustrating to work on a device that has a wired 

connection to the internet while at HMSC. These respondents did use mobile devices while at 

home, which might indicate they had a better wireless signal there. Alternatively, working from 

home on a mobile device might indicate that they compartmentalize their library-research time as 

an activity to do at home instead of in the office.  

Researchers used their mobile devices to access the library while in the field less than originally 

expected, but upon further reflection, it made sense that researchers would be less likely to use 

library resources during periods of data collection for oceanic or other water-based research 

projects because of their focused involvement during that stage. The water-based research also 

increases the risk of losing mobile devices. 

Library Resources Accessed via Mobile Devices 



 

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND LIBRARIES | DECEMBER 2017 

 

15 

To learn more about how these respondents used the library website, we asked them to choose 

what they were searching for from a list of options. Respondents could choose as many options as 

applied to their searching behaviors. HMSC respondents’ primary reason for visiting the library’s 

site via a mobile device was to find a specific source: 68 percent looked for an article, 45 percent 

for a journal, 36 percent for a book, and 14 percent for a thesis. Many of the HMSC respondents 

also looked for procedural or library-specific information: 36 percent looked for hours, 32 percent 

for My Account information, 18 percent for interlibrary loan, 14 percent for contact information, 9 

percent for how to borrow and request books, 9 percent for workshop information, and 9 percent 

for Oregon estuaries bibliographies—a unique resource provided by the HMSC library. Fifty-five 

percent of searches were for a specific source and 43 percent were for procedural or library-

specific information. Notably missing from this list were respondents who reported searching via 

their mobile device for directions to the library.  

Compared to the 2015 OSU Libraries main-campus survey respondents, HMSC respondents were 

much more likely to visit the library website via a mobile device to look for an article (68 percent 

vs. 37 percent), find a journal (45 percent vs. 23 percent), access My Account information (32 

percent vs. 7 percent), use interlibrary loan (18 percent vs. 5 percent), or find contact information 

(14 percent vs. 1 percent). However, unlike HMSC participants, who do not have access to course 

reserves at the branch library, 7 percent of OSU main-campus respondents used their mobile 

devices to find course reserves on the library website. See Figure 2. 

 

0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70%

Directions

Contact information

Interlibrary loan

Course reserves

My account

A journal

A book

Library hours

An article

Branch 2016 Main 2015



 

MOBILE WEBSITE USE AND ADVANCED RESEARCHERS | MARKLAND, REMPEL, AND BRIDGES 
doi:10.6017/ital.v36i4.9953 

16 

Figure 2. 2016 HMSC vs. 2015 OSU main-campus participants reported searches while visiting the 

library website via a mobile device by percent of responses. 

It is possible that HMSC users with different affiliations might use the library site via a mobile 

device differently. These exploratory findings show that graduate students used the greatest 

variety of content via mobile devices. Graduate students as a group reported using 11 of the 14 

provided content choices via a mobile device while faculty reported using 8 of the 14. Graduate 

students were the largest group (62 percent of respondents), which might explain why as a group 

they searched for more types of content via mobile devices. Interestingly, faculty members and 

faculty researchers reported looking for a thesis via a mobile device, but no graduate students did. 

Perhaps these graduate students had not yet learned about the usefulness of referencing past 

theses as a starting point for their own thesis writing. Or perhaps they were only familiar with 

searching for journal articles on a topic. In contrast, faculty members might have been searching 

for specific theses for which they had provided advising or mentoring support. 

To help us make decisions about how to best direct users to library content via mobile devices, we 

asked respondents to indicate their searching behaviors and preferences. Of the 16 HMSC 

respondents who answered this question, 12 (75 percent) used our web-scale discovery search 

box via mobile devices; 4 (25 percent) reported that they did. Presumably these latter searchers 

were navigating to another database to find their sources. Of 16 respondents, only 6 (38 percent) 

indicated that they looked for a specific library database (as opposed to the discovery tool) when 

using a mobile device. Those respondents who were looking for a database tended to be looking 

for the Web of Science database, which makes sense for their field of study. When conducting 

searches for sources on their mobile devices, HMSC respondents employed a variety of search 

strategies: the 12 respondents who replied used a combination of author (75 percent), journal 

title (67 percent, keyword (67 percent), and book title (50 percent) searches when starting at the 

mobile version of the discovery tool. 

When asked about their preferred way to find sources, a majority of HMSC respondents reported 

that they tended to prefer a combination of searching and menu navigation while using the library 

website from mobile devices, while the remainder were evenly divided between preferring menu-

driven and search-driven discovery. While OSU Libraries does not currently provide links to any 

specific apps for source discovery, such as PubMed Mobile or JSTOR Browser, 13 (62 percent) of 

the HMSC respondents indicated they would be somewhat or very likely to use an app to access 

and use library services. This finding connects to the issue of reliable wireless access. Medical 

graduate students had a wider array of apps available to them, but the primary reason they 

wanted to use these apps was because they provided a better searching experience in hospitals 

that had intermittent wireless access—an experience to which researchers at HMSC could relate.32 

University Website Use Behaviors on Mobile Devices 

To help situate respondents’ library use behaviors on mobile devices in comparison to the way 

they use other academic resources on mobile devices, we asked HMSC respondents to describe 



 

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND LIBRARIES | DECEMBER 2017 

 

17 

their visits to resources on the OSU (nonlibrary) website via mobile devices. Compared to their 

use of the library site on a mobile device, respondents’ use of university services was higher: 43 

percent (9 respondents) visited the university’s website via a mobile device at least once a week 

compared to only 9 percent (2 respondents) who visited the library site with that frequency. This 

makes sense because of the integral function many of these university services play in most 

university employees’ regular workflow. Respondents indicated visiting key university sites 

including MyOSU (a portal webpage, visited by 60 percent of respondents), the HMSC webpage 

(55 percent), Canvas (the university’s learning management system, visited by 50 percent of 

respondents), and webmail (45 percent). See Figure 3. 

 

Figure 3. University webpages HMSC respondents access on a mobile device by percent of 

responses. 

University resources such as campus maps, parking locations, and the graduate school website 

were frequently used by this population. The use of the first two makes sense as HMSC users are 

located off-site and need to use maps and parking guidance when they visit the main campus. The 

use of the graduate school website makes sense because the respondents were primarily graduate 

students and graduate school guidelines are a necessary source of information. Interestingly, our 

advanced users are similar to undergraduates in that they primarily read email, information from 

social networking sites, and news on their mobile devices.33 

Other Research Behaviors on Mobile Devices 



 

MOBILE WEBSITE USE AND ADVANCED RESEARCHERS | MARKLAND, REMPEL, AND BRIDGES 
doi:10.6017/ital.v36i4.9953 

18 

We wanted to know what other research-related behaviors the HMSC respondents are engaged in 

via mobile devices to determine if there might be additional ways to support researchers’ 

workflows. We specifically asked about respondents’ reading, writing, and note-taking behaviors 

to learn how well these respondents have integrated them with their mobile usage behaviors. All 

respondents reported reading on their mobile device (see Figure 4). Email represented the most 

common reading activity (95 percent), followed by “quick reading” activities, such as reading 

social networking posts (81 percent), current news (81 percent), and blog posts (62 percent). 

Smaller numbers used their mobile devices for academic or long-form reading, such as reading 

scholarly articles (33 percent) or books (19 percent). Of those respondents who read articles and 

books on their mobile devices, only respondents highlighted or took notes using their mobile 

device. Seven respondents used a citation manager on their mobile device: three used EndNote, 

one used Mendeley, one used Pages, and one used Zotero. One respondent used Evernote on their 

mobile device, and one advanced user reported using specific data and database management 

software, websites, and apps related to their projects. More advanced and interactive mobile-

reading features, such as online spatial landmarks, might be needed before reading scholarly 

articles on mobile devices becomes more common.34 

 

Figure 4. What HMSC respondents reported reading on a mobile device by percent of responses. 

LIMITATIONS 

This exploratory study had several limitations, most of which reflect the nature of doing research 

with a small population at a branch campus. This study had a small sample size, which limited 

observations of this population; however, future studies could use research techniques such as 

interviews or ethnographic studies to gather deep qualitative information about mobile-use 

19%

33%

62%

81%

81%

95%

0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 120%

Books

Academic or scholarly articles

Blog posts

Current news

Social networking posts (Facebook, Twitter, etc.)

Email

Percent of Responses



 

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND LIBRARIES | DECEMBER 2017 

 

19 

behaviors in this population. A second limitation was that previous studies of the OSU Libraries 

mobile website used Google Analytics to compare survey results with what users were actually 

doing on the library website. Unfortunately, this was not possible for this study. Because of how 

HMSC’s network was set up, anyone at HMSC using the OSU internet connections is assigned an IP 

address that shows a Corvallis, Oregon, location rather than a Newport, Oregon, location, which 

rendered parsing HMSC-specific users in Google Analytics impossible. The research behaviors of 

advanced researchers at a branch campus has not been well-examined; despite its limitations, this 

study provides beneficial insights into the behaviors of this user population. 

CONCLUSION 

Focusing on how advanced researchers at a branch campus use mobile devices while accessing 

library and other campus information provides a snapshot of key trends among this user group. 

These exploratory findings show that these advanced researchers are infrequent users of library 

resources via mobile devices and, contrary to our initial expectations, are not using mobile devices 

as a research resource while conducting field-based research. Findings showed that while these 

advanced researchers do periodically use the library website via mobile devices, mobile devices 

are not the primary mode of searching for articles and books or for reading scholarly sources. 

Mobile devices are most frequently used for viewing the library website when these advanced 

researchers are at home or in transit.  

The results of this survey will be used to address the HMSC knowledge gaps around use of library 

resources and research tools via mobile devices. Both graduate students and faculty lack 

awareness of library resources and services and have unsophisticated library research skills.35  

While the OSU main campus has library workshops for graduate students and faculty, these 

workshops have been inconsistently duplicated at the Guin Library. Because the people working at 

HMSC come from such a wide variety of departments across OSU that focus on marine sciences, 

HMSC has never had a library orientation. The results indicate possible value in devising ways to 

promote Guin Library’s resources and services locally, which could include highlighting the 

availability of mobile library access. While several participants mentioned using research tools 

like Evernote, Pages, or Zotero on their mobile devices, most participants did not report enhancing 

their mobile research experience with these mobile-friendly tools. Workshops specifically 

modeling how to use mobile-friendly tools and apps such as Dropbox, Evernote, GoodReader, or 

Browzine could help introduce the benefits of these tools to these advanced researchers.  

Because wireless access is even more of a concern for researchers at this branch location than for 

researchers at the main campus, database-specific apps will be explored to determine if the use of 

searching apps could help alleviate inconsistent wireless access. If database apps that are 

appropriate for marine science researchers are available, these will be promoted to this user 

population. 

Future research might involve follow-up interviews or focus groups, ethnographic studies, or 

interviews, which could expand the knowledge of these researchers’ mobile-device behaviors and 



 

MOBILE WEBSITE USE AND ADVANCED RESEARCHERS | MARKLAND, REMPEL, AND BRIDGES 
doi:10.6017/ital.v36i4.9953 

20 

their perceptions of mobile devices. Exploring the technology usage by these advanced 

researchers in their labs, including electronic lab notebooks or other tools, might be an interesting 

contrast to their use of mobile devices. In addition, as the HMSC campus grows with the expansion 

of the Marine Studies Initiative, increasing numbers of undergraduates will use Guin Library. The 

ECAR 2015 statistics show that current undergraduates own multiple internet-capable devices.36 

Presumably, these HMSC undergraduates will be likely to follow the trends seen in the ECAR data. 

Certainly, the plans to expand HMSC’s internet and wireless infrastructure will affect all its users.  

Our mobile survey gave us insights into how a sample of the HMSC population uses the library’s 

resources and services. These observations will allow Guin Library to expand its services for the 

HMSC campus. We encourage other librarians to explore their unique user populations when 

evaluating services and resources. 

REFERENCES 
 

1 Maria Anna Jankowska, “Identifying University Professors’ Information Needs in the Challenging 

Environment of Information and Communication Technologies,” Journal of Academic Librarianship 

30, no. 1 (2004): 51–66, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jal.2003.11.007; Pali U. Kuruppu and Anne 

Marie Gruber, “Understanding the Information Needs of Academic Scholars in Agricultural and 

Biological Sciences,” Journal of Academic Librarianship 32, no. 6 (2006): 609–23; Lotta Haglund 

and Per Olsson, “The Impact on University Libraries of Changes in Information Behavior among 

Academic Researchers: A Multiple Case Study,” Journal of Academic Librarianship 34, no. 1 (2008): 

52–59, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2007.11.010; Nirmala Gunapala, “Meeting the Needs of 

the ‘Invisible University’: Identifying Information Needs of Postdoctoral Scholars in the Sciences,” 

Issues in Science and Technology Librarianship, no. 77 (Summer 2014), 

https://doi.org/10.5062/F4B8563P. 

2 Tina Chrzastowski and Lura Joseph, “Surveying Graduate and Professional Students’ 

Perspectives on Library Services, Facilities and Collections at the University of Illinois at Urbana-

Champaign: Does Subject Discipline Continue to Influence Library Use?,” Issues in Science and 

Technology Librarianship no. 45 (Winter 2006), https://doi.org/10.5062/F4DZ068J; Kuruppu and 

Gruber, “Understanding the Information Needs of Academic Scholars in Agricultural and Biological 

Sciences”; Haglund and Olsson, “The Impact on University Libraries of Changes in Information 

Behavior Among Academic Researchers.” 

3 Ellyssa Kroski, “On the Move with the Mobile Web: Libraries and Mobile Technologies,” Library 

Technology Reports 44, no. 5 (2008): 1–48, https://doi.org/10.5860/ltr.44n5. 

4 Paula Torres-Pérez, Eva Méndez-Rodríguez, and Enrique Orduna-Malea, “Mobile Web Adoption 

in Top Ranked University Libraries: A Preliminary Study,” Journal of Academic Librarianship 42, 

no. 4 (2016): 329–39, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2016.05.011. 

5 David J. Comeaux, “Web Design Trends in Academic Libraries—A Longitudinal Study,” Journal of 

Web Librarianship 11, no. 1 (2017), 1–15, https://doi.org/10.1080/19322909.2016.1230031; 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jal.2003.11.007
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2007.11.010
https://doi.org/10.5062/F4B8563P
https://doi.org/10.5062/F4DZ068J
https://doi.org/10.5860/ltr.44n5
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2016.05.011
https://doi.org/10.1080/19322909.2016.1230031


 

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND LIBRARIES | DECEMBER 2017 

 

21 

 

Zebulin Evelhoch, “Mobile Web Site Ease of Use: An Analysis of Orbis Cascade Alliance Member 

Web Sites,” Journal of Web Librarianship 10, no. 2 (2016): 101–23, 

https://doi.org/10.1080/19322909.2016.1167649. 

6 Barbara Blummer and Jeffrey M. Kenton, “Academic Libraries’ Mobile Initiatives and Research 

from 2010 to the Present: Identifying Themes in the Literature,” in Handbook of Research on 

Mobile Devices and Applications in Higher Education Settings, ed. Laura Briz-Ponce, Juan Juanes-

Méndez, and José Francisco García-Peñalvo (Hershey, PA: IGI Global, 2016), 118–39. 

7 Jankowska, “Identifying University Professors’ Information Needs in the Challenging 

Environment of Information and Communication Technologies.” 

8 Chrzastowski and Joseph, “Surveying Graduate and Professional Students’ Perspectives on 

Library Services, Facilities and Collections at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.” 

9 Carole A. George et al., “Scholarly Use of Information: Graduate Students’ Information Seeking 

Behaviour,” Information Research 11, no. 4 (2006), http://www.informationr.net/ir/11-

4/paper272.html. 

10 Kristin Hoffman et al., “Library Research Skills: A Needs Assessment for Graduate Student 

Workshops,” Issues in Science and Technology Librarianship 53 (Winter-Spring 2008), 

https://doi.org/10.5062/F48P5XFC; Hannah Gascho Rempel and Jeanne Davidson, “Providing 

Information Literacy Instruction to Graduate Students through Literature Review Workshops,” 

Issues in Science and Technology Librarianship 53 (Winter-Spring 2008), 

https://doi.org/10.5062/F44X55RG. 

11 Jankowska, “Identifying University Professors’ Information Needs in the Challenging 

Environment of Information and Communication Technologies.” 

12 Ka Po Lau et al., “Educational Usage of Mobile Devices: Differences Between Postgraduate and 

Undergraduate Students,” Journal of Academic Librarianship 43, no. 3 (May 2017), 201–8, 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2017.03.004. 

13 Noa Aharony, “Mobile Libraries: Librarians’ and Students’ Perspectives,” College & Research 

Libraries 75, no. 2 (2014): 202–17, https://doi.org/10.5860/crl12-415. 

14 Hannah Gashco Rempel and Laurie M. Bridges, “That Was Then, This Is Now: Replacing the 

Mobile-Optimized Site with Responsive Design,” Information Technology and Libraries 32, no. 4 

(2013): 8–24, https://doi.org/10.6017/ital.v32i4.4636. 

15 Paula Barnett-Ellis and Charlcie Pettway Vann, “The Library Right There in My Hand: 

Determining User Needs for Mobile Services at a Medium-Sized Regional University,” Southeastern 

Librarian 62, no. 2 (2014): 10–15. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/19322909.2016.1167649
http://www.informationr.net/ir/11-4/paper272.html
http://www.informationr.net/ir/11-4/paper272.html
https://doi.org/10.5062/F48P5XFC
https://doi.org/10.5062/F44X55RG
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2017.03.004
https://doi.org/10.5860/crl12-415
https://doi.org/10.6017/ital.v32i4.4636


 

MOBILE WEBSITE USE AND ADVANCED RESEARCHERS | MARKLAND, REMPEL, AND BRIDGES 
doi:10.6017/ital.v36i4.9953 

22 

 
16 William T. Caniano and Amy Catalano, “Academic Libraries and Mobile Devices: User and 

Reader Preferences,” Reference Librarian 55, no. 4 (2014), 298–317, 

https://doi.org/10.1080/02763877.2014.929910. 

17 Haglund and Olsson, “The Impact on University Libraries of Changes in Information Behavior 

Among Academic Researchers.” 

18 Kuruppu and Gruber, “Understanding the Information Needs of Academic Scholars in 

Agricultural and Biological Sciences.” 

19 Christine Wolff, Alisa B. Rod, and Roger C. Schonfeld, “Ithaka S+R US Faculty Survey 2015,” 

Ithaka S+R, April 4, 2016, http://www.sr.ithaka.org/publications/ithaka-sr-us-faculty-survey-

2015/. 

20 M. Macedo-Rouet et al., “How Do Scientists Select Articles in the PubMed Database? An 

Empirical Study of Criteria and Strategies,” Revue Européenne de Psychologie Appliquée/European 

Review of Applied Psychology 62, no. 2 (2012): 63–72. 

21 Rempel and Bridges, “That Was Then, This Is Now.” 

22 Ellie Bushhousen et al., “Smartphone Use at a University Health Science Center,” Medical 

Reference Services Quarterly 32, no. 1 (2013): 52–72, 

https://doi.org/10.1080/02763869.2013.749134. 

23 Jill T. Boruff and Dale Storie, “Mobile Devices in Medicine: A Survey of How Medical Students, 

Residents, and Faculty Use Smartphones and Other Mobile Devices to Find Information,” Journal of 

the Medical Library Association 102, no. 1 (2014): 22–30, https://doi.org/10.3163/1536-

5050.102.1.006. 

24 Bushhousen et al., “Smartphone Use at a University Health Science Center”; Boruff and Storie, 

“Mobile Devices in Medicine.” 

25 Eden Dahlstrom et al., “ECAR Study of Students and Information Technology, 2015 ," research 

report, EDUCAUSE Center for Analysis and Research, 2015, 

https://library.educause.edu/~/media/files/library/2015/8/ers1510ss.pdf?la=en. 

26 Ibid., 24. 

27 Lutishoor Salisbury, Jozef Laincz, and Jeremy J. Smith, “Science and Technology Undergraduate 

Students’ Use of the Internet, Cell Phones and Social Networking Sites to Access Library 

Information,” Issues in Science and Technology Librarianship 69 (Spring 2012), 

https://doi.org/10.5062/F4SB43PD. 

28 Rempel and Bridges, “That Was Then, This Is Now.” 

29 Ibid. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/02763877.2014.929910
http://www.sr.ithaka.org/publications/ithaka-sr-us-faculty-survey-2015/
http://www.sr.ithaka.org/publications/ithaka-sr-us-faculty-survey-2015/
https://doi.org/10.1080/02763869.2013.749134
https://doi.org/10.3163/1536-5050.102.1.006
https://doi.org/10.3163/1536-5050.102.1.006
https://library.educause.edu/~/media/files/library/2015/8/ers1510ss.pdf?la=en
https://doi.org/10.5062/F4SB43PD


 

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND LIBRARIES | DECEMBER 2017 

 

23 

 
30  “Mobile/Tablet Operating System Market Share,” NetMarketShare, March 2017, 

https://www.netmarketshare.com/operating-system-market-share.aspx?qprid=8&qpcustomd=1. 

31 Boruff and Storie, “Mobile Devices in Medicine”; Patrick Lo et al., “Use of Smartphones by Art 

and Design Students for Accessing Library Services and Learning,” Library Hi Tech 34, no. 2 

(2016): 224–38, https://doi.org/10.1108/LHT-02-2016-0015. 

32 Boruff and Storie, “Mobile Devices in Medicine.” 

33 Dahlstrom et al., “ECAR Study of Students and Information Technology, 2015.” 

34 Caroline Myrberg and Ninna Wiberg, “Screen vs. Paper: What Is the Difference for Reading and 

Learning?” Insights 28, no. 2 (2015): 49–54, https://doi.org/10.1629/uksg.236. 

35 Barnett-Ellis and Vann, “The Library Right There in My Hand”; Haglund and Olsson, “The Impact 

on University Libraries of Changes in Information Behavior Among Academic Researchers”; 

Hoffman et al., “Library Research Skills”; Kuruppu and Gruber, “Understanding the Information 

Needs of Academic Scholars in Agricultural and Biological Sciences”; Lau et al., “Educational Usage 

of Mobile Devices”; Macedo-Rouet et al., “How Do Scientists Select Articles in the PubMed 

Database?” 

36 Dahlstrom et al., “ECAR Study of Students and Information Technology, 2015.” 

https://www.netmarketshare.com/operating-system-market-share.aspx?qprid=8&qpcustomd=1
https://doi.org/10.1108/LHT-02-2016-0015
https://doi.org/10.1629/uksg.236

	ABSTRACT
	INTRODUCTION
	LITERATURE REVIEW
	METHODS
	RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
	Participant Demographics and Devices Used
	Frequency of Library Site Use on Mobile Devices
	Where Researchers Are When Using Mobile Devices for Library Tasks
	Library Resources Accessed via Mobile Devices
	University Website Use Behaviors on Mobile Devices
	Other Research Behaviors on Mobile Devices
	LIMITATIONS
	CONCLUSION
	REFERENCES

