
Editorial Board Thoughts: 
Reinvesting in Our Traditional 
Personnel Through Knowledge 
Sharing and Training Mark Dehmlow 

 

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND LIBRARIES | DECEMBER 2017 4 

 

Mark Dehmlow (mdehmlow@nd.edu) is a member of the ITAL Editorial Board and Director of 
Library Information Technology, Hesburgh Library, University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana.  

Lately I have been giving a lot of thought to how those of us in technology positions can extend our 
impact throughout our organizations. With finite budgets and time and relatively low personnel 
turnover, I have realized that the solution goes beyond merely finding ways that technology can 
optimize workflows through automation. I have been working in academic library technology for 
nearly 20 years and when I began my career, virtually all areas of technology required specialized 
staff – from supporting general computer applications to managing the technical infrastructure 
that underlay our core systems. These days, technology is still a specialty, but the function of 
technicians has become more focused on providing infrastructure and much of the general 
application support we used to provide has become ubiquitous and has become an expectation of 
almost all library positions. Managing email, creating specialized formulas for data analysis, 
navigating operating systems, even developing basic databases, are now regular parts of library 
work. The trend of technological infusion will continue but instead of general technical tasks, 
almost all new library positions will require deeper technical skills. This is due, in part, to the 
function of knowledge work becoming more specialized as libraries focus on the areas where they 
can create the most value and those new domains require more technical expertise to be effective.  

Perhaps the most striking example of this evolution is in the transition of catalogers to metadata 
specialists. The days of working with a single metadata format (MARC) in a single, tabular 
interface (catalog) are quickly slipping away and being replaced by metadata structured in 
multiple complex schemes, expressed in formats like XML and JSON. Instead of acquiring data 
from OCLC, libraries need to work with web-based APIs to harvest metadata. And the tools for 
manipulation require basic programming skills in languages like Python or working with open 
source applications that look little like the integrated library systems we are used to. Working 
with these tools can enable metadata experts to customize metadata at scale, but it requires new 
knowledge and even new ways of thinking about metadata and metadata manipulation. Cataloging 
isn’t the only position undergoing change in academic libraries, either. Acquisitions is pushing 
toward greater automation and patron driven selection. The catalog is becoming more like a 
bookstore and the discovery landscape includes a panoply of resources that are purchased only at 
the point a user clicks on a link to a resource. Acquisitions is also occurring at larger scale, and 
requiring the ability to work with thousands of items in a batch, to select based on the qualities of 
what libraries want to make available, to analyze usage trends, and to load, update, and remove 
metadata as quickly from our discovery environment as possible. The tools to accomplish this are 
similar to those for metadata. Beyond technical services, we’re beginning to see the role of the 
subject selector transition from building broad disciplinary collections toward a focus on  curation 



 

EDITORIAL BOARD THOUGHTS | DEHMLOW 5 
https://doi.org/10.6017/ital.v36i4.10239 

of specialized collections requiring digitization and digital curation. The tools to accomplish this 
are digital asset management systems and web-based digital exhibition tools which are 
specialized content management systems. Subject selectors are transforming into digital content 
creators and managers. 

Technologically-driven change regularly outpaces generational personnel turnover in libraries, 
and given that technological change continues to grow exponentially, it is clear we need a flexible 
workforce and an organizational commitment to training and professional growth. While 
organizations are rewriting positions to include technical skills, we will always have a 
preponderance of staff that started their careers in libraries with depreciating skillsets. Merely 
directing staff to webinars, conferences and self-driven development isn’t enough. Multi-day 
workshops are great as long as there are opportunities to apply learning upon returning to work. 
To guarantee skill retention, sustained training needs to be directed towards the specific skills 
needed now and based in actual work, not just theoretical exercises. The challenge, then, becomes 
how to implement such a program and identifying who can provide the necessary training. How 
can specialization be disseminated to non-specialists? Many libraries have some of the needed 
resources close at hand, even if staffing is thin and technical resources scarce. It requires thinking 
a bit pragmatically to reuse the resources libraries do have, and for technologists to evolve with 
demands as well, transitioning our roles from technology experts alone to a hybrid of 
practitioners, teachers, and enablers. 

Teaching is, itself, a specialty and many IT professionals are unlikely to have developed that 
skillset. Most libraries, though, have staff who do have experience and expertise in training and 
pedagogy. Evolving towards in-sourced technology development will undoubtedly require IT staff 
to first learn effective teaching methods and basic curricula development. They will need a 
framework to take a set of specific skills and build ad-hoc courses with medium range learning 
objectives. Teaching can occur in the context of actual work scenarios so that learning is put to 
practical use as part of that training, and skills retention improved. Libraries can become labs for 
cross-training and knowledge sharing through leveraging our teachers and technologists in 
interdisciplinary partnerships and collaboration with a focus on internal growth so that library 
organizations can meet continuously changing demands. 

Once staff have been trained in new technical areas, there is another opportunity for IT 
professionals to extend their impact, by dividing technology-driven projects into the parts that 
require deep technical work and the parts that require transferable technical skills. If 
technologists start looking at ways to implement technical solutions in componentized ways 
instead of as end-to-end solutions, they have the opportunity to empower newly trained staff to 
contribute in practical ways through building solution foundations and then delegating 
configurable application inputs. As an example – developing a full application stack requires 
considerable programming skill, but learning to create and update extensible stylesheets to 
transform XML-based metadata is a teachable skill. IT professionals could develop applications 
that take a configuration file and an XSL file as inputs while staff with XSLT training can modify the 
configuration to include parameters for connecting to APIs or loading XML. Trained staff could 
then modify the XSL to transform data to their specifications without having to pass the task back 
to the IT professional.  



 

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND LIBRARIES | DECEMBER 2017 6 

 

Moving toward more holistic technology capability in libraries will require all personnel to be 
committed to evolving to meet the emerging needs of our organizations – IT professionals 
included. For decades, technologists have been in the privileged position of having the necessary 
skills to advance the profession’s digital future, but it will be important for technologists in 
libraries to integrate the many valuable skills other personnel can offer so that they also can 
evolve in ways that best support our organizations – leveraging foundational library skills to 
enhance overall organizational capacity to accomplish tasks that are increasingly requiring 
technical expertise. 

I won’t pretend it will be easy. It will require libraries to prioritize organizationally-led training, 
even amidst the flurry of demands around us, but I think it is also critical to the future of the 
profession, and the old adage that winter pays for summer feels apropos here. Technologists will 
need to be open to incorporating foundational library skills, to collaborating and learning from 
other library specialists, to thinking of their positions more broadly, and, for those who live in 
ivory towers (you know who you are), to eliminating the silos they’ve built and collaborate, 
cooperate, and engage. Technologists are an important part of library ecosystems with what we 
contribute operationally, but I think we can have a greater impact if we propagate our knowledge 
in an effort to increase the profession’s overall technology capacity and become agents to support 
knowledge workers’ future skill development.  


