MEDITATIONS and Vows , Divine and Moral . 

Serving For direction in Christian and Civil practice . 

Divided into two Books . 

By Jos . Hall.  

AT LONDON Printed by Humphrey Lownes , for john Porter . 

1605.  

Votum Authoris . 

Qvas ego non vano deprompsi e pectore leges , 
Quaeque ego vota tuli pacis honesta meae . 
Alme Deus ( nec enim sine te vovisse inhabit , 
Te sine nil facio , nil fugio sine te ) 
Da placide seruem , & praesta seruando quietem , 
Sic mihi certa salus , sic mihi sancta quies . 
To the Right Worshipful Sir Robert Drury , Knight , my singular good Patron . All increase of true Ho●or a●d Virtue . 

Sir , that I have made these my homely Aphorisms public , needs n● other reason ; but that , though the world is furnished with other writings , eu●n to satiety and surfeit : yet , of these , which reduce Christianity to practise , there is ( at least ) scarcity enough : wherein ( yet ) I must needs confess , I had some eye to myself ; for ( having after a sort vowed this austere course of judgement and practice to myself ) I thought it best to acquaint the world with it , that it might either witness my answerable proceeding , or check me in my straying therefrom : by which means , so many men as I live amongst , so many monitors I shall have , which shall point me to my own rules , and upbraid me with my aberrations . Why I have dedicated them to your name , cannot be strange to any , that knows you , my Patron ; and me , your Pastor : the regard of which bond , easily drew me on to consider , that whereas my body , which was ever weak , began of ●ate to languish more ; it would be not in-expedient ( at the worst ) to leave behind me this little monument of that great respect , which I ( deservedly ) bear you : And i● it shall please GOD to reprieve me , until a longer day ; yet●●t shall not repent me , to have sent this unworthy scroll , to wait upon you , in your necessary absences ; neither shall it be ( I hope ) bootless for you , to adjoine these my mean speculations , unto those grounds of virtue , you have so happily laid : to which , if they shall add but one scruple , it shall be to me sufficient joy , contentment , recompense . 

From your Halsted . Dec. 4.  Your Worships humbly devoted JOS . HALL. . 

The first Book , containing a full Centurie of Meditations and Vows , both Divine and Moral . 

1.  

IN Meditation , those , which begin heavenly thoughts , & prosecute them not , are like those , which kindle a fire under green wood , and leave it , so soon as it but begins to flame : losing the hope of a good beginning , for want of seconding it with a suitable proceeding : when I set myself to meditate , I will not give over , till I come to an issue . It hath been said by some , that the beginning is as much as the midst ; yea , more them all : but I say , the ending is more them the beginning . 

2 There is nothing ( but Man ) that respecteth greatness : Not God , not Nature , not Disease , not Death , not judgement : Not God , he is no accepter of persons : Not nature , we see the sons of Princes born as naked , as the poorest ; and the poor child as fair , welfavored strong , witty , as the heir of nobles : Not disease , death , judgement , they sicken alike , die alike , fare alike after death : There is nothing ( besides natural men ) of whom goodness is not respected : I will honour greatness in others , but for myself , I will esteem a dran of goodness , worth a whole world of greatness . 

3 As there is a foolish wisdom : so there is a wise ignorance , in not prying into God's Ark : not enquiring into things not revealed . I would fain know all that I need , and all that I may : I leave God's secrets to himself . It is happy for me , that God makes me of his Court , though not of his Counsel . 

4.  

As there is no vacuity in nature , no more is there spiritually : Every vessel is full , if not of liquor , yet of air ; so is the hart of man : though ( by nature ) it is empty of grace , yet it is full of hypocrisy and iniquity . Now , as it filleth with grace , so it is emptied of his evil qualities . As in a vessel , so much water as goes in , so much air goes out : but man's heart is a narrow-mouthed vessel , and receives grace but by drops ; and therefore asks a long time to empty and fill . Now , as there be differences in degrees , and one hart is nearer to fullness then an other : so , the best vessel is not quite full , while it is in the body , because there are still remainders of corruption : I will neither be content with that measure of grace I have , nor impatient of God's delay : But every day I will endeavour to have one drop added to the rest , so my last day shall fill up my vessel to the brim . 

5 

Satan would seem to be mannerly & reasonable , making , as i● he would be content with one half of the hart , whereas God challengeth all or none : as ( indeed ) he hath most reason to claim all , that made all : But this is nothing , but a crafty fetch of Satan , for he knows , that if he have any part , God will have none ; so , the whole falleth to his share alone . My heart ( when it is both whole , & at the best ) is but a straight & unwoorthy lodging for God ; if it were bigger & betters I would rescrue it all for him . Satan may look in at my doors by a temptation , but he shall not have so much as one chamber-room setapart , for him to sojourn in . 

6 

I see , that in natural motions , the nearer any thing comes to his end , the swifter it moveth . I have seen great rivers , which at their first rising out of some hills side , might be covered with a bushel , which , after many miles , fill a very broad channel ; & drawing near to the Sea , do even make a little Sea in their own banks : So , the wind at the first rising , as a little vapour from the crannies of the earth , and passing forward about the earth , the further it goes , the more blustering and violent it waxeth ; a Christians motion ( after he is regenerate ) is made natural to Godward ; and therefore , the nearer he comes to Heaven , the more zealous he is . A good man must be like the Sun ; not like Ezechias Sun , that went backward , nor like josuahs' Sun , that stood still , but David's Sun , that ( like a Bridegroom ) comes out of his chamber ; and as a Champion rejoiceth to runn● his race : only , herein is the difference , that when he comes to his high noon , he declineth not . How ever therefore , the mind ( in her natural faculties ) follows the temperature of the body , yet in these supernatural things she quite crosses it , for with the coldest complexion of age , is joined in those that are truly religious , the feruentest zeal and affection to good things : which is therefore the more reverenced , and better acknowledged , because it cannot be ascribed to the hot spirits of youth . The devil himself devised that old slander of ●arly holiness ; A young Saint , an old Devil : sometimes young Devils have proved old Saints ; never the contrary ; but true Saints in youth , do always prove Angels in their age . I will strive to be ever good , but if I should not find myself best at last , I should fear I was never good at all . 

7 

Consent hartneth sin , which a little dislike would have daunted at first ; As we say , there would be no thieves , if no receivers : so would there not be so many open mouths to detract and slander , if there were not as many open ears to entertain them . If I cannot stop other men's mouths from speaking ill● I will either open my mouth to reprove it , or else I will stop mine ears from hearing it ; & let him see in my face , that he hath no room in my heart . 

8 

I have oft wondered how fishes can retain their fresh taste , and yet live in salt waters ; since I see that every other thing participates of the nature of the place , wherein it abides : so , the waters passing through the channels of the earth , vary their savour with the vennes of soil , through which they slide : So , brute creatures transported from one Region to another , alter their former quality , & degenerate by little and little . The like danger have I seen in the manners of men , conversing with evil companions , in corrupt places : For , besides that , it blemisheth our reputation , and makes us thought ill , though we be good ; it breeds in us an insensible declination to ill ; and works in us , if not an approbation , yet a less dislike of those sins , to which , our ears & eyes are so continually enured . I may have a bad acquaintance , I will never have a wicked companion . 

9 

Expectation in a weak mind , makes an evil , greater ; and a good , less : but in a resolved mind , it digests an evil , before it come , and makes a future good , long before , present . I will expect the worst , because it may come the best , because I know it will come . 

10 

Some promise what they cannot do , as Satan to Christ ; some , what they could , but mean not to do , as the Sons of jacob to the Shechemites : some , what they meant for the time , and after retrayt , as Laban to jacob ; some , what they do also give , but unwillingly , as H●rod ; some , what they willingly give , and after repent them , as joshu● to the Gibeonites . So great distrust is there in man , whether from his impotence or faithlesness as in other things , so in this , I see God is not like man : but what ever he promises , he approves himself most faithful , both in his ability and performances : I will therefore ever trust God on his bare word , even with hope , besides hope , above hope , against hope : and onwards , I will rely on him for small matters of this life : for how shall I hope to trust him in impossibilities , if I may not in likelihoods ? how shall I depend on him , for raising my body from dust , and saving my soul ; if I mistrust him for a crust of bread , towards my preservation . 

11 

If the world would make me his Minions he could give me but what he hath : and what hath he to give ? but a smoke of honour , a shadow of riches , a sound of pleasures , a blast of fame ; which , when I have had in the best measure ; I may be worse ; I cannot be better : I can live no whit longer , no whit merrier , no whit happier . If he profess to hate me , what can he do but disgrace me in my name , impoverish me in my state , afflict me in my body ? in all which , it is easy , not to be ever the more miserable : I have been too long beguiled with the vain semblances of it : Now henceforth accounting myself born to a better world , I will in an holy loftiness , bear myself as one too good to be enamoured of the best pleasures , to be daunted with the greatest miseries of this life . 

12 

I see there is no man so happy , as to have all things , and no man so miserable , as not to have some ; Why should I look for a better condition , than all others ? If I have somewhat , and that of the best things , I will in thankfulness enjoy them , and want the rest with contentment . 

13 

Constraint makes an easy thing toilesom , whereas again , love makes the greatest toil , pleasant : How many miles do we ride & run , to see one silly beast follow another , with pleasure : which , if we were commanded to measure upon the charge of a superior , we should complain of weariness . I see the folly of the most men , that make their lives miserable , and their actions tedious , for want of love to that , they must do : I will first labour to ●ettle in my heart a good affection to heavenly things ; so , Lord , thy yoke shall be easy , and thy burden light . 

14 

I am a stranger even at home , therefore if the dogs of the world bark at me , I neither care , no● wonder . 

15 

It is the greatest madness in the world , to be an hypocrite in religious profession : Men hate thee , because thou art a Christian , so much as in appearance : God hate's thee double , because thou art but in appearace : so , while thou hast the hatred of both , thou hast no comfort in thyself : Yet if thou wilt not be good , as thou seemest ; I hold it better to seem ill as thou art : An open wicked man doth much hurt with notorioussinnes , but an hypocrite doth at last more shame goodness , by seeming good ; I had rather be an open wicked man , than an hypocrite , but I had rather be no man , then either of them . 

16 

When I cast down mine eyes upon my wants , upon my sins , upon my miseries ; me thinks no man should be worse , no man so ill as I ; my means so many , so forceable , and almost violent ; my progress so small , and insensible ; my corruptions so strong , my infirmities so frequent , and remediless ; my body so unaunswerab●e to my mind . But when I look up to the blesinges that GOD hath enriched me with all , me thinks I should soon be● induced to think none more happy than myself : God is my friend , and my Father : the world not my Master , but my slave : I have friends , not many , but so tried , that I dare trust them . An estate not superfluous , not needy : yet nearer to defect , than abundance : A calling , if despised of men , yet honourable with God : A body not so strong , as to admit security , but often checking me in occasion of pleasure : nor yet so weak , as to afflict me continually : A mind not so furnished with knowledge , that I may boast of it ; nor yet so naked , that I should despair of obtaining it : My miseries afford me joy , mine enemy's advantage ; my account is cast up for another world : And if thou think , I have said too much good of myself , either I am thus , or I would be . 

17 

The worldlings life is ( of all other ) most uncomfortable , for that which is his God , doth not always favour him , that which should be , never . 

18 

There are three messengers of death : Casualty , Sickness , Age : The two first are doubtful , since many have recovered them both ; the last is certain : The two first are sudden , the last leisurely and deliberate : As for all men upon so many summons , so , especially for an old man , it is a shame to be unprepared for death : For , where other see they may die , he sees he must die . I was long ago old enough to die , but if I live till age , I will think myself too old to live longer . 

19 

I will not care what I have , whether much or little 〈◊〉 If little , my account shall be the less ; If more , I shall do the more good , and receive the more glory . 

20 

I care not for any companion , but such as may teach me somewhat , or learn somewhat of me . Both these shall much pleasure me ; one as an agent , the other as an subject to work upon , neither know I whether more ; for though it be an excellent thing to learn , yet I learn but to teach others . 

21 

If earth ( that is provided for mortality , and is possessed by the Maker's enemies ) have so much pleasure in it ; that Worldlings think it worth the account of their heaven : such a Sun to enlighten it , such an heaven to wall it about , such sweet fruits and flowers to adorn it , such variety of creatures , for the commodious use of it : What must heaven needs be , that is provided for God himself , & his friends : How can it be less in worth , than God is above his creatures , and Gods friends better , than his enemies . I will not only be content , but desirous to be dissolved . 

22 

It is commonly s●ene , that boldness puts men forth before their time , before their ability . Wherein , we have seen many that ( like Lapwings , and Partridges ) have run away with some part of their shell on their heads : Whence it follows , that as they began boldly , so they proceed unprofitably , and conclude not without shame : I would rather be haled by force of others to great duties , them rush upon them unbidden : It were better a man should want work , than that great worke● should want a man answerable to their weight . 

23 

I will use my friends , as Moses did his rod ; While it was a rod , he held it familiarly in his hand ; when once a Serpent , he ran away from it . 

24 

I have seldom seen much ostentation ; and much learning met together : The Sun rising and declining , makes long shadows , at midday when he is at highest , none at all : Besides , that skill when it is too much shown , loses the grace , as fresh-coloured wares , if they be often opened , lose their brightness , and are soiled with much handling : I had rather , applaud my self for having much , that I show not : then that others should applaud me , for showing more , than I have . 

25 

An ambitious man is the greatest enemy to himself , of any in the world besides . For he still torments himself with hopes , and desirest an cares , which he might avoid , if he would remit of the height of his thoughts ; and live quietly . My only ambition shall be to be in God's favour on earth , & to be a Saint in heaven . 

26 

There was never good thing easily come by : The heathen man could say , God sells knowledge for sweat , and so , he doth honour for jeopardy : Never any man hath got either wealth , or learning with ease● Therefore , the greatest good must needs be most difficult . How shall I hope to get Christ , if I take no pains for him ; and if in all other things the difficulty of obtaining , whets the mind so much the more to seek , why should it in this alone daunt me , I will not care what I do , what I suffer , s● I may win Christ ; If men can endure such cutting , such lancing , searing of their bodies , to protract a miserable life , yet a while longer ; what pain should I refuse for eternity ? 

27 

I● I die ; the world shall miss me but a little , I shall miss it less ; Not it me , because it hath such store of better men ; Not I it , because it hath so much ill , & I shall have so much happiness . 

28 

Two things make a man set by , Dignity and Desert , amongst fools the first without the second is sufficient : amongst wise men , the second without the first ; Let me deserve well , though I be not advanced . The Conscience of my worth , shall cheer me more in others contempt , than the approbation of others can comfort me● against the secret check of my own unworthiness . 

29 

The best qualities do so cleave to their subjects , that they cannot be communicated to others : For , where patrimony , & vulgar accounted of honour , follow the blood in many generations , virtue is not traduced in propagation , nor learning bequeathed by our will to our heirs : lest the givers should wax proud , and the receivers negligent : I will accounted nothing my own , but what I have gotten ; nor that my own , because it is more of gift than desert . 

30 

then only is the Church most happy , when Truth and Peace kiss each other ; and them miserable , when either of them balk the way , or when they meet and kiss not : For truth without peace is turbulent ; and peace without truth is secure injustice ; though I love peace well , yet I love main truths better ; and though I love all truths well , yet I had rather conceal a small truth , then disturb a common Peace . 

31 

An indiscreet good action , is little better them a discreet mischief , for in this , the doer wrongs only the patient : but in that other , the wrong is done to the good action ; for both it makes a good thing odious ( as many good tales are marred in telling ) & besides , it prejudiced a future opportunity : I will rather let pass a good gale of wind ; and stay still on the shore , then launch forth , when I know the wind will be contrary . 

32 

The world teaches me , that it is madness to leave behind me those goods , that I may carry with me : Christianity teaches me that , what I charitably give alive , I carry with me dead ; and experience teaches me , that what I leave behind I lose ; I will carry that treasure with me by giving it , which the worldling loses by keeping it ; so , while his corpse shall carry nothing but a winding-cloath to his grave , I shall be richer under the earth , them I was above it . 

33 

Every worldling is an hypocrite , for while his face naturally looks upward to heaven , his hart grovels beneath on the earth ; yet if I would admit of any discord in the inward & outward parts ; I would have an heart , that should look up to heaven , in an holy contemplation of the things above , and a countenance cast down to the earth in humiliation ; this only dissimilitude is pleasing to God.  

34 

The heart of man is a short word , a small substance , yet great in capacity , yea , so infinite in desire , that the round Globe of the world cannot fill the three corners of it ; when it desire's more , and cries , Give , Give . I will set it over to that infinite good ; where the more it hath , it may desire more , and see more to be desired ; when it desire's but what it needeth , my hands shall soon satisfy it ; either of which , if it may contain it , when it is without the body , much more may both of them fill it , while it is within . 

35 

With men it is a good rule to try first , and then to trust , with God it is contrary : I will first trust him as most wise , omnipotent , merciful , and try him afterwards : I know it is as impossible for him to deceive me● , as not to be . 

36 

As Christ was both a Lamb and a Lion , so is every Christian : A Lamb for patience in suffering , and innocence of life . A Lion for boldness in his innocence : I would so order my courage and mildness , that I may be neither Lion-like in my conversation , nor sleepish in the defence of a good cause . 

37 

The godly sow in tears , reap in joy : The seede●time is commonly waterish , and louring : I will be content with a wet spring ; so I may be sure of a clear and joyful harvest . 

38 

Every man hath an Heaven and an Hell : Earth is the wicked man's Heaven , his Hell is to come ; On the contrary , the godly have their hell upon earth , where they are vexed with tentations , and afflictions by Satan and his complices ; their heaven is above in endless happiness ; If it be ill with me on earth , it is well my torment is so short , and so easy : I will not be so covetous , to hope for two heavens . 

39 

Man on his Deathbed hath a double prospect , which in his life-time the interposition of pleasure and miseries debarred him from : The good man looks upward , and sees heaven open with Steven , and the glorious Angels ready to carry up his soul . The wicked man looks downward , and sees three terrible spectacles , Death , judgement , Hell , one beyond another ; & all to be passed through by his soul : I marvel not , that the godly have been so cheerful in Death , that those torments , whose very sight hath overcomne the beholders , have seemed easy to them● I marvel not that a wicked man is so loath to hear of death , so dejected , when he feels sickness , and so desperate , when he feels the pangs of death ; nor that every Balaam would fain die the death of the righteous . Henceforth , I will envy none , but a good man ; I will pity nothing so much , as the prosperity of the wicked . 

40 

Not to be afflicted , is a sign of weakness : For therefore God imposes no more on me , because he sees I can bear no more : God will not make choice of a weak Champion's when I am stronger , I will look for more ; And when I sustain more , it shall more comfort me , that God finds me strong , than it shall grieve me , to be pressed with an heavy affliction . 

41 

That the wicked have peace in themselves , is no wonder , they are as sure as Tentation can make them : no Prince makes War with his own Subjects : The godly are still enemies : Therefore , they must look to be assaulted both by Stratagems and violence : Nothing shall more joy me , than my inward unquietnes . A just war is a thousand times more happy than an ill-conditioned Peace . 

42 

Goodness is so powerful , that it can make things simply evil ( namely our sins ) good to us ; not good in nature , but good in the event ; good , when they are done , not good to be done : Sin is so powerful , that it can turn the holiest Ordinances of God in itself : But herein our sins goes beyond our goodness ; that sin defiles a man or action otherwise good ; but all the goodness of the world cannot justify one sin : As the holy ●le●h in the skirt makes not the bread holy that touches it ; but the unclean touching an holy thing , defiles it . I will loathe every evil for it own sake , I will do good but not trust to it . 

43 

Fools measure good actions by the event after they are done : Wise men beforehand by judgement , upon the rules of reason and faith : Let me do well , let God take charge of the success , if it be we●l accepted , it is well . If not , my thank is with God.  

44 

He was never good man , that amends not . For if he were good , he must needs desire to be better . Grace is so sweet , that who ever tastes of it , must needs long after more : and if he desire it , he will endeavour it , and if h●e do but endeavour ; GOD will crown it with success . God's family admits of no Dwarffes ; which are unthriving , and stand at a stay ; but men of measures . What ever become of my body , or my estate ; I will ever labour to find somewhat added to the stature of my soul . 

45 

Pride is the most dangerous of all sins , for both it is most insinuative , having crept into HEAVEN , and Paradise ; and most dangerous where it is : For where all other Tentations are about evil , this alone is conversant only about good things● and one dram of it poisons many measures of grace . I will not be more afraid of doing good things amiss , then of being proud , when I have performed them . 

46 

Not only Commission makes a sin : A man is guilty of all those sins he hates not . If I cannot avoid all , yet I will hate all . 

47 

Prejudice is so great an enemy to truth , that it makes the mind uncapable of it . In matters of faith , I will first lay a sure ground , and then believe , though I cannot argue : holding the conclusion in spite of the premises : but in other less matters , I will not so forestall my mind with resolution , as that I will not be willing to be better informed . Neither will I say in myself ● I will hold it , therefore it shall be truth ; but , This is truth , therefore I will hold it : I will not strive for victory , but for truth . 

48 

Drunkenness and Covetousness do much resemble one another , for the more a man drinks , the more he thirsteth ; and the more he hath , still the more he coveteth : and for their effects , besides other , both of them have the power of transforming a man into a beast , and of all other beasts , into a Swine . The former is evident to sense ; the other , though more obscure , is no more questionable : the covetous man in two things plainly resembles a Swine : That he cuer roots in the earth , not so much as looking towards Heaven : That he never doth good , till his death : In desiring , my rule shall be necessity of nature , or estate ; in having , I will accounted that my good , which doth me good . 

49 

I acknowledge no Master of Requests in Heaven but one , Christ my Mediator : I know I cannot be so happy , as not to need him , nor so miserable , that he should contemn me : I will always ask ; and that of none , but where I am sure to speed , but where there is so much store , that when I have had the most , I shall leave no less behind ; Though numberless drops be in the Sea , yet if one be taken out of it , hath so much the less , though insensibly ; but God , because he is infinite , can admit of no diminution : Therefore are men niggardly , because the more they give , the less they have : but thou , Lord , mayst give what thou wilt , without abatement of thy store : Good prayers never came weeping home ; I am sure I shall receive either what I ask , or what I should ask . 

50 

I see that a fit Booty many times makes a thief , and many would be proud , if they had but the common causes of their neighbours : I accounted this none of the least favours of GOD , That the world goes no better forward with me ; for I fear , if my estate were better to the world , it might be worse to God. As it is an happy necessity that enforces to good , so is that next happy , that hinders from evil . 

51 

It is the basest love of all others that is for a benefit ; for herein we love not another , so much as ourselves : Though there were no Heaven , OH Lord , I would love thee : Now there is one , I will esteem it , I will desire it , yet still will love thee for thy goodness sake ; Thyself is reward enough , though thou broughtest no more . 

52 

I see men point the field , and desperately jeopard their lyves , as prodigal of their blood , in the revenge of a disgraceful word against themselves , while they can be content to hear GOD pulled out of Heaven with blasphemy , and not feel so much as a rising of their blood : Which argues our cold love to God , and our over-seruent affection to ourselves : In my own wrongs , I will hold patience laudable , but in God's injuries , impious . 

53 

It is an hard thing to speak well , but it is harder to be well silent , so as it may be free from suspicion of affectation , or sullenness , or ignorance : Else loquasitie , and not silence , would be a note of wisdom . Herein I will not care how little , but how well ; He said well for this . Not that which is much , is we●l , but that which is well , is much . 

54 

There is nothing more odious , then fruitless old age . Now , for that no Tree bears fruit in Autumn , unless it blossom in the spring ; to the end that my age may be profitable , and laden with ripe fruit I will endeavour , that my youth may be studious , & flowered with the blossoms of learning and observation . 

55 

Revenge commonly hurts both the offerer , and sufferer : as we see in the foolish Bee ( though in a ● other things commendable ) yet herein the pattern of fond spightfulnesse ; which in her anger invenometh the flesh , and loses hersting , and so lives a Drone ever after . I accounted it the only valour to remit a wrong , and will applaud it to myself , as right noble and Christian , that I might hurt , and will not . 

56 

He that lives well , cannot choose but die well ; for if he die suddenly , yet he dies not unpreparedly ; if by leisure , the conscience of his well-led life , makes his death more comfortable : But it is seldom seen , that he which lives i● , dy●th well , for the conscience of his former evils , his present pain , and the expectation and fear of greater , so take up his heart , that he cannot seek God ; and now it is just with God , not to be sought , or not to be found , because he sought to him in his life time , and was repulsed : Whereas therefore , there are usually two main cares of good men , to live well , & die well , I will have but this one , To live well . 

57 

With God there is no freeman , but his Servant , though in the Galleys , no slave , but the sinner , though in a Palace , none noble , but the virtuous , if never so basely descended , none rich , but he that possesseth God , even in rags , none wise , but he that is a fool to himself , and the world ; none happy , bu● him whom the world pity's : Let me be free , noble , rich , wise , happy to God ; I pass not what I am to the world . 

58 

When the mouth prayeth , man heareth ; when the heart , God heareth ; every good prayer knocks at Heaven for a blessing ; but an importunate prayer pierces it ( though as hard as brass ) & makes way for itself , into the ears of the Almighty : and as it ascends lightly up , carried with the wings of Faith , so it comes ever laden down again upon our heads : In my prayers , my thoughts shall not be guided by my words ; but my words shall follow my thoughts . 

59 

If that servant were condemned for evil , that gave God no more than his own , which he had received , what shall become of them that rob God of his own ; If God gain a little glory by me , I shall gain more by him : I will labour so to husband the stock that God hath left in my hands , that I may return my soul better than I received it ; and that he may make it better than I return it . 

60 

Heaven is compared to an hill , and therefore is figured by Olympus among the Heathen , by mount Zion in GOD'S Book : Hell chose to a Pit● The ascent to the one is hard therefore , and the descent of the other easy and headlong : and so , as if we once begin to fall , the recovery is most difficult : and not one of many stays , till he comes to the bottom , I will be content , to pant , and blow , and sweat , in climbing up to Heaven ; as contrarily , I will be wary of setting the first step downward towards the Pit : For as there is a I●cobs' Ladder into heaven , so there are blind stairs that go winding down into death , whereof each makes way for other ; From the object , is raised an ill suggestion , suggestion draws on delight , delight consent , consent endeavour , endeavour practice , practise custom , custom excuse , excuse defence , defence obstinacy , obstinacy boasting of sin , boasting a reprobate sense : I will watch over my ways , and do thou , Lord , watch over me , that I may avoid the first degrees of sin , and if those overtake my frailty , yet keep me that presumptuous sins prevail not over me . Beginnings are with more ease and safety declined , when we are free ; than proceedings when we have begun . 

61 

It is fitter for youth to learn then teach , and for age to teach then learn ; and yet fitter for an old man to learn then be ignorant ; I know I shall never know so much , that I cannot learn more ; and I hope I shall never live so long , as till I be too old to learn . 

62 

I never loved those Salamanders , that ar● never well , but when they are in the fire of contention ; I will rather suffer a thousand wrongs , then offer one ; I will suffer an hundreth , rather than return one ; I will suffer many , ere I will complain of one● and endeavour to right it by contending ; I have ever found , that to strive with my superior is furious , with ●y equal doubtful , with my inferior , sordid & base , with any , full of unquietnes . 

63 

The praise of a good speech standeth in words & matter : Matter which is as a fair and well featured body ; Elegance of words , which is as a neat and well fashioned garment ; Good matter slubbred up in rude & careless words , is made loathsome to the hearer , as a good body mishapen with unhandsome clothes : Elegance without soundness , is no better than a nice vanity : Although therefore the most hearers are like Bees , that go all to the flowers ; never regarding the good herbs that are of as wholesome use , as the other of fair show ; yet let my speech strive to be profitable ; plausible as it happens● Better the coat be mishapen , than the body . 

64 

I see , that as black and white colours to the eyes , so is the Vice and Virtue of others to the judgement of men : Vice gathers the beams of the sight in one , that the eye may see it , and be intent upon it . Virtue scatters them abroad , and therefore hardly admits of a perfect apprehension : whence it comes to pass , that as judgement is according to sense , we do so soon espy , and so earnestly censure a man for one vice , letting pass many laudable qualities undiscerned , or at least unacknowledged ; yea , whereas every man is once a fool , and doth that perhaps in one fit of his folly , which he shall at leisure repent of ; as Noah in one hour's drunkenness , uncovered those secrets which were hid six hundred years before ; The world , is hereupon ready to call in question all his former integrity , and to exclude him from the hope of any future amendment . Since God hath given me two eyes ; the one shall be busied about the present fault that I see , with a detesting commiseration , the other about the commendable qualities of the offender , not without an unpartial approbation of them : So shall I do GOD no wrong , in robbing him of the glory of his gifts , mixed with infirmities , nor yet in the mean time encourage Vice , while I do distinctly reserve for it a due portion of hatred . 

65 

God is above man , the brute creatures under him , he set in the midst : lest he should be proud that he hath infinite creatures under him ; that one is infinite degrees above him ; I do therefore own awe unto God , mercy to the inferior creatures ; knowing that they are my fellows , in respect of creation ; whereas there is no proportion betwixt me and my Maker . 

66 

One said , it is good to mure the mouth to speak well , for good speech is many times drawn into the affection ; But I would fear , that speaking well without feeling , were the next way to procure an habitual hypocri●i● : Let my good works follow good affections , not go before them , I will therefore speak as I think ; but withal , I will labour to think well , and then I know I cannot but speak well . 

67 

When I consider my soul ; I could be proud to think of how divine a nature and quality it is ; but when I cast down mine eyes to my body , as the Swan to her black legs ; and see what loathsome matter issue's from the mouth , nostrils , ears , pores , and other passages , and how most carrion-like of all other creatures it is after death ; I am justly ashamed , to think that so excellent a guest dwells but in a more cleanly dunghill . 

68 

Every worldling is a mad man : for , besides , that he prefers profit and pleasure to Virtue , the world to GOD , earth to Heaven , ti●e to eternity ; he pampers the body , and starves the soul : He feeds one fowl an hundreth times , that it may feed him but once , and ●eekes all Lands and Seas for dainties ; not caring whether any , or what repast , he provides for his soul : He clothes the body with all rich ornaments , that it may be as fair without , as it is filthy within ; whiles his soul goes bare and naked ; having not a rag of knowledge to cover it : Yea , he cares not to destroy ●is soul to please the b●dy , when for the salvation of the soul , he will not so much as hold the body short of the least pleasure . What is , if this be not a reasonable kind of madness ? Let me enjoy my soul no longer , than I prefer it to my body ; Let me have a deformed , lean , crooked , unhealthful , neglected body ; so that I may find my soul ; sound , strong , well furnished , well disposed both for earth and heaven . 

69 

Asa was sick but of his feet , far from the hart , yet because he sought to the Physicians , not to God ; he escaped not : Ezekiah was sick to die , yet because he trusted to God , not to Physicians , he was restored Means without GOD cannot help ; GOD without means can and often doth : I will use good means , not to rest in them . 

70 

A man's best monument is his virtuous actions , foolish is the hope ofimmortality , and future praise by the cost of a senseless stone ; when the passenger shall only say , here lies a fair stone and a filthy carcase : That only can report thee rich , but for other praises , thyself must build thy own monument alive ; and write thy own Epitaph in honest and honourable actions : which are so much more noble , than the other , as living men are better than dead stones : Nay , I know not if the other be not the way to work a perpetual succession of infamy : whiles the censorious Reader , upon occasion thereof , shall comment upon thy bad life ; Whereas in this every man's heart is a Tomb , and every man's tongue writes an Epitaph upon the well behaved : Either I will procure me such a Monument to be remembered by , or else it is better to be inglorious , then infamous . 

71 

The basest things are ever most plentiful ; history and experience tell us , that some kind of Mouse breedeth 120. young ones in one nest , whereas the Lion , or Elephant beareth but one at once . I have ever found , the least wit yieldeth the most words : It is both the surest and wisest way , to speak little , and think more . 

7● 

An evil man is clay to God , wax to the Devil : God may stamp him into powder , or temper him a new , but none of his means can melt him . chose , a good man is God's wax , and Satan clay , he relents at every look of God , but is not stirred at any temptation . I had rather bow , then break to God ; but for Satan , or the world , I had rather be broken in pieces with their violence , then suffer myself to be bowed unto their obedience . 

73 

It is an easy matter for a man to be careless of himself , & yet much easier to be enamoured of himself : For if he be a Christian , whiles he contemns the world perfectly , it is hard for him to reserve a competent measure of love to himself : If a worldling , it is not possible but he must overlove himself . I will strive for the mean of both ; and so hate the world , that I may care for myself , and so care for myself , that I be not in love with the world . 

74 

I will hate popularity and ostentation , as ever dangerous , but most of all in God's business : which who so affect , do as ill spokesmen , who when they are sent to woo for GOD , speak for themselves ; I know how dangerous it is to have GOD my rival . 

75 

Earth affords no sound contentment : for what is there under Heaven not troublesome , besides that which is called pleasure : and that in the end I find most irksome of all other . 

76 

God is ever with me , ever before me ; I know he cannot but oversee me always , though my eyes be held that I see him not ; yea , he is still within me , though I feel him not : Neither is there any moment , that I can live without God ; Why do I not therefore always live with him ? Why do I not accounted all ho●reses lost , wherein I enjoy him not ? 

77 

There is no man so happy as the Christian ; When he looks up into Heaven , he thinks , That is my home , the God that made it , and owes it , is my Father ; The Angels more glorious in nature then myself are my attendants ; mine enemies are my vassals : Yea , those things , which are the terriblest of all to the wicked , are most pleasant to him : When he hears God thunder above his head , he thinks this is the voice of my Father ; when he remembers the Tribunal of t●e last judgement , he thinks it is my Saviour that sits in it ; when death , he esteems it but as the Angel set before Paradise ; which with one blow admits him to eternal joy ; and which is most of all , nothing in earth or Hell can make him miserable : There is nothing in the world worth envying but a Christian . 

78 

As man is a little world ; so every Christian is a little Church within himself . As the Church therefore is sometimes in the wane through persecution , other times in her full glory and brightness : So let me expect myself sometimes drooping under Tentations , and sadly hanging down the head , for the want of the feeling of GOD'S presence ; at other times carried with the full sail of a resolute assurance to Heaven : Knowing that as it is a Church at the weakest stay , so shall I in my greatest dejection hold the child of God.  

79 

Tentations on the right hand , are more perilous than those on the left ; and destroy a thousand to the others ten ; As the Sun more usually causeth the Traveller to cast his cloak , than the wind : For those on the left hand miscarry men but two ways , to distrust , and denial of God ; more rare sins : but the other , to all the rest , wherewith men's lyves are so commonly defiled : The spirit of Christians is like the English jet , whereof we read , that is fired with water , quenched with oy●e . And these two , prosperity and adversity , are like heat and cold ; the one gathers the powers of the soul together , and makes them abler to resist by uniting them , the other diffuses them , and by such separation makes them easier to conquer : I hold it therefore as praise worthy with God , for a man to contemn a proffered honour , or pleasure for conscience sake , as on the rack not to deny his profession : When these are offered , I will not nibble at the bait , that I be not taken with the hook . 

80 

GOD is Lord of my body also , and therefore challengeth as well reverend gesture , as inward devotion : I will ever in my prayers , either stand as a Servant before my Master , or kneel as a Subject to my Prince . 

81 

I have not been in others breasts ; but for my own part , I never tasted of aught , that might deserve the name of pleasure ; And if I could , yet a thousand pleasures cannot countervail one torment , because the one may be exquisite , the other not without composition ; and if not one torment , much less a thousand ; and if not for a moment , much less for eternity ; and if not the torment of a part , much less of the whole ; for if the pain but of a tooth be so into lerable , what shall the racking of the whole body be ; and if of the body , what shall that be , which is primarilie of the soul . If there be pleasures that I hear not of , I will be wary o● buying them so over-deere . 

82 

As hypocrisy is a common counterfeit of all virtues , so there is no special virtue , which is not to the very life of it seemingly resembled by some special vice : So , devotion is counterfeited by superstition , good thirst by niggardliness , charity with vainglorious pride : For as charity is bounteous to the poor , so is vainglory to the wealth ; as charity sustains all for truth , so pride for a vain praise ; both of them make a man courteous & affable : So the substance of every virtue is in the heart ; which since it hath not a window made into it by the Creator of it ; but is reserved under lock and key for his own view : I will judge only by appearance : I had rather wrong myself by credulity , than others by unjust censures & suspicions . 

83 

Every man hath a kingdom within himself : Reason as the Princess dwells in the highest & inwardest room : The senses are the Guard and attendants on the Court ; without whose aid nothing is admitted into the Presence : The supreme faculties as will , memory etc. ar● the Peers : The outward parts and inward affections are the Commons : Violent Passions are as Rebels to disturb the common Peace . I would not be a Stoic to have no Passions ; for that were to overthrow this inward government , God hath erected in me ; but a Christian , to order those I have : and for that I see that as in commotions , one mutinous person draws on more , so in passions , that one m●kes way for the extremitic of another ( as excess of love cause's excess of grie●e , upon the loss of what we loved ) : I will do as wise Princes use , to those they misdoubt for faction , so hold them down , and keep them bare , that their very impotency & remissness ●hall afford me security . 

84 

I look upon the things of this life , as an owner , as a stranger : As an owner in their right , as a stranger in their use . I see that owning is but a conceit besides using : I can use ( as I lawfully may ) other men's commodities as my own ; walk in their woods , look on their fair houses , with as much pleasure as my own . Yet again , I will use my own , as if it were another's , knowing that though I hold them by right , yet it is only by Tenure at william  

85 

There is none like to Luther's three Masters . Prayer , Tentation , Meditation : Tentation stirs up holy meditation , meditation prepares to prayer , & prayer makes profit of ●entation ; and fetcheth all divine knowledge from Heaven : O● others , I may learn the Theory of Divinity , of ●hese only , the practice . Other Masters teach me by rote , to speak Parot-like of heavenly things , these alone with feeling and understanding . 

86 

Expectation is the greatest enemy both of doing well , and good acceptance of what is done I hold it the part of a wise man , to endeavour rather t●at Fame may follow him then go before him . 

87 

I see a number which with Shimei , whiles they seek their servant , which is riches ; lose their souls : no worldly thing shall draw me without the gates , within which , God hath confined me . 

88 

It is an hard thing for a man to find weariness in pleasure , while it ●a●teth , or contentment in pain while he is under it : after both ( indeed ) it is easy : y●t both of these must be found in both ; or else we shall be drunken with pleasures , and overwhelmed with sorrow : As those therefore which should eat some dish over deliciously sweet , alloy it with tart sauce , that they may not be cloyed ; and those that are to receive bitter pills , that they may not be anoyed with their unpleasing ●ast , role them in Sugar ; so in all pleasures it is best to labour , not how to make them most delightful , but how to moderate them from excess ; and in a●l sorrows so to sett●e our hearts in true grounds of comfort , that we may not care so much for being bemoaned of others , as how to be most contented in ourselves . 

8● 

In ways , we see Travellers choose not the fairest and greenest , if it be either cross or contrary , but the nearest , though miry & uneven : so in opinions , let me follow not the plausiblest , but the truest , though more perplexed . 

90 

Christian society is like a bundle of sticks laid together , whereof one kindles another : Solitary men have fewest provocations to evil , but again fewest incitations to good : so much as doing good is better than not doing evil , will I accounted christian good fellowship better than an Eremitish & melancholic solitariness . 

91 

I had rather confess my ignorance , them falsely profess knowledge : It is no shame not to know all things ; but it is a just shame to overreach in any thing . 

62 

Sudden extremity is anotable trial of faith , or any other disposition of the soul : for as in a sudden fear , the blood gathers to the heart , for guarding of that part which is principal ; so the powers of the soul combine themselves in an hard exigent , that they may be easily judged of : The faithful ( more suddenly than any casualty ) can lift up his heart to his stay in Heaven : Whereas the worldling stands amazed , and distraught with the evil , because he hath no refuge to fly unto , for not being acquainted with God in his peace , how should he but have him to seek in his extremity . When therefore some sudden stitch girds me in the side , like to be the messenger of death , or when the sword of my enemy in an unexpected assault threatens my body , I will seriously note how I am affected● so the suddainest evil , as it shall not come unlooked for , shall not go away unthought of : If I find myself courageous , and heavenly minded , I will rejoice in the truth of God's graces in me , knowing that one dram of tried faith , is worth a whole pound of speculative : and that which once stood by me , will never fail me : If dejected , and heartless , herein I will acknowledge cause of humiliation , and with all care and earnestness seek to store myself against the dangers following . 

93 

The rules of civil policy , may well be applied to the mind : as therefore for a Prince , that he may have good success against either rebels or foreign enemies , it is a sure axiom , Divide and rule : but when he is once seated in the throne over loyal Subjects , Unite and rule : So in the regiment of the soul , there must be variance ' set in the judgement , & the conscience , and affections , that that what is amiss may be subdued ; but when all parts brought to order , it is the only course to maintain their peace ; that all seeking to establish and help each other , the whole may prospero . Always to be at war , is desperate ; always at peace , secure , and over Epicure-like . I do accounted a secure peace , a just occasion of this civil dissension , in myself , and a true Christian peace , the end of all my secret wars ; which when I have achieved , I shall reign with comfort , and never will be quiet , till I have achieved it . 

94 

I brought sin enough with me into the world , to repent of all my life , though I should never actually sin ; and sin enough actuallie every day to sorrow for , though I had brought none with me into the world : but laying both together , my time is rather too short for my repentance : It were madness in me to spend my short life in jollity & pleasures , whereof I have so small occasion , and neglect the opportunity of my so just sorrow : especially since before I came into the world , I sinned ; after I am gone out of the world , the contagion of my sin past , shall add to the guilt of it ; yet in both these states I am uncapable of repentance ; I will do that while I may , which when I have neglected , is unrecoverable . 

95 

Ambition is torment enough for an enemy , for it affords as much discontentment in enjoying , ●as in want , making men like poisoned Rats , which when they have tasted of their bane , cannot rest till they drink , and then can much less rest , till their death : It is better for me to live in the wisemen's stocks in a contented want , then in a fool's Paradise to vex myself with wil●full unquietnes . 

96 

It is not possible but a conceited man must be a fool : for that overweening opinion , he hath of himself , excludes all opportunity of purchasing knowledge . Let a vessel be once full of never so base liquor , it will not give room to the costliest ; but spills beside what so ever is infused : the proud man , though he be empty of good substance , yet he is full of conceit : Many men had proved wise , if they had not so thought themselves . I am empty enough to receive knowledge enough : Let me think myself but so bare as I am , & more I need not . OH Lord , do thou teach me how little , how nothing I have : and give me no more them I know I want . 

97 

Every man hath his turn of sorrow ; whereby , some more , some less , all men are in their times miserable , I never yet could meet with the man that complained not of somewhat . Before sorrow come , I will prepare for it , when it is come , I will welcome it ; when it goes , I will take but half a farewell of it , as still expecting his return . 

98 

There be three things that follow an injury , so far as it concerneth ourselves ( for as the offence toucheth GOD , it is above our reach : ) revenge , censure , satisfaction ; Which must be remitted of the merciful man ; Yet not all at all times : But revenge always , leaving it to him that can , and will do it ; censure oft times ; satisfaction sometimes ; He that deceives me oft , though I must forgive him , yet charity binds me not , not to censure him for untrustie : and he that hath endamaged me much , cannot pled breach of charity in my seeking his restitution : I will so remit wrongs , as I may not encourage others to offer them : and so retain them , as I may not induce God to retain mine to him . 

99 

Garments that have once one rent in them , are subject to be torn on every nail , and every brere ; and glasses that are once cracked , are soon broken : such is a man's good name● once tainted with just reproach : Next to the approbation of God , and the testimony of my own conscience , I will seek for a good reputation with men● not by close carriage concealing faults , that they may not be known to my shame , but avoiding all vices , that I may not deserve it : the efficacy of the agent is in the patient wel● disposed ; It is hard for me ever to do good , unless I be reputed good . 

100 

Many vegetable , and many brute creatures exceed man in length of age ; which hath opened the mouths of heathen Philosophers to accuse nature , as a stepmother to man : who hath given him the lest time to live , that only could make use of his time in getting knowledge : But herein religion doth most magnify God in his wisdom and justice , teaching us , that other creatures live long , and perish to nothing ; only man recompenses the shortness of his life , with eternity after it ; that the sooner he dies well , the sooner he comes to the Perfection of knowledge : which he might in vain seek below ; the sooner he dies ill , the less hurt he doth with his knowledge : There is great reason then , why man should live long ; greater , why he should die early : I will neu●r blame God for making me too soon happy , for changing my ignorance for knowledge , my corruption for immortality , my infirmities for perfection● Come Lord lesus , come quickly . 

The second book OF MEDITATIONS and Vows , 

Divine and Moral . 

AT LONDON Printed by Humphrey Lownes , for john Porter . 

1605.  

TO THE RIGHT virtuous and Worshipful Lady , the Lady Drury , all increase of Grace . 

Madam , I know your Christian ingenuity such , that you will not grudge others the communication of this your private right : which ye● I durst not have presumed to adventure , if I feared that either the benefit of it would be less , or the acceptation . Now it shall be no less yours , only it shall be more known to be yours . Vouchsase therefore to take part with your worthy husband , of these my simple Meditations . And if your long and gracious experience , have written you a larger volume of wholesome laws , and better informed you by precepts fetched from your own ●eeling , than I can hope for , by my b●re speculation , yet where these my not unlikely rules shall accord with yours , let your redoubled assent allow them , and they confirm it . I made them not for the eye , ●ut for the heart ; neither do I commend them to your reading , but your practice : wherein also it shall not be enough , that you are a mere and ordinary agent , but that you be a pattern propounded unto others imitation : so shall your virtuous and holy progress , besides your own peace and happiness , be my crown , and rejoicing in the day of our common appearance . Halsted . Dec. 4.  

Your L. humbly devoted , jos . Hall.  

2 

I find that all worldly things require a long labour in getting , and afford a short pleasure in enjoying them . I will not care much for what I have , nothing for what I have not . 

3 

I see natural bodies for●ake their own place and condition , for the preservation of the whole , but of all other creatures , man , and of all other men , Christians , have the least interest in themselves ; I will live as given to others , lent only to myself . 

4 

That which is said of the Elephant , that being guilty to his deformity , he cannot abide to look on his own face in the water , but seeks ●or troubled and muddy channels , we see well moralised in men of evil conscience , who know their souls are so filthy , that they dare not so much as view them ; but shift off all checks of their former iniquity , wit● vain excuses of good fellowship : Whence it is , that every ●inal reprehension so galls them , because it calls the eyes of the soul home to itself , & makes them see a glance of what they would not : So have I seen a foolish and timorous patient , which knowing his wound very deep , would not endure the Chirurgeon ●o search it ; Whereon what can ensue , but a festering of the part , and a danger of the whole body● so I have seen many prodigal wasters run so far in books , that they cannot abide to hear of a reckoning . It hath been an old and true Proverb , oft and even reckoninges make long friends . I will oft sum up my estate with GOD , that I may know what I have to expect , and answer for : Neither shall my score run on so long with GOD , that I shall not know my debts , or fear an Audit , or despair of payment . 

5 

I accounted this body nothing but a close prison to my soul , and the earth a larger prison to my body . I may not break prison , till I be loosed by death , but I will leave it not unwillingly when I am loosed . 

6 

The common fears of the world are causeless , and ill placed ; no man fears to do ill , every man to suffer ill : wherein if we consider it well , we shall find that we fear our best friends ; for my part , I have learned more of God and of myself in one week's extremity , than all my whole lyves' prosperity had taught me before : And in reason and common experience , prosperity usually makes us forget our death ; adversity on the other side makes us neglect our life : Now if we measure both of these by their effects , forgetfulness of death makes us secure , neglect of this life makes us careful of a better ; so much therefore as neglect of life is better than forgetfulness of death ; and watchfulness better than security , so much more beneficial will I esteem adversity then prosperity . 

7 

Even grief itself is pleasant to the remembrance , when it is once past , as joy is , whiles it is present . I will not therefore in my conceit make any so great difference betwixt joy and grief ; sith grief past is joyful , and long expectation of joy is grievous . 

8 

Every sickness is a little death , I will be content to die oft , that I may die once Well . 

9 

Oft times those things which have been sweet in opinion , have proved bitter in experience ; I will therefore ever suspend my resolute judgement , until the trial and event , in the mean while I will fear the worst , & hope the best . 

10 

In all divine and moral good things , I would fain keep that I have , and get that I want ; I do not more loath all other covetousness , than I affect this : in all these things alone I profess never to have enough : If I may increase them , therefore either by labouring , or begging , or usury , I shall leave no means unattempted . 

11 

Some children are of that nature , that they are never well , but while the rod is over them : such am I to God : let him beat me , so he amend me ; let him take all away from me , so he give me himself . 

12 

There must not be one uniform proceeding with all men in reprehension : but that must vary according to the disposition of the reproved : I have seen some men as thorns , which easily touched , hurt not ; but if hard and unwarily , fetch blood of the hand● others , as nettles , which if they be nicely handled , sting and prick , but if hard and roughly pressed , are pulled up without harm : Before I take any man in hand , I will know whether he be a thorn or a nettle . 

13 

I will accounted no sin little , since there is not the least , but works out the death of the soul ; It is all one , whether I be drowned in the ebbed shore , or in the midst of the deep Sea.  

14 

It is a base thing to get goods to keep them : I see that GOD which only is infinitely rich , holdeth nothing in his own hands , but gives all to his creatures . But if we will needs lay up ; were should we rather repose it , then in Christ's treasury : The poor man's hand is the treasury of Christ : All my superfluity shall be there hoarded up , where I know it shall be safely kept , and surely returned me . 

15 

The School of God and Nature require two contrary manners of proceeding : In the School of Nature , we must conceive , and then beleeve● In the School of God , we must first believe , and then we shall conceive : He that believes no more than he conceives , can never be a Christian ; nor he a Philosopher that assents without reason . In Nature's School we are taught to bolt out the truth by Logical discourse : God cannot endure a Logician in his School ; he is the best Scholar that reasons least , and assents most : In divine things , what I may , I will conceive , the rest I will believe and admire . Not a curious head , but a credulous & plain heart is accepted with God.  

16 

no worldly pleasure hath any absolute delight in it , but as a Bee , having honey in the mouth , hath a sting in the tail ; Why am I so foolish to rest my heart upon any of them ; and not rather labour to aspire to that one abso●lute good , in whom is nothing ●avouring of grief , nothing wanting to perfect happiness . 

17 

A sharp reproof I accounted better than a smooth deceit ; therefore when my friend cheques me , I will respect it with thankfulness ; when others flatter me , I will suspect it , and rest in my own censure of myself , who should be more privy , a●d less partial to my own deservings . 

18 

Extremity distinguisheth friends : worldly pleasures like Physicians , gives us over when once we lie a dying , and yet the deathbed had most need of comforts : Christ jesus stands by his in the pangs of death ; and after death , at the bar of judgement , not leaving them either in their bed , or grave : I will use them therefore to my best advantage , not trust them . But for thee ( OH my Lord ) which in mercy and truth canst not fail me , whom I have found ever faithful and present in all extremities ; Kill me , yet will I trust in thee . 

19 

We have heard of so many thousand generations passed , and we have seen so many hundreths die within our knowledge , that I wonder any man can make account to live one day . I will die daily , it is not done before the ●ime , which may be done at all times . 

20 

Desire ofttimes makes us unthankful ; for who hopes for that , he hath not , usually forgets that which he hath . I will not suffer my heart to rove after high or impossible hopes , lest I should in the mean time contemn present benefits . 

21 

In hoping well , in being ill , & fearing worse , the life of man is wholly consumed . When I am ill , I will live in hope of better , when well , in fear of worse , neither will I at any time hope without fear , lest I should deceive myself with too much confidence , wherein evil shall be so much more unwelcome & intolerable , because I looked for good ; nor again , fear without hope , lest I should be overmuch dejected ; nor do either of them without true contentation . 

22 

What is man to the whole earth ? what is earth to the Heaven ? What is Heaven to his Maker ? I will admire nothing in itself , but all things in God , and God in all things . 

23 

There be three usual causes of ingratitude , upon a benefit received , Envy , Pride , Covetousness : Envy looking more at others benefits than our own : Pride looking more at ourselves , than the benefit ; Covetousness looking more at what we would have , than what we have . In good turns I will neither respect the giver , nor myself , nor the gift , nor others ; but only the intent and good will from whence it proceeded ; so shall requite others great pleasures with equal goodwill , and accept of small favours with great thankfulness . 

24 

Whereas the custom of the world , is to hate things present , to desire future , and magnific what is past● I will contrarilie esteem that which is present , best : for both , what is past , was once present , & what is future , will be present ; future things next , because they are present in hope ; what is past , least of all , because it cannot be present , yet somewhat , because it was . 

25 

We pity the folly of the Lark , which while in playeth with the feather , and stoopeth to the glass , is caught in the Fowler's net ; & yet cannot see ourselves alike made fools by Satan , who deluding us by the vain feathers , and glasses of the world , suddenly enwrappeth us in his snares ; we see not the nets indeed , it is too much that we shall feel them , and that they are not so easily escaped after , as before avoided ; OH Lord keep thou mine eyes from beholding vanity , and though mine eyes see it , let not my heart stoop to it ; but loathe it a far off ; And if I stoop at any time , & be taken , Set thou my soul at liberty , that I may say , My soul is escaped even as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler ; the snare is broken , and I am delivered . 

26 

In suffering evil , to look to secondary causes , without respect to the highest , maketh impatience ; for so we by't at the stone , and neglect him that threw it . If we take a blow at our equal , we return it with usury , if of a Prince , we repined not : What matter is it , if God kill me , whether he do it by an Ague , or by the hand of a Tyrant's Again , in expectation of good , to look to the first cause , without care of the second , argues idleness , and causeth want : As we cannot help ourselves without God ; so God will not ordinarily help us without ourselves ; In both , I will look up to God , without repining at the means in one , or trusting them in the other . 

27 

If my money were another man's , I could but keep it ; only the expending shows it my own : It is greater glory , comfort , and gain , to lay it out well , then to keep it safely : God hath made me not his Treasurer , but his Steward . 

28 

Augustine's friend Nebridius , not unjustly hated a short answer to a weighty & difficult question : because the disquisition of great truths requires time , and the determining is perilous : I will as much hate a tedious and farre-fetched answer to a short and easy question : For as that other wrongs the truth , so this the hearer . 

29 

Performance is a binder ; I will request no more favour of any man , than I must needs : I will rather choose to make an honest shift , them overmuch enthrall myself by being beholden . 

30 

The world is a stage ; Every man an actor ; and plays his part here either in a Comedy or Tragedy ; The good man is a Comedian , which how ever he begins , ends merrily : but the wicked man acts a Tragedy , and therefore ever ends in horror . thou seest a wicked man vaunt himself on this stage , stay till the last act , and look to his end , as Da●id did , and see whether that be peace : thou wouldst make strange Tragedies , if thou wouldst have but one act : who sees an Ox grazing in a fat and rank pasture , and thinks not that he is near to the slaughter ? whereas the lean beast that toils under the yoke , is far enough from the shambles . The best wicked man cannot be so envied in his first shows , as he is pitiable in the conclusion . 

32 

Of all objects of Beneficence , I would choose either an old man , or a child ; because these are most out of hope to requite : The one forgets a good turn , the other lives not to repay it . 

32 

That which Pythagoras said of Philosophers , is more true of Christians : for Christianity is nothing but a divine & better Philosophy : Three sorts of men come to the Market , buyers , sellers , lookers on : The two first are both busy , and carefully distracted about their Market ; only the third live happily , using the world as if they used it not . 

33 

There be three things which of all other I will never strive for : the wall , the way , the best seate● If I deserve well , a low place cannot disparage me so much , as I shall grace it ; if not , the height of my place shall add to my s●ame : whiles every man shall condemn me of pride matched with unworthiness . 

34 

I see there is not so much difference betwixt a man and a beast , as betwixt a Christian and a natural man : For whereas man lives but one life of reason , above the beast : A Christian lives four lyves above a natural man : The life of inchoate regeneration by grace : The perfect life of imputed righteousness : the life of glory begun in the separation of the soul ; the life of perfect glory in the society of the body , with the soul in full happiness : The woo●st whereof is better by many degrees , then t●e best life of a natural man : For whereas the dignity of the life is measured by the cause of it ; in which regard the life of the plant is basest , because it is but from the juice arising from the root , administered by the earth : the life of the bruit creature better than it , because it is sensitive ; of man better than it , because reasonable ; and the cause of this life , is the spirit of GOD ; so far as the spirit of GOD is above reason , so far doth a Christian exceed a mere naturalist . I thank God much that he hath made me a man ; but more that he hath made me a Christian ; without which , I know not whether it had been better for me , to have been a beast , or not to have been . 

35 

Great men's favours , friends promises , and dead men's shoes I will esteem , but not trus● to . 

36 

It is a fearful thing to sin , more fearful to delight in sin , yet worse to defend it , but worse them worst , to boast of it : If therefore I cannot avoid sin , because I am a man ; yet I will avoid the delight , defence , and boasting of sin , because I am a Christian . 

37 

Those things which are most eagerly desired , are most hardly both gotten , and kept : God commonly crossing our desires , in what we are over fervent . I will therefore accounted all things as too good to have , so nothing too dear to lose . 

38 

It is best to be courteous to all , entire with few● so may we ( perhaps ) have less cause of joy , I am sure , less occasion of sorrow . 

39 

Secrecies as they are a burden to the mind ere they be uttered , so are they no less charge to the receiver , when they are uttered : I will not long after more inward secrets , lest I should procure doubt to myself , and jealous fear to the discloser : But as my mouth shall be shut with fidelity , not to blab them , so my ear shall not be too open to receive them . 

40 

As good Physicians by one receipt make way for another , so is it the safest course in practice : I will reveal a great secret to none , but whom I have found faithful in less . 

41 

I will enjoy all things in GOD , and GOD in all things , nothing in itself : So shall my joys neither change nor perish ; for how ever the things themselves may alter , or fade , yet he in whom they are mine , is ever like himself , constant , and everlasting . 

42 

If I would provoke myself to contentation , I will cast down my eyes to my inferiors , and there see better men in worse condition : If to humility , I will cast them up to my betters , and so much more de●ect myself to them , by how much more I see them , thought worthy to be respected of others , and deserve better in themselves . 

43 

True virtue rests in the conscience of itself , either for reward , or censure . If therefore I know myself upright , false rumours shall not daunt me ; If not answerable to the good report of my favourers , I will myself find the first fault , that I may prevent the shame of others . 

44 

I will accounted virtue the best riches , knowledge the next , riches the worst ; and therefore will labour to be virtuous and learned without condition ; as for riches , if they fall in my way , I refuse them not ; but if not , I desire them not . 

45 

An honest word I accounted better than a careless oath , I will say nothing but what I dare swear , & will perform , it is a shame for a Christian to abide his tongue a false Servant , or his mind a loose Mistress . 

46 

There is a just and easy difference to be put betwixt a friend , and an enemy ; betwixt a familiar and a friend ; and much good use to be made of all ; But of all with discretion . I will disclose myself no whi● to my enemy , somewhat to my friend , wholly to no man , lest I should be more others than my own : Friendship is brittle stuff , how know I whether he that now loves me , may not hate me hereafter ? 

47 

no man but is an easy judge of his own matters ; and lookers on oftentimes see the more . I will therefore submit myself to others , in what I am reproved , but in what I am praised , only to myself . 

48 

I will not be so merry as to forget God , nor so sorrowful to forget myself . 

49 

As nothing makes so strong and mortal hostility , as discord in religions , so nothing in the world unites men's hearts so firmly , as the bond of faith : For whereas there are three grounds of friendship , virtue , pleasure , profit , and by all confessions , that is the surest which is upon virtue , it must needs follow , that what is grounded on the best , & most heavenly virtue , must be the fastest● which as it unites man to God so inseparably , that no tentations , no torments , not all the gates of H●ll can sever him ; so it unites one Christian soul to another so firmly , that no outward occurrences , ●o imperfections in the party loved , can dissolve them ; If I love not the child of GOD for his own sake , for his Father's sake , more than my friend for my commodity , or my kinsman for blood , I never received any spark of true heavenly love . 

50 

The good duty that is differed upon a conceit of present unfitness , at last grows irksome , and there-upon altogether neglected . I will not suffer my heart to entertain the least thought of loathnesse towards the task of devotion , wherewith I have stinted myself : but violently break through any motion of unwillingnes , not without a deep check to myself for my backwardness . 

51 Hearing is a sense of great apprehension , yet far more subject to deceit then seeing ; not in the manner of apprehending , but in the uncertainty of the object : words are vocal interpreters of the mind , actions real ; and therefore how ever both should speak according to the truth of what is in the heart ; yet words do more belie the heart , than actions : I care not what words I hear , when I see deeds ; I am sure what a man doth , he thinketh , not so always what he speaketh : Though I will not be so severe a censor , that for some few evil acts I should condemn a man of false-hartednes ; yet in common course of life , I need not be so mopish , as not to believe rather the language of the hand , then of the tongue . He that says we●l , and doth well , is without exception commendable ; but if one of these must be severed from the other , I like him well that doth well , and ●aith nothing . 

52 

That which they say of the Pelican , that when the Shepherds in desire to catch her , lay fire not far from her nest , which ●he finding , and fearing the danger of her young , seeks to blow out with her wings , so long till ●he burn herself , and makes herself a prey in an unwise pity to her young● I see morally verified in experience , of those which indiscreetly med●ling with the flame of descension kindled in the Church , rather increase then quench it ; rather fire their own wings than help others . I had rather bewail the fire a far off , then stir in the coals of it . I would not grudge my ashes to it , if those might abate the burning , but since I see it is daily increased with partaking ; I will behold it with sorrow ; and meddle no otherwise then by prayers to God , and entreaties to men ; seeking my own safety , and the peace of the Church in the freedom of my thought , & silence of my tongue . 

53 

That which is said of Lucillaes' faction , that anger bred it , pride fostered it , and covetousness confirmed it , is true of all Schisms , though with some inversion : For the most are bred through pride ; whiles men upon an high conceit of themselves , scorn to go in the common road , and affect singularity in opinion ; are confirmed through anger , whiles they stomach & grudge any contradiction ; & are nourished through covetousness , whiles they seek ability to bea●e out their part . In some other again Covetousness obtains the first place , Anger the second , Pride the ●ast : Herein therefore I have be●ne always wont to commend and admire the humi●ity of those great & profound wi●ss , whom depth of knowledge hath not led to by-paths in judgement , but wal●ing in the beaten path of the church , have bend all their forces to the establishment of received truths : accounting it greater glory to confirm an ancient verity , then to devose a new opinion ( though never so probable ) unknown to their predecessors : I will not reject a truth for myere novelty ; old truths may come newly to light : neither is God tied to times for the gift of his illumination , but I will suspect a novel opinion of untruth ; and not entertain it , unless it may be deduced from ancient grounds . 

54 

The ear and the ey● are the minds rece●uerss ; but the tongue is only busied in expending the treasure received , if therefore the revenues of the mind be uttered as fast or faster than they are received , it cannot be but that the mind must needs be held bare , and can never lay up for purchase . But if the receivers take in still with no utterance , the mind may soon grow a burden to itself , and unprofitable to others . I will not lay up too much , and utter nothing , lest I be covetous , nor spend much , and store up little , lest I be prodigal and poor . 

55 

I will speak no ill of others , no good of myself . 

56 

That which is the misery of Travellers , to find many hosts , and few friends , is the estate of Christians in their pilgrimage to a better life : Good friends may not therefore be easily forgone ; neither must they be used as suits of apparel , which when we have worn threadbare , we cast off , and call for new ; Nothing but death or villainy shall divorce me from an old friend : But still I will follow him so far , as is either possible or honest : And then I will leave him with sorrow . 

57 

True Friendship necessarily requires Patience , for there is no man in whom I shall not mislike somewhat ; and who shall not as justly mislike somewhat in me . My friends faults therefore , if little , I will swallow and digest ; if great , I will smot●er them ; how ever , I wil● wink at them to others , but lovingly notify them to himself . 

58 

Injuries hurt 〈◊〉 mor● in the receiving , then in the remembrance : A small injury shall go as it comes , a great injury may dine or sup with me ; but none at all shall lodge with me ; why should I vex myself , because another hath vexed me . 

59 

It is good dealing with that , over which we have the most power : if my estate will not be framed to my mind , I will labour to frame my mind to my estate . 

60 

In greatest company I will be alone to myself ; in greatest privacy , in company with God.  

61 

Grief for things past that cannot be remedied , and care for things to come that cannot be prevented , may easily hurt , can never benefit me ; I will therefore commit myself to God in both , and enjoy the present . 

62 

Let my estate be never so mean , I will ever keep myself rather beneath ; then either level , or above it : A man may rise when he will with honour , but cannot fall without shame . 

63 

Nothing doth so befool a man as extreme passion ; this doth both make them fools , which otherwise are not ; and show them to be fools that are so : Violent passions , if I cannot tame them , that they may yield to my ease ; I will at least smother them by concealment , that they may not appear to my shame . 

64 

The mind of man , though infinite in desire , yet is finite in capacity : Since I cannot hope to know all things , I will labour first to know what I needs must for their use ; next , what I best may for their convenience . 

65 

Though time be precious to me ( as all irrevocable good things deserve to be ) and of all other things I would not be lavish of it ; yet I will accounted no time lost , that is either lent to , or bestowed upon my friend . 

66 

I will honour good examples , but I will live by good precepts . 

67 

As charity requires forgetfulness of evil deeds , so Patience requires forgetfulness of evil accidents● I will remember evils past to humble me , not to vex me . 

68 

It is both a misery and a shame , for a man to be a Bankrupt in love ; which he may easily pay , and be never the more impovirished . I will be in no man's debt for good will ; but will at least return every man his own measure ; if not with usury : It is much better to be a Creditor , than a Debtor in any thing ; but especially of this : yet of this , I will so be content to be a debtor , that I will always be paying it where I owe it ; and yet never will have so paid it , that I shall not own it more . 

69 

The Spanish proverb is too true ; Dead men & absent find no friends : All mouths are boldly opened with a conceit of impunity : My ●are shall be no grave to bury my friends good name : But as I will be my present friends self , So I will be my absent friends Deputy ; to say for him what he would , and cannot speak for himself . 

70 

The loss of my friend as it shall moderately grieve me , so it shall another way much benefit me in recompense of his want : for it shall make me think more often , and seriously of earth , and of heaven : Of earth , for his body which is reposed in it : of Heaven for his soul , which possesseth it before me : of earth to put me in mind of my like frailty and mortality : of Heaven , to make me desire , and after a sort emulate his happiness and glory . 

71 

Variety of objects is wont to cause distraction ; when again a little one lay● close to the eye , if but of a penny breadth , wholly takes up the sight , which could else see the whole half Heaven at once : I will have the eyes of my mind ever forestalled , and filled with these two objects , the shortness of my life , eternity after death . 

72 

I see that he is more happy , that hath nothing to lose , than he that loses that which he hath . I will therefore neither hope for riches , nor fear poverty . 

73 

I care not so much in anything for multitude , as for choice ; Books & friends I will not have many : I had rather ●eriouslv converse with a few , then wander amongst many . 

74 

The wicked man is a very coward , and is afraid of every thing of God , because he is his enemy , of Satan , because he is his tormenter ; of God's creatures , because they joining with their Maker , fight against him ; of himself , because he bears about him his own accuser , and executioner : The godly man contrarily , is afraid of nothng● not of GOD , because he knows him his best friend , and therefore will not hurt him ; not of Satan , because he cannot hurt him , not of afflictions , because he knows they proceed from a loving God , and end his own good ; not of the creatures , since the very stones of the field are in league with him ; not of himself , since his conscience is at peace ; A wicked man may be secure , because he knows not what he hath to fear , or desperate , through extremity of fear ; but truly courageous he cannot be . Faithlesnes cannot choose but be false hearted : I will ever by my courage take trial of my faith : By how much more I fear , by so much less I believe . 

75 

The godly man lives hardly , and like the Ant toils here , during the Summer of his peace , holding himself short of his pleasures , as looking to provide for an Winter● which when it comes , he is able to wear it out comfortably ; whereas the wicked man doth prodigally lash out all his joys in the time of his prosperity : and like the Grasshopper , singing merrily all Summer , is starved in Winter . I will so enjoy the present , that I will lay up more for hereafter . 

76 

I have wondered oft , and blushed for shame , to read in mere Philosophers ( which had no other Mistress but Nature ) such strange resolution in the contempt of both fortunes ( as they call them ) ; such notable precepts for a constant setlednes and tranquillity of mind ; and to compare it with my own disposition , and practise ; whom I have found too much drooping and dejected under small crosses , and easily again carried away with little prosperity . To see such courage and strength to contemn death in those , which thought they wholly perished in death , and to find such faint-hartednes in myself at the first conceit of death , who yet am throughly persuaded of the future happiness of my soul : I have that benefit of nature as well as they , besides infinite more help that they wanted● O the dulness & blindness of us unworthy Christians , that suffer Heathens by the dim Candle-light of Nature , to go further than we by the clear Sun of the Gospell● that an indifferent man could not tell by our practice , whether were the Pagan . Let me never for shame accounted myself a Christian , unless my Art of Christianity have imitated and gone beyond nature so far , that I can find the best heathen as far below me in true resolution , as the vulgar sort were below them . Else , I may shame Religion , it can neither honest nor help me . 

77 

If I wou●d be irreligious & unconscionable , I would make no doubt to be rich , for if a man will defraud , dissemble , forswear , bribe , oppress , serve the time , make use of all men for his own turn , make no scruple of any wicked action for his advantage : I cannot see how he can escape wealth and preferment . But for an upright man to rise is difficult ; whiles his conscience straight curbs him in from every unjust action ; and will not allow him to advance himself by indirect means : So riches come seldom easily to a good man ; seldom hardly to the consciencelesse . Happy is that man that can be rich with truth , or poor with contentment , I will not envy the gravel in the unjust man's throat . Of riches let me never have more , than an honest man can bear away . 

78 

God is the God of order not of confusion : As therefore in natural things he uses to proceed from one extreme to another by degrees , through the mean ; so doth he in spiritual . The Sun rises not an once to his highest from the darkness of midnight , but first sends forth some feeble glimmering of light in the dawning ; them looks out with weak and waterish beams , & so by degrees ascends to the midst of heaven : So in the seasons of the year , we are not one day scorched with a Summer heat , and on the next , frozen with a sudden extremity of cold : But Winter comes on softly , first by cold dews , then whore frosts , until at last it descend to the hardest weather of all : such are GOD'S spiritual pro●eedings● He never brings ani● man from the estate of sin , to the estate of glory , but through the state of grace . And in grace seldom when , any man from gross wickedness , to any eminency of perfection : I will be charitably jealous of those men , which from notorious lewdness leap at once into a sudden forwardness of profession . Holiness doth not like ●onas gourd grow up in a night . I like it better to go on soft and sure , then for an hasty fit to run myself out of wind , and after stand still and breathe me . 

79 

It hath been said of old , To do well and hear ill , is princely ; which as it is most true , by reason of the Envy which follows upon justice ; so is the contrary no less justified by many experiments : To do ill , and to hear well , is the fashion of many great men : To do ill , because they are born out with the assurance of impunity . To hear well , because of abundance of Parasites , which as Ravens to a carkasse●●ather about great men . Neither is there any so great misery in greatness as this , that it conceals men from themselves ; and when they will needs have a sight of their own actions , it shows them a ●alfe glass to look in . Meanness of state ( that I can find ) hath none so great inconvenience . I am no whit sorry that I am rather subject to contempt , than flattery . 

80 

There is no earthly blessing so precious , as health of body , without which all other worldly good things are but troublesome : Neither is there any thing more difficult , then to have a good soul in a strong and vigorous body ; for it is commonly seen , that the worse part draws away the better : But to have an healthful and sound soul , in a weak sickly body , is no novelty ; whiles the weakness of the body is an help to the soul : playing the part of a perpetual monitor , to incite it to good , and check it for evil : I will not be over glad of health , nor over fearful of sickness . I will more fear the spiritual hurt that may follow upon health , than the bodily pain that accompanies sickness . 

81 

There is nothing more troublesome to a good mind then to do nothing ; for besides the furtherance of our estate , the mind doth both delight , and better itself with exercise . There is but this difference then betwixt labour and idleness ; that labour is a profitable and pleasant trouble , idleness a trouble both unprofitable and comfortless . I will be ever doing something , that either God when he cometh , or Satan when he tempteth , may find me busied . And yet since as the old proverb is , Better it is be idle then effect nothing , I will not more hate doing nothing , then doing something to no purpose . I shall do good but a while ; let me strive to do it while I may . 

82 

A faithful man hath three eyes : The first of sense , common to him with brute creatures ; the second of reason , common to all men ; the third , of faith proper to his profession : Whereof each looketh beyond other , and none of them meddleth with others obiect● : For neither doth the eye of sense reach to intelligible things , and matters of discourse : nor the eye of reason to those things which are supernatural and spiritual ; neither doth faith look down to things that may be sensibly seen . If thou discourse to a brute beast of the depths of Philosophy never so plainly , he understands not , because they are beyond the view of his eye , which is only of sense : If to a mere carnal man of di●ine things : He perceiveth not the things of God , neither indeed can do , because they are spiritually discerned ; and therefore no wonder if those things seem unlikelie , incredible , impossible to him , which the faithful man having a proportionable means of apprehension , doth as plainly see , as his eye doth any sensible thing . Tell a plain countryman that the Sun , or some higher or lesser star , is much bigger than his Cartwheel ; or at least so many scores bigger them the whole earth ; he laughs thee to scorn , as affecting admiration , with a learned untruths Yet the Scholar by the eye of reason , doth as plainly see & acknowledge this truth , as that his hand is bigger than his pen : What a thick mist ; yea , what a palpable & more than Egyptian darkness doth the natural man live ? What a world is there , that he doth not see at all , and how little doth he see in this , which is his proper element ; There is no bodily thing but the brute creatures see as well as he , & some of them better . As for his eye of reason ; how dim is it in those things which are best fitted to it : What one thing is there in nature , which he doth perfectly know ? what herb , or flower , or worm that he treads on , is there , whose true essence he knoweth ? no not so much , as what is in his own bosom ; What it is , where it is , or whence it is that gives ●eing to himself : But for those things which concern the best world , he doth not so much as confusedly see them , neither knoweth whether they be : He sees no whit into the great & awful majesty of God ; he discerns him not in all his creatures , filling the world with his infinite & glorious presence ; he sees not his wise providence overruling all things , disposing all casual events , ordering all sinful actions of men to his own glory ; he comprehends nothing of the beauty , majesty , power , & mercy of the Saviour of the world , sitting in his humanity at his father's right hand : He sees not the unspeakable happiness of the glorified souls of the Saints ; he sees not the whole heavenly commonwealth of Angels , ascending & descending to the behoof of God's children ; waiting upon him at all times invisibly ; not excluded with the closenes of prisons nor desolatnes of wildernesses ; and the multitude of evil spirits passing & standing by him to tempt him unto evil ; but like unto the foolish bird , when he hath hid his head that he sees no body , he thinks himself altogether unseen : & then count's himself solitary , when his eye can meet with no companion . It was not without cause that we call a mere fool , a Natural ; for how ever worldlings have still thought christians Gods fools , we know them the fools of the world . The deepest Philosopher that ever was ( saving the reverence of the schools ) is but an ignorant sot to the simplest Christian : For the weakest Christian may by plain information see somewhat into the greatest mysteries of Nature , because he hath the e●e of reason common with the best but the best Philosopher by all the demonstration in the world , can conceive nothing of the mysteries of godliness ; because he utterly ●ants the eye of faith . Though my insight into matters of the world be so shallow , that my simplicity moveth pity , or maketh sport unto others ; it shall be contentment & happiness , that I see further into better matters : That which I see not is worthless , and deserves little better than contempt ; that which I see is unspeakable , inestimable , for comfort , for glory . 

83 It is not possible for an inferior to live at peace , unless he have learned to be contemned . For the pride of his Superiors , and the malice of his equals & inferiors , shall offer him continual● and inevitable occasions of unquietnes . As contentation is the mother of inward peace with our selves ; so is humility the mother of peace with others : for if thou be vile in thine own eyes first , it shall the less trouble thee to be accounted vile of others . So that a man of an high hart in a low place , cannot want discontentment ; whereas a man of a lowly●stomak , can swallow & digest contempt without any distemper . For wherein can he be the worse for being contemned , who out of his own knowledge of his deserts did most of all contemn himself I should be very improvident , if in this cal●ing I did not look for daily contempt : wherein , we are made a spectacle to the world , to Angels , & men : when it comes , I will either embrace it , or contemn it . Embrace it when it is within my measure , when above , contemn it : so embrace it , that I may more humble myself vnder it ; & so contemn it , that I may not give hart to him that offers it ; nor disgrace him , for whose cause I am contemned . 

14 Christ raised three dead men to life : One newly departed ; another on the Beer , a third smelling in the grave ; to show us that no degree of death is so desperate , that it is past help . My sins are many , & great , yet if they were more , they are far below the mercy of him that hath remitted them● & the value of his ransom that hath paid for them : A man hurts himself most by presumption , ●ut we cannot do God a greater wrong , then to despair of forg●uenes . It is a do●ble injury to God , first that we offend his justice by sinning , then that we wrong his mercy with despairing . etc.  

85 For a man to be weary of the world through miseries that he meets with , and for that cause to covet death , is neither difficult , nor commendable ; but rather argues a base weakness of mind . So it may be a cowardly part to contemn the utmost of all terrible things , in a fear of lingering misery : But for a man either living happily here on earth , or resolving to live miserably , yet to desire his remoovall to Heaven , doth well become a true Christian courage ; and argues a notable mixture of patience & faith : ●f patience , for that he can and dare abide to live sorrowfully ; of faith , for that he is assured of his better Being otherwhere ; and therefore prefers the absent joys he looks for , to those he feels in present : no sorrow shall make me wish myself dead , that I may not be at all : no contentment shall hinder me from wishing myself with Christ , that I may be happier . 

89 It was not for nothing , that the wise Creator of all things hath placed gold & ●iluer , and all precious minerals under our feet to be trod upon ; and hath hid them low in the bowels of the earth , that they cannot without great labour be either found , or gotten ; whereas he hath placed the noblest part of his creation above our heads ; and that so open to our view , that we cannot choose but every moment behold them : wherein what did he else intent , but to draw away our minds from these worthless , & yet hidden treasures , to which he foresaw we would be too much addicted , & to ca●l them unto the contemplation of those better things , which besides their beauty , are more oblivious to us ; that in them we might see & admire the glory of their Maker , and withal seek our own . How do those men wrong themselves , & misconstrue God , who , as if he had hidden these things , because he would have them sought , and laid the other open for neglect , bend themselves wholly to the seeking of these earthly commodities & do no more mind heaven , them if there were non . If we could imagine a beast to have reaso , how could he be more absurd in his choice ? How easy is it to observe , that still the higher we go , the more purity & perfection we find So earth is the very dross & dregss of all the elements , water somewhat more pure than it , yet also more feculent them the air above it ; the lower air less pure them his uppermost regions , & yet they as far inferior to the lowest heavens : which again are more exceeded by the glorious and empireall seat of God , which is the heaven of the just . Yet they ( brutish men ) take up their rest , and place their felicity in the lowest and worst of all God's workmanship ; not regarding that , which with it own glory can make them happy . Heaven is the proper place of my soul , I will send it up thither continually in my thoughts whiles it sojourns with me , before it go to dwell there for ever . 

87 A man need not to care for more knowledge , then to know himself ; he needs no more pleasure then to content himself ; no more victory then to overcome himself , no more riches then to enjoy himself . What fools are they that seek to know all other things , & are strangers in themselves ; that seek altogether to satisfy others humours , with their own displeasure ; that seek to vanquish Kingdoms & Countries , when they are not Masters of themselves ; that have no hold of their own hearts , yet seek to be possessed of all outward commodities : Go home to thyself first , vain hart , & when thou hast made sure work there , in knowing , contenting , overcoming , enjoying thyself , spend all the superfluity of thy time & labour upon others . 

88 It was an excellent rule that fell from Epicure , whose name is odious to us for the father of looseness . That if a man would be rich , honourable , aged , he should not strive so much to add to his wealth , reputation , years , as to detract from his desires . For certainly in these things , which stand most upon conceit , he hath the most that desireth least . A poor man that hath little , and desire's no more , is in truth richer than the greatest monarch , that thinks he hath not what he should ; or what he might , or that grieves there is no more to have . It is not necessity but ambition that sets men's hearts on the rack . If I have meat , drink , apparel , I will learn therewith to be content . If I had the world full of wealth beside , I could enjoy no more than I use ; the rest could please me no otherwise but by looking on ; and why can I not thus solace myself , while it is others ? 

89 

An inconstant & wavering mind , as it makes a man unfit for Society ( for that there can be no assurance of his words , or purposes , neither can we build on them without deceit ) so , besides that , it makes a man ridiculous , it hinders him from ever attaining any perfection in himself For a rolling stone gathers no moss ; and the mind whilst it would be every thing , proves nothing ; oft changes cannot be without loss : yea , it keeps him from enjoying that which he hath attained , for it keeps him ever in work : buildings pulling down , selling , changing , buying , commanding , forbidding : so whiles he can be no other man's friend , he is the least his own . It is the safest course for a man's profit , credit , and ●●se , to deliberate long , to resolve surely , hardly to alter . Not to enter upon that , whose end he fore-sees not answerable ; and when he is once entered , not to surcease till he have attained the end he foresaw : so may he to good purpose begin a new work , when he hath well finished the old . 

90 The way to Heaven is like that which ●onathan and his armour bearer passed betwixt two rocks , one Bozez , the other Sene● ; that is foul and thorny ; whereto we must make shift to climb on our hands and knees ; but when we are come up , there is victory , and triumph . God's children have three suits of apparel , whereof two are worn dail●y on earth , the third laid up for the in the wardrobe of Heaven ; They are ever either in black mourning , in red persecuted , or in white glorious : Any way shall be pleasant to me , that leade● unto such an end : It matters not what rags or what colours I wear with men , so I may walk with my Saviour in white , and reign with him in glory , Amen . 

FINIS . 





Pro. ●9● 22 1 , Cor. 120●  Math. 23. 28.  Coloss● 3● 2●  