THE PASSION SERMON , PREACHED AT PAUL'S CROSS on Good-friday . Apr. 14. 1609.  

By I H.  

LONDON Printed by W. S. for Samuel Macham , and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Bullhead . 

ANNO. 1609.  

TO THE ONLY HONOUR AND GLORY OF GOD MY DEAR AND BLESSED SAVIOUR ( WHICH HATH DONE AND SUFFERED ALL THESE THINGS FOR MY SOUL . ) 

HIS WEAK AND UNWORTHY SERVANT HUMBLY DESIRE'S TO consecrate HIMSELF AND HIS POOR LABOURS : BESEECHING HIM TO ACCEPT AND BLESS THEM TO THE PUBLIC GOOD , AND TO THE PRAISE OF HIS OWN GLORIOUS NAME . 

To the Reader . 

I Desire not to make any Apology for the Edition of this my Sermon : It is motive enough , that herein I affect a more public and more enduring good . Spiritual niceness , is the next degree to unfaithfulness : This point cannot be too much urged , either by the tongue , or press . Religion and our souls depend upon it , yet are our thoughts too much beside it . The Church of Rome , so fixes herself ( in her adoration ) upon the Cross of Christ , as if she forgot his glory : Many of us so conceive of him glorious , that we neglect the meditation of his Cross , the way to his glory and ours . If we would proceed aright , we must pass from his Golgotha , to the mount of Olives , and from thence to heaven , and there seek and settle our rest . According to my weak ability , I have led this way in my speech , beseeching my Readers to follow me with their hearts , that we may overtake him which is entered into the true sanctuary , even the highest heavens , to appear now in the sight of God for us.  

THE PASSION SERMON . 

JOHN . 19  VERSE 30.  

When jesus therefore had received the Vinegar , he said ; It is finished : and bowing the head , he gave up the ghost . 



THE bitter and yet victorious Passion of the Son of GOD ( right Honourable and beloved Christians ) as it was the strangest thing that ever befell the earth : So , is both of most sovereign use , and looks for the most frequent and careful meditation . It is one of those things , which was once done , that it might be thought of for ever . Every day therefore must be the Good-friday of a Christian ▪ who , with that great Doctor of the Gentiles , must desire to know nothing but jesus Christ , and him crucified . 

There is no branch or circumstance in this wonderful business , which yields not infinite matter of discourse . According to the solemnity of this time and place , I have chosen to commend unto your Christian attention , our Saviour's Farewell to Nature ( for his reviuing was above it ) in his last word in his last act . His last word , It is finished , his last act , He gave up the ghost : That which he said , he did . If there be any theme that may challenge and command our ears and hearts , this is it ; for , behold ; the sweetest word that ever Christ spoke , and the most meritorious act that ever he did , are met together in this his last breath . In the one ye shall see him triumphing ; yielding in the other , yet so as he overcomes . Imagine therefore , that you saw Christ ●esus , in this day of his passion ( who is every day here crucified before your eyes ) advanced upon the chariot of his Cross , and now , after a weary conflict , cheerfully overlooking the despite and shame of men , the wrath of his Father , the law , sin , death , hell ; which all lie gasping at his foot : and then you shall conceive , with what spirit he saith , Consummatum est , It is finished . What is finished ? Shortly ; All the prophecies , that were of him ; All legal observations , that prefigured him ; his own sufferings ; Our salvation . The prophecies are accomplished , the ceremonies abolished , his sufferings ended , our salvation wrought : these four heads shall limit this first part of my speech , only let them find and leave you attentive . 

Even this very word is prophesied of ; All things that are written of me have an end , saith Christ . What end ? this , It is finished : this very end hath his end here . What therefore is finished ? not this prediction only of his last draught , as Augustine , that were too particular . Let our Saviour himself say , All things that are written of me by the Prophets . It is a sure and convertible rule ; Nothing was done by Christ , which was not for told , nothing was ever foretold by the Prophets of Christ , which was not done . It would take up a life to compare the Prophets and Evangelists , the predictions and the history , & largely to discourse how the one foretells , and the other answers ; let it suffice to look at them running . Of all the Evangelists , S. Matthew hath been most studious , in making these references and correspondences ; with whom , the burden or undersong of every event , is still ( ut impleretur ) That it might be fulfilled . Thus hath he noted ( if I have reckoned them aright ) two and thirty several prophecies concerning Christ , fulfilled in his birth , life , death . 

☞ ☜ ☞ ☜ esay 7.14 . Mat. 1.23 . Zach. 9.9 . Mat. Ibidem . Mich. 5.2 . Mat. 2.6 . jere. 7.11 . Mat. 21.13 . esay . 11.1 . Mat. 2.15 . Psalm . 8.2 . Mat. 21.16 . jer. 31.15 . Mat. 2.18 . esay . 5.8 . Mat. 21.33 . judg. 13.5 . Mat. 2. ult.  Psal . 118.22 . Mat. 21.44 . Esa . 40.3 . Mat. 3.2 . Psal . 110.1 . Mat. 22.44 . esay 9.1 . Mat. 4.15 . esay . 8.14 . Mat. 21.44 . Leu. 14.4 . Mat. 8.4 . Psal . 41.9 . Mat. 26.31 . esay 53.4 . Mat. 8.17 . esay . 53.10 . Mat. 26.54 . esay 61.1 . Mat. 11.4 . Zach. 13.7 . Mat. 26.31 . esay 42.1 . Mat. 12.17 , Lam. 4.20 . Mat. 26.56 . jona. 1.17 . Mat. 12.40 . esay . 50.6 . Mat. 26.67 . esay 6.9 . Mat. 13.14 . Zac. 11.13 . Mat. 27.9 . Psal . 78.2 . Mat. 13.35 . Psal . 22.18 . Mat. 27.35 . Es . 35.5.6 . Mat. 15.30 . Psal . 22.2 . Mat. 27.46 . Es . 62.11 . Mat. 21.5 . Psal . 69.22 . Mat. 27.48 . 

To which Saint john adds many more . Our speech must be directed to his Passion ; omitting the rest , let us insist in those . 

He must be apprehended : it was foreprophesied ; The Anointed of the Lord was taken in their nets , sayeth jeremie : but how ? he must be sold : for what ? thirty silver pieces , and what must those do ? buy a field , all foretold ; And they took thirty silver pieces , the price of him that was valued , and gave them for the Potter's field , saith Zacharie ( miswritten jeremy , by one letter mistaken in the abbreviation , by whom ? that child of perdition , that the Scripture might be fulfilled . Which was he ? It is foretold ; He that eateth bread with me , saith the Psalmist . And what shall his Disciples do ? Run away , so saith the pprophecy : I will smite the shepherd , and the sheep shall be scattered , saith Zacharie . What shall be done to him ? he must be scourged and spit upon : behold , not those filthy excrements could have light upon his sacred face , without a pprophecy ; I hid not my face from shame and spitting , saith esay . what shall be the issue ? In short , he shall be led to death : it is the pprophecy , the messias shall be slain , saith Daniel : what death ? he must be lift up ▪ Like as Moses lift up the Serpent in the wildenesse , so shall the son of man be lift up . Chrysostome saith well , that some actions are parables ; so may I say , some actions are prophecies , such are all types of Christ , and this with the foremost . Lift up , whither ? to the Cross , it is the pprophecy , hanging upon a tree , saith Moses , how lift up ? nailed to it , so is the pprophecy , foderunt manus , they have pierced my hands and my feet , saith the Psalmist : with what company ? two thieves , with the wicked was he numbered , saith esay : where ? without the gates saith the pprophecy : what becomes of his garments ? they cannot so much as cast the dice for his coat , but it is prophesied , They divided my garments , and on my vestures cast lots , saith the Psalmist : he must die then on the Cross , but how ? voluntarily . Not a bone of him shall be broken : what hinders it ? lo , there he hangs , as it were neglected , and at mercy , yet all the raging jews , no , all the Devils in hell cannot stir one bone in his blessed body : It was prophesied in the Easter-lambe , and it must be fulfilled in him , that is the true Passeover , in spite of fiends and men : how then ? he must be thrust in the side : behold not the very spear could touch his precious side being dead , but it must be guided by a pprophecy ; They shall see him whom they have thrust through , saith Zacharie : what shall he say the while ? not his very words but are forespoken : his complaint , Eli Eli lamma sabactani , as the Chalde , or 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 as the Hebrew , Psalm 22.2 . his resignation : In manus tuas , Into thy bands I commend my spirit , Psalm 31.5 . His request , Father forgive them : He prayed for the transgressors , saith esay . And now when he saw all these prophecies were fulfilled , knowing that one remained , he said , I thirst , Domine , quid sitis ? saith one , OH LORD , what thirstest thou for ? A strange hearing , that a man , yea that GOD and MAN dying should complain of thirst . 

could he endure the scorching flames of the wrath of his Father , the curse of our sins , those tortures of body , those horrors of soul , & doth he shrink at his thirst ? no , no : he could have born his drought , he could not bear the Scripture not fulfilled . It was not necessity of nature , but the necessity of his Father's decree , that drew forth this word , I thirst . They offered it before , he refused it : whether it were an ordinary potion for the condemned to hasten death ( as in the story of M. Anthony ) which is the most received construction , or whether it were that jewish potion , whereof the Rabbins speak ; whose tradition was , that the malefactor to be executed , should after some good counsel from two of their Teachers , be taught to say ; Let my death be to the remission of all my sins ; and then , that he should have given him a bowl of mixed wine , with a grain of Frankincense , to bereave him both of reason and pain . 

I durst be confident in this latter ; the rather for that Saint Mark calls this draught , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Myrrh wine , mingled ( as is like ) with other ingredients . And Montanus agrees with me in the end , ad stuporem & mentis alienationem ; A fashion which Galatine observes out of the Sannedrim , to be grounded upon Proverbs , 31.6 . Give strong drink to him that is ready to perish , I leave it modestly in the midst ; let the learneder judge ▪ whatsoever it were , he would not die till he had complained of thirst , and in his thirst tasted it : Neither would he have thirsted for , or tasted any but this bitter draught ; that the Scripture might be fulfilled ; They gave me vinegar to drink : And lo , now Consummatum est ; all is finished . 

If there be any jew amongst you , that like one of johns' unseasonable Disciples , shall ask , Art thou he , or shall we look for another ? He hath his answer ; ye men of Israel , why stand you gazing and gaping for another messias ? In this alone , all the Prophecies are finished ; and of him alone , all was prophesied , that was finished . Paul's old rule holds still . To the Jews a stumbling block ; and that more ancient Curse of David , Let their table be made a snare ; And Stevens two brands sticks still in the flesh of these wretched men : One in their neck , stiffnecked , the other in their heart ; uncircumcised ; the one , Obstinacy , the other Unbelief : stiff necks indeed , that will not stoop and relent with the yoke of sixeteen hundred years judgement and servility ; uncircumcised hearts , the fi●me of whose unbelief , would not be cut off with so infinite convictions . O mad & miserable nation : let them show us one pprophecy that is not fulfilled , let them show us one other in whom all the prophecies can be fulfilled , and we will mix pity with our hate : If they cannot , and yet resist ; their doom is past ; Those mine enemies , that would not have me to reign over them , bring them hither , & slay them before me . So let thine enemies perish , OH Lord  

But what go I so far ? even amongst us ( to our shame ) this riotous age hath bred a monstrous generation ( I pray God I be not now in some of your bosoms , that hear me this day ) compounded , much like to the Turkish Religion , of one part ▪ Christian ; another , lieu ; a third , worldling , a fourth , Atheist : a Christians face ; a jews heart , a worldlings life ; and therefore Atheous in the whole ; that acknowledge a God , and know him not ; that profess a Christ , but doubt of him ; yea , believe him not : The fool hath said in his heart , there is no Christ . What shall I say of these men ? they are worse than Devils : that yielding evil spirit , could say , jesus I know : and these miscreants are still in the old tune of that tempting Devil ; Si tu es filius Dei , if thou be the Christ : O God that after so clear a Gospel , so many miraculous confirmations , so many thousand martyrdoms , so many glorious victories of truth , so many open confessions of Angels , men , devils , friends , enemies ; such conspirations of heaven and earth , such universal contestations of all ages and people ; there should be left any spark of this damnable infidelity in the false hearts of men . Behold then , ye despisers , & wonder , and vanish away : whom have all the Prophet's foretold ? or what have the prophecies of so many hundred , yea thousands of years foresaid , that is not with this word finished ? who could foretell these things , but the spirit of God ? who could accomplish them , but the Son of God ? He spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets , saith Zacharie : he hath spoken , and he hath done ; one true God in both : none other spirit could foresay these things should be done , none other power could do these things , thus fore showed this word therefore , can fit none but the mouth of God our Saviour , It is finished . We know whom we have believed ; thou art the Christ the Son of the living GOD. Let him that loves not the Lord jesus , be accursed to the death . 

Thus the prophecies are finished : Of the legal observations , with more brevity . Christ is the end of the Law : what law ? Ceremonial , Moral . Of the Moral , it was kept perfectly by himself , satisfied fully for us : Of the Ceremonial , it was referred to him , observed of him , fulfilled in him , abolished by him . There were nothing more easy , then to show you how all those jewish Ceremonies looked at Christ , how Circumcision , Passeover , the Tabernacle , both outer and inner , the Temple , the Laver , both the Altars , the tables of Shewbread , the Candlesticks , the Veil , the Holy of holies , the Ark , the Propitiatory , the pot of Manna , Aaron's rod , the high Priest , his order and line , his habits , his inaugurations , his washings , annointing , sprinckling , offer , the sacrifices , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and what ever jewish rite ; had their virtue from Christ , relation to him , and their end in him . This was then their last gasp ; for , now strait they died with Christ , now the veil of the Temple rend : As Austen well notes out of Mathewes order ; It tore then , when Christ's last breath passed : That conceit of Theophilact is witty ; that as the jews were wont to rend their garments , when they heard blasphemy : so the Temple not enduring these execrable blasphemies against the Son of God , tore his veil in pieces . But that is not all , the veil rend , is the obligation of the ritual law canceled ; the way into the heavenly Sanctuary opened ; the shadow giving room to the substance : in a word , it doth that which Christ saith ; Consummatum est . Even now then the law of ceremonies died : It had along & solemn burial , as Augustine sayeth well , perhaps figured in Moses , who died not lingeringly , but was thirty days mourned for : what means the Church of Rome to dig them up , now rotten in their graves ? & that , not as if they had been buried , but sown , with a plenteous increase ; yea , with the inverted usury of too many of you Citizens ; ten for one . It is a grave and deep censure of that resolute Hierome ; Ego è contrario loquar . etc. I say , saith he , and in spite of all the world dare maintain , that now the jewish ceremonies are pernicious and deadly , and whosoever shall observe them , whether he be jew or Gentile , in barathrum Diaboli devolutum ; shall fry in hell for it . Still Altars ? Still Priests ? sacrifices still ? still washings ? still unctions ? sprinkling , shaving , purifying ? still all , and more than all ? Let them hear but Augustine's censure , Quisquis nunc etc.  Whosoever shall now use them , as it were , raking them up out of their dust ; he shall not be Pius deductor corporis , sed impius sepulturae violator ; an impious and sacrilegious wretch , that ran sacks the quiet tombs of the dead . 

I say not that all Ceremonies are dead ; but the Law of Ceremonies , and of jewish . It is a sound distinction of them , that profound Peter Martyr hath in his Epistle , to that worthy Martyr , Father , Bishop Hooper : Some are typical , foresignifying Christ to come : some , of order and decency . Those are abrogated , not these : the jews had a fashion of prophesying in the Churches ; so the Christians from them , as Ambrose : the jews had an eminent pulpit of wood ; so we : they gave names at their Circumcision ; so we at Baptism : they sung Psalms melodiously in Churches , so do we , they paid and received tithes , so do we , they wrapped their dead in linen , with odours ; so we ; the jews had sureties at their admission into the church ; so we : these Instances might be infinite : the Spouse of Christ cannot be without her laces , and chains , and borders . Christ came not to dissolve order . But thou Lord , how long ? how long shall thy poor Church find her ornaments , her sorrows ? and see the dear sons of her womb , bleeding about these apples of strife , let me so name them not for their value ( even small things , when they are commanded , look for no small respect ) but for their event : the enemy is at the gates of our Syracuse ; how long will we suffer ourselves , taken up with angles and circles in the dust : ye men brethren , & fathers , help ; for God's sake put to your hands , to the quenching of this common flame ▪ the one side by humility & obedience ; the other , by compassion ; both by prayers and tears : who am I , that I should revive to you the sweet spirit of that divine Augustine , who when he heard and saw the bitter contentions betwixt two grave & famous Divines , Jerome and Ruffian ; Heu mihi , saith he , qui vos all cubi simul invenire non possum , Alas that I should never find you two together , how I would fall at your feet , how I would embrace them and weep upon them , and beseech you , either of you for other , and each for himself , both of you for the Church of God , but especially , for the weak , for whom Christ died , who not without their own great danger , see you two fight in this Theatre of the world . Yet let me do what he said he would do ; beg for peace , as for life : by your filial piety to the Church of GOD , whose ruins follow upon our divisions ; by your love of God's truth ; by the graces of that one blessed Spirit , whereby we are all informed and quickened , by the precious blood of that son of God , which this day , and this hour , was shed for our redemption , be inclined to peace & love , & though our brains be different , yet let our hearts be one . It was , as I heard , the dying speech of our late reverend , worthy and gracious Diocesan ; Modo me moriente vivat ac floreat Ecclesia ; O , yet if , when I am dead , the Church may live and flourish . 

What a spirit was here ? what a speech ? how worthy never to die ? how worthy of a soul so near to his heaven ? how worthy of so happy a succession ? Ye whom God hath made inheritors of this blessed care , who do no less long for the prosperity of Zion , live you to effect , what he did but live to wish ; all peace with ourselves , and war with none but Rome and Hell. And if there be any weyward Separatist , whose soul professeth to hate peace ; I fear to tell him Paul's message , yet I must : Would to God those were cut off that trouble you . How cut off ? As good Theodosius said to Demophilus , a contentious Prelate ; Si tu pacem fugis , etc.  If thou fly peace , I will make thee fly the Church . Alas , they do fly it : that which should be their punishment , they make their contentment , how are they worthy of pity ? As Optatus of his Donatists' ; they are brethren , might be companions , and will not . O wilful men ; whither do they run ? from one Christ to another ? Is Christ divided ? we have him , thanks be to our good God , and we hear him daily ; and whither shall we go from thee ? thou hast the words of eternal life . 

Thus the Ceremonies are finished , : now hear the end of his sufferings , with like patience and devotion : his death is here included ; it was so near , that he spoke of it as done ; and when it was done , all was done . How easy is it to lose ourselves in this discourse : how hard , not to be overwhelmed with matter of wonder ; and to find either beginning or end : his sufferings found an end , our thoughts cannot . Lo , with this word , he is happily waded out of those deeps of sorrows , whereof our conceits can find no bottom : yet let us with Peter , gird our coat , and cast ourselves a little into this sea . 

All his life was but a perpetual Passion : In that he became man , he suffered more than we can do , either while we are men , or when we cease to be men ; he humbled , yea , he emptied himself . We , when we cease to be here , are clothed upon . 2.  Cor. 5.  We both win by our being , and gain by our loss ; he lost , by taking our more or less to himself , that is , manhood . For , though ever as God , I and my Father are one : yet as man , My Father is greater than I That man should be turned into a beast , into a worm , into dust , into nothing ; is not so great a disparagement , as that GOD should become man : and yet it is not finished ; it is but begun . But what man ? If , as the absolute Monarch of the world , he had commanded the vassalage of all Emperors and Princes , and had trod on nothing but Crowns and Sceptres , and the necks of Kings , and bidden all the Potentates of the earth to attend his train ; this had carried some port with it ; suitable to the heroical Majesty of God's Son . no such matter , here is neither Form nor Beauty ; unless perhaps ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) the form of a servant : you have made me to serve , with your sins . Behold , he is a man to God ; a servant to man ; and , be it spoken with holy reverence , a drudge to his servants . He is despised and rejected of men ; yea ( as himself , of himself ) a worm , and no man , the shame of men , and contempt of the people . Who is the King of glory ? the Lord of hosts , he is the King of glory . Set these two together ; the King of glory ; the shame of men : the more honour , the more abasement . Look back to his Cradle , there you find him re●ected of the Bethlemites ; born and laid , alas , how homely , how unworthily ; sought for by Herod , exiled to Egypt , obscurely brought up in the Cottage of a poor Foster-father , transported and tempted by Satan , derided of his kindred , blasphemously traduced by the jews , pinched with hunger , restless , harbourlesse , sorrowful , persecuted by the Elders , and Pharisies , sold by his own servant , apprehended , arraigned , scourged , condemned , and yet it is not finished . Let us , with that Disciple , follow him a far off ; and passing over all his contemptuous usage in the way , see him brought to his Cross . Still the further we look , the more wonder : every thing adds to this ignominy of suffering , & triumph of overcoming : where was it ? not in a corner , as Paul saith to Festus , but in jerusalem , the eye , the heart of the world . Obscurity abateth shame : public notice heightens it : Before all Israel and before this Sun , saith GOD to David , when he would thoroughly shame him : In jerusalem , which he had honoured with his presence ; taught with his preachings , astonished with his miracles , bewailed with his tears ; OH jerusalem , jerusalem , how oft would I , and thou wouldst not : OH yet , if in this thy day . Cruelty and unkindness , after good desert , afflict so much more , as our merit hath been greater . Where about's ? without the gates : in Caluary , among the stinking bones of execrable Malefactors . Before , the glory of the place , bred shame , now the vileness of it . When ? but in the Passeover ; a time of greatest frequency , and concourse of all jews and Proselytes : An holy time , when they should receive the figure , they reject the substance : when they should kill and eat the Sacramental Lamb , in faith , in thankfulness , they kill the Lamb of GOD , our true Passeover , in cruelty and contempt . With whom ? The quality of our company , either increases or lessens shame . In the midst of thiefs ( saith one ) as the Prince of thiefs : there was no guile in his mouth , much less in his hands : yet behold he that thought it no robbery to be equal with God , is made equal to robbers and murderers ; yea superior in evil . What suffered he ? As all lives are not alike pleasant , so all deaths are not equally fearful ▪ there is not more difference betwixt some life and death , then betwixt one death and another . See the Apostles gradation ? He was made obedient to the death , even the death of the Cross . The Cross , a lingering , tormenting , ignominious death . The jews had four kinds of death for malefactors ; the towel , the sword , fire , stones ; each of these above other in extremity . Strangling with the towel , they accounted easiest ▪ the sword worse than the towel ; the fire worse than the sword : stoning worse than the fire , but this Roman death was worst of all . Cursed is every one that hangs on Tree . Yet ( as jerome well ) he is not therefore accursed , because he hangs ; but therefore he hangs , because he is accursed . He was made ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) a Curse for us. The curse was more than the shame : yet the shame is unspeakable ; and yet not more than the pain . Yet all that die the same death , are not equally miserable : the very thiefs fared better in their death than he . I hear of no irrision , no inscription , no taunts , no insultation on them : they had nothing but pain to encounter , he pain and scorn . An ingenuous and Noble nature , can worse brook this then the other ; any thing rather than disdainfulness and derision : especially , from a base enemy . I remember , that learned Father begins Israel's affliction , with Ismaels' persecuting laughter . The jews , the Soldiers , yea , the very Thiefs flouted him , and triumphed over his misery ; his blood cannot satisfy them , without his reproach . Which of his senses now was not a window to let in sorrow ? his eyes saw the tears of his Mother , and friends , the unthankful demeanour of Mankind , the cruel despite of his enemies , his ears heard the revile and blasphemies of the multitude ; and ( whether the place were noisome to his scent ) his touch felt the nails , his taste the gall . Look up OH all ye beholders , look upon this precious body , and see what part ye can find free ? that head which is adored and trembled at by the Angelical spirits , is all raked and harrowed with thorns : that face , of whom is said ; thou art fairer than the children of men , is all besmeared with the filthy spittle of the jews , and furrowed with his tears ; those eyes , clearer than the Sun , are darkened with the shadow of death ; those ears that hear the heavenly consorts of Angels , now are filled with the cursed speakings & scoffs of wretched men : those lips that spoke as never man spoke , that command the spirits both of light and darkness , are scornfully wet with vinegar and gall : those feet that trample on all the powers of hell ( his enemies are made his footstool ) are now nailed to the footstool of the Cross : those hands that freely sway the sceptre of the heavens , now carry the reed of reproach , & are nailed to the tree of reproach : that whole body , which was conceived by the holy Ghost , was all scourged , wounded , mangled : This is the outside of his sufferings . Was his heart free ? O no , the inner part or soul of this pain , which was unseen , is as far beyond these outward and sensible , as the soul is beyond the body ; God's wrath beyond the malice of men : these were but love-tricks to what his soul endured . OH all ye that pass by the way , behold and see , if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow : Alas , Lord , what can we see of thy sorrows ? we cannot conceive so much as the heinousness and desert of one of those sins , which thou barest : we can no more see thy pain , than we could undergo it ; only this we see , that what the infinite sins , of almost infinite men , committed against an infinite Majesty , deserved in infinite continuance ; all this thou in the short time of thy passion hast sustained . We may behold and see ; but all the glorious spirits in Heaven , cannot look into the depth of this suffering . Do but look yet a little into the passions of this his Passion : for , by the manner of his sufferings , we shall best see , what he suffered . Wise and resolute men do not complain of a little ; holy Martyrs have been racked , and would not be loosed ; what shall we say , if the author of their strength , God & man , bewray passions ? what would not have overwhelmed men , would not have made him shrink ; and what made him complain , could never have been sustained by men ▪ What shall we then think , if he were affrighted with terrors , perplexed with sorrows , and distracted with both these ? And lo , he was all these : for , first , here was an amazed fear ; for million of men to despair , was not so much as for him to fear : and yet it was no sleight fear : he began ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) to be astonished with terror . Which in the days of his flesh , offered up prayers and supplications , with strong cries and tears , to him that was able to help him , and was heard in that he feared . Never man was so afraid of the torments of hell , as Christ ( standing in our room ) of his father's wrath . Fear is still suitable to apprehension . Never man could so perfectly apprehend this cause of fear ; he felt the chastisements of our peace , yea , the curse of our sins ; and therefore might well say with David ; I suffer thy terrors with a troubled mind ; yea , with job , The arrows of God are in me , and the terrors of God fight against me . With fear , there was a deiecting sorrow ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) My soul is on all sides heavy to the death : his strong cries ; his many tears are witnesses of this Passion : he had formerly shed tears of pity , and tears of love , but now of anguish : he had before sent forth cries of mercy ; never of complaint till now : when the Son of God weeps and cries , what shall we say or think ? yet further , betwixt both these and his love , what a conflict was there ? It is not amiss distinguished , that he was always in agone ; but now in 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , in a struggling passion of mixed grief . Behold , this field was not without sweat and blood ; yea a sweat of blood . O what man or Angel can conceive the taking of that heart , that without all outward violence , merely , out of the extremity of his own Passion , bled ( through the flesh and skin ) not some faint dew , but solid drops of blood ? no thorns , no nails , fetched blood from him , with so much pain as his own thoughts : he saw the fierce wrath of his Father , and therefore feared : he saw the heavy burden of our sins to be undertaken ; and thereupon , besides fear , justly grieved ; he saw the necessity of our eternal damnation , if he suffered not : if he did suffer , of our redemption , and therefore his love encountered both grief and fear . In itself , he would not drink of that cup : in respect of our good , and his decree , he would and did ; and while he thus striveth , he sweats and bleeds . There was never such a combat , never such a bloodshed , and yet it is not finished ; I dare not say with some Schoolmen , that the sorrow of his Passion , was not so great as the sorrow of his compassion : yet that was surely exceeding great . To see the ungracious carelessness of mankind , the slender fruit of his sufferings , the sorrows of his mother , Disciples , friends ; to foresee from the watchtower of his Cross , the future temptations of his children , desolations of his Church ; all these must needs strike deep into a tender heart . These he still sees and pities , but without passion ; then he suffered in seeing them . 

Can we yet say any more ? Lo , all these sufferings are aggravated by his fullness of knowledge , and want of comfort ▪ for , he did not shut his eyes , as one saith , when he drunk this cup : he saw how dreggish , and knew how bitter it was . Sudden evils afflict , if not less , shorter . He foresaw , and foresaid every particular he should suffer : so long as he foresaw , he suffered : the expectation of evil , is not less than the sense : to look long for good , is a punishment ; but for evil is a torment . no passion works upon an unknown object : as no love , so no fear is of what we know not . Hence men fear not hell , because they foresee it not : if we could see that pit open before we come at it , it would make us tremble at our sins , and our knees to knock together , as Baltazars , and perhaps , without faith , to run mad at the horror of judgement . He saw the burden of all particular sins to be laid upon him ; every dram of his father's wrath , was measured out to him , ere he touched this potion ; this cup was full , and he knew that it must be wringd , not a drop left : it must be finished . O yet , if as he foresaw all his sorrows , so he could have seen some mixture of refreshing . But I found none to comfort me , no , none to pity me . And yet it is a poor comfort that arises from pity . Even so , OH Lord , thou treadest this winepress alone , none to accompany , none to assist thee . I remember , Ruffinus in his Ecclesiastical story reports , that one Theodorus a Martyr , told him , that when he was hanging ten hours upon the rack for religion , under julians' persecution , his jointes distended and distorted , his body tightly tortured with change of Executioners ; so as never age ( saith he ) could remember the like : he felt no pain at all , but continued indeed , all the while in the sight of all men , singing and smiling ▪ for there stood a comely young man by him on his libbet ( an Angel rather , in form of a man ) which with a clean towel , still wiped off his sweat , and poured cool water upon his racked limbs ▪ wherewith he was so refreshed , that it grieved him to be let down . Even the greatest torments are easy , when they have answerable comforts : but a wounded and comfortless spirit , who can bear ? If yet but the same Messenger of GOD , might have attended his Cross , that appeared in his agony ; and might have given ease to their Lord , as he did to his servant . And yet , what can the Angels help , where God will smite ? Against the violence of men , against the fury of Satan , they have prevailed in the Cause of GOD , for men : they dare not , they cannot comfort , where God will afflict . When our Saviour had been wrestling with Satan in the end of his Lent , than they appeared to him , and served ; but now , while about the same time ; he is wrestling with the wrath of his Father for us , not an Angel dare be seen , to look out of the windows of heaven to relieve him ; for men , much less could they , if they would ; but what did they ? Miserable comforters are ye all : the Soldiers , they stripped him , scorned him with his purple , crown , reed , spat on him , smote him ; the passengers , they revi●ed him , and insulting , wagging their heads and hands at him ; Hey , thou that destroyest the Temple , come down , etc The Elders and Scribes ; alas , they have bought his blood , suborned witnesses , incensed Pilate preferred Barrabas , undertook the guilt of his death , cried out , Crucify , crucify : Ho , thou that savedst others . His Disciples , alas : they forsook him , one of them forswears him ; another runs away naked , rather than he will stay and confess him . His mother and other friends : they look on indeed , and sorrow with him ; but to his discomfort . Where the grief is extreme , and respects near , partnership doth but increase sorrow . Paul chides this love : what do you weeping and breaking my heart ? The tears of those we love , do either slacken out hearts , or wound them . Who then shall comfort him ? himself ? Sometimes our own thoughts find a way to succour us , unknown to others : no , not himself . Doubtless ( as Aquinas ) the influence of the higher part of the soul , was restrained from the aid of the inferior : My soul is filled with evils . Psalm . 87.4 . Who then ? his Father ? here , here ; was his hope : If the Lord had not holpen me , my soul had almost dwelled in silence : I and my Father are one . But now ( alas , ) he , even he , delivers him into the hands of his enemies ; when he hath done , turns his back upon him as a stranger ; yea ; he woundeth him as an enemy . The Lord would break him . esay , 53. 10.  Yet any thing is light to the Soul , whiles the comforts of God sustain it : who can dismay , where God will relieve ? But here , My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ? What a word was here , to come from the mouth of the Son of GOD ? My Disciples are men , weak and fearful ; no marvel , if they forsake me . The jews are themselves , cruel and obstinate . Men are men , graceless , and unthankful . Devil's are according to their nature , spiteful and malicious . All these do but their kind ; and let them do it : but thou , OH Father , thou that hast said ; This is my well-beloved son , in whom I am well pleased : thou of whom I have said , It is my father that glorifies me , what ? forsaken me ? Not only brought me to this shame , smitten me , unregarded me ; but , as it were , forgotten , yea , forsaken me ? What , even me , my Father ? How many of thy constant servants have suffered heavy things : yet in the multitudes of the sorrows of their hearts , thy presence and comforts have refreshed their souls . Hast thou relieved them , and dost thou forsake me ? me , thine only , dear , natural , eternal son . OH ye heavens and earth , how could you stand , whiles the Maker of you thus complained . Ye stood ; but partaking after a sort of his Passion : the earth trembled and shaken , her rocks tore , her graves opened , the heavens withdrew their light , as not daring to behold this sad and fearful spectacle . 

O dear Christians , how should these earthen and rocky hearts of ours shake , and rend in pieces at this Meditation ? how should our faces be covered with darkness , and our joy be turned into heaviness ? All these voices and tears , and sweats , & pangs are for us , yea , from us. Shall the Son of God thus smart for our sins , yea with our sins and shall not we grieve for our own ? shall he weep to us in this Market place , and shall not we mourn ? Nay , shall ●e sweat and bleed for us , and shall not we weep for ourselves ? Shall he thus lamentably shrieke out , under his Father's wrath , and shall not we tremble ? Shall the heavens and earth suffer with him , and we suffer nothing ? I call you not to a weak & idle pity of our glorious Saviour : to what purpose ? His injury was our glory . no , no ; Ye daughters of jerusalem , weep not for me ; but weep for yourselves : for our sins , that have done this ; not for his sorrow that suffered it : not for his pangs , that were ; but for our own , that should have been , and ( if we repent not ) shall be . O how grievous , how deadly are our sins , that cost the son of God ( besides blood ) so much torment ? how far are our souls gone , that could not be ransomed with any easier price ? that that took so much of this infinite Redeemer of men , God and man , how can it choose but swallow up and confound thy soul , which is but finite and sinful ? If thy soul had been in his soul's stead , what had become of it ? it shall be , if his were not in stead of thine . This weight that lies thus heavy on the Son of God , and wrung from him these tears , sweat , blood , and these unconceivable groans of his afflicted spirit , how should it choose but press down thy soul to the bottom of hell ? & so it will do , if he have not suffered it for thee , thou must and shalt suffer it for thyself . Go now thou lewd man , and make thyself merry with thy sins ; laugh at the uncleanenesses , or bloodinesse of thy youth : thou little knowest the price of a sin : thy soul shall do , thy Saviour did , when he cried out , to the amazement of Angels , & horror of men ; My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ? But now no more of this ; It is finished : the greater conflict , the more happy victory . Well doth he find and feel of his Father , what his type said before , He will not chide always , nor keep his anger for ever . It is fearful ; but in him , short : eternal to sinners ; short to his Son , in whom the Godhead dwelled bodily . Behold ; this storm , wherewith all the powers of the world were shaken , is now over . The Elders , Pharisies , judas , the soldiers , Priests , witnesses , judges , thiefs , Executioners , devils , have all tired themselves in vain , with their own malice ; and he triumphs over them all , upon the throne of his Cross : his enemies are vanquished , his father satisfied , his soul with this word at rest and glory ; It is finished . Now there is no more betraying , agonies , araignements , scourge , scoffing , crucifying , conflicts , terrors ; all is finished . Alas beloved , and will we not yet let the son of God be at rest ? do we now again go about to fetch him out of his glory , to scorn and crucify him ? I fear to say it : God's spirit dare and doth ; They crucify again to themselves the Son of God , and make a mock of him . To themselves , not in himself : that they cannot , it is no thank to them ; they would do it . See and consider , the notoriously-sinfull conversations of those , that should be Christians , offer violence unto our glorified Saviour , they stretch their hands to heaven , and pull him down from his throne , to his Cross : they tear him with thorns , pierce him with nails , load him with reproaches . thou hatest the jews , spittest at the name of judas , railest on Pilate , condemnest the cruel butchers of Christ ; yet , thou canst blaspheme , and swear him quite over , curse , swagger , lie , oppress , boil with lust , scoff , riot , and livest like a debauched man ; yea , like an human Beast ; yea , like an unclean Devil . Cry Hosanna as long as thou wilt ; thou art a Pilot , a jew , a judas , an Executioner of the Lord of life ; and so much greater shall thy judgement be , by how much thy light and his glory , is more . O , beloved , is it not enough that he died once for us ? Were those pains so light , that we should every day redouble them ? Is this the entertainment that so gracious a Saviour hath deserved of us by dying ? Is this the recompense of that infinite love of his , that thou shouldst thus cruelly vex and wound him with thy sins ? Every of our sins is a thorn ; and nail , and spear to him : while thou pourest down thy drunken carouses , thou givest thy Saviour a potion of gall ; while thou despisest his poor servants , thou spittest on his face , while thou puttest on thy proud dresses , and liftest up thy vain heart with high conceits , thou s●ttest a Crown of thorns on his head : while thou wringest and oppressest his poor children , thou whippest him , and drawest blood of his hands & feet . thou hypocrite , how darest thou offer to receive the Sacrament of GOD , with that hand , which is thus imbrued with the blood of him whom thou receivest ? In every Ordinary , thy profane tongue walks , in the disgrace of the religious and conscionable . thou makest no scruple of thine own sins , and scornest those that do : Not to be wicked , is crime enough : hear him that saith , Saul , Saul why persecutest thou me ? Saul strikes at Damascus : Christ suffers in heaven . thou strikest ; Christ jesus smarteth , and will revenge . These are the ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) afterings of Christ's sufferings : in himself it is finished ; in his members it is not , till the world be finished . We must toil , & groan , and bleed ; that we may reign ; if he had not done so , It had not been finished . This is our warfare ; this is the region of our sorrow and death . Now are we set upon the sandy pavement of our Theatre , and are matched with all sorts of evils ; evil men , evil spirits , evil accidents ; and ( which are worst ) our own evil hearts ; tentations , crosses , persecutions , sicknesses , wants , infamies , death ; all these must in our courses , be encountered by the law of our profession . What should we do but strive & suffer , as our General hath done ; that we may reign as he doth , and once triumph in our Consummatum est ? God and his Angels sit upon the Scaffolds of heaven , and behold us : our Crown is ready ; our day of deliverance shall come ; yea , our redemption is near : when all tears shall be wiped from our eyes ; and we that have sown in tears , shall reap in joy . In the mean time , let us possess our souls , not in patience only , but in comfort : let us adore and magnify our Saviour in his sufferings , and imitate him in our own : our sorrows shall have an end ; our joys shall not : our pains shall soon be finished ; our glory shall be finished , but never ended . 

Thus his sufferings are finished ; now together with them , Man's salvation . Who knows not , that man had made himself a deep debtor , a bankrupt , an outlaw to GOD ? Our sins are our debts , & by sins , death . Now , in this word and act , our sins are discharged , death endured , & therefore we cleared : the debt is paid , the score is crossed , the Creditor satisfied , the Debtors acquitted , and since there was no other quarrel saved : we are all sick and that mortally : Sin is the disease of the soul : Quot vitia , ●●t febres , saith Chrysostome ; so many sins , so many Fevers , and those pestilent . What wonder is it , that we have so much plague , while we have so much sin ? Our Saviour is the Physician ? The whole need not the Physician , but the sick : wherein ? He heals all our infirmities : he heals them after a miraculous manner ; not by giving us receipts , but by taking our receipts for us. A wonderful Physician ; a wonder full course of cure One while he would cure us by abstinence ; our superfluity , by his forty day's emptiness ▪ according to that old Rule ; Hunger cures the diseases of Gluttony . Another while , by Exercise : He went up ▪ and down from City to City , and in the day was preaching in the Temple , in the night , praying in the Mount. then , by diet ; Take , eat , this is my body : and , Let this cup pass . After that yet , by sweat ; such a sweat as never was ; a bloody one : yet more by incision ; they pierced his hands , feet , side : and yet again by potion ; a bitter potion of vinegar and gall . And lastly , which is both the strangest , and strongest receipt of all , by dying : Which died for us ; that whether we wake or sleep , we should live together with him . We need no more , we can go no further ; there can be no more physic of this kind ▪ there are cordials after these , of his Resurrection and Ascension ; no more penal receipts . By this blood we have redemption , Ephes , 1.7 . justification , Rom. 3.24 . Reconciliation , Colos . 1 20.  Sanctification , 1.  Pet. 1.2 . Entrance into glory , Heb. 10.19 . Is it not now finished ? Woe were us , if he had left but one mite of satisfaction upon our score , to be discharged by our souls : and woe be to them that derogate from Christ , that they may charge themselves ; that botch up these al-sufficiently meritorious sufferings of Christ , as imperfect with the superfluities of flesh and blood . Maledictus homo , qui spem ponit in homine . We may not with patience see Christ wronged by his false friends : As that heroical Luther said in the like ; Cursed be the silence that here forbeareth . To be short , here be two injuries intolerable ; both give Christ the lie upon his Cross : It is finished . no , somewhat remains : the fault is discharged , not the punishment . Of punishments , the eternal is quit , not the temporal . It is finished by Christ : no , there wants yet much ; the satisfactions of Saints applied by his Vicar ; add men's sufferings to Christ's , than the treasure is full ; till then , It is not finished . 

Two qualities strive for the first place in these two opinions ; Impiety and absurdity ; I know not whither to prefer . For impiety ; here is GOD taxed of injustice , unmercifulnesse , insufficiency , falsehood . Of injustice , that he forgives a sin , and yet punishes for that which he hath forgiven : unmercifulnesse , that he forgives not while he forgives , but doth it by halves ; insufficiency , that his ransom must be supplied by men : Falshood , in that he saith , It is finished , when it is not . For Absurdity , how gross and monstrous are these Positions ? that at once the same sin should be remitted and retained ; that there should be a punishment , where there is no fault : that , what could strike off our eternal punishment , did not wipe off the temporal ; that he which paid our pounds , sticks at our farthings , that God will retain what man may discharge , that it is , and is not finished . 

If there be any opinions , whose mention confutes them , these are they . None can be more vain , none had more need of solidity : for , this prop bears up alone , the weight of all those million of Indulgences , which Rome creates and sells to the world . That Strumpet would well near go naked , if this were not . These spiritual Treasures , fetch in the Temporal : which yet our reverend and learned Fulke , justly calls a most blasphemous & beggarly principle : it brings in whole chests , yea mines of gold , like the Pope's Indieses : and hath not so much as a rag of proof to cover it , whether of Antiquity , of Reason , of Scripture . Not of Antiquity , for , these jubilee Proclamations began but about three hundred years ago . Not of Reason , how should one mere man pay for another , dispense with another , to another , by another ? Not of Scripture , which hath flatly said , The blood of jesus Christ his son , purgeth us from all sin : and yet I remember , that acute Sadeel hath taught me , that this practice is according to Scripture : what Scripture ? He cast the money-changers out of the Temple , and said ; Ye have made my house a den of thiefs . Which also Joachim , their prophetical Abbot , well applies to this purpose . Some modest Doctors of Lovan , would fain have minced this Antichristian blasphemy ; who began to teach , that the passions of the Saints are not so by Indulgences applied , that they become true satisfactions ; but that they only serve to move God , by the sight of them , to apply unto us Christ's satisfaction . But these meal-mouthed Divines , were soon charmed ; four several Popes ( as their Cardinal confesseth ) fell upon the neck of them , and their opinion ; Leo the tenth , Pius the fifth , Gregory the thirteenth , and Clemens the sixth : and with their furious Bulls , bellow out threats against them , and toss them in the air for heretics , and teach them , upon pain of a Curse , to speak home with Bellarmine , Passionibus sanctorum expiari delicta : and strait , Applicari nobis sanctorum passiones ad redimendas poenas , quas pro peccatis Deo de bemus : that by the sufferings of Saints , our sins are expiated ; and that , by them applied ; we are redeemed from those punishments , which we yet owe to God. Blasphemy , worthy the tearing of garments : how is it finished by Christ , if men must supply ? O blessed Saviour , was every drop of thy blood enough to redeem a world , and do we yet need the help of men ? How art thou a perfect Saviour , if our brethren also must be our redeemers ? O ye blessed Saints , how would you abhor this sacrilegious glory ? and with those holy Apostles , yea , that glorious Angel , say , Vide ne feceris ; and with those wise Virgins : lest there will not be enough for us , and you , go to them that sell , and buy for yourselves . For us , we envy not their multitude ; Let them have as many Saviour's as Saintes , and as many Saints as men : we know with Ambrose , Christi passio adiutore non eguit ; Christ's passion needs no helper : and therefore , with that worthy Martyr , dare say , None but Christ , none but Christ . Let our souls die , if he cannot save them ; let them not fear their death or torment ; if he have finished . Hear this , thou languishing and afflicted soul : There is not one of thy sins , but it is paid for ; not one of thy debts in the s●roll of God , but it is crossed ; not one farthing of all thine infinite ransom is unpaide . Alas , thy prosperity of fools destroyeth them ; yea , the confidence of prosperity : thou sayest , God is merciful , thy Saviour bounteous , his passion absolute : All these , and yet thou mayest be condemned . Merciful , not unjust ; bountiful , not lavish ; absolutely sufficient for all , not effectual to all . Whatsoever God is , what art thou ? Here is the doubt : thou sayest well ; Christ is the good Shepherd . wherein ? He gives his life , but for whom ? for his sheep . What is this to thee ? ? while thou art secure , profane , impenitent , thou art a Wolf , or a Goat : My sheep hear my voice : what is his voice , but his precepts ? where is thine obedience to his commandments ? If thou wilt not hear his law , never harken to his gospel : here is no more mercy for thee , then if there were no Saviour . He hath finished , for those in whom he hath begun . If thou have no beginnings of grace as yet , hope not for ever finishing of salvation ; Come to me all ye that are heavy laden , saith Christ : thou shalt get nothing , if thou come when he calls thee not . thou art not called , and canst not be refreshed , unless thou be laden , not with sin ( this alone keeps thee away from God ) but with conscience of sin : A broken and a contrite heart , OH God , thou wilt not despise . Is thy heart wounded with thy sin ? doth grief & hatred strive within thee , whether shall be more ? are the desires of thy soul with God ? dost thou long for holiness , complain of thy imperfections , struggle against thy corruptions ? thou art the man , fear not , It is finished . that law which thou wouldst have kept and couldst not ; thy Saviour could , and did keep for thee , that salvation which thou couldst never work out alone ( alas poor impotent creatures , what can we do towards heaven without him , which cannot move on earth but in him : ) he alone for thee hath finished . Look up therefore boldly to the throne of GOD , and , upon the truth of thy repentance and faith , know , that there is no quarrel against thee in heaven , nothing but peace and joy : All is finished : he would be spitted on , that he might wash thee , he would be covered with scornful robes , that thy sins might be covered : he would be whipped , that thy soul might not be scourged eternally : he would thirst , that thy soul might be satisfied : he would bear all his Father's wrath , that thou mightest bear none ; he would yield to death , that thou mightest never taste of it : he would be in sense for a time as forsaken of his father , that thou mightest be received for ever . 

Now bid thy Soul return to her rest , and enjoin it David's task . Praise the Lord , OH my soul ; and , What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits ? I will take the cup of salvation , and call upon the name of the Lord And , as ravished from thyself with the sweet apprehension of this mercy , call all the other creatures to the fellowship of this joy , with that divine esay : Rejoice , OH ye heavens , for the Lord hath done it , shout ye lower parts of the earth , burst forth into praises ye mountains . for , the Lord hath redeemed jacob , and will be glorified in Israel . And even now , begin that heavenly Song , which shall never end with those glorified Saints ; Praise and honour ; and glory , and power , be to him that sitteth upon the throne , and to the Lamb for evermore . 

Thus , our speech of Christ's last words is finished . His last act accompanied his words ; our speech must follow it : let it not want your devout & careful attention ; He bowed and gave up the ghost . 

The Cross was a slow death , & had more pain than speed ; whence a second violence must dispatch the crucified ; their bones must be broken , that their hearts might break . Our Saviour stays not death's leisure , but willingly and courageously meets him in the way , and like a Champion that scorns to be overcome , yea , knows he cannot be , yieldeth in the midst of his strength , that he might by dying , vanquish death . He bowed and gave up : Not bowing , because he had given up , but because he would . He cried with a loud voice , saith Matthew . Nature was strong , he might have lived ; but he gave up the Ghost , and would die , to show himself Lord of life and Death . O wondrous example , he that gave life to his enemies , gave up his own : he gives them to live , that persecute and hate him ; and himself will die the while , for those that hate him . He bowed and gave up : not they ; they might crown his head , they could not bow it : they might vex his spirit ; not take it away : they could not do that without leave ; this they could not do , because they had no leave . He alone would bow his head , and give up his Ghost : I have power to lay down my life : Man gave him not his life ; man could not bereave it . no man takes it from me . Alas , who could ? The highpriestes forces , when they came against him armed ; he said but , I am he , they flee and fall backward . How easy a breath dispersed his enemies ? whom he might as easily have bidden the earth , yea , hell to swallow , or fire from heaven to devour . Who commanded the Devils and they obeyed : could not have been attached by men : he must give not only leave , but power to apprehend himself , else they had not lived to take him : he is laid hold of ; Peter fights : Put up saith Christ , Thinkest thou that I cannot pray to my Father , and he will give me more than 12.  Legions of Angels ? What an Army were here ? more than threescore and twelve thousand Angels , and every Angel able to subdue a world of men : he could , but would not be rescued ; he is led by his own power , not by his enemies ; and stands now before Pilate , like the scorn of men ; crowned , robbed , scourged , with an Ecce homo ; Yet thou couldst have no power against me , unless it were given thee from above . 

Behold , he himself must give Pilate power against himself , else he could not be condemned : he will be condemned , lifted up , nailed ; yet no death without himself . He shall give his soul an offering for sin . esay , 53.10 . no action , that savours of constraint , can be meritorious , he would deserve , therefore he would suffer and die . He bowed his head , and gave up the Ghost , OH gracious and bountiful Saviour , he might have kept his soul within his teeth , in spite of all the world , the weakness of God is stronger than men : and if he had but spoken the word , the heavens and earth should have vanished away before him : but he would not . Behold , when he saw that impotent man could not take away his soul , he gave it up , and would die , that we might live . See here a Saviour , that can contemn his own life for ours : & cares not to be dissolved in himself , that we might be united to his Father . Skin for skin , saith the Devil , and all that he hath , a man will give for his life . Lo here to prove Satan a liar , skin and life and all , hath Christ jesus given for us. We are besotted with the earth , and make base shifts to live ; one with a maimed body , another with a perjured soul , a third with a rotten name : and how many had rather neglect their soul , than their life , and will rather renounce and curse GOD , then die ? It is a shame to tell ; many of us Christians dote upon life , and tremble at death ; and show ourselves fools in our excess of love , Cowards in our fear . Peter denies Christ thrice , and forswears him ; Marcellinus twice casts grains of incense into the Idols fire ; Ecebolius turns thrice ; Spira revolts and despairs : O let me live , saith the fearful soul . whither dost thou reserve thyself , thou weak and timorous Creature ? or what wouldst thou do with thyself ? thou hast not thus learned Christ : he dies voluntarily for thee , thou wilt not be forced to die for him : he gave up the Ghost for thee : thou wilt not let others take it from thee for him , thou wilt not let him take it for himself . 

When I look back to the first Christians , and compare their zealous contempt of death with our backwardness : I am at once amazed and ashamed : I see there even women ( the feebler sex ) running with their little ones in their arms , for the preferment of martyrdom , and ambitiously striving for the next blow . I see holy and tender virgins , choosing rather a sore and shameful death , then honourable Espousals . I hear the blessed Martyrs , entreating their Tyrants and tormentors for the honour of dying : Jgnatius , amongst the rest , fearing lest the beasts will not devour him : and vowing the first violence to them , that he might be dispatched . And , what less courage was there , in our memorable and glorious forefathers of the last of this age ? and do we , their cold and feeble offspring , look pale at the face of a fair and natural death ; abhor the violent , though for Christ ? Alas , how have we gathered rust with our long peace ? Our unwillingness is from inconsideration , from distrust . Look but up to Christ jesus upon his Cross , and see him bowing his head , and breathing out his soul , and these fears shall vanish : he died , and wouldst thou live ? he gave up the Ghost , and wouldst thou keep it ? whom wouldst thou follow , if not thy Redeemer ? If thou die not , if not willingly , thou goest contrary to him , and shalt never meet him . Though thou shouldst every day die a death for him , thou couldst never requite his one death , and dost thou stick at one ? Every word hath his force , both to him & thee : he died , which is Lord of life , and commander of death ; thou art but a tenant of life , a subject of death ; And yet it was not a dying , but a giving up , not of a vanishing & airy breath , but of a spiritual soul , which after separation , hath an entire life in itself . He gave up the Ghost : he died , that hath both overcome and sanctified , and sweetened death . What fearest thou ? he hath pulled out the sting and malignity of death . If thou be a Christian , carry it in thy bosom , it hurts thee not . Darest thou not trust thy Redeemer ? If he had not died , death had been a Tyrant , now he is a slave . OH Death where is thy sting ? OH Grave where is thy victory ? Yet the Spirit of God saith not , he died , but gave up the Ghost . The very Heathen Poet saith : He durst not say , that a good man dies . It is worth the noting ( me thinks ) that when Saint Luke would describe to us the death of Ananias and Sapphira , he sayeth ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) he expired : but when Saint john would describe Christ's death , he saith , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 he gave up the Ghost : how ? how gave he it up , and whither ? so , as after a sort he retained it : his soul parted from his body ; his Godhead was never distracted either from soul or body : this union is not in nature , but in person . If the natures of Christ could be divided , each would have his subsistence ; so there should be more persons . God forbid , one of the natures therefore may have a separation in itself : the soul from the body : one nature cannot be separate from other , or either nature from the person . If you cannot conceive , wonder : the Son of GOD hath wedded unto himself our humanity , without all possibility of divorce ; the body hangs on the Cross , the soul is yielded , the Godhead is eviternally united to them both ; acknowledges , sustains them both . The soul in his agony feels not the presence of the God head ; the body upon the Cross feels not the presence of the soul . Yet as the Fathers of Chalcedon say truly , ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , ) indivisibly , inseparably is the Godhead , with both of these , still and ever , one and the same person . The Passion of Christ ( as Augustine ) was the sleep of his Divinity : so I may say : The death of Christ , was the sleep of his humanity . If he sleep , he shall do well , said that Disciple , of Lazarus ▪ Death was too weak to dissolve the eternal bonds of this heavenly conjunction . Let not us Christians go too much by sense ; we may be firmly knit to God , & not feel it : thou canst not hope to be so near to thy God as Christ was , united personally : thou canst not fear , that God should seem more absent from thee , than he did from his own Son ; yet was he still one with both body and soul , when they were divided from themselves : when he was absent to sense ; he was present to faith ; when absent in vision , yet in union one , and the same : so will he be to thy soul , when it is at worst . He is thine , and thou art his : if thy hold seem loosened , his is not . When temptations will not let thee see him , he sees thee , and possesses thee ; only believe thou against sense , above hope ; & though he kill thee , yet trust in him . whither gave he it up ? Himself expresses ▪ Father , into thy hands , and , This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise . It is justice to restore whence we receive ; Into thy hands . He knew where it should be both safe & happy : true ; he might be bold ( thou sayest ) as the Son with the father . The servants have done so ; David before him , Steven after him . And lest we should not think it our common right ; Father saith he , I will that those thou hast given me , may be with me , even where I am : he wills it , therefore it must be . It is not presumption , but faith , to charge God with thy spirit ; neither can there ever be any believing soul so mean , that he should refuse it : all the fear is in thyself , how canst thou trust thy jewel with a stranger ? What sudden familiarity is this ? God hath been with thee , and gone by thee ; thou hast not saluted him : and now in all the haste , thou bequeathest thy soul to him ▪ On what acquaintance ? how desperate is this carelessness . If thou have but a little money , whither thou keep it , thou layest it up in the Temple of trust ; or whether thou let it ; thou art sure of good assurance , sound bonds ; if but a little land ; how carefully dost thou make firm conveyances to thy desired heirs ? If goods , thy will hath taken secure order , who shall enjoy them ; we need not teach you Citizens to make sure work for your estates : if Children , thou disposest of them in trades , with portions , only of thy soul ( which is thyself ) thou knowest not what shall become . The world must have it no more ; thyself wouldst keep it , but thou knowest thou canst not : Satan would have it ; and thou knowest not whether he shall : thou wouldst have God have it ; and thou knowest not whether he will ; yea , thy heart is now ready with Pharaoh to say ; Who is the Lord ? OH the fearful and miserable estate of that man , that must part with his soul , he knows not whither : which , if thou wouldst avoid , ( as this very warning shall judge thee if thou do not ) be acquainted with GOD in thy life , that thou mayest make him the Guardian of thy soul in thy death . Given up it must needs be ; but to him that hath governed it : if thou have given it to Satan in thy life ; how canst thou hope God will in thy death entertain it ? Did you not hate me , and expel me out of my father's house ; how then come ye to me now in this time of your tribulation , said jeptha , to the men of Gilead . no , no , either give up thy soul to God while he calls for it in his word , in the provocations of his love , in his afflictions , in the holy motions of his spirit to thine : or else when thou wouldst give it , he will none of it , but as a judge to deliver it to the Tormentor . 

What should God do with an unclean , drunken , profane , proud , covetous soul ? without holiness , it is no seeing of God : Departed from me , ye wicked , I know ye not ; go to the gods you have served . See how God is even with men : they had in the time of the Gospel , said to the holy one of Israel , Departed from us ; now in the time of judgement , he saith to them ; Departed from me , They would not know God when they might ; now God will not know them , when they would . 

Now therefore ( beloved ) if thou wouldst not have God scorn the offer of thy deathbed , fit thy soul for him in thy health ; furnish it with grace , enure it to a sweet conversation with the God of heaven : then mayest thou boldly give it up , and he shall as graciously receive it , yea fetch it by his Angels to his glory· 

He gave up the Ghost . We must do as he did : not all with the same success . Giving up , supposes a receiving , a returning . This inmate that we have in our bosom , is sent to lodge here for a time ; may not dwell here always . The right of this tenure , is the Lords , not ours . As he said of the hatchet : It is but lent , it must be restored : It is ours to keep , his to dispose and require . See and consider both our privilege and charge . It is not with us as with brute Creatures : we have a living ghost to inform us , which yet is not ours , ( and , alas , what is ours , if our souls be not ? ) but must be given up , to him that gave it . 

Why do we live , as those that took no keep of so glorious a guest ? as those that should never part with it , as those that think it given them to spend , not to return with a reckoning ? 

If thou hadst no soul , if a mortal one , if thine own , if never to be required ; how couldst thou live but sensually ? O remember but who thou art , what thou hast , and whether thou must ; and thou shalt live like thyself , while thou art , and give up thy ghost confidently , when thou shalt cease to be . Neither is there here more certainty of our departure then comfort ▪ Carry this with thee to thy deathbed , and see if it can refresh thee , when all the world cannot give thee one dram of comfort . Our spirit is our dearest riches : if we should lose it , here were just cause of grief . Howl and lament , if thou thinkest thy soul perishes : it is not forfeited , but surrendered . How safely doth our soul pass through the gates of death , without any impeachment , while it is in the hands of the Almighty ? Woe were us , if he did not keep it while we have it ; much more when we restore it . We give it up to the same hands that created , infused , redeemed , renewed , that do protect ; preserve , establish , and will crown it : I know whom I have believed , & am persuaded that he is able to keep that , which I have committed to him against that day . OH secure and happy estate of the godly : OH blessed exchange of our condition : while our soul dwells in our breast , how is it subject to infinite miseries ? distempered with passions , charged with sins , vexed with tentations ; above none of these : how should it be otherwise ? This is our pilgrimage ; that our home : this our wilderness , that our land of promise , this our bondage , that our kingdom : our impotency causeth this our sorrow . 

When our soul is once given up , what evil shall reach unto heaven ; and wrestle with the Almighty ? Our loathness to give up , comes from our ignorance and infidelity . no man goes unwillingly to a certain preferment , I desire to be dissolved , saith Paul ; I have served thee , I have believed thee , and now I come to thee , saith Luther : The voices of Saints , not of men . If thine heart can say thus , thou shalt not need to entreat with old Hilarion , Egredere mea anima , egredere , quid times ? Go thy ways forth my soul , go forth , what fearest thou ? but it shall fly up alone cheerfully from thee ; and give up itself , into the arms of God , as a faithful Creator , and Redeemer . This earth is not the element of thy soul , it is not where it should be : It shall be no less thine , when it is more the owners . Think now seriously of this point ; God's Angel is abroad , and strikes on all sides ? we know not which of our turns shall be the next : we are sure , we carry deaths enough within us. If we be ready , our day can not come too soon . Stir up thy soul to an heavenly cheerfulness , like thy Saviour : Know but whither thou art going ; & thou canst not but with divine Paul , say from our Saviour's mouth , even in this sense : It is a more blessed thing to give , then to receive God cannot abide an unwilling guest : give up that spirit to him , which he hath given thee , and he will both receive what thou givest , and give it thee again with that glory and happiness , which can never be conceived , and shall never be ended . Even so Lord jesus , Come quickly . 

Gloria in excelsis DEO . 





〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Sit mors mea in remissio nem omnium iniquitatum mearum . Vt usus rationis tollatur . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Aug. ad Hie. Dum volunt & judaei esse & Christiani , nec judaei sunt , nec christiani . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Ex quo apparet , tunc scissum esse , cum Christus emisit spiritum . Ceremoniae sicut defuncta corpora necessariorum officijs deducenda erant ad sepulturam , non simulatè , sed religiosè , nec deserenda continuò . Augustin . Ego è contrario loquar , & reclamante mundo liberâ voce pronunciem , ceremonias judaeorun perniciosas esse , et mortiferas , & quicunque eas obseruaverit , sive ex Gentibus , in barathrum diaboli devolutum . Hier.  Quisquis nunc ea celebrare voluerit , tanquam sopitos cineres eruens , non erit pius , etc.  Si tu pacem fugis , ego te ab Ecclesia fugere mando . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Psal . 24.10 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Act. 26.27 . & In medio la tronum tanquam latronum ●mmanissimus . Luther . Caput Angelicis spiritibus ●●emebundii spinis coronatur , etc.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Vt nulla unquam aetas similem meminerit . ● . These . 5 , 10  Maledictum silentium , quod hic connivet . Negotiatores terrae sunt ipsi Sacerdotes , qui vendunt orationes & missas pro denarijs : Facientes domum orationis , Apothecam negotionis . In Revel . l. 10. p. 5.  Bellar. l. 1. de Indulgent . Revel . 5.  Quod emittitur voluntarium est : quod amittitur necessarium . Ambr.  Quod si venire noluerint , ego vim faciam ut devorer . Si per singulos dies pro eo moreremur , qui nos dilexit , non sic debitum exol●eremus . Chrysost . Act. 5.5 . Quantumcunque te deieceris , humilior non eris Christo . Hieron . Vt contra : Nullam animam recipio quae me nolente seperatur à corpore . Hieron . 