CHARACTERS OF VERTVES AND VICES : In two Books : By JOS . HALL. . 

LONDON , Printed by Melch. Bradwood for Eleazar Edgar and Samuel Macham , and are to be sold at the sign of the Bulhead in Paul's Churchyard . ANNO 1608.  

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE MY SINGULAR GOOD LORDS , EDWARD LORD DENNY BARON OF WALTHAM , AND JAMES LORD HAY HIS RIGHT NOBLE AND WORTHY SON IN LAW , I H. HUMBLY DEDICATES HIS LABOUR , DEVOTETH HIMSELF , WISHES ALL HAPPINESS . 

A PREMONITION of the Title and Use of Characters . 

READER , 

The Divines of the old Heathens were their Moral Philosophers : These received the Acts of an inbred law , in the Sinai of Nature , and delivered them with many expositions to the multitude : These were the Overseers of manners , Correctors of vices , Directors of lives , Doctors of virtue , which yet taught their people the body of their natural Divinity , not after one manner ; while some spent themselves in deep discourses of human felicity and the way to it in common ; others thought best to apply the general precepts of goodness or decency , to particular conditions and persons : A third sort in a mean course betwixt the two other , and compounded of them both , bestowed their time in drawing out the true lineaments of every virtue and vice , so lively , that who saw the medals , might know the face : which Art they significantly termed Charactery . Their papers were so many tables , their writings so many speaking pictures , or living images , whereby the ruder multitude might even by their sense learn to know virtue , and discern what to detest . I am deceived if any course could be more likely to prevail ; for herein the gross conceit is led on with pleasure , and informed while it feels nothing but delight : And if pictures have been accounted the books of idiots , behold here the benefit of an image without the offence . It is no shame for us to learn wit of Heathens , neither is it material , in whose School we take out a good lesson : yea , it is more shame not to follow their good , than not to lead them better . As one therefore that in worthy examples hold imitation better than invention , I have trod in their paths , but with an higher & wider step ; and out of their Tablets have drawn these larger portraitures of both sorts . more might be said , I deny not of every virtue , of every vice : I desired not to say all , but enough . If thou do but read or like these , I have spent good hours ill ; but if thou shalt hence abjure those vices , which before thou thoughtest not ill-favoured , or fall in love with any of these goodly faces of virtue ; or shalt hence find where thou hast any little touch of these evils , to clear thyself , or where any defect in these graces to supply it , neither of us shall need to repent of our labour . 

THE SUM OF the whole . 

FIRST BOOK . 

The Prooeme . Pag. 1 
Character of Wisdom . 5 
Of Honesty . 13 
Of Faith. 19 
Of Humility . 27 
Of Valour . 33 
Of Patience . 39 
Of True-friendship . 45 
Of True-nobilitie . 51 
Of the good Magistrate . 57 
SECOND BOOK . 

The Prooeme . 67 
Character of the Hypocrite . 71 
Of the Busie-bodie . 79 
Of the Superstitious . 87 
Of the Profane . 93 
Of the Malcontent . 99 
Of the Inconstant . 107 
Of the Flatterer . 113 
Of the Slothful . 119 
Of the Covetous . 125 
Of the Vainglorious . 133 
Of the Presumptuous . 141 
Of the Distrustful . 147 
Of the Ambitious . 153 
Of the Unthrift . 161 
Of the Envious . 167 
THE FIRST Book . Characterismes of Virtues . 

LONDON , Printed by M. B. for Eleazar Edgar , and S. Macham . 

The Prooeme . 

VIRTUE is not loved enough , because she is not seen ; and Vice loseth much detestation , because her ugliness is secret . Certainly , my Lords , there are so many beauties , and so many graces in the face of Goodness , that no eye can possibly see it without affection , without ravishment ; and the visage of Evil is so monstrous , through loathsome deformities , that if her lovers were not ignorant , they would be mad with disdain and astonishment . What need we more than to discover these two to the world ? this work shall save the labour of exhorting , and dissuasion . I have here done it as I could , following that ancient Master of Morality , who thought this the fittest task for the ninety and ninth year of his age , and the profitablest monument that he could leave for a farewell to his Grecians . Lo here then Virtue and Vice stripped naked to the open view , and despoiled , one of her rags , the other of her ornaments , and nothing left them but bare presence to pled for affection : see now whether shall find more suitors . And if still the vain minds of lewd men shall dote upon their old mistress , it will appear to be , not because she is not foul , but for that they are blind , and bewitched . And first behold the goodly features of WISDOM , an amiable virtue and worthy to lead this stage ; which as she extends herself to all the following Graces , so amongst the rest is for her largeness most conspicuous . 

CHARACTER of the WISE MAN  

THERE is nothing that he desire's not to know , but most and first himself ; andnot so much his own strength , as his weaknesses ; neither is his knowledge reduced to discourse , but practice . He is a skilful Logician not by nature , so much as use ; his working mind doth nothing all his time but make syllogisms , & draw out conclusions ; every thing that he sees & hears serves for one of the premises : with these he cares first to inform himself , then to direct others . Both his eyes are never at once from home , but one keeps house while the other roves abroad for intelligence . In material and weighty points he abides not his mind suspended in uncertainties ; but hate's doubting where he may , where he should be resolute : and first he makes sure work for his soul ; accounting it no safety to be unsettled in the foreknowledge of his final estate . The best is first regarded ; and vain is that regard which endeth not in security . Every care hath his just order ; neither is there any one either neglected or misplaced . He is seldom overseen with credulity ; for knowing the falseness of the world , he hath learned to trust himself always ; others so far , as he may not be dammaged by their disappointment . He seeks his quietness in secrecy , and is wont both to hide himself in retiredness , and his tongue in himself . He loves to be guessed at , not known ; and to see the world unseen ; and when he is forced into the light , shows by his actions that his obscurity was neither from affectation nor weakness . His purposes are neither so variable as may argue inconstancy ; nor obstinately unchangeable , but framed according to his after-wits , or the strength of new occasions . He is both an apt scholar and an excellent master ; for both every thing he sees informs him , and his mind enriched with plentiful observation can give the best precepts . His free discourse runs back to the ages past , and recovers events out of memory , and then preventeth Time in flying forward to future things ; and comparing one with the other can give a verdict well-near prophetical : wherein his conjectures are better than another's judgements . His passions are so many good servants , which stand in a diligent attendance ready to be commanded by reason , by religion ; and if at any time forgetting their duty they be miscarried to rebel , he can first conceal their mutiny ; then suppress it . In all his just and worthy designs he is never at a loss , but hath so projected all his courses , that a second begins where the first failed ; and fetcheth strength from that which succeeded not . There be wrongs which he will not see ; neither doth he always look that way which he meaneth ; nor take notice of his secret smarts , when they come from great ones . In good turns he loves not to own more than he must ; in evil to own and not pay . Just censures he deserves not , for he lives without the compass of an adversary ; unjust he contemneth , and had rather suffer false infamy to die alone , than lay hands upon it in an open violence . He confineth himself in the circle of his own affairs , and list's not to thrust his finger into a needless fire . He stands like a Centre unmoved , while the circumference of his estate is drawn above , beneath , about him . Finally , his wit hath cost him much , and he can both keep , and value , and employ it . He is his own Lawyer ; the treasury of knowledge , the oracle of counsel ; blind in no man's cause , best-sighted in his own . 

The Characterism of an Honest man  

HE looks not to what he might do , but what he should ; justice is his first guide , the second law of his actions is expedience . He had rather complain than offend , & hate's sin more for the indignity of it , than the danger : his simple uprightness works in him that confidence , which ofttimes wrongs him , and gives advantage to the subtle , when he rather pity's their faithlesnes , than reputes of his credulity : he hath but one heart , and that lies open to sight ; and were it not for discretion , he never thinks aught , whereof he would avoid a witness : his word is his parchment , and his yea his oath , which he will not violate for fear , or for loss . The mishaps of following events may cause him to blame his providence , can never cause him to eat his promise : neither saith he , This I saw not ; but This I said . When he is made his friend's Executor , he defrays debts , pays legacies , and scorneth to gain by orphans , or to ransack graves ; and therefore will be true to a dead friend , because he sees him not . All his dealings are square , & above the board : he betrays the fault of what he sells , and restores the overseen gain of a false reckoning . He esteems a bribe venomous , though it come guilded over with the colour of gratuity . His cheeks are never stained with the blushes of recantation ; neither doth his tongue falter to make good a lie with the secret glosses of double or reserved senses ; and when his name is traduced , his innocence bears him out with courage : then , lo , he goes on the plain way of truth , and will either triumph in his integrity , or suffer with it . His conscience overrules his providence : so as in all things , good or ill , he respects the nature of the actions , not the sequel . If he see what he must do , let God see what shall follow . He never loadeth himself with burdens above his strength , beyond his will ; and once bound , what he can he will do ; neither doth he will but what he can do . His ear is the Sanctuary of his absent friends name , of his present friends secret ; neither of them can miscarry in his trust . He remembers the wrongs of his youth , and repays them with that usury which he himself would not take . He would rather want than borrow , and beg than not pay : his fair conditions are without dissembling ; and he loves actions above words . Finally , he hate's falsehood worse than death : he is a faithful client of truth ; no man's enemy ; and , it is a question , Whether more another man's friend , or his own ; and if there were no heaven , yet he would be virtuous . 

The Characterism of the Faithful man  

His eyes have no other objects , but absent & invisible ; which they see so clearly , as that to them sense is blind : that which is present they see not ; if I may not rather say , that what is past or future is present to them . Herein he exceeds all others , that to him nothing is impossible , nothing difficult , whether to bear , or undertake . He walks every day with his Maker , and talks with him familiarly , and lives ever in heaven , and sees all earthly things beneath him : when he goes in , to converse with God , he wears not his own clothes , but takes them still out of the rich Wardrobe of his Redeemer , and then dare boldly press in , and challenge a blessing . The celestial spirits do not scorn his company , yea his service . He deals in these worldly affairs as a stranger , and hath his heart ever at home : without a written warrant he dare do nothing , and with it , any thing . His war is perpetual , without truce , without intermission ; and his victory certain : he meets with the infernal powers , and tramples them under feet . The shield that he ever bears before him , can neither be miss , nor pierced : if his hand be wounded , yet his heart is safe : he is often tripped , seldom foiled ; and if sometimes foiled , never vanquished . He hath white hands , and a clean soul , fit to lodge God in , all the rooms whereof are set apart for his Holiness : Iniquity hath oft called at the door , and craved entertainment , but with a repulse : or if sin of force will be his tenant ; his lord he can not . His faults are few , and those he hath , God will not see . He is allied so high , that he dare call God Father , his Saviour Brother , heaven his Patrimony , and thinks it no presumption to trust to the attendance of Angels . His understanding is enlightened with the beams of divine truth ; God hath acquainted him with his will ; and what he knows he dare confess : there is not more love in his heart , than liberty in his tongue . If torments stand betwixt him and Christ , if death , he contemns them ; and if his own parents lie in his way to God , his holy carelessness makes them his footsteps . His experiments have drawn forth rules of confidence , which he dares oppose against all the fears of distrust ; wherein he thinks it safe to charge God with what he hath done ; with what he hath promised : Examples are his proofs ; and Instances his demonstrations . What hath God given which he can not give ? What have others suffered which he may not be enabled to endure ? Is he threatened banishment ? There he sees the Dear Evangelist in Pathmos cutting in pieces : he sees esay under the saw . Drowning ? he sees jonas diving into the living gulf . Burning ? he sees the three children in the hot walk of the furnace . Devouring ? he sees Daniel in the sealed den amids his terrible companions . Stoning ? he sees the first Martyr under his heap of many grave-stones . Heading ? lo there the Baptist's neck bleeding in Herodias platter . He emulates their pain , their strength , their glory . He wearies not himself with cares ; for he knows he lives not of his own cost : not idly omitting means , but not using them with diffidence . In the midst of ill rumours and amazements his countenance changes not ; for he knows both whom he hath trusted , & whither death can lead him . He is not so sure he shall die , as that he shall be restored ; and out-faceth his death with his resurrection . Finally , he is rich in works , busy in obedience , cheerful and unmooved in expectation ; better with evils , in common opinion miserable , but in true judgement more than a man  

Of the Humble man  

HE is a friendly enemy to himself : for though he be not out of his own favour , no man sets so low a value of his worth as himself , not out of ignorance , or carelessness , but of a voluntary and meek deiectednesse . He admires every thing in another , whiles the same or better in himself he thinks not unworthily contemned : his eyes are full of his own wants , and others perfections . He loves rather to give , than take honour , not in a fashion of complemental courtesy , but in simplicity of his judgement ; neither doth he fret at those , on whom he forceth precedency , as one that hoped their modesty would have refused ; but holds his mind unfeignedly below his place , and is ready to go lower ( if need be ) without discontentment : When he hath but his due , he magnifieth courtesy , and disclaims his deserts . He can be more ashamed of honour , than grieved with contempt ; because he thinks that causeless , this deserved . His face , his carriage , his habit , savour of lowliness without affectation , and yet he is much under that he seemeth . His words are few & soft , never either peremptory or censorious ; because he thinks both each man more wise , and none more faulty than himself : and when he approacheth to the throne of God , he is so taken up with the divine greatness , that in his own eyes he is either vile or nothing . Places of public charge are fain to sue to him , and hale him out of his chosen obscurity ; which he holds off , not cunningly to cause importunity , but sincerely in the conscience of his defects . He frequenteth not the stages of common resorts , and then alone thinks himself in his natural element , when he is shrouded within his own walls . He is ever jealous over himself , and still suspecteth that which others applaud . There is no better object of beneficence , for what he receives , he ascribes merely to the bounty of the giver ; nothing to merit . He emulates no man in any thing but goodness , and that with more desire , than hope to overtake , no man is so contented with his little , and so patient under miseries , because he knows the greatest evils are below his sins , and the least favours above his deservings . He walks ever in awe , and dare not but subject every word & action to an high and just censure . He is a lowly valley sweetly planted , and well watered ; the proud man's earth , whereon he trampleth ; but secretly full of wealthy mines , more worth than he that walks over them ; a rich stone set in lead ; and lastly , a true Temple of God built with a low roof . 

The Character of a Valiant man  

He undertakes without rashness , and performs without fearer● he seeks not for dangers ; but when they find him , he bears them over with courage , with success . He hath oft times looked death in the face , and passed by it with a smile , & when he sees he must yield , doth at once welcome and contemn it . He forecasts the worst of all events , & encounters them before they come in a secret and mental war ; and if the suddenness of an inexpected evil have surprised his thoughts , & infected his cheeks with paleness ; he hath no sooner digested it in his conceit , than he gathers up himself , and insults over mischief . He is the master of himself , and subdues his passions to reason ; and by this inward victory works his own peace . He is afraid of nothing but the displeasure of the highest , and runs away from nothing but sin : he looks not on his hands but his cause ; not how strong he is , but how innocent : and where goodness is his warrant , he may be over-maistered , he can not be foiled . The sword is to him the last of all trials , which he draws forth still as Defendant , not as Challenger , with a willing kind of unwillingness : no man can better manage it , with more safety , with more favour : he had rather have his blood seen than his back ; and disdains life upon base conditions . no man is more mild to a relenting or vanquished adversary , or more hate's to set his foot on a carcase . He had rather smother an injury than revenge himself of the impotent : and I know not whether more detests cowardliness or cruelty . He talks little , and brags less ; and loves rather the silent language of the hand ; to be seen than heard . He lies ever close within himself , armed with wise resolution , and will not be discovered but by death or danger . He is neither prodigal of blood to misspend it idly , nor niggardly to grudge it when either God calls for it , or his Country ; neither is he more liberal of his own life , than of others . His power is limited by his will , and he holds it the noblest revenge , that he might hurt and doth not . He commands without tyranny & imperiousness , obeys without servility , and changes not his mind with his estate . The height of his spirits overlooks all casualties , and his boldness proceeds neither from ignorance nor senselessness : but first he values evils , and then despises them : he is so balanced with wisdom , that he floats steddilie in the midst of all tempests . Deliberate in his purposes , firm in resolution , bold in enterprising , unwearied in achieving , and howsoever happy in success : and if ever he be overcome , his heart yields last . 

The Patient man  

The patient man is made of a mettle , not so hard as flexible : his shoulders are large , fit for a load of injuries ; which he bears not out of baseness and cowardliness , because he dare not revenge , but out of Christian fortitude , because he may not : he hath so conquered himself , that wrongs can not conquer him ; & herein alone finds , that victory consists in yielding . He is above nature , while he seems below himself . The vilest creature knows how to turn again ; but to command himself not to resist being urged is more than heroical . His constructions are over full or charity and favour ; either this wrong was not done , or not with intent of wrong , or if that , upon misinformation ; or if none of these , rashness ( though a fault ) shall serve for an excuse . Himself craves the offender's pardon , before his confession ; and a slight answer contents where the offended desires to forgive . He is God's best witness , and when he stands before the bar for truth , his tongue is calmly free , his forehead firm , and he with erect and settled countenance hears his unjust sentence , and rejoices in it . The jailers' that attend him are to him his pages of honour ; his dungeon the lower part of the vault of heaven ; his rack or wheel the stairs of his ascent to glory : he challengeth his executioners , and encounters the fiercest pains with strength of resolution ; and while he suffers , the beholders pitse him , the tormentors complain of weariness , and both of them wonder . no anguish can master him , whether by violence or by lingering . He accounts expectation no punishment , and can abide to have his hopes adiourned till a new day . Good laws serve for his protection , not for his revenge ; and his own power , to avoid indignities , not to return them . His hopes are so strong , that they can insult over the greatest discouragements ; and his apprehensions so deep , that when he hath once fastened , he sooner leaveth his life than his hold . Neither time nor perverseness can make him cast off his charitable endeavours , and despair of prevailing ; but in spite of all crosses , and all denials , he redoubleth his beneficial offers of love . He trieth the sea after many shipwrecks , and beats still at that door which he never saw opened . Contrariety of events doth but exercise , not dismay him ; and when crosses afflict him , he sees a divine hand invisibly striking with these sensible scourges : against which he dares not rebel , not murmur . Hence all things befall him alike ; and he goes with the same mind to the shambles and to the fold . His recreations are calm and gentle ; and not more full of relaxation than void of fury . This man only can turn necessity into virtue , and put evil to good use . He is the surest friend , the latest and easiest enemy , the greatest conqueror , and so much more happy than others , by how much he could abide to be more miserable . 

The True Friend . 

His affections are both united and divided ; united to him he loveth ; divided betwixt another and himself ; and his one heart is so parted , that whiles he hath some , his friend hath all . His choice is led by virtue , or by the best of virtues , religion ; not by gain , not by pleasure ; yet not without respect of equal condition , of disposition not unlike ; which once made admits of no change , except he whom he loveth be changed quite from himself , nor that suddenly , but after long expectation . Extremity doth but fasten him , whiles he like a wellwrought vault lies the stronger by how much more weight he bears . When necessity calls him to it , he can be a servant to his equal , with the same will wherewith he can command his inferior ; and though he rise to honour , forgets not his familiarity , nor suffers inequality of estate to work strangeness of countenance ; on the other side , he lists up his friend to advancement , with a willing hand , without out envy , without dissimulation . When his mate is dead , he accounts himself but half alive ; then his love not dissolved by death derives itself to those orphans which never knew the price of their father ; they become the heirs of his affection , and the burden of his cares . He embraces a free community of all things , save those which either honesty reserves proper , or nature ; and hate's to enjoy that which would do his friend more good : his charity serves to cloak noted infirmities , not by untruth , not by flattery , but by discreet secrecy ; neither is he more favourable in concealment , than round in his private reprehensions ; and when another's simple fidelity shows itself in his reproof , he loves his monitor so much the more by how much more he smarteth . His bosom is his friend's closet , where he may safely lay up his complaints , his doubts , his cares , and look how he leaves , so he finds them ; save for some addition of seasonable counsel for redress . If some unhappy suggestion shall either disjoint his affection , or break it , it soon knits again , and grows the stronger by that stress . He is so sensible of another's injuries , that when his friend is stricken he cries out , and equally smarteth untouched , as one affected not sympathy , but with a real feeling of pain : and in what mischief may be prevented he interposeth his aid , and offers to redeem his friend with himself ; no hour can be unseasonable , no business difficult , nor pain grievous in condition of his ease : and what either doth or suffereth , he neither cares nor desires to have known ; lest he should seem to look for thanks . If he can therefore steal the performance of a good office unseen , the conscience of his faithfulness herein is so much sweeter as it is more secret . In favours done his memory is frail , in benefits received eternal : he scorneth either to regard recompense , or not to offer it . He is the comfort of miseries , the guide of difficulties , the joy of life , the treasure of earth ; and no other than a good Angel clothed in flesh . 

Of the Truly-noble . 

HE stands not upon what he borrowed of his Ancestors , but thinks he must work out his own honour : and if he can not reach the virtue of them that gave him outward glory by inheritance , he is more abashed of his impotency , than transported with a great name . Greatness doth not make him scornful and imperious , but rather like the fixed stars , the higher he is , the less he desire's to seem . Neither cares he so much for pomp and frothy ostentation , as for the solid truth of Nobleness . Courtesy and sweet affability can be no more severed from him , than life from his soul ; not out of a base and servile popularity , and desire of ambitious insinuation ; but of a native gentleness of disposition , and true value of himself . His hand is open and bounteous , yet not so , as that he should rather respect his glory , than his estate ; wherein his wisdom can distinguish betwixt parasites and friends , betwixt changing of favours and expending them . He scorneth to make his height a privilege of looseness , but accounts his titles vain , if he be inferior to others in goodness : and thinks he should be more strict , the more eminent he is ; because he is more observed , and now his offences are become exemplar . There is no virtue that he holds unfit for ornament , for use ; nor any vice which he condemns not as fordid , and a fit companion of baseness ; and whereof he doth not more hate the blemish , than affect the pleasure . He so studies as one that knows ignorance can neither purchase honour , nor wield it ; and that knowledge must both guide and grace him . His exercises are from his childhood ingenuous , manly , decent , and such as tend still to wit , valour , activity : and if ( as seldom ) he descend to disports of chance , his games shall never make him either pale with fear , or hot with desire of gain . He doth not so use his followers , as if he thought they were made for nothing but his servitude ; whose felicity were only to be commanded and please : wearing them to the back , and then either finding or framing excuses to discard them empty ; but upon all opportunities let's them feel the sweetness of their own seruiceablenesse and his bounty . Silence in officious service is the best Oratory to pled for his respect : all diligence is but lent to him , none lost . His wealth stands in receiving , his honour in giving : he cares not either how many hold of his goodness , or to how few he is beholden : and if he have cast away favours , he hate's either to upbraid them to his enemy , or to challenge restitution . None can be more pitiful to the distressed , or more prone to succour ; and then most , where is least means to solicit , lest possibility of requital . He is equally addressed to war & peace ; and knows not more how to command others , than how to be his country's servant in both . He is more careful to give true honour to his Maker , than to receive civil honour from men . He knows that this service is free and noble , and ever loaded with sincere glory ; and how vain it is to hunt after applause from the world , till he be sure of him that moldeth all hearts , and poureth contempt on Princes ; and shortly , so demeans himself , as one that accounts the body of Nobility to consist in Blood , the soul in the eminence of Virtue . 

Of the Good Magistrate . 

HE is the faithful Deputy of his Maker , whose obedience is the rule whereby he ruleth : his breast is the Ocean whereinto all the cares of private men empty themselves ; which as he receives without complaint and overflowing , so he sends them forth again by a wise conveyance in the streams of justice : his doors , his ears are ever open to suitors ; and not who comes first speeds well , but whose cause is best . His nights , his meals are short and interrupted ; all which he bears well , because he knows himself made for a public servant of peace and justice . He sits quietly at the stern , & commands one to the topsail , another to the main , a third to the plummet , a fourth to the anchor , as he sees the need of their course and weather requires ; and doth no less by his tongue , than all the Mariners with their hands . On the bench he is another from himself at home ; now all private respects of blood , alliance , amity are forgotten ; and if his own son come under trial , he knows him not : Pity , which in all others is wont to be the best praise of humanity , & the fruit of Christian love , is by him thrown over the bar for corruption : as for Favour the false Advocate of the gracious , he allows him not to appear in the Court ; there only causes are heard speak , not persons : Eloquence is then only not discouraged , when she serves for a client of truth : mere Narrations are allowed in this Oratory , not Proemes , not Excursions , not Glosses : Truth must strip herself , and come in naked to his bar , without false bodies , or colours , without disguises : A bribe in his closet , or a letter on the bench , or the whispering and winks of a great neighbour are answered with an angry and courageous repulse . Displeasure , revenge , recompense stand on both sides the bench , but he scorns to turn his eye towards them ; looking only right forward at Equity , which stands full before him . His sentence is ever deliberate and guided with ripe wisdom , yet his hand is slower than his tongue ; but when he is urged by occasion either to doom or execution , he shows how much he hates merciful injustice : neither can his resolution or act be reversed with partial importunity . His forehead is rugged and severe , able to discountenance villainy , yet his words are more awful than his brow , and his hand than his words . I know not whether he be more feared or loved , both affections are so sweetly contempered in all hearts . The good fear him lovingly , the middle sort love him fearfully , and only the wicked man fears him slavishly without love . He hate's to pay private wrongs with the advantage of his office , and if ever he be partial it is to his enemy . He is not more sage in his gown than valorous in arms , and increaseth in the rigour of his discipline as the times in danger . His sword hath neither rusted for want of use , nor surfeteth of blood , but after many threats is unsheathed , as the dreadful instrument of divine revenge . He is the guard of good laws , the refuge of innocence , the Comet of the guilty , the paymaster of good deserts , the champain of justice ; the patron of peace , the tutor of the Church , the father of his Country , and as it were another God upon earth . 

THE SECOND Book . Characterismes of Vices . 

LONDON , Printed by M. B. for Eleazar Edgar , and S. Macham . 

The Prooeme . 

I Have showed you many fair Virtues : I speak not for them , if their sight can not command affection , let them lose it . They shall please yet better , after you have troubled your eyes a little with the view of deformities ; and by how much more they please , so much more odious , and like themselves , shall these deformities appear . This light contraries give to each other , in the midst of their enmity , that one makes the other seem more good , or ill . Perhaps in some of these ( which thing I do at once fear , and hate ) my stile shall seem to some less grave , more Satirical ; if you find me not without cause jealous , let it please you to impute it to the nature of those vices , which will not be otherwise handled . The fashions of some evils are besides the odiousness , ridiculous ; which to repeat , is to seem bitterly merry . I abhor to make sport with wickedness , and forbid any laughter here , but of disdain . Hypocrisy shall lead this ring ; worthily , I think , because both she cometh nearest to Virtue , and is the worst of Vices . 

The Hypocrite . 

AN Hypocrite is the worst kind of player , by so much as he acts the better part ; which hath always two faces , oft times two hearts : That can compose his forehead to sadness and gravity , while he bids his heart be wanton and careless within , and ( in the mean time ) laughs within himself , to think how smoothly he hath cozened the beholder . In whose silent face are written the characters of Religion , which his tongue & gestures pronounce , but his hands recant . That hath a clean face and garment , with a soul soul ; whose mouth belies his heart , and his fingers belie his mouth . Walking early up into the City , he turns into the great Church , and salutes one of the pillars on one knee , worshipping that God which at home he cares not for ; while his eye is fixed on some window , on some passenger , and his heart knows not whither his lips go . He rises , and looking about with admiration , complains of our frozen charity , commends the ancient . At Church he will ever sit where he may be seen best , and in the midst of the Sermon pulls out his Tables in haste , as if he feared to lose that note ; when he writes either his forgotten errand , or nothing : then he turns his bible with a noise , to seek an omitted quotation ; and folds the lease , as if he had found it ; and asks aloud the name of the Preacher , and repeats it , whom he publicly salutes , thanks , praises , invites , entertains with tedious good counsel , with good discourse , if it had come from an honester mouth . He can command tears , when he speaks of his youth , indeed because it is past , not because it was sinful : himself is now better , but the times are worse . All other sins he reckons up with detestation , while he loves and hides his darling in his bosom . All his speech returns to himself , and every occurrent draws in a story to his own praise . When he should give , he looks about him , and says WHO sees ME ? no alms , no prayers fall from him without a witness ; belike lest God should deny , that he hath received them : and when he hath done ( lest the world should not know it ) his own mouth is his trumpet to proclaim it . With the superfluity of his usury , he builds an Hospital , and harbours them whom his extortion hath spoilt ; so while he makes many beggars , he keeps some . He turneth all Gnats into Camels , and cares not to undo the world for a circumstance . Flesh on a Friday is more abomination to him than his neighbour's bed : He abhors more not to uncover at the name of jesus , than to swear by the name of God. When a Rhymer reads his Poem to him , he begs a Copy , and persuades the Press ; there is nothing that he dislikes in presence , that in absence he censures not . He comes to the sick bed of his stepmother , & weeps , when he secretly fears her recovery . He greets his friend in the street with so clear a countenance , so fast a closure , that the other thinks he reads his heart in his face ; and shakes hands with an indefinite invitation of When will you come ? and when his back is turned , joys that he is so well rid of a guest : yet if that guest visit him unseared , he counterfeits a smiling welcome , and excuses his cheer , when closely he frowns on his wife for too much . He shows well , and says well ; and himself is the worst thing he hath . In brief , he is the stranger's saint , the neighbour's disease , the blot of goodness ; a rotten stick in a dark night , a poppy in a corn field , an ill tempered candle with a great snuff , that in going out smells ill ; an Angel abroad , a Devil at home ; and worse when an Angel , than when a Devil . 

The Characterism of the Busie-bodie . 

His estate is too narrow for his mind , and therefore he is fain to make himself room in others affairs ; yet ever in pretence of love . no news can stir but by his door ; neither can he know that , which he must not tell : What every man ventures in Guiana voyage , & what they gained he knows to a hair . Whether Holland will have peace he knows , and on what conditions ; and with what success is familiar to him ere it be concluded . no Post can pass him without a question , and rather than he will lose the news , he rides back with him to appose him of tidings ; and then to the next man he meets , he supplies the wants of his hasty intelligence , and makes up a perfect tale ; wherewith he so haunteth the patient auditor that after many excuses , he is fain to endure rather the censure of his manners in running away , than the tediousness of an impertinent discourse . His speech is oft broken off with a succession of long parentheses , which he ever vows to fill up ere the conclusion , and perhaps would effect it , if the others ear were as unweariable as his tongue . If he see but two men talk and read a letter in the street , he runs to them , and asks if he may not be partner of that secret relation ; and if they deny it , he offers to tell , since he may not hear , wonders : and then falls upon the report of the Scotish Mine , or of the great fish taken up at Linne , or of the freezing of the Thames ; and after many thanks and dismissions is hardly entreated silence . He undertakes as much as he performs little : this man will thrust himself forward to be the guide of the way he knows not ; and calls at his neighbour's window , & asks why his servants are not at work . The Market hath no commodity which he prizeth not , and which the next table shall not hear recited . His tongue like the tail of Sampsons' foxes carries firebrand , and is enough to set the whole field of the world on a flame . Himself begins tabletalk of his neighbour at another's board ; to whom he bears the first news , and adiures him to conceal the reporter : whose choleric answer he returns to his first host , enlarged with a second edition : so , as it uses to be done in the fight of unwilling mastiffs , he claps each on the side apart , and provokes them to an eager conflict . There can no Act pass without his Comment , which is ever farfetched , rash , suspicious , dilatory . His ears are long , and his eyes quick , but most of all to imperfections , which as he easily sees , so he increases with intermeddling . He harbours another man's servant , and amids his entertainment asks what fare is usual at home , what hours are kept , what talk passeth their meals , what his master's disposition is , what his government , what his guests ? And when he hath by curious inquiries extracted all the juice and spirit of hoped intelligence , turns him off whence he came , and works on a new . He hate's constancy as an ear-then dulness , unfit for men of spirit : and loves to change his work and his place ; neither yet can he be so soon weary of any place , as every place is weary of him ; for as he sets himself on work , so others pay him with hatred ; and look how many masters he hath , so many enemies : neither is it possible that any should not hate him , but who know him not . So then he labour's without thanks , talks without credit , lives without love , dies without tears , without pity ; save that some say it was pity he died no sooner . 

The Superstitious . 

Svperstition is Godless religion , devout impiety . The superstitious is fond in observation , servile in fear , he worship's God but as he lists : he gives God what he asks not , more than he asks ; and all but what he should give ; and makes more sins than the Ten Commandments . This man dares not stir forth till his breast be crossed , and his face sprinkled : if but an hare cross him the way , he returns ; or if his journey began unawares on the dismal day ; or if he stumbled at the threshold . If he see a snake unkilled , he fears a mischief ; if the salt fall towards him , he looks pale and red , and is not quiet till one of the waiters have poured wine on his lap ; and when he neeseth , thinks them not his friends that uncover not . In the morning he listens whether the Crow crieth eeven or odd , and by that token presages of the weather . If he hear but a Raven croak from the next roof , he makes his will , or if a Bittour fly over his head by night : but if his troubled fancy shall second his thoughts with the dream of a fair Garden , or green rushes , or the salutation of a dead friend , he takes leave of the world , and says he can not live . He will never set to Sea but on a Sunday ; neither ever goes without an Erra Pater in his pocket . Saint Paul's day and Saint Swithunes with the Twelve are his Oracles ; which he dares believe against the Almanac . When he lies sick on his deathbed , no sin trouble's him so much as that he did once eat flesh on a Friday , no repentance can expiate that ; the rest need none . There is no dream of his without an interpretation , without a prediction ; and if the event answer not his exposition , he expounds it according to the event . Every dark groave and pictured wall strikes him with an awful but carnal devotion . Old wives and Stars are his counsellors ; his night-spell is his guard , and charms his Physicians . He wears Paracelsian Characters for the toothache , and a little hallowed wax is his Antidote for all evils . This man is strangely credulous , and calls impossible things , miraculous : If he hear that some sacred block speaks , moves , weeps , smiles , his bare foot carry him thither with an offering ; and if a danger miss him in the way , his saint hath the thanks . Some ways he will not go , & some he dares not ; either there are bugs , or he feigneth them ; every lantern is a ghost , & every noise is of chains . He knows not why , but his custom is to go a little about , and to leave the cross still on the right hand . One event is enough to make a rule ; out of these rules he concludes fashions proper to himself ; and nothing can turn him out of his own course . If he have done his task he is safe , it matters not with what affection . Finally , if God would let him be the carver of his own obedience , he could not have a better subject , as he is he can not have a worse . 

Characterism of the Profane . 

The Superstitious hath too many Gods , the Profane man hath none at all , unless perhaps himself be his own deity , and the world his heaven . To matter of religion his heart is a piece of dead flesh , without feeling of love , of fear , of care , or of pain from the deaf strokes of a revenging conscience . Custom of sin hath wrought this senselessness , which now hath been so long entertained that it pleads prescription , and knows not to be altered . This is no sudden evil : we are born sinful , but have made ourselves profane ; through many degrees we climb to this height of impiety . At first he sinned , and cared not ; now he sinneth , and knoweth not . Appetite is his lord , and reason his servant , and religion his drudge . Sense is the rule of his belief ; and if piety may be an advantage , he can at once sergeant and deride it . When aught succeedeth to him he sacrifices to his nets , and thanks either his fortune or his wit ; and will rather make a false God , than acknowledge the true : if contrary , he cries out of destiny , & blames him to whom he will not be beholden . His conscience would fain speak with him , but he will not hear it ; sets the day , but he disappoints it ; and when it cries loud for audience , he drowns the noise with good fellowship . He never name's God but in his oaths ; never thinks of him but in extremity ; & then he knows not how to think of him , because he begins but then . He quarrels for the hard conditions of his pleasure , for his future damnation ; and from himself lays all the fault upon his maker ; and from his decree fetcheth excuses of his wickedness . The inevitable necessity of God's counsel makes him desperately careless : so with good food he poisons himself . Goodness is his Minstrel ; neither is any mirth so cordial to him as his sport with God's fools . Every virtue hath his slander , and his jest to laugh it out of fashion : every vice his colour . His usuallest theme is the boast of his young sins , which he can still joy in , though he can not commit ; and ( if it may be ) his speech makes him worse than he is . He can not think of death with patience , without terror , which he therefore fears worse than hell , because this he is sure of , the other he but doubts of . He comes to Church as to the Theatre , saving that not so willingly , for company , for custom , for recreation , perhaps for sleep ; or to feed his eyes or his ears : as for his soul he cares no more than if he had none . He loves none but himself , and that not enough to seek his true good ; neither cares he on whom he treads , that he may rise . His life is full of licence , and his practice of outrage . He is hated of God as much as he hates goodness , and differs little from a devil , but that he hath a body . 

The Characterism of the Malcontent . 

HE is neither well full nor fasting ; and though he abound with complaints , yet nothing dislikes him but the present : for what he condemned while it was , once past he magnifies , and strives to recall it out of the jaws of Time. What he hath he seeth not , his eyes are so taken up with what he wants ; and what he sees he cares not for , because he cares so much for that which is not . When his friend carves him the best morsel , he murmurs that it is an happy feast wherein each one may cut for himself . When a present is sent him , he asks Is this all ? and What no better ? and so accepts it as if he would have his friend know how much he is bound to him for vouchsafing to receive it . It is hard to entertain him with a proportionable gift . If nothing , he cries out of unthankfulness ; if little , that he is basely regarded ; if much , he exclaims of flattery , and expectation of a large requital . Every blessing hath somewhat to disparage & distaste it : Children bring cares , single life is wild and solitary ; Eminency is envious , retiredness obscure ; Fasting painful , satiety unweldie ; Religion nicely severe , liberty is lawless ; Wealth burdensome , mediocrity contemptible : Every thing faulteth either in too much or too little . This man is ever headstrong , and self-willed , neither is he always tied to esteem or pronounce according to reason ; some things he must dislike he knows not wherefore , but he likes them not : and other where rather than not censure , he will accuse a man of virtue . Every thing he meddleth with , he either findeth imperfect , or maketh so : neither is there any thing that soundeth so harsh in his ear as the commendation of another ; whereto yet perhaps he fashionably and coldly assenteth , but with such an after-clause of exception , as doth more than mar his former allowance : and if he list not to give a verbal disgrace , yet he shakes his head and smiles , as if his silence should say , I could and will not . And when himself is praised without excess , he complains that such imperfect kindness hath not done him right . If but an unseasonable shower cross his recreation , he is ready to fall out with heaven , and thinks he is wronged if GOD will not take his times when to rain , when to shine . He is a slave to envy , and loseth flesh with fretting , not so much at his own infelicity , as at others good ; neither hath he leisure to joy in his own blessings whilst another prospereth . fain would he see some mutinies , but dare not raise them ; and suffers his lawless tongue to walk thorough the dangerous paths of conceited alterations , but so as in good manners he had rather thrust every man before him when it comes to acting . Nothing but fear keeps him from conspiracies , and no man is more cruel when he is not manacled with danger . He speaks nothing but Satyrs , and libels , and lodgeth no guests in his heart but rebels . The inconstant and he agree well in their felicity , which both place in change : but herein they differ ; the inconstant man affects that which will be , the malcontent commonly that which was . Finally , he is a querulous cur , whom no horse can pass by without barking at ; yea , in the deep silence of night the very moonshine openeth his clamorous mouth : he is the wheel of a well-couched firework that fly's out on all sides , not without scorching itself . Every ear was long ago weary of him , and he is now almost weary of himself . Give him but a little respite , and he will die alone ; of no other death , than others welfare . 

The Unconstant . 

The inconstant man treads upon a moving earth , and keeps no pace . His proceedings are ever headdie and peremptory ; for he hath not the patience to consult with reason , but determines meerelie upon fancy . no man is so hot in the pursuit of what he liketh ; no man sooner weary . He is fiery in his passions , which yet are not more violent than momentanie : it is a wonder if his love or hatred last so many days as a wonder . His heart is the Inn of all good motions , wherein if they lodge for a night it is well ; by morning they are gone and take no leave , and if they come that way again they are entertained as guests , not as friends . At first like another Ecebolius he loved simple truth , thence diverting his eyes he fell in love with idolatry ; those heathenish shrines had never any more doting and besotted client , and now of late he is leapt from Rome to Munster , and is grown to giddy Anabaptism : what he will be next , as yet he knoweth not ; but ere he have Wintered his opinion , it will be manifest . He is good to make an enemy of ; ill for a friend ; because as there is no trust in his affection , so no rancour in his displeasure . The multitude of his changed purposes brings with it forgetfulness ; and not of others more than of himself . He says , swears , renounces , because what he promised he meant not long enough to make an impression . Herein alone he is good for a Commonwealth , that he sets many on work , with building , ruining , altering ; and makes more business than Time itself ; neither is he a greater enemy to thrift , than to idleness . Propriety is to him enough cause of dislike ; each thing pleases him better that is not his own . Even in the best things long continuance is a just quarrel ; Manna itself grows tedious with age , and Novelty is the highest stile of commendation to the meanest offers : Neither doth he in books and fashions ask How good , but How new . Variety carries him away with delight , and no uniform pleasure can be without an irksome fullness . He is so transformable into all opinions , manners , qualities , that he seems rather made immediately of the first matter than of well tempered elements ; and therefore is in possibility any thing , or every thing ; nothing in present substance . Finally , he is servile in imitation , waxey to persuasions , witty to wrong himself , a guest in his own house , an ape of others , and in a word , any thing rather than himself . 

The Flatterer . 

Flattery is nothing but false friendship , fawning hypocrisy , dishonest civility , base merchandise of words , a plausible discord of the heart and lips . The Flatterer is blear-eyed to ill , and can not see vices ; and his tongue walks even in one track of unjust praises ; and can no more tell how to discommend , than to speak true . His speeches are full of wondering Interjections ; and all his titles are superlative , & both of them seldom ever but in presence . His base mind is well matched with a mercenary tongue , which is a willing slave to another man's ear ; neither regardeth he how true , but how pleasing . His Art is nothing but delightful cozenage , whose rules are smoothing and guarded with perjury ; whose scope is to make men fools , in teaching them to overvalue themselves ; and to tickle his friends to death . This man is a Porter of all good tales , and mends them in the carriage : One of Fame's best friends , and his own ; that helps to furnish her with those rumours , that may advantage himself . Conscience hath no greater adversary ; for when she is about to play her just part , of accusation ; he stops her mouth with good terms , and well-near strangleth her with shifts . Like that subtle fish he turns himself into the colour of every stone , for a booty . In himself he is nothing , but what pleaseth his GREAT-ONE , whose virtues he can not more extol , than imitate his imperfections , that he may think his worst graceful . Let him say it is hot , he wipes his forehead , and unbraceth himself ; if cold , he shivers , & calls for a warmer garment . When he walks with his friend he swears to him , that no manels is looked at ; no man talked of ; and that whomsoever he vouchsafes to look on & nod to , is graced enough : That he knoweth not his own worth , lest he should be too happy ; and when he tells what others say in his praise , he interrupts himself modestly , and dares not speak the rest : so his concealment is more insinuating than his speech . He hangs upon the lips which he admireth , as if they could let fall nothing but oracles , and finds occasion to cite some approved sentence under the name he honoureth ; and when aught is nobly spoken , both his hands are little enough to bless him . Sometimes even in absence he extolleth his patron , where he may presume of safe conveyance to his cares ; and in presence so whispereth his commendation , to a common friend , that it may not be unheard where he meant it . He hath salves for every sore , to hide them , not to heal them ; complexion for every face : Sin hath not any more artificial broker or more impudent band . There is no vice , that hath not from him his colour , his allurement ; and his best service is either to further guiltiness , or smother it . If he grant evil things inexpedient , or crimes errors , he hath yielded much ; either thy estate gives privilege of liberty , or thy youth ; or if neither , What if it be ill , yet it is pleasant ? Honesty to him is nice singularity , repentance superstitious melancholy , gravity dulness , and all virtue an innocent conceit of the baseminded . In short , he is the moth of liberal men's coats , the earwig of the mighty , the bane of Courts , a friend and a slave to the trencher , and good for nothing but to be a factor for the Devil . 

The Slothful . 

HE is a religious man , and wears the time in his cloister ; and as the cloak of his doing nothing , pleads contemplation ; yet is he no whit the leaner for his thoughts , no whit learneder . He takes no less care how to spend time , than others how to gain by the expense ; and when business importunes him , is more troubled to forethink what he must do , than another to effect it . Summer is out of his favour for nothing but long days , that make no haste to their eeven . He loves still to have the Sun witness of his rising ; and lies long more for loathness to dress him , than will to sleep : and after some streaking and yawning calls for dinner , unwashed ; which having digested with a sleep in his chair , he walks forth to the bench in the Marketplace , and looks for companions : whomsoever he meets , he stays with idle questions , and lingering discourse ; how the days are longthened , how kindly the weather is , how false the clock , how forward the Spring , and ends ever with What shall we do ? It pleases him no less to hinder others , than not to work himself . When all the people are gone from Church , he is left sleeping in his seat alone . He enters bonds , and forfeits them by forgetting the day ; and asks his neighbour when his own field was fallowed , whether the next piece of ground belong not to himself . His care is either none , or too late : when Winter is come , after some sharp visitations , he looks on his pile of wood , and asks how much was cropped the last Spring . Necessity drives him to every action , and what he can not avoid , he will yet defer . Every change trouble's him , although to the better ; and his dulness counterfeits a kind of contentment . When he is warned on a jury , he had rather pay the mulct , than appear . All but that which Nature will not permit , he doth by a deputy , and count's it troublesome to do nothing , but to do any thing , yet more . He is witty in nothing but framing excuses to sit still , which if the occasion yield not , he coineth with ease . There is no work that is not either dangerous , or thankless , and whereof he foresees not the inconvenience and gainlesnesse before he enters ; which if it be verified in event , his next idleness hath found a reason to patronise it . He had rather frieze than fetch wood , and chooses rather to steal than work ; to beg than take pains to steal , and in many things to want than beg . He is so loath to leave his neighbour's fire , that he is fain to walk home in the dark ; and if he be not looked to , wears out the night in the chimney-corner ; or if not that , lies down in his clothes to save two labours . He eats , and prays himself asleep ; and dreams of no other torment but work . This man is a standing pool , and can not choose but gather corruption : he is descried amongst a thousand neighbours by a dry and nasty hand , that still savours of the sheet ; a beard uncut , unkembed ; an eye and ear yellow with their excretions ; a coat shaken on , ragged , vnbrushed ; by linen and face striving whether shall excel in uncleanlinesse . For body he hath a swollen leg , a dusky and swinish eye , a blown cheek , a drawling tongue , an heavy foot , and is nothing but a ●older earth moulded with standing water . To conclude , is a man in nothing but in speech and shape . 

The Covetous . 

He is a servant to himself , yea to his servant ; and doth base homage to that which should be the worst drudge . A liveless piece of earth is his master , yea his God , which he shrines in his coffer , and to which he sacrifices his heart . Every face of his coin is a new image , which he adores with the highest veneration ; yet takes upon him to be protector of that he worshippeth : which he fears to keep , and abhors to lose : not daring to trust either any other God , or his own . Like a true Chemist he turns every thing into silver , both what he should eat , and what he should wear ; and that he keeps to look on , not to use . When he returns from his field , he asks , not without much rage , what became of the loose crust in his cupboard , and who hath rioted amongst his leeks ? He never eats good meal , but on his neighbour's trencher ; and there he makes amends to his complaining stomach for his former and future fasts . He bids his neighbours to dinner , and when they have done , sends in a trencher for the shot . Once in a year perhaps , he gives himself leave to feast ; and for the time thinks no man more lavish ; Wherein he list's not to fetch his dishes from far ; nor will be beholden to the shambles ; his own provision shall furnish his board with an insensible cost ; and when his guests are parted , talks how much every man devoured , and how many cups were emptied , and feeds his family with the mouldy remnants a month after . If his servant break but an earthen dish for want of light , he abates it out of his quarters wages . He chips his bread , & sends it back to exchange for staler . He let's money , and sells Time for a price ; and will not be importuned either to prevent or defer his day ; and in the mean time looks for secret gratuities , besides the main interest ; which he sells and returns into the stock . He breeds of Money to the third generation ; neither hath it sooner any being , than he sets it to beget more . In all things he affects secrecy and propriety : he grudgeth his neighbour the water of his well : and next to stealing he hate's borrowing . In his short and unquiet sleeps he dreams of thieves , & runs to the door , and name's more men than he hath . The least sheaf he ever culles out for Tithe ; and to rob God holds it the best pastime , the clearest gain . This man cries out above other ; of the prodigality of our times , and tells of the thrift of our forefathers : How that great Prince thought himself royally attired , when he bestowed thirteen shillings & four pence on half a suit : How one wedding gown served our Grandmothers , till they exchanged it for a winding sheet ; and praises plainness , not for less sin , but for less cost . For himself he is still known by his forefather's coat , which he means with his blessing to bequeath to the many descents of his heirs . He neither would be poor , nor be accounted rich . no man complains so much of want to avoid a Subsidy ; no man is so importunate in begging , so cruel in exaction ; and when he most complains of want , he fears that which he complains to have . no way is indirect to wealth ; whether of fraud or violence : Gain is his godliness ; which if conscience go about to prejudice , and grow troublesome by exclaiming against , he is condemned for a common barretor . Like another Ahab he is sick of the next field , and thinks he is ill seated , while he dwells by neighbours . Shortly , his neighbours do not much more hate him , than he himself . He cares not ( for no great advantage ) to lose his friend , pine his body , damn his soul ; and would dispatch himself when corn falls , but that he is loath to cast away money on a cord . 

The Vainglorious . 

All his humour rises up into the froth of ostentation ; which if it once settle , falls down into a narrow room . If the excess be in the understanding part , all his wit is in print ; the Press hath left his head empty ; yea not only what he had , but what he could borrow without leave . If his glory be in his devotion , he gives not an Alms but on record ; and if he have once done well , God hears of it often ; for upon every unkindness he is ready to upbraid him with his merits . Over and above his own discharge he hath some satisfactions to spare for the common treasure . He can fulfil the law with ease , and earn God with superfluity . If he have bestowed but a little sum in the glazing , paving , parieting of God's house , you shall find it in the Church-window . Or if a more gallant humour possess him , he wears all his land on his back , and walking high , looks over his left shoulder , to see if the point of his rapier follow him with a Grace . He is proud of another man's horse ; and well mounted thinks every man wrongs him , that looks not at him . A bare head in the street , doth him more good than a meal's meat . He swears big at an Ordinary , and talks of the Court with a sharp accent ; neither vouchsafes to name any not honourable , nor those without some term of familiarity ; and likes well to see the hearer look upon him amazedly , as if he said , How happy is this man that is so great with great ones ! Under pretence of seeking for a scroll of news , he draws out an handful of letters endorsed with his own stile , to the height ; and half reading every title , passes over the latter part , with a murmur ; not without signifying , what Lord sent this , what great Lady the other ; and for what suits ; the last paper ( as it happens ) is his news from his honourable friend in the French Court. In the midst of dinner , his Lackey comes sweeting in , with a sealed note from his creditor , who now threatens a speedy arrest , and whispers the ill news in his Master's ear , when he aloud name's a Counsellor of State , and professes to know the employment . The same messenger he calls with an imperious nod , and after expostulation , where he hath left his fellows , in his ear sends him for some new spur-leathers or stockings by this time footed ; and when he is gone half the room , recalls him , and saith aloud , It is no matter , let the greater bag alone till I come ; and yet again calling him closer , whispers ( so that all the table may hear ) that if his crimson suit be ready against the day , the rest need no haste . He picks his teeth when his stomach is empty , and calls for pheasants at a common Inn . You shall find him prising the richert jewels , and fairest horses , when his purse yields not money enough for earnest He thrusts himself into the press , before some great Ladies ; and loves to be seen near the head of a great train . His talk is how many Mourners he furnished with gowns at his father's funerals , how many messes ; how rich his coat is , and how ancient , how great his alliance ; what challenges he hath made and answered ; what exploits he did at Cales or Nieuport : and when he hath commended others buildings , furnitures , suits , compares them with his own . When he hath undertaken to be the broker for some rich Diamond , he wears it , and pulling off his glove to struck up his hair , thinks no eye should have any other object . Entertaining his friend , he chides his cook for no better cheer , and names the dishes he meant , and wants . To conclude , he is ever on the stage , and acts still a glorious part abroad , when no man carries a base heart , no man is more so . did and careless at home . He is a Spanish soldier on an Italian Theatre ; a bladder full of wind , a skin full of words , a fool's wonder , and a wiseman's fool . 

The Presumptuous . 

Presumption is nothing but hope out of his wits , an high house upon weak pillars . The presumptuous man loves to attempt great things , only because they are hard and rare : his actions are bold , and venturous , and more full of hazard than use . He hoiseth sail in a tempest , & saith never any of his Ancestors were drowned : he goes into an infected house , and says the plague dares not seize on noble blood : he runs on high battlements , gallops down steep hills , rides over narrow bridges , walks on weak ice , and never thinks , What if I fall ? but , What if I run over and fall not ? He is a confident Alchemist , and braggeth , that the womb of his furnace hath conceived a burden that will do all the world good ; which yet he desire's secretly born , for fear of his own bondage : in the mean time , his grass breaks ; yet he upon better luting , lays wagers of the success , and promises wedges beforehand to his friend . He saith , I will sin , and be sorry , and escape ; either God will not see , or not be angry , or not punish it ; or remit the measure . If I do well , he is just to reward ; if ill , he is merciful to forgive . Thus his praises wrong God no less than his offence ; and hurt himself no less than they wrong God. Any pattern is enough to encourage him : show him the way where any foot hath trod , he dares follow , although he see no steps returning ; what if a thousand have attempted , and miscarried ; if but one have prevailed , it sufficeth . He suggests to himself false hopes of never too late ; as if he could command either Time or repentance : and dare defer the expectation of mercy till betwixt the bridge and the water . Give him but where to set his foot , and he will remove the earth . He foreknows the mutations of States , the events of war , the temper of the seasons ; either his old prophecy tells it him , or his stars . Yea , he is no stranger to the Records of Gods secret counsel , but he turns them over , and copies them out at pleasure . I know not whether in all his enterprises he show less fear , or wisdom : no man promises himself more , no man more believes himself . I will go and sell , and return and purchase , and spend and leave my sons such estates ; all which if it succeed , he thanks himself ; if not , he blames not himself . His purposes are measured , not by his ability , but his will , and his actions by his purposes . Lastly , he is ever credulous in assent , rash in undertaking , peremptory in resolving , witless in proceeding , and in his ending miserable ; which is never other , than either the laughter of the wise , or the pity of fools . 

The Distrustful . 

The distrustful man hath his heart in his eyes , or in his hand ; nothing is sure to him but what he sees , what he handles : He is either very simple , or very false ; and therefore believes not others , because he knows how little himself is worthy of belief . In spiritual things , either God must leave a pawn with him , or seek some other Creditor . All absent things and unusual , have no other , but a conditional entertainment : they are strange , if true . If he see two neighbours whisper in his presence , he bids them speak out , and charges them to say no more than they can justify . When he hath committed a message to his servant , he sends a second after him , to listen how it is delivered . He is his own Secretary , and of his own counsel , for what he hath , for what he purposeth : and when he tells over his bags , looks thorough the keyhole , to see if he have any hidden witness , and asks aloud , Who is there ? when no man hears him . He borrows money when he needs not , for fear lest others should borrow of him . He is ever timorous , and cowardly ; and asks every man's errand at the door , ere he opens . After his first sleep , he starts up , and asks if the furthest gate were barred , and out of a fearful sweat calls up his servant , and bolts the door after him ; and then studies whether it were better to lie still and believe , or rise and see . Neither is his heart fuller of fears , than his head of strange projects , and far-fetched constructions ; What means the State , think you , in such an action , and whether tends this course : Learn of me ( if you know not ) The ways of deep policies are secret , and full of unknowen windings ; That is their act , this will be their issue : so casting beyond the Moon , he makes wise and just proceedings suspected . In all his predictions , and imaginations , he ever lights upon the worst ; not what is most likely will fall out , but what is most ill . There is nothing that he takes not with the left hand ; no text which his gloss corrupts not . Words , oaths , parchments , seals , are but broken reeds ; these shall never deceive him ; he loves no payments but real . If but one in an age have miscarried , by a rare casualty , he misdoubts the same event . If but a tile fallen from an high roof have brained a passenger , or the breaking of a coach-wheel have endangered the burden ; he swears he will keep home ; or take him to his horse . He dares not come to Church , for fear of the crowd ; nor spare the Sabbaths labour for fear of the want ; nor come near the Parliament house , because it should have been blown up ; What might have been , affects him as much as what will be . Argue , vow , protest , swear , he hears thee , and believes himself . He is a Sceptic , and dare hardly give credit to his senses which he hath often arraigned of false intelligence . He so lives , as if he thought all the world were thieves , and were not sure whether himself were one : He is uncharitable in his censures , unquiet in his fears ; bad enough always , but in his own opinion much worse than he is . 

The Characterism of the Ambitious . 

Ambition is a proud covetousness , a dry thirst of honour , the longing disease of reason , an aspiring , and gallant madness . The ambitious climes up high and perilous stairs , and never cares how to come down ; the desire of rising hath swallowed up his fear of a fall . Having once cleaved ( like a burr ) to some great man's coat , he resolves not to be shaken off with any small indignities , and finding his hold thoroughly fast , casts how to insinuate yet nearer ; and therefore , he is busy and servile in his endeavours to please , and all his officious respects turn home to himself . He can be at once a slave to command , an intelligencer to inform , a parasite to sooth and flatter , a champain to defend , an executioner to revenge ; any thing for an advantage of favour . He hath projected a plot to rise , and woe be to the friend that stands in his way : He still haunteth the Court , and his unquiet spirit haunteth him ; which having fetch 't him from the secure peace of his countrey-rest , sets him new and impossible tasks ; & after many disappointments incourages him to try the same sea in spite of his shipwrecks ; and promises better success . A small hope gives him heart against great difficulties , and draws on new expense , new servility ; persuading him ( like foolish boys ) to shoot away a second shaft , that he may find the first . He yieldeth , and now secure of the issue , applauds himself in that honour , which he still affecteth , still misseth ; and for the last of all trials , will rather bribe for a troublesome preferment , than return void of a title . But now when he finds himself desperately crossed , and at once spoilt both of advancement and hope , both of fruition and possibility , all his desire is turned into rage , his thirst is now only of revenge ; his tongue sounds of nothing but detraction & slander : Now the place he sought for is base , his rival unworthy , his adversary injurious , officers corrupt , Court infectious ; and how well is he that may be his own man , his own master ; that may live safely in a mean distance , at pleasure , free from starving , free from burning . But if his designs speed well ; ere he be warm in that seat , his mind is possessed of an higher . What he hath is but a degree to what he would have : now he scorneth what he formerly aspired to ; his success doth not give him so much contentment , as provocation ; neither can he be at rest , so long as he hath one , either to overlook , or to match , or to emulate him . When his Countrey-friend comes to visit him , he carries him up to the awful presence ; and now in his sight crowding nearer to the Chair of State , desire's to be looked on , desire's to be spoken to , by the greatest , and studies how to offer an occasion , lest he should seem unknowen , unregarded ; and if any gesture of the least grace fall happily upon him , he looks back upon his friend , lest he should carelessly let it pass , without a note : and what he wanteth in sense , he supplies in history . His disposition is never but shamefully unthankful ; for unless he have all , he hath nothing . It must be a large draught , whereof he will not say , that those few drops do not slake , but inflame him : so still he thinks himself the worse for small favours . His wit so contrives the likely plots of his promotion , as if he would steal it away without God's knowledge , besides his will ; neither doth he ever look up , and consult in his forecasts , with the supreme moderator of all things ; as one that thinks honour is ruled by Fortune , and that heaven meddleth not with the disposing of these earthly lots : and therefore it is just with that wise God to defeat his fairest hopes , and to bring him to a loss in the hottest of his chase ; and to cause honour to fly away so much the faster , by how much it is more eagerly pursued . Finally , he is an importunate suitor , a corrupt client , a violent undertaker , a smooth factor , but untrusty , a restless master of his own ; a bladder puffed up with the wind of hope , and self-love . He is in the common body as a Mole in the earth , ever unquietly casting ; and in one word is nothing but a confused heap of envy , pride , covetousness . 

The Unthrift . 

HE ranges beyond his pale , and lives without compass . His expense is measured not by ability , but william His pleasures are immoderate , and not honest . A wanton eye , a lickerous tongue , a gamesome hand have impoverished him . The vulgar sort call him bountiful , and applaud him while he spends , and recompense him with wishes when he gives , with pity when he wants : Neither can it be denied that he reached true liberality , but over-went it . no man could have lived more laudably , if when he was at the best , he had stayed there . While he is present none of the wealthier guests may pay aught to the shot , without much vehemency , without danger of unkindness . Use hath made it unpleasant to him , not to spend . He is in all things more ambitious of the title of good fellowship than of wisdom . When he looks into the wealthy chest of his father , his conceit suggests that it cannot be emptied ; and while he takes out some deal every day , he perceives not any diminution ; and when the heap is sensibly abated , yet still flatters himself with enough : One hand cousins the other , and the belly deceives both : He doth not so much bestow benefits , as scatter them . True merit doth not carry them , but smoothness of adulation : His senses are too much his guides , and his purueyors ; and appetite is his steward . He is an impotent servant to his lusts ; and knows not to govern either his mind or his purse . Improvidence is ever the companion of unthriftinesse . This man can not look beyond the present , & neither thinks , nor cares what shall be ; much less suspects what may be : and while he lavishes out his substance in superfluities , thinks he only knows what the world is worth , and that others overprize it . He feels poverty before he sees it , never complains till he be pinched with wants ; never spares till the bottom , when it is too late either to spend or recover . He is every man's friend save his own , and then wrongs himself most , when he courteth himself with most kindness . He vies Time with the slothful , and it is an hard match , whether chases away good hours to worse purpose ; the one by doing nothing , the other by idle pastime . He hath so dilated himself with the beams of prosperity , that he lies open to all dangers , and cannot gather up himself , on just warning , to avoid a mischief . He were good for an Almoner , ill for a Steward . Finally , he is the living tomb of his forefathers , of his posterity , and when he hath swallowed both , is more empty than before he devoured them . 

The Envious . 

He feeds on others evils , & hath no disease but his neighbour's welfare : whatsoever God do for him , he can not be happy with company ; and if he were put to choose , whether he would rather have equals in a common felicity , or superiors in misery , he would demur upon the election . His eye casts out too much , and never returns home , but to make comparisons with another's good . He is an ill prizer of foreign commodity ; worse of his own : for , that , he rates too high , this under value . You shall have him ever enquiring into the estates of his equals and betters ; wherein he is not more desirous to hear all , than loath to hear any thing overgood : and if just report relate aught better than he would , he redoubles the question , as being hard to believe what he likes not ; and hopes yet , if that be averred again to his grief , that there is somewhat concealed in the relation , which if it were known , would argue the commended party miserable , and blemish him with secret shame . He is ready to quarrel with God , because the next field is fairer grown ; and angrily calculates his cost , and time , and tillage . Whom he dares not openly backbite , nor wound with a direct censure , he strikes smoothly with an over-cold praise ; and when he sees that he must either maliciously oppugn the the just praise of another ( which were unsafe ) or approve it by assent , he yieldeth ; but shows withal that his means were such , both by nature , and education , that he could not without much neglect , be less commendable : So his happiness shall be made the colour of detraction . When an wholesome law is propounded , he crosseth it , either by open , or close opposition ; not for any incommoditie or inexpedience , but because it proceeded from any mouth , besides his own ; And it must be a cause rarely plausible , that will not admit some probable contradiction . When his equal should rise to Honour , he strives against it unseen ; and rather with much cost suborneth great adversaries ; and when he sees his resistance vain , he can give an hollow gratulation in presence ; but in secret , disparages that advancement ; either the man is unfit for the place , or the place for the man ; or if fit , yet less gainful , or more common than opinion ; Whereto he adds , that himself might have had the same dignity upon better terms , and refused it . He is witty in devising suggestions to bring his rival out of love , into suspicion . If he be courteous , he is seditiously popular ; if bountiful , he binds over his Clients to a faction ; if successful in war , he is dangerous in peace ; if wealthy , he lays up for a day ; if powerful , nothing wants but opportunity of rebellion . His submission is ambitious hypocrisy , his religion , politic insinuation ; no action is safe from a jealous construction . When he receives an ill report of him whom he emulates ; he saith , Fame is partial , and is wont to blanche mischiefs ; and pleaseth himself with hope to find it worse ; and if Ill-will have dispersed any more spiteful narration , he lays hold on that , against all witnesses ; and broacheth that rumour for trust , because worst : and when he sees him perfectly miserable , he can at once pity him , and rejoice . What himself can not do , others shall not : he hath gained well , if he have hindered the success of what he would have done , and could not . He conceals his best skill , not so as it may not be known that he knows it , but so as it may not be learned ; because he would have the world miss him . He attained to a sovereign medicine by the secret legacy of a dying Empiric , whereof he will leave no heir , lest the praise should be divided . Finally , he is an enemy to God's favours , if they fall beside himself ; The best nurse of ill Fame ; A man of the worst diet ; for he consumes himself , and delights in pining ; A thorne-hedge covered with nettles ; A peevish interpreter of good things , and no other than a lean and pale carcase quickened with a fiend . 

