EPISTLES The FIRST VOLUME : Containing II DECADES . 

* ⁎ * By JOSEPH HALL. . 

AT LONDON Printed by H. L. for Samuel Macham & E. Edgar : & are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard , at the sign of the Bullhead . 1608.  

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE , HENRY , PRINCE OF GREAT Britain , Son and Heir Apparent to our Sovereign Lord , JAMES , King of Great Brit. etc. all glory in either world . 

Most gracious Prince : 

IT is not from any conceit of such worth in my labours , that they durst look so hie . A lower Patronage would have served an higher work . It were well , if ought of mine could be worthy of popular eyes . Or if I could wring aught from myself , not unworthy of a judicious Reader ; I know your Highness wants neither presents , nor counsels : presents from strangers , counsels from your teachers ; neither of them matcheable by my weakness : Only duty herein excuses me from presumption . For , I thought it injustice to devote the fruit of my labour , to any other hand beside my Masters : which also I knew to be as gracious , as mine is faithful . Yet ( since even good affections cannot warrant too much vileness in gifts to Princes ) lest while my modesty disparages my work , I should hazard the acceptation ; here shall your Grace find variety , not without profit . I hate a Divine , that would but please ; and , withal , think it impossible for a man to profit , that pleaseth not . And if , while my stile fixeth itself upon others , any spiritual profit shall reflect upon your H. how happy am I ! who shall ever think , I have lived to purpose , if ( by the best of my studies ) I shall have done any good office to your Soul . Further ( which these times accounted not the least praise ) your Grace shall herein perceive a new fashion of discourse , by Epistles ; new to our language , usual to others : and ( as Novelty is never without some plea of use ) more free , more familiar . Thus , we do but talk with our friends by our pen , and express ourselves no whit less easily ; somewhat more digestedly . 

Whatsoever it is , as it cannot be good enough to deserve that countenance ; so , the countenance of such Patronage shall make it worthy of respect from others . The God of Princes protect your person , perfect your graces , and give you as much favour in heaven , as you have honour on earth . 

Your Grace's humbly-devoted servant , JOS . HALL. . 

EP. 1.  TO JACOB WADSWORTH , Lately revolted , in Spain . 

Ep. 1.  Expostulating for his departure , and persuading his return . 

How unhappily is my stile changed ! Alas , that to a friend , to a brother , I must write as to an Apostate , to an adversary ! Doth this seem harsh ? you have turned it , by being turned yourself . Once , the same walls held us in one loving society ; the same Diocese , in one honourable function ; Now , not one Land , and ( which I lament ) not one Church : you are gone , we stand and woder . For a sheep , to stray through simplicity , is both ordinary and lamentable : but , for a shepherd is more rare , more scandalous . I dare not presume overmuch , upon an appeal to a blinded conscience . Those , that are newly come from a bright candle into a dark room , are so much more blind , as their light was greater ; and the purest ivory turneth with fire into the deepest black . Tell us yet by your old ingenuity , and by those sparks of good which yet ( I hope ) lie covered under your cold ashes , tell us , what divided you ? Your motives shall once be scanned before an higher bar . Shame not to have the weak eyes of the world see that , which once your undeceiveable judge shall see , and censure . What saw you , what heard you anew , that might offer violence to a resolved mind , & make it either to alter , or suspend ? If your reasons be invincible ; inform us , that we may follow you : but if ( as they are ) slight and feeble ; return you to us : return , and think it no shame to have erred , just shame to continue erring . What such goodly beauty saw you in that painted , but ill-favoured strumpet , that should thus bewitch you , so to forget yourself , and contemn the chaste love of the Spouse of your Saviour ? I saw her , at the same time in her gayest dress : Let my soul never prospero , if I could see any thing worthy to command affection . I saw , and scorned : you saw , and adored . Would God your adoration were as far from superstition , as my scorn from impiety . That God judge betwixt us , whether herein erred : yea , let men judge , that are not drunk with those Babylonish dregss . How long might an indifferent eye look upon the comical and mimic actions in those your mysteries , that should be sacred , your magical exorcisms , your clericall shave , your uncleanly unctions , your cross , crep , censing , sprinkling , your cozening miracles , garish processions , burning of noone-daie , christening of bells , marting of pardons , tossing of beads , your superstitious hallowing of candles , wax , ashes , palms , chrism , garments , roses , swords , water , salt , the Pontifical solemnities of your greatmaster , and whatever your new mother hath ( besides ) plausible , before he should see aught , in all these , worthy of any other entertainment , than contempt ! Who can but disdain , that these things should procure any wise proselyte ? Cannot your own memory recount those truly religious spirits , which having sought Rome as resolved Papists , have left the World as holy Martyrs ; dying for the detestation of that which they came to adore ? Whence this ? They heard and magnified that , which they now saw , and abhorred . Their fire of zeal brought them to the flames of Martyrdom . Their innocent hopes promised them Religion : they found nothing but a pretence ; promised devotion , and behold idolatry : they saw , hated , suffered , and now reign ; while you wilfully , and unbidden , will lose your soul , where others meant to lose , and have found it . Your zeal dies , where theirs began to live : you like to live , where they would but die . They shall comfort us , for you : they shall once stand up against you : While they would rather die in the heat of that fire , then live in the darkness of their errors ; you rather die in the Egyptian darkness of errors , then live in the pleasant light of truth : Yea , I fear , rather in another fire , than this light . 

Alas ! what shall we looke-for of you ? Too late repentance , or obstinate error ? Both miserable . A Spira , or a Staphylus ? Your friends , yourself , shall wish you rather unborn , then either . 

OH thou , which art the great shepherd , great in power , great in mercy , which leavest the ninety & nine to reduce one , fetch home ( if thy will be ) this thy forlorn charge : fetch him home , drive him home to thy fold , though by shame , though by death . Let him once recover thy Church , thou him , it is enough . Our common Mother I know not whether more pities your loss , or disdeignes thus to be robbed of a son : Not for the need of you ; but her own piety , her own love . For , how many troops of better informed souls hath she every day returning into her lap ; now breathing from their late Antichristianisme , and embracing her knees upon their own ? She laments you , not for that she fears she shall miss you ; but , for that she knows you shall want her . See you her tears , and do but pity yourself as much as she you . And , from your Mother , to descend to your Nurse ; Is this the fruit of such education ? Was not your youth spent in a society of such comely order , strict government , wise laws , religious care ( it was ours , yet let me praise it to your shame ) as may justly challenge ( after all brags ) either RHEIMS , or DOUAI , or if your Jesuits have any other den more cleanly , and more worthy of ostentation ? And could you come out , fresh and unseasoned , from the midst of those salt waves ? could all those heavenly showers fall beside you ; while you , like a Gedeons' fleece , want moisture ? Shall none of those divine principles , which your youth seemed to drink in , check you in your new errors ? Alas ! how unlike are you to yourself , to your name ? Jacob wrestled with an Angel , and prevailed : you grapple but with a jesuit , and yield . Jacob supplanted his brother : an Esau hath supplanted you . Jacob changed his name for a better , by his valiant resistance : you , by your cowardly yielding , have lost your own . Jacob strove with God , for a blessing : I fear to say it , you against him for a curse ; for , no common measure of hatred , nor ordinary opposition can serve a revolter : Either you must be desperately violent , or suspected . The mighty one of Israel ( for he can do it ) raise you fallen , return you wandered ; and give you grace at last to shame the Devil , to forsake your stepmother , to acknowledge your true Parent , to satisfy the world , to save your own soul . If otherwise ; I will say of you , as jeremie of his Israelites ( if not rather with more indignation ) My soul shall weep in secret for your revolt , and mine eyes shall drop down tears , because one of the Lords flock is carried away captive . 

To my Lord and Patron , the Lord DENNY , Baron of Waltham . 

EP. 2.  Of the Contempt of the world . 

MY Lord , my tongue , my pen , and my heart , are all your servants ; when you cannot hear me , through distance , you must see me in my Letters . You are now in the Senate of the Kingdom , or in the concourse of the City , or perhaps ( though more rarely ) in the royal face of the Court. All of them , places fit for your place . From all these , let me call off your mind to her home above ; and , in the midst of business , show you rest : If I may not rather commend , then admonish , and beforehand confess my counsel superfluous , because your holy forwardness hath prevented it . You can afford these , but half of yourself : The better part is better bestowed ; Your soul is still retired , and reserved . You have learned to vouchsafe these worldly things , use , without affection ; and know to distinguish wisely , betwixt a Stoical dulness , and a Christian contempt : & have long made the world , not your God , but your slave . And , in truth ( that I may lose myself into a bold and free discourse ) what other respect is it worthy of ? I would adore it on my face , if I could see any Majesty , that might command veneration . Perhaps , it loves me not so much , as to show me his best . I have sought it enough : And have seen what others have doted on ; and wondered at their madness . So may I look to see better things above , as I never could see aught here , but vanity & vileness . 

What is fame , but smoke ? and metal , but dross ? and pleasure , but a pill in sugar ? Let some gallants condemn this , as the voice of a Melancholic scholar : I speak that which they shall feel , and shall confess . Thomas I never was so , I have seen some as happy , as the world could make them : and yet I never saw any more discontented . Their life hath been neither longer , nor sweeter , nor their heart lighter , nor their meals heartier , nor their nights quieter , nor their cares fewer , nor their complaints . Yea , we have known some , that have lost their mirth when they have found wealth ; and at once have ceased to be merry and poor . All these earthly delights , if they were sound , yet how short they are ! and if they could be long , yet how unsound ! If they were sound , the● are but as a good day between two agues , or a sunshine betwixt two tempests . And if they were long , their honey is exceeded by their gall . This ground bears none but maples , hollow , and fruitless ; or , like the banks of the dead sea , a fair apple , which under a red side contains nothing but dust . Every flower in this garden either pricks , or smells ill . If it be sweet , it hath thorns : and if it have no thorns , it annoys us with an ill sent . Go then , ye wise idolatrous Parasites , & erect shrines , and offer sacrifices to your God , the World ; and seek to please him with your base and servile devotions : It shall be long enough ere such religion shall make you happy . You shall at last forsake those altars , empty and sorrowful . How easy is it for us Christians , thus to insult over the worldling , that thinks himself worthy of envy ? How easy to turn off the World with a scornful repulse ; and when it makes us the Devil's proffer , All these will I give thee , to return Peter's answer , Thy silver & thy gold perish with thee ? How easy to accounted none so miserable , as those that are rich with injury , and grow great by being conscious of secret evils ? Wealth and honour , when it comes upon the best terms , is but vain ; but , when upon ill conditions , burdensome . When they are at the best , they are scarce friends ; but , when at the worst , tormentors . Alas ! how ill agrees a gay coat , and a festered heart ? what avails an high title , with an hell in the soul ? I admire the faith of Moses : but , presupposing his faith , I wonder not at his choice . He preferred the afflictions of Israel , to the pleasures of Egypt ; and choose rather to eat the Lamb , with sour herbs , than all their fleshpotss : For , how much better is it to be miserable then guilty ? and what comparison is there betwixt sorrow and sin ? If it were possible , let me be rather in hell without sin , then on earth wickedly glorious . But , how much are we bound to God , that allows us earthly favours , without this opposition ! That GOD hath made you at once honourable and just , and your life pleasant and holy , and hath given you an high state with a good heart ; are favours , that look for thanks . These must be acknowledged , not rested in : They are yet higher thoughts that must perfect your contentment . 

What God hath given you , is nothing to that he means to give : He hath been liberal ; but , he will be munificent . This is not so much as the taste of a full cup. Fasten your eyes upon your future glory , and see how meanly you shall esteem these earthly graces . Here , you command but a little pittance of mould ( great indeed , to us ; little , to the whole ) : there , whole heaven shall be yours . here you command , but as a subject : there you shall reign as a King. here , you are observed ; but sometimes with your just distaste : There , you shall reign with peace , and joy . here , you are noble among men ; there , glorious amongst Angels . Here , you want not honour ; but you want not crosses : there , is nothing but felicity . Here , you have some short joys : there , is nothing but eternity . You are a stranger , here ; there , at home . Here , Satan tempts you , and men vex you : there , Saints and Angels shall applaud you ; and God shall fill you with himself . In a word , you are only blessed here , for that you shall be . 

These are thoughts worthy of greatness : which , if we suffer either employments , or pleasures to thrust out of our doors , we do wilfully make ourselves comfortless . Let these still season your mirth , & sweeten your sorrows , & ever interpose themselves betwixt you & the world . These , only , can make your life happy , and your death welcome . 

To my Lord HAY , H. and P.  

EP. 3.  Of True Honour . 

MY Lord , It is safe to complain of Nature where Grace is ; and to magnify Grace , where it is at once had , and affected . It is a fault of Nature , and not the least , that as she hath dim eyes , so they are misplaced . She looks still , either forward , or downward ; forward to the object she desire's , or downward to the means : Never turns her eyes either backward , to see what she was ; or upward , to the cause of her good : Whence , it is just with God to withhold what he would give , or to curse that which he bestows ; and to besot carnal minds with outward things , in their value , in their desire , in their use : Whereas true wisdom hath clear eyes , and right set ; and therefore sees an invisible hand in all sensible events , effecting all things , directing all things to their due end ; sees on whom to depend , whom to thank . Earth is too low , and too base , to give bounds unto a spiritual sight . no man then can truly know what belongs to wealth , or honour , but the gracious ; either how to compass them , or how to prise them , or how to use them . I care not how many thousand ways there are to seeming honour , besides this of virtue : they all ( if more ) still lead to shame : Or what plots are devised to improve it ; if they were as deep as hell , yet their end is loss . As there is no counsel against God : so there is no honour without him . He inclines the hearts of Princes to favour ; the hearts of inferiors to applause . Without him , the hand cannot move , to success ; nor the tongue , to praise : And what is honour without these ? In vain doth the world frown upon the man , whom he means to honour ; or smile , where he would disgrace . Let me then tell your L. who are favourites in the Court of heaven ; even whiles they wander on earth : Yea , let the great King himself tell you , Those that honour me , I will honour . That men have the grace to give honour to God , is an high favour : but , because men give honour to God ( as their duty ) that therefore God should give honour to men , is to give , because he hath given . It is a favour of God , that man is honoured of man like himself : but , that God alloweth of our endeavours as honour to himself , is a greater favour than that wherewith he requires it . 

This is the goodness of our God : The man that serves him , honour's him : and whosoever honour's him with his service , is crowned with honour . I challenge all times , places , persons : who ever honoured God , and was neglected ? Who wilfully dishonoured him , and prospered ? Turn-over all Records ; and see how success ever blessed the just , after many dangers , after many storms of resistance , and left their conclusion glorious ; how all godless plots , in their loose , have at once deceived , shamed , punished their Author . I go no further : Your own breast knows , that your happy experience can herein justify GOD. The world hath noted you , for a follower of virtue ; and hath seen how fast Honour followed you : While you sought favour with the GOD of heaven , he hath given you favour with his Deputy on earth . 

God's former actions are patterns of his future : He teaches you what he will do , by what he hath done . Unless your hand be weary of offering service , he cannot either pullen his hand from rewarding , or hold it out empty . Honour him still , and God pawns his honour , on not failing you . You cannot distrust him , whom your proof hath found faithful . And , whiles you settle your heart in this right course of true glory ; laugh , in secret scorn , at the idle endeavours of those men , whose policies would outreach God , and seize upon honour , without his leave . ( GOD laughs at them in heaven . It is a safe and holy laughter , that follows his . ) And pity the preposterous courses of them , which make religion but a footstool to the seat of advancement ; which care for all things but heaven , which make the world their standing mark ; and do not so much as rove at GOD. Many had sped well , if they had begun well , and proceeded orderly . 

A false method is the bane of many hopeful endeavours . God bids us seek first his kingdom ; and earthly things shall find us , unsought . Foolish nature first seeks the world : and if she light on God by the way , it is more than she expects , desires , cares for ; and therefore fails of both , because she seeks neither aright . Many had been great , if they had cared to be good ; which now are crossed in what they would , because they willed not what they ought . If Solomon had made wealth his first suit , I doubt he had been both poor and foolish ; now , he asked wisdom , and gained greatness ; Because he choose well , he received what he asked not . OH the bounty and fidelity of our God because we would have the best he gives us all : Earth shall wait upon us , because we attend upon heaven . 

Go-on then , my Lord , go-on happily to love religion , to practise it : let God alone , with the rest . Be you a Pattern of virtue ; he shall make you a Precedent of glory . Never man lost aught , by giving it to God : that liberal hand returns our gifts , with advantage . Let men , let God see that you honour him ; and they shall hear him proclaim before you , Thus shalt it be done to the man whom the King will honour . 

To Mr NEWTON , 

Tutor to the Prince . 

EP. 4.  Of Gratulation , for the hopes of our Prince ; with an advising apprecation . 

Sir , God hath called you to a great and happy charge ; You have the custody of our common Treasure : Neither is there any seurice comparable to this of yours ; whether we regard God , or the world . Our labours , ofttimes bestowed upon many , scarce profit one : yours , bestowed upon one , redounds to the profit of many million : This is a summarie way of obliging all the World to you . I encourage you not in your care : you have more comfort in the success of it , than all Worlds can give you . The very subject of your pains would give an hart to him that hath none . I rather congratulate , with you , our common happiness , and the hopes of posterity , in that royal and blessed issue . You have best cause to be the best witness of the rare forwardness of our gracious Master : and I have seen enough , to make me think I can never be enough thankful to God for him . That Princes are fruitful , is a great blessing : but , their children are fruitful in grace , & more eminent in place then virtue , is the greatest favour God can do to a State. The goodness of a private man is his own ; of a Prince , the whole worlds . Their words are Maxims , their actions examples , their examples , rules . When I compare them with their royal Father ( as I do oft and cheerfully ) I cannot say whether he be more happy in himself , or in them . I see both in him , and them ; I see & wonder , that God distributes to natural prince's gifts proportionable to their greatness . That wise Moderator of the world knows what use is of their parts : he knows that the head must have all the senses that pertain to the whole body : And how necessary it is , that inferiors should admire them no less for the excellency of their graces , then for the sway of their authority . Whereupon , it is , that he gives heroical qualities to Princes : and , as he hath bestowed upon them his own name ; so also he gives them special stamps of his own glorious image . Among all other virtues , what a comfort is it to see those years , and those spirits stoop so willingly to devotion ? Religion is grown too severe a Mistress for young and high courages to attend . Very rare is that Nobility of blood , that doth not challenge liberty ; and that liberty , that ends not in looseness . Lo , this example teaches our gallants , how well even Majesty can stand with homage ; Majesty to men , with homage to God.  

far be it from me , to do that which my next clause shall condemn : but , I think it safe to say , that seldom ever those years have promised , seldom have performed so much . Only God keep two mischiefs ever from within the smoke of his Court ; Flattery and Treachery : The iniquity of times may make us fear these ; not his inclination . 

For , whether as English , or as men , it hath been ever familiar to us to faun upon Princes : Thomas , what do I bestow two names upon one vice , but attired in two sundry suits of evil : For , Flattery is no other than gilded treason ; nothing else but poison in gold : This evil is more tame ; not less dangerous . It had been better for many great ones not to have been , then to have been in their conceits more than men . This , Flattery hath done : and what can it not ? That other , Treachery , spills the blood ; this , the virtues of Princes . That takes them from others : This bereaves them of themselves . That , in spite of the actors , doth but change their Crown : this steals it from them for ever . Who can but wonder , that reads of some not unwise Princes , so bewitched with the enchantments of their Parasites , that they have thought themselves Gods immortal , and have suffered themselves so styled , so adored ? Neither temples , nor statues , nor sacrifices have seemed too much glory to the greatness of their selfe-loue ; Now none of all their actions could be either evil , or unbeseeming ; Nothing could proceed from them worthy of censure , unworthy of admiration : Their very spots have been beauty , their humour's justice , their errors witty , their Paradoxes divine , their excesses heroical . OH the damnable servility of false minds ! which persuade others of that which themselves laugh to see believed . OH the dangerous credulity of self-love which entertains all advantages if never so evil , never so impossible . How happy a service shall you do to this whole world of ours , if you shall still settle in that princely mind a true apprehension of himself ; and shall teach him to take his own height aright ; and even from his childhood to hate a parasite , as the worst traitor : To break those false glasses , that would present him a face not his own : To applaud plain truth , and bend his brows upon excessive praises . Thus affected , he may bid vice do her worst . Thus shall he strive with virtue , whether shall more honour each other . Thus sincere and solid glory shall every where follow , and crown him . Thus , when he hath but his due , he shall have so much , that he shall scorn to borrow the false colours of adulation . Go-on happily in this worthy and noble employment . The work cannot but succeed , that is furthered with so many prayers . 

To Sr. THOMAS CHALLONER , 

EP. 5.  A report of some Observations in my travel . 

Sir , besides my hopes , not my desires , I travelled of late ; for knowledge partly , & partly for health . There was nothing that made not my journey pleasant , save the labour of the way : which yet was so sweetly deceived , by the society of Sr Edmund Bacon ( a Gentleman truly honourable , beyond all titles ) that I found small cause to complain . The sea brooked not me , nor I it ; an unquiet element , made only for wonder and use , not for pleasure . Alighted once from that wooden conveyance , and uneven way , I bethought myself how fond our life is committed to an unsteadie and reeling piece of wood , fickle winds , restless waters ; while we may set foot , on steadfast and constant earth . Lo , than every thing taught me , every thing delighted me ; so ready are we to be affected with those foreign pleasures , which at home we should overlook . I saw much , as one might in such a span of earth , in so few months . The time favoured me : for , now newly had the key of peace opened those parts which war had before closed ; closed ( I say ) to all English , save either fugitives or captives . All civil occurrences ( as what fair Cities , what strange fashions , entertainment , dangers , delights we found ) are fit for other ears , and winter evenings . What I noted , as a divine within the sphere of my profession , my paper shall not spare in some part to report ; and that to yourself , which have passed a longer way , with more happy fruit of observation . Even little streams empty themselves into great rivers ; and they again into the Sea. Neither do I desire to tell you what you know not : it shall be sufficient that I relate aught , which others shall think memorable . 

Along our way , how many Churches saw we demolished ! Nothing left , but rude heaps , to tell the passenger , there had been both devotion and hostility . OH the miserable footsteps of war , besides bloodshed , ruin and desolation ! Fury hath done that there , which Covetousness would do with us ; would do , but shall not : The truth within , shall save the walls without . And , to speak truly ( whatever the vulgar exclaim ) Idolatry pulled down those walls ; not rage . If there had been no Hollander to raze them , they should have fallen alone , rather them hide so much impiety under their guilty roof . These are spectacles not so much of cruelty , as justice ; Cruelty of man , justice of God. But ( which I wondered at ) Churches fall , and Jesuits Colleges rife , every where : There is no City , where those are not either rearing , or built . Whence cometh this ? Is it , for that devotion is not so necessary as Policy ? Those men ( as we say of the Fox ) fare best , when they are most cursed . None so much spighted of their own ; none so hated of all ; none so opposed by ours : and yet these ill weeds grow . Whosoever lives long , shall see them feared of their own , which now hate them ; shall see these seven lean kine devour all the sat beasts that feed on the meadows of Tiber . I prophesy , as Pharaoh dreamt : The event shall justify my confidence . 

At Bruxelles , I saw some English-women profess themselves Vestals ; with a thousand rites , I know not whether more ridiculous , or magical . Poor souls ! they could not be fools enough at home . It would have made you to pity , laugh , disdain ( I know not which more ) to see by what cunning sleights and fair pretences that weak sex was fetched into a wilful bondage ; and ( if those two can agree ) willingly constrained to serve a master whom they must and cannot obey : Whom they neither may forsake for their vow , nor can please for their frailty . What follows hence ? Late sorrow , secret mischief , misery irremediable . Their forwardness , for will-worship , shall condemn our coldness for truth . 

I talked there ( in more boldness , perhaps , then wisdom ) with Costerus a famous jesuit ; an old man , more tasty than subtle , and more able to wrangle then satisfy . Our discourse was long & roving ; & on his part full both of words & vehemency . He spoke as at home ; I as a stranger : yet so , as he saw me modestly peremptory . The particulars would swell my Letter too much : It is enough , that the Truth lost less than I gained . At Gaunt ( a City that commands reverence for age , and wonder for the greatness ) we fell upon a Cappucine novice , which wept bitterly , because he was not allowed to be miserable . His head had now felt the razor , his back the rod : all that Laconicall discipline pleased him well ; which another , being condemned to , would justly accounted a torment . What hindered then ? Piety , to his mother , would not permit this which he thought piety to God : He could not be a willing beggar , unless his mother must beg unwillingly . He was the only heir of his father , the only stay of his mother : the comfort of her widowhoode depended on this her orphan ; who now naked must enter into the world of the Capucines , as he came first into this ; leaving his goods to the division of the fraternity : The least part whereof should have been hers , whose he wished all : Hence those tears , that repulse . I pitied his ill-bestowed zeal ; and rather wished , then durst teach him more wisdom . These men for devoute , the Jesuits for learned and pragmatical , have engrossed all opinion , from other Orders . OH hypocrisy ! no Capucine may take or touch silver : for , these are ( you know ) the quintessence of Franciscan spirits . This metal is as very an Anathema to these , as the wedge of gold to Achan ; at the offer whereof he starts back , as Moses from the serpent : Yet he caries a boy with him , that takes and caties it ; and never complains of either metal or measure . I saw , and laughed at it ; and , by this open trick of hypocrisy , suspected more , more close . How could I choose ? while commonly the least appears of that which is ; especially of that which is loathsome in appearance , much more in nature . At Namurs , on a pleasant and steep hill-top , we found one that was termed a married Hermit ; approving his wisdom above his fellows , that could make choice of so cheerful and sociable a solitariness . Whence , after a delightful passage up the sweet river Mosa , we visited the populous and rich Clergy of Leodium . That great City might well be dichotomized into Cloisters , & Hospitals . If I might adventure , I could here play the Critic , after all the ruins of my neglected Philology . Old monumnts , and after them our Lipsius , call this people Eburones : I doubt whether it should not rather be written Ebriones ; yet without search of any other Records , save my own eyes : While yet I would those streets were more moist with wine , then with blood ; wherein no day , no night is not dismal to some . no law , no Magistrate layeshold on the known murderer , if himself lift : For three days after his fact ; the gates are open , and justice shut : private violence may pursue him , public justice can not : whence , some of more hot temper carve themselves of revenge ; others take-up with a small pecuniary satisfaction . OH England , thought I , happy for justice , happy for security ! There you shall find in every corner a Mammet ; at every door a Begget , in every dish a Priest . From thence we passed to the Spa , a village famous for her medicinal and mineral waters , compounded of iron & Copperice ; the virtue whereof yet the simple inhabitant ascribes to their beneficial Saint , whose heavy foot hath made an ill-shaped impression , in a stone of his Savenir ; A water more wholesome than pleasant , & yet more famous than wholesome . The wild deserts ( on which it borders ) are haunted with three kinds of ill cattle ; Freebooters , Wolves , Witches ; Although these two last are ofttimes one . For , that savage Ardenna , is reputed to yield many of those monsters , whom the greeks call 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; they , Lougarous ; we ( if you will ) Witchwolues : Witches that have put on the shape of those cruel beasts . We saw a boy there , whose halfe-face was devoured by one of them near the village : yet so , as that the ear was rather out then bitten off . Nor many days before our coming , at Limburgh was executed one of those miscreants , who confessed on the wheel to have devoured two and forty children in that form . It would ask a large volume , to scan this Problem of Lycanthropy . The reasons , wherewith their relation furnished me on both parts , would make an Epistle tedious . This in short I resolved ; A substantial change is above the reach of all infernal powers , proper to the same hand that created the substance of both : Herein the Devil plays the double Sophister ; yea , the Sorcerer with Sorcerers . He both deludes the Witch's conceit , and the beholders eyes . 

One thing I may not omit , without sinful oversight ; A short , but memorable Story , which the Grephier of that Town ( though of different religion ) reported to more ears than ours . When the last Inquisition tyrannised in those parts , and helped to spend the Faggots of Ardenna ; one of the rest , a confident Confessor , being led far to his stake , sung Psalms along the way , in an heavenly courage , and victorious Triumph : the cruel Officer envying his last mirth , and grieving to see him merrier than his tormentors , commanded him silence ; He sings still , as desirous to improove his last breath to the best . The view of his approaching glory , bred his joy ; his joy breaks forth into a cheerful confession : The enraged Sheriff cause's his tongue , drawn forth to the length , to be cut off near the roots . Bloody wretch ! It had been good Music to have heard his shrieks : but , to hear his Music was torment . The poor Martyr dies in silence , rests in peace . Not many months after , our butcherly officer hath a son born with his tongue hanging down upon his chin , like a Dear after long chase ; which never could be gathered up within the bounds of his lips . OH the divine hand , full of justice , full of revenge ! Go now , Lipsius , and write the new miracles of thy Goddess ; and confirm superstition by strange events . judge you that have seen , if ever the Chapel of Halle or Zichem have yielded aught more notable . We met every where Pilgrims to those his Ladies : two Ladies shall I call them , or one Lady in two shrines ? If two , why do they worship but one ? If but one , why doth she that cure at Zichem , which at Halle she could not ? OH what pity it is , that so a high a wit should in the last be subject to dotage ! All the masculine brood of that brain we cherished , and ( if need were ) admired : but , these his silly virgins , the feeble issue of distempered age , who can abide ? One of his darlings , at Lovan , told me from his own mouth ; that the elder of these two daughters , was by him in ten days got , conceived , born , christened . I believed , and wondered not . These acts of superstition have an invisible father , and midwife : besides that it is not for an Elephant to go three years with a Mouse . It was told me in the shop of his Moretus , not without some indignation , that our King , when he had well viewed the book , and read some Passages , threw it to the ground with this Censure ; Damnation to him that made it , and to him that believes it . Whether a true story , or one of their Legends , I inquire not : I am sure , that sentence did nor so much discontent them , as it joyed me . Let me tell you yet , ere I take off my pen , two wonders more , which I saw in that wonder of Cities , Antwerp ; One , a solemn mass in a shambles , & that on God's day : while the house was full of meat , of butchers , of buyers ; some kneeling , others bagaining , most talking , all busy . It was strange to see one house sacred to God , and the belly ; and how those two services agreed : The Priest did eat flesh , the butchers sold flesh in one roof , at one instant . The butcher killed , and sold it by pieces ; the Priest did sacrifice , and orally devour it whole : whether was the more butcher ? The like we might have seen at Malines . The other , an Englishman , so madly devout , that he had wilfully mured up himself as an Anachoret ; the worst of all prisoners : There sat he pent-up , for his further merit , half hunger-starved for the charity of the Citizens . It was worth seeing , how manly he could bite-in his secret want , and dissemble his over-late repentance . I cannot commend his mortification , if he wish to be in heaven , yea , in purgatory , to be delivered from thence : I durst not pity him ; because his durance was willing , & ( as he hoped ) meritorious : But , such encouragement as he had from me , such thank shall he have from God ; who in stead of an Euge , which he looks for , shall angrily challenge him , with Who required this ? I leave him now , in his own fetters ; You , to your worthy , and honourable employments . 

Pardon me this length . Loquacity is the natural fault of Travellers : while I profit any , I may well be forgiven . 

To Sr DAVID MURRAY , 

EP. 6.  Concerning the Miracles of our time . 

Indeed the world abounds with miracles . These , while they fill the mouths of many , sway the faith of some , and make all men wonder . Our nature is greedy of news ; which it will rather fain , than want . Certainly , ere long , miracles will be no wonders , for their frequency . I had thought , our age had had too many grey hairs , and with time experience , and with experience craft , to have descried a juggler : but , now I see , by the simplicity , it declines to his second childhood . The two Lipsian Ladies , the charms of Bluntstones' boy , and Garnets' straw , what a noise have they made ! I only wonder how Faux and Catesby escaped the honour of Saints , and privilege of miracles . Herein you ask my sentence ; more seasonably , than you hoped . For , I meant to have written a just volume of this subject , and furnished myself accordingly in that region of wonders ; but that I feared to surcharge the nice stomach of our time , with too much . Neither would my length have aught availed you ; whose thoughts are so taken up with those high and serviceable cares , that they can give no leisure to an over long discourse . May it please you therefore to receive , in short , what I have deliberately resolved in myself , and think I can make good to others . 

I have noted four ranks of commonly named Miracles : from which , if you make a just subduction , how few of our wonders shall remain either to belief or admiration ? The first merely reported , not seen to be done ; the next seeming to be done , but counterfeited ; the third , truly done , but not true miracles ; the last , truly miraculous , but by Satan . The first of these are bred of lies , and nourished by credulity : The mouth of fame is full of such blasts . For these , if I listed awhile to rake in the Legends , and book of Conformities , an ingenuous Papist could not but blush , an indifferent Reader could not but lay his hand on his spleen , and wonder as much that any man could be so impudent to broach such reports , or any so simple to believe them ; as the credulous multitude wonders that any should be so powerful to effect them . But , I seek neither their shame , nor others laughter . I dare say , not the Talmud , not the Alcoran , hath more impossible tales , more ridiculous lies . Yea , to this head , Canus himself ( a famous Papist ) dare refer many of those ancient miracles reported , and ( by all likelihood ) believed of Bede , and Gregory . The next are bred of fraud , & cozenage , nourished by superstition . Who knows not , how the famous Kentish I do I moved her eyes , and hands , by those secret gimmors , which now every Puppet-play can imitate ? How Saint Wilfreds' needle opened to the penitent , and closed itself to the guilty ? How our Lady sheds the tears of a bleeding vine ? and doth many of her daily feats , as Bel did of old eat up his banquet , or as Picens' the Eremite fasted forty days . But , these two every honest Papist will confess , with voluntary shame and grief ; and grant that it may grow a disputable question whether Mountebanks or Priests are the greatest cozeners . Vives , beyond his wont vehemently , terms them execrable and satanical impostors . The third are true works of GOD , under a false title : God gives them their being , men their name : unjust , because above their nature ; wherein , the Philosopher and the superstitiously-ignorant , are contrarily extreme : while the one seeks out natural causes of Gods immediate and metaphysical works ; The other ascribes ordinary effects , to supernatural causes . If the violence of a disease cease , after a vow made to our Lady ; If a soldier , armed with this vow , escape gunshot ; a captive , prison ; a Woman travelling , death ; the vulgar ( and I would they alone ) cry out , A miracle . One loadstone hath more wonder in it , than a thousand such eventes . Every thing draws a base mind to admiration . Francisco del Campo ( one of the Archduke's Quiryes ) told us , not without importunate devotion , that in that fatal field of Newport , his vow to their Virgin helped him to swim over a large water , when the oars of his arms had never before tried any waves . A dog hath done more , without acknowledgement of any Saint . Fear gives sudden instincts of skill , even without precept . Their own Costerus durst say , that the Cure of a disease is no miracle : His reason , because it may be done by the power of Nature , albe in longer time . Yield this , and what have Lipsius his two Ladies done ? wherefore serves all this clamour , from the two hills ? I assented not ; neither will be herein thus much their enemy : For , as well the manner of doing , as the matter , makes a miracle . If Peter's handkerchief , or shadow , heal a disease , it is miraculous , though it might have been done by a Potion . Many of their recoveries , doubtless , have been wrought through the strength of Nature in the Patient ; not of virtue in the Saint . How many sick men have mended , with their physic in their pocket ? Thomas many other also ( I doubt not ) of those Cures have fallen into the fourth head ; which indeed is more knotty , and requires a deeper discourse . Wherein , if I shall evince these two things , I shall ( I hope ) satisfy my Reader , and clear the Truth : One , that miracles are wrought by Satan ; the other , that those which the Romish Church boasteth , are of this nature , of this author . I contend not of words : we take miracles in Augustine's large sense ; wherein is little difference betwixt a thing marvellous & miraculous ; such as the spirit of GOD in either instrument calls 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , & 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Perhaps , it would be more proper to say , that God works these miracles by Satan : for , as in the natural and voluntary motions of wicked men ; so in the supernatural acts of evil spirits ( as they are acts ) there is more than a mere permission . Satan , by his tempest , bereaves job of his children : yet job , looking higher , saith The Lord hath taken . no sophistry can elude this proof of Moses ; that a Prophet or dreamer may give a true sign or wonder , and yet say Let us go after strange Gods : nor that of our Saviour , who foretells of false Christ's , false Prophets that shall give 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; signs and wonders , and those great . The are some too great , I grant , for the hand of all infernal powers : by which , our Saviour invincibly proves the truth of his deity : These never graced falsehood , neither admit any precedent from our times . As to the rest so frequent and common , for me , I could not believe the Church of Rome were Antichristian , if it had not boasted of these wonders . All the knot lies then , in the application of this to Rome , and our imaginary Lady : How shall it appear , that their miracles are of this kind ? Ludovicus Vives gives six notes to distinguish God's miracles , from Satan's ; Lipsius three : Both of them too many , as might easily be discovered by discussing of particulars . It is not so much the greatness of the work , not the belief of witnesses , not the quality nor manner of the action , nor truth of essence , that can descry the immediate hand which worketh in our miracles . That alone is the true and golden rule which justin Martyr ( if at least that book be his ) prescribes in his Questions and Answers ; How shall it be known that our miracles are better than the Heathens , although the event countenance both alike ? Resp . Ex fide & cultu veri dei : Miracles must be judged by the doctrine which they confirm ; not the doctrine , by the miracles . The dreamer , or prophet , must be esteemed , not by the event of his wonder ; but , by the substance and scope of his teaching . The Romanists argue preposterously , while they would prove the truth of their Church by miracles ; whereas they should prove their miracles by the truth : To say nothing of the fashion of their Cures , that one is prescribed to come to our LADY , rather on a Fridaye , as * Henry Loyez ; another , to wash nine Days in the Water of MONT — AIGV , as Leonard Stocqueau ; another , to eat a piece of the Oak where the image stood , as Magdaleine the widow of Bruxelles . All which if they savour not strong of magical receipts , let the Indifferent judge . Surely , either there is no sorcery , or this is it . All shall be plain , if the doctrine confirmed by their miracles be once discussed : for , if that be divine truth , we do unjustly impugn these works as diabolical ; if falsehood , they do blasphemously proclaim them for divine . These works tend all chiefly to this double doctrine ; that the blessed virgin is to be invoked , for her mediation ; That God & Saints are to be adored in & by Images ; Positions that would require a volume , and such as are liberally disputed by others : whereof one is against scripture ; the other ( which in these cases values no less ) besides it . One deifies the virgin ; the other , a stock or stone . It matters not what subtle distinctions their learned Doctors make betwixt mediation of Redemption , and Intercession , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the Saint and the Image : We know , their common people , whose devotion inriches those shrines ( by confession of their own Writers ) climb the Hill of Zichem with this conceit , that Marie is their Savioresse ; that the stock is their Goddess : which unless it be true , how do their wonders teach them lies ! and therefore how from GOD ? But , to take the first at best ( for , the second is so gross , that were not the seconde commandment by Papists purposely razed out of their Primiers , children and carrers would condemn it ) it cannot be denied , that all the substance of prayer is in the heart ; the vocal sound is but a compliment , and as an outward case wherein our thoughts are sheathed . That Power cannot know the prayer , which knows not the heart : either than the Virgin is God , for that she knows the heart , or to know the heart is not proper to GOD : or to know the heart , and so our prayers , is falsely ascribed to the Virgin : and therefore these wonders , which teach men thus to honour her , are Doctors of lies ; so , not of GOD. There cannot be any discourse , wherein it is more easy to be tedious . To end ; If prayers were but in words , and Saints did meddle with all particularities of earthly things , yet blessed Marie should be a God , if she could at once attend all her Suitors . One solicits her at Halle , another at Scherpen-hewell , another at Luca , at our Walsingham another ; one in Europe , another in Asia ; or perhaps another is one of her new Clientes in America : Ten thousand devout Supplyants' are at once prostrate before her several shrines . If she cannot hear all ; why pray they ? If she can , what can GOD do more ? Certainly ( as the matter is used ) there cannot be greater wrong offered to those heavenly spirits , then by our importunate superstitions to be thrust into God's throne ; and to have forced upon them the honours of their Maker . There is no contradiction in heaven : a Saint cannot allow that an Angel forbids . See thou do it not , was the voice of an Angel : if all the miraculous blocks in the world shall speak contrary , we know whom to believe . The old rule was , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : Either that rule is devilish , or this practice . And if this practice be ill , GOD deliver me from the immediate author of these miracles . Change but one Idol for another , and what differ the wonders of Apollo's Temples , from those of these Chappelles ? We reverence ( as we ought ) the memory of that holy and happy Virgin : We hate those that dishonour her ; we hate those that deify her . Cursed be all honour , that is stolen from God.  

This short satisfaction I give , in a long question ; such as I dare rest in ; and resolve that all Popish miracles are either falsely reported , or falsely done , or falsely miraculous , or falsely ascribed to heaven . 

To Mr. WILLLIAM BEDELL , at Venice . 

EP. 7.  Lamenting the death of our late Divines and inciting to their imitation . 

WE have heard , how full of trouble , & danger , the Alps were to you ; and did at once both pity your difficulties , and rejoice in your safety . Since your departure from us , Reynolds is departed from the World. Alas ; how many worthy lights have our eyes seen shining and extinguished ? 

How many losses have we lived to see the Church sustain , and lament ; of her children , of her pillars ; our own , and foreign ? I speak not of those , which ( being excellent ) would needs be obscure : whom nothing but their own secrecy deprived of the honour of our tears . There are , besides , too many whom the world noted and admired ; even since the time that our common mother acknowledged us for her sons . Our Fulk led the way ; that profound , ready and resolute Doctor , the hammer of heretics , the champion of Truth : whom our younger times have heard oft disputing acutely , and powerfully . Next him , followed that honour of our schools , & Angel of our church , learned Whitakers ; than whom , our age saw nothing more memorable : what clearness of judgement , what sweetness of stile , what gravity of person , what grace of carriage was in that man ? Who ever saw him , without reverence ? or heard him , without wonder ? Soon after , left the world that famous and truly illuminate Doctor , Francis junius , the glory of Leiden , the other hope of the Church , the Oracle of Textuall and schoole-divinity : rich in languages , subtle in distinguishing , & in argument invincible : and his companion in labours , Lu. Trelcatius , would needs be his companion in joys ; who had doubled our sorrow & loss , but that he recompensed it with a son like himself . Soon after , fell old reverend Beza ; a long-fixed star in this firmament of the Church : who , after many excellent monuments of learning and fidelity , lived to prove upon his adversaries , that he was not dead at their day . Neither may I without injury , omit that worthy payr of our late Divines , Greenham , and Perkins : whereof the one excelled in experimental divinity ; and knew well how to stay a weak conscience , how to raise a fallen , how to strike a remorseless : The other , in a distinct judgement , and a rare dexterity in clearing the obscure subtleties of the school , and easy explication of the most perplex discourses . Doctor Reynolds is the last ; not in worth , but in the time of his loss . He alone was a well-furnished library , full of all faculties , of all studies , of all learning : The memory , the reading of that man , were near to a miracle . These are gone , amongst many more , whom the Church mourns for in secret : would God her loss could be as easily supplied , as lamented . Her sorrow is for those that are past ; her remainder of joy in those that remain ; her hope in the next age . I pray God the causes of her hope , and joy , may be equivalent to those of her grief . 

What should this work in us , but an imitation , yea ( that word is not too big for you ) an emulation of their worthiness ? It is no pride , for a man to wish himself spiritually better than he dare hope to reach : nay , I am deceived , if it be not true humility . For , what doth this argue him , but low in his conceit , high in his desires only ? Or if so ; happy is the ambition of grace , and power of sincere seruiceablenesse to God. Let us wish , and affect this , while the world lays plots for greatness : Let me not prospero , if I bestow envy on them . He is great , that is good : and no man , me thinks , is happy on earth , to him that hath grace for substance , and learning for ornament . If you know it not , the Church ( our mother ) looks for much at your hands : she knows how rich our common father hath left you : she notes your graces , your opportunities , your employments : she thinks you are gone so far , like a good Merchant , for no small gain ; and looks you shall come home well jaded . And for vent of your present commodities ( though our chief hope of success be cutoff with that unhoped peace ) yet what can hinder your private traffic for God ? I hope ( and who doth not ? ) that this blow will leave in your noble Venetians a perpetual scar ; & that their late irresolution shall make them ever capable of all better counsels ; and have his work ( like some great Eclipse ) many years after . How happy were it for Venice , if as she is every year married to the sea , so she were once thoroughly espoused to Christ ! In the mean time , let me persuade you to gratify us at home , with the publication of that your exquisite Polemicall discourse ; whereto our conference with M. Alabaster , gave so happy an occasion : You shall hereby clear many truths ; and satisfy all Readers : yea , I doubt not , but an adversary ( not too perverse ) shall acknowledge the Truths victory and yours . It was wholesome counsel of a Father , that in the time of an heresy every man should write . Perhaps , you complain of the inundations of Francford : How many have been discouraged from benefiting the world , by this conceit of multitude ! Indeed we all write ; and , while we write , cry out of number . 

How well might many be spared , even of those that complain of too many ? whose importunate babbling cloys the world , without use . 

To my Lord , the Earl of ESSEX . 

EP. 8.  Advise for his Travails . 

MY Lord , both my duty and promise make my Letters your debt ; and , if neither of these , my thirst of your good . You shall never but need good counsel , most in travail : then are both our dangers greater , and our hopes . 

I need not tell you the eyes of the world are much upon you , for your own sake , for your fathers : Only let your eyes be upon it again , and pitied , which have brought nothing from foreign Countries , but misshapen clothes , or exotic gestures , or new games , or affected lissping , or the diseases of the place , or ( which is worst ) the vices ? These men have at once wandered from their Countily , and from themselves : and some of them ( too easy to instance ) have left God behind them ; or perhaps , in stead of him , have after a loose and filthy life brought home some idle Puppet in a box , whereon to spend their devotion . Let their wrack warn you : and let their follies be entertained by you , with more derestation than pity . I know your Honour too well to fear you : your young years have been so graciously prevented with sovereign antidotes of truth and holy instruction , that this infection despairs of prevailing . Your very blood gives you argument of safety : yet , good counsel is not unseasonable , even where danger is not suspected . For God's sake , my Lord , whatsoever you gain , loose nothing of the truth ; remit nothing of your love and piety to God ; of your favour and zeal to religion . As sure as there is a God , you were trained up in the true knowledge of him . If either Angel , or Devil , or jesuit , should suggest the contrary , send him away , with defiance . There you see and hear , every day , the true mother and the feigned , striving and pleading for the living child . The true Prince of peace hath past sentence from heaven , on our side . Do not you stoop so much as to a doubt , or motion of irresolution . Abandon those from your table and salt , whom your own or others experience shall descry dangerous ; Those serpents are full of insinuations : But , of all , those of your own Country : which are so much more pernicious , by how much they have more colour of privilege of entireness . Religion is the greatest care : advices for carriage , & improvement of travail , challenge the next place . I need not counsel you to keep your state , with affability ; and so to menage yourself , as that your courtesy may be more visible , than your greatness . Nature hath taught you this , and hath secretly propagated it from your Father : who , by his sweetness of disposition , won as many hearts , as by his valour and munificence . I rather tell you , that a good nature hath betrayed many ; who , looking for that in others which they have found in themselves , have at last complained of their own credulity , and others deceit . Trust not Strangers too much ; with your counsel , with your person : and , in your greatest familiarities , have an eye to their common disposition , and infirmities . Those natures , wherewith you converse , are subject to displeasure ; and violent , in pursuit of small indignities . Yesterday heard I named , from no unfaithful report , a French Courtier , that in single combat hath sent 18. souls from the field to their place : yet he ever as the patient in the quarrel ; and for this , mentioned with more than excuse : I censure not how justly . This is others care : Only hence I argue the rifeness of unkindness taken , and pursued . You shall see , that the soil is not so divers , as the inclination of persons : who , in all Climates , though they differ in particulars , yet still agree too well in common falls . The Italian deep , close , and crafty ; the French rash ; the German dull . One not forward to offer wrongs ; but , apprehensive of a small wrong offered : another , prone either to take , or give them ; but , not uneasy to remit : another , long in conceiving , long in retaining . What do I exemplify ? There are long Catalogues of peculiar vices , that haunt special places ; which , if they were not notoriously infamous , my charity would serve me to particularise : It were pity there should be fewer virtues , local and proper . There are good uses to be made of others enormities ; if no more , by them to correct our own : who loathes vice in another , is in good forwardness to leave it in himself . The view of the public calamities , and disorders of other Churches , shall best teach you thankfulness for the better state of ours : But , better use of their virtues ; by how much it is more excellent to know what we should do , than what we should not . You must now look upon all things , not with the eyes of a stranger only , but of a Philosopher , but of a Christian ; which accounts all lost , that is not reduced to practice . It is a great praise , that you are wiser by the contemplation of foreign things ; but , much greater , that you are better . That you have seen Cities , and Courts , and Alps , & Rivers , can never yield you so sound comfort , as that you have looked seriously into yourself . In vain do we affect all foreign knowledge , if we be not thoroughly acquainted at home . Think much , and say little ; especially in occasions of dispraise : wherein , both a little is enough , and ofttimes any thing is too much . You cannot inquire too much : that , which in us inferiors would be censured for dangerous curiosity , in your greatness shall be construed as a commendable desire of knowledge . Ask still after men of greatest parts & reputation : & where you find Fame no liar , note & respect them . Make choice of those for conversation , which either in present , or in hope , are eminent : & when you meet with excellencies in any faculty , leave not without some gain of knowledge . What are others graces to you , if you only admire them ; not imitate , not appropriate them ? Lo , your equals in time grow up happily in the College ( so I may term it ) of our young , and hopeful Court , which you have left ; and , above all , that gracious Precedent of worthiness and perfection : whom while in all other things you serve , you may without reproof emulate for learning , virtue , piety . Myself am witness of their progress ; which I do joyfully gratulate to the succeeding age . Beware , lest their diligence shall outstrip you , and upbraid you with that ancient check of Going far and faring worse . I am bold & busy in counselling : you abound with better monitors ; and the best you carry about , I hope , in your own bosom . Thomas these should be needless , yet they argue my humble affection , and discharge my duty . My prayers are better than my counsels ; both of them hearty and unfeigned for your good . God guide and return you safe , from a journey not more happy and prosperous than I wish it . 

To St. ROBERT DRURY , and his Lady . 

EP. 9  Concerning my Remooveall from them . 

With how unwilling an heart I leave you , he knows that searches the heart : Neither durst I go , but that I sensibly see his hand pulling me from you . Indeed , desire of competency betrayed me , at first ; and drew mine eyes to look aside : but , when I bend them upon the place , and saw the number and the need of the people , together with their hunger and applause , meeting with the circumstances of Gods strange conveyance of this offer to me ; I saw , that was but as the fowler's feather , to make me stoop : and , contemning that respect of myself , I sincerely acknowledged higher motives of my yielding ; and resolved I might not resist . You are dear to me , as a Charge to a Pastor ; If my pains to you have not proved it , suspect me : Yet I leave you . God calls me to a greater work : I must follow him . It were more ease to me , to live secretly hidden in that quiet obscurity , as Saul amongst the stuff , then to be drawn out to the eye of the world , to act so hie a part before a thousand witnesses . In this point , if I seem to neglect you , blame me not ; I must neglect and forget myself . I can but labour , wheresoever I am . GOD knows how willingly I do that , whether there or here . I shall dig , and delve , & plant , in what ground soever my Master sets me . If he take me to a larger field , complain you not of loss , while the Church may gain . But , you are my own charge ; no wise father neglects his own in compassion of the greater need of others : yet consider , that even careful Parents , when the Prince commands , leave their families , and go to warfare . What if God had called me to heaven ; would you have grudged my departure ? Imagine that I am there , where I shall be ; although the case be not to you altogether so hopeless : for , now I may hear of you , visit you , renew my holy counsels , and be mutually comforted from you ; there , none of these . He , that will once transpose me from earth to heaven , hath now chosen to transpose me from one piece of earth to another : what is here worthy of your sorrow , worthy of complaint ? That should be for my own good : this shall be for the good of many . If your experience have taught you , that my labours do promise profit ; obtain of yourself to deny yourself so much , as to rejoice that the loss of a few should be the advantage of many souls . Thomas , why do I speak of loss ? I speak that , as your fear , not my own : and your affection cause's that fear , rather than the occasion . 

The God of the harvest shall send you a Laborer , more able , as careful : That is my prayer , and hope , and shall be my joy . I dare not leave , but in this expectation , this assurance . Whatever become of me , it shall be my greatest comfort to hear you commend your change ; and to see your happy progress in those ways I have both showed you , and beaten . So shall we meet in the end , and never part . 

Written to Mr. I B. and Dedicated to my father , Mr. I HALL. . 

EP. 10.  Against the fear of Death . 

You complain , that you fear Death : He is no man , that doth not . Besides the pain , Nature shrinks at the thought of parting . If you would learn the remedy , know the cause ; For that she is ignorant ▪ & faithless . She would not be cowardly , if she were nor foolish . Our fear is from doubt , and our doubt from unbelief : and whence is our unbelief , but chiefly from ignorance ? She knows not what good is elsewhere : she believes not her part in it . Get once true knowledge and true faith , your fear shall vanish alone . Assurance of heavenly things , makes us willing to part with earthly . He cannot contemn this life , that knows not the other . If you would despise earth therefore , think of heaven . If you would have death easy , think of that glorious life that follows it . Certainly if we can endure pain , for health ; much more shall we abide a few pangs , for glory . Think how fond we fear a vanquished enemy . Lo , Christ hath triumphed over Death : he bleedeth and gaspeth under us ; and yet we tremble . It is enough to us , that Christ died : Neither would he have died , but that we might die with safety , and pleasure . 

Think , that death is necessarily annexed to nature : We are for a time on condition that we shall not be ; we receive life , but upon the terms of redeliucrie . Necessity makes somethings easy ; as it usually makes easy things difficult . It is a fond injustice to embrace the covenant , and shrink at the condition . 

Think , there is but one common road to all flesh : There are no by-paths of any fairer , or nearer way ; no , not for Princes . Even company abateth miseries : and the commonness of an evil makes it less fearful . What worlds of men are gone before us ; yea , how many thousand out of one field ? How many crowns and sceptres lie piled up at the gates of death , which their owners have left there , as spoils to the Conqueror ? Have we been at so many graves , & so oft seen ourselves die in our friends ; and do we shrink when our course cometh ? Imagine you alone were exempted from the common law of mankind , or were condemned to Methusalahs' age ; assure yourself death is not now so fearful , as your life would then be wearisome . 

Think not so much what Death is , as from whom he comes , and for what . We receive even homely messengers from great persons ; not without respect to their masters : And what matters it who he be , so he bring us good news ? what news can be better than this . That God sends for you , to take possession of a kingdom ? Let them fear death , which know him but as a pursuivant sent from hell ; whom their conscience accuses of a life wilfully filthy ; and bindes-over secretly to condemnation : We know whither we are going , and whom we have believed ; Let us pass on cheerfully ▪ through these black gates , unto our glory . 

Lastly , know that our improvidence only adds terror unto death . Think of death , and you shall not fear it . Do you not see , that even Bears , and Tigers , seem not terrible to those that live with them ? How have we seen their keeper's sport with them , when the beholders durst scarce trust their chain ? Be acquainted with Death ; though he look grim upon you , at the first , you shall find him , yea , you shall make him a good companion . Familiarity cannot stand with fear . These are receipts enough . Too much store doth rather overwhelm than satisfy . Take but these , and I dare promise you security . 

FINIS . 

The second Decade of Epistles . 

To Sr. ROBERT DARCY . 

EP. 1.  The estate of a true , but weak Christian . 

IF you ask how I fare : Sometimes , no man better ; and , if the fault were not my own , Always . Not that I can command health , & bid the world smile when I li●t . How possible is it for a man to be happy without these ; yea in spite of them ? These things can neither augment , nor impair those comforts , that come from above . What use , what sight is there of the stars , when the sunshines ? then only can I find myself happy , when ( overlooking these earthly things ) I can fetch my joy from heaven . I tell him that knows it , the contentments that earth can afford her best Favourites , are weak , imperfect , changeable , momentary ; and such , as ever end in complaint . We sorrow that we had them ; and , while we have them , we dare not trust them : Those from above are full , and constant . What an heaven do I feel in myself , when ( after many traverses of meditation ) I find , in my heart , a feeling possession of my God When I can walk , and converse with the God of heaven , not without an openness of heart , and familiarity : When my soul hath caught fast and sensible hold of my Saviour ; and either pulls him down to itself , or rather lists up itself to him ; and can and dare secretly avouch , I know whom I have believed : When I can look upon all this inferior creation , with the eyes of a stranger , & am transported to my home in my thoughts ; solacing myself in the view and meditation of my future glory , and that present of the Saints : When I see wherefore I was made , and my conscience tells me I have done that for which I came ; done it , not so as I can boast , but so as it is accepted ; while my weaknesses are pardoned , and my acts measured by my desires , and my desires by their sincerity ; Lastly , when I can find myself ( upon holy resolution ) made firm & square , fit to entertain all events ; the good with moderate regard , the evil with courage and patience , both with thanks ; strongly settled to good purposes , constant and cheerful in devotion ; and , in a word , ready for God , yea full of God. Sometimes I can be thus , and pity the poor and miserable prosperity of the godless ; and laugh at their months of vanity , and sorrow at my own : But then again ( for why should I shame to confess it ? ) the world thrusts itself betwixt me and heaven ; and , by his dark and indigested parts , eclipseth that light which shined to my soul . Now , a senseless dulness over-takes me , and besots me ; my lust to devotion is little , my joy none at all : God's face is hid , and I am troubled . then I begin to compare myself with others , and think , Are all men thus blockish and earthen ? or , am I alone worse than the rest , and singular in my wretchedness ? Now I carry my carcase up and down carelessly , and ( as dead bodies are rubbed , without heat ) I do in vain force upon myself delights , which others laugh at : I endeavour my wont work , but without an heart ; there is nothing is not tedious to me , no not myself . 

Thus I am , till I single myself out alone , to him that alone can revive me : I reason with myself , & confer with him ; I chide myself , and entreat him : and , after some spiritual speeches interchanged , I renew my familiarity with him ; and he the tokens of his love to me . Lo , than I live again , and applaud myself in this happiness , and wish it might ever continue , and think basely of the world in comparison of it . Thus I hold on , rising and falling ; neither know , whether I should more praise God for thus much fruition of him , or blame myself for my inconstancy in good ; more rejoice , that sometimes I am well , or grieve that I am not so always . I strive , and wish , rather than hope , for better . This is our warfare ; we may not look to triumph always : we must smart sometimes , & complain ; and then again rejoice that we can complain ; and grieve that we can rejoice no more , and that we can grieve more , Our hope is , If we be patient , we shall once be constant . 

To Sr. EDMUND BACON . 

EP. 2.  Of the benefit of Retiredness , and secrecy . 

Svspect ( if you can ) that , because now many cold winds blow betwixt us , my affection can be cooler to you . True love is like a strong stream , which the further it is from the head , runs with more violence . The thoughts of those pleasures I was wont to find in your presence , were never so delightful , as now when I am barred from renewing them . I wish me with you ; yea ( if I could or might wish to change ) I should wish me yourself . To live hidden , was never but safe , and pleasant ; but now , so much better , as the world is worse . It is an happiness , not to be a witness of the mischief of the times ; which it is hard to see , and be guiltless . Your Philosophical Cell is a safe shelter from tumults , from vices , from discontentments . Besides that lively , honest , and manly pleasure , which arises from the gain of Knowledge in the deep mysteries of Nature ; How easy is it , in that place to live free from the common cares , from the infection of common evils . Whether the Spaniard gain or save by his peace , and how he keeps it ; and whether it were safer for the States to lay down arms , and be at once still and free ; Whether the Emperor's truce , with the Turk , were honourable and seasonable ; or whether Venice have won or lost by her late jars ; are thoughts that dare not looke-in at those doors . Who is envied , and who pitied at Court ; Who buys hopes , and kindness dearest ; who lays secret mines to blow up another , that himself may succeed , can never trouble you : These cares dare not enter into that Sanctuary of Peace . Thence you can see how all , that live public , are tossed in these waves , and pity them . For , great places have seldom safe and easy entrances : and ( which is worst ) great charges can hardly be plausibly wielded , without some indirect policies . Alas ! their privileges cannot countervail their toil . Weary days , and restless nights , short lives and long cares , weak bodies , & unquiet minds attend lightly on greatness . Either Clients break their sleep in the morning , or the intention of their mind drives it off from the first watch : Either suits or complaints thrust themselves into their recreations ; and Packets of Letters interrupt their meals . It is ever Term with them , without Vacation . Their businesses admit of no night , no holiday : Lo , your privacy frees you from all this , and whatever other glorious misery . There you may sleep , and eat , and honestly disport , and enjoy yourself , and command both yourself and others . And , whiles you are happy , you live out of the reach of Envy ; unless my praises send that guest thither : which I should justly condemn as the fault of my love . no man offers to undermine you , none to disgrace you : you could not want these inconveniences abroad . Yea , let a man live in the open world , but as a looker on , he shall be sure not to want abundance of vexations . An ill mind holds it an easy torment , to live in continual sight of evil ; if not rather a pleasure : but , to the well disposed , it is next to hell . Certainly , to live among Toads & Serpents , is a Paradise to this . One jests pleasantly with his Maker : another makes himself sport with Scripture . One fills his mouth with oaths of sound : another scoffs at the religious . One speaks villainy ; another laughs at it ; a third defends it . One makes himself a Swine ; another a Devil : Who ( that is not all earth ) can endure this ? who cannot wish himself rather a desolate Hermit , or a close prisoner ? Every evil we see , doth either vex , or infect us. Your retiredness avoids this ; yet so , as it equally escapes all the evils of Solitariness . You are full of friends ; whose society , intermixed with your closenes , makes you to want little of public . The Desert is too wild , the City too populous : the Country is only fit for rest . I know , there want not some obscure corners , so haunted with dulness , that as they yield no outward unquietnes , so no inward contentment . Yours is none of those ; but such as strives rather , with the pleasure of it , to require the solitariness . The Court is for honour , the City for gain , the Country for quietness ; A blessing , that need not ( in the judgement of the wisest ) yield to the other two . Yea , how many have we known , that having nothing but a cote of thatch to hide them from heaven , yet have pitied the careful pomp of the mighty ? How much more may those which have full hands , and quiet hearts , pity them both ? I do not so much praise you in this , as wonder at you . I know many upon whom the conscience of their wants , forces a necessary obscurity ; who if they can steal a virtue out of necessity , it is well : but , I no where know so excellent parts shrouded in such willing secrecy . The world knows you , and wants you ; and yet you are voluntarily hid . Love yourself still ; & make much of this shadow , until our common mother call you forth to her necessary service , & charge you to neglect yourself , to pleasure her . Which once done ; you know where to find Peace . Whether others applaud you , I am sure you shall yourself : and I shall still magnify you , and ( what I can ) imitate you . 

TO Mr. JOHN WHITEING . 

EP. 3.  An Apologetical discourse of the Marriage of Ecclesiastical persons . 

I Know not , whether this quarrel be worthy of an answer , or rather of a silent scorn ; or if an answer , whether merry or serious . I do not willingly suffer my pen to wade into questions : Yet , this argument seems shallow enough for an Epistle . If I free not this Truth , let me be punished with a divorce . Some idle table-talk calls us to pled for our wives . Perhaps some gallants grudge us one , who can be content to allow themselves more . If they thought wives curses , they would afford them us. Our marriage is censured ( I speak boldly ) of none but them , which never knew to live chastely in marriage ; who never knew Gratian'ss true distinction of Virginity . What care we for their censure , where God approves ? But some perhaps maintain it , out of judgement : Bid them make much of that , which Paul tells them , is a doctrine of Devils . Were it not for this opinion , the church of Rome would want one evident brand of her Antichristianisme . Let their shavelings speak for themselves ; upon whom , their unlawful Vow hath forced a wilful & impossible necessity . I leave them to scan the old rule of In turpi voto muta decretum ; if they had not rather , Cautè si non castè . Even moderate Papists will grant us free , because not bound by vow ; no not so far as those old germans , pro posse et nosse . Or what care we , if they grant it not ? while we hold us firm to that sure rule of Basil the great ; He that forbids what God enjoins , or enjoins what God forbids , let him be accursed . I pass not what I hear men , or Angels say , while I hear God say , Let him be the husband of one wife . That one word shall confirm me , against the barking of all impure mouths . He that made marriage , says it is honourable : what care we for the dishonour of those that corrupt it ? yea , that which Nature noteth with shame , God mentions with honour , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; Greg. with the title of opus castum ; Paphnutius , of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , chastity . But , if God should be judge of this controversy , it were soon at an end ; who , in the time even of that legal strictness , allowed wedlock , to the ministers of his sanctuary . Let Cardinal Panormitan be heard speak . Continency , saith he , in Clergy men is neither of the substance of their order , or appointed by any law of GOD. And Gratian , out of Augustine , yet more . 

Their marriage , saith he , is neither forbidden by legal , nor evangelical , nor Apostolic authority . 

God never imposed this law of Continence : who then ? The Church . As if a good spouse would gainsay what her husband willeth : But , how well ? Hear , OH ye Papists , the judgement of your own Cardinal ; and confess your mouths stopped . But I believe ( saith he ) it were for the good and safety of many souls , and would be an whole some law , that those which would , might marry ; For that , as experience teacheth us , a contrary effect follows upon that law of Continency ; since at this day they live not spiritually , neither are clean , but are defiled with unlawful copulation , to their great sin : whereas with their own wife it might be chastity . Is this a Cardinal , think you , or an Huguenot ? But , if this red hat be not worthy of respect ; Let a Pope himself speak out of Peter's Chair . Pius the second , as learned as hath sit in that room this thousand years ; Marriage saith he , upon great reason was taken from the Clergy ; but , upon greater reason is to be restored . What need we other judge ? How just this law is , you see ; see now how ancient : For , some doctrines have nothing to pled for them , but Time. Age hath been an old refuge for Falsehood . Tertullians' rule is true ; That , which is first , is truest . What the ancient jewish Prelates did , Moses is clear : what did the Apostles ? Doth not Paul tell us that both the rest of the Apostles , and the brethren of the Lord , and Cephas , had wives , and ( which is more ) carried them still along in their travels ? For that childish elusion of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , who can abide , but to laugh at ? Doth not Clemens of Alexandria ( a father not of more antiquity , than credit ) tell us , that Peter , Philip , and Paul himself , were married ? and this last ( though unlikest ) how is it confirmed by Ignatius , in his Epistle to the Philadelphians ? Yea , their own Cardinal , learned Cajetan , doth both avouch and evince it . This was their practice : what was their Constitution ? Look in these Canons , which the Romish Church fathers upon the Apostles , and Franciscus morion their lesuite sweats to defend it in a whole volume : There you find , Canon . 5. enacted that no Bishop , Presbyter , Deacon , shall forsake his wife ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) in pretence of religion , upon pain of deposition . It would move laughter , to see how the Jesuits gnaw upon this bone , and suck-in nothing but the blood of their own jaws ; while the sixth General Council avers and proclaims this sense truly Apostolical , in spite of all contradiction . 

follow the times now , and descend lower ; what did the ages succeeding ? Search records : Whatever some palpably-foysted Epistles of Popes insinuate ; they married , without scruple of any contrary injunction . Many of those ancients admired virginity ; but , imposed it not . amongst the rest , Origen ( though himself a wilful Eunuch ) is fain to persuade the sons of Clergy men , not to be proud of their Parentage . After this , when the fathers of the Nicene Council went about to enact a law of Continency , Socrates the Historian expresses it thus : It seemed good ( saith he ) to the Bishops to bring in a new law into the Church . It was then new , and they but would have brought it in ; therefore before it was not : where we know how Paphnutius , himself a Virgin , famous for holiness , famous for miracles ; rising ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) cried loud , that they ought not to lay this ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) heavy yoke , upon men of the Church . His Arguments wan assent . He spoke and prevailed . So this liberty was still continued and confirmed . If this be not plain enough ; Holy Athanasius , a witness past exception , shall serve for a thousand histories till his age . 

Many Bishops , saith he have not married ; and contrarily Monks have been fathers of children : as contrarily , you see Bishops the fathers of children ; and Monks that have not sought posterity . Would you yet have instances of the former , and the next age ? Here you have Numidicus the Martyr , a married Presbyter ; Cheremon of Nilus , a married Bishop ; Demetrianus Bishop of Antioch , whose son Domnus succeeded Paulus Samosatenus ; Philo●omus and Phileas BB. of the Thmuites ; Gabinius brother of Eutychianus BB. of Rome ; The father of Nazianzen , Basil , and the other Gregory , Hilarius , and that good Spiridion Bishop of Cyprus , of whom Sozomen gives so direct testimony . To omit others ▪ what should I speak of many Bishops of Rome , whose sons not spurious , as now adays , but ( as Pope Vrban himself witness ) lawfully begot in wedlock , followed their fathers in the Pontifical chair . The reason whereof , that Pope himself ingenuously rendereth ; for that marriage was every where lawful to the Clergy , before the prohibition ( which must needs be late ) and in the Eastern Church to this day is allowed . What need we more testimonies or more examples ? What ever Heliodorus , Bishop of Trica ( a man fitter for a wanton love-storie , than a Church controversy ) brought into the Church of Thessalia , Socrates thus flatly writes of those Bishops of his time ; For many of them in the place and function of Bishops , beget children of their lawful wives . This was practised : see what was decreed in that sixth general Council of Constantinople , to this purpose , to the confusion of all replyers . If any Protestant Church in Christendom can make a more peremptory , more full and absolute , more cautelous decree for the marriage of Ecclesiastical persons , let me be condemned as faithless : A place , I grant , miserably handled by our adversaries ; and because they cannot blemish it enough , indignly torn out of the Counsels . What dare not impudence do ? Against all evidences of Greek Copies , against their own Gratian , against pleas of antiquity . This is the readiest way ; Whom they cannot answer , to burn ; what they cannot shifted off , to blot out ; and to cut the knot , which they cannot untie . The Romanists of the next age were somewhat more equal : who , seeing themselves pressed with so flat a decree , confirmed by authority of Emperors , as would abide no denial , began to distinguish upon the point ; limiting this liberty only to the Eastern Church , and granting that all the Clergy of the East might marry , not theirs . So Pope Steven the second freely confesses : The tradition ( saith he ) of the Eastern Churches is otherwise , then that of the Roman Church . For , their Priests , Deacons , or Subdeacons' are married ; but , in this Church , or the Western , no one of the Clergy , from the Subdeacon to the Bishop , hath leave to marry . 

Liberally ; but not enough : and if he yield this , why not more ? shall that be lawful in the East , which in the West is not ? Do the Gospels or laws of equity alter according to the four corners of the world ? doth God make difference betwixt Greece & England ? If it be lawful , why not every where ? if unlawful , why is it done any where ? So than you see , we differ not from the Church in this ; but from the Romish Church : But this sacred council doth not only universally approve this practice ( with pain of deposition to the gainsayers ) but avouches it for a decree Apostolical . judge now , whether this one authority be not enough to weigh down an hundred petty Conventicles , and many legions ( if there had been many ) of private contradictions . Thus , for seven hundred years , you find nothing but open freedom : All the scuffling arose in the eight age ; wherein yet this violent imposition found many & learned adversaries , & durst not be obtruded at once . Lo , even then , Gregory the third , writing to the BBs. of Bavaria , gives this disiunct charge ; Let none keep an harlot or a concubine : but either let him live chastely , or marry a wife ; whom it shall not be lawful for him to forsake : According to that rule of Clerks cited from Isidore , and renewed in the Council of Mentz , to the perpetual shame of our juggling adversaries . Nothing can argue guiltiness so much , as unjust expurgations . Isidore saith , Let them contain , or let them marry but one : They cite him , Let them contain ; and leave out the rest : somewhat worse them the Devil cited scripture . But , I might have spared all this labour of writing , could I persuade whosoever either doubts , or denies this , to reade-over that one Epistle which Huldericus BB. of Auspurge wrote learnedly , and vehemently , to Pope Nicolas the first , in this subject : which if it do not answer all cavils , & satisfy all Readers , and convince all ( not wilful ) adversaries , let me be cast , in so just a cause . There you shall see , how just , how expedient , how ancient this liberty is ; together with the feeble and injurious grounds of forced continency : Read it , and see whether you can desire a better advocate . After him ( so strongly did he pled , & so happily ) for two hundred years more , this freedom still blessed those parts ; yet , not without extreme opposition . Histories are witnesses of the busy , & not unlearned combats of those times , in this argument . But now , when the body of Antichristianisme began to be complete , and to stand up in his absolute shape , after a thousand years from Christ ; this liberty , which before wavered under Nicolas 1. now by the hands of Leo 9  Nicolas 2. and that brand of hell , Gregory 7. was utterly ruined , wives debarred , single life urged : A good turn for whoremasters ( saith Aventine ) who now for one wife might have six hundred Bedfellows . 

But , how approved of the better sort appears ( besides that the Churches did ring of him , ech-where , for Antichrist ) in that at the Council of Worms the French and Germane BB ● deposed this Gregory , in this name ( amongst other quarrels ) for separating man and wife . Violence did this ; not reason : neither was Gods will here questioned ; but , the Pope's wilfulness . What broils hereon ensued , let aventine witness . 

The bickeringes of our English Clergy , with their Dunstanes , about this time , are memorable in our own Hist . which teach us how late , how repiningly , how unjustly , they stooped under this yoke . I had rather send my Reader to Bale and Fox , them abridge their monuments , to enlarge my own . 

I have ( I hope ) fetched this truth far enough ; and deduced it low enough , through many ages , to the midst of the rage of Antichristian tyranny . There left our liberty ; there began their bondage . Our liberty is happily renewed with the Gospel : what God , what his Church hath ever allowed , we do enjoy . Wherein we are not alone : The Greek Church , as large for extent as the Roman ( and , in some parts of it , better for their soundness ) do thus ; and thus have ever done . 

Let Papists and Atheists say what they will ; It is safe erring with GOD and his purer Church . 

To my Sister , M B. BRINSLY . 

EP. 4.  Of the Sorrow not to be repent of . 

IT is seldom seen , that a silent grief speeds well : for , either a man must have strong hands of resolution to strangle it in his bosom ; or else it drives him to some secret mischief : whereas sorrow revealed , is half remedied , and ever abates in the uttering . Your grief was wisely disclosed ; and shall be as strangely answered . I am glad of your sorrow ; and should weep for you , if you did not thus mourn . Your sorrow is , that you cannot enough grieve for your sins . Let me tell you , that the Angels themselves sing at this lamentation ; neither doth the earth afford any so sweet music in the ears of God. This heaviness is the way to joy . Worldly sorrow is worthy of pity , because it leads to death : But , this deserves nothing but envy and gratulation . If those tears were common , hell would not so enlarge itself . Never sin , repent of , was punished : and never any thus mourned , and repented not . Lo , you have done that , which you grieve you have not done . That good GOD , whose act is his will , accounts of our will as our deed . If he required sorrow proportionable to the heinousness of our sins , there were no end of mourning . Now , his mercy regards not so much the measure , as the truth of it ; & accounts us to have that which we complain to want . I never knew any truly penitent , which in the depth of his remorse , was afraid of sorowing too much ; nor any unrepentant , which wished to sorrow more . Yea , let me tell you , that this sorrow is better , and more , than that deep heaviness for sin , which you desire . Many have been vexed with an extreme remorse for some sin , from the gripes of a galled conscience , which yet never come where true repentance grew ; in whom the conscience plays at once the accuser , witness , judge , tormentor : But , an earnest grief , for the want of grief , was never found in any but a gracious heart . You are happy , & complain . Tell me , I beseech you ; This sorrow which you mourn to want , is it a grace of the spirit of God , or not ? If not , why do you sorrow to want it ? If it be , o how happy it is to grieve for want of grace ! The God of all truth & blessedness hath said , Blessed are those that hunger and thirst after righteousness ; and , with the same breath , Blessed are they that mourn : for , they shall be comforted . You say , you mourn ; Christ saith , you are blessed : you say you mourn ; Christ saith , you shall be comforted . Either now distrust your Saviour , or else confess your happiness , and with patience expect his promised consolation . What do you fear ? you see others stand like strong Oaks , unshaken , unremoved : you are but a reed , a feeble plant , tossed & bowed with every wind , and with much agitation bruised : Lo , you are in tender and favourable hands , that never broke any , whom their sins bruised ; never bruised any whom temptations have bowed . You are but flax ; and your best is not a flame , but an obscure smoke of grace : Lo , here his spirit is as a soft wind , not as cold water ; he will kindle , will never quench you . The sorrow you want , is his gift : Take heed least while you vex yourself with dislike of the measure , you grudge at the giver . Beggar's may not choose . This portion he hath vouchsafed to give you , if you have any , it is more than he was bound to bestow : yet you say , What , no more ? As if you took it unkindly , that he is no more liberal . Even these holy discontentments are dangerous . Desire more ( so much as you can ) but repined not , when you do not attain . Desire ; but so as you be free from impatience , free from unthankfulnes . Those , that have tried , can say how difficult it is to complain , with due reservation of thanks . Neither know I whether is worse , to long for good things impatiently , or not at all to desire them . The fault of your sorrow , is rather in your conceit , then in itself . And , if indeed you mourn not enough , stay but God's leisure , and your eyes shall run over with tears . How many do you see sport with their sins , yea brag of them ? How many that should die for want of pastime , if they might not sin freely , and more freely talk of it ? What a Saint are you to these , that can droop under the memory of the frailty of youth , and never think you have spent enough tears ! Yet so I encourage you in what you have , as one that persuades you not to desist from suing for more . It is good to be covetous of grace , and to have our desires herein enlarged with our receipts . Weep still , and still desire to weep : but , let your tears be as the rain in a sunshine ; comfortable and hopeful : and let not your longing , savour of murmur , or distrust . These tears are reserved ; this hunger shall be satisfied ; this sorrow shall be comforted : There is nothing betwixt God and you , but time . Prescribe not to his wisdom : hasten not his mercy . His grace is enough for you : his glory shall be more then enough . 

To Mr. HUGH CHOLMLEY . 

EP. 5.  Concerning the Metaphrase of the Psalms . 

Fear not my immoderate studies . I have a body that controls me enough in these courses ; my friends need not . There is nothing whereof I could sooner surfeit , if I durst neglect my body to satisfy my mind : But , while I affect knowledge , my weakness cheques me and says , Better a little learning then no health . I yield , and patiently abide myself debarred of my chosen felicity . The little I can get , I am no niggard of : neither am I more desirous to gather , then willing to impart . The full handed , are commonly most sparing . We vessels , that have any empty room , answer the least knock with a hollow noise : you , that are full , sound not . If we pardon your closeness , you may well bear with our profusion : If there be any wrong , it is to ourselves , that we utter what we should lay up . It is a pardonable fault to do lesle good to ourselves , that we may do more to others . amongst other endeavours , I have boldly undertaken the holy metres of David ; how happily , judge you by what you see . There is none of all my labours so open to all censures ; none , whereof I would so willingly hear the verdict of the wise , and judicious . Perhaps , some think the verse harsh ; whose nice ear regards roundness , more than sense : I embrace smoothness , but affect it not . This is the least good quality of a verse ; that intends any thing but musical delight . Others may blame the difficulty of the tunes : whose humour cannot be pleased without a greater offence . For , to say truth , I never could see good verse written in the wont measures . I ever thought them most easy , and least Poetical . This fault ( if any ) will light upon the negligence of our people ; which endure not to take pains for any fit variety : The French & Dutch have given us worthy examples of diligence , & exquisiteness in this kind . Neither our ears , nor voices are less tuneable . here is nothing wanting , but will to learn . What is this but to eat the corn out of the ear , because we will not abide the labour to grind , and knead it ? If the question be , whether our verse must descend to them , or they ascend to it ; a wise moderation I think would determine it most equal , that each part should remit somewhat , and both meet in the midst . Thus I have endeavoured to do , with sincere intent of their good , rather than my own applause . For , it had been easy to have reached to an higher strain : but I durst not ; whether for the grave Majesty of the Subject , or benefit of the simplest Reader . You shall still note , that I have laboured to keep David's entire sense , with numbers neither lofty , nor slubbred : which mean is so much more difficult to find , as the business is more sacred ; and the liberty less . Many great wits have undertaken this task ; which yet have either not effected it , or have smothered it in their private desks , and denied it the common light . amongst the rest , were th●se two rare spirits of the Sidnyes ; to whom , Poesy was as natural as it is affected of others : and our worthy friend , Mr. Sylvester , hath showed me , how happily he hath sometimes turned from his Bartas , to the sweet Singer of Israel . It could not be , that in such abundant plenty of Poesy , this work should have passed unattempted : would God I might live to see it perfected , either by my own hand , or a better . In the mean time , let me expect your unpartial sentence , both concerning the form , and sense . Lay aside your love , for a while ; which too oft blinds judgement . And as it uses to be done in most equal proceedings of justice , shut me out of doors , while my verse is discussed : yea , let me receive not your censure only , but others by you : this once ( as you love me ) play both the Informer and the Judge . Whether you allow it , you shall encourage me ; or correct , you shall amend me : Either your stars or your spits ( that I may use Origens' notes ) shall be welcome to my margin . It shall be happy for us , if God shall make our poor labours any way serviceable to his Name , & Church . 

To Mr. SAMVEL SOTHEBY . 

EP. 6.  A Preface to his Relation of the Russian affairs . 

Travel perfiteth wisdom ; and observation gives perfection to travel : without which , a man may please his eyes , not feed his brain ; and , after much earth measured , shall return with a weary body , and an empty mind . Home is more safe , more pleasant ; but less fruitful of experience : But , to a mind not working and discursive , all heavens , all earth's are alike . And , as the end of travel is observation ; so , the end of observation is the informing of others : for , what is our knowledge if smothered in ourselves , so as it is not known to more ? Such secret delight can content none but an envious nature . You have breathed many & cold airs , gone far , seen much , heard more , observed all . These two years you have spent in imitation of Nebuchadnezars' seven ; conversing with such creatures as Paul fought with , at Ephesus . Alas ! what a face , yea what a back of a Church have you seen ? what manners ? what people ? Among whom , ignorant superstition strives with close Atheism , treachery with cruelty , one Devil with another ; while Truth & Virtue do not so much as give any challenge of resistance . Returning once to our England after this experience , I imagine you doubted whether you were on earth , or in heaven . Now them ( if you will hear me , whom you were wont ) as you have observed what you have seen , & written what you have observed ; so , publish what you have written : It shall be a grateful labour , to us , to posterity . I am deceived , if the fickleness of the Russian state , have not yielded more memorable matter of history them any other in our age , or perhaps many centuries of our predecessors . How shall I think , but that God sent you thither before these broils , to be the witness , the register of so famous mutations ? He loves to have those just evils which he doth in one part of the world , known to the whole ; & those evils , which men do in the night of their secrecy , brought forth into the Theatre of the world ; that the evil of men's sin being compared with the evil of his punishment , may justify his proceedings & condemn theirs . Your work shall thus honour him ; besides your second service , in the benefit of the Church . For , whiles you discourse of the open Tyranny of that Russian Nero , John Basilius ; the more secret , no less bloody plots of Boris ; the ill success of a stolen Crown ; though set upon the head of an harmless son ; the bold attempts and miserable end of a false , yet aspiring challenge ; the perfidionsnesse of a servile people , unworthy of better governors ; the miscarriage of wicked governors , unworthy of better subjects ; the injust usurpations of men , just ( though late ) revenges of God , cruelly rewarded with blood , wrong claims with overthrow , treachery with bondage ; the Reader , with some secret horror , shall drawin delight , and with delight instruction : Neither know I any relation whence he shall take out a more easy lesson of justice , of loyalty , of thankfulness . 

But , above all , let the world see & commiserate the hard estate of that worthy and noble Secretary , Buchinski . Poor gentleman ! his distress recalls ever to my thoughts Esop's Stork , taken amongst the Cranes : He now nourishes his hair , under the displeasure of a foreign Prince ; At once in durance , and banishment . He served an ill master ; but , with an honest heart , with clean hands . The master's injustice doth no more infect a good servant , than the truth of the servant can justify his ill master . A bad workman may use a good instrument : and ofttimes a clean napkin wipeth a foul mouth . It joys me yet to think , that his piety , as it ever held friendship in heaven , so now it wins him friends in this our other world : Lo , even from our Island inexpected deliverance takes a long flight , and blesseth him beyond hope ; yea rather , from heaven , by us. That GOD , whom he serves , will be known to those rude and scarce human Christians , for a protector of innocence , a favourer of truth , a rewarder of Piety . The mercy of our gracious King , the compassion of an honourable Councillor , the love of a true friend , and ( which wrought all , and set all on work ) the grace of our good God , shall now lose those bonds , and give a glad welcome to his liberty , and a willing farewell to his distress . He shall , I hope , live to acknowledge this ; in the mean time , I do for him . Those Russian affairs are not more worthy of your records , than your love to this friend is worthy of mine . For , neither cold this large Sea drown or quench it , nor time and absence ( which are wont to breed a lingering consumption of friendship ) abate the heat of that affection , which his kindness bred , religion nourished . Both rareness , and worth shall commend this true love ; which ( to say true ) hath been now long out of fashion . Never time's yielded more love ; but , not more subtle . For , every man loves himself in another , loves the estate in the person : Hope of advantage is the loadstone that draws the iron hearts of men ; not virtue , not desert . no age afforded more Parasites , fewer friends : The most are friendly in sight , serviceable in expectation , hollow in love , trustless in experience . Yet now Buchinski , see & confess thou hast found one friend , which hath made thee many : on whom while thou bestowedst much favour , thou hast lost none . I cannot but think how welcome , Liberty ( which though late , yet now at last hath looked back upon him ) shall be to the Cell of his affliction ; when , smiling upon him , she shall lead him by the hand , and ( like another Angel ) open the iron gates of his miserable captivity , and ( from those hard Prestaves and savage Christians ) carry him by the hair of the head , into this paradise of God. In the mean time I have written to him as I could , in a known language , with an unknowen hand ; that my poor Letters of gratulation might serve as humble attendants to greater . 

For your work , I wish it but such glad entertainment , as the profit , yea the delight of it deserves ; and fear nothing , but that this long delay of publication will make it scarce news : We are all grown Athenians , and accounted a strange report like to a fish , and a guest . Those eyes and hands stayed it , which might do it best . I cannot blame you , if you think it more honoured by the stay of his gracious perusal , than it could be by the early acceptation of the world . Even the cast garments of Princes are precious Others have in part prevented you ; whose labours , to yours , are but as an Echo to a long period : by whom , we hear the last sound of these stirs , ignorant of the beginning . They give us but a taste in their hand : you lead us to the open fountain . Let the Reader give you but as much thank , as you give him satisfaction ; you shall desire no more . 

Finally , GOD give us as much good use , as knowledge of his judgements ; the world , help of your labours ; yourself , encouragement ; Buchinski , liberty . 

To STANISLAUS BUCHINSKI , late Secretary to DEMETRIUS Emp. of Russia . 

EP. 7.  Of the comfort of Imprisonment . 

The knowledge , that the eye gives of the face alone , is shallow , uncertain , imperfect . For , what is it , to see the utmost skin , or favour of the visage ; changeable with disease , changeable with passion ? The ear ( me thinks ) doth both most clearly disclose the minds of others , and knit them faster too ours : which , as it is the sense of discipline , so of friendship ; commanding it even to the absent , and in the present cherishing it . This thing we have lately proved in yourself , most noble Stanislaus : nearer examples we might have had ; better , we could not . How many , how excellent things have we heard of you , from our common friend , though av-s_d yours , which have easily wone our belief , our affections ! How oft , how honourable mention hath he made of your name ! how frequently , how seruently have we wished you , both safety , and liberty ! And now , Lo where she comes , as the greeks say , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , & visits her forlorn Client . Although , I would not doubt to say that this outward durance of the body , hath seemed more harsh to the behoulders , then to yourself , a wise man , and ( which is more ) a Christian ; whose free soul , in the greatest straits of the outer man , fly's over Seas and Lands , whither it listeth ; neither can , by any distance of place , nor swelling of waves , nor height of mountains , nor violence of enemies , nor strong bars , nor walls , nor guards , be restrained from what place itself hath chosen . Lo , that enjoys God , enjoys itself , and his friends ; and so feeds itself with the pleasure of enjoying them , that it easily either forgers , or contemns all other things . It is no Paradox , to say that A wise Christian cannot be imprisoned , cannot be banished : He is ever at home , ever free . For , both his liberty is within him , and his home is universal . And what is it , I beseech you ( for you have tried ) that makes a prison ? Is it straitness of walls ? then you have as many fellows , as there are men . For , how is the soul of every man penned within these clay-walles of the body , more close , more obscure● whence , she may look oft , through the grates of her busy thoughts ; but , is never released in substance , till that God , who gave us our Mittimus into this Gaol , give us our Delivery , with a Return ye sons of Adam : Thus , either all men are prisoners , or you are none . Is it restraint ? How many ( especially of that other sex in those your Eastern parts ) chamber up themselves , for state ; so as they neither see the Sun , nor others them ? How many superstitious men , for devotion ? How many obscure Aglai , for ease and carelessness , keep themselves in their own Cottage , in their own village ; & never walk forth so much as to the neighbour towns ? And what is your Russia to all her inhabitants , but a large prison , a wide Galley ? yea , what other is the world to us ? How can he complain of straitnes , or restraint , that roves all over the world , and beyond it ? Tyranny may part the soul from the body ; cannot confine it to the body . That which others do for ease , devotion , state , you do for necessity : why not as willingly , since you must do it ? Do but imagine the cause other ; & your case is the same with theirs which both have chosen , and delight to keep close ; yet hating the name of prisoners , while they embrace the condition . But , why do I persuade you , not to mislike that , which I pray you may forsake ? I had rather you should be no prisoner at all ; then to be a cheerful prisoner upon necessity . If the doors be open , my persuasion shall not hold you in : Rather our prayers shall open those doors , and fetch you forth into this common liberty of men ; Which also hath not a little ( though an inferior ) contentment . For , how pleasant is it to these senses , by which we men are wont to be led , to see & be seen , to speak to our friends , and hear them speak to us ; to touch and kiss the dear hands of our Parents and with them at last to have our eyes closed ? Either this shall befall you ; or what hopes , what pains ( I add no more ) hath this your careful friend lost ? and we , what wishes , what consultations ? It shall be ; I dare hope , yea believe it : Only thou our good God give such end , as thou hast done entrance into this business ; and so dispose of these likely endeavours , that whom we love and honour absent , we may at last in presence see and embrace . 

To my father in law , Mr. GEORGE WENYFFE . 

EP. 8.  Exciting to Christian cheerfulness . 

You complain of dulness ; a common disease , and incident to the best minds , and such as can most contemn vanities . For , the true Worldling hunt's after nothing but mirth ; neither cares how lawless his sport be , so it be pleasant : he feigns to himself false delights , when he wants : and , if he can pass the time , and chase away Melancholy , he thinks his day spent happily . And thus it must needs be ; while the world is his God , his devotion can be but his pleasure : whereas the mortified soul , hath learned to scorn these frivolous and sinful joys ; and affects either solid delights , or none ; and had rather be dull for want of mirth , then transported with wanton pleasures . When the world , like an importunate Minstrel , thrusts itself into his chamber , and offers him Music , unsought ; if he vouchsafe it the hearing , it is the highest favour he dare , or can yield : He rewards it not , he commends it not ; Yea , he secretly loathes those harsh and jarring notes , and rejects them . For , he finds a better consort within , betwixt GOD and himself , when he hath a little tuned his heart with meditation . To speak fully , the World is like an ill fool in a play : the Christian is a judicious spectator , which thinks those jests too gross to be laughed at ; and therefore entertains that with scorn , which others with applause . Yet in truth , we sin , if we rejoice not : There is not more error in false mirth , then in unjust heaviness . If Worldlings offend , that they laugh when they should mourn ; we shall offend no less , if we droop in cause of cheerfulness . Shall we envy , or scorn , to see one joy in red and white dross , another in a vain title ; one in a dainty dish , another in a jest ; one in a book , another in a friend ; one in a Kite , another in a Dog ; while we enjoy the God of heaven , and are sorrowful ? What dull metal is this we are made of ? We have the fountain of joy , and yet complain of heaviness . Is there any joy , without God ? Certainly , if joy be good , and all goodness be from him ; whence should joy arise , but from him ? And if he be the Author of joy ; how are we Christians , and rejoice not ? What ? do we frieze in the fire , and starve at a feast ? Have we a good conscience , and yet pine and hang down the head ? When GOD hath made us happy , do we make ourselves miserable ? When I ask my heart David's question , I know not whether I be more angry , or ashamed at the answer ; Why art thou sad , my soul ? My body , my purse , my fame , my friends ; or perhaps none of these : only I am sad , because I am . And what if all these , what if more ? when I come to my better wits , Have I a father , an advocate , a comforter , a mansion in heaven ? if both earth and hell conspired to afflict me , my sorrow cannot countervail the causes of my joy . Now I can challenge all adversaries ; and either defy all miseries , or bid all crosses , yea death itself , welcome . Yet GOD doth not abridge us of these earthly solaces , which dare weigh with our discontentments , & sometimes depress the balance . His greater light doth not extinguish the less . If God had not thought them blessings , he had not bestowed them : and how are they blessings , if they delight us not ? Books , friends , wine , oil , health , reputation , competency , may give occasions , but not bounds to our reioycings . We may not make them Gods rivals , but his spokesmen . In themselves they are nothing ; but , in God , worth our joy . These may be used ; yet so as they may be absent without distraction . Let these go ; so God alone be present with us , it is enough : He were not God , if he were not All-sufficient . We have him , I speak boldly ; We have him in feeling , in faith , in pledges , and earnest ; yea , in possession . Why do we not enjoy him ? Why do we not shake-off that senseless drowsiness , which makes our lives unpleasant ; and leave-over all heaviness , to those that want God ; to those that either know him not , or know him displeased ? 

To Mr. W. R. Dedic . to Mr. THOMAS BURLZ . 

EP. 9  Consolations of immoderate Grief for the death of friends . 

While the stream of sorrow runs full , I know how vain it is to oppose counsel . Passions must have leisure to digest . Wisdom doth not more moderate them , than time . At first , it was best to mourn with you , and to mitigate your sorrow , by bearing part ; wherein , would GOD my burden could be your ease . Every thing else is lesle , when it is divided ; And then is best , after tears , to give counsel : yet , in these thoughts I am not a little straited . Before you have digested grief , advice comes too early ; too late , when you have digested it . Before , it was unseasonable ; after , would be superfluous . Before , it could not benefit you : after , it may hurt you , by rubbing-up a skinned sore afresh . It is as hard to choose the season for counsel , as to give it : and that season is , after the first digestion of sorrow ; before the last If my Letters then meet with the best opportunity , they shall please me , and profit you : If not , yet I deserve pardon , that I wished so . You had but two jewels , which you held precious ; a Wife , and a Son : One was yourself divided ; the other , yourself multiplied : You have lost both , and well-near at once . The loss of one caused the other , & both of them your just grief . Such losses , when they come single , afflict us ; but , when double , astonish us ; and , though they give advantage of respite , would almost overwhelm the best patient . Lo , now is the trial of your manhood , yea of your Christianity : You are now in the lists , set-upon by two of God's fierce afflictions ; show now what patience you have , what fortitude . wherefore have you gathered , and layd-up , all this time , but for this brunt ? Now bring forth all your holy store to light , and to use ; and approve to us in this difficulty , that you have all this while been a Christian in earnest . I know , these events have not surprised you on a sudden : you have suspected they might come ; you have put-cases if they should come . Things that are hazardous , may be doubted : but , certain things are , and must be expected . Providence abates grief , and discountenances a cross . Or , if your a●●●ction were so strong , that you 〈◊〉 not forethink your loss ; take it equally but as it falls . A wise man and a Christian , knows death so fatal to Nature , so ordinary in event , so gainful in the issue , that I wonder he can for this either fear or grieve . Doth GOD only lend us one another , and do we grudge when he calls for his own ? So I have seen ill debtors , that borrow with prayers , keep with thanks , repay with enmity . We mistake our tenure : We take that for gift , which GOD intends for loan ; We are Tenants at will , and think ourselves owners . Your wife and child are dead : Well ; they have done that for which they came . 

If they could not have died , it had been worthy of wonder ; not at all , that they are dead . If this condition were proper only to our families ; and friends , or yet to our climate alone ; how unhappy should we seem to our neighbours , to ourselves ! Now it is common , let us mourn that we are men . Lo , all Princes and Monarches dance with us in the same ring : yea , what speak I of earth ? The God of Nature , the Saviour of men , hath trod the same steps of death ? And do we think much to follow him ? How many servants have we known , that have thrust themselves betwixt their Master & death ; which have died , that their master might not die ? and shall we repined to die with ours ? How truly may we say of this our David , thou art worth ten thousand of us ; yea , worth a world of Angels : yet he died , and died for us. Who would live , that knows his Saviour died ? who can be a Christian , and would not be like him ? Who can be like him , that would not die after him ? Think of this , and judge whether all the world can hire us not to die . I need not ask you , whether you loved those whom you have lost : could you love them , and not wish they might be happy ? could they be happy , and not die ? In truth , Nature knows not what she would have ; We can neither abide our friends miserable in their stay , nor happy in their departure : We love ourselves so well , that we cannot be content they should gain by our loss . The excuse of your sorrow is , that you mourn for yourself . True : but , compare these two , and see whether your loss or their gain be greater . For , if their advantage exceed your loss ; take heed , lest while you bewray your love in mourning for them , it appear that you love but yourself in them . They are gone to their preferment , and you lament : your love is injurious . If they were vanished to nothing , I could not blame you , though you took up Rachel's lamentation : But now , you know they are in surer hands than your own : you know , that he hath taken them , which hath undertaken to keep them , to bring them again : You know , it is but a sleep , which is miscalled Death ; and that they shall , they must awake , as sure as they lie down ; and wake more fresh , more glorious , then when you shut their eyes . What do we with Christianity , if we believe not this ? and if we do believe it , why do we mourn as the hopeless ? But the matter , perhaps , is not so heavy as the circumstance : Your crosses came sudden , and thick ; You could not breathe from your first loss , ere you felt a worse . As if he knew not this , that sent both : As if he did it not on purpose . His proceedings seem harsh ; are most wise , most just . It is our fault , that they seem otherwise then they are . Do we think , we could carve better for ourselves ? OH the mad insolence of Nature , that dares control , where she should wonder ! Presumptuous clay ! that will be checking the Potter . Is his wisdom , himself ? Is he , in himself , infinite ? is his Decree out of his wisdom ; and do we murmur ? Do we , foolish worms , turn again when he treads upon us ? What ? do you repine at that which was good for you , yea best ? That is best for us , which God seeth best : and that he sees best , which he doth . This is God's doing . Kiss his rod in silence , and give glory to the hand that rules it . His will is the rule of his actions ; and his goodness , of his william Things are good to us , because he will's them : He will's them , because they are good to himself . It is your glory that he intends , in your so great affliction . It is no praise to wade over a shallow Ford : but , to cut the swelling waves of the Deep , commends both our strength and skill . It is no victory , to conquer an easy and weak cross . These main evils have crowns answerable to their difficulty : Wrestle now , and go away with a blessing . Be patient in this loss , and you shall once triumph in your gain . Let God have them with cheerfulness , and you shall enjoy God with them in glory . 

To Mr. I A. Merchant . 

EP. 10.  Against Sorrow for worldly losses . 

IT is fitter for me to begin with chiding , then with advice : what means this weak distrust ? Go on , and I shall doubt whether I write to a Christian . You have lost your heart , together with your wealth : How can I but fear , lest this Mammon was your God ? Hence was God's jealousy in removing it ; and hence your immoderate tears for losing it . If thus ; God had not loved you , if he had not made you poor . To some , it is an advantage to lose : you could not have been at once thus rich , and good . Now , heaven is open to you , which was shut before ; & could never have given you entrance , with that load of iniquity . If you be wise in menaging your affliction , you have changed the world for GOD , a little dross for heaven . Let me ever lose thus , and smart when I complain . 

But , you might have at once retained both . The stomach , that is purged , must be content to part with some good nourishment , that it may deliver itself of more evil humours . God saw ( that knows it ) you could not hold him so strongly , while one of your hands was so fastened upon the world . You see , many make themselves wilfully poor : why cannot you be content God should impoverish you ? If God had willed their poverty , he would have commanded it : If he had not willed yours , he would not have effected it . It is a shame for a Christian , to see an Heathen philosopher laugh at his own shipwreck ; while himself howls out , as if all his felicity were embarked with his substance . How should we scorn , to think that an heathen man should laugh either at our ignorance , or impotence ? ignorance , if we thought too highly of earthly things ; impotence , if we overloved them . The fear of some evils is worse them the sense . To speak ingenuously ; I could never see , wherein poverty deserved so hard a conceit . It takes away the delicacy of fare , softness of lodging , gayness of attire , and perhaps brings with it contempt : This is the worst , and all . View it now on the better side : Lo , there quiet security , sound sleeps , sharp appetite , free merriment ; no fears , no cares , no suspicion , no distemper of excess , no discontentment . If I were judge , my tongue should be unjust , if poverty went away weeping . I cannot see , how the evils it brings , can compare with those which it removes ; how the discommodities should match the blessings of a mean estate . What are those you have lost , but false friends , miserable comforters ? Else they had not left you . O slight and fickle stay , that winds could bereave you of ! If your care could go with them , here were no damage : and , if it go not with them , it is your fault . Grieve more for your fault , then for your loss . If your negligence , your riotous misspence had impaired your estate , than Satan had impoverished you ; now would I have added to your grief , for your sin , not for your asfliction : But now , since winds and waters have done it as the officers of their maker ; why should not you say with me , as I with Job , The Lord hath taken ? Use your loss well , and you shall find that God hath crossed you with a blessing . And if it were worse than the world esteems it , yet think not what you feel , but what you deserve : You are a stranger to yourself , if you confess not , that God favours you in this whip . If he had stripped you of better things , and scourged you with worse , you should still have acknowledged a merciful justice : If you now repine at an easy correction , you are worthy of severity . Beware the next , if you grudge and swell at this . It is next to nothing which you suffer : what can be further from us , than these goods of outward estate ? You need nor abate either health , or mirth , for their sakes . If you do now draw the affliction nearer than he which sent it , and make a foreign evil domestical ; if while God visits your estate , you fetch it home to your body , to your mind ; thank yourself that you will needs be miserable : But , if you love not to far ill ; take crosses as they are sent , and go lightly away with an easy burden . 

FINIS . 

Errata . 

Pag. 86. line 2. falls for faults . pag 98. li. 1. nor for not . 





 The name of the upper Well of the Spa.  Histoire et Miracles , etc.  Que le 8. iour du mois de Septembre an dict an . 1603. estant Feste de la Nativitè de nostre Dame , le nombre de Pelerins a estè ewiron 20000.  Pag. 35.  Virgo Hallensis . Mechlinia . One Goodwin a Kentish-man . The Rood of Grace at Boxley Abbey .  ●n l' an mill six cents & trois , y fureut comptez cent & trente cinque potences & iambes the bo●ss de personnes boyteuses y apportées au seul espace de quatre ou cincque mois . Histoire & Miracles . c. 12. p. 34.  Or 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Deut. 13. 1  By the faith and worship of the true God.  Pag. 7.   Histoire & miracles the nostre Dame. pag. 73. pag. 102.  Examen Pacifique de lafoy doctrine des Huguenots . Osaweresie sawe moy . Manuel of French prayers , printed at Liege , by approbation and authority of Anton. Ghevart Inquisitor , etc.  Let no man worship the Virgin Marie . 

virg . Carnis , 
Mentis 

Caus 35. q. 5. C. Tunc sa●●bitur . M●lier suam virginitatem bene secuat , si●●eo nubat ut filios pariat ad iustitiam . Profitentur continentiam corporum , in incontinen tiam debacchantur animorum . De Rom. Cler. Saluianus .  Qui vetat quod Deus , praecepit . aut praecipit quod Deus vetuit , maledictus habeatur ab omnious qui amant Dominum . In Moralib . sum . ca 14.   Heb. 13.  The Marriage Bed is honourable .  Non quia peccatum sit coniugibus commisceri : hoc enim opus castum non habet culpam in coniuge , etc.  Gregory in Psal . Poenit. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Socrat. hist . eccles .  Continentia non est in clericis secularibus de substantia ordinis , nec de iure divino . 〈◊〉   Copula sasacerdotalis nec legali , nec Euangeli●● nec Apostolica authoritate prohibetur . 26. cue 2. c sors . ex Aug.   Only ex statuto Ecclesiae . Durand . 4.  Dist . 37. cue 1.  Tom. in 2. 2. q. 88 art . 11.   Sed credo pro bono & salute esse animarum ( quod esset salubre statutum ) ut volentes possint contrahere ; quia experientia docente , contrarius prorsus effectus sequit●r ex illa lege continent a ; cum hodie non vivant spiritualiter nec sint mundi , sed maculantur illicito coitu cum eorum gravissimo peccato , ubi cum propriâ uxore esset castitas . Panormit . de Cler. Comug . cap. Cum olim .  Sacerdotibus magna ratione sublatas nuptias , maiore restituendas videri : In the record of Platina himself In vita Pij . 2.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , etc. 1.  Cor. 9 5.  etc.   Rhemists read it a woma● asister .  Clemens , citatus etiam ab Euseb . l. 3. c. 13 ▪ Petrum cum uxorem svam ad mortem ducicerneret hortatum & consolatum his verbis . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 .  In illud . ad Philip. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ( non eijciat ) 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Can. Apost . 5.   Constant . 6 l. 3.  Can. Quoniam . Canon Apostolicae 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Nos , sequentes veterem Canonem Apostolicae 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , & constitutiones sacrorum virorum , legales suptias amodò valere volumus , etc.   Qui a Christianis parentibus enutriti sunt , etc. maximè si fuerint ex patribus sacerdot●li sede dignificatis . i Episco patus , presbyteratus , aut diaconatus ne glorientur . Orig. Tract 8. in Matth ▪   Visum erat Episcopis legen novam introducere in Ecclesiam . Socr. l. 1. c. 8.   Signa per Paphnutium non m●nus quam dudum per Apostolos siebant . Ruff. n. l. 1. c. 4.  Pathnutium , miraculis & pietate clarus , obtinuit in Nicena synodo habendum pro castitate cum propriauxore concubitum Socra . l. ● . c. 8   In Epist . ad Dracont .  Multi ex episcopis matrimonia non inierunt ; Monach● contrà parents ●iberorun facti sunt : quemad modum vicissim Episcopos filiorum patres , & Monachos generis potestatem non quaesivisse animaduertas . Athana● . Epistola . ad Dracon●ium .  Numidicus presbyter , qui uxorem concrematan & adhae a rentem lateri laetus aspexit . Cyprian . l. 4.  Ep. 10.   Ex D●onisio . Euseb . l. 6. c. 41   Euseb . l. 7. cap. 29.  Euseb . l. 8. c. 9  Gregorios' verò apud Nazianzum oppidum in locum patris sui episcopus subrogatus Ruffin . l. 2. c 9   Gregor . Nassen frater Basilij , teste Nicephoro , uxoratus , uxorem & liberos habuit : sed non propterea fuit inrebus et exercitijs divinis inferior vel deterior . Sozom ▪  De legiti nis coniugiis nat .  cum ergo ex sacerdotibus nati in summos Pontifices legantur esse promoti , non sunt intelligendi de fornication sed de legitimis connubiis nati ; quae sacerdotibu● ubique ante prohibitionem licita erant , et in Orientali ecclesia usque body eyes licere probantur , Dist . 56.  Ceno●an .  The author of the Aethiopic history .  Nam non pauci illorum , dum Episcopatum gerunt , etiam liberos ex uxore legitimâ procreant . Socrat. l. 5. cap. 21.   The words of that Council are thus truly translated by Chemnitius ; Quoniam in Romana ecclesia , loco canonis seu decieti , traditum esse cognovimus , ut ij qui digni haben di sunt ordinatione diaconi vel piesa byteri piofiteantur se deinceps cum uxoribus suis non congressuros ; nos sequentes veterem canonem Apostolicae , sincerae , exquisitae & ordinatae constitutionis , legitimas sacrorum virorum cohabitationes coniugales etiam ex hodierno die in poster● valere ratas & firmas esse volumus ; nullo modo eorum cum uxoribus propriis coniunctionem seu copulationem dissoluentes . Itaque si quis dignus inveniatur etc. is minime prohibendus est ad hunc gradum ascendere , ideo quòd eum legitimâ uxore cohabitet . Nec tempore ordinationis suae ab eo postuletur , seu cogatur ut abstinere velit aut debeat legitimo congressu cum propriâ uxore . Citat a Nilo Thesalonicensi .  Aliter se Orientalium habet traditio Ecclesiarun : aliter huius sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae . Nam eorum sace●doteses , diaconi , ●ut subdiacont . matrimonio copulantur : Istius autem ecclesiae vel occidentalium nullus sacerdotum , a subdiacono usque ad episcopum , licentiam habet coniugiun sortiendi . dis . 31   Nemo scor ta aut concubinam alat : sed aut casten vivat , aut uxorem ducat ; quam repudiare fas non esto .  Dist . 23.   Anno. 813   Clerici castimonian inviolati corporisperpetuò conseruare studeant ; aut certè unius matrimonij vinculo foederentur . Isid . reg . cleric .  Whether Huldericus or ( as he is somewhere entitled ) Volusianus , I inquire not : the matter admits of no doubt . Huldericus Episcopus Augustae . Anno. 860.  Aeneas Sylu. in svam Germ. Hedion . Eccl. hist . l. 8. c. 2.  Fox , in Act. & Monum . hath it fully translated .  Auentinus l. 5.  Gratum scortatoribus , quibus pro una uxore sex centas iam malierculas ●●re l●cebat .  Anno. 1076.   Maritos ab uxoribus separate .  Ex Interdicto sacerdotum coniugio , gravissiam seditio gregem Christi perculit : nec urquam talis lues populum Christi afflixit . Auent . l. 5.  Henric. Huntingdon . de Anselmo . l 7. de An. 1100 in synodo Londinensi : Prohibu●● sacerdotibus uxores , antè non prohibitas : Anselm . ( saith that Historian ) was the first that forbade marriage to the Clergy of England ( and this was , about the year of our Lord , 1080 ) Till then ever free . Item Fabianus Liberos aijt fu●sse sacerdotes per annos 1080.  Asteriscus . 
Veru . 
