A short answer to the tedious vindication of Smectymnus . 

By the author of the humble remonstrance . 

London , printed for Nathaniel Butter in Paul's churchyard at the pied-bull near St. Austin's gate . 1641.  

To the most high court of parliament . 

Most honourable Lords , and ye most noble knights , citizens , and burgesses of the house of Commons : 

Nothing could fall out more happily to me , then that my bold adversaries have appealed to your inviolable justice ; for sure i am , while you are ( As you ever will  be ) yourselves , wise , and just , my cause cannot miscarry in your hands . With no less , therefore , but better grounded confidence , i cast myself upon your unpartial judgement ; rejoicing to think , how clearly you will distinguish betwixt a facing boldness , and a modest evidence of truth : how can i but receive courage from your pious , and just proceedings ? It is i that vindicate , these men oppose that holy liturgy , which your most religious order in this active session commanded to be entirely observed . How busy faction is to cross that your most seasonable decree , every day yields new and lamentable proofs . If these endeavours of mine serve only for the pursuance of your so necessary , and gracious act ; they cannot fear to be unwelcome . But , if i have hurt a good cause , by a weak and insufficient handling , let me suffer in your censure , and let my adversaries triumph in my sufferings . Contrarily , if after all their smooth insinuations , it shall be found , that this champertous combination hath gone about , by mere shows of proof , to feed the unquiet humours of men , in the unjust dislike of most justifiable , ancient , and sacred institutions , and to cast false blames upon my peaceable and sincere managings of a certain truth , let them pass for what they are , and feel that justice which they have appealed . 

An answer to a calumniatory epistle , directed by way of preface to the reader . 

Readers , 

my comfort is , that you have eyes of your own ; and know how to use them : with what gravity would our Smectymnuans else persuade you , that my late defence is fraught with such stuff , as you shall find undiscernable by any but their eyes ? You cannot well judge of the management of this quarrel , unless it will please you to receive notice how this fray began . It is not long since i sent forth a meek and peaceable remonstrance , bemoaning the frequency of scandalous pasquins , and humbly pleading for the just and ancient right of liturgy and episcopacy . Wherein i could not suppose that any person could find himself touched , save only those , who profess friendship to libels , enmity to the established forms : when all on the sudden , the Smectymnuans , a strange generation of men , unprovoked , unthought of , cry out of hard measure , and fly in my face , as men wrongfully accused ; i know them not , i hurt them not ; if their own guilt have galled them , that is no fault of mine ; a long and bitter answer is addressed by them , where no question was moved : insomuch , as i could hardly induce his majesty , when i presented my defence to his royal hands , to believe , that any except on could be taken to so fair and innocent a discourse : my labour was all for peace , even this is made the ground of the quarrel : what should i now do ? I were worse than a worm , if upon this treading upon , i did not turn again ; yet , not so much out of respect to my own poor , and ( if need were ) despicable reputation , as to the public cause of God , and his church , which i saw now engaged in this unjust brawl . According to my true duty , therefore , i published a short and defensive reply to their long answer ; wherein , i hope the judicious will witness , that the truth sustains no loss : now , enraged with a moderate opposition , they heat their furnace seven times more , and break forth into a not more voluminous , then vehement invective . I do not see them look cleeringly through their fingers , at their seeminglyunknown , ( yet often discovered , and oft vilified ) antagonist ; it is all one , so long as he is nameless ; if he be a consul , they are senators ; civility is but a ceremony ; all faces under masks are alike ; it matters not for the person , let it please you to look at the cause : in the carriage whereof , they first tax me , with over-lashing in my accusations ; i had objected to them , misallegations , misinterpretations , misinferences , weak and colourable proofs ; neither can their querulous noise make me go less , or be less confident in my charge . They liken themselves to Cato , and well May , they are extremely like ; of thirty accusations , no one could be proved against Cato ; of no fewer charges , which are laid upon them , i see not how they acquit themselves of one . 

who can but wonder at this eminent boldness , that they dare tell you , there are ( after all my general exclamations ) but four places , for which i tax them of falsehood ? Falsehood , is their own word ; misallegation is mine : be pleased to cast your eye upon my margin , and to Count this quaternion of their imputed errors : but they are misinferences , and weak inconsequences , which ( besides miscitations ) were upon the file of my accusations ; wherein i fear Cato's number will be outvied . 

readers , such fidelity , as you find in the denial of my manifest exceptions against their allegations , look for in the demonstrative proofs of their exceptions against mine . There is belike , a Machiavel somewhere , find him out , i beseech you , and let him be brought forth to shame ; certainly , where the falsehood lies , there he lurks . 

in the second place they tell you of railings , revilings , scornings , never the like since Montague's appeal ; and present you with a whole bundle of such strange flowers of rhetoric , as truly , i wondered should ever grow in my garden ; wherein , they have done passing wisely , in not noting the pages , as the several beds , wherein such rare plants grew ; for i have carefully reexamined the book , and profess seriously , that some of them i cannot find at all ; others i find , but utterly mis-applied ; we are called ( they say ) vain , frivolous cavillers , riotous , proud , false , envious , &c.  Let me appeal to your eyes , readers ; where ever i thus wronged those , whom i call brethren ? Divers of these words i confess to have used , but to another purpose , upon a different subject ; that which i speak of the things , they unjustly take of the persons : for example ; i talk of false , and frivolous exceptions ; they say , i call them false and frivolous men : i talk of vain cavils ; they charge me to say , they are vain cavillers : i speak of a riot of assailants ; they cry out , that i call them riotous men : i say , a suggestion is envious ; they take it to themselves : i call the libelers , factious persons ; they misapply it , as spoken of them : i say an intimation is witless and malicious ; i am taken to say the men are so : and not to weary you with so odious a rabble , i say , this is weakly and absurdly objected ; they say , i call them weak and absurd men . Thus , i could easily pass through the rest ; and show you , that what i speak by way of supposition , they take absolutely ; what i speak as dehorting , they as accusing ; what of speeches , they of persons ; what of others , they of themselves : and thus rises the rare rhetoric which they have imputed to me ; wherein i doubt not , but ye my readers , will take occasion to think , what fidelity shall we expect from these men , in citing other authors , when they do so foully misreport the book in our hand ? They arenot then my flowers , but their own weeds , which they have thus bundled up together . 

but had i so far over-lashed , as is pretended , your wisdom , readers , would send you to inquire of the provocation : for surely , the occasion May , if not justify a man's act , yet abate his blame ; when therefore ye shall look back , and see with what strange insolence i was entertained by these undertakers , ye will be so far from complaining of my sharpness , that ye will rather censure my patience ; how blind self-love will make men in their own concernments ? These men will not see in themselves that true guilt , which they unjustly cry out of , in another : so , i have heard a man with a very noisome breath , censure the ill lungs of his neighbour ; let my margin present thee , reader , with but an handful out of a full sack . 

these are their terms in their very first papers ; without any pretence of imitation : but if we should rake together the scornful , girding and ( as some of their betters have styled them ) unmannerly passages of this their angry vindication , it were enough to fill a book alone . Readers , ye May , if you please , believe , how easy it were for me , to pay them home in their own coin ; but i had rather to consider what is fit for me ( how nameless soever ) to give , than what they are worthy to receive : some others May perhaps be more sensible of this indignity than myself ; who have learned to think more meanly of myself , than they can speak ; and at once both to pity this petulancy , and disregard it . 

in the third place they talk of daring protestations , and bold asseverations ; and spend some instances of the particular expressions of my confidence . Do not think , readers , that i will be beaten out with words ; there is no one line of those passages , which they have recited , that i will not make good against all the clan of Smetymnuus . 

neither can i , out of this assurance , decline any bar under heaven , for the trial of my righteous cause ; it is therefore an unreasonably envious suggestion of theirs , that in dedicating my book to his sacred majesty , i did , ever the more , fly from the judgement of parliament ; when in that very epistle , i made confident mention of my secure reliance upon the noble justice of their judicature ; besides , that it is not too wise , nor too loyal an intimation of these men , which would imply such a distance betwixt sovereign , and parliamentary interest : for me , i would ever suppose such an entire union betwixt them , as the head and the body ; that they neither should , nor can be severed in the rights of their several concernments . 

as for that resolute averment of the author of episcopacy by divine right , that he offers to forfeit his life to justice , and his reputation to shame , if any living man can show any lay-presbyter ( not as they please to report the word , a ruling elder ) in the world , till Farell and Viret first create him ; let me be his hostage ; let my life go for his , if any one such lay-presbyter can be produced . Let them search records , and try their skill ; and when they have overcome , triumph . But in the mean time , they May not think to fob us off , with the colourable testimonies of b. Whitgift , King , Saravia , who were all well known to be just so good friends to lay-presbytery , as themselves are to episcopacy . For the rest , if i have been somewhat bold with them , in telling them , rightdown , of poor arguments , verbal exceptions , mere declamations , shuffling of testimonies , unproving illustrations , i May crave your pardon , readers , but theirs i cannot ; as not conscious of any ill-placed word , in this easy censure . Shortly , my much reverenced friend , learned rivetus , will give them but a little thanks in misapplying his censure of Bishop Montague , to a man so differently tempered , whom he hath with particular respects vouchsafed to honour , and oblige . 

in the fourth place , they tell you , that after all these thrasonical boasts of mine , if their whole book were divided into four parts , there is one quarter , of which i make no mention : wherein , readers , i think verily you May believe them ; for in the first leaf of my defence , i foretold you so much ; as finding nothing in that swollen bulk , but a mere unsound tympany , instead of a truly solid conception ; whereof you May easily perceive the one half ( well near ) bestowed either in mere verbal quarrels , or in real disputes of things uncontroverted . I am more thrifty of my good hours , then to follow them in so wild a chase : pitching , only , upon those points , which i conceived to be valuable , and pertinent ; wherein my profession was , so to save time , as that i should not lose aught of truth : it is an injurious suggestion therefore , which these men make , that where their proofs are strongest , there i have glided away without answer ; since i can safely call God to witness unto my soul , that i am not conscious to myself of any one considerable argument of theirs , that i have balked in my replicatory defence : but if in their estimation , there be any such , as wherein they have placed an overweening confidence , let them not spare to reinforce it to the utmost ; that the world May witness their valour , and my cowardice . 

what need is there of this , you will say , when they have already gloried in the victory ; vaunting , that they have me , confitentem reum ; and , in effect , the cause granted by me , in those things which are most material ? Were it so , readers , as they pretend , that i come nearer to their tenets , than some others ; one would think they should , in this , find cause to acknowledge , and embrace mine ingenuity , rather than to insult upon me , as in way of disgrace . I wis , it is not the force of their argutation , that could move me one foot forward ; but if God's blessing upon my free disquisition of truth , should have so wrought upon my better-composed thoughts , as that i should have yielded to go some steps further than others , towards the meeting of peace , one would not think this should yield any fit matter of exprobration ; but , the truth is , i have not departed , one inch , from either my own tenet , or from the received judgement of our orthodox divines . 

now that they May see the fault is not in my levity , but in their own misunderstanding ; that identity of the names and offices of Bishops and presbyters , in the beginning of the apostles times , whereat they take advantage , they May see averred , at large , in episcopacy by divine right , 2. part. § . 4. and , to second it , they are challenged in my defence , to name any one of our writers , that hath not proclaimed this truth ; where then lies the contradiction ? 

the clear nominal distinction of the three orders of Bishops , presbyters , deacons , i professed to prove only out of the writings of those , who were the next successors to the apostles ; what is here of either yieldance or contradiction ? And if i have ingenuously granted , that the primitive Bishops were elected by the clergy , with the assent of the persons ; that Bishops neither do , nor May challenge to themselves such a sole interest in ordination , or jurisdiction , as utterly to exclude presbyters from some participation in this charge , and act ; that they ought not to divest themselves of their jurisdictive power , by delegating it to others ; that the ordinary managing of secular employments is improper for them ; if , in all these , i have gratified them , why do they complain ? and if i have disadvantaged my cause , why is it not urged to my conviction ? 

it is warily said of these men , that i almost grant lay-elders in antiquity ; i do so almost grant them in my own sense , that i utterly deny them in theirs : why should i make any doubt to yield unto the justice of their complaints , in the postscript against the insolence , and tyranny of popish prelates ? What lose we by this condescent ? Or how can they plead they are not justly taxed for diffusing other men's crimes to the innocent , when their consciences cannot but fly in their faces for this injustice ? 

lastly , i am charged with shameful self-contradictions , which surely must needs argue great rashness , or much weakness of judgement . See the instances ; in the same epistle , i profess not to tax their abilities , and yet call them impotent assailants : and why not both of these ? He that taxeth not their abilities , doth not therefore presently approve them ; they May , perhaps , not want good abilities in themselves , and yet be unable to prove their cause ; they May be able men , and yet impotent matches . 

the contradiction they would raise in the words concerning evangelists , is merely cavillatory ; May you be pleased to turn to the ninety fourth page of my defence , you shall clearly acknowledge it . The word in a common sense , signifies any preacher of the gospel ; but in the peculiar sense of the new testament , it signifies some persons extraordinarily gifted , and employed ; not settled in any one place , but sent abroad by the apostles on that blessed errand : now , to say that any of these latter were such as had ordinary places , and ordinary gifts , ( as they do , sect. 13. pag. 48. ) i do justly blame as a mere fancy , not herein contradicting any thing , but their light imagination . 

in the contradiction pretended to be , concerning the extent of episcopacy , sure they cannot but check themselves ; in my remonstrance and defence , they report men to say somewhere ( but , where , no man can tell ) that Bishops had been everywhere ; and , that all churches through the whole Christian world , have uniformly , and constantly maintained episcopacy ; elsewhere , that i say they were not everywhere , and that there are less noble churches that do not confer to episcopal government ; words are more easily accorded , then acknowledged ; there are not , there have not been everywhere settled Christian churches ; where ever there have been settled Christian churches , there have been Bishops ; from the apostles times to this present age , there have been Bishops in all Christian regions ; now , some late reform churches have been necessitated to forbear them ; where , i beseech you , lies the contradiction ? 

i have often granted , that the name of Bishops , and presbyters was , at the first , promiscuously used , and yet , i do no less justly maintain , that for this sixteen hundred years , the name of Bishops hath been ordinarily appropriated ( in a contra-distinctive sense ) to church-governors in an apparent superiority . Distinguish times , and reconcile histories . 

the two next exceptions concerning diocesan Bishops , and civil government , are fully cleared and convinced in the due places of this ensuing answer ; i shall not blur paper in an unseasonable anticipating my own discourse . 

sole ordination , and sole jurisdiction , we so disclaim , as that we hold the power of both , primarily in the Bishop , the concurrent assistance in the presbyters ; what opposition is there in an orderly subordination ? 

the last contradiction clearly reconciles itself : in stating the question concerning episcopacy , i distinguish betwixt divine and apostolical authority , professing , not to affirm that Bishops were immediately ordained by Christ ; and yet averring , that Christ laid the grounds of this imparity in his first agents ; what discordance is in these two ? Is the groundwork of an house , the whole frame of it ? Can they find the roof in the foundation ? In the epistles to the seven Asian churches , Christ ( i truly say ) acknowledges ( at least intimates ) the hierarchy of those seven angels : do i imply that he did immediately ordain them ? 

readers , ye have seen the poor stuff of these their selected exceptions : believe it , such are all their contradictions to me , as these contradictions which they find in me , to myself , groundless , and worthless : as i shall make good in this following discourse , concerning the ancient , holy , and beneficial use of set-liturgies in the church . This subject , because , as it is untracked with any frequent pens of others , so it is that , wherein my adversaries seem most to pride themselves , ( as supposing to have in it the most probable advantages against me ) i have somewhat largely handled , to your ample satisfaction . But , as for that other head of episcopacy , which hath already filled so many rheims of waste-paper , for as much as i see they offer nothing , but that which hath passed an hundred ventilations , transeat . I have resolved to bestow my time better , then in drawing this saw to and fro , to no purpose . Let them first give a full , and punctual answer to that , which hath been already , in an entire body of a treatise , written concerning the divine right of episcopacy ; and then , let them expect , that i should trouble myself with sweeping away these loose scraps of their exceptions . Till then , let them , if they can , be silent , at least i shall ; as one that know how to give a better account of the remainder of my precious hours . 

A short answer to the tedious vindication of Smectymnus . 

Sect. i.  

I am sorry , brethren , that your own importunity will needs make you guilty of your further shame : had you sat down silent in the conscience of a just reproof , your blame had been by this time dead , and forgotten ; but now , your impetuous defence shall let the world see , you did in vain hope to face out an ill cause with a seeming boldness . I May not spend volumes upon you , but some lines i must : enough to convince the reader of the justice of my charge , and the miserable insufficiency of your vindication ; it is not your stiff denial that can make it other than God's truth , which i maintain , or that can justify your errors ; let the cause speak for itself , and let that great moderator of heaven , to whom we both appeal , judge . 

It was a light touch , that i gave to your grammatical slip of areopagi ; wherein it would not have hurt you , to have confessed your oversight ; had you yielded that you stumbled , though withal you say , you stumbled like Emperors , we could have passed it over with a smile ; but now , that you will needs fall into a serious contestation , and spend almost a whole leaf in a faulty defence ; i must tell you , that you make this an heinous trifle : to face out wilfully the least error , is no less than a crime ; and such is this of yours , as every true grammarian knows : i doubt not , but you had heard of Dionysius Areopagita ; but if you should have cited him under the name of Dionysius Ariopaguses , every scholar would have laughed you to scorn : had you said , the admired sons of justice , the Ariopaguses ; i grant it had been good , according to that which you cite out of Sarisburiensis ; but to say , the admired sons of justice , the areopagi , no grammar , no authority can bear you out ; and however you face it , that you can bring precedents enough , out of approved authors , name but one , and take all : that of Sarisburiensis , which you allege , is altogether for me , against yourselves : he says that senate of Athens was called Ariopaguses ; so said my margin before : but what is this to your false Latin ? Brethren , this matter of latinity is but a straw , but let me say , this willing defence of a plain falsehood , is a block , which your very friends cannot but stumble at ; and how can the reader choose but think , he that will wilfully stand in the defence of a known falsehood in language , will not stick to defend a known error in his cause ? Before , ye stumbled ; now , ye fall : rise up for shame in a just confession , and look better to your feet hereafter . 

But belike , you have not a better faculty in stumbling , than i in leaping : and talk of huge great blocks that i have over-skipped in this whole book : where are they , which be they , brethren ? If such were , they are , i hope , still visible ; show them me , i beseech you , that i May yet try my skill : you instance in some words sounding to contempt ; i thought what these blocks would prove : mere matter of words , not less windy , than the froth of your next paragraph ; wherein your gravity is set upon a merry pin ; and , in a becoming jeer , tells us of the gentleman student in philosophy , that desires to learn the rare secret of the sinking of froth ; for which , i remit you , and your deep student , to the next tapster . 

It is not all your shuffling that can shift the just charge of your gross uncharitableness ; the remonstrance comparing in a general notion , the forms of civil government and ecclesiastical , expresses it in these terms ; [ since if antiquity May be the rule , the civil polity hath sometimes varied , the sacred , never ; and if original authority May carry it , that came from arbitrary imposers , this from men inspired : ] than which , no word can be in a right sense more safe , or more innocent : your good gloss appropriates what ( in thesi ) was spoken of all forms of civil government , to our particular monarchy ; and tells your reader , that i deliver it as arbitrary , & alterable ; than which , there cannot i suppose be any slander more dangerous ; and to mend the matter now in your vindication , you redouble your most injurious charge upon the remonstrant , as if upon this ground , it could follow that to attempt the alteration of monarchical government , had been , in his opinion , less culpable than to petition the alteration of episcopal ; quite contrary to the express words of my remonstrance ; whose implication is no other than this , that , if it were capital in them who endeavoured to alter the forms of civil government , they must needs seem worthy of more than an easy censure , that went about in a libellous way to work the change of a settled government in the church . 

See , reader , this latter is in the Remonstrants' judgement , worthy of more than an easy censure , the others accusation is no less than deadly : whether now doth he hold less culpable ? Truly , brethren , if you be not ashamed of this unjust crimination , i hope some body will blush for you . With how bold a face dare you appeal to the reader , yea to the most honourable parliament , and to the sacred majesty of our sovereign , that you do the man no wrong ? Join issue then and let all these judge : first you say , one of the most confident advocates of episcopacy , hath said , that where a national church is settled in the orderly regiment of certain grave overseers , to seek to abandon this form , and to bring in a foreign discipline is as unreasonable , as to cast off the yoke of just and hereditary monarchy , and to affect many-headed sovereignty ; this you think an assertion insolent enough , that sets the mitre , as high as the crown ; but what a foul injury is this ? Reader do but view the place , and see , where the mitre stands : the words run thus : [ so were it no less unreasonable where a national church is settled in the orderly regiment of certain grave overseers , ruling under one acknowledged sovereign , by wholesome and unquestionable laws , and by these laws punishable if they overlash : &c. ] Say now , reader , whether this man sets the mitre as high as the crown ? Neither doth he say , it were no less heinous , ( For the difference of the morality is excepted before ) but , no less unreasonable : as that which is there said to argue a strange brainsick giddiness in either offence . 

Yet more anger ; the remonstrant rises higher and sets the mitre above the crown ? Wherein , i beseech you , brethren ? What a Woolseian insolence were this ? He tells us ( You say ) that civil government came from arbitrary imposers , the sacred from men inspired ; now civil government here includes monarchy ; therefore this is to advance episcopacy above monarchy ; since the one challenges God for the founder , the other human arbitrement . brethren , had your argument as much reason , as spite , it would press sore : now , as you have framed it , it is a mere cavil . The remonstrant speaks of all civil government in general ; the several forms whereof amongst several nations , and persons , no reasonable man can deny were introduced variously , according to the first institution of their founders ; what error can your sharp eyes find in this proposition ? Now , you will needs draw this by an envious application to monarchy , as if i meant to derive it only from men , not from God : ye are mistaken , brethren : they are your better friends , that thus deduce monarchy ; for us , we hold it is from God , by men , from God as the author & ordainer , by men , as the means ; we fetch it not from earth , but from heaven ; we know who said , by me King's reign ; and from him we derive their crowns and sceptres : but ye May know ( Which we have oft blushed , and sighed to see laid in our dish , by popish authors ) who it was that said ; Kings , Princes and governors have their authority of the persons , and upon occasion they May take it away again , as men May revoke their proxies : who it was that said , it is not enough for subjects not to obey , but they must withstand wicked Princes . Sure they were no fautors of episcopacy , that have written so bloody lines against the safety , and lives of lawful Princes , as i dare not transcribe ; that have so undervalved their power , and so abased their original ; small reason had you to twit me with this hateful guilt . 

It is but a poor put-off , that you censure not my words as treasonable , from my pen , which from yours had received no better construction : the words are the same , the intimation evident ; and not less evincible , than your vilifying of the judgement of that wise , & ( Above all examples ) learned k. James ; whom while you smooth in words , and directly oppose in his well-grounded edict , concerning the liturgy of the church , what do you but verbally praise , and really check ? Ye cannot therefore so easily wipe off these aspersions of uncharitableness , by either stiff denial , or unjust recrimination ; for me , such is my malice towards you , that i can at once convince your want of charity , and forgive it . 

If the religion of King William Rufus , or the infallible judgement of Pope Pius May do you any service , make your best of them ; to me they are much alike . Whatsoever Daniel ( The poet , not the prophet ) pleased to say ; all historians were not monks , nor all monks false-tongued ; would God all divines were true : the actions of this Prince blazon him more , than the historians pens ; whereof some have taxed him for favour of Judaism , others for touches of atheism , all for indevotion : as for the Bishops of those times , i say they were popish , and , in that notion , tyrannical ; for that dependence which they had upon him , who exalts himself above all that is called God , exalted them to their proud contestation with Princes . It was their popery therefore , that made them insolent , and their insolence , that made them odious to Kings . 

it hath been ( Ye say ) the usual quality of former and later Bishops , to tyrannize over such as fear them , and to flatter such as they fear : your tongues are your own ; but , brethren , if this be their quality , it is your fault that you will not suffer it to be their property : there are those that can do this , and more ; can tyrannize over those whom they ought to reverence , and flatter those whom they should not fear . 

As for your Pius ; should not the Pope have been my Antichrist , i am sure he is yours ; little reason therefore could you have , to use his testimony against your own profession . But , why May we not ( You say ) use the testimony of Antichrist , against Antichristian Bishops ? brethren , i understand you not ; i hope you have more grace , then to call ours so : if you have so much of the separatist in you , many good hearts will justly grieve to see that ye pretend to come forth under licence ; sure you dare not mean , you dare not say , that the public government established here by law , is Antichristian ; this were to strike where you would not ; or , if you could be so bold , authority Might oversee , but would never allow so lawless an affront : if our Bishops be Antichristian , whence is your ordination ? Good speed May you have , brethren , towards Amsterdam . 

Full witty , and sound is the inference which you draw from the grounds , which i give of the Pope's unwillingness to yield a divine right to Bishops ; for that he would have them derive their authority merely from himself : therefore ( Say you ) it follows , that they have no more divine right , than the Pope : just ; for the Pope thinks so ; pretending his own ( False ) right , and disclaiming their true . 

But what 's this ( I ask ) to our Bishops , who profess notwithstanding the apostolical , that is , divine right of their calling , to hold the places and exercise of their jurisdiction , wholly from his majesty : you answer , [ Surely ours have begun to affect the same exemption from secular power ; to make large and haughty strides , towards an independent hierarchy . ] where , or wherein , brethren ? Will any justice hold it enough to accuse ? I challenge your instances , if you can find an universal guiltiness this way , spare us not ; i shall yield , we cannot suffer too much : but if your exceptions be either none , ( As your silence argues ) or particular , why should not you smart for the unjust branding of a whole order ? 

Me thinks you should shame and fear to speak of our affected independence of hierarchy , when ye know that an independent parochial hierarchy ( If it could be worth so high a name ) is in public pamphlets , and open sermons set afoot with much earnestness by those , who would be thought no mean ones in your fraternity ; and when you cannot but know , that the Bishop's bench is openly challenged in the name of too much dependence upon sovereignty ? Away with these idle slanders of your innocent , grave , and modest governors . For mr Hooker , we know you love and honour his memory , dearly , nothing of his can be unwelcome to us ; neither doubt we , but that you will be no less edified by his last works , if they May see the light , then with his first ; that man doth not look , as if he meant to contradict his own truths . 

Ye doubt to be chid for this licentiousness of your pen ; and so you well May ; for it can be no less than a foul slander to charge that faction upon whole episcopacy , which you dare ( Upon urging ) impute but to a few . the more ( Ye say ) is your misery , that a few Bishops can put both the kingdoms into so dangerous a combustion . true ; but , if it be your misery , it is not our sin ; blame the guilty , strike not the innocent : but , if but a few can do this ( Ye say ) what a stir would they all make , if they should unite their powers ? this is in your own phrase argumentum galeatum ; if a few factious preachers in our neighbour pulpits , since the entering of this parliament , have kindled such a fire in the city , and kingdom , what would they all do , if their seditious tongues were all united ? 

But now , ye speak to purpose ; if but a few were factors for this attempt ; how was it that one of the episcopal tribe in open court called the Scottish design , bellum episcopale ? who can forbear to smile at this doughty proof ? Why , brethren , was that word too big for one man's mouth ? Could he not utter it without help of his fellows ? Did they either say , or think it , the more , because he spoke it ? What reason have you to feoff a private conceit on all ? especally when the words May be capable of a less evil construction , as referring to the Northern rise of that quarrel , not to our prosecution . 

But , where ( Ye say ) were the rest of the peaceable and orthodox Bishops the while ? truly in all likelihood , at home , quietly , in their own sees ; in their retired studies ; without notice of any plots , without any intimation of dangers ; much more without intermeddling in any secrets of state , or close stratagems of disturbance ; so as , it was not their love to peace and truth , that could oppose , what they never could reach to know : neither is it any fault of theirs , that the dear and precious name of episcopacy is exposed to base and vulgar obloquy . Let those who will needs pour contempt upon the guiltless , look for a just revenge from him , who hath said , touch not mine anointed , and do my prophets no harm . 

Still therefore must i take leave to cry , fie , upon those my brethren , that dare to charge faction upon episcopacy , and withal to deplore the unhappy miscarriages of any of our spiritual fathers , that shall be found guilty of these woeful broils . What Cyprian would have done upon occasion of so high an indignity offered by you to that holy function , appears sufficiently in his epistle to Rogatianus ; though no instance can come home to the point ; for , let me boldly say , that since Christianity looked forth into the world , there were never so high , and base scorns put upon episcopacy , as there have been by shameless libelers within the space of this one year in this kingdom ; yea in this city : God in his great mercy forgive the authors , and make them sensible of the danger of his just vengeance . 

Sect. ii  

What a windy section have you past , wherein you confess you have striven for words ? Things , you say , shall now follow ; things well worthy to be not more precious to the remonstrant , then to every well-minded Christian ; liturgy and episcopacy . 

Liturgy leads the way ; we had need to begin with our prayers . I challenged you for the instances of those many alterations you talked of , in the present liturgy ; you answer me , truly Sir , if we were able to produce no fuller evidence of this , than you have done of your Jewish liturgy ever since Moses time , we should blush indeed ; but if we can bring forth such instances , &c.  truly brethren , you could do little , if ye could not crack and boast : the greatest cowards can do this best ; do not say , what ye can do , but do what ye say ; put it upon this very issue . for the liturgy ( Ye say ) we can bring forth instances of such alterations as shall prove this present liturgy to be none of that which was confirmed by parliamentary acts . 

Mark well , readers , for certainly , in plain English , these men go about to mock you : the question is of the present liturgy , which is pretended to vary extremely much from that in Queen Elizabeth's days ; now come our braving vindicators , and , after all their brags , labour to show that this our present liturgy differs from that in the days of Edward the sixt ; and spend one whole page , in the particular instances : is not this pains well bestowed , think you ? have they not hit the bird in the eye ? utterly balking what they undertook , they undertake what no man questioned ; and now beforehand crow , and triumph in these cockleshells of a famous conquest . But ye lay this for your ground , that the liturgy confirmed by our parliamentary acts , is the same which was made and confirmed in the fifth and sixth of Edward the sixt : with one alteration , or addition of certain lessons to be used on every Sunday in the year , and the form of the litany altered and corrected ; and two sentences only added in the delivery of the sacrament to the communicant , and none other or otherwise ; thus says the act. now comes your rare sagacity , and finds notwithstanding , Queen Elizabeth's liturgy varying from the former in many omissions , in many additions , in many alterations : wherein , what do ye other than give the check to a whole parliament ? they say flatly , none other , or otherwise ; you say , the book is so altered , that the liturgy now in use , is not the same that was established by act of parliament : but , be that as it May ; there lies not the question : if Queen Elizabeth's book did so much differ from King Edwards ; what is that to us ? Say , ( As you have undertaken ) what such huge difference there is betwixt King James his book , and Queen Elizabeth's ? now , your loud vaunts end in flat silence ; neither can you instance in any thing , save some two petty particles , not worthy of mention ; that in the title of confirmation , the words for imposition of hands , are added ; and , in the epistle for Palm-sunday , in , is turned into at : these are all ( Besides those which i fore-specified ) which have so misaltered the liturgy , that it can no more be known , to be itself , than the strangely-disguised Dames , which were mentioned in doctor Hall's reproof . now let the reader say , who is worthy to wear those liveries of blushes , which , in your wardrobe of wit , you have been pleased to lay up for your friends . But i have not yet said all : if ( You say ) to these we should add the late alterations in the use of the liturgy , bringing in loud music ; uncouth , and unedifying anthems ; a pompous superstitious altar-service , we think any indifferent eye will say , this is not the liturgy established by parliament . what mean you , brethren , thus to delude the reader ? are these things you mention , any part of the liturgy ? are they prescribed by any law of the church ? are they found in any rubric of the communion-book ? Do not the allowed forms of our public prayers in all parochial , and some cathedral churches , in chapels , in houses , stand entirely without these ? Why do you therefore bring in these things , as essential to liturgy ; in the meet omission of some whereof , no doubt , some Bishops of England ( No less zealously conscionable , though better tempered , than yourselves ) May be found to conspire with you : as for the nameless Bishop , whom you cite , you must pardon me , if i did not understand either you , or him ; for the words in your defence , run , [ that the service of the church of England is not so dressed , that if a Pope should come and see it , he would claim it as his own . ] now you report them to be , that the service of the church of England is now so dressed , &c. so as you cannot blame me if i knew not the meaning or the man ; but by this your description of his preaching it as matter of humiliation to all the Bishops of this kingdom , in a day of solemn and national fasting , i perceive it is the reverend Bishop of Carlisle whom you thus cited , and whom you have , herein , not a little wronged ; i acquainted that worthy prelate with the passage , he disavows the words , and defies the reporters , vehemently protesting , that he never spoke either those words , or that sense ; and to make it good , delivered me the pretended clause , transcribed out of his notes , with his own hand ; which i reserve by me ; no whit sounding that way ; but signifying only a vehement dislike of some innovations , as the turning the table to an altar , and the low crindging towards the altar so erected ; but , as for the liturgy or service of the church of England , not a touch of either in his thoughts , or tongue : now brethren , learn you hence just matter of private humiliation , for so foul a slander of a grave and religious Bishop , and in him , of this whole church . 

For learned Calvin ; if those who profess to honour his name , would have been ruled by his judgement , we had not had so miserable distractions in the church , as we have now cause to bewail ; all that i say of him , is , that his censure of some tolerable fooleries in our holy service , Might well have been forborn in alienâ republicâ ; your vindication is , that he wrote that epistle to the English at Francford ; who doubts it ? The parties were proper , the occasion just , but not the censure ; parciùs ista , when we meddle with other men's affairs : i May well be pardoned , if i say that harsh phrase doth not answer the moderation which that worthy divine professeth to hold in the controversy of the English . 

As for that unparalleled discourse , whereon you run so much descant , concerning the antiquity of liturgies deduced so high as from Moses time ; you argue that it cannot be , because you never read it : brethren , your not omniscient eyes shall see that my eyes are so Lyncean , as to see you proudly misconfident ; you shall see that others have seen what you did not ; and shall sample that which you termed , unparalleled . 

It is neither thank to your bounty , nor praise to your ingenuity , that the question is half-granted by you ; but an argument of your self-contradiction ; an order of divine service you yield , but not a form ; or a form , but not prescribed , not imposed ; and for this , you tell us a tale of Justin martyrs liturgy , and Tertullian's liturgy , how much to the purpose , the sequel shall show . 

In the former , you grant , that after the exhortation they all rose , and joined in prayer ; prayer ended , they went to the sacrament ; but , whether these prayers were suddenly conceived , or ordinately prescribed , there is the question ; and whether that sacrament were administered in an arbitrary , and various form , methinks yourselves should find cause to doubt : but , Justin says ( To clear this point ) that in the beginning of this action , the precedent poured out prayers , and thanksgiving according to his ability , and the persons said amen . What ever his ability was , i am sure you have a rare ability in misconstruing the fathers ; and particularly these testimonies of Justin , and Tertullian . 

To begin with the latter ; out of him you say , the Christians in those times did in their public assemblies pray , sine monitore , quia de pectore ; without any prompter but their own heart . prove , first , that Tertullian speaks of public assemblies . Secondly , know that if he did , the place is to your disadvantage ; for ( As a late learned author well urges ) would ye have it imagined , that the assembled Christians did betake themselves publicly to their private devotions , each man by himself , as his own heart dictated ? this were absurd , and not more against ancient practice , than ( As your selves think ) piety . 

Was it , then , that not the persons , but the minister was left to the liberty of his expressions ? What is that to the persons ? How did they ere the more pray without a prompter ? How is it more out of their heart , when they follow the minister praying out of unknown conceptions , than out of foreknown prescription ? So as , you must be admonished , that your sine monitore , without a prompter , is without all colour of proof of prayers conceived : your Zephyrus blows with too soft a gale to shake the foundation of this argument ; and indeed is but a side-wind to my Heraldus , and the very same blast with your Rigaltius ; though you would seem to fetch them out of different corners ; if i give you your own asking , you have gained nothing : for what would you infer ? Christians prayed for the Emperors without a monitor , as the heathens did not ; therefore they had no forms of Christian prayers : he were liberal , that would grant you this consequent ; when rather the very place shows what the form was , which the Christians then used ; we are praying still for all Emperors , that God would give them a long life , a secure reign , a safe court , valiant hosts , faithful counsellors , good persons , and a quiet world ; this was Tertullian's liturgy , wherein the hearts of Christians joined without a monitor ; it is small advantage that you will find in my sense of sine monitore ; ( Not being urged by any superior injunction ) if no injunction , you say , how could it be a liturgy , a commanded , imposed form ? you are unwilling to understand , that the injunction here meant is general , a command to pray for the Emperor , not a particular charge of the forms enjoined in praying ; this was therefore the praise of their Christian loyalty , that even unrequired , they poured out their supplications for Princes : shortly then , after all these pretended senses , Tertullian will not upon any terms be drawn to your party . 

Those other two places of Tertullian and Austin are merely sleeveless , and unproving ; not making any whit at all more for conceived prayers , then for prescribed ; who ever made question , whether we Might build our prayers upon our saviour's form ? or whether we Might vary our prayers with our occasions ? Those fathers say no more , we no less ; ye dare not say there were no public liturgies in s. Austin's time ; my margin was conviction enough ; which ye touch as an iron too hot , with an hand quickly snatched away . Your denial should have drawn on further proofs . 

Justin martyr ( Though fifty years before Tertullian ) follows him in your discourse ; how guiltily you both translate and cite him , an author of no mean judgement hath showed before me . I shall not therefore glean after his sickle ; but shortly thus , take your ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) in your own best sense ( For quantum pro virile potest ) what will follow ? the precedent prayed , and gave thanks to the utmost of his power ; therefore the church had then no liturgy . What proof call you this ? Look back , brethren , to your own citation ; you shall find prayers more than once in their lordsday meetings ; these latter were the precedents , the former some other ministers ; these in the usual set forms , those out of present conception ; both stand well together , both agreeable to the practice , as of these , so of former ages . 

But while i affect overfull answers , i feel myself grow ( Like you ) tedious , i must contract myself and them . Your assertion of the original of set forms of liturgy , i justly say is more magistral , then true , and such as your own testimonies confute . 

That of the council of Laodicea is most pregnant for set forms , before Arrius or Pelagius looked forth into the world ; wherein mention is expressly made of three forms of prayer , one by and for the catechumeni , the second for the penitents , the third for the faithful . you cannot elude so clear a proof , by saying the council required prayers for all these , but did not bind to set forms in prayers ; for the same council stops your mouth while it tells you in plain terms , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} that the same form or liturgy of prayers was to be used morning and evening ; and Clemens ( Though not the true , yet ancient ) tells us , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , &c. and in the eight book of his constitutions , recites large prayers which were publicly used in the church . Let the reader now judge , where this shuffling lies : the canon requires one of these prayers to be in silence ; what then ? So doth our liturgy require in the ordination of ministers , that in one passage of this solemn act , our prayers should be secret and silent , yet the rest is no less in set forms . 

You Might then be ashamed to object want of fidelity to me in the citation of that testimony , which i but barely quoted in my margin . Neither can you avoid a self-confutation in your own proofs ; there was no noise of the Arian heresy till the Nicene council ; the council of Laodicea ( Wherein set forms are notified ) was before the Nicene by your own account : yea , but , say you , the heresy of Arrius was not just born at the period of the Nicene council ; true ; but was it born so long before , as that any council took notice of it , before the Nicene ? This you dare not affirm : but ( For a second shift ) the heresy of Arrius troubled the church sometime , before the name of Arrius was borrowed by it ; grant we ( Upon good authority of fathers , and counsels ) that the ground of the cursed error of Arrius , concerning the son of God , was laid before by others ; what is that to the question of set prayers ? What is , if this be not a plain shuffle ? Neither is it any other than a mere slur , wherewith you pass over the unanswerable pressure of the Laodicean council , before mentioned , by cavilling the difference betwixt prescribing , and composing ; the council is flat in both , and enjoins one and the same liturgy of prayers : certainly , brethren , you find cold comfort at Laodicea ; let us see how you mend yourselves at Carthage . The fathers there , enjoin that no man in his prayers should name the father for the son ; or the son for the father ; that in assisting at the altar , their prayers should be directed to the father ; that no man should make use of any other form than is prescribed , unless he did first confer with his more learned brethren : hence you gather , there was no set form in use in the church ; and no such circumscribing of liberty in prayer that a man should be tied to a set liturgy . the charge was doubtless given upon a particular occasion , which is buried with time ; whether it were ignorance , or heedlessness in those African priests , that they thus mistake in their devotions , i cannot determine ; but , why Might it not be then , as it is with too many now , that notwithstanding the church's prescriptions , men will be praying as they list ; and let fall such expressions as May well deserve censure and restraint ? However , that they had set forms , seems to be sufficiently employed in their own words ; quicunque sibi preces aliunde describit ; for what can that aliunde relate unto but some former prescription ; which , that they had , even in these African churches , we need no other testimony then of the Magdeburgenses , who cite Cyprian himself for this purpose in his book de oratione dominica ; where he tells us that the priest began with , sursum corda , lift up your hearts ; and the congregation answered , we lift them up unto the Lord : to which they add , formulas denique quasdam precationun sine dubio habuerunt ; they had then without doubt certain set forms of prayers ; and to suppose , that they had prescribed forms for public use , which no man should be required to use , it were a strange and uncouth fancy : neither need we any better contest for our defence then him , whom you cite in your margin , learned Cassander , in the just allegation both of this council , and the Milevitane , the canon whereof runs thus ; it pleaseth the fathers that those prayers , or orisons which are approved in the synod , shall be used by all men ; and no other shall be said in the church , but such as have been made , by some prudent authors , or allowed of the synod ; lest perhaps something May be composed by them through ignorance , or want of care , contrary to the faith . 

Say , readers , is not this a likely testimony to be produced against set forms of prayer ? What is it then that you would hence infer ? First , that this being ( Anno 416. ) is the first mention of prayers to be approved or ratified in a synod , and the restraining to the use of them : grant that it were so , of prayers to be ratified , or restrained , is it so of prayers to be used ? Are you not sufficiently convinced herein , by the synod of Laodicea ? It is the occasion that draws on the law ; till now , this presumption of obtruding private men's prayers upon the public use of the church , was not heard of in those parts ; now only was it seasonable for correction . 

Secondly , you say the restriction was not such but that it admitted a toleration of prayers , framed by prudent divines ; no less , than those which were approved by the synod ; what gain you by that ? when these prayers were said , and not conceived ; and so said , that they were put into forms , not left to arbitrary delivery . 

Secondly , the occasion of this restriction ( Being the prevention of errors in praying ) is so universal both for time and place , that it May well argue this practice to be most ancient for the original , and worthy to be perpetual for the continuance . And now , that the vindicators May see how small cause the remonstrant hath to be convinced of the lateness of set forms imposed , ( Not till the Arian and Pelagian heresies invaded the church ) let them be pleased to tell the reader , what those {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , prayers prescribed were , whereof Origen speaks in his 6. book against cells . so frequently used ; and if that word May undergo another sense , what those {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} can be construed , wherefrom he quotes three or four passages of scriptures , in the fourth book against Celsus ? lastly , what the meaning and inference May be , of that which the centuries allege out of Origen in his 11.  Homily upon Jeremy ; vbi frequenter in oratione dicimus , da omnipotens , da nobis partem cum prophetis , da cum apostolis christi tui , tribue ut inveniamur ad vestigia unigeniti tui . if this be not part of a set form of prayer , and long before Arrius or Pelagius , i have lost both my aim , and the day ; if it be , repent of your confidence , and recant your error : and grant at last , that out of most venerable antiquity , the approvers of liturgies have produced such evidences for their ancient use , as your insolent wisdom May jeer , but can never answer . 

How i admire your goodness ! Merciful men , you pardon that fault , which in justice ye could not find , or cannot prove : my confident assertion of the prayers wherewith Peter and John joined , when they went up into the temple at the ninth hour of prayer , that they were not of a sudden conception , but of a regular prescription , shall be made good with better authority , than your bold and braving denial ; i say the prayers wherewith they joined , not the prayers which they made ; the prayers which they made , were their own , ( Which wipes away your stout instance , in the Pharisee and publican ) but the prayers wherewith they joined , were public and regular . For in all their sacrifices and oblations , the Jews had their set service of prayers , which gave life to those otherwise dead ( Or , at least , dumb ) actions . The noble and learned Lord , Du-plessis , the great glory of the reform church of France , speaks home to this purpose ; so doth the renowned p. Fagius the dead martyr of our Cambridge , besides learned Cappellus , whom we cited in our late defence . confessio olim in sacrificio solennis ; ejus , praeterquam in lege vestigia , in prophetis formulam habemus : in ipsis judaeorum libris verba tanquam concepta extant , quae sacerdos pronunciare solitus , saith the said Mornay Du-plessis . there was a solemn confession in their sacrifice of old ; whereof , besides that we have certain footsteps in the law , we have the very form in the prophets ; in the books of the Jews , the very express words are extant , which the priest had wont to pronounce . Thus he . And Lyranus well acquainted with the Jewish practices ( As being one of them himself ) tells us , that the priest was used to confess in general , all the sins of the persons , as ( Saith he ) we are wont to do in the entrance of our mass . But Ludovicus Cappellus , the French oracle of Hebrew learning , hath those very words , whereat you jeer so oft , as falling from my pen : ex quibus videre est , orationem cujus causa petrus & johannes petebant templum , fuisse eam , quae à judaeis dicitur {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} quae respondet oblationi vespertinae lege praescriptae , quae fiebat , ut loquitur scriptura , inter duas vesperas ; thus he ; whom i beseech you brethren , laugh at for company . 

Admire with me , reader , the subtlety of this deep exception ; our saviour ( I say ) prescribed to his disciple , besides the rule , a direct form of prayer ; what say my great challengers to this ? the remonstrant will have an hard task ( Say they ) to prove from scripture , that either John or our saviour gave to their disciple public liturgies , or that the disciple were tied to the use of this form . truly the task were as hard , as the very mention of it is absurd and unreasonable . For shame brethren , leave this palpable shuffling ; the remonstrant spoke of a prayer , ye ask for a liturgy ; the remonstrant speaks of prescribing , ye talk of tying ; which ( Till your reply ) came not so much as into question ; it must be a weak sight that cannot discern your gross subterfuges . 

The use that our saviour was pleased to make in his last supper of the fashions and words which were usual in the Jewish feasts , is plainly affirmed not by Cassander only , ( Whose videtur you please to play upon ) but by Paulus Fagius at large , by Mornaeus , by Cappellus : and if these took it from Maimonides , who wrote not till a thousand years after Christ ; yet , from whom i beseech you had Maimonides this observation ? A man of yesterday May upon good grounds of authority tell a truth of a thousand years old . 

I let pass the mere nonsense wherewith you shut up this paragraph , as more worthy of the readers smile then my confutation ; who will easily assume by comparing the place , how little i meant to fetch a liturgy from a feast ; or necessity out of an arbitrary act . 

To prove that the Jews had a form of liturgy even from Moses his time , i produced a monument above the reach of your either knowledge , or censure ; a Samaritan chronicle , now in the hands of our most learned and famous primate of Ireland ; written in Arabic , translated into that tongue , out of the Hebrew , as ios : Scaliger ( Whose it once was ) testifies ; fetching down the story from Moses to Adrian's time , and somewhat below it ; out of this so ancient record , i cited the very words of the author , which these men would fain mistake as my own ; wherein he mentions a book of the old liturgy of the Jews , in which were contained those songs and prayers which were used before their sacrifices : adding ; for before every of their several sacrifices , they had their several songs still used in those times of peace ; all which , accurately written , were transmitted to the subsequent generations , from the time of the legate ( Moses ) unto this day , by the ministry of the high priest . Thus he . This is our evidence ; now let us see your shifts : first , you tell us , those were only divine hymns , wherein there was always something of prayer . if but thus , we have what we would ; for what are praises , but one kind of prayers ; and what can be more said for a set form of hymns , then of petitions ? But , brethren , ye Might have seen in the authors own words , ( Which you are loath to see ) songs and prayers , which were ever used before their sacrifices ; and were comprised in that ancient service-book : see now reader , whether there be not something for set prayers in the authors own words , which these men would wittingly outface , and not willingly see . 

The testimony cannot be eluded , now it must be disparaged ; [ Joseph Scaliger had certainly but two Samaritan chronicles ] who says he had more ? I cited but one , what needed you ( But to show the world you can tell something ) to talk of two ? What business have we with that shorter chronicle , which you will needs draw into mention ? Let that be as fond , as your exception is unseasonable ; what is that to us ? How else should we have known , that you had taken notice of a Samaritane Pentateuch , and learned Mr. Sel. dens marmora Arundeliana ? away with this poor ostentation ; speak to the purpose ; what can you say against that large Samaritan chronicle , which i produced , turned out of Hebrew into Arabic , written in a Samaritan character , and now not a little esteemed by the great , and eminently judicious primate , in whose library it is ? Surely , as i have heard some bold pleaders ; when they have feared a strong testimony , pick quarrels at the face of the witness ; so do you , brethren , in this case . Scaliger himself you say ( The former owner ) passes this censure upon it , that though it have many things worthy of knowledge , yet they are crusted over with Samaritan devices . who can expect other but that a Samaritan should speak like himself , when it comes to a difference in religion ? but this is no reason , why in matters accorded , there should be any distrust : what a Bellarmine writes of the holy trinity passeth for no less currant than the best of our own ; if Ainsworth lived and died a separatist , yet we dare believe him in his report of Jewish antiquities , no less than Broughton , Weems , Drusius . so as this wind shakes not the authority of this relation . 

But , judge ( You say ) how much credit we are to give to this book for antiquity , as far as Moses , which makes no mention of their own original , any other ways , then , that they came out of Egypt by Moses ; a poor and groundless exception : for that which we allege this author for , is only the report of a book containing the forms of prayers used by the Jews since Moses ; and as for the mention of their own original , it was their glory to fetch themselves from the first Jewish patriarchs , ( As the Samaritan woman did at Jacob's well ) neither would they challenge a lower rise ; no marvel therefore if they passed in silence the history of the defection of the ten tribes ; as rather tending to their own blemish ; especially considering , what Josephus reports of their fashion , that ever when the Jews prospered , they claimed brotherhood of them ; when contrarily , they proclaimed hostility ; and what if this author doth only touch the names of Samson , Samuel , David , what doth this detract from the credit and validity of his history ? So as notwithstanding your frivolous cavils , we will take leave to make so much of our Samaritan chronicle , as to avow it for a noble and ancient proof of that my confident assertion of the use of liturgies since Moses . 

Your pretended proof to the contrary , which you so gloriously bring out of your famous rabbi Moses Maimonides in his Mishneh , will prove but a vain flourish ; & if it work any thing , it will be for my advantage . For what is it that he says ? it is ( Saith he ) an affirmative precept , that prayers should be made to God , every day , &c.  caeterùm neque numerus , &c. but neither the number of those prayers , nor the obligation to this , or that prayer , nor the certain , and definite time of prayer , is enjoined in the law : thus he . Now , how doth that concern us ? Who ever defended , that Moses in the letter of the law , had given order for either number , or time , or obligation of particular prayers of several Israelites ? although , under your good favour , we know that even then there were solemn forms of words , to be used in the remove and resting of the ark ; and in the solemn benedictions of Israel , and in the trials of jealousy , prescribed by God himself to the priests ; whereof what can ye make other , than a shorter kind of stinted liturgy ? Length , or brevity makes no variance . But what doth this imply other , then that there were of old , prescription both of number , and time , and forms , though not expressed in the law ? particulars whereof we shall produce in the sequel ; such as were not only for the help of the ignorant , but for the direction of the priests themselves , and for the better devotion of the persons . That Ezra therefore and the men of the great synagogue , made use of those eighteen forms of prayers , or benedictions , prescribed by them so long ago , it argues nothing , that the like forms were not in set practice before their times ; so as your Maimonides ( After all your proritation ) holds no other then fair terms with our Samaritan chronicle . 

And would learned Capellus ( Think you ) make himself so merry at the view of this passage ? surely , brethren , it would be at your fond and ridiculous misprision , in playing not upon my words , but your own idle fancy . 

I cited Capellus for the forms of prayer used at the Minchah , and other sacrifices , which you cannot gainsay , but that i should infer from him , that the Jewish liturgies were as ancient as Moses ; it is your mere dream , not my assertion : it would become you to make more conscience of your suggestions . As for the marginal note out of Buxtorfius , it is worthy of but a marginal touch ; what such abuse were it to say , that Maimonides took those thirteen articles of his creed , from the Jews devotion ; when the same author confesses they had a being before ; but were by rabbi Moses bar Maimon redacted into this order , wherein they stand ? Surely , that ever since Ezra's time they had a known form of prayer , is confessed clearly by the same rabbin , in his Misnah , as we have formerly seen ; and , what place could be more proper for the seat of a creed ? But , to meet a little with your crowing insultation , in this passage of the age of the Jewish liturgy , what say you to that express testimony of Paulus Fagius , ( A man , one of the best acquainted with Hebrew learning , of all ours in his age ) who upon the Chaldee paraphrase of Leviticus , chap. 16. in the words [ et confiteatur super eum ] hath thus , forma confessionis quâ tum usus est summus pontifex , secundum hebraeorum relationem , haec fuit , &c.  the form of confession which the high priest ( Then , in the first times of the law ) used , according to the relation of the Hebrews , was thus , oh Lord , thy persons of the house of Israel have sinned , they have done wickedly , they have grievously transgressed before thee ; i beseech thee now , oh Lord , forgive their sins , and iniquities , and transgressions , wherein thy persons , the house of Israel , have sinned , and done wickedly , and transgressed before thee ? and when the said high-priest offered a bullock for a sin offering , than he said in this manner , oh Lord , i have sinned , i have done wickedly , and have grievously transgressed ; i beseech thee now , oh Lord , be merciful to those sins , and iniquities , and grievous transgressions wherein i have sinned , done wickedly , and transgressed against thee . and when he should offer the other bullock , he used much what the same form , adding , i , and my house , and the sons of Aaron , thy holy persons , have sinned , &c.  I beseech thee now , oh Lord , pardon the sins , and iniquities , and transgressions , &c.  

This triple confession did the high-priest solemnly use , in the feast of expiation ; and what the form of the high priest's prayer was when he appeared before the Lord , the said Fagius shows us out of the Thalmud . 

Besides this , there was a set form ( And that somewhat large ) of prayer and benediction , which the Master of the family amongst the Jews , was privately wont to use in his holy feasts ; which the same author elsewhere in his Chaldee paraphrase , upon deut. 8. fully expresses ; adding withal , ( Which you were pleased to make sport with , as mine ) verisimile est christum quibusdam quae in his precibus continentur , usum fuisse ; it is very likely , that our saviour made use of some passages which are contained in these prayers : and Paulus Burgensis tells us , it was an old tradition amongst the Jews , that when they had eaten the Paschall lamb , they sung the psalms , from laudate pueri dominum , to beati immaculati , that is , from the 113th . to the 119th . adding , verisimile hos à domino decantatos : it is likely , that these were sung by our saviour in his last supper . 

By this time the reader sees there is somewhat more ground for a set form of prayer amongst the ancient Jews , than your deep rabbinism would condescend unto . I have dwelled somewhat longer in this point , because i see the chief pride of your vindication lies in this passage of Jewish skill ; wherein i well see with whose heifer you have ploughed ; and what name you Might add ( If there were room ) to your learned acrostics ; but when all is done , i am deceived , if you May not put your gains in your eye . 

For Christian liturgies , your like confidence challenges the remonstrant , to produce any liturgy that was the issue of the first three hundred years : i name those under the stile of James , Basil , Chrysostom ; as ancient , though spuriously interserted ; you tell me of those of Peter , Matthew , mark , &c. ( Though Peter was the same with Mark's ) and cite learned rivetus , who censures these as Zizania ; the tares , which the enemy sowed while the husbandman slept ; quite beside the cushion : those were such , as all wise Christians will confess ( With St. Austin ) were , a sutoribus fabularum , sub apostolorum nomine conscripti ; broached by some cogging merchants , under the name of the apostles : but these other were generally , both for matter and manner , holy ; though interspersed with some passages that Might argue a later hand ; while others of them bear such age , as that they are cited by ancient fathers , for authentic parts of the formerly received liturgies : shortly then , to produce those entire liturgies , which were in the first three hundred years , is as unreasonable to demand , as impossible to perform ; how many noble monuments , besides these , have perished , as swallowed up by the devouring jaws of time , which it were a vain hope to revoke ? But that there were such liturgies in use , with those churches , within the time required , i doubt not to evince ; what else , i beseech you , was that euchologium , which Origen ( Before that time ) cites ? whence were those passages of interchanged devotion , which the centuriators themselves instance in , from Cyprian , forealleged by me ? I dare boldly say , ye cannot answer these demands , and not yield your cause : to which let me add in the next succeeding age , those {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , which Eusebius tells us , that Constantine made use of in his court : our learned Christophorson renders it thus ; constitutas cum universo ecclesiae coetu , preces reddebat ; so as ( Notwithstanding your colourable proof in your defence , of the frame of a prayer enjoined to the soldiers by that good Emperor ) it is clear enough that , in those times , there was a set form of liturgy , enjoined to the use of the church . Learned Morney , an author past exception , shall attest with me ; who , in that elaborate , and accurate treatise of the mass and the parts thereof , dividing that divine service , according to the distribution of the Laodicean synod , ( Which you would fain have eluded by a pretence of no prescription of forms ) into that of the catechumeni , that of the penitents , that of the faithful , hath thus ; hic jam mille fidelium locus , cujus ab oratione generali exordium , &c.  This then is the place of the service of the faithful ; whose entrance was always with a general prayer , for all the world , for the state of the church , for the necessities both public and private . the Grecians call this a litany , or supplication , &c.  Quae autem orationis illius forma fuerit ab incunabulis ecclesiae , ad hoc usque seculum custodita , ex coaevis authoribus perspicuum : what the form of that prayer was , which hath been kept , even from the cradle of the church unto this very age , it is apparent out of the authors that lived in those times . thus that famous Lord , Du Plessis ; who seconds his own judgement by pregnant authorities from Chrysostom , Ambrose , Augustine ; to which , out of the fear of tediousness , i remit my reader . By all which it is ( I hope ) made evident enough , that , before ever Pelagius , or Arrius infected the world , prescribed forms of public prayers were commonly used in the Christian church . It is indeed more than an implication , which the remonstrant drew from the Ancyran synod , the presbyter that had once sacrificed , was forbidden , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , to offer , to preach , to officiate in priestly administrations : what is the ministers employment but the word , sacraments , and prayers ; all three here inhibited , and these last , under the name of liturgies ? 

And that these antiremonstrants May not delude the reader with an opinion , that any either mistake , or fraud will follow upon the ambiguity of the word ; it May please the reader , to take notice of what these carpers will not see ; a plain expression in my translated words , of liturgies , or ministrations . It is great pity that the remonstrant did not know so well as these deep heads , that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} is a word of both various , and general use : they needed not to send him to Zonaras , or Balsamon , for this parcel of philology , which he could have taught them nearer home , out of saint Paul himself , and saint Luke ; in whom they shall find [ {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ] applied to Zacharias his sacrificing ; and {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , which our last translation turns vessels of the ministry : yea , the very collection of alms is saint Paul's {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} and Epaphroditus is his {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} what use then was there of this wast piece of grammar-learning , when the remonstrant himself interpreted liturgies by ministrations ? 

I extolled the due use of conceived prayer ; even this doth not please , but invites suspicion rather ; well Might i complain of this sullenness and morosity . 

If the quarrels that you picked with the both original and confirmation of our liturgy prove unjust , you May well allow me to call your arguing about it , no other then wrangling . For the original , i deduced it from ancient models , not Roman , but Christian ; you except at the terms of pretended opposition , and still could fetch sparks to fling in the face of him , who by the suffrages of unquestionable divines hath showed the just sense of the true visibility of the Roman church . Truly , brethren , this is merely to bark where you have no power at all to bite . What faculty you have in flinging sparks i know not , but i am sure , if you blow this coal hard , the sparks will fly in your eyes . The question is so thoroughly settled by those ( Which you spitefully call begged ) suffrages , that no wit of man can find but a probable colour to revive it . 

Fain would you have something to say to doctor hall , if ye knew what it were ; in his book of the old religion , he cites a speech of Luther's ; that this good friend of Rome says , under the papacy is true Christianity , yea the very kernel of Christianity : what of this ? Did doctor hall fain that Luther said so ? Or do these men fear that Luther is turned Papist ? Compare this ( You say ) with that the Bishop of Salisbury saith , in his begged suffrage , who thus , speaks ; that the church of Rome is no more a true church , than an arrant whore is a true wife to her husband . well : compare Luther with the Bishop of Salisbury ; two worthy divines , what then ? They will , i hope , prove good friends , and doctor hall with them both ; whose own suffrage hath been , and is no less peremptory against Rome , than this which he begged ; a married woman , though she be a close harlot , is yet a wife ; and though she be not true to her husband's bed , yet she is truly his wife , till she belegally divorced : such is the state of the Roman church , to doctor Davenant , and doctor hall , and all other orthodox divines . Where now is your charity in raising such groundless intimations against your innocent brethren ? Tell the reader , i beseech you , where that scorn lies , which you say is cast upon you in this passage of my defence . i justly boast of those our martyrs and confessors , which were the composers of our liturgy ; you would fain counterpoise them with some holy martyrs and confessors of the same reform religion , that opposed it , even to persecution ; and tell us of the troubles of Frankford . pardon me , brethren ; some confessors you May talk of , but martyrs ye can name none : one , who was the most vehement of all those opposers , i knew to live and die in a quiet submission to the liturgy established ; none of them suffered death for religion : they Might be holy men , and yet Might square in their opinions ; even betwixt Paul and Barnabas there was a {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . My praise of our martyrs tended not to the disparagement of any other . 

As for that slur which your answer seemed to cast upon the edict of King James , and our parliamentary acts , that they are not unalterable , as the laws of the Medes and Persians' ; your so deep protestation clears you in our thoughts ; i have charity enough to believe you ; but i must tell you , that speech Might have a good heart , but it hath an ill face ; let it pass with favour : and as for those cheerful expressions which you confess you have taken liberty to make use of , in the passages of your book , you will pardon me , if they be entertained with as cheerful answers : Tertullian , shall  be seconded by Horace , ridentem dicere verum , quis vetat ? let those laugh that win . 

For your quaeres ; it seems you think i am merry too soon , in receiving them with so sarcasticall a declamation : your project is of the altering of our liturgy ; i tell you seriously , if you drive at a total alteration ( As your words seem to import ) your quaere is worthy of no better reception than scorn : for , that any private person should ( As of his own head ) move for the entire change of a thing , established by so sacred authority , and such firm and full laws , can be no better than a bold and ridiculous insolence . It was truly told you , that if you intended only a correction of some inconvenient expressions , no doubt it would be considered of , by wiser heads than your own ; whereby i meant , that honourable and reverend committee , to which this great care was , by public assent , referred ; you straight suspect a design to gain upon the parliament ; and , by a pretended shadow of alteration , to prevent a real and total reformation . Take heed , brethren ; lest you heedlessly wrong them whom you profess to honour , and we with you : is the parliament ( Think you ) so easy to be gained upon by pretended shadows ? Will those solid judgements be likely to be swayed by colours ? Why do you cast that aspersion upon them , to whom ye say you have presented these considerations ; and to whose grave wisdoms we do no less humbly submit ? That God , who sits in the assembly of the judges of the earth , will , we hope , so guide the hearts of those great , and prudent peers and Commons , that they shall determine what May conduce most to peace , and godly uniformity . But sure , brethren , you could not imagine , that by those wiser heads , we should mean our own ; when you compare your own designs and success , with our plain credulity , and late unthriving proceedings . Enjoy your winnings without our envy , not without our pity of the poor church of England , which will , i fear , too late rue your prevalence . 

The alteration of the liturgy sent into Scotland is a business utterly unconcerning us : whatever unhappy hands were in it , would God they had been prevented by some seasonable gout , or palsy ; in the report of the alteration made of the liturgy in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's time , i fear , you do not well agree either with truth or with yourselves , if we compare this passage with your first entry into this large section ; let the scanning of it be left to the readers better leisure : as not worthy to retard our way . Doctor Taylor ( Whom you are pleased seriously to honour with the titles of my irony ) hath made good amends , belike , for the praise he gave to our liturgy which he helped to compose , in his censure of a Bishop's licence , and the priestly robes ; the one whereof ( You say ) he called the mark of the beast , the other a fool's coat : but , what if the strange variety of popish vestments , seemed to that holy martyr , ridiculous ? what if to take a licence to preach from the hands of a popish Bishop , seemed to him no better than to receive the mark of a beast ? what is that to us ? what to the cause ? Were these tenets erroneous , is this sufficient to enervate his testimony , for the allowance of that litany , which he made his last prayer at his parting with his dear consort ? And for the free use whereof he blessed that God to whom he was sending up his soul ? Were it a good ground of judgement , that he , who once errs , can never say true ? But , for this censure of the good martyr , let those that feel the smart of it complain . 

Let us descend ( Since you will have it so ) to the re-examination of those your reasons , which enforce your desired alteration : first , it symbolizeth with the popish mass : i say , neither as mass , nor as popish : you disprove me in neither , neither indeed can do . Could you instance , this prayer is superstitious , that idolatrous , this heretical , that erroneous , you Might have just reason to except at any touch of our symbolising with them ; but , if the prayer be good , and holy , why should i more refuse it , as coming from a Papists mouth , than i would make use of a vicious prayer coming from the best Protestant ? Where i said , if the devil confess Christ to be the son of God , shall i disclaim the truth , because it passed through a damned mouth ? you answer , but you know Sir , that Christ would not receive such a confession from the devil's mouth , nor Paul neither , act. 16.  True , in respect of the person confessing , not of the truth confessed : as it came from an evil spirit , our saviour , and St. Paul had reason to refuse it ; but neither of them would disclaim the matter of that truth , which was so averred . There is great difference betwixt the words of a foul spirit , and a faulty man ; but if you will needs make a parallel , it must be personal : Christ would not allow a devil to confess him ; we will not allow a popish sacrificer to usurp our good prayers ; but if my saviour would not disallow that i should make use of the good confession of an evil spirit , much less would he dislike that i should make use of that good prayer , which was once the expression of an evil man : and yet these were not such , being taken from the composures of holy men , and ill places ; so as this is no other , then to take up gold mislaid in a channel , which could not impure it : you May well ask why it was laid there ; you have no reason to ask why a wise man should take it up : your question therefore ; what need we go to the Roman porteous for a prayer , when we can have one more free from jealousies in another place ; Might have been moved to those worthies , which gathered this pile of devotion , who would easily have answered you , that your jealousy is causeless , while the prayers themselves are past exception ; but can with no colour of reason be charged upon us , who take holy prayers from good hands , not needing to inquire whence they had them . 

Your second reason is as forceless , as your first . our liturgy was composed ( You say ) into this form on purpose to bring the Papist to our churches ; that failing , there is no reason to retain it . the argument fails in every part : first , our liturgy was thus composed on purpose , that all Christians Might have a form of holy devotion , wherein they Might safely , and comfortably join together , both publicly and privately , in an acceptable service to their God ; and this end , i am sure , fails not in respect of the intention of the composers , however it speed in the practice of the users of it . secondly , there is no reason that where the issue of things faileth , the good intention of the agent should be held frustrate , or his act void : our end in preaching the gospel , is , to win souls to God ; if we prevail not , shall we surcease , and condemn our errand as vain ? But here , i say , the project sped ; for till the eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth , there was no recusant . You tell me , it was not the converting power of the liturgy , but the constraining power of the law , that effected this : but , brethren , what constraining power was of any use , where there was no recusant ? Every constraint implies a reluctation , here was none : if then our liturgy had no power of converting to our churches , yet it had no operation of averting from them . What the Pope's negotiations were with Queen Elizabeth , at this time , imports nothing ; i am sure i have those manuscript decisions of the Jesuitish casuists , which first determined it unlawful to join with our assemblies ; till which our liturgy had so good effect , that those , who differed from us in opinion , were not separated in our devotion . But how am i mistaken ? That which i boasted of , as the praise , is objected to me as the reproach of our divine service . what credit is this to our church ( You say ) to have such a form of public worship , as Papists May , without offence , join with us in , &c.  Or , how shall that reclaim an erring soul that brings their bodies to church , and leaves their hearts still in error ? i beseech you , brethren , what think you of the Lord's prayer ? is that a perfect platform of our devotion , or is it not ? Tell me then , what Christian is there in the world , of what nation , language , sect soever , ( Except the separatist only ) will refuse to join with their fellow Christians in that form of prayer ? And , what credit is it to our Christian profession to have such a form of public prayer , as Papists , Grecians , Moscovites , Armenians , Jacobites , Abassines , May , without offence , join with us in ? i had thought you would have looked for the reclamation of erring souls by the power of preaching ? Here is no unteaching or confutation of errors , no confirmations of either doctrines , or uses in the forms of our prayers : and if i should ask you how many you have reclaimed by your conceived prayers , you would not , i fear , need to spend too much breath in the answer . 

When i therefore impute the rare gain of souls to the want or weakness in preaching , you think to choke me by an exprobration of the fault of your governors : let the Bishops see how they will clear their souls of this sin , who , having the sole power of admitting ministers into the church , have admitted so many weak ones , and have rejected so many faithful , able preachers , for not conforming to their beggarly rudiments : let those whose guiltiness finds themselves galled with this crimination , fly out in an angry answer ; but if there be those , who have been constionably careful not to admit them that are not competently {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} not to eject any peaceable , and conscionable divine , for mere matter of ceremony , how injuriously have you fastened upon them other men's delinquences ? although it is not unpossible , that men May be able preachers , and yet turbulent ; and there May be ceremonial rites , neither theirs , nor beggarly . 

You are deceived , brethren , it is not our liturgy that hath lost any ; too many have lost themselves by a mistaught prejudice against our liturgy : as for the miscatholic part , tell me , i pray you , whether is it more likely that a staggering Papist will rather join with a church that useth a liturgy , or one that hath none ? With a church that allows some of their wholesome prayers , or that which rejects and defies all , though never so holy , because theirs ? And for our own , surely , if our acute Jesuits had no keener arguments , than this you bring , we should be in small fear to lose proselytes ; for what weak Protestant could not easily reply , the church of Rome was ancient , but yours is new ; that was orthodox , this false : the service was not yours , but borrowed and usurped from better hands ; we make use of it ( as we May ) in the right of Christianity , not in any relation to you , and your errors ? so much for you and your Jesuit in the second reason . 

Your third reason is grounded upon stumbling blocks , it is no marvel if it fall : those , you say , are laid by the liturgy ; and i say , removed by many : so ye know they are by Hooker , abbot , Hutton , Morton , Burges , Covell , and i know not how many others ; amongst the rest i stumbled upon a blind man , whose inward sight abundantly supplied the want of his bodily eyes ; who hath in many of those points given , in my opinion , very clear satisfaction ; but sure you could not suppose me so weak , as to imagine that his lack of eyes could exempt him from error ; although divers of your exceptions are ( If they were worth our insisting upon ) more groundless than his tenets ; but while i allowed many of his passages , i never meant to justify all : it is far from me to excuse , or patronize other men's paradoxes . We know the old distinction of scandals , taken , and given ; if there be any danger of the latter , it is ( I say ) under careful hands to remove it ; and , however it pleases you to fall into choleric comparisons , perhaps those hands which you slight , May not be the least active . 

To the fourth , which is the idolising of the liturgy , i say truly , separatists abhor it for such ; never true Protestant adored it for such . Show us the man that ever worshipped the service-book , that we May wonder at that uncouth idolatry : show us the man that holds it the only worship of God in England , as you unjustly pretend . 

I tell you of some others that stick not to say , too many do injuriously make an idol of preaching : ( Why should you hope i am not serious in affirming so undoubted a truth ? ) yet we May not think of abandoning it : even , in cool blood the argument holds firm , without equalizing one with the other . Some have made an idol of their silver and gold , must i therefore cast away this metal ? You needed not fear that i would speak aught to the derogation from my own profession ; but if i compare God's ordinance of prayer , with his ordinance of preaching , and this individual liturgy , with that individual sermon , i hope there is no danger in that collation . 

To the fifth , the great distaste which these public prayers meet withal , is truly lamentable , and the effect of that distaste , separation : yet more ? Let those miszealous men who have infused these thoughts into well-meaning souls see how they will answer it in that great day , to the judge of the quick and dead ; surely , if the case were mine , i should fear it would fall heavy upon my soul ; for , if it be granted , that there are divers passages in our liturgy faulty , and worthy of correction , yet no wise enemy can say , they are so heinous , that they bar all communion : did they contain heresy , or blasphemy , we could but separate from their use ; now , their separation can no more be without our pity , then without their own sin : your argument hence inferred , that the partition wall of our offensive liturgy should be removed , because some brainsick men ( For that title is here merely your own , not mine ) are scandalised thereby , will no less hold , if this our liturgy were either altered , or abolished : for , are there not thousands that profess to be no less scandalised with any set forms whatsoever ? So then , if we have any prescribed , or stinted devotions at all , the partition wall stands still ; and if that should be demolished , how many more , and more considerable thousands do ye think , would be scandalised with the want of those holy forms , whereto they have been so long , and so beneficially enured ? Here is therefore a scandal on both parts , unavoidable ; and it will be our wisdom and piety , to fall upon the least . You say , ye think , nay , you know that some few prelates , by their overrigorous pressing of the service-book , and ceremonies , have made more separatists , than all the preachers disaffected to the ceremonies in England : i examine not the truth of your confident assertion ; but will you to distinguish betwixt causes and occasions : the rigour of those few prelates Might be the occasion ; but the mispersuasions of those disaffected preachers were the causes of this woeful separation : both Might unhappily concur to this mischief ; but those more , who are the direct and immediate agents in so bad a service . 

Your last reason is so slightly enforced , that it merits rather pity than refutation ; i do justly aver that , there is no reason why difference in liturgies should breed disunion between churches ; or why union in religion should bind us to the same liturgies ; distinguishing ( As i ought ) betwixt essential points , and mere outward formalities . how faintly you reply , that , [ it is true , every difference in liturgies doth not necessitate a disunion of churches : but here the difference is too large to be covered with a few figleaves ! ] grant it to be larger than it is ; is it yet essential ? the question is not , what May cover our differences , but what May disunite our churches ? it is not forms of liturgies , but matter of obstinate and fundamental error , that can draw on such an effect : tell not me therefore , or your reader , of some ceremonies of ours , that will not down with other reform churches ; when ye May , as good cheap , hear of some fashions of theirs , which will not down with us : it is good reason , that as we give , so we should take liberty in things indifferent ; without any reciprocal dislike . As for precedency of time in our liturgy , and of dignity in our church , they May well have this operation with us , that our liturgy could not conform to that which had no being ; and that other churches should rather conform to ours , which was ever noted for more noble , and eminent . You desire not to eclipse the glory of this church , as you profess ; yet you are willing to overshadow it somewhat darkly ; while you can say , our first reformation was only in doctrine , theirs in doctrine and discipline too : wherein you are double-faulty ; first , in imputing a defect to our church , most unjustly , in the extent of our reformation . What ? Was there no reformation but in matter of doctrine ? none in matter of practice ? None in idolatrous or superstitious rites ? None in offensive customs ? None in corruption of government ? None in laws ecclesiastical ? What call you eclipsing , if this be none ? Secondly , in imputing that to the reform churches as their perfection , which is , indeed , their unwilling , and forced defect : reformation implies the renewing of a form that once was ; now , show us , if you can , where ever in the world , that form of discipline ( Whose erection you applaud to some neighbour churches ) found place , before it was in this last age provisionally taken up , by those , who could not be allowed , with the liberty of true religion , to enjoy their former government ? As for the comparison you are pleased to mention , betwixt the liturgies of the reform churches , and those of other Christians , Grecians , Armenians , &c. wherein you say , if you should set down what you have read in the liturgies of those churches , you believe the remonstrant would blush for intimating , there is as much reason to conform to their liturgies , as those of the reform churches : i must tell you , it is of your own making , neither did ever fall from my pen ; i do blush indeed , but it is to see your bold mistakings , and confident obtrusions of things never spoken , never meant : i do not mention a conformity to their liturgies , as equally good ; but only ask , why we should be tied to the forms of one church , more than another , as those who are entire within ourselves , and equally free from obligations to any ; so as you shut up your first quaere with a mere cavil , and the reasons whereby you endeavoured to back it , are utterly reasonless . 

Your second quaere is to seek of so much as any good pretence of reason , yea of sound authority ; whether the first reformers of religion did ever intend the use of a liturgy further than to be an help in the want , and to the weakness of the ministers ? for first , have they ever professed their whole and sole intentions , or have they not ? If not , how come you to know what they never expressed ? If they have , why have you suppressed it ? Secondly , it is obvious to every common understanding , that there were other reasons besides this , of framing set forms of public liturgies ; as , the uniformity of divine services in every national church , the opportunity of the better joining together of all hearts in common devotions , the better convenience of fixing the thoughts upon the matter of a foreknown expression : so as this , which you have so groundlessly intimated , cannot be imagined to be the only reason of prescribed liturgies . Tell me , i beseech you , what think you of our saviour's epitome of a liturgy , the Lord's prayer ? for certainly it was no other ; a form of prayer enjoined by divine authority : was that only intended to be an help in the want , and to the weakness of the ministers ? Was it not prescribed for the help of the devotion of all disciple ? Your instances are ( If it Might be ) poorer than your assertion . The 23.  Canon of the 4th . Council of Carthage ordains , ut nemo patrem nominet pro filio , &c.  in a care to prevent the dangerous misprisons of some ignorant priests in Africa , in misnaming the sacred persons in the trinity , it charged them not to misapply the terms ; therefore all prescribed forms of prayer are only intended to supply wants , or weaknesses , of ministers : a stout inference , and irresistible . The composers of the liturgy for the French church at Frankford tell us , ha' formulae inserviunt tantùm rudioribus ; nullius libertati praescribitur : these forms serve only for the ignorant sort ; not prescribing to any man's liberty . what mean you , brethren , to urge so improbable a proof ? First this was but a particular congregation , and therefore of no use or validity for the practice of the whole church : secondly , these prayers , which they set forth , were only for the private use of Christians ; for i hope you will not imagine , that when they say [ rudioribus tantum inserviunt , they serve only for the more rude and ignorant sort of persons , ] that they herein meant to point out the ministers ; so as your very allegation confutes yourselves , and seconds me . Your following enforcement in this paragraph fails of sense , much more of reason ; and doth but beg what it cannot evince . you tell me of thousands , who desire to worship God with devout hearts , that cannot be easily persuaded that these set forms , ( Though never so free from just exception ) will prove so great an help to their devotion ; i tell you of many more thousands then they , and no less devoutly affected , that bless God to have found this happy , and comfortable effect , in the fore-set prayers of the church . Neither doth this plead at all against the use of present conception , whether in praying , or preaching ; or derogate any thing from that reverent and pious esteem of conceived prayer , which i have formerly professed : surely , i do from my sold honour both ; i gladly make use of both , and praise God for them as the gracious exercises of Christian piety , and the effectual furtherances of salvation : there is place enough for them both ; they need not justle each other : and , if experience had not made good this truth of mine to many , the most eminent divines of these later times ( Eminent , i mean , not more for learning , then strict piety ) why would they in their prayers , both after , and especially before their sermons , have confined themselves to a set form of their own making , without the variation of any one clause , as i can abundantly instance ? Certainly , they wanted not that freedom of either spirit , or tongue which is challenged by meaner persons , but did purposely hold themselves to the usual conceptions , wherewith their thoughts , and the people's ears were best acquainted . 

As for the difference which is pretended in the use of liturgies in other reform churches , which you say do use liturgies , but do not bind their ministers to the use of them , it will prove no better than a mere logomachy . In this point , if we be understood , we shall not differ : if , as you explicate yourselves in the sequel , out of the canons and rubric both of the Dutch , and Genevian churches , you mean only , that the ministers were not so tied up to those prescribed forms , that they Might not at some times , and upon some occasions , make use of their own conceptions , you have herein no adversary : doubtless , all Christian divines have ever had that liberty in all the churches that have professed the name of Christ ; neither ought it , neither can it be denied to any , either of theirs , or ours : all allegations to this sense , Might well have been spared ; we shall willingly concur with you , both in opinion , and practise : but , if by this [ not binding to the use of a liturgy ] you understand either an arbitrary power not in use in any liturgy at all , or an absolute release from any whatsoever usage of their publickly-prescribed forms , and a wilful rejection of them , as either unfit or unlawful , because set and stinted ; none of your cited authorities , no practice of any well governed church will countenance so strange a paradox : in this Calvin fights directly against you , while he order , ut certa illa extet , à quâ pastoribus discedere non liceat : that there should be a certain form , from which it May not be lawful for ministers to depart : the contradiction whereunto , alleged out of your nameless liturgy , of formulae pro arbitrio , i leave to your own reconciling . 

As for the Lutheran churches , though they have more superfluity than want , yet why they should be excluded out of the list of the reform , i know no reason ; since , if all Protestant churches ( Which is the usual contradistinction from popish ) come under that stile , these are wont to challenge the deepest share in that denomination : neither is it out of any disrespect to the churches reform ( As your charity would fain suggest ) that i say , they are but a poor handful in comparison of the world of Christians abroad ; ( I have ever honoured them , no less than yourselves ) but in regard of the paucity of their professors ; their value is no whit the less , because their number is so . One spark of a diamond May be worth large piles of marble : but i Might well argue , that in a point ; wherein no judicious man can place an error , there can be no just reason that we should abandon the received practice of all the Christian churches upon earth , for the late institution of a few : if herein i misjudge , i am willing to be convinced . 

The rubric of King Edward the sixth , agreeing with the liberty given by divers ordinances , at this day , of omitting ( Upon some great occasions ) part of the liturgy enjoined , makes nothing for the proof of the proposition , supposed in your quaere , [ that the reformers of religion did never intend the use of a liturgy , further , then to be an help in the want , or to the weakness of a minister : ] it will be an hard task to make these two other then inconsequent : you tell me of the practice of some stiff ordinaries , that have denied this liberty ; and plead , that what some ordinaries have voluntarily yielded , you cannot be blamed to desire , as a favour from the high court of parliament : it is not for me to return the answer of my superiors ; but i cannot but put you in mind , that there is a vast difference betwixt an act of occasional indulgence , and a constant claim ; betwixt a particular dispensation , and an universal rule : further than this , i prescribe not , but obey . However the state of homilies and liturgies be much different , these latter having been , even from the primitive times , prescribed to the common usage of the church , which the former offers not to challenge ; yet i granted , that , if we did utterly abridge all ministers of the public use of any conceived prayer , on what occasion soever , the argument Might hold force against us . you tell me of some men that have sacrilegiously done so : i send you to those some men for your answer : the commands and practices of the church of England are within the task of my defence : let private men speak for themselves . From the desk you leap into the pulpit , and tell us , that your argument is as strong against limiting in prayer , as limiting in preaching ; wherein you are unwilling to know , that our church allows equal freedom in both ; who that hath sat within the report of our pulpits , can but say , that our ministers do there ordinarily pray , as freely as they preach ? I pray God they May do it holily and discreetly in both : while they are allowed this freedom in their pulpits , what inconvenience can it be to be limited to solemn , public ( But sacred ) forms in their desk ? we allow both , you would rob us of one , where is the sacrilege ? 

So then , in all this eager passage , your reader sees what fearful venies you give to your own shadow ; for certainly , you have here no visibly real adversary : if by a set liturgy we went about to infringe all liberty of conceived prayer , you Might pretend some ground of a quarrel ; but when we allow , and commend , and practise both , in their due places , where can you fasten ? 

The reason is lamentable which you urge in the fifth place , that many deny their presence at our church-meeting , in regard of those imposed prayers ; our eyes can witness ( Not without tears ) the too much truth of this sad assertion ; we have seen , and pitied to see many poor misguided mechanics , waiting abroad in the churchyards , for the good hour ; who , so soon as ever the long expected psalm calls in to the ensuing sermon , have thronged into the congregation , as now only worthy of their presence ; alas poor souls , were their knowledge ( Which they overween ) but equal to their zeal , they would see , and hate their own misjudgement : in the mean time ( Shift it how you please ) woe , wo be to those teachers that have misled well-meaning persons , to this dangerous , and ungodly prejudice : it had been better for them never to have been born , then to have lived to be authors of so pernicious a schism in the church of God . I have no reason to accuse you , whom i know not ; although i must tell you , your cold put-off doth little less than accuse yourselves : for your parts , you say , you profess that you are not against a free use of a liturgy ; we thank you for this favour ; what is this but to say , if a liturgy be not left free , we profess ourselves to be against it , we animate all others in that profession ? 

You are yet more courteous , and tell us , ye do not Count a liturgy a sufficient ground of separation from the church : Mark , reader , there is fraud in the words ; they say , they do not Count a liturgy a sufficient ground of separation ; they do not say , this liturgy : such a liturgy as they could device , and upon such terms , Might perhaps be no sufficient ground of a separation ; but this liturgy of our church , as it now stands , they do not undertake for . Speak out , brethren , and do not smother your thoughts ; declare freely to your auditors , whether the liturgy established in this church , be such , as wherewith they ought to join ; and whether that come within saint Augustine's rule of non-scindendas ecclesias : were you less reserved , the church would perhaps be more happy . 

The Remonstrants' dilemma May peradventure come too late , when you have forestalled the minds of ignorant men with strong resolutions against all imposed liturgies , but especially our own : now , you can confidently say , [ the persons concerned will deny , that either the liturgy is good ; or lawfully imposed , if it were good ; ] and here ( For aught i see ) they and you are resolved to rest : in vain shall we go about to make good the premises , while you have taught them to hold fast the conclusion : disputes will not do it ; you have found a way that will work the feat : by losing the bond of imposition , and taking away the cause of disputes , and troubles of many thousand consciences . why now , brethren , i like you well ; plain-dealing is a jewel : the way not to be troubled with liturgies , is to have no liturgies at all ; and the way to have no use of liturgies at all , is not to enjoin them : as if you said , the way to loose the Gordian knot , is to cut it in pieces ; the way to prevent the danger of violating laws , is to let them loose , or make them arbitrary ; the way to remedy the discontent of popish recusants , is to retract the oath ; the way not to be barred by the gate , is to throw open the hedge : truly , brethren , if this be the only means of redress , you have reduced us unto a good condition ; it is the established , and ( As hath hitherto been thought ) the wholesome law of this kingdom , that this ( And this only ) liturgy should be used , and frequented by ministers , and persons ; and this hath hitherto been obediently , and peaceably observed : now , upon some new exotic scruples , good persons are taught to place piety in the disobedience of those acknowledged laws , and nothing will quiet their many thousand consciences , but an abrogation of the good laws they were wont to live under . What must the indifferent reader needs think of this ? The law is the same it was , under which our religious forefathers went happily to heaven ; the change is in us . Oh miserable men , whom some few tempestuous blasts from New-england , and Amsterdam have thus turned about , and made insensible of our former blessings ! 

Mean while , that which pincheth you in my reply , you are willing to pass over in silence . Were the imposition amiss , what were this to the persons ? The imposition ( If faulty ) is upon the minister ; how can that more concern the persons , than their joining with him in an usual prayer , ( Whereto he ties himself ) of his own making ? If the case be equal , why do you not labour to convince your persons of so unjust a partiality ; and to reclaim them from so palpable an error ? the end whereof ( Without a speedy remedy ) can be no other than that i have most unwillingly fore-spoken , perfect difformity and confusion . 

I May not omit to proclaim to the reader your eminent charity to me , of whom you say , yea , so resolute he is not to yield to a liberty , in what is established , &c. that we evidently see by his answer , that had the reading of homilies been as strictly enjoined as the book of common prayer , the ablest minister in England , ( were the law in the Remonstrants' hands , ) must be held as strictly to them , as to this . how now , brethren ? What , in so angry a confidence ? On what ground , i beseech you ? The remonstrant is well known to have been as diligent a preacher as any in your alphabet ; and to be still ( As not yet defective in that duty , so ) as great an encourager of preaching as the best of your patrons ; why will ye thus unjustly raise so envious a suggestion against him ? [ he is soresolute not to yield a liberty ; ] alas , what power hath he , to either yield , or deny a liberty , who professeth ( As he ought ) nothing but humble obedience ? But when a question is stated concerning the injunction , or freedom of a liturgy , you May be pleased to give me leave to defend that part which my conscience ( And i think upon sure grounds ) dictates to me for a certain truth : non eadem sentire bonis , &c. had wont to be a received rule ; but , as to this challenge itself , Might the readers leisure serve him to cast back his eye upon this passage of my defence , he shall no less marvel at the injustice , than the uncharitableness of it : he shall there see with what inoffensive caution i marshal homilies , and liturgy in the same rank ; so making our obedience the rule of the use of both , as that i profess a just liberty yielded in both ; showing , that if homilies were enjoined to be read , and yet a free use of preaching allowed , there were no more cause to refuse them , than we have now to refuse the liturgy , having withal a freedom to our conceived prayers : in which position i would fain see what malice itself can find to carp at . 

As for that strange project of yours , of imposing the use of set forms as a punishment to unsufficient ministers , ye Might well give me leave to smile a little at so uncouth a penance , and so unheard-of a mulct ; whereat , others , perhaps , will laugh out . You answer me with a retortion of my own words , and seem to please yourselves much in the conceit , calling the ingenious reader to record of your own gross mistaking : be this once pleased , readers , since you are called up , to examine these men's confident fidelity ; i had ( As i well Might ) taxed this rare project of theirs ; yet himself ( Say they ) comes out with a project about preaching , never a whit better , and doth as good as confirm our saying , in the latter end : view the place , i beseech you ; see if you can find any the least intimation of either preaching , or project ; all that passage is only concerning prayer , the gift whereof , i say , every forward artisan will be unjustly challenging : away then ( Say i ) with the book , while it May be supplied with his more profitable nonsense ; and conclude , how fit it is , where is nothing but an empty overweening , and proud ignorance there should be a just restraint , a restraint , i say , in a limitation of the forms of prayer ; for what should artisans have to do with preaching ? Or what such absurd project is there , in this just restraint ? Tell me now , reader , whether this be not as like Bellarmine , as the man in the moon : truly , how either the Cardinal came into the line , or the noble peer into the margin , he were wise that could tell . What was professed in the hearing of some of you , and some of your superiors , of a willing condescent to part with that which is indifferent to themselves , if they Might be informed it is offensive to others , must be supposed to import , as a true information , so , a just offence ; wherein they should be sure of the concurrence of some whom you are pleased to censure , as less merciful ; than whom , none can be more ready to make good that of Gregory , in putting to their hand for the removing of customs truly burdensome to the church . 

Thus you have very poorly vindicated the first part of your answer concerning liturgy , having made good nothing which you have undertaken , disproved nothing which i affirmed : and if ( As you profess ) your desire was a sincere pursuit of truth , you are the more to be pitied , that you missed it ; it is not yet too late for you to recover it ; be but ingenuous , in confessing what you cannot but see , and we cannot differ : and if you do heartily join with me in lamenting the breaches , and miserable distractions of the church , why should you not join with me in the effectual endeavours to make them up ? Why do you suffer your hands to widen that , which your tongues would seem to close ? If peace be the thing you desire , who is it that hath broken it ? We are where we were ; the change is on your parts : and if there have been some particular encroachments , and innovations in some few hands ; what is that to the whole church of England ? what is that to those , whose proceedings have been square and innocent ? We hope then that the worthies of that high court , the great patrons of peace and truth , will soon see , and seriously consider where the grief of the church lies , and by their wisdoms put a seasonable end to these miserable , and dangerous distempers . 

Sect. iii  

Your third section is nothing but a mere jangle of words ; wherewith it was too much for the reader to be once troubled ; for whose sake , i shall cut you up short ; making it apparent , that my affection to my cause , ( However you are pleased to scandalize my discourse ) hath no whit transported me to any overreaching expressions , in lifting up the antiquity , and extolling the universality of episcopal government beyond truth . That which i spoke of the libelers abroad , your charity would fain have extended to foreign churches ; now , as ashamed of the misprision , you would fain salve it up with a pretended probability of your mistaken sense : for my part , now that my innocence is cleared , if you can put any honest colour upon your misunderstanding , i shall willingly connive at it ; although i must tell you there is enough dissimilitude in your instance . In what sense you meant the self-confoundedness you impute to me , what matters it to the reader ? such a one you confess it was , that makes men speak they know not what ; it is a fair livery , and well beseeming the bounty of such munificent hands . I justly professed myself so self-confounded , as to say confidently , that he is no peaceable and well affected son of the church of England , that doth not hate libels , and wish well to liturgy and episcopacy . your charity ( Presuming upon advantages ) dares to choke me with the name of a parliament ; wherein how you will answer your injurious imputation to that high court , i appeal to their bar.  To make the matter altogether envious , you guiltily leave out the first clause , concerning libels , and aggravate the second ; and that which i professedly spoke of complainants , you spitefully draw home to the judges : whom i must still suppose , you do heinously wrong , in fastening upon them this bold imputation of ill-affectedness to a well established liturgy , and a well-regulated episcopacy : i believe those honourable peers , and noble Commons will give you small thanks for this insolent assertion . 

What i said , concerning the derivation of episcopal government from the times of the apostles , without the contradiction of any one congregation in the Christian world , i am ready to make good against all your frivolous clamours ; purposely to lay the ground of a quarrel , you intersert , diocesan ; which came not within the terms of my proposition ; and to confute your own addition , tell us how late dioceses came into the church , and now will needs enforce me to maintain what your so magistral power will put upon me : pardon me , brethren , i undertake to defend my own words , not yours : but you say , as good to have said nothing at all , as not this ; and , we know what kind of government it is that the remonstrant pleads for : i grant , you have reason to guess it ; but what is that to my proposition ? Whether they were Bishops of cities , or dioceses , or parishes , or provinces , that is not essential to the question : neither do we speak of them , quà diocesani , but , quà episcopi : if they were such as were placed in an imparity of degree above presbyters , and were induced with an eminent power of jurisdiction and ordination , what ever the limits of their government were , my assertion holds good ; on this ground well Might b. hall say , that Timothy was a diocesan Bishop , that is , sustained that place , and did those offices , which his successors being formal diocesans , held and performed ; this kind of Bishops , i defend to have continue in the Christian world unto this age , without the contradiction of any one congregation ; you tell me of Scotland , as if i had affirmed , that there had been Bishops always , everywhere ; it is no small wonder to me how you can with such sober vehemence press upon me so impossible an absurdity : when you plainly see , that all i contend for , is this , that there hath been no time , no age from the apostles days , wherein this form of episcopal government hath not been without contradiction continue ; yet your importunity will force a tenet upon me , mal-grè ; and tells me you are sure it is the assertion of episcopal men ; amongst whom you cite d. Hall's irrefragable proposition ; no man living , no history can show any well allowed , and settled national church , in the whole Christian world , that hath been governed otherwise , then by Bishops , in a meet and moderate imparity , ever since the times of Christ and his apostles , until this present age ; and the like passage you bring out of his episcopacy by divine right part 2. p. 110.  What can you make of these allegations ? There is no one line in them , which i am not ready to justify ; what one word is here liable to exception ? Will it follow from hence , that i affirm Bishops to have been always everywhere ? you see first it is limited to the Christian world , not the pagan , and in that , not to every parochial church , but a national ; and not to every national church , which is in fieri , and inchoatè ; ( Such as that of Scotland in those first times was ) but a settled national church ; and to make yet more sure , lest any schismatical company Might put in for a share , it is superadded , a well-allowed , settled , national church . i should have acknowledged you brave vindicators , indeed , if now , in the height of your learned valour , you could have choked me with direct and particular instances of any well-allowed , settled , national churches in Christendom before this present age , that were otherwise governed . 

In stead of this you tell me a tale of a sorry quarrel taken up against the Bishop of Pampelona by some barbarous Biscainers ; whose rudeness when i proved to you by their savage deportment to their King , you give a very civil and charitable construction of my marginal , as intimating it no less crime to offer an affront to a prelate , then to a King ; thus love creeps where it cannot go . But to mend the matter , you instance in the reform churches ; they have made contradiction to episcopal government ; true , but not till this present age ; that period was set before in my assertion , whence now arises your sudden passion ; Sir bethink you , take up your remonstrance , read your own words , mark the parenthesis : Sir , i have done all this , and wonder what it is that you would have me to see , or to say ? The words are plain , without either welt , or guard ; say what you would infer upon them . the limitation of time here ( You say ) hath reference to the continuance of episcopacy , not the contradiction of episcopacy ; certainly , in any indifferent readers eye , to both : neither doth the very scope of the place evince any less ; for could you suppose any man so utterly insensate , as to say ; by the joint confession of reform divines , the reform churches of this age have never contradicted episcopacy ? this were indeed a paradox fit for none but a self-confounded man : fasten it upon those that are fit for dark rooms and Ellebore . just such another is the next , you say ; such another indeed , as truly affirmed , and as unjustly excepted to : that episcopal government hath continue in this island , since the first plantation of the gospel to this present day , without contradiction : what talk you of taking in the manner , and salving of credit ? as if you had your adversary at a great advantage : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as the Greek proverb is , and as we are wont to say ; here is great cry , and little wool . for , whereas , the proposition May bear this double sense ; the continuance of episcopacy in this island , hath had no contradiction ; or , there hath been no contradiction to the right of the continuance of it in this island ; at the choice of the propounder , i am ready to make it good in both senses , neither are you able justly to oppose it in either ; i am sure those instances which you bring , out of Wickliff , Lambert , richardus de Mediavilla , occam , Walter Mapes , Robert Langland , in your next section , will shrink in the wetting , and come far short of your undertaking . 

But brethren , i must sadly tell you , that in your next , and last exception , you have exceeded yourselves in malice ; what loud and hideous out cries have you made against me , both in your answer , and vindication , for a safe and innocent passage in my remonstrance ? speaking of the continuance and derivation of episcopacy from the primitive times , i had said ; certainly , except all histories , all authors fail us , nothing can be more plain than this truth : now comes your charitable veracity , and , in your answer ( Seconded now again by your vindication ) reports the words thus ; except all histories , all authors fail us , nothing can be more certain than this truth ; and thereupon cry out , os durum ! and descant fearfully upon the word , nothing more certain ? What is it not more certain that there is a God ? Is it not more certain that Christ is God and man ? Must this be an article of our creed , &c.  Nothing more certain ? Oh that men should not only forget themselves , but God also , and in their zeal for their own honour utter words bordering upon blasphemy . 

Thus you ; whether like sober , and honest men , let the reader judge ; who casting back his eye upon that passage of my remonstrance , shall well find that i have used no such word at all , as you have thus insolently and injuriously played upon : my phrase was only , nothing can be more plain , you falsify it , nothing more certain ; and run strange , and uncharitable descant upon it ; such as whereof i think your friends will be ashamed ; and when i , not urging the great difference of this expression , was willing to pass it over , with intimating only the ordinary use of this manner of speech , in our hourly discourse , wherein we would be loath to be called to an account of our creed ; yet still , as eager and unsatisfied , in this your vindication , you redouble the charge upon me ; we cry out ( You say ) of such a shamelessness as dares equal this opinion of his , of episcopal government to an article of our creed : when as here was no mention , no thought either of certainty , or of creed ; but only an harmless affirmation of the clear evidence of this truth : but i will not stir this puddle any more ; only beseeching my reader , by this one passage to judge of the spirit of these men , so set upon detraction , and contradiction , that rather than they will want colours of exception , they will device them out of their own brains , and fasten them where they would disgrace . 

Lest this place should not yield you sufficient ground of so foul a crimination , you fly back to episcopacy by divine right , and thence will fetch a clearer conviction ; where the author saith , he for his part is so confident of the divine institution of the majority of Bishops above presbyters , that he dare boldly say , there are weighty points of faith , which have not so strong evidence in scripture ; he said it , and made it good by instances in the same place : why do you snarl at the speech , and not confute the proofs ? Try your skill in that one particular , the baptization of infants ; which , i am deceived , if the church holds not a weighty point of faith ; let us , if you please , enter into a serious contestation ; show me more clear evidence of scripture for this holy and universally received position , and practise , of baptising infants , than i can produce for the majority of Bishops above presbyters ; till then give me leave to return your own prayer ; God give the men less confidence , or more truth ; and let me add , more charity ; for truly , in whether of these two latter you are more defective , it is not easy to judge ; in the mean time you have as much failed in clearing yourselves from those just imputations , which are laid upon you , as you have overreached in the unjust bespattering of your staunch and innocent adversary . 

And now forbear ( If you can ) readers , to smile in the parting , at the grave counsel of our wise Smectymnuus , who after he hath tired his reader with a tedious volume in answer to my short defence , adviseth me very sadly , that my words May be less in number : yet howsoever his weary loquacity May , in this causeless exprobration , deserve to move your mirth ; i shall resolve to make good use of his counsel . est olitor saepe opportuna locutus . in the sequel , my words ( Which were never yet taxed for an offensive superfluity ) shall be very few ; and such as , to your greater wonder , i shall be beholden for , to my kind adversaries : the rearward of my late defence was backed by the sound testimony of dr. Abraham Scultetus , the famous professor of Heydelburgh , and the great oracle in his time of the palatinate , who in both the tenets of episcopacy by divine right , and the unwarrantableness of lay-presbytery agrees so fully with me , as i do with myself , the grounds whereof , i dare confidently say , are such as no wit of man can overthrow , or weaken : now what say my Smectymnuans to this ? for brevity sake , we will content ourselves with what that learned Rivet spoke , when these two treatises of Scultetus were showed to him , by a great prelate amongst us , and his judgement required ; haec omnia jamdudum sunt protrita & profligata , all these have been long since overworn and beaten out and baffled . in good time , brethren ; and why should not i take leave to return the same answer to you in this your tedious velitation of episcopacy ? There is not one new point in this your overswolne , and unweldie bulk ; no haycock hath been oftener shaken abroad , and tossed up and down in the wind , than every argument of yours hath been agitated by more able pens than mine : haec omnia jamdudum sunt protrita & profligata ; why should i abuse my good hours ; and spend my last age ( Devoted to better thoughts ) in an unprofitable babbling ? You May perhaps expect to meet with fit matches , that have more leisure ; the cause is not mine alone , but common to this whole church , to the whole hierarchy ; to all the fathers of the church throughout the world ; to all the dutiful sons of those fathers wheresoever ; you May not hope that so many learned and eminent divines , who find themselves equally interessed in this quarrel , can suffer either so just a cause unseconded , or so high insolence unchastised ; for myself , i remember the story that Plutarch tells of the contestation between Crassus and Deiotarus ; men well-stricken in age , and yet attempting several exploits , not so proper for their grey hairs : what , said Crassus to Deiotarus ; dost thou begin to build a city , now in the latter end of the day ? And truly , said Deiotarus to him again , i think it somewhat with the latest for you to think of conquering the Parthians : some witty lookers on , will perhaps apply both these to me ; it is the city of God , the evangelical Jerusalem which some factious hands have miserably demolished , is it for shaking and wrinkled hands to build up again , now in the very setting , and shutting in of the day ? 

They are dangerous and not inexpert Parthians , who shoot out their arrows , even bitter invectives , against the sacred and apostolical government of the church , and such as know how to fight , fleeing ; are these fit for the vanquishing of a decrepit leader ? Shortly then , since i see that our Smectymnuans have vowed , ( Like as some impetuous scolds are wont to do ) to have the last word ; and have set up a resolution ( By taking advantage of their multitude ) to tire out their better employed adversary , with mere length of discourse , and to do that by bulk of body , which by clean strength they cannot , i have determined to take off my hand from this remaining controversy of episcopacy ( Wherein i have said enough already , without the return of answer , and indeed anticipated all those threadbare objections which are here again regested to the weary reader ) and to turn off my combined opposites to matches more meet for their age and quality : with this profession notwithstanding , that if i shall find ( Which i hope i never shall ) this just and holy cause ( Whether out of insensibleness , or cautious reservedness ) neglected by more able defenders ; i shall borrow so much time from my better thoughts , as to bestow some strictures , where i May not afford a large confutation ; i have ever held {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , which as it holds in whatsoever matter of discourse , so especially in this so beaten subject of episcopacy ; wherein since i find it impossible for my adversaries to fall upon any but former notions , oft urged , oft answered , for brevity sake we will content ourselves with what that learned Rivet spoke of the two treatises of Scultetus , haec omnia jam dudum sunt protrita & profligata : with this yet for a conclusion , that if in this their wordy , and wearisome volume , they shall meet with any one argument , which they dare avow for new , they shall expect their answer by the next post . 

Finis . 





Tertul. apol. c. 30. pag. of the defence — 13 August . Ep. 121.  14 Justin martyr . Apol. 2.  14 Concil. laodie . c. 8.  15 Concil. carthag . 3.  15 Concil. milevit . 2.  16 Hieron. ad euagr.  61 Greg. naz. orat. 28.  65 Firmilianus in cypr. ep 75.  71 Ambr. in Presbyt . consignant . 72 Concil. Antioch . c. 10.  72 D. Raynolds . 101 Orig. contr. cells . 141 August . contr. crescon. l. 3.  146 in the answer to the humble remonstrance . Episcopal bravado . P. 3 Treason , treason . P. 4 Episcopal zeal broke into flames of indignation . P. 6.  We know not what his arrogancy Might attempt . P. 14 So many falsities and contradictions . P. 15 A face of confident boldness . P. 15 A self-confounded man . P. 15 Notorious falsity . P. 15 Notorious — P. 16 Not leave his — P. 16 os durum P. 18 Forgets not himself , but God also . P. 18 Words bordering upon blasphemy . P. 18 Indignation will not suffer us to prosecute these falsities . P. 18 A stirrup for Antichrist . P. 30 Antichristian government . P. 65 We thank God we are none of you . P. 74 Borders upon Antichrist . P. 80 Pride , rebellion , treason , unthankfulness , which have issued from episcopacy . P. 85 defence , p. 48.  

doth he say , those judges were called areopagi ? parag. 2.  answ . p. 4.  they cite it [ no less heinous ] these words [ Ruling under one acknowledged sovereign ] are purposely left out in their citation of them to make the proposition odious : what fidelity there is in this , let the reader judge . the first and greatest zealot at Frankford . lib de obedient . and Buchanan in his book de jure regni . Nos autem id contendimus , populum à quo reges nostri habent quicquid juris sibi vendicant , regibus esse potentiorem , jus quidem in illos habere multitudinem , &c. Buchan . de jure regni . parag. 3.  parag. 4.  cypr. l. 3. ep. 9  act for the uniformity of common prayer . 1• . eliz.  tolerabiles ineptiae . in anglorun controversia moderationem tenui , cujus me non poenitet . cal. epist. parag. 2.  author of the use of public prayer . this is that which is ordinarily termed by thena sacrifice of fools , out eccles. 5. 1.  precantes sumus pro omnibus imperatoribus ; vitam prolixam , imperium securum , domum tutam , exercitus fortes , senatum fidelen , populum probum , orbem quietum . tert. apol. c. 30.  your cavil in the margin of your book , shows you want matter of quarrel ; the suas , which you would have in stead of nostras , is a disadvantage to yourself : those are called the people's prayers , which the church ever had , and shall have ; and those were to be looked on , therefore prescribed , and to be read ; there being a clear opposition betwixt audirent , and intuerentur . Justin mart. apol. 2.  Use of public prayers . the word May as well imply all intention of voice , because the congregation was large . pag. 15.  parag. 3.  conc. laod. c. 19  conc. laod. c. 8.  conc. carthag. 3. c. 23.  centur. magdeb. cent . 3. c. 6.  concil. milevit . 2.  vid. author of the use of public prayer . pag. 8 , 9  cent. 3. c. 6.  Where we often in our prayer , say , give us , oh Lord almighty , give us a portion with thy prophets , give us a portion with the apostles of thy Christ , grant that we May be found in the footsteps of thine only begotten son . parag. 4.  so Hannah made her private prayers in the house of God , 1 sam. 1. 10.  mor. de bless . de missa . l. 1. c. 3. p. Fagius in Paraphras . Chald. in lev. 16. & in 23.  Du Pless . de missa & ejus partibus . l. 1. c. 5.  ( verba tanquam concepta ) the very words as conceived by him . lyran. in lev. 16.  Lud Cappell . Spic in act. 3 whence we May see , that the prayer for which Peter and John went up to the temple , was that which the Jews called {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} the lesser oblation ; which answered to the evening oblation prescribed by the law , &c.  parag. 5.  postea mortuus est Adrianus , cujus deus non misereatur ; obiitque cum luctu & magna contritione ; tempus autem regni , anni sunt 21.  ( deus conterat ejus ossa ) ita ut computus annorum ab adamo ad mortem ejus 4513. mens. 7.  Quo tempore &c. abstulit librum optimum qui penes illos fuit , jam inde a diebus illis tranquillis & pacificis , qui comprehendebat cantiones & preces sacrificiis praemissas ; singulis enim sacrificiis singulas praemiserunt cantiones jam tum diebus pacis usitatas , quae omnia accurate conscripta in singulas transmissa subsequentes generationes à tempore legati ( Moses sc. ) ad hunc usque diem per ministorium pontificum max.  Hunc ille librum abstulit , &c. quo libro historia nulla praeter Pentateuchun mosis antiquior invenitur , &c.  Chron. Samaritan . parag. 6.  num. 10. 35 , 36.  Num. 6. 23 , 24 , 25 , 26.  Capell . spicil . in act. 2.  p. Fagius in chal. parap . Levit. 16.  oh domine , peccarunt , iniqua egerunt , &c.  et cum offerret juvencum pro peccato . ubi supra . p. Fagius in chal. parap . Deut. 8.  parag. 7.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Euseb. de vita const. li . 4. c. 17.  morn . de Pless . lib. de miss. cap. 5.  concil. anc.  Luke 1.  heb. 9 21.  1 cor. 9 12.  parag. 8.  paragr. 9  paragr. 10.  paragr. 11.  paragr. 12.  paragr. 13.  paragr. 14.  paragr. 15.  Calvin epist. to the protector , &c. prius citat . paragr. 16.  paragr. 17.  paragr. 18.  paragr. 19  para. 2.  para. 2.  pag. 21.  episc. by d. r. p. 2. 127.  para. 4.  Plutarch in vita Crassis . 









































