A survey of that foolish , seditious , scandalous , profane libel , the protestation protested . 

Both . de consolation .  . 

London , printed in the year , 1641.  

Reader . 

This flash , the sudden thoughts of a day , had outfaced its adversary the first week of his age , ni praesum sub frequenti puerpero gemiscens , obste••iceam negasset operam ; nor without much pressure through a crowd of opposition hath it thronged out to thy hands ; the birth how mean soever was nigh strangled in the ••adle : take it as it is , an autoschediastick . The same affection to my mother the church screw it from me , that loosed his tongue in defence of his father ; she May say to her more concerned sons , as Jacob to his , why stand you gazing one upon another ? a fatal lethargy hath so stiffened their imaginations , that nothing is heard from them but the damps and groans of a dying body , whether sydere tacti , or fallen in a spiritual praemunire , i know not . It is true their scale May expect a more proportioned adversary , but they do not mean time consider that libels the more vulgar , because fitted to that capacity , be the more dangerous ; silence appears guilty or timorous to this talkative age , either of these May edge an ignorant or base party . This come• points also at the state , for the loose rained popularity the libeler aims at , is no less dangerous to the liberty of the subject , than a too high tuned prerogative . Once acquaint that Briareus , the multitude with the secrets of government , they will rush into the clothe of state ; they like the smaller stars have their course th•art that of the greater lights of the kingdom , nor give any motion ( Unless these be retrograde at biddings ) to the higher spheres , except that of trepidation , and when they come to be stellae culminantes , and take the influence , the management upon them , they neither know the disease , nor the remedy , but like empty 〈◊〉 ••ackss work upon themselves , while the spiders of the state weave nets of their humours to catch adv 〈◊〉 . sed manum de tabula , i find my affections  here for my judgement . I do ingenuously  no enemy to the agents or petitioners for a reforma••on ; the last times abound most in lees , and the evening horizon hath the thickest vapours : but a medicine not a destructive must purge those , a 〈◊〉 not ••hunderclap dispel these , only the sectaries who swell now beyond the reach of names and numbers , i have here glanced at : these hotspurs run themselves breathless , and leave others so far behind that they despair to follow : nor can they ( Error and faction is so individ•ated with their opinions ) attend the leisure of authority , or keep the path chalked out to them by a parliament , but they must needs instantly from superstition to profaneness , from disorder to anarchy ; so far have i justified myself , give thy approbration if it please thee , i court it not , nor 〈◊〉 i a chameli•• to breath in that •ire ; only let thy charity extend to the errors of the press , and be not moved with such grains and scruples , but impute them to the epidemic of the times . 

Farewell . 

Errata . 

Pag. 2. l. 9 for a read or . p. 6. l. 4. f. •ayles r.  p. 7. l. 16. to  . 

A survey of that foolish , seditious , scandalous , profane libel , the protestation protested . 

epist. 2. timoth. chap. 3.  

in the last times perilous days shall come ; for men shall be lovers of their own selves , covetous , boasters , blasphemous , disobedient to parents , unthankful , unholy ; without natural affection , truce-breakers , false accusers , incontinent , fierce , despisers of these that are good : traitorous , heady , high-minded , lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God : having a form of godliness , but denying the power thereof , from such turn away : for of this sort are they that creep unto houses , and lead captive silly women , loaden with sin , led away with divers lusts , ever learning , and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth ; now as Jannes and Jambres withstood moose , so do these also resist the truth . 

epist. 2. pet. chap. 2.  

but these speak evil of the things they understand not , and shall perish utterly in their own corruption : they have eyes full of adultery , and that cannot cease from sin , beguiling unstable souls : an heart they have exercised with covetous practices ; cursed children , which have forsaken the right way , and have gone astray , following the way of Baalam the son of Bosor , who loved the wages of unrighteousness : these are wells without water , clouds that are carried with a tempest , to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever : for when they speak swelling words of vanity , they allure through the lusts of the flesh , and while they promise them liberty , they themselves are the servants of corruption . 

epist. Jude . 

also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh , despise dominions , and speak ill of dignities : these speak ill of these things which they know not : w•e unto them , for they have gone in the way of coin , and run greedily after the error of Baalam for reward , and perished in the gainsaying of Core : clouds they are without water , carried about with winds ; trees , whose fruit withereth ; without fruit , twice dead , plucked up by the root : raging waves of the sea , foaming out their own shame ; wand'ring stars , to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever : these are murmurers , complainers , walking after their own lusts , and their mouths speak great swelling words . 

Goodman cobbler , ( It is you that hath stitched together this tubb-sermon ) or whosoever else of the most holy inspired fraternity , i have taken you Sir for my task : and that because of my abilities , nil su•or ultra crepidam , i dare venture no farther than your old shoes ; if i can find you there , and that your trade mistake not the reformation of soles , it is well : but you are become a preacher at the last , and by that old piece of yours , ( Such stuff you meddle with ) taken from Barrow , or marprelates relics , hath made the scissure worse . Nor shall i trouble your conscience to thrust order upon you , whose religion it is to contemn all order ; i must follow you , as you have followed your enthusiasms , and that in the same manner ; for as in preaching and prayer you are extemporary , so am i in answering : i am not two days your debtor , lest you , as your usurious brethren are wont , had expected interest : it was too much cost to bestow paper though not pains upon you . When i traced every step of your lazy and superfluous discourse , to have joined with my adversary , i found you as naked as an Adamite , not ( One reason ) the least piece of armour with you ; it had been a shame therefore to have drawn upon you , i have only used the whip , that May perhaps teach you sense . It is true , four times you cite antiquity , but in your own way , that is , with greater respect to heathenism , than Christianity , if that proceed from a Bishop , for you marshal three ethnic Emperors with one Eusebius . and why him , i pray you ? doth not this derogate from your infallibility , if in a syllable you be obliged to a father ? what ? are not you and your bible the only judge of controversies ? can any one find out the true meaning of scripture , except yourself , who hath monopolised ( With all piety and reverence be it spoken ) the spirit of truth ? To say otherwise , were to prefer Rome to Amsterdam : but i do forgive you , you have dealt very moderately in this point ; one only you mention , and him in matter of fact , the rest of the book is your own invention , where you have as faithfully abstained from learning and antiquity , as ( And they are so to you ) from heresy and superstition . If the reader complain of vinegar in the ink , let him remember that the bite of the viper ( And such they are that rend the bowels of their mother the church ) is best helped by the antidote of vipers : a frenzy is hardly cured but by the lance , the scourge , the whipping-post : dark rooms indeed , and a large dose of Ellebor , were the fittest attendants for such rovings : but give me leave to convey him home to his bedlam , there in the paroxysm of his madness , to have his family exercise ; and by the way ( Though i wander after him that hath long since wandered from himself ) i hope in charity so belabour the man , that he May henceforth know that part of scripture practically ; ( If it be not against his justification to know any so ) a rod is for the back of the fool : nor wish i worse success to all his braying associates , though their lugges be without the Bishop's visitation , yet i hope their necks is within that of the parliament ; that honourable and judicious assembly will in due time provide against these monstrously absurd libels , that heap of nonsense , from the which such a vapour of stupidity and ignorance is exhaled ; that who are strangers to our better times , if they behold this island thorough the same , shall verily think it under an universal lunacy . But i have stayed you too long before the door . 

You usher in that discourse of yours by a preface , used belike many times before your dresser-lectures , and tell us something of conscience , and its scale ; not unlike the lapwing , keeping the greatest stir when you are farthest from your nest : conscience in the contemplation , in the pretence , is yours ; but what have you to do with it in the reality , ( So here you press it ) in the practice ? beware this care of yours in agendis make you not suspect of merit , if not of supererogation . The piece of sacred scripture you make bold with , in my poor judgement comes not home to the point : the words do rather concern a voluntary then imposed vow , if any be such ; and therefore had been more congruous ( If , as you do , by your infallibility , you had justified the matter ) to the holy protestation is made in your parlour meetings , for tearing a liturgy , rending a surplice , burning the rails , and pluming a Bishop : but you cheat the world with a froth of words , and amuse the well-meaning ; but the ignorant multitude with an empty noise of conscience , purity , and reformation : they say it is an evil sign to stumble at the threshold ; and if God take no pleasure in fools , you have prefixed a very slender approbation to your book . 

Your next is , you tremble to see what small account most men do make of so solemn a vow . How do you ( Which is yours quarto modo ) preach and practise contradictions ? Were ever the most superlative votaries of the church of Rome , Jesuits and seminary priests , more obstinately miszealous in refusing oaths , as civil and ecclesiastical tyranny and Antichristianism than you , when they suit not with your passions , and interests ? Witness these of supremacy and canonical obedience ; the gatehouse can tell us how much less you have esteemed your bodily , than your Christian liberty in such cases : and if the fear to be plundered of a fair estate , or the love to a fatter benefice , can buy in this niceness of yours , and persuade you to lose a button , you have no more conscience in observing , than you had obedience in taking the oath : for , if authority be in the waning , and some popular stars promise you liberty , how soon do you break these cords asunder ; and with a jusjurandum illicitum solummodo stringit ad poenitentiam , start you aside like a deceitful bow ? Yea , think yourself obliged to redeem your slackened rigour by an after-increase of heat and violence ? Yet are you still the same man , love of gain prescribed your oath , and the same absolves you from it , which doubtless your honesty by a mental reservation , did ever lay as a ground ; happy you , whose conscience can mould and fashion itself to the impress of the times , and ebb and flow with the aspect of different occasions ! be ashamed therefore ( Tremble you cannot ) when you see what small account most of you make of your solemn vows : God is not mocked ; nor shall your brags of casting out devils of idolatry and superstition in his name , save you in that day . 

Having thus skirmished , you advance with the main battle , subjoyning , that the ministers and persons have taken the protestation , and have solemnly vowed to maintain the doctrine of the church , so far as it is opposite to popery . they have so , and so Might they ever perform ; but cannot one devil be cast out , unless seven enter ? have they therefore vowed to erect Anabaptism ? is there no mid betwixt the extremes ? no salvation , but either in the communion of the one , or conventicle of the other ? must either a shaveling or a scavinger be the star to point us out the way to Christ ? lend us some of your light , your tallow , to find out a consequence here , i pray : i must tell you , and ( ni frons periit ) you May blush at it ; you have defiled your father's house , and laid us open to the opprobrious insolence of the common enemy , who eyeing us in ( 〈◊〉 ) our dross , wantonly upbraid us , to have rejected under the name of superstition all visibility of a church , and by the title of purity , to have brought in nothing else but profaneness and atheism . 

And it is not profaneness to think so slovenly as you do of God and his service , atheism ; to profess so much , and practise nothing at all ? You are so pointblank against an innocent , harmless , decent worship ; that either there have been no Christians before your days , or you are none such : ours perhaps in abomination of so obstinate foolishness , May desperately make apostasy to Rome , but we can expect none from thence , if you be admitted to banish from us the outward being of a church , their very sails May think us refuted by common sense , when they find nothing amongst us that relates to Christianity . But what if under the name of popery we find you 〈◊〉 touched by the protestation , and so transport you in a second colony from New-england to Babylon ? it is a received principle , that proximius est extremum extremo , quam extremum medio : and Lysimachus Nicanor doth tell you , ( Not these to whom he speaks ) that whilst you refute the •ittle , you nourish the worst of Papists in your own bosoms . See yourself in him , and take these gleanings further : you plead the same independency with Rome from the civil power , except it be more easy for a state to tamper with one Bishop in Christendom , than with one in each parish : you maintain the excommunication of Princes , which is denied by many of her followers ; and that too , so much the more dangerous in you , as you are ready to pretend a charter , a demise , of temporalities in ordine ad spiritualia , not from the Pope , but by a revelation from heaven ; with the clause , deus transfert imperia : you May , and it please you , remember of Johannes lerdensis rex israel , who was hurried by such a trick as this from the shuttle to the sceptre . Yea , in the matter of episcopacy you join hands with the beast ; you and his holiness must have all Bishops , except him and yourselves , to be in the best sense , but of human institution ; see the hot bickerings about this plea , ( If your reading goeth beyond a sixpenny beware ) in the third convocation of the council of Trent : unhappy Bishops ! ground betwixt two factions , as betwixt two millstones ; there the Pope of Rome , here the Pope of the parish upbraiding them equally as usurpers . I could tell you further your ethusiasmes , and their traditions are from the same mint-house , you from a tumour of presumption , they of authority , alike ready to belie the holy spirit , and the blessed fathers : but having brought you to Tiber , i leave you both as twins ( No difference but in age ) to suck the wolf your common nurse , and proceed to your ( For the sections , if no more ) schismatical discourse . 

Here i must luctare cum larva , grapple with nonentities , doubts and negatives ; as if the old sceptike philosophers were revived in you , or as if sixins Empericus had founded your sect ; tell me in good earnest , why is there nothing positive in you , but all your reformations consist of denials : you are perhaps , afraid , by having any thing common with others , to be thought of the church universal , which you have now thrust out of your creed , and given her a bill of divorce ; or else it is that your Christian liberty can hear of no restraint , even in the fundamentals . Your objections ( Though like Ixion's cloud , airy , and by your own fancy and supposition ) i pass them by , as the only orthodox part in you ; and shall strictly tie myself to your answers , lest i seem rather to have a cause , than found a party . ) 

In your first and second , you make your posture , and take your aim , in the third you let in the thrust against the church of England ; but with no less mistake , nor better success , than when dou Quixot ( One who for a head-piece , Might have been moderator to your diet ) justed against the windmill , in stead of the enchanted castle . At the first view , by the multiplying glass of your purity , you can descry four of the beasts heads , and inform us , that the liturgy , discipline , government and ceremonies of the church of England are popish . suppose now it were so , is not your curse , who discovereth your mother's nakedness , double to his , who did not cover his fathers ? But i have mistaken you , your anabaptization doth privilege you to be none of her sons . What a cursed Shimei is this to lay this heaviest imputation upon the most glorious church in the world ? I should tell you , if you had either patience or judgement for instruction , the church of England , since the reformation hath been only she , who hath seriously entered the lists with the enemy , keeped them in hot blood , and scarce granted a breathing time to her opposites , who , if not to award her blows , had not daigned to blunt a pen against your sect. did not Cranmer , Ridley , Latimer , and numbers more of religious and learned martyrs , seal their departure from the church of Rome by their dearest blood , and must your sacrilegious hands throw their sacred dust in the air , by persuading us , that they died popish , not as members only , but ( In some kind ) authors of that church , that public service we now enjoy ? How May this encourage the Romanists , when by our pretended selves , not only our best champions , but our very church is made theirs ? How shall they triumph over us , and our unnecessary debates , ( They fight closely within doors , when we bawl in the streets ) telling us , we cannot agree amongst ourselves , until we return ad petram unde excisi sumus . what you say in defence of this your general position , we shall see in each particular , only i cannot pass your imposition of the liturgy ; hinc illae lachrymae : any thing that is by order and authority is burdensome ; you idolize only the calves of your own making , that is , of your crazed imagination . But how shall this humour of yours suit with the unity of a church ? can many shreads of cloth make a garment , and do not you remember that Christ's coat was without a seam ? Nay , for that you care not , you will be very loathe to plead right in Christ's testament ; my peace i leave you ; for a needless fear to be polluted with the Antichristianism of ecclesiastical courts . These who are in civil or ecclesiastical power , May from thence learn , what a narrow circle you confine them within ; nor should they take this ill , when some of you , the Antinomians , do pretend immunity from the moral law , the law of God himself ( Perhaps they dream of a patentee by the gospel ) and tell us with pharabo , in the pride and hardness of their hearts , who is the Lord that we should obey him ? but i hasten to your next . 

Then you labour with tooth and nail to untie the obligement of the chaos , and tell us first , that the law for reformation never intended to allow or set up popery in England , nor i hope to deface Christianity . What the intention of the law hath been , and how understood hitherto , whether shall we believe the law itself , the articles , the canons , the rubrickes , the service of the church , the statutes of parliament , the joint consent and practice of all good men , and learned writers ( These without a seeming difference , give approbation to the present liturgy and government of the church ) or you , who is filius terrae , a mushrume , a son of yesterday's ? yourself conceit deserves my pity , not my refutation , and having by your pulse found out your fever , pardon me if i refuse to take such a verdict upon your trust , until you be restored to your wits , neither then must you expect to be balanced with so many contrary pregnant testimonies . Your second is yet of a higher reach , all human laws contrary to God's word are invalid and void , ipso facto , and all must be such , to the which your infallibility is not pleased to give approbation . Tell me , i pray you , whether should the judges , or yourselves determine the integrity of the law ? if they , why do not you attend their determination ? how is it , that the hand must reform the head , the persons their Prince ? and do you think petitions , covenants , and insurrections the surest gradations to the kingdom of heaven ? But if yourselves only , what need have you of judges ? Magistracy , and triennial parliaments are to you but cyphers , and visible nothings ; your consent is the figure which makes the number : for if old laws be to be repealed , it is sufficient , if you say , these are against the word of God , no more obedience from you ; your sic volo sic jubeo is more than powerful , the wall of each city must to the ground at the voice of your rams-horns . And if new laws be to be made , it seems it is you that truch with the sceptre ; unless your wise heads find them agreeable to the word of God , all is void ipso facto : what language is this ? Is it not the dial•ct of rebellion ? the very {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the tactus physicus of all disorder , mutiny , and confusion ? Now let the world judge betwixt us , whether or not this your doctrine strikes home to the very life of government , and destroys it insensibly , as the worm that gourd of Ionas : every man , by this ipso facto of yours , is left with a supreme power to be King and priest to himself . 

Your third ground is of the same bullion , and carrieth your image , that is , of schism and democracy : you have vowed against all popery , and finding the particulars mentioned to be so , you will have no more communion with them . what if you should find the decalogue , and the Lord's prayer ( As you have already the creed ) to be popish , must not all the principles of our religion , for your pleasure , be drawn within the verge of a thundering abjuration ? nor is this fear in vain : your precisest gospelers already deny the law , as only suitable to the climate of the Jews , and some of your best rabbis make it a case of conscience not to say the Lord's prayer , that magicum canticum ( As they term it ) pontificorum ; if therefore this wantonness of yours be not restrained , i appeal to yourselves ( That is , to prejudice and faction itself ) if we shall have more certainty of religion left us , then what May subsist with the ebbing and flowing of your distempered and moon-changing brains . 

It is your next care to draw the parliament to your party ; but there is no communication betwixt light and darkness : nature hath taught all entities to intend their own preservation ; nor can that honourable court forget its being , and join with you : plant you at such a distance , whether your antipathy May reach , you shall no less exhaust the privileges and authority of that most honourable meeting , than the cabbage doth the sap and life , and vigour of the noble vine : can this be more evident than by the case in hand , where you take the supremacy upon you , and with intolerable pride and foolishness presumes to give us the infallible sense and meaning of the parliament : i know you had no such commission from their honours , as to be their trenchman , and to print a declaration for them . But let us examine your reasons . First , they intended the protestation against all papery . it is granted : but are you not like the door that turneth all day upon the hinges , and never changeth its place ? 

Have you yet proved these things to be popish ? nay , though you had , ( Which you shall never do , — rumpantur utilia codro . ) were the probabilities of your arguments , a warrant good enough for your reformation , without the approbation of your superiors ? you indeed never desire a better , whilst you do what seems good in your own eyes , acknowledging no King in Israel . but who gave you authority to cleanse the temple , unless you maintain that all power is from the persons , ( Your hands ) and that you May stop the wellspring , the fountain , when the fit takes you . Secondly , you remember us that the honourable house of Commons will not have the protestation extended to the maintenance of any form of worship , discipline , and government ; nor of any rites and ceremonies of the church of England , and therefore they condemn them as popish ? What a wild consequence is this ? if that pious judicatory did not find it convenient ( As it is not ) to assert the grounds of doctrine and discipline with the same oath ; did they therefore condemn all as Antichristianism ? that they did not is clear to any that will not shut his eyes : first , from the main distance they put betwixt popery and popish innovations , and the form of worship , discipline , government , and ceremonies of the church of England , interserted by such a period , as your ends shall never be able to draw together : secondly , from their laudable and religious practice , in being at all occasions present at the service of the church , wherein none but Familists ( Who do conform themselves to any public worship ) can imagine their integrity and nobleness , for all the world would prevaricate , if they had but thought ( Much less declared ) the liturgy , as you would have it , to be the mass-book . And for the government of the church by Archbishops and Bishops ( This is the heel you would most willingly bruise , because it bruiseth your head ) it is no less evident that the protestation doth not condemn that : first , from their actual sitting in the house , should these members integrate that body , if they were already adjudged as •imss of the Antichrist ? this were a too heterogeneous fancy : secondly , what needed the late dispute concerning the present discipline , if the sentence had been already past ? Thirdly , would so considerable men for honesty , wisdom and power , of that number , whose reasons militates for episcopacy have stood up in defence of a main branch of popery , and not have been ashamed ( If not punished ) for public maintaining the Antichrist , and contradicting their late vow and order ? These reasons , nill you will you , do convince you , that it was not the intention of the parliament ( As you to arm them against ecclesiastical persons and orders in every corner of the kingdom would bear the persons in hand ) to protest against ( Though it seemed not fitting to protest for ) the present discipline , government and ceremonies of the church ; if you had a forehead , you would be ashamed of this boldness , but your obduration hath no more sense , quam si dura silex , aut stet Marpesia cautes . 



These great patrons of church and state , shall no doubt punish this malapert sauciness of yours ; for their love to peace and truth cannot permit such a firebrand to belie their int•ntion , and abuse the credulous simplicity of the multitude : i am confident this reply of mine shall first visit you in the gatehouse . Did you , i beseech you , ever think it possible , that the roarings and out-cries of such braying schismatics as yourself , could have induced the honourable court of parliament to change upon a sudden the whole face of the church , as that of a scene , upon the daring and misgrounded information of your ignorant & malicious libels : the dross , the off-scourings of the multitude are yours ; these , and these only , you are able to induce by promises , or deceive by pretences : tell them , as you do , that they are the persons of God , set apart for the great work , and shall not this ambition blow up the unconstant vulgar ? Show them they May change their fortunes , and last share in the public government , you May draw them along with you to the slaughter , though there you leave them with your grandfather munsers benediction , si quidem populus vult decipi , decipiatur . but do you expect that the grave statesmen of the kingdom shall be pleased to venture upon this chaos , and let you shuffle the cards again , in hopes of a better set ? your parity brings along with it an anarchy , and that , all imaginable ruin and confusion ; I 'll tell you in your ear , you had better keep your pamphlets at home , and have restrained the late zealous stirs at Southwark and saint Margaret's , if you would not have had your passions detected ; these staring looks of yours so soon after the change , do foretell what madness you May come to at the height of the moon , and will ( No doubt ) persuade that supreme judicatory either to draw blood of you in time , or to provide manacles for binding up your furious attempts , lest you tear out your own bowels . Your third reasons leans to a thought , a supposition , and is a strain of your old lunacy ; that the honourable house of Commons did intend to exclude whatsoever should be found to be a branch of popery . But who should find it so ? themselves , or you ? Have they resigned that power which God , his majesty , and their ancient privileges have endued them with , into your hands ? must they and we be tied to what fancy your humour shall be pleased , to thrust upon their just commands , and our due obedience ? This were a dangerous implicit faith , and of as large bounds and great variety , as there is judgements and opinions in a kingdom : for shame ( If you be reasonoable creatures ) spare this nonsense ; and rather think that the protestation hath an edge to cut out your tongue , than to cut off what your unsettled imagination after a Fridays supper from the back of an oyster shall dictator-like happen to belch up . You tell us in the fourth place : that you are all in an erected hope of a reformation from this most noble parliament ; and so are we too ; yea , no less confident than yourselves , that all popish trash shall be made packing ; but May it please you to go along with that baggage , and attend the safe transportation of these fopperies , we shall be rid of two great evils ; at your return from Rome , you May take your rest by the way with your brethren at Amsterdame ; no peace for Israel how long the Jebusites are thorns in our sides ; and if the Papists and you ( I cannot tell how to name you , unless it be legions , you are so many ) the foxes , the boutefeux joined by the tails were once removed , we should have good hopes no more to see our cornfields in a fire . The reformation you expect , is a deformation ; your active zeal extends to the purifying of churches , yea , of churchyards ; as lately one of your society was buried in the fields , lest his sanctified body Might be polluted by consecrate , that is , superstitious ground : a strange separation that hold even amongst the dead : but when you have banished from us all that can speak as Christians , what shall be the event ? the sad ruins of a torn church and state , yea , of religion itself is at the stake : for the more weak and conscientious persons , who expect salvation in some church , will rather join with Rome , then have no church at all , like the fish , changing the hot water with the hotter fire ; others , who have made religion their handmaid , shall be bold to laugh at piety , and think it nothing but an invention of policy , to bridle the humours of the less daring , and to encompass the designs of the more active wits ; so the fruits of your reformation shall be like these of Gomorra , pleasing to the sight , but in effect either apostasy , or atheism . In your fifth ground i acknowledge your perfect idiom , the complete language of amsteldame ; their you tell me , that suppose the house of Commons had , not intended the removal of these things , but the protection rather of the same , yet private Christians must put to their bands , and reform themselves , and live no longer schoolboys and punies under the fernla of that discipline : now you speak to the point , and have but dallied hitherto . Bishops i see and parliaments are in the same respect to you , if once they cross your humour ; if this be not a trumpet of sedition , there is nothing so . Go on , and give not over till the commonwealth be fitted to your church ( As one of yours said , the hangings to the room ) let us have that prodigious monster , your parity , in both , without so much as distinction of head and feet , and then you May reform when , and what , and how you please . Can there be the least thought of loyalty and subjection beneath this , when such an oh yes is made for every man to take up arms , and to reform what first comes unto his hand ? nor is it a wonder to hear this from you ; e'er all be done you will speak with a higher tone , even that the propriety of all goods is your own : for it is your doctrine that we have fallen from all dominion and right to rhe creature by the mortal sin of Adam ; this , say you , was restored by Christ , who reserved the dominion to himself ( There your love to magistracy ) but gave the right to his children , the sons of the church , these whom the conventicle hath assured that they are marked with the white stone , you May therefore possidere terram , and who besides you do so , are but usurpers . Yet give me leave to wonder , if in a settled church and state some care be not taken to supresse this madness , whereby every man is invited to a freedom and liberty of doing what his humour suggesteth ; as if this Diana of yours inspired nothing else but frenzy and rebellion : you will by this your exorbitancy , make the Bishops enemies long after them , and while they are going out at doors , pull them backe by the gowns : in the time of their power , which of you durst vent such dangerous whimsies ; now you teach us , that by one blow we cannot land off the inconveniency of Bishops , and the inconveniency of no Bishops , and that the greatest danger in a mutation is that all daugers cannot be foreseen : if this popular reformation of yours take root for religion , learning and civility , we must content ourselves with profaneness , ignorance and barbarity , nay , all the evils that anarchy and confusion can produce must attend upon us . But the honourable house of Commons , against whom by this reason you have taken up the bucklers , will provide for that fire , that gangrene of yours , which hath already inflamed the bedstraw , and ceased almost upon the very heart of the kingdom . 

In your sixt answer you 'd dealt your strokes about you ; your first blow is at the liturgy ; this you observe to be popish in two respects . 

First , in regard of the whole frame and matter of it , as being translated out of the Romish Latin liturgy : but is it not the Romish liturgy translated ? That is , are there any thing in the mass book , which is not in the book of service ▪ if your answer be negative , i leave you to be hissed at ; but if affirmative , what advantage have you gotten by this envious calumny ? Do you think we May not use what is in the mass book consonant to scripture , and purest antiquity ? to say otherwise , were to deny the Lord's prayer and the decalogue , because they are there : indeed i think you intend no less than a perfect reformation from Rome , that is , a flat denial of all that ever Rome maintained , so much doth your new creed proport : God grant you do not deny Christ to be the son of God , because the devils confessed him to be so . Tell me in good earnest , are you so silly as to conceive that there have been heretics before yourselves , who durst adventure to have nothing common with preceding Christianity ? And why May there not be some few pearls in that dunghill , the mass-book ? If these be culled out , and according to scripture , and the best pattern of ancient liturgies , most judiciously framed for the service of our church , what can malice or ignorance say against it ? no greater error in you , and our other enemies of Rome , than not to distinguish betwixt the purging of an old church , and the building of a new ; they upbraid us , because they say it is so , you because you think it is not so ; all must be admitted from them , errors with truths , all rejected by you , truths with errors : they destroy the perfection of the scripture , you the being of the church ; you no less enemies to the authority of this , than they to the belief of that . But let both of you roar like the lioness bereaved of her whelps , and mix heaven and earth together by your lowings , Naaman shall be the same man to us before and after his washing , we will in despite of papists cleanse the leprosy , in spite of you retain the substance ; you mention the late parallel , in a mathematical sense , justly so called ; for as lines parallel cannot be in one point coincident : so neither the service book with that of the mass : he is an ungracious son of the church , who hath falsely invented these whoredoms , and they the unworthy offspring of such a mother , if they rest unrevenged . Mean time what a death it is to think of the sport and advantage our watchful enemies will be sure to make of our self-confession , that we have the same public worship which in them we do condemn as heresy , as idolatry ? what exporbrations , what triumph of theirs will hence ensue ? How shall we argue against them without bespattering our own faces in time to come ? all our help is that the treatise itself ( The parallel ) is so ridiculous a piece , that it will be thought the dreams of a sleeping person , and ( They say ) dormientes non tenentur de j•re , we are not answerable for the fact . You tell us , you omit to say , what you cannot , you dare not say , all your frivolous exceptions are so fully answered by the learned mason , judicious Hooker , and others , that it will be three ages yet ere you attain to so much judgement as to understand their discourses : why do you gull the world with these bravadoes , such general flashes , and when it comes to the close , to the dispute , — frustra comprensa manus affugit imag• , 
Par levibus ventis volucrique fimillima som•• . 




No word of you then : if we dare call the settled laws of church and state in question , we shall by the meanest of five thousand in England stop your black and ignorant mouths , and make you confess , there is nothing contained in that book which is not agreeable with scripture , suitable to antiquity , and allowable by the confessions and writings of the best reform churches and divines in Europe . and you Sir , who hath made all this din , how should a man find your out , either to convert you , or to be converted by you ? your name it seems was affrighted of the title-page ; but it May be you had none , and that this libel hath been penned by you , in the interi•• betwixt your renunciation of that name you had from the church of England , and your anabaptization . You add there is viciouss things ( animus meminisse horret ) that run thorough all the veins of the service book ; all the letters of the alphabet cannot furnish censures for this blasphemous Rabshakeh ; God rebuke thee Satan . Sufficiently discovered ? by whom ? in whose age ? Did your separatists ever produce any thing upon this subject , but lazy indigested fables , as far from learning as their authors from sense . King Arthurs story , a tale of Robin Hood , or the books of chivalry , were ever thought more profitable nonsense , more judicious stuff . 

your second general respect is , the imposition of the liturgy upon all men's consciences ; let the matter be never so landable , yet the manner , the imposition , is a wile of the Antichrist : here i entreat Geneva to answer you , whose church hath an imposed , a set form of liturgy , and whose worthiest men , Calvin and Beza , do stoutly maintain the church's power in prescribing ceremonies and orders for unity and peace sake : it were easy to have loaden the margin with quotations , if i had not abhorred the ostentive foolishness of your sect. who runs May read here that in terminis terminantibus you brand all superiority ecclesiastical , whether of King , church , or parliament ( For all these are included in this imposition ) with the mincing titles of popery and Antichristianism ; if this be the reformation you intend , that no law can please you , much good May it do you , and those that desire it : i am confident the church and state of England are not so weary of themselves as to become slaves to your fancy ; this perhaps May fit America , where there is no government at all , but how it May subsist with a being of a kingdom here , i understand it not . Popery ( You say ) is Antichristianism , hence every Papist must be the Antichrist ; nor stay you here , but bring the matter home from Italy to England , and tell us by a necessary consequence ; that not Bishops only , but all superiors do oppose and overthrow the kingly office of Christ , which is incommunicable to any creature and power in heaven or earth , bona verba quaeso . the scripture you bring 2 ioh. 22. is as far from the point as you from truth and judgement : speak out , dare you say it in open terms , though indeed you say as much , that the King and parliament , because of the liturgy imposed have denied Jesus to be Christ ? Tyburn for you if you do . You indeed seem rather stained with this blasphemy , who hath boldly and prophancly averred , that bowing at that sacred name is idolatry , and ( As you jeer with the bad thief on the cross ) jesu-worship . But let me from your own principles use one argument against you ; whosoever prescribeth to their persons a set form of prayer , do Lord it over the conscience , and are the very Antichrist , but your extemporary prayers in public are to your persons a set form of prayer , you therefore are the Antichrist . The major is your own , the subsumption is proved by this inevitable dilemma ; when you pray before your hearers , either it is as their mouth to God , or for yourselves only : if you say the last , you contradict the action itself , your expressions , and the cause of your meeting ; and if the first , must not the persons join with you in word , or at least , in thought ? and is not this to be stinced and tied to aforme of prayer how raw and senseless so ever ? By your sole lawgiver , you express your thoughts of authority ; you can hear of no general commission for ordering the house of God as place and time shall require ; but pardon me to believe the apostle better than you , who hath not in vain appointed this qualification , omnia fiant decenter & ordine ; if the Kings and states of Europe would be pleased from this your tenet to learn what a moth , a cancer-worm you are to all superiority and jurisdiction , you would be sent novos quaeritare orbs . And for this cause the Pope , say you , is proved to be the Antichrist , in that he fitteth in and over the temple of God , that is , as you please to paraphrase it , the consciences of men : it had been well you had spoken with application ; you are the only men i know , who must have all men's consciences squared by the supposition of your own . The will-worship you name is truly that you practise , that is , an affected contradictorious way in the service of God to scripture , to antiquity , to the church you live in , to discretion , yea to Christianity itself . If by a liturgy devised by men , you understand man's device , it is a gross calumny , a notorious untruth , not a syllable in that book , which is not either ( As the greater part ) the words of scripture itself , or clearly deducible in the very phrase from thence ; if your sense be , that it is imposed by human power , you are no less mistaken ; there is either a particular warrant from scripture , or at the least a general commission granted for the ordering of the house of God , which extends to the full latitude of the book , if you had either impartiality to conceive aright , or conscience to obey ; but it May be you mean that men have contrived the book of liturgy , so they have the apostles creed , which perhaps you for the same reason have rejected ; nor was ever the church of God since the first congregation of the Jews in a politic body , to your last and worst days , without a public form of service and worship . We bid you therefore with saint Augustines , erigere scal•• , and go up to heaven alone , but again , Dat• venia•• , nos non credimus , that all the churches of the Christian world have been over-laid with idolatry and Antichristianism , till this late one of yours . 

Having choked ( As you think ) the liturgy with this illpeeced discourse of yours concerning the Antichrist , your second onset is upon the ceremonies of the church ; these you say because of man's devising and imposed upon the conscience are also popery : you give no new reason , nor i any new answer , only this , there is no greater error committed by you sectaries , then that because the church of Rome hath thrust upon us some unnecessary , many superfluous ceremonies , you would have the reformation to have none at all , not considering that ceremonies as the hedge , do fence the substance of religion from the indignities that profaneness and irreligion oftentimes put upon it . Ceremonies though in the particular , that is , this or that , be not necessary , in the general they are ; how long we are men , and do inhabit these our dull bodies , we had much need of some visible helps to sti•re up our devotion , and to give a being , a continuity to public decency and order : it is true , the inward worship of the heart , is the great service of God , but the outward worship of God , is the great witness to this , whereby our light shineth to the world , that men May glorify our father which is in heaven ; now no outward worship without ceremonies , they , the ancienter ( Superfluity and superstition laid aside ) the better , so they fit time and place : for you , your are so spiritual , ( Though some think you no less carnal than your neighbours ) i am afraid your religion , May evapour in words , turn in the smoke of a thin airy profession , and as no substance of good works , so leave no visibility of worship behind it ; though now while the heat of a party keeps in the fire , you seem to have some zeal in your breasts , if you were settled on your dregs , and after this great motion returned to your cold blood , it is very possible you shall have no religion 〈◊〉 all . It were not hard to tell you here what happiness Christians do enjoy by the wholesome constitutions of a church or state ; what peace , what unity , what concord , what increase of ••ll p•ety and virtue from thence . And unity , if it be not nature itself , it is the first principle riveted by the hand of nature , no essence , no action without this sickness and rebellion , the two great confusions of the natural and politic body do evidence this truth , no subsistence , no continuation of other , but by a first cause , a prime agent , even your discipline must have unity and order in it , if it have life and motion ; and this the more general it is , the better : it 's true , the extension of good is not its touchstone , yet this doth not hinder it to be communicative , and that to the dimension of the body which is to be governed . But now the matter imposed is left in its own nature indifferent still , though not so in the practice , and why this very same restraint enlargeth then Christian liberty , for otherwise they would be in conscience obliged to abstain from every thing that the nice and peevish humorist should conceive to be offensive , now , being tied by a law , they May use their freedom , yea , must prefer a necessary duty to an imaginary scandal . But this were to digress , nor are you for such peaceable thoughts , for you love that order and not any besides it , that May be raked out of the ashes of monarchy , but your late injuries meeting with its discretion will teach a necessity of foresight , not to adventure huge bodies as you are , quia su• feruntur pondere , down steep hills , that is , to your own swing . But you could soon reply to me that not to abstain for every offence though in a case commanded by lawful authority , were soul-murder , and against the sixth commandment , and that the authority so commanding were Antichristian : which how it May agree with a legislative power in King or in parliament , and how comply with the presbyterial or parochial government more than with that of Bishops , i profess i do not understand , all superiority , all imposition , all public order and common decency is a popish and Antichristian usurpation of Christ's sceptre . 

Your third endeavour is against the discipline of the church in exercising the power of excommunication ; this you prove to be another branch of popery , because it is from the church of Rome : you May with the same pains argue Christ and his apostles to have been popish , who are the undoubted authors of that power , but you do well to deny all censures , having already denied all laws , superiors , and judges , least you Might happen be punished for this contumacy . you tell us of the homilies , and what do you think are meant by the third mark , the true discipline there ? it must be either this of ours , or that of yours : yours are not at all , that we have heard of , nor needs there discipline where there is neither law nor injunction ; if this of ours , the homilies stand up and witness against you : but your aim is to prove the church of England by the book of homilies to be no church at all ; i pray you , how were they homilies , but by the church ? this is to prove by a church that we have no church at all . A logic indeed that beseems your conventicles , where repugnantia in adiecto is attended by wilful malice and gross ignorance . Now , this clear denial of a church , how agreeth it with your advise of reformation ? motus supponit non facit subiectum , nor can we reform that church which as yet is not gathered together ; i know by your breath you are an actual separatist , who have some years ago condemned the whole body of this church to hell and perdition , though now to insinuate yourself the better you appear ( As your Master before you ) sometime as an angel of light . You add the not due administration of the sacraments ; did you never think that rightly done , till in Germany the holy supper ( With all reverence to that sacred mystery be it spoken ) was given by one of your number after some long wound orations from the back of an oyster board to his fellow sitting communicanter in brown bread and small bear : it was say you , the pride and delicacy of the Antichrist , that first used a wheat loaf and wine , nor will you have us in this ( Though in other things to the very communicating in an upper room , as you do , and after supper ) follow the example of Christ , he , you tell us ( horr•sco refer•us ) was content with the ordinary and native elements of the country , and so must we be too . But the church of England doth no less hate the absurd popish transubstantiation , than your foolish sacramentary bare representing signs : both sacrifical and sacramentary let them go packing for her , and so that other sacrament of baptism , though you have vainly nibbled about the sign of the cross , ( No less hateful and Idolatmus to you , then ridiculous and shameful to the pagans' of old ) yet when it comes to the push of an argument , you deserve nothing but Virgil's description of his evanishing apparitions : Ingenti trepidare metu : parstollere vocem 
Exiguam : incoeptus clamor frustratur hiantes . 




In spite of you and all wrangling opposites , the church of England , as the purity , so shall ever retain her decency as beseemeth so high actions in dispensing these sacred mysteries . The restraint and edicts you complain of were much indeed against your Catholic gift of preaching , but now i hope you have repaid that loss , when not a sowgelder among you who makes not hold with a tub for his pulpit , dii , fi qua est coelo pietas quae talia curet , persolvant grates dignas . 

The fourth plea is against the root of all bitterness , the very heart and lungs of the Antichrist , the government of Bishops , each casual mishap in them must be an error , so will your rabbis have to be , who deeming themselves less in employment then in merit , do heartily rail against that which they heartily desire , the rochet . This you say is not of divine , therefore it must be of diabolical institution , can you give a reason of this consequence ? yes , i will help your to it , and from your own grounds , all laws , impositions ; superiorities , ordinanc•ss from men , are in your opinion , ( And this is no weak one ) usurped , tyrannical , •ntichristianty , and against the prerogative of Christ , who is the sole 〈◊〉 to the commonwealth of Israel in his spiritual kingdom ; these are your wise religious thoughts , but what say you to your parishes , these were not instituted by Christ , here perhaps you will slip me and adhere to family , yea personal discipline , and withal bring your warrant for it , that Paul did send greeting to the church at the house of Priscilla and Aquila : neither can i reach you here , i know not what customs you use in your rebaptisation ; what say you of meeting together in private houses , and expounding a piece of scripture ? for this you will allege apostolical practice , and the same necessity , because of the persecution , and the same ( Otherwise the argument were naught ) infallibly too : what say you of the giving of the holy supper to women ? this sure you dare not deny , least the diaconists punish you , if i should remember you here of the baptising of infants , the distinction of apocryphical & canonical scripture the apostles creed , you would presently stifle me with the noise of tradition , the first and last of those you have taken an order with , and for the other , you desire no more testimony from or of scripture , than your own , that is , of your own spirit , you are so naked in your outward worship ( As the wrestlers of old ) it is impossible to lay hold upon you , and so grumbling against all church custom and laws ( For what is not commanded in scripture is to you contramandat , and shall so be to us too if you grant a general power , and rest not only upon particulars ) that i can find nothing material of public order and decency to lay to your charge . 

I must therefore go about to prove the government of Bishops to be of divine institution , or nothing , and here i will take the surest way , that is to show the divine institution of episcopacy from Christ himself , not from the precept and practices of the apostles , else you would s•ip out of my fingers and tell me , that if not by the blessed apostles themselves ( As one of yours said ) yet in their time this mystery of iniquity of Antichristianism , did begin to work . My assertion is therefore and with better ground than your denial of all authority , that the apostolical office itself , in its proper & reciprocal acts , was nothing else but the episcopal ( I see you startle & change your complexion ) as it is now a days exercised in the church of England : whether the ordination of that function was , ioh. 21. 15. or 20. 22. or as others more probable by these words , as my father sent me so send i you in the same place , and at the same time were Bishops ordained : these are the apostles successors in ass et ex solido in all things that ever was assentative to their office ; as to call the disciple and elders of the church ( Not theirs who come with sword• and pistols to maintain the truth ) together , act. 12. 2. 20. 17. v. or divine prosbytors . Act. 14. 25. to give direction for church censures 1 Corinth . 5. 5. to make laws and canons ecclesiastical . 1 cor. 11. 2. to require observation of the same 1 cor. 16. 1.  Now the gifts of immediate calling universal commission , infallibility , long••• , and miracles , were 〈◊〉 , in the apostles nor official , but personally only extraordinary , and for the employments of the time ▪ neither indeed can that be called apostolical , which is not proper to , and convertible with the apostles , but all these extraordinary inducements were in others besides them , and in the e•angelistss , in Philip the deacon , or in the disciple , though not all of them in every one of these  essential to that office in constituendo , but the acts of ordination and jurisdiction : these the apostles as apostles once had , and these by the same right of institution , transmitted by the succession of many ages to the present Bishops . 〈◊〉 you angry at this ( stant lumina flamma ) and it May be it May do your good , if you shall happen to empty your stomach of some loathsome humours at the view of this position , nor have you a possible way , for all your windings to get about it , unless you either maintain that the office of the apostles , in its very 〈◊〉 was extraordinary ( And then no office , 〈◊〉 an inducement , a gift ) and nothing useful for our times , which your schisms , as many of them , as you are of men , will not suffer us to believe ; or that each of you , and not the Bishops only are the 〈◊〉 of the apostles , and then would we gladly see you give imposition of hands ( As they did ) and pronounce the sentence of excommunication , without the consent or assistance of your lay-brethrens , and inspired-parishoners , but you divide the coat , seemlesse before , betwixt you . You have better right , i think , to the extraordinary gifts , as that of immediate calling , when you despise the orders of the church , & tell us the imposition of hands was the ceremony of a miracle if you can presume upon your abilities , and obtain the humings of a factious congregation , you have your calling , and are sent by God : that of universal commission , when the reformation of all kingdom•s is alike to you ; 〈◊〉 parishes must confine the single gifts of others , but a whole national church , not your double qualifications , that of infal•ibility , when you obtrude your sense of scripture ; the fathers are but dull tapers to your bright stars , they more of kin to the Antichrist than you ; if you think you have found a text for it they ( Good men ) must be heretics , no more disprite , you cannot err , that of miracles was never more believed by the popish ridiculous legends , than by you , Johannes de Vordg . feigned something that deserved the name of a wonder , but your rabbis , to the laughter of the hearers , content themselves with each common accident , ) this they will have to fall out by the strength of their prayers , either for the confusion of the reprobate , as they call them , or the furtherance of the good cause ; nor are they satisfied to give ( Which every Christian must and should ) the determination of all successes to almighty God . but they in a presumptuous holiness will be upon his sacred counsels , prey into his secrets , and boldly design a particular end for his divine providence in every thing . Only the gift of tongues , i cannot tell how to fix upon you , and withal not pollute you with ( Which God knows you are not guilty of the language  ) you see now i have not troubled 〈◊〉 conscience with Timothy and Titus ( And the•e shall be still Bishops to me ; while you prove the circular and monthly changes ) i have derived the original of episcopacy from the apostles office ; not their authority ; doubt not therefore if Bishops be  , unless you doubt if the apostles were so , or because of your love of parity you think them of that same order with the seaventy disciple , deny if you dare that the institution of our blessed saviour Jesus Christ were divine , and i give you the bucklers , as to neg antibus principia . thus have i flourished with you ; it were a shame to bestow a blow in earnest upon such a poor smatterer as yourself , i have ever thought it the best refutation of you and of your cause , to lay your foolish impertinences open to the eye of the world , than i am assured only these who love to have their brains suspected , would give you the least approbation . 

You find in the administration of the episcopacy office the perfect image of the papal beast from horn to hose ; but stay and take it home to yourself , who a•e the only beasts i know amongst men , if irrationality and passion , can argue want of judgement , and turbulence in affections , your plurality of marriages ( The old licence o• the German Anabaptists ) your love feasts , your night me•tingss can abundantly witness this ; your absurd simplici•y and ignorance in this and other your libels give testimony of that , it is not altogether a mistake of religion but aliquod naturae vitium , a hypocondriacy a fault in your brain , that causeth your ravings ( Hence i incline to think this humour of yours May be epidemical because of some 〈◊〉 ) & this to be as physio logists transformed ( As the life quoad act• secundum ) a man in a beast . But i have mistaken you , all this time you m•ane the papal beast the Antichristianism , i pray you if his definition can fit you , who sit in the house of God and opposeth•l ( Magistrates ) that are called gods ; only in this you differ , that God's house is mistaken for your own : nor shall we want an individuality , it is no less in the unity of your covenants and oaths of secrecy , than in the successive race of the Bishops of Rome . You are pleased to call the ministers a dumb priesthood , a mockery : what disgrace is this to the church , to these that have baptism from her , or do expect salvation in her ? You have indeed named them bald-pate• , with those ungracious children , but take your seat for it in the first psalm , and there stay for your punishment . Doctors with us and priests do pronounce the sentence of excommunication , and with no more indecency , we think , than if some reverend cobbler , or inspired button maker did the same ; give me leave to remember you here of the late schism of your congregation at rotterd 〈◊〉 ; they upon debate were divided in two bodies ; each of them was the supreme church of God upon earth , and each of them gave commission to an honest weaver to excommunicate the other ; this cannot but please you well ( Though your discipline cannot ) because there is neither reason , nor order in it . 

I think it strange , that you who deny all outward calling except that from the persons , should think the curates , none of the ministers of Christ in that they derive their ministry from the Antichristian hierarchy , if no orders be necessary , sure a mistake of orders cannot be much prejudicial . Hence let the world judge how both these mal•cious factions spend their fury upon the church of England ; the papists object that she hath for feited her ordination , you that she hath one , but the papists they tell us we are no church because we want a priesthoood , you , because we have one : they will here of none but a monarchical subjection , you do establish a democracy in the church or an anarchy rather ; they complain of perjury , because we refuse to maintain their orders ( As if who amongst them had sworn canonical obedience to a heretical Bishop , were obliged to be a heretic ) you of the want of purity , because we do not renounce all continuation and orders of the church . In spite of you both she shall still maintain a visible succession in the mi•istery from the very apostles times : May not the church of Rome though in her old age more faulty , give baptism , and May not this warrant the derivation of our orders from her first and better times ? but i crave you mercy Sir , this argument do•h not concern you , who not after the church of Rome only , but also in the church of England , do rebaptize . You frame here an objection to yourself concerning the antiquity of Arch-bishops , & dio•esan Bishops ( This you add to distinguish them from these of the late edition for parishes ) and how do you answer it ? First you tell us they were not known by the primitive fathers ; but this is as gross as to say the primitive fathers did not know themselves , whom we undoubtedly know by a moral belief to have been Bishops , as we do that the Saxons did here succeed the Britain's : scarce a leaf in the counsels , fathers , and church histories that doth not speak this for us . Secondly , you tell us that government was corrupt even from the wellhead , but since i have proved to you that this was Christ ( The apostles you will venture upon ) i hope you will mend your expression , and retire . 

Thirdly , you will have this government a• limb of papacy , and i dare boldly-say it , there is nothing more destructive of it , for to maintain that every Bishop is de jure divin• ( As you in the same place grant that the present Bishops of England do ) is 〈◊〉 only to deny all dependence from Rome but to give her her death's wound by lopping of the prerogative whereby she subsists ; for by virtue of this ,  come to her , dispensations from her , exemptions of 〈◊〉 and religious houses ( The main pillars ) which if the Bishops of Europe by man-seeming there office to be de jure divino , would challenge as an usurpation , her borrowed father's might ; perhaps return home to the first own ; 〈◊〉 . You say the Pope and the Bishops of England hold their authority by the  •amely from Christ , so i hope duth the meanest 〈◊〉 sweeper amongst you his calling to preach , to expound scri•pture , to give the sacraments , and yet will be oftended , if you think him or his argument popish , though the Pope of Rome do the very same here , like yourself , that is , a very compound of absurdity , and boldness , you mention doctor hall , and his learned pains : out upon thee for a fool , and a babbler ! The works of that reverend , p•infull , and judicious Bishop , shall be entertained by the posterity , with app•obation and thankfulness , when the better times shall •isse thee and thy associat• out of the church ; the quintessence of you all do come short to the meanest croatchet of his learning , judgement , integrity , & eloquence ; nor shall these your calumnies be aught else to him but stig•ata laudis , cicatrices to testify his conscience and resolution , who had the courage to set his face against you the Amalakites , when others turned the back . For 〈◊〉 ; his very citation refutes you ; you say he fails in that he cannot prove Rome's succession from Peter , and yet you have said , his assertion is that he proved saint gregoryes succession from Peter . but i forgive you , you knew not before now  it , that gregori• was Bishop of Rome . Now , what if i should teach you , that we in the church of England , perhaps have neither Christianity nor sacred orders from Rome , s•re the first we had not : for by the observation of Easter according to the tradition of the Eastern church ( To let the tale of Simon Zelotes , and Joseph of aramathe• pass ) it is most probable this kingdom had the blessing of the gospel from the disciple of John : if after the Saxon devastation we were restored by Rome , in some parts of the island , the Northerns at the same time ; were converted to the faith , by Bishop aydanus from Scotland ; as Beda mentions lib. 3. cap. 3.  But this discourse is not for you , who in the preceding page hath prophainly called the ministry itself a pe•ce of popery , whether from Rome or not is all one to you , such is your superlative hatred against all order . Give me leave here to slip out of the way , and meet with a friend of yours , the author of the petition for Bishops examined ; this man tells us our Arch-bishops , and Bishops were substituted to the places of the ar•hflaminss & flamens of the heathens , this is a now conceit , that Bishops are not from the new , but old Rome , not Antichristian but heathenish . Here for all the grace you brag of you May learn of nature , that not the least show of religion , except this mad one of yours , can subsist without 〈◊〉 cement , this harmony , the subordination in its office-betrers . But will he have the Bishops heathenish  joy the rooms designed for the residence of the flamens , and are we not all Papists , yea pagan's , because such did once inhabit this kingdom ? Now i smell out the reason why you persuade so vehemently the pulling down of churches , it is because of some inherent wickedness in the place . He says further that the first four or five hundred years there was Bishops in Scotland , but that ( As he cites joannes mayor ) communi monachorun regebantur concilio , but their histories are there for it , that amphibalus was Bishop in the isle of man an. 237. and for some 100 of years after the monks were not so much as reckoned among the clergy , much less had they dominion over them . 

In the close of this answer you are assured that the government is protested against . If such a worm as myself Might presume to speak of that honourable judicatory and the p•otestation made by it , i Might upon better grounds argue , that you and your sectaries , are within the reach of the same : my instance shall be in one point ( When i Might in a hundred ) that of magistracy , your doctrine concerning it , is pointblank against the doctrine of the church of England , the King's honour and estate , the power and privilege of parliaments , and that for to use your terms , deserveth to be cut off and cast out as a fruitless withered branch , and to be plucked up by the roots as a tree twice dead , and as a plant not of God's planting . 

Hitherto i Might have taken you up by some pains , but now you pass all understanding : fall you once upon the business of reformation , you rave perfectly , like these lunatics who will perhaps speak sense , do they encounter with the purpose that first chased them out of their wits , then straight they run out . Sir , by laughing at you , you have spared me the cost of physic for expelling melancholy . Your first assertion is that it will be impossible to constitute a national church agreeable in all points to the visible congregation of Christ : here you no less cross the consisteries than the Bishops ; and therefore it shall be convenient to leave you to their refutation . 

It is your brag , that there is many thousand saints , whose hearts are perfect before God , that is pleasing to you : and shall these empty pitchers , these factious lights , these trumpets of intent , multiplied to make a noise , affright the kingdom ? I dare say , that if from your party you deduce mad men and fools ( And none of these , are men envied ) with such as love for their own ends , to fish in your muddy waters , scar•e a number , yea scarce an unity shall remain ; though you try the sword of the Lord and of Geddon , as a friend of yours did in another kingdom , the church and state of England , will ever have prudence to detect your stratagems , and courage to award your blows . What you mean by defiling of garments i know not , but i know you have lately provided against that by your naked meetings . now you speak plain language in persuading a separation , and , forcing us to believe , we are in no better condition than those heathens to whom the apostles first peached the gospel ; for you tell us the sheep must be called forth , and gathered into Christ's folds , and that it is a strange speech be you separate . You therefore will begin ab ovo , and call together the holy ones , to make up your new household congregations : but how shall these be descended ? Only by the infallibility and presumed omniscience of your spirit , that of error , not that of truth ; you only know these few names , and here you tell us that sca•se a number shall be found to make up these holy meetings , what ? are all your thousands evanished , you boasted of in the last page ? oportuit mendacem esse memorem , but i take you at your last word , if there be so few ( as you profanely abuse that scripture ) marked with the white stone in his kingdom , pray you spare us the pains of separation , separate yourselves for some new colony in Virginia , and trouble not your pates about unpossibiliti•ss ; would to God you would leave us , or your madness you , and then both of us should be at rest . Now let the whole world judge if you be a fit man to usher in a reformation , and thus boldly to thrust your impious sense upon the protestation , ( Made by the most honourable parliament ) whose head is fraughted with such whimses , and who can hear of nothing but the gathering of a new church in this kingdom . And if we all had made a total apostasy from the faith ; we should descry you blasphemously as the apostles did when they came to plant churches in a country where the gospel had not been formerly preached ; not your ears , but your neck is in danger for this . 

but what answer you to the question , if they have not received baptism ? Or are they not Christians ? Here something sticks in your throat : you answer negatively , by an equipollent metaphor , that the lame and blind are not to be offered up in a sacri•ice to the Lord . Do you thus tempt the patience of the Prince and persons ? Is it nothing for you to object paganism to them at every word ? To call them profane , ignorant , unbaptised , unchristian persons ? This were intolerable to any free soul , and must induce all those who have the smallest affection to generosity and religion , to provide a way how such monsters as yourself May be suppressed . 

You go on , and tell us the godly May not communicate with the profane . quo Donate ruis ? are not all profane to you , that are good churchmen and obedient subjects ? And must all these fall within the verge of your excommunication ? May we expect , dum viatores sumus , your contemplative perfection , or that the wheat shall be here without the chaff ? And know you what iniquity some of your holy sisters Might have committed yesternight ? if you communicate with them , do you partake of their profanation ? It May be you have so before , nor is it a sin in you or her , but an oversight : i see there is a necessity laid upon us to search the hearts of men , to have their breasts made of crystal , to find out their very thoughts , else no fellowship , no communion . But if every known sin be every man's , where is Christ's burden ? What difference put you betwixt the head and the branch ? Others uncleanness can no more defile you , than your holiness excuse them : if you be for this separation , you must either fly out of the world , or your flight is in vain ; the best metal here hath its dross , the best grain its oftall , there is need indeed of a fan , and a furnace , but not that of yours , destructive , not purging . 

Nor stay you here , all are dogs and swine to you that will not be of your kennel , nor wallow in your puddle : so your founders the Pharises upbraided Christ , with the name of a wine bibber , and said he had a devil , because he haunted with sinners and publicans , while they themselves cleansed only the outside of the platter , beware of their woe . a little leaven leaven•th the whole lump , never better known then of late by you , what cozenage and hypocrisy have these years by-gone hide up in the mass from the eye of discipline : none must come to the Passeover except yourselves , who have not washen your hands in innocency , but your tongues in the gall of asps . you seem to speak of known evil doers ; if you mean such as are under the church's censures , you fight against your own shadow , none such are admitted to partake of our holy mysteries ; but if you understand , as you do , those of a contrary judgement to yourself ( For it is the first , and your fancy about that , not the second table , all this time you respect ) we pray for your health , and do protest against your madness . 

Now i have found you out — qualem primo qui s•rgere mense 
Aut videt aut vidisse putat per nubila iunam . 




And know how to take a direct aim : the reformation you aim at is shorter laced than either consistories or parishes , there is a necessity of setting up other congregations besides these ; here your intent is to have all reduced to families , old 〈◊〉 must be your doctor and pastor , his wife Tib your diaconess , his son die your ruling elder , and the serving man will your deacon : a pretty church indeed , and where none are to be admitted but such as are approved by the whole assembly ; he and his household , the supreme and only congregation upon earth ; not any beyond it in purity , above it in jurisdiction ; no more contest now for consistories , or parochial churches , you for the avoiding of profaneness have assigned us a lesser circle — ipse ratem conto subigit — all will be well and you be at the Stearn . Is this your model , your pattern of reformation ? It is so , ridiculous children will point at you and it in the streets ; if not for Christianity , yet for shame •ake abstain from such motions for the which the enemies dreaming you and the church of England to be concentrike , nam• us no more heretics , but mad men : nor are you less dangerous than they : the innocent sheep are no less terrified by the barking of the dogs within , then by the handling of the wolves without ; my very soul bleedeth to think what discouragements you give us at home , what ignominy , and scandal , and disgrace you are to us abroad . 

But you proceed and tell us , if there must be a national church , let not this exclude and bar out the free use of congregations . here you play the libertine : give you freedom and you care not what religion is at the next doors : this is the golden branch , let you once see this , though your mouths were as main and wide as these of cerberuss tumida ex ira tune corda recedunt . this is indeed the confusion your parity aims at , that every man May do what seemeth him good in his own eyes : now let any Christian judge , whether it is your love to purity , that persuaded your separation from the church , now your reformation of the church , or your desire of licence , when , if that be granted to you , you are willing to be daily spectators of the Antichristianism and their patron ( Such is all to you beside your sanctified conventicle ) of a national church , order as they call it : and how do you ? You have no use , no name for order at all : all be•de your humour , though prescribed by the state , must be order as they call it : this is your respect to parliaments , you are the only mouths , i know , of all power and jurisdiction . Nor must the consciences of God's persons in things indifferent for order and unities sake , be regulated by wholesome laws ; when every man's conscience must be tied to yours in the very principles of religion ; how far they decline from this , so far from purity , from salvation : without this no admission to your society , to your communion , nor ( As you will have it ) to the kingdom of heaven . It is said of Aristotle , he disputed against monarchy , least any beside his Master should affect that , just so you against government , when you are the hardest tax-masters , the most curious searchers of opinions in the world , nothing can pass your censures ( And that is either to be saved or damned ) which is not borrowed from yourselves . 

You will have us to believe , that though you are in , yet you are not of the world , you , good men , are separated from the world in the corruptions thereof ; whether is this that you cannot sin , or that you do not sin , whether boast you here of your opinion , or your practice ? If the first , take it with you , and that of the apostles , when you say you have not sin you are liars , and the truth is not in you : but if the last , i will tell you , you are now too gross not to be discerned , all your fig-tree leaves , of purity and reformation , will not cover your nakedness , violence , rebellion , deceit , cruelty , dissimulation , wrath , incharity , in a word all the titles that attend you in the first page , are your individual lackeys , and do your best , will acknowledge no other Master ; i have known men of honest civil dispositions , ere they joined to your sect , but then , as if Satan had entered with the sop , immediately became proud , testy , hollow-hearted , and whose charity dared nor so much as extend itself to the respects of nature or acquaintance : these in the children of disobedience Might be accounted sins , what they are in you i know not ; it May be , as by the access of truth and light , your natures are essentialy changed , so the qualities and viciousness of your actions . But i have mistaken you all this time , it is a separation from the world in doctrine , not in practice ; you intend you are as far from this , as you are from Rome . 

Mean time you bear us in hand you are not separate ( And woes me for it ) from the civil state , but are peac•able members thereof , subject and obedient to all good , and just laws , how long they May happen to fit your i•ching humours ; go beyond this train , the laws will be neither good nor just ; you must have the power to interpret them , as you have the protestation , and thereafter obey not them , but your fancy concerning them . Here you bring in your fulminatrix leg•o , as if all we were pagans' about you , what your prayers have procured to us , let these last thundering days witness ; the almost ruins of a poor church by your schisms , will testify it to the succeeding ages . 

The apostle indeed exhorts us to pray for Kings , your hearers know how you obey this exhortation , when by your prayers you teach them how to suspect their Princes of lukewarmeness and oppression ; in your wavering petitions to God for their reformation , their amendment , as Joab did to Amasa , you stab their authority , their reputation , beneath the fifth rib.  But if it were not proprium convertibile with your sect , to make bold with scripture , i could fit you better with texts , and tell you of a Miriam , who said , hath the Lord spoken only by Moses , and not by us also ? and of a core of whom you learned your dialect , you take too much upon you , seeing all the congregation of the Lord are holy , wherefore lift you yourselves above the congregation of the Lord ? but you are worse than both these ; no speech by Moses , as by yourselves ; not all the congregation of the Lord , but only you are holy . I will therefore assign you a third , that comes more home to the point , to your tents oh Israel , what inheritance have we in the son of Jesse ? validior est oris quàm operis vox . let the condition of the times , your defections , your stirs , speak for me the truth of the matter : if the parliament should give ear to your desires , royalty Might seek a patron amongst the nominalists ; you would soon find that burdensome that is not profitable , and at the last answer the charges of the crown with a quorsum proditio haec ? you make too bold with Domitian's example ; blessed be God for it , we have none such ; no edicts come out for persecution ; but it is customary with you to compare King and persons to tyrants and heathens . You tell us here of protection and toleration from civil states , what if you shall imagine , as now you do , that this reciprocal duty is not sufficiently afforded you ? why then have you not only jus determinationis , but vindictae , you May judge betwixt you and your Prince , and thereafter your rebellion is but a holy war ; for the maintenance of religion you May do any thing . This is a summary excommunication of yours ; and the martyrs of the primitive times were but dunces , that could not fall upon it : Kings have no more certainty of your obedience , then of your humours , your mutations , at the first change of the weathercock ( And you are no less moving ) or information sent you from Amsterdam of a design against the religion , omnia susque deque miscentur , all is turned topsy-turvy . Do not therefore offer us sugar for your pill : we are not so purblind , but we do perceive the nail in the one hand , while you carry milk in the other hand . 

Now when you have drained us of all discipline and unity , how proceed you against the fomentation of envy , and faction in the state ? you give a bill of divorce to all ecclesiastical , and a seeming power to civil laws : these say you , May take order with transgressors , but with the proviso of incorrigibility : and can there be any such in your exempted congregations ? this is either against your doctrine of admission or perseverance . But let no man blame you before they try you : do you deal so with others ? no , that were a suspicion of charity , or a remission of zeal in you : quod tibi non vis fieri &c. is a precept too practical for your contemplative faith , what accusations from you of apostasy , of treason , of heresy , upon suspicions , probabilities , and consequents ? Hear you of preparation for war ? It is to bring in popery . Of the a ornation of a chapel ? it is superstition . Ask you how you know this , you reply , the thoughts and intentions of the men are not upright , and is not this without trial to judge the mind ? Whether is this a trick of the Antichrist or not , an usurpation of God's prerogative ? but you have made too bold with infallibility to forge this privilege , without this fuel your calumnies ( The very life of your sect ) Might be soon starved in cold blood . Nay how blame you a whole church and nation ? is there a corner in all this 〈◊〉 of yours which is not stuffed with accusations of a total apostasy and profanation against her ? Her doctrine is idolatry , her discipline Antichristianism , her religion at every turn , compared with heathenism : b•t the eye that mocketh his father and despiseth the government of his mother , the ravens of the river shall pull it out , and the young eagles eat it . 

That old stratagem of Satan , you have executed handsomely this year against the Bishops , and with as great moderation as he whom you name did , Nero : they poor men , are by you made the gate to disburden the persons of their sins ; and will that slaughter on too if you can accomplish your ends , but it is their , and our comfort , that he who hath let you loose can cast a hook in your nose , and chain you again , the devil cannot so much as enter a heard of swine without permission from almighty God , you tell us the gospel , that novum evangelium of yours , will kindle coals and stir up debate , and for all this the civil power May not cast you out , nor can without much fasting and prayer , you then ( It seems ) and religion are convertible terms , but see how you deal with us here ; shall we seem profane to you , you must separate from us , shall you be troublesome and contentious to us , we not from you ? This is your legerdemain , your Hocus pocus whereby you delude the persons by this you intend to blindfold the state , and toss the whole kingdom ( With reverence be it spoken ) like to an old bear tied to a stake . Kings you will have none , unless they be made by yourselves , as he at Leyden : a one May give you , the sons of the church , that which is yours , the fat of the earth for others , they are children of Belial , all both Prince and persons have forfeited their right , their dominion in the creature , and never as yet restored , because not of the reformation , only you whom the •onventicle hath assured to be of the faithful , have the liberty of the gospel . you May therefore freely , and with a safe conscience reject your King , and deceive your neighbour , and think it no more sin , than when the Israelites revolted from Pharaoh , and borrowed the eate-rings of the Egyptians ; your bondage hath been the same , and your warrant as particular , if we May believe you ; nor do the coals you talk of burn no higher ; you are as peremptory in granting rooms in heaven , as you are in giving peace on earth , to them you are pleased to call heretics ; and yet not the less for all this , the state must nourish you in her bosom , though your •rrand be then to suck out her heart blood . 

For your next doubt , that your perfection will be envied , it is of your own making ; there is none who knows your conversations , can justly charge you with popery , that you intend for heaven by good works : but if you had not added purity ( Which with you is only speculative ) to your perfection , i Might have suspected you of the three vows , which falsely March under that name ; though your many wives , and large usury May serve to purge you from that of chastity and poverty ; and for that of obedience you May very well take it in the negative . You call your way of devotion Christ's sweetness ; spare , i entreat you such appropriations ; your works must not ever pass as the works of God : lest as you else where make him the author of sin , so you May thrust ( With all reverence be it spoken ) violence or dissimulation upon him ; and is not this to lay a ground work for atheism , when you preach and practise contradictions ? and yet will have your credulous hearers ( Who have pulled out their eyes for you ) conceive , that all you speak is from above ? 

Now fall you down again upon the parishes , and maintain a necessity to separate your exempted congregations from them ; no minister , you say , will be so unchristian as to envye this : pereunt civili vulnere fratres ; each of you hath his sword in his brother's side . When will you agree among yourselves ? it seems you are erecting the Babel ; you so much talk of ; if the confusion of tongues , hearts , and opinions be suitable to the work ; one calls for an elder , another brings a widow ; one will have a parish , another a family ; one for the separation another against it ; this man that the doctor is an office-bearer , this that he is not , he for a diaconisse , he against her : one says the doctors May excommunicate , another contradicts that ; he gives the right of prophesying to the inspired-lay-elder , he denies it ; another denies all church superiority and jurisdiction ; he maintains it in a presbytery , this man in a parish ; — non si linguae centum , oraeque centum — ferrea vox , and yet all of these ( mirum dictu ! ) leaning to the like immediate , the like infallible revelation ; neither learning , church , nor fathers , must assist to find out the genuine sense of scripture concerning any of these . The poets tell us that the mistaken history of Babylon , was {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , this in a twofold meaning , May be so . Settle the business among yourselves , and say ( You who maintain the discipline and government of the church to be so clearly and particularly set down in God's word ) hitherto shall our proud wits ( That casteth up dirt and mire continually ) come . Then it is possible we May join with you , and that safely too , because you are no more yourselves , if you once but listen to unity and concord ; but this were dangerous ; agreement amongst yourselves Might at the last end in the monarchical government of the church of Rome ; your purity , and peace are compositio incompossibilium ; and that is even what you are in your most formal essence , a very notion of the brain , Christ told us in his apology for himself , that the old serpent would not have regnum in se divisum , his poison is yours , not his policy , you are not so far learned yet . In the close of this answer you tell us , that your independent congregations will not plead for tithes : now you take the title of independence upon you , from church and state ; such is the liberty of your family meetings ; nor will you meddle with tithes , this were ( God save us ) to judaise . It is your custom to ingratiate the persons to you by preaching sacrilege , rebellion , and usury ; King , priest and persons are too cheap sold for your 5. s. freewill-offering . Nor shall you thus avoid the reward of Balaam ; your purchase it May be is as good as the set rent of others ; to live by the chimney corner is sometimes as profitable as to live by the altar : twenty or thirty pounds of collection is a mean reward for some of your household lectures , even for one exhortation , if some godly families about midnight be pleased to join themselves together . That piece of scripture is practically yours indeed , godliness is great gain ; nor must the good women ( The conceit of whose devotion is measured by their reward ) want their oblation , though they should borrow it from the pockets of their sleeping husbands , or send their clothes to Long-lane to fetch it : not many wise , you can tell us , these are likely to detect your knaveries , but as rich as May be , they will drop the more oil for your zeal , and you out of your Christian pity will adventure to disburden them of part of their goods that they May have the more easy passage through the needle's eye . your small tithes you gather them ipsa corpora at your chamber conferences and long feasts , which you repay with as long graces , praying to the extent of your belly , where not a morsel May pass your censure if your hand be not in the dish ; fastings , unless it be with the manichaes upon the Lord's day , fall not out in your callendar till the 32 day of the month . 

The parliament you tell us is about a reformation ; a glorious work indeed ! God prosper them , and send it us , to the rooting out of you and all who have wrought our unquiet and troubled the peace of Israel : these convulsions and renting pains , which in a part , you to the horror of every Christian soul do stir up , admonish us what humours , what obstructions are yet to be purged : but under favour you must not prescribe the medicine , such a measure of acrimony should then be administered , that not the diseases only but the vital spirits Might readily be exhausted : you are a part of our consumption , and in such a case strength not weakness is to be studied , whereby the kingdom May work out the malignity of the sickness . But what reformation do you conceive ? when shall you make a stand ? must every year produce you a new religion ? every month a new faith ? nor shall the rabbis of the next moon , be content with what you do , a new inspired-eldership upon a new pretended revelation will perhaps demolish this platform : you have indeed reached home to the first , the patriarchal , each of them were priests to themselves , so you ; thus is was before the law , before ceremonies were in custom and therefore is the only means for you , who are without all law , to reclaim the church your household from ceremonies . 

You persuade yourself , the parliament will remove that government you name hierarchical , and we hope it will not ; you indeed labour what you can to throw sparks in the flax to put the kingdom in a flame , that you May see to find out popery , or rather the treasure and revenues of the church , hide up in the time of darkness ; hence your zeal is active , yea so hot , that it is strange that it melt not the plate , the bells , the very lead of the church into coin . But those of that honourable that religious judicature are lately taught by your madness , that essentially to change the present state of things , were no less present death to the state , then to open a vein and disable nature in the height the rage of a fever , if in the time of your seeming interdict , you have been so excessive , how should we find superlatives to express your carriage , if the church government were totally removed ? sure no more difference , propriety , nor distinction of person , things , and conditions , should be left amongst us then if that dream , that idea of Plato's were made real , did you imagine these noble and conscientious pilots of this great body would resign their present tranquillity , for the fancies of you , distempered humorists ? nay though they should ( Animpossible supposition ) God himself would preserve some order amongst us , lest the harmony of nature should be dissolved by you , and all reduced to the mother , chaos . Go therefore with this your conceit to New-england , there convert the Americans from popery ( Every thing beside your own opinion is so to you ) we hope never to see this confusion of government , this parity of beings , this annihilation of laws and magistracy , you bring along with you , received with any thing but laughter and derision in this kingdom . It is true you have some reason & no more to brag of your connivance hitherto ; not is it wonderful ( That is without a known cause ) though you would bear the world in hand , that as your knowledge , so your helps are immediately from heaven : it will be possible to tell you , what angeli •otores , what great agents have turned the sphere , and racked their heads , if not their consciences ( These i know they have , i doubt if those ) to advance your ends , for their own ; i speak no mysteries now , blindness itself hath gotten eyes to see it . But the never sufficiently admired parliament by the hand of wisdom and providence will a midst all these distractions pull off your mask , and having made you visible to the world , either reduce you to a nonentity , or restrain you within the limits of your proper vocations , no more to intermeddle yourselves with church and state . Do not you too much rejoice over the ( Perhaps deserved ) afflictions of others : if judgement begin at the house of God , what do you expect ? the brim of the cup May purge , May refine them ; the dregs , plague and confound you ; and such fierce scourges as yourselves , after their just chastisement , May be ( If your proper element can punish you ) thrown into the fire . 

that a national church hath no pattern , no direction in scripture , is false and scandalous ; and because no less repugnant to the position of consistories , then of Bishops , i leave you to their just censures : if you loved peace half so well , as you pretend to love truth , this expression had never dropped from your pen : that olive branch , i am afraid , shall not be brought home to us , while it please God by a mighty wind to abate and dry up your waters . 

you would gladly purge the universities and schools ; non amonimium diligentes : this vomitive of yours May be the evacuation of their learning and livelihoods ; i pray God the houses themselves May obtain favour at your religious hands , whose piety extends to the very extirpation of your own enemy knowledge , and a single life ; that argues your simplicity , this your wantonness : nor shall you want pretext ; this is monastical , that vain philosophy ; either paganism , or that which is worse , popery . But since already , the name of a scholar is no less odious to you , then that of an academic to Paul the second , and that to know but the titles of schoolmen , and in what language the fathers have written , is for that to be suspected of heresy , for this of superstition . — •ro miserere laborum 
Tantorum , miserere avimi non digna ferentis . 




For generosities sake , envade not your enemy under the cloud , but leave us the title page of two universities , that the after ages May know , we had once religion and civility amongst us . 

You come at the last to a strange position , it is indifferent to you what ever liturgy or ceremonies or discipline are left to accompany this national government : is this you that told us all these are popish ? it is true you did , but it is the imposition you only complain of , let you enjoy your Christian liberty at home in your parlours , and let mahomatism reign in our cathedrals for you ; now let your blinded followers themselves judge whether it be prejudice or reason , your malice or its misdeserving hath so inflamed you against the present church government ; give freedom to you , you crave no more ; it is therefore not the crimes of the episcopal office , but because it curbs your passions , your vagaries , that hath stirred your humours against it . if the judicious reader shall take the measure of your whole body by this your foot , he shall find that it is nor your purity but your peevishness is in the issue betwixt us : our camels shall be but gnats to you , if a way May be found to dispense with your obedience , and make you something betwixt a King and a subject ; by this outward pulse a man May find the inward motions of your heart , how unequal these are and how this aguish and preternatural heat of yours forespeaks a sweat from my heart ; i wish not that of blood . 

You add , that a dangerous error stiffly maintained , is liable to excommunication : i am glad you grant a possibility of error ; now there is some hopes you May be instructed since your presumed infallibility permitts you to think , you can think amiss , the acknowledgement of a sickness is the first step to health , but how your excommunication from other churches and your exempted independent congregations can be soadered together , i profess i understand it not ; to me they seem as contradictorious , as independent , & not independent : your heresy divides itself in so many cross ways that it must sometimes thwart , and the more , that your extemporary conclusion , know neither premises nor deliberation . 

In your last words you seem to cast a smile upon the civil power , and give a hail to your Master , by granting that in a reflexive way it May punish the oversights of the s•aternity ; but if hypotheca impossibilis aequipollet simpliciter neganti , this is no grant at all , so you speak of such crimes as cannot possible fall upon any of that sanctification , such as the root of apostasy , and the errors derived from hence ; nay if they did , such falterers were no more of your society , because you are obliged in conscience to separate from them : so it is then that the magistrate hath not only no power in Ecclesias•icis ( This is to you directly Antichristianism ) but in civilibus , neither to censure any member of your exempted and independent congregation : this is the Gideon's fleece that must never be of the common dependence and condition of the rest of the kingdom . See now what necessity his sacred majesty hath ( Unless he would sell all his possession ) to buy your pearls to curb this feaster of yours ; do not flatter yourselves , his authority and yours cannot breathe under one climate your pretended freedom is wholly incompatible with his due obedience , ( Witness these sad eclipses , these late storms , these clouds that yet threaten a tempest ) either that , or this , withal loyalty i speak , it is not of God ; nor deal you more favourably with parliaments ; how much you regard the power , the integrity of that most honourable court this your discourse can best give evidence ; if you once carried the business , you have professed it , that no law no statute shall oblige you further than you find convenient to your exempted congregation . And how have you suited your respects to the better times ? that light of redress hath only served to make your jet the blacker : what horrid monsters , quot Africa non caperet , hath a too favourable beam of toleration , raised out of the mud and clay of your ignorant presumption and drossy wits ? how is the pleasant land become a wilderness . Infelix lolium & steriles dominantur avenae ; 
Pro molli violâ , pro purpureo narcisso 
Carduus , & spinis surgit paliurus acutis . 




And why do such bats and owls as you screech about our churches ? enter , you May not for pollution ) as if the ruins and desolations of Babel had already seized upon us ? the spirits of all good men do already groan under your spiritual democracy , and do suffer a forehand , when their tenderness represents to them the rubbish ( Unless your violence be prevented ) of a demolished church and state ; it is true you are of flint , and the politicians of the times who do use you as their stalking-horse from whence to shoot their prey , abundantly furnish tinder , but our prudent King and most careful parliament shall quench your ignis fatu•s & not suffer you to consume us all to ashes : you have been spared hitherto either to try the length of your arm how far these your designs would reach , or that the kingdom had not yet collected itself out of that amazement , which by your sudden irruption as that of many rivers , you had caused : but it is now high time to throw full buckets of water upon your fiery heads , to take the matches from you , and either to send you hence , or prescribe you bounds ; lest that the combustible body about you ( All are now of gunpowder ) take hold of your sparks , and burn up all to the extermination first of order , than of religion , and last of humanity itself . These are the prayers , and these the fears of all them that with more real sighs and groans , than you , to the hazard of your buttons employ in charming of your hearers , love the prosperity , and long after the peace of Jerusalem . 

Finis . 





























































































































































