THE DEVOUT SOUL , OR , Rules of heavenly DEVOTION . 

ALSO , THE FREE PRISONER , OR , The Comfort of RESTRAINT . 

By Jos. H. B. N.  

London , Printed by W. H. and are to be sold by George Latham , Junior , at the Bishops-head in St. Paul's Churchyard . 

M. DC . L.  

TO All Christian Readers , Grace and Peace , 

That in a time when we hear no noise but of Drums and Trumpets , and talk of nothing but arms , and sieges , & battles , I should write of Devotion , may seem to some of you strange & unseasonable ; to me , contrarily , it seems most fit and opportune ; For when can it be more proper to direct our address to the throne of grace , than when we are in the very jaws of Death ? or when should we go to seek the face of our God , rather , than in the needful time of trouble ? 

Blessed be my God , who in the midst of these woeful tumults , hath vouchsafed to give me these calm , & holy thoughts ; which I justly suppose , he meant not to suggest , that they should be smothered in the breast wherein they were conceived , but with a purpose to have the benefit communicated unto many . Who is there that needs not vehement excitations , and helps to Devotion ? and when more than now ? In a tempest the Mariners themselves do not only cry everyman to his God , but awaken Jonah , that is fast asleep under the hatches , and chide him to his prayers . Surely , had we not been failing in our devotions , we could not have been thus universally miserable ; That duty , the neglect whereof is guilty of our calamity , must in the effectual performance of it , be the means of our recovery . Be but devout , and we cannot miscarry under judgements ; We is me , the tears of penitence , were more fit to quench the public flame , than blood . How soon would it clear up above head , if we were but holily affected within ? could we send our zealous Ambassadors up to heaven , we could not fail of an happy peace . I direct the way ; God bring us to the end ; For my own particular practice ; God is witness to my soul , that ( as one , the sense of whose private affliction is swallowed up of the public ) I cease not daily to ●ly the Father of mercies with my fervent prayers , that he would , at last , be pleased , after so many streams of blood , to pass an Act of Pacification in heaven : And what good heart can do otherwise ? brethren , all ye that love God , and his Church , and his Truth , and his Anointed , and your Country , & yourselves , and yours , join your forces with mine , and let us by an holy violence make way to the gates of Heaven with our petition , for mercy and peace ; and not suffer ourselves to be beaten off from the threshold of Grace , till we be answered with a condescent . He , whose goodness is wont to prevent our desires , will not give denials to our importunities . 

Pray , and farewell . NORWICH . March 20. 1643.  

THE DEVOUT SOUL . 

SECT . I  

Devotion is the life of Religion , the very soul of Piety , the highest employment of grace ; and no other than the prepossession of heaven by the Saints of God here upon earth ; every improvement whereof is of more advantage and value to the Christian soul , than all the profit & contentments which this world can afford it . 

There is a kind of Art of Devotion ( if we can attain unto it ) whereby the practice thereof may be much advanced : We have known indeed some holy souls , which out of the general precepts of piety , and their own happy experiments of God's mercy , have , through the grace of God , grown to a great measure of perfection this way ; which yet might have been much expedited , and completed , by those helps , which the greater illumination and experience of others might have afforded them : Like as we see it in other faculties ; there are those , who out of a natural dexterity , and their own frequent practice , have got into a safe posture of defence , and have handled their weapon with commendable skill , whom yet the Fence-school might have raised to an higher pitch of cunning : As nature is perfited , so grace is not a little furthered by Art ; since it pleaseth the wisdom of God , to work ordinarily upon the soul , not by the immediate power of miracle , but in such methods , and by such means , as may most conduce to his blessed ends . It is true , that all our good motions come from the Spirit of God ; neither is it less true , that all the good counsels of others proceed from the same Spirit ; & that good Spirit cannot be cross to itself ; he therefore that infuses good thoughts into us , suggests also such directions , as may render us apt both to receive and improve them : If God be bounteous , we may not be idle , and neglective of our spiritual aids . 

SECT . II  

IF you tell me ( by way of instance in a particular act of Devotion ) that there is a gift of prayer , and that the Spirit of God is not tied to rules ; I yield both these ; but withal , I must say there are also helps of prayer , and that we must not expect immediate inspirations : I find the world much mistaken in both ; They think that man hath the gift of prayer , that can utter the thoughts of his heart roundly unto God , that can express himself smoothly in the phrase of the holy Ghost , and press God with most proper words , & passionate vehemence : And surely this is a commendable faculty whersoever it is : but this is not the gift of prayer ; you may call it , if you will , the gift of Elocution . Do we say that man hath the gift of pleading , that can talk eloquently at the Bar , that can in good terms loud and earnestly importune the Judge for his Client ; and not rather he that brings the strongest reason , and quotes his books , and precedents with most truth , and clearest evidence , so as may convince the Jury , and persuade the Judge ? Do we say he hath the gift of Preaching , that can deliver himself in a flowing manner of speech , to his hearers , that can cite Scriptures , or Fathers , that can please his auditory with the flowers of Rhetoric ; or rather , he , that can divide the Word aright , interpret it sound , apply it judiciously , put it home to the Conscience , speaking in the evidence of the Spirit , powerfully convincing the gainsayers , comforting the dejected , and drawing every soul nearer to heaven ? The like must we say for prayer ; the gift whereof he may be truly said to have , not that hath the most rennible tongue , ( for prayer is not so much a matter of the lips , as of the heart ) but he , that hath the most illuminated apprehension of the God to whom he speaks , the deepest sense of his own wants , the most eager longings after grace , the ferventest desires of supplies from heaven ; and in a word , whose heart sends up the strongest groans and cries to the Father of mercies . 

Neither may we look for Enthusiasms , & immediate inspirations ; putting ourselves upon God's Spirit , in the solemn exercises of our invocation , without heed , or meditation ; the dangerous inconvenience whereof hath been too often found in the rash , and unwarrantable expressions that have fallen from the mouths of unwary suppliants ; but we must address ourselves with due preparation , to that holy work ; we must digest our suits ; & fore-order our supplications to the Almighty ; so that there may be excellent and necessary use of meet rules of our Devotion . 

He , whose Spirit helps us to pray , and whose lips taughts us how to pray , is an all-sufficient example for us : all the skill of men , and Angels , cannot afford a more exquisite model of supplicatory Devotion , than that blessed Saviour of ours gave us in the mount ; led in by a divine , and heart-raising preface , carried out with a a strong and heavenly enforcement ; wherein an awful compellation makes way for petition ; and petition makes way for thanksgiving ; the petitions marshaled in a most exact order , for spiritual blessings , which have an immediate concernment of God , in the first place ; then for temporal favours , which concern ourselves , in the second ; so punctual a method had notbeen observed by him that heareth prayers , if it had been all one to him , to have had our Devotions confused , and tumultuary . 

SECT . III  

There is commonly much mistaking of Devotion , as if it were nothing but an act of vocal prayer , expiring with that holy breath , and revived with the next task of our invocation ; which is usually measured of many , by frequency , length , smoothness of expression , loudness , vehemence ; Whereas , indeed it is rather an habitual disposition of an holy soul , sweetly conversing with God , in all the forms of an heavenly ( yet awful ) familiarity ; and a constant entertainment of ourselves here below with the God of spirits , in our sanctified thoughts , and affections ; One of the noble exercises whereof , is our access to the throne of grace in our prayers ; whereto may be added , the ordering of our holy attendance upon the blessed word & sacraments of the Almighty : Nothing hinders therefore , but that a stammering suppliant may reach to a more eminent devotion , than he that can deliver himself in the most fluent and pathetical forms of Elocution ; and that our silence may be more devout than our noise . We shall not need to send you to the Cells or Cloisters for this skill ; although it will hardly be believed , how far some of their Contemplative men have gone in the Theory hereof ; Perhaps , like as Chemists give rules for the attaining of that Elixir , which they never found ; for sure they must needs fail of that perfection they pretend ; who err commonly in the object of it , always in the ground of it , which is faith ; stripped , by their opinion , of the comfortablest use of it , certainty of application . 

SECT . iv.  

AS there may be many resemblances betwixt Light and Devotion , so this one especially ; that as there is a light universally diffused through the air , and there is a particular recollection of light into the body of the Sun and Stars ; so it is in Devotion ; There is a general kind of Devotion that goes through the renewed heart and life of a Christian , which we may term Habitual , and Virtual ; and there is a special , and fixed exercise of Devotion , which we name Actual . 

The soul that is rightly affected to God , is never void of an holy Devotion ; where ever it is , what ever it doth , it is still lifted up to God , and fastened upon him , and converses with him ; ever serving the Lord in fear , and rejoicing in him with trembling . 

For the effectual performance whereof , it is requisite first , that the heart be settled in a right apprehension of our God ; without which , our Devotion is not thankless only , but sinful : With much labour therefore , & agitation of a mind illuminated from above , we must find ourselves wrought to an high , awful , adorative , and constant conceit of that incomprehensible Majesty , in whom we live , and move , and are ; One God , in three most glorious persons , infinite in wisdom , in power , in justice , in mercy , in providence , in all that he is , in all that he hath , in all that he doth ; dwelling in light inaccessible , attended with thousand thousands of Angels ; whom yet we neither can know , ( neither would it avail us if we could ) but in the face of the eternal Son of his Love , our blessed Mediator God and Man ; who sits at the right hand of Majesty in the highest heavens ; from the sight of whose glorious humanity , we comfortably rise to the contemplation of that infinite Deity , whereto it is inseparably united ; in and by him , ( made ours by a lively Faith ) finding our persons , and obedience accepted , expecting our full redemption , and blessedness . Here , here must our hearts be unremovably fixed ; In his light must we see light : no cloudy occurrences of this world , no busy employments , no painful sufferings must hinder us from thus seeing him that is invisible . 

SECT . v.  

Neither doth the devout heart see his Grd aloof off , as dwelling above , in the circle of heaven , but beholds that infinite Spirit really present with him ; The Lord is upon thy right hand , saith the Psalmist . Our bodily eye doth not more certainly see our own flesh , than the spiritual eye sees God , close by us ; Yea in us ; A man's own soul is not so intimate to himself , as God is to his soul ; neither do we move by him only , but in him : What a sweet conversation therefore , hath the holy soul with his God ? What heavenly conferences have they two , which the world is not privy to ; whiles God entertains the soul with the divine motions of his Spirit , the soul entertains God with gracious compliances ? Is the heart heavy with the grievous pressures of affliction ? the soul goes in to his God , and pours out itself before him in earnest bemoaning , and supplications ; the God of mercy answers the soul again , with seasonable refresh of comfort : Is the heart secretly wounded and bleeding with the conscience of some sin ? it speedily betakes itself to the great Physician of the soul , who forthwith applies the balm of Gilead for an unfailing and present cure : Is the heart distracted with doubts ? the soul retires to that inward Oracle of God for counsel , he returns to the soul an happy settlement of just resolution : Is the heart deeply affected with the sense of some special favour from his God ? the soul breaks forth into the passionate voice of praise & thanksgiving ; God returns the pleasing testimony of a cheerful acceptation : O blessed soul , that hath a God to go unto upon all occasions ; O infinite mercy of a God , that vouchsafes to stoop to such intirents with dust & ashes . It was a gracious speech of a worthy Divine upon his deathbed , now breathing towards heaven , That he should change his place not his company : His conversation was now before hand with his God , and his holy Angels ; the only difference was , that he was now going to a more free and full fruition of the Lord of life , in that region of glory above , whom he had truly ( though with weakness and imperfection ) enjoyed in this vale of tears . 

SECT . VI  

Now , that these mutual respects may be sure not to cool with intermission , the devout heart takes all occasions both to think of God , and to speak to him . There is nothing that he sees , which doth not bring God to his thoughts . Indeed , there is no creature , werein there are not manifest footsteps of omnipotence ; Yea , which hath not a tongue to tell us of its Maker . The heaven declare the glory of God , and the firmament showeth his handiwork ; one day telleth another , and one night certifieth another : Yea , OH Lord , how manifold are thy works ! in wisdom hast thou made them all : The earth is full of thy riches , so is the great and wide sea , where are things creeping innumerable , both small and great beasts : Every herb , flower , spire of grass , every twig and leaf ; every worm and fly ; every scale and feather ; every billow and meteor , speaks the power and wisdom of their infinite Creator ; Solomon sends the sluggard to the Ant ; esay sends the Jews to the Ox and the Ass ; Our Saviour sends his Disciples to the Ravens , & to the Lilies of the field ; There is no creature of whom we may not learn something ; we shall have spent our time ill in this great school of the world , if in such store of Lessons , we be non-proficients in Devotion . Vain Idolaters make to themselves Images of God , whereby they sinfully represent him to their thoughts and adoration ; could they have the wit and grace to see it , God hath taken order to spare them this labour , in that he hath stamped in every creature such impressions of his infinite power , wisdom , goodness , as may give us just occasion to worship and praise him with a safe and holy advantage to our souls : For the invisible things of God , from the creation of the world , are clearly seen , being understood by the things that are made , even his eternal power and Godhead . And indeed , wherefore serve all the volumes of Natural History , but to be so many Commentaries upon the several creatures , wherein we may read God ; and even those men who have not the skill , or leisure to peruse them , may yet out of their own thoughts , and observation , raise from the sight of all the works of God sufficient matter to glorify him . Who can be so stupid as not to take notice of the industry of the Bee , the providence of the Ant , the cunning of the Spider , the reviving of the Fly , the worms endeavour of revenge , the subtlety of the Fox , the sagacity of the Hedgehog , the innocence and profitablenesse of the Sheep , the laboriousnesse of the Ox , the obsequiousness of the Dog , the timorous shifts of the Hare , the nimbleness of the Dear , the generosity of the Lion , the courage of the Horse , the fierceness of the Tiger , the cheerful music of Birds , the harmlesnesse of the Dove , the true love of the Turtle , the Cock's observation of time , the Swallows architecture , shortly , ( for it were easy here to be endless ) of the several qualities , and dispositions of every of those our fellow-creatures , with whom we converse on the face of the earth ; and who that takes notice of them , cannot fetch from every act , and motion of theirs , some monition of duty , and occasion of devout thoughts ? Surely , I fear many of us Christians , may justly accuse ourselves as too neglective of our duty this way ; that having thus long spent our time in this great Academy of the world , we have not , by so many silent documents , learned to ascribe more glory to our Creator ; I doubt those creatures if they could exchange their brutality with our reason , being now so docible as to learn of us so far as their sense can reach , would approve themselves better Scholars to us , than we have been unto them . 

Withal , I must add that the devout soul stands not always in need of such outward monitors , but finds within itself , sufficient incitements to raise up itself to a continual minding of God ; and makes use of them accordingly ; and , if at any time , being taken up with importunate occasions of the world , it finds God missing but an hour , it chides itself for such neglect , and sets itself to recover him with so much more eager affection : as the faithful spouse in the Canticles , when she finds him whom her soul loved , withdrawn from her for a season , puts herself into a speedy search after him , and gives not over till she have attained his presence . 

SECT . VII . 

Now as these many monitors both outward & inward , must elevate our hearts very frequently , to God ; so those raised hearts must not entertain him with a dumb contemplation , but must speak to him in the language of spirits : All occasions therefore must be taken of sending forth pious and heavenly ejaculations to God ; The devout soul may do this more than an hundred times a day , without any hindrance to his special vocation : The Huswife at her Wheel , the Weaver at his Loom , the Husbandman at his Plough , the Artificer in his Shop , the Traveller in his way , the Merchant in his Warehouse may thus enjoy God in his busiest employment ; For , the soul of man is a nimble spirit ; and the language of thoughts needs not take up time ; and though we now , for example's sake , cloth them in words , yet in our practice we need not : Now these Ejaculations may be either at large , or Occasional : At large , such as that of old Jacob , OH Lord I have waited for thy salvation ; Or that of David , OH save me for thy mercy's sake : And these either in matter of Humiliation , or of Imploration , or of Thanksgiving : In all which , we cannot follow a better pattern than the sweet singer of Israel , whose heavenly conceptions we may either borrow , or imitate . 

In way of humiliation , such as these . Heal my soul OH Lord , for I have sinned against thee . O remember not my old sins , but have mercy upon me . If thou wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss , OH Lord who may abide it ? Lord thou knowest the thoughts of man that they are but vain . OH God why abhorrest thou my soul , and hidest thy face from me . 

In way of Imploration . Up Lord , and help me OH God ; O let my heart be sound in thy statutes , that I be not ashamed . Lord , where are thy old loving mercies ? O deliver me , for I am helpless , and my heart is wounded within me . Comfort the soul of thy servant , for unto thee OH Lord , do I lift up my soul . Go not far from me OH God. OH knit my heart unto thee that I may fear thy name . thou art my helper and redeemer , OH Lord make no long tarrying . O be thou my help in trouble , for vain is the help of man O guide me with thy counsel , and after that receive me to thy glory . My time is in thy hand , deliver me from the hands of mine enemies . O withdraw not thy mercy from me , OH Lord Led me OH Lord in thy righteousness because of mine enemies . OH let my soul live , and it shall praise thee . 

In way of Thanksgiving : O God , wonderful art thou in thine holy places . OH Lord , how glorious are thy works ! & thy thoughts are very deep . O God , who is like unto thee ! The Lord , liveth , and blessed be my strong helper . Lord , thy loving kindness is better than life itself . All thy works praise thee , OH Lord , and thy Saints give thanks unto thee . O how manifold are thy works ! in wisdom hast thou made them all . Who is God but the Lord , and who hath any strength except our God ? We will rejoice in thy salvation , and triumph in thy name OH Lord. OH that men would praise the Lord for his goodness . O how plentiful is thy goodness , which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee ! thou Lord hast never failed them that seek thee . In thy presence is the fullness of joy , and at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore . Lord , what is man that thou art mindful of him ? Not unto us Lord , not unto us , but unto thy Name give the praise . 

SECT . VIII . 

Occasional Ejaculations are such , as are moved upon the presence of some such object as carries a kind of relation or analogy to that holy thought which we have entertained . Of this nature I find that , which was practised in S. Basils' time ; that , upon the lighting of candles , the manner was to bless God in these words , Praise be to God the Father , and the Son , and the Holy ghost ; which that Father says was anciently used ; but who was the Author of it he professeth to be unknown : to the same purpose was the Lucernarium , which was a part of the evening office of old ; For which , there may seem to be more colour of reason , than for the ordinary fashion of apprecation , upon occasion of our sneesing ; which is expected , and practised by many , out of civility : Old and reverend Beza was wont to move his hat with the rest of the company , but to say withal , Gramercy Madame la Superstition ; Now , howsoever in this , or any other practice , which may seem to carry with it a smack of Superstition , our Devotion may be groundless and unseasonable , yet nothing hinders but that we may take just & holy hints of raising up our hearts to our God. As when we do first look forth , and see the heavens over our heads , to think , The heavens declare thy glory OH God. When we see the day breaking , or the Sun rising , The day is thine , and the night is thine , thou hast prepared the light and the Sun . When the light shines in our faces , thou deckest thyself with light as with a garment ; or , Light is sprung up for the righteous . When we see our Garden embellished with flowers , The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord When we see a rough sea , The waves of the sea rage horribly , and are mighty ; but the Lord that dwelleth on high , is mightier than they . When we see the darkness of the night , The darkness is no darkness with thee . When we rise up from our bed , or our seat , Lord thou knowest my down-sitting , and my uprising ; thou understandest my thoughts afar off . When we wash our hands , Wash thou me , OH Lord , and I shall be whiter than snow . When we are walking forth , OH hold thou up my goings in thy paths , that my footsteps slip not . When we hear a passing-bell , O teach me to number my days , that I may apply my heart to wisdom : or , Lord , let me know my end , and the number of my days . 

Thus may we dart out our holy desires to God , upon all occasions ; Wherein , heed must be taken that our Ejaculations be not , on the one side , so rare , that our hearts grow to be hard and strange to God , but that they may be held on in continual acknowledgement of him , and acquaintance with him ; and , on the other side , that they be not so overfrequent in their perpetual reiteration , as that they grow to be ( like that of the Romish votaries ) fashionable ; which if great care be not taken , will fall out , to the utter frustrating of our Devotion . Shortly , let the measure of these devout glances be , the preserving our hearts in a constant tenderness , & godly disposition ; which shall be further actuated upon all opportunities , by the exercises of our more enlarged , and fixed Devotion : Whereof there is the same variety that there is in God's services , about which it is conversant . 

There are three main businesses wherein God accounts his service , here below , to consist ; The first is , our address to the throne of Grace , and the pouring out of our souls before him in our prayers : The second is , the reading and hearing his most holy Word ; The third is , the receipt of his blessed Sacraments ; In all which there is place and use for a fettled Devotion . 

SECT . IX . 

TO begin with the first work of our actual , and enlarged Devotion : Some things are pre-required of us , to make us capable of the comfortable performance of so holy and heavenly a duty ; namely , that the heart be clean first , and then that it be clear : clean from the defilement of any known sin ; clear from all entanglements and distractions : What do we in our prayers , but converse with the Almighty ? and either carry our souls up to him , or bring him down to us ; now , it is no hoping , that we can entertain God in an impure heart : Even we men loathe a nasty and sluttish lodging ; how much more will the holy God abhor an habitation spiritually filthy ? I find that even the unclean spirit made that a motive of his repossession , that he found the house swept and garnished : Satan's cleanliness is pollution ; and his garnishment , disorder and wickedness ; without this he finds no welcome ; Each spirit looks for an entertainment answerable to his nature ; How much more will that God of spirits , who is purity itself , look to be harboured in a cleanly room ? Into a malicious soul wisdom shall not enter , nor dwell in the body that is subject unto sin . What friend would be pleased that we should lodge him in a Lazar-house ? or who would abide to have a Toad lie in his bosom ? Surely , it is not in the verge of created nature to yield any thing that can be so noisome and odious to the sense of man , as sin is to that absolute , and essential Goodness : His pure eyes cannot endure the sight of sin ; neither can he endure that the sinner should come within the sight of him ; Away from me , ye wicked , is his charge , both here , and hereafter . It is the privilege and happiness of the pure in heart , that they shall see God ; see him both in the end , and in the way ; enjoying the vision of him , both in grace , and in glory : this is no object for impure eyes : Descend into thyself therefore , and ransack thy heart , who ever wouldst be a true Client of Devotion ; search all the close windings of it , with the torches of the law of God ; and if there be any iniquity found lurking in the secret corners thereof , drag it out and abandon it ; and when thou hast done , that thy fingers may retain no pollution , say with the holy Psalmist ; I will wash my hands in innocence , so will I go to thine Altar . Presume not to approach the Altar of God , there to offer the Sacrifice of thy Devotion , with unclean hands : Else thine offering shall be so far from winning an acceptance for thee , from the hands of God ; as that thou shalt make thine offering abominable . And if a beast touch the Mount , it shall die . 

SECT . X.  

AS the soul must be clean from sin , so it must be clear and free from distractions . The intent of our Devotion is to welcome God to our hearts ; now where shall we entertain him , if the rooms be full thronged with cares , and turbulent passions ? The Spirit of God will not endure to be crowded up together with the world in our straight lodgings ; An holy vacuity must make way for him in our bosoms . The divine pattern of Devotion , in whom the Godhead dwelled bodily , retires into the Mount to pray ; he that carried heaven with him , would even thus leave the world below him . Alas , how can we hope to mount up to heaven in our thoughts , if we have the clogs of earthly cares hanging at our heels : Yea , not only must there be a shutting out of all distractive cares , and passions , which are professed enemies to our quiet conversing with God in our Devotion , but there must be also a denudation of the mind from all those images of our fantasy ( how pleasing soever ) that may carry our thoughts aside from those better objects : We are like to foolish children , who when they should be steadfastly looking on their books , are apt to gaze after every butterfly , that passetin by them ; here must be therefore a careful intention of our thoughts , a restraint from all vain , and idle roving , and an holding ourselves close to our divine task : whiles Martha is troubled about many things , her devouter sister , having chosen the better part , plies the one thing necessary , which shall never be taken from her ; and whiles Martha would feast Christ with bodily fare , she is feasted of Christ with heavenly delicacies . 

SECT . XI . 

After the heart is thus cleansed and thus cleared , it must be in the next place decked with true humility , the cheapest , yet best ornament of the soul . If the wise man tell us , that pride is the beginning of sin ; surely , all gracious dispositions must begin in humility . The foundation of all high and stately buildings must be laid low : They are the lowly valleys that soak in the showers of heaven , which the steep hills shelve off , and prove dry and fruitless . To that man will I look ( saith God ) that is poor , and of 〈◊〉 contrite spirit , and trembleth at my Word : Hence it is , that the more eminent any man is in grace , the more he is dejected in the sight of God ; The father of the faithful comes to God under the stile of dust , and ashes : David under the stile of a worm and no man ; Agur the son of Jakeh , under the title of more brutish than any man , and one that hath not the understanding of a man ; John Baptist , as not morthy to carry the shoes of Christ after him ; Paul , as the least of Saints , and chief of sinners : On the contrary , the more vile any man is in his own eyes , and the more dejected in the sight of God , the higher he is exalted in God's favour : Like as the Conduict-water , by how much lower it falls , the higher it riseth . When therefore we would appear before God , in our solemn devotions , we must see that we empty ourselves of all proud conceits , and find our hearts fully convinced of our own vileness , yea nothingness in his sight . Down , down with all our high thoughts ; fall we low before our great and holy God ; not to the earth only , but to the very brim of hell , in the Conscience of our own guiltiness ; for though the miserable wretchedness of our nature may be a sufficient cause of our humiliation , yet the consideration of our detestable sinfulness is that which will depress us lowest in the sight of God.  

SECT . XII . 

IT is fit the exercise of our Devotion should begin in an humble confession of our unword●●nesse . Now for the effectual furtherance of this our self-dejection , it will be requisite to bend our eyes upon a threefold object ; To look inward into ourselves , upward to heaven , downward to hell . First , to turn our eyes into our bosoms , and to take a view ( not without a secret self-loathing ) of that world of corruption that hath lain hidden there ; & thereupon to accuse , arraign , and condemn ourselves before that awful Tribunal of the Judge of heaven and earth ; both of that original pollution , which we have drawn from the tainted loins of our first parents ; and those innumerable actual wickednesses derived therefrom ; which have stained our persons and lives . How can we be but thoroughly humbled , to see our souls utterly overspread with the odious and abominable leprosy of sin : We find that Uzziah bore up stoutly a while , against the Priests of the Lord , in the maintenance of his sacrilegious presumption , but when he saw himself turned Lazar , on the sudden , he is confounded in himself , and in a depth of shame hastens away from the presence of God to a sad , and penitential retirednes . We should need no other arguments to loathe ourselves , than the sight of our own faces , so miserably deformed with the nasty and hateful scurse of our iniquity : Neither only must we be content to shame , and grieve our eyes with the foul nature and condition of our sins , but we must represent them to ourselves in all the circumstances that may aggravate their nainousnesse . Alas , Lord , any one sin is able to damn a soul ; I have committed many , yea numberless : they have not possessed me single , but , as that evil spirit said , their name is Legion ; neither have I committed these sins once , but often ; thine Angels ( that were ) sinned but once , and are damned for ever ; I have frequently reiterated the same offences , where ( than were it not for thy mercy ) shall I appear ? neither have I only done them in the time of my ignorance , but since I received sufficient illumination from thee ; It is not in the dark that I have stumbled , and fallen , but in the midst of the clear light and sunshine of thy Gospel , and in the very face of thee my God ; neither have these been the slips of my weakness , but the bold miscarriages of my presumption ; neither have I offended out of inconsideration , and inadvertency , but after and against the checks of a remurmuring conscience ; after so many gracious warnings , and fatherly admonitions , after so many fearful examples of thy judgements , after so infinite obligations of thy favours . 

And thus having looked inward into ourselves , and taken an impartial view of our own vileness , it will be requisite to cast our eyes upward unto heaven , and there to see against whom we have offended ; even against an infinite Majesty , & power , an infinite mercy , an infinite justice ; That power and Majesty which hath spread out the heavens as a Curtain , and hath laid the foundations of the earth so sure that it cannot be moved ; who hath shut up the sea with bars and doors , and said , Hitherto shalt thou come and no further , and here shalt thou stay thy proud waves ; who doth whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth ; who commands the Devils to their chains , able therefore to take infinite vengeance on sinners . That mercy of God the Father , who gave his own Son out of his bosom for our redemption ; That mercy of God the Son , who , thinking it no robbery to be equal unto God , for our sakes made himself of no reputation , and took upon him the form of a servant ; and being found in fashion as a man , humbled himself , and became obedient to the death , even the accursed death of the Cross ; That mercy of God the holy Ghost , who hath made that Christ mine , and hath sealed to my soul the benefit of that blessed Redemption ; Lastly , that justice of God , which as it is infinitely displeased with every sin , so will be sure to take infinite vengeance on every impenitent sinner . 

And from hence it will be fit and seasonable for the devout soul , to look downward into that horrible pit of eternal confusion ; and there to see the dreadful , unspeakable , unimaginable torments of the damned ; to represent unto itself the terrors of those everlasting burnings ; the fire and brimstone of that infernal Tophet ; the merciless and unwearible tyranny of those hellish executioners ; the shrieks , and howl , and gnash of the tormented ; the unpitiable , interminable , unmitigable tortures of those ever-dying , and yet never-dying souls . By all which , we shall justly affright ourselves into a deep sense of the dangerous and woeful condition wherein we lie in the state of nature and impenitence , and shall be driven with an holy eagerness to seek for Christ , the Son of the everliving God , our blessed Mediator ; in and by whom only , we can look for the remission of all these our sins , a reconcilement with this most powerful , merciful , just God , and a deliverance of our souls from the hand of the nethermost hell . 

SECT . XIII . 

IT shall not now need , or boot to bid the soul which is truly apprehensive of all these , to sue importunately to the Lord of life for a freedom , and rescue from these infinite pains of eternal death , to which our sins have forfeited it ; and for a present happy recovery of that favour , which is better than life . Have we heard , or can we imagine some heinous Malefactor , that hath received the sentence of death , and is now bound hand , and foot , ready to be cast into a Den of Lions , or a burning furnace , with what strong cries , and passionate obsecrations he plies the Judge for mercy ? we may then conceive some little image of the vehement suit , and strong cries of a soul truly sensible of the danger of God's wrath deserved by his sin , and the dreadful consequents of deserved imminent damnation ; Although what proportion is there betwixt a weak creature , and the Almighty ; betwixt a moment , and eternity ? 

Hereupon therefore follows a vehement longing ( uncapable of a denial ) after Christ ; and fervent aspirations to that Saviour , by whom only we receive a full and gracious deliverance from death and hell ; and a full pardon and remission of all our sins ; and if this come not the sooner , strong knock 's at the gates of heaven , even so loud that the Father of mercies cannot but hear & open : Never did any contrite soul beg of God , that was not prevented by his mercy ; much more doth he condescend when he is strongly entreated ; our very entreaties are from him , he puts into us those desires which he graciously answers : Now therefore doth the devout soul see the God of all comfort to bow the heavens , and come down with healing in his wings ; and hear him speak peace unto the heart thus thoroughly humbled ; Fear not , thou shalt not die but live . Be of good cheer , thy sins are forgiven thee : Here therefore comes in that divine grace of Faith , effectually apprehending Christ the Saviour , and his infinite satisfaction and merits ; comfortably applying all the sweet promises of the Gospel ; clinging close to that all-sufficient Redeemer ; and in his most perfect obedience emboldening itself , to challenge a freedom of access to God , and confidence of appearance before the Tribunal of heaven ; and now the soul clad with Christ's righteousness , dares look God in the face , and can both challenge and triumph over all the powers of darkness : For , being justified by faith , we have peach with God through Jesus Christ our Lord  

SECT . FOURTEEN . 

BY how much deeper the sense of our misery and danger is , so much more welcome and joyful is the apprehension of our deliverance ; and so much more thankful is our acknowledgement of that unspeakable mercy : The soul therefore that is truly sensible of this wonderful goodness of its God ; as it feels a marvellous joy in itself , so it cannot but break forth into cheerful and holy ( though secret ) gratulations : The Lord is full of compassion , and mercy , long suffering , and of great goodness ; he keepeth not his anger for ever ; he hath not dealt with me after my sins , nor rewarded me after mine iniquities . What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits towards me ? I will take the cup of salvation , and call upon the name of the Lord I will thank thee , for thou hast heard me , & hast not given me over to death , but art become my salvation . OH speak good of the Lord all ye works of his ; Praise thou the Lord OH my soul . 

SECT . xv.  

The more feelingly the soul apprehends , and the more thankfully it digests the favours of God in its pardon , and deliverance , the more freely doth the God of mercy impart himself to it ; and the more God imparts himself to it , the more it love's him , and the more heavenly acquaintance and entireness grows betwixt God & it ; and now that love which was but a spark at first grows into a flame ; and wholly takes up the soul . This fire of heavenly love in the devout soul , is , and must be heightened more and more , by the addition of the holy incentives of divine thoughts , concerning the means of our freedom and deliverance . And here , offers itself to us that bottomless abyss of mercy in our Redemption , wrought by the eternal Son of God , Jesus Christ the just , by whose stripes we are healed ; by whose blood we are ransomed ; where none will befit us but admiring and adoring notions . We shall not disparage you , OH ye blessed Angels , and Archangels of Heaven , if we shall say , ye are not able to look into the bottom of this divine love , wherewith God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son , that whosoever believeth in him should not perish , but have everlasting life : None , o none can comprehend this mercy , but he that wrought it . Lord what a transcendent , what an infinite love is this ? what an object was this for thee to love ? A world of sinners Impotent , wretched creatures , that had dispighted thee , that had no motive for thy favour but deformity , misery , professed enmity ? It had been mercy enough in thee , that thou didst no● damn the world ; but that thou shouldst love it , 〈◊〉 more than mercy . It was thy great goodness to forbear the acts of just vengeance to the sinful world of man ; but to give unto it tokens of thy love , is a favour beyond all expression . The least gift from thee had been more than the world could hope for ; but that thou shouldst not stick to give thine only begotten Son , the Son of thy love , the Son of thine essence , thy coequal , coeternal Son , who was more than ten thousand worlds , to redeem this one forlorn world of sinners , is love above all comprehension of men and Angels . What diminution had it been to thee and thine essential glory , OH thou great God of heaven , that the souls that sinned should have died , and perished everlastingly ? yet so infinite was thy loving mercy , that thou wouldst rather give thy only Son out of thy bosom , than that there should not be a redemption for believers . 

Yet , OH God , hadst thou sent down thy Son to this lower region of earth , upon such terms , as that he might have brought down heaven with him , that he might have come in the port and Majesty of a God , clothed with celestial glory , to have dazzled our eyes , and to have drawn all hearts unto him ; this might have seemed , in some measure , to have sorted with his divine magnificence ; But thou wouldst have him to appear in the wretched condition of our humanity : Yet , even thus , hadst thou sent him into the world , in the highest estate , and pomp of royalty , that earth could afford , that all the Kings and Monarches of the world should have been commanded to follow his train , and to glitter in his Court ; and that the knees of all the Potentates of the earth should have bowed to his Sovereign Majesty , and their lips have kissed his dust , this might have carried some kind of appearance of a state next to divine greatness ; but thou wouldst have him come in the despised form of a servant : And thou , OH blessed Jesus , waste accordingly willing for our sakes , to submit thyself to nakedness , hunger , thirst , weariness , temptation , contempt , betraying , agonies , scorn , buffeting , scourge , distension , crucifixion , death : O love above measure , without example , beyond admiration ! Greater love ( thou sayest ) hath no man , than this , that a man lay down his life for his friends ; But , o , what is it then , that thou , who wert God and man , shouldst lay down thy life , ( more precious than many worlds ) for thine enemies ! Yet , had it been but the laying down of a life , in a fair and gentle way , there might have been some mitigation of the sorrow of a dissolution ; there is not more difference betwixt life and death , than there may be betwixt some one kind of death and another ; thine , OH dear Saviour , was the painful , shameful , cursed death of the cross ; wherein yet , all that man could do unto thee was nothing to that inward torment , which , in our stead , thou enduredst from thy father's wrath ; when in the bitterness of thine anguished soul , thou cried'st out , My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ? Even thus , thus wast thou content to be forsaken , that we wretched sinners might be received to mercy ; OH love stronger than death which thou vanquishedst ! more high , than that hell is deep , from which thou hast rescued us ! 

SECT . XVI . 

The sense of this infinite love of God cannot choose but ravish the soul , and cause it to go out of itself , into that Saviour who hath wrought so mercifully for it ; so as it may be nothing in itself , but what it hath , or is , may be Christ . By the sweet powers therefore of Faith and Love the soul finds itself united unto Christ , feelingly , effectually , indivisibly : so as that it is not to be distinguished betwixt the acts of both : To me to live is Christ , saith the blessed Apostle ; and elsewhere , I live , yet not I , but Christ liveth in me , and the life which now I live in the flesh , I live by the faith of the Son of God , who loved me , and gave himself for me . My beloved is mine , and I am his , saith the Spouse of Christ in her Bridal Song . OH blessed union , next to the hypostatical , whereby the human nature of the Son of God is taken into the participation of the eternal Godhead . 

SECT . XVII . 

Out of the sense of this happy union ariseth an unspeakable complacency and delight of the soul in that God and Saviour , who is thus inseparably ours , and by whose union we are blessed ; and an high appreciation of him above all the world ; and a contemptuous undervaluation of all earthly things , in comparison of him ; And this is no other than an heavenly reflection of that sweet contentment , which the God of mercies takes in the faithful soul ; thou hast ravished my heart , my sister , my Spouse , thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes . thou art beautiful , OH my Love , as Tirzah , comely as Jerusalem , Turn away thine eyes from me , for they have overcome me . How fair is thy love , my sister , my Spouse ? How much better is thy love than wine , and the smell of thine ointments better than all spices . And the soul answers him again in the same language of spiritual dearness ; My beloved is white and ruddy , the chief est among ten thousand . Set me as a seal upon thine heart , as a seal upon thine arm , for love is as strong as death : And as in an ecstaticall qualm of passionate affection ; Stay me with fiaggons , and comfort me with apples , for I am sick of love . 

SECT . XVIII . 

Upon this gracious complacency will follow an absolute self-resignation , or giving up ourselves to the hands of that good God , whose we are , and who is ours ; and an humble contentedness with his good pleasure in all things ; looking upon God with the same face , whether he smile upon us in his favours , or chastise us with his loving corrections ; If he speak good unto us , Behold the servant of the Lord ; be it unto me according to thy word ; If evil , It is the Lord , let him do whatsoever he will : Here is therefore a cheerful acquiescence in God ; and an hearty reliance , and casting ourselves upon the mercy of so bountiful a God ; who having given us his Son , can in and with him deny us nothing . 

SECT . XIX . 

Upon this subacted disposition of heart will follow a familiar ( yet awful ) compellation of God ; and an emptying of our souls before him in all our necessities . For that God , who is infinitely merciful , yet will not have his favours otherwise conveyed to us than by our supplications . The style of his dear ones is , his people that prayeth , and his own stile is , the God that heareth prayers : To him therefore doth the devout heart pour out all his requests with all true humility , with all fervour of spirit , as knowing , that God will hear neither proud prayers , nor heartless : wherein his holy desires are regulated by a just method ; First , suing for spiritual favours , as most worthy ; then for temporal , as the appendances of better ; and in both , aiming at the glory of our good God , more than our own advantage : And in the order of spiritual thngs , first and most for those that are most necessary , and essential for our souls health , than for secondary graces , that concern the prosperity & comfort of our spiritual life : Absolutely craving those graces that accompany salvation , all others , conditionally , and with reference to the good pleasure of the munificent giver ; Wherein , heed must be taken , that our thoughts be not so much taken up with our expressions , as with our desires ; and that we do not suffer ourselves to languish into an unfeeling length , and repetition of our suits : Even the hand of a Moses , may in time grow heavy ; so therefore must we husband our spiritual strength , that our devotion may not flag with overtiring , but may be most vigorous at the last . And as we must enter into our prayers , not without preparatory elevations , so must we be careful to take a meet leave of God , at their shutting up : following our supplications , with the pause of a faithful , and most lowly adoration ; and as it were sending up our hearts into heaven , to see how our prayers are taken ; and raising them to a joyful expectation of a gracious and successful answer from the father of mercies . 

SECT . xx.  

Upon the comfortable feeling of a gracious condescent , follows an happy fruition of God in all his favours ; so as we have not them so much , as God in them ; which advanceth their worth a thousand fold , and as it were brings down heaven unto us ; whereas , therefore , the sensual man rests only in the mere use of any blessing , as health , peace , prosperity , knowledge , and reaches no higher ; the devoute soul , in , and through all these , seas , and feels a God that sanctifies them to him , and enjoys therein his favour , that is better than life . Even we men are wont , out of our good nature , to esteem a benefit , not so much for its own worth , as for the love , and respect of the giver : Small legacies for this cause , find dear acceptation ; How much more is it so betwixt God and the devout soul ? It is the sweet apprehension of this love that makes all his gifts , blessings . Do we his gifts , blessings . Do we not see some vain churl , though cried down by the multitude , herein secretly applauding himself that he hath bags at home ? how much more shall the godly man find comfort against all the crosses of the world , that he is possessed of him that possesseth all things ; even God All-sufficient ; the pledges of whose infinite love he feels in all the whole course of Gods dealing with him ? 

SECT . XXI . 

Out of the true sense of this inward fruition of God , the devout soul breaks forth into cheerful thanksgiving to the God of all comfort , praising him for every evil that it is free from ; for every good thing it enjoyeth : For , as it keeps a just Inventory of all God's favours , so it often spreads them thankfully before him and lays them forth ( so near as it may ) in the full dimensions ; that so , God may be no loser by him in any act of his beneficence . Here therefore every of God's benefits must come into account ; whether eternal or temporal , spiritual or bodily , outward or inward , public or private , positive or privative , past or present , upon ourselves or others . In all which , he shall humbly acknowledge both Gods free mercy , and his own shameful unworthiness ; setting off the favours of his good God the more , with the soil of his own confessed wretchedness , and unanswerableness to the least of his mercies . 

Now as there is infinite variety of blessings from the liberal hand of the Almighty , so there is great difference in their degrees ; For , whereas there are three subjects of all the good we are capable of ; The Estate , Body , Soul ; and each of these do far surpass other in value , ( the soul being infinitely more worth than the body , and the body far more precious than the outward estate ) so the blessings that appertain to them , in several , differ in their true estimation accordingly . If either we do not highly magnify God's mercy for the least , or shall set as high a price upon the blessings that concern our estate , as those that pertain to the body , or upon bodily favours , as upon those that belong to the soul , we shall show ourselves very unworthy , and unequal partakers of the Divine bounty . But it will savour too much of earth , if we be more affected with temporal blessings , than with spiritual and eternal . By how much nearer relation then , any favour hath to the Fountain of goodness , and by how much more it conduceth to the glory of God , and ours in him , so much higher place should it possess in our affection and gratitude . no marvel therefore if the Devout Heart be raised above itself , and transported with heavenly raptures , when , with Stephen's eyes , it beholds the Lord Jesus standing at the right hand of God , fixing itself upon the consideration of the infinite Merits of his Life , Death , Resurrection , Ascension , Intercession , and finding itself swallowed up in the depth of that Divine Love , from whence all mercies flow into the soul ; so as that it runs over with passionate thankfulness , and is therefore deeply affected with all other his mercies , because they are derived from that boundless Ocean of Divine goodness . Unspeakable is the advantage that the soul raises to itself by this continual exercise of thanksgiving ; for the grateful acknowledgement of favours , is the way to more ; even amongst men ( whose hands are short and straight ) this is the means to pull on further beneficence ; how much more from the God of all Consolation , whose largest bounty diminisneth nothing of his store ? And herein the devout Soul enters into its heavenly Task ; beginning upon earth those Hallelujahs , which it shall perfect above in the blessed Chore of Saints and Angels , ever praising God , and saying , Blessing , and Glo-ry , and Wisdom , and Thanksgiving , and Honour , and Power , and Might , be unto our God for ever and ever . 

Amen . 

SECT . XXII . 

None of all the services of God can be acceptably , no not unsinfully performed without due devotion ; as therefore in our prayers and thanksgiving , so in the other exercises of Divine Worship , ( especially , in the reading and hearing of God's Word , and in our receipt of the blessed Sacrament ) it is so necessary , that without it , we offer to God a mere carcase of religious duty , and profane that sacred name we would pretend to honour . First then , we must come to God's Book , not without an holy Reverence , as duly considering both what and whose it is ; Even no other , than the Word of the everliving God , by which we shall once be judged . Great reason have we therefore , to make a difference betwixt it , and the writings of the Holiest men , even no less than betwixt the Authors of both : God is true , yea , truth itself : and that which David said in his haste , S. Paul says in full deliberati on , Every man is a liar . Before we put our hand to this Sacred Volume , it will be requisite to elevate our hearts to that God whose it is , for both his leave and his blessing : Open mine eyes , saith the sweet singer of Israel , that I may behold the wondrous things of thy Law. Lo , David's eyes were open before to other objects ; but when he comes to God's Book , he can see nothing without a new act of apertion : Letters he might see , but wonders he could not see , till God did unclose his eyes , and enlighten them . It is not therefore for us , presumptuously to break in upon God , and to think by our natural abilities to wrist open the precious Caskets of the Almighty ; and to fetch out all his hidden treasure thence , at pleasure ; but we must come tremblingly before him , and in all humility crave his gracious admission . I confess I find some kind of envy in myself , when I read of those scrupulous observances of high respects given by the Jews to the Book of God's Law : and when I read of a Romish Saint , that never read the Scripture but upon his knees , and compare it with the careless neglect whereof I can accuse myself , and perhaps some others : Not that we should rest in the formality of outward Ceremonies of reverence , wherein it were more easy to be superstitious than devout ; but that our outward deportment may testify , and answer the awful disposition of our hearts : whereto we shall not need to be excited , if we be thoroughly persuaded of the Divine Original , and authority of that Sacred Word . It was motive enough to the Ephesians zealously to pled for , and religiously to adore the Image of their Diana , that it was the Image that fell down from Jupiter . Believe we , and know , that the Scripture is inspired by God ; and we can entertain it with no other than an awful address , and we cannot be Christians if we do not so believe . 

Every Clause therefore of that God-inspired Volume , must be , as reverently received by us , so seriously weighed , and carefully laid up ; as knowing , that there is no tittle therein without his use . What we read , we must labour to understand ; what we cannot understand , we must admire silently , and modestly inquire of . There are plain Truths , and there are deep mysteries . The bounty of God hath left this Well of Living-water open for all ; what runs over is for all comers ; but every one hath not wherewith to draw . There is no Christian that may not enjoy God's Book , but every Christian may not interpret it ; those shallow Fords that are in it , may be waded by every Passenger , but there are deeps wherein he that cannot swim , may drown . How can I without a Guide , said that Ethopian Eunuch : wherefore serves the tongue of the Learned , but to direct the Ignorant ? Their modesty is of no less use than the others skill . It is a woeful condition of a Church when no man will be ignorant . 

What service can our eyes do us in the ways of God without our thoughts ? our diligent and frequent reading , therefore , must be attended with our holy meditation : we feed on what we read , but we digest only what we meditate of . What is in our Bible is Gods ; but that which is in our hearts , is our own : By all which our care must be , not so much to become wiser , as to become better , labouring still to reduce all things to godly practice . 

Finally , as we enter into this task with the lifting up of our hearts for a blessing , so we shut it up in the ejaculations of our thanksgiving to that God , who hath blessed us with the free use of his Word . 

SECT . XXIII . 

Our eye is our best guide to God our Creator , but our ear is it that leads us to God our Redeemer . How shall they believe except they hear ? Which that we may effectually do , our devotion suggests unto us some duties before the act , some in the act , some after the act . 

It is the Apostles charge , that we should be swift to hear , but heed must be taken , that we make not more haste than good speed : we may not be so forward as not to look to our foot when we go to the house of God , lest if we be too ready to hear , we offer the sacrifice of Fools . What are the feet of the soul , but our affections ? If these be not set right , we may easily stumble , and wrench at God's threshold . Rash actions can never hope to prospero ; as therefore to every great Work , so to this , there is a due preparation required ; and this must be done by meditation first , then by prayer . Our meditation first , sequesters the heart from the world , and shakes off those distractive thoughts , which may carry us away from these better things : for what room is there for God , where the World hath taken up the lodging ? We cannot serve God and Mammon . then secondly , it seizes upon the heart for Gof , fixing our thoughts upon the great business we go about ; recalling the greatness of that Majesty into whose presence we enter , and the main importance of the service we are undertaking ; and examining our intentions wherewith we address ourselves to the work intended ; I am now going to God● House ; wherefore do I go thither ? Is it to see , or to be seen ? Is it to satisfy my own curiosity in hearing what the Preacher will say ? Is it to satisfy the law , that requires my presence ? Is it to please others eyes , or to avoid their censures ? Is it for fashion ? Is it for recreation ? Or is it with a sincere desire to do my soul good , in gaining more knowledge , in quickening my affections ? Is it in a desire to approve myself to my God , in the conscience of my humble obedience to his command , and my holy attendance upon his Ordinance ? And where we find our ends amiss , chiding and rectifying our obliquities ; where just and right , prosecuting them towards a further perfection . 

Which that it may be done , our meditation must be seconded by our prayers . It is an unholy rudeness to press into the presence of that God whom we have not invoked : Our prayer must be , that God would yet more prepare us for the work , and sanctify us to it , and bless us in it ; that he would remove our sins , that he would send down his Spirit into our hearts , which may enable us to this great service ; that he would bless the Preacher in the delivery of his sacred message , that he would be pleased to direct his Messenger's tongue to the meeting with our necessities ; that he would free our hearts from all prejudices and distractions ; that he would keep off all temptations , which might hinder the good entertainment , and success of his blessed Word : Finally , that he would make us truly teachable , and his ordinance the power of God to our salvation . 

In the act of hearing , Devotion calls us to Reverence , Attention , Application . Reverence to that great God , who speaks to us , by the mouth of a weak man ; for , in what is spoken from God's Chair , agreeable to the Scriptures , the sound is man's , the substance of the message is Gods ; Even an Eglon , when he hears of a message from God , riseth out of his seat . It was not St. Paul's condition only , but of all his faithful servants , to whom he hath committed the word of reconciliation ; They are Ambassadors for Christ ; as if God did beseech us by them , they pray us in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God : The Embassy is not the bearers , but the Kings ; and if we do not acknowledge the great King of heaven in the voice of the Gospel , we cannot but incur a contempt . 

When therefore we see God's messenger in his pulpit , our eye looks at him as if it said with Cornelius , We are all here present before God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God ; whence cannot but follow together with an awful disposition of mind , a reverend deportment of the body ; which admits not a wild & roving eye , a drowsy head , a chatting tongue , a rude and indecent posture ; but composes itself to such a site a may befit a pious soul in s● religious an impoiment . Neither do we come as authorised Judges to sit upon the Preacher , but as humble Disciples to sit at his feet . 

SECT . XXIV . 

Reverence cannot but draw on Attention ; We need not be bidden to hang on the lips of him whom we honour . It is the charge of the Spirit , Let him that hath an ear hear ; Every one hath not an ear , and of those that have an ear , every one heareth not ; The soul hath an ear as well as the body ; if both these ears do not meet together in one act , there is no hearing : Common experience tells us that when the mind is otherwise taken up , we do no more hear what a man says , than if we had been deaf , or he silent . Hence is that first request of Abigail to David ; Let thine handmaid speak to thine ears , and hear the words of thine handmaid ; and Job so importunately urgeth his friends , Hear diligently my speech and my declaration with your ears . The outward ear may be open , and the inward shut ; if way be not made through both , we are deaf to spiritual things . Mine ear hast thou bored , or digged , saith the Psalmist ; the vulgar reads it , my ears hast thou perfitted : Surely our ears are grown up with flesh ; there is no passage for a perfect hearing of the voice of God , till he have made it by a spiritual perforation . 

And now that the ear is made capable of good counsel , it doth as gladly receive it ; taking in every good lesson , and longing for the next : Like unto the dry and chopped earth , which soaks in every silver drop , that falls from the clouds , and thirsteth for more ; not suffering any of that precious liquor to fall beside it . 

SECT . XXV . 

Neither doth the devout man care to satisfy his curiosity , as hearing only that he might hear ; but reducts all things to a saving use ; bringing all he hears , home to his heart , by a self-reflecting application ; like a practiser of the art of memory , referring every thing to its proper place ; If it be matter of comfort , There is for my sickbed , There is for my outward losses , There for my drooping under afflictions , There for the sense of my spiritual desertions ; If matter of doctrine , There is for my settlement in such a truth , There for the conviction of such an error , There for my direction in such a practice ; If matter of reproof , he doth not point at his neighbour , but deeply charges himself ; This meets with my dead-heartedness and security , This with my worldly-mindednesse , This with my self-love and flattery of mine own estate , This with my uncharitable censoriousnesse , This with my foolish pride of heart , This with my hypocrisy , This with my neglect of God's services , and my duty ; Thus in all the variety of the holy passages of the Sermon , the devout mind is taken up with digesting what it hears ; and working itself to a secret improvement of all the good counsel that is delivered , neither is ever more busy , than when it sits still at the feet of Christ . I cannot therefore approve the practice ( which yet I see commonly received ) of those , who think it no small argument of their Devotion , to spend their time of hearing , in writing large notes from the mouth of the Preacher ; which , however it may be an help for memory in the future , yet cannot ( as I conceive ) but be some prejudice to our present edification ; neither can the brain get so much hereby , as the heart loseth . If it be said , that by this means , an opportunity is given for a full rumination of wholesome Doctrines afterwards : I yield it , but withal , I must say that our after-thoughts can never do the work so effectually , as when the lively voice sounds in our ears , and beats upon our heart ; but herein I submit my opinion to better judgements . 

SECT . XXVI . 

The food that is received into the soul by the ear , is afterwards chewed in the mouth thereof by memory , concocted in the stomach by meditation , and dispersed into the parts by conference and practice ; True Devotion finds the greatest part of the work behind ; It was a just answer that john Gerson reports , given by a Frenchman , who being asked by one of his neighbours if the Sermon were done ; no saith he , it is said , but it is not done , neither will be , I fear , in haste . What are we the better if we hear and remember not ? If we be such auditors as the Jews were wont to call sieves , that retain no moisture that is poured into them ? What the better if we remember , but think not seriously of what we hear ; or if we practise not carefully what we think of ? Not that which we hear is our own , but that which we carry away : although all memories are not alike , one receives more easily , another retains longer ; It is not for every one to hope to attain to that ability , that he can go away with the whole fabric of a Sermon , and readily recount it unto others ; neither doth God require that of any man , which he hath not given him ; Our desires and endeavours may not be wanting where our powers fail ; It will be enough for weak memories , if they can so lay up those wholesome counsels which they receive , as that they may fetch them forth when they have occasion to use them ; & that what they want in the extent of memory , they supply in the care of their practice ; Indeed that is it , wherein lies the life of all religious duties , and without which they are but idle formalities ; that which the Philosopher said of all virtue , I must say of true godliness , that it consists in action ; Our Saviour did not say , Blessed are ye if you know these things ; But , If ye know these things , blessed are ye if ye do them . The end of our desire of the sincere milk of the Gospel , is , that we may grow thereby in the stature of all Grace , unto the fullness of God.  

SECT . XXVII . 

The highest of all God's services are his Sacraments ; which therefore require the most eminent acts of our Devotion . The Sacrament of initiation , which in the first planting of a Church is administered only to those of riper age and understanding , calls for all possible reverence , and religious addresses of the receivers ; wherein the Primitive times were punctually observant , both for substance , and ceremony ; now , in a settled and perpetuated Church , in which the virtue of the Covenant descends from the parent to the child , there seems to be no use of our preparatory directions : Only , it is fit that our Devotion should call our eyes back , to what we have done in our infancy , and whereto we are ever obliged ; that our full age may carefully endeavour to make our word good , and may put us in mind of our sinful failing . That other Sacrament of our spiritual nourishment , which our Saviour ( as his farewell ) left us for a blessed memorial of his death and passion , can never be celebrated with enough Devotion . far be it from us to come to this feast of our God , in our common garments ; the soul must be trimmed up , if we would be meet guests for the Almighty . The great Master of the feast will neither abide us to come naked , nor ill clad : Away therefore , first with the old beastly rags of our wont corruptions : Due examination comes in first , and thoroughly searches the soul , and finds out all the secret nastiness , and defilements that it hides within it ; and by the aid of true penitence , strips it of all those loathsome clouts , wherewith it was polluted ; Sin may not be clothed upon with grace ; Joshuah's filthy garments must be plucked off , ere he can be capable of precious robes : Here may be no place for our sinful lusts , for our covetous desires , for our natural infidelity , for our malicious purposes , for any of our unhallowed thoughts ; The soul clearly devested of these and all other known corruptions , must in the next place in stead thereof , be furnished with such graces and holy predispositions , as may fit it for so heavenly a work . amongst the grace's requisite , Faith justly challengeth the first place , as that which is both most eminent , and most necessarily presupposed to the profitable receipt of this Sacrament ; for whereas the main end of this blessed banquet is the strengthening of our faith , how should that receive strength , which hath not being ? to deliver these sacred viands to an unbeliever , is to put meat into the mouth of a dead man : Now therefore must the heart raise up itself to new acts of believing , and must lay faster hold on Christ , and bring him closer to the soul ; more strongly applying to its self , the infinite merits of his most perfect obedience , & of his bitter death and passion ; and erecting itself to a desire and expectation of a more vigorous and lively apprehension of its omnipotent Redeemer . Neither can this faith be either dead , or solitary ; but is still really operative , and attended ( as with other graces , so ) especially with a serious repentance ; whose wonderful power is , to undo our former sins , and to mould the heart and life to a better obedience : A grace so necessary , that the want of it ( as in extreme corruption of the stomach ) turns the wholesome food of the soul into poison ; An impenitent man therefore coming to God's Board , is so far from benefiting himself , as that he eats his own judgement : Stand off from this holy table , all ye that have not made your peace with your God ; or that harbour any known sin in your bosom ; not to eat is uncomfortable , but to eat in such a state is deadly ; yet rest not in this plea , that ye cannot come because ye are unreconciled ; but ( as ye love your souls ) be reconciled that you may come . 

Another Grace necessarily pre-required is charity to our brethren , and readiness to forgive ; For this is a communion , as with Christ the head , so with all the members of his mystical body : This is the true Love-feast of God our Saviour , wherein we profess ourselves inseparably united both to him and his ; If there be more hearts than one at God's Table , he will not own them ; These holy elements give us an Emblem of ourselves : This bread is made up of many grains , incorporated into one mass ; and this wine is the confluent juice of many clusters ; neither do we partake of several loaves , or variety of liquors , but all eat of one bread , and drink of one cup. Here is then no place for rancour and malice ; none for secret grudge and heartburning ; Therefore , if thou bring thy gift to the Altar , and there remember'st that thy brother hath aught against the , Leave there thy gift , and go thy way ; first be reconciled to thy brother , and them come and offer thy gift . 

Neither may we do , as those two emulous Commanders of Greece did , who resolved to leave their spite behind them at Mount Athos , and to take it up again in their return ; here must be an absolute , and free acquitting of all the back-reckoning of our unkindness , that we may receive the God of peace into a clear bosom . 

SECT . XXVIII . 

Besides these graces there are certain holy predispositions so necessary that without them our souls can never hope to receive true comfort in this blessed Sacrament ; whereof the first is an hungering and thirsting desire after these gracious means of our salvation : What good will our meat do us without an appetite ? Surely without it , there is no expectation of either relish , or digestion ; as therefore those that are invited to some great feast , care first to seed their hunger ere they feed their body ; labouring by exercise to get a stomach , ere they employ it ; so it concerns us to do here : and , as those that are listlesse , and weak stomached , are wont to whet their appetite with sharp sauces ; so must we by the tart applications of the law , quicken our desires of our Saviour here exhibited . 

could we but see our sins , and our miseries by sin ; could we see God frowning , and hell gaping wide to swallow us , we should not need to be bidden to long for our deliverer ; and every pledge of his favour would be precious to us . 

Upon the apprehension of our need of a Saviour and so happy a supply thereof presented unto us , must needs follow a renewed act of true thankfulness of heart to our good God , that hath both given us his dear Son to work our redemption , & his blessed Sacrament to seal up unto us our redemption thus wrought and purchased ; And with souls thus thankfully elevated unto God , we approach with all reverence , to that heavenly Table , where God is both the Feast-master and the Feast . What intention of holy thoughts , what fervour of spirit , what depth of Devotion must we now find in ourselves ? Doubtless , out of heaven no object can be so worthy to take up our hearts . What a clear representation is here of the great work of our Redemption ? How is my Saviour by all my senses here brought home to my soul ? How is his passion lively acted before mine eyes ? For lo , my bodily eye doth not more truly see bread and wine , than the eye of my faith sees the body and blood of my dear Redeemer ; Thus was his sacred body torn and broken ; Thus was his precious blood poured out for me ; My sins ( wretched man that I am ) helped thus to crucify my Saviour ; and for the discharge of my sins would he be thus crucified : Neither did he only give himself for me , upon the Cross , but lo , both offers and gives himself to me in this his blessed institution ; what had his general gift been without this application ? Now my hand doth not more sensibly take , nor my mouth more really eat this bread , than my soul doth spiritually receive , and feed on the bread of life ; OH Saviour , thou art the living bread that came doom from heaven ; Thy flesh is meat indeed , and thy blood is drink indeed : O that I may so eat of this bread , that I may live for ever . He that cometh to thee , shall never hunger ; he that believeth in thee , shall never thirst : O that I could now so hunger , and so thirst for thee , that my soul could be for ever satisfied with thee ; Thy people of old , were fed with Manna in the wilderness , yet they died ; that food of Angels could not keep them from perishing ; but o , for the hidden Manna , which giveth life to the world , even thy blessed self , give me ever of this bread , and my soul shall not die but live : O the precious juice of the fruit of the Vine , wherewith thou refreshest my soul ! Is this the blood of the grape ? Is it not rather thy blood of the New Testament , that is poured out for me ? thou speakest , OH Saviour , of new wine that thou wouldst drink with thy Disciples , in thy Father's Kingdom , can there be any more precious and pleasant , than this , wherewith thou cheerest the believing soul ? our palate is now dull and earthly , which shall then exquisite and celestial ; but surely , no liquor can be of equal price or sovereignty with thy blood ; O how unsavoury are all earthly delicacies to this heavenly draught ! OH God , let not the sweet taste of this spiritual Nectar ever go out of the mouth of my soul ; Let the comfortable warmth of this blessed Cordial ever work upon my soul , even till , and in , the last moment of my dissolution . Dost thou bid me , OH Saviour , do this in remembrance of thee ? O , how can I forget thee ? How can I enough celebrate thee for this thy unspeakable mercy ? Can I see thee thus crucified before my eyes , and for my sake thus crucified , and not remember thee ? Can I find my sins accessary to this thy death , and thy death meritoriously expiating all these my grievous sins , and not remember thee ? Can I hear thee freely offering thyself to me , and feel thee graciously conveying thyself into my soul , and not remember thee ? I do remember thee OH Saviour ; but o that I could yet more effectually remember thee ; with all the passionate affections of a soul sick of thy love ; with all zealous desires to glorify thee , with all fervent longings after thee , and thy salvation ; I remember thee in thy sufferings , O do thou remember me in thy glory . 

SECT . XXIX . 

Having thus busied itself with holy thoughts in the time of the celebration , the devout soul breaks not off in an abrupt unmannerliness , without taking leave of the great master of this heavenly feast , but with a secret adoration , humbly blesseth God for so great a mercy , and heartily resolves and desires to walk worthy of the Lord Jesus , whom it hath received , and to consecrate itself wholly to the service of him that hath so dearly bought it , and hath given it these pledges of its eternal union with him . 

The Devout Soul hath thus supped in heaven , and returns home , yet the work is not thus done : after the elements are out of eye and use , there remains a digestion of this celestial food , by holy meditation ; and now it thinks , O what a blessing have I received to day ! no less than my Lord Jesus , with all his merits ; and in and with him , the assurance of the remission of all my sins , and everlasting salvation : How happy am I , if I be not wanting to God & myself ? How unworthy shall I be , if I do not strive to answer this love of my God and Saviour , in all hearty affection , and in all holy obedience ? 

And now after this heavenly repast , how do I feel myself ? what strength , what advantage hath my faith gotten ? how much am I nearer to heaven than before ? how much faster hold have I taken of my blessed Redeemer ? how much more firm and sensible is my interest in him ? 

Neither are these thoughts , and this examination the work of the next instant only , but they are such , as must dwell upon the heart ; and must often solicit our memory , and excite our practice , that by this means we may frequently renew the efficacy of this blessed Sacrament , and our souls may batten more and more , with this spiritual nourishment , and may be fed up to eternal life . 

SECT . XXX . 

These are the generalities of our Devotion , which are of common use to all Christians ; There are besides these certain specialties of it , appliable to several occasions , times , places , persons ; For there are morning , and evening Devotions ; Devotions proper to our board , to our closer , to our bed , to God's day , to our own ; to health , to sickness , to several callings , to recreations ; to the way , to the field , to the Church , to our home ; to the student , to the soldier , to the Magistrate , to the Minister , to the husband , wife , child , servant ; to our own persons , to our families ; The severalties whereof , as they are scarce finite for number , so are most fit to to be left to the judgement , and holy managing of every Christian ; neiiss it to be imagined , that any soul which is taught of God , and hath any acquaintance with heaven , can be to seek in the particular application of common rules to his own necessity or expedience . 

The result of all is , 

A devout man is he that ever sees the invisible , and ever trembleth before that God he sees ; that walks ever , here on earth , with the God of heaven ; and still adores that Majesty with whom he converses ; That confers hourly with the God of spirits in his own language ; yet so , as no familiarity can abate of his awe , nor fear abate aught of his love . To whom the gates of heaven are ever open ; that he may go in at pleasure to the throne of grace , & none of the Angelical spirits can offer to challenge him of too much boldness : Whose eyes are well acquainted with those heavenly guardians , the presence of whom he doth as truly acknowledge , as if they were his sensible Companions . He is well known of the King of glory , for a daily suitor in the Court of heaven , and none so welcome there , as he : He accounts all his time lost that falls beside his God ; and can be no more weary of good thoughts , than of happiness . 

His bosom is no harbour for any known evil ; and it is a question whether he more abhors sin , or hell ; His care , is to entertain God in a clear and free heart , and therefore he thrusts the world out of doors , and humbly beseeches God to welcome himself to his own : He is truly dejected , and vile in his own eyes : Nothing but hell is lower than he ; every of his slips are heinous , every trespass is aggravated to rebellion ; The glory and favours of God heighten his humiliation ; He hath looked down to the bottomless deep , and seen with horror what he deserved to feel everlastingly ; His cries have been as strong , as his fears just ; and he hath found mercy more ready to rescue him , than he could be importunate : His hand could not be so soon put forth as his Saviour's , for deliverance . The sense of this mercy hath raised him to an unspeakable joy , to a most fervent love of so dear a Redeemer ; that love hath knit his heart to so meritorious a deliverer , and wrought a blessed union betwixt God and his soul . That union can no more be severed from an infinite delight , than that delight can be severed from an humble , & cheerful acquiescence in his munificent God ; And now , as in an heavenly freedom , he pours out his soul into the bosom of the Almighty , in all faithful suits for himself and others ; so , he enjoys God in the blessings received , and returns all zealous praises to the giver . 

He comes reverently to the Oracles of God , and brings not his eye , but his heart with him ; not carelessly negligent in seeking to know the revealed will of his Maker , nor too busily inquisitive into his deep counsels ; not too remiss in the letter , nor too peremptory in the sense : gladly comprehending what he may , and admiring what he cannot comprehend . Doth God call for his ear ? He goes awfully into the holy presence and so hears , as if he should now hear his last : Latching every word that drops from the Preachers lips , ere it fall to the ground , and laying it up carefully where he may be sure to fetch it . He sits not to censure , but to learn , yet speculation and knowledge is the least drift of his labour ; Nothing is his own but what he practiseth . Is he invited to God's feast ? he hate's to come in a soul and slovenly dress ; but trims up his soul , so , as may be fit for an heavenly guest : Neither doth he leave his stomach at home cloyed with the world , but brings a sharp appetite with him ; and so feeds as if he meant to live for ever . All earthly Delicates are unsavoury to him , in respect of that celestial Manna : Shortly , he so eats and drinks , as one that sees himself set at Table with God , and his Angels ; and rises and departs full of his Saviour ; and in the strength of that meal walks vigorously and cheerfully on towards his glory . Finally , as he well knows that he life's , and moves , and hath his being in God , so he refers his life , motions , and being wholly to God ; so acting all things , as if God did them by him , so using all things , as one that enjoys God in them ; and in the mean time so walking on earth , that he doth in a sort carry his heaven with him . 

THE FREE PRISONER : OR , The COMFORT of RESTRAINT . 

Written Some while since in the Tower , BY I H. B. N.  

The Free Prisoner : OR , The Comfort of Restraint . 

SECT . I  

SIR , 

whiles you pity my Affliction , take heed lest you aggravate it , and in your thoughts make it greater than it is in my own ; It is true , I am under restraint ; What is that to a man , that can be free in the Tower , and cannot but be a prisoner abroad ? Such is my condition , and every Divine Philosophers with me . Were my walks much straighter than they are , they cannot hold me in ; It is a bold word to say , I cannot , I will not be a prisoner : It is my soul that is I : my flesh is my partner , ( if not my servant ) not myself : However my body may be immured , that agile spirit shall fly abroad , and visit both earth & heaven at pleasure . Who shall hinder it from mounting up ( in an instant ) to that supreme region of bliss , and from seeing that , by the eye of faith , which S. Paul saw in ecstasy ; and when it hath viewed that blessed Hierarchy of heaven , to glance down through the innumerable , and unmeasurable globes of light ( which move in the firmament ; and below it ) into this elementary world ; and there to compass seas and lands , without shipwreck , in a trice , which a Drake , or Cavendish cannot do , but with danger , and in some year's navigation ; And if my thoughts list to stay themselves in the passage ; with what variety can my soul be taken up of several objects ; Here , turning in to the dark vaults , and dungeons of penal restraint , to visit the disconsolate prisoners , and to fetch from their greater misery , a just mitigation of mine own ; There , looking in to the houses of vain jollity , and pitying that which the sensual fools call happiness ; Here stepping in to the Courts of great Princes , & in them observing the fawning compliances of some , the treacherous underworking of others ; hollow friendships , faithless engagements , fair faces , smooth tongues , rich suits , viewing all save their hearts , and censuring nothing that it sees not ; There calling in at the low cottages of the poor , and out of their empty cupboard furnishing itself with thankfulness ; Here so overlooking the Courts of Justice , as not willing to see rigour or partiality ; There listening what they say in those meetings w changed would pass for sacred , and wondering at what it hears . Thus can , and shall , and doth my nimble spirit bestir it self in a restless flight , making only the Empyreal heaven , the bounds of its motion ; not being more able to stand still , than the heavens themselves , whence it descended : Should the Iron enter into my soul , as it did into that good Patriarches , yet it cannot fetter me : no more can my spirit be confined to one place , than my body can be diffused to many . Perhaps therefore you are mistaken in my condition ; for what is it I beseech you that makes a prisoner ? Is it an allotment to the same room without change , without remove ? What is that still to a mind that is free ? 

And why is my body then more a prisorer than the best man's soul ; that , you know , is peremptorily assigned , for inhabitation to this house of clay till the day of dissolution : Why more than the stars of heaven , which have remained fixed in their first stations ever since they were first created ? Why more than those great persons which keep up for state ; or dames for beauty ? Why more than those Anachorites whom we have seen willingly cooped up for merit ? How much more scope have we than they ? We breathe fresh air , we see the same heavens with the freeest travellers . 

SECT . II  

But we have ( you will say ) bounds for our restraint which the free spirit hate's ; as never being pleased , but with a full liberty both of prospect and passage ; Any bar , whether to the foot , or to the eye , is a death : O vain affectation of wild , and roving curiosity ! If their desires cannot be bounded , yet their motions must ; When they have the full sight of heaven above them , they cannot climb up into it ; they cannot possibly see that whole glorious contignation ; and when the whole earth lies open before them , they can measure but some small pieces of it . How can they be quiet till they have purchased Tycho Brahe his prospective trunk of thirty two foot long , whereby they may discover a better face of heaven ; some lesser Planets moving round about the Sun , and the Moonets about Saturn and Jupiter , & the mountains , seas and valleys in the Moon ? How can they rest till having acquainted themselves with the constellations of our Hemisphere , they have passed the Equinoctial , and seen the triangle , the cross , and the clouds , and the rest of the unknown stars that move above the other Pole ? And when all this is done , they are but who they were , no whit better , no whit wiser , and perhaps far less happy than those , who never smelled any but their own smoke ; never knew any star , but Charls-wayn , the morning star , and the seven . For me , I do not envy , but wonder at the licentious freedom , which these men think themselves happy to enjoy ; and hold it a weakness in those minds , which cannot find more advantage and pleasure in confinement , & retiredness ; Is it a small benefit , that I am placed there , where no oaths , no blasphemies beaten my ears ? where my eyes are in no peril of wounding objects ; where I hear no invectives , no false doctrines , no sermocinations of Iron-mongers , Feltmakers , Cobblers , Broom-men , Grooms , or any other of those inspired ignorants ; no curses , no ribaldries : where I see no drunken comessations , no rebellious routs , no violent oppressions , no obscene rejoinings , nor ought else that might either vex or affright my soul . This , this is my liberty : who whiles I sit here quietly locked up by my keeper , can pity the turmoils & distempers abroad , and bless my own immunity from those too common evils . 

SECT . III  

IS is the necessity , and force of the restraint ; since those things which we do voluntarily , are wont to pass from us with delight , which being imposed seem grievous to us ? Why should not I have so much power over my will as to make that voluntary in me , to undergo , which another wills forceably to inflict ? the mind that is truly subacted to Grace , can so frame itself to what it must suffer , as that it finds a kind of contentment in patience ; Thus we daily do to the Almighty , whose will , by our humble submission , we make ours ; and pray that we may do so : And who can restrain us without him ? If therefore my wise and holy God think it best to cage me up , by the command of authority ( upon what cause soever ) why should not I think this enclosure a better liberty : who know there is perfect freedom in his obedience ? So then , if constraint make a prisoner , I am none ; who an most willingly , where my God will have me : And , if my will did not often carry me out of my own walls at home , why cannot it as well confine me to a larger compass of the Tower ? 

SECT . iv.  

IS it solitude and Infrequence of visitation ? This may perhaps be troublesome to a man that knows not to entertain himself ; but , to him that can hold continual discourse with his own heart , no favour can be greater ; For of all other , these self-conferences are most beneficial to the soul ; Other men's communication may spend the time with more advantage of learning , or mirth ; but none can yield us so much spiritual profit , as our own soliloquies : And when all is done , the Greeks said well ; It is not much , but useful that makes truly wise . Besides this , we can never have the opportunity of so good company , as when we are alone : Now , we enjoy the society of God , and his Angels , which we cannot so freely do in a throng of visitants : When God would express his greatest entireness with his Church , Ducam eam in solitudinem , saith he : I will bring her into the wilderness , and there speak comfortably to her . We cannot expect so sweer conversation with God , in the presence of others , as apart . O the divine benefit of an holy solitariness , which no worldly heart can either know , or value ! What care I for seeing of men , when I may see him that is invisible ? What care I for chatting with friends , when I may talk familiarly with the God of heaven ? What care I for entertaining mortal guests , when I may with Abraham & his Nephew Let feast the Angels of God : and ( which were too great a word , if God himself had not spoken it ) be attended by them ? 

SECT . v.  

IS it the reproach and ignominy that commonly attends the very name of an imprisonment ? weak minds may be affected with every thing : but , with solid judgements , it is not the punishment , but the cause that makes either the Martyr , or the malefactor . S. Paul's bonds were famous : and Petrus and vincula is not without a note of yearly celebrity : and it were hard , if so many blessed Martyrs , and Confessors , who have lived , and died in Jails , for the truth's sake , should not have brought prisons ( such as they may be ) into some credit . Shortly , as notorious crimes may be at liberty , so even innocence may be under restraint ; yet those crimes no whit the better , nor this innocence the worse . 

Besides ( that which perhaps came not within your freer thoughts ) every restraint is not for punishment ; there is a restraint for safety , a salva custodia , as well as arcta , such is this of ours : This strong Tower serves not so much for our prison , as for our defence ; what norror soever the name may carry in it : I bless God for these walls , out of which I know not where we could ( for the time ) have been safe from the rage of the mis-incensed multitude : Poor seduced souls , they were taught it was pieto to be cruel ; and were mispersuaded to hate and condemn us for that , ( which should have procured their reverence , and honour ) even that holy station which we hold in God's Church ; and to curse those of us , who had deserved nothing but their thanks and prayers : railing on our very profession in the streets ; and rejoicing in our supposed ruin : Father , forgive them , for they knew not what they did : Here we were out of the danger of this misraised fury , and had leisure to pray for the quenching of those wildfires of contention , and causeless malice , which ( to our great grief ) we saw wicked incendiaries daily to cast amongst God's dear , & well-minded people . Here we have well & happily approved with the blessed Apostle , that ( what ever our restraint be ) the Word of God is not bound ; With what liberty , with what zeal , with what success hath that been preached by us to all comers ? Let them say , whether the Tower had ever so many , such guests , or such benedictions ; so as if the place have rendered us safe , we have endeavoured to make it happy ; Wherein our performances have seemed to confute that which Cornelius Bishop of Rome long since observed , that the mind laden with heavy burdens of affliction , is not able to do that service , which it can do when it is free and at ease ; Our troubles through God's mercy made us more active , and our labours more effectual . 

SECT . VI  

Add unto these ( if you please ) the eminent dignity of the place , such as is able to give a kind of honour to captivity , the ancient seat of Kings , chosen by them , as for the safe residence of their Royal persons , so for their Treasury , their Wardrobe , their Magazine ; all these precious things are under the same custody with ourselves ; sent hither , not as to prison , but a repositorie ; and why should we think ourselves in any other condition ? How many worthy inhabitants make choice to fix their abode within these walls , as not knowing where to be happier ? the place is the same to us , if our will may he the same with theirs ; they dearly purchase that , which cost us nothing but our fees ; nothing makes the difference , but the mere conceit of Liberty , which , whiles I can give to myself , in my thoughts , why am I pitied as miserable , while their happiness is applauded ? 

You see then , how free I am in that which you miscall my prison ; see now , how little cause I have to affect this liberty , which you imagine me to want ; since I shall be , I can be no other than a Prisoner abroad : There is much difference of Prisons ; One is strait and close locked , so far from admitting visitants , that it scarce allows the Sun to look in at those crosse-barred grates ; another , is more large and spacious , yielding both Walks and access ; Even after my discharge from these Walls , I shall be yet sure to be a Prisoner , both these ways ; For , what is my body but my prison in the one ? and what is the world , but my prison in the other kind ? 

SECT . VII . 

TO begin with the former , never was there a more close prisoner than my soul is for the time to my body ; Close in respect of the essence of that spirit , which since its first Mittimus , never stirred out from this straight room ; never can do , till my Gaole-delivery . 

If you respect the improvement of the operations of that busy soul , it is any where , it is successively , every where ; no place can hold it , none can limit it ; but if you regard the immortal , and immaterial substance of it , it is fast locked up within these walls of clay , till the day of my changing come ; even as the closest Captive may write letters to his remotest friends , whilst his person is in durance ; I have too much reason to acknowledge my native Jail , and feel the true Symptoms of it to my pain ; what darkness of sorrow have I here found ? what little-ease of melancholic lodgings ? what manacles and shackles of cramps ? yea what racks of torturing convulsions ? 

And if there be others , that find less misery in their prison , yet there is no good soul , but finds equal restraint : That spiritual substance , which is imprisoned within us , would fain be flying up to that heaven whence it descended ; these walls of flesh forbid that evolation , ( as Socrates called it of old ) and will not let it out , till the God of spirits ( who placed it there ) shall unlock the doors and free the prisoner by death ; He that infused life into Lazarus , that he might call him from the prison of the grave , must take life from us , when he calls us out of this prison of flesh ; I desire to be loosed , and to be with Christ , ( saith the Apostle ) as some versions express it ; whiles we are chained to this flesh , we can have no passage to heaven , no free conversation with our Saviour ; Although it was the singular privilege of that great Doctor of the Gentiles , that he was in heaven before his dissolution : whether in the body , or out of the body , he knew not : How far that rapture extended , whether to both soul and body , if he knew not , how should we ? But this we know , that such ecstasy and vision was in him , without separation of the soul from the body ; which another should hope for in vain : And for him , so he saw this glory of Paradise , that he could not yet enjoy it : Before he , or we , can be blessed with the fruition of Christ , we must be loosed , that is , freed from our clog , & our chain of this mortal body . 

What but our prison walls can hinder us here , from a free prospect ? What but these walls of flesh can hinder me from a clear vision of God ? I must now , for the time , see as I may : Nothing can enter into my soul , but what passes through my senses , & partakes , in some sort , of their earthliness ; when I am freed from them , I shall see as I am seen ; in an abstracted & heavenly way ; so as one spirit apprehends another : I do now , at the best , see those spiritual objects darkly , by the eye of faith , as in a glass ; and that not one of the clearest neither : ( Alas , what dim representations are these , that I can attain to here , of that Majesty , whose sight shall make me blessed ? ) I shall once see as I am seen , face to face ; the face of my glorified soul shall see the face of that all-glorious Deity , and in that sight be eternally happy ; It is enough for a prisoner in this dungeon of clay , to know of , and fore-expect , such felicity , whereof these earthly gyves tender him as yet uncapable . 

SECT . VIII . 

WOE is me ! how many prisons do we pass ? so soon as ever this divine soul is infused into this flesh , it is a prisoner ; neither can any more pass out of this skin , till this frame of nature be demolished : And now , as the soul of this Embryon is instantly a prisoner to the body , so the body is also a prisoner in the womb , wherein it is form : what darkness , what closeness , what uneasinesie , what nuisance is there in this Dungeon of nature ? There he must lie in an uncouth posture , for his appointed month , till the native bonds being loosed , and the doors forced open , he shall be by an helpful obstetrication drawn forth into the larger prison of the world ; there indeed he hath elbow-room enough : but all that wide scope cannot free him from a true incarceration : Who knows not that there are many differences , and latitudes of restraint ? A Simeon may imprison and enchain himself in the compass of a pillar , not allowing himself the ease of his whole dimensions ; Peter may be locked up in a larger Jail , betwixt his two Leopards ( as that Father terms them ; ) S. Paul may be two years allowed to be a Prisoner in his own hired house , but under the guard of his keeper , and not without his chain : There are those , who upon heinous , and dangerous occasions may be kept close under many locks ; there are prisoners at large , who have the liberty of the Tower ; yet even these last notwithstanding the allowance of spacious walks , & fresh gardens , are no other than acknowledged prisoners : Such is my condition to the world , when I am at my fullest liberty . It is true , that when I look back to the straitness of my first , and native prison , and compare it with the large extent of that wide world , into which I am brought , I may well with Isaac's Herds-mensay , Rehoboth , For now , the Lord hath made me room : but when I compare that world , wherein I am , with that whereto I aspire , and which I know to be above , and look to enjoy ; I can see nothing here , but mere prison-walls , and profess my life to be no other than a perpetual durance . 

SECT . IX . 

IF Varro said of old , that the world was no other than the great house of little man , I shall be bold to add what kind of house it is ; It is no other than his prison , yea , his dungeon . 

Far be it from me to disparage the glorious work of my omnipotent Creator : I were not worthy to look upon this large , and glittering roof of heaven , nor to see the pleasant varieties of these earthly landscapes , If I did not adore that infinite power , and wisdom which appears in this goodly , and immense fabric ; and confess the marvellous beauty of that majestic , and transcendent workmanship ; Rather when I see the Moon and the Stars , which thou hast ordained , I say with the Psalmist , Lord what is man ? 

But , OH God , it is no dishonour to thee , that though this be a fair house , yet thou hast one so much better than it , as a Palace is beyond a Jail . 

This beauty may please , but that ravisheth my soul : Here is light , but dim , and dusky , in respect of that inaccessible light , wherein thou dwellest : Here is a glorious Sun , that illumineth this inferior world , but thou art the Sun who enlightenest that world above : thou , to whom thy created Sun is but a shadow . 

Here we converse with beasts , or at the best , with men ; there with blessed souls , and heavenly Angels : Here some frivolous delights are intermixed with a thousand vexations ; There in thy presence is the fullness of joy : So then , let the sensual heart mis-place his paradise here in the world , it shall not pass for other with me , than my prison : How can it ? Why should it ? for what other terms do I find here ? 

What blind light looks in here at these scant loopholes of my soul ? Yea , what darkness of ignorance rather possesses me ? what bolts and shackles of heavy crosses do I bear about me ? how am I fed here with the bread of affliction ? how am I watched and beset with evil spirits ? how contumeliously traduced ? how disdainfully looked upon ? how dragging the same chain with the worst malefactors ? how disabled to all spiritual motions ? how restrained from that full liberty of enjoying my home , and my God in it , which I daily expect in my dissolution ? when therefore , I am released from these walls , I am still imprisoned in larger . and so shall be till the Lord of the Spirits of all flesh ( who put me here ) shall set me free ; and all the days of my appointed time will I wait , till this my changing come . 

SECT . X.  

You see then by this time , how little reason I have to be too much troubled with this imprisonment , or my friends for me ; But indeed , there are some sorts of Prisoners , which neither you nor I can have tears enough to bewail : and those especially of two kinds . 

The one , those that are too much affected with an outward bondage : The other , those that are no whit affected with a spiritual . 

In the first rank are they that sink under the weight of their Irons : Poor impotent souls , that groaning under the cruelty of a Turkish thraldom , or a Spanish Inquisition , want Faith to bear them out , against the impetuous violences of their tormentors : I sorrow for their sufferings ; but for their fainting more : could they see the Crown of Glory , which the righteous Judge holds ready for their victorious Patience , they could not but contemn pain , and all the pomp of Death , and confess that their Light affliction ( which is but for a moment ) works for them a far more exceeding & eternal weight of glory . But alas , it is the weakness of their eyes , that they only look at the things that are seen , close walls , heavy fetters , sharp scourges , merciless racks , and other dreadful engines of torture , and see not the things which are not seen , the glorious reward of their victory , blessedness . Had they had Stephen's eyes , they would have emulated his martyrdom ; Surely whosoever shall but read the story of the mother and the seven brothers in the Maccabees , & that of the forty Armenian Martyrs frozen to death , reported by Gaudentius , and shall there see the fainting revolter dying uncomfortably in the Bath , whiles the other thirty and nine ( together with their new converted Keeper ) are crowned by an Angel from heaven , cannot choose ( except he have nothing but ice in his bosom ) but find in himself a disposition emulous of their courage , & = ambitious of their honour ; But alas , what ever our desires , and purposes may be , it is not for every one to attain to the glory of Martyrdom ; this is the highest pitch , that earthly Saints are capable of : He must be more than a man , whom pain and death cannot remove from his holy resolutions , and especially , the lingering execution of both . It is well if an age can yield one , Mole : In what terms shall I commemorate thee , OH thou blessed Confessor , the great example of invincible constancy , in these backsliding times ( if at least thy rare perseverance be not more for wonder than imitation ) whom thirty years tedious durance in the Inqusitory at Rome , could not weary out of thy sincere profession of the Evangelical truth ? All this while thou wert not allowed the speech , the sight of any , but thy persecutors : Here was none to pity thee , none to exhort thee ; If either force of persuasion , or proffers of favour , or threats of extremity , could have wrought thee for thy perversion , thou hadst not at last died ours . Blessed be the God of all comfort , who having stood by thee , & made thee faithful to the death , hath now given thee a Crown of life and immortality ; and left thee a noble pattern of Christian Fortitude , so much more remarkable , as less frequently followed . 

Whether I look into the former , or the present times , I find the world full of shrinking professors . 

amongst the first Christians , persecution easily discovered four sorts of cowardly Renegadoes ; The first , and worst , whom they justly styled Idolaters , that yielded to all the public forms of worship to those false Gods : The second , Sacrificers , who condescended so far , as to some kind of immolation unto those feigned deities , or , at least , to a tasting of those things which were thus offered : The third , Incensers , such as ( with Marcellinus himself ) came on so far , as to cast some grains of incense into the Idols fire : The last were their Libellaticks , such as privately by themselves , or by some allowed proxey , denied the Faith , yet with their money bought out this ignominy , and sin of any public Act of Idolatry . 

Not to speak of those many thousands which fell down before Solyman the second , and held up their finger to signify their conversion to his Mahometism , for ease of their taxations ? how many do we hear of daily of all nations , and some ( which I shame and grieve to say ) of our own , who yield to receive circumcision , and to renounce their Saviour ? O the lamentable condition of those distressed Christians ! If constant to their profession , they live in a perpetual purgatory of torment ; If revolting , they run into the danger of an everlasting damnation in hell ; Even this gentle restraint puts me into the meditation of their insupportable durance ; Why do not all Christian nhearts bleed with the sense of their deplorable estate ? why is not our compassion heightened , according to the depth of their peril , and misery ? 

What are our bowels made of , if they yearn not at their unexpressible calamity ? ye rich Merchants , under whose employment many of these poor souls have thus unhappily miscarried , how can you bless yourselves in your bags , whiles you see themembers of Christ your Saviour , thus torn from him , for want of a petty ransom ? ye eminent persons whom God hath advanced to power & greatness , how can you sleep quietly upon your pillows , whiles you think of the cold and hard lodgings , the hungry bellies , the naked and walled backs of miserable Christians ? Lastly , what fervent prayers should we all , that profess the dear name of Christ , pour out unto the God of heaven for the strengthening of the faith & patience of these afflicted souls against the assaults of violence ? and for their happy and speedy deliverance out of their woeful captivity ? 

SECT . XI . 

These prisoners are worthy of our deep compassion ; as those , who are too sensible of their own misery ; Others there are , who are so much more worthy of greater pity , by how much they are less apprehensive of their need of it ; plausible prisoners under a spiritual tyranny ; whose very wills are so captived to the powers of darkness , that to choose they would be no other than bondmen ; pleasing themselves in those chains , whose weight is enough to sink their souls into hell ; such are they , who have yielded themselves over to be enthralled by any known sin ; no men under heaven do so much applaud themselves in the conceit of their liberty ; none so great slaves as they ; If the very Stoic Philosophers had not enough evinced this truth , Divinity should : Indeed , the world is a worse kind of Algiers , full of miserable captives ; here lies one so fettered in lust , that he rots again ; there another , so laden with drunken excess , that he can neither go nor stand , and in very deed is not his own man : here , one so pinched with golden fetters , that he can neither eat , nor sleep , nor at all enjoy himself ; there , another so pined with envy , that he is forced to feed on his own heart : here , one so tormented with anger that he is stark mad for the time ; and cares not how he mischiefs himself in a furious desire to hurt others : there , another so racked with ambition , that he is stretched beyond his own length , and lives in the pain of a perpetual self-extension . 

These , and all others of this kind are most miserable prisoners , chained up for everlasting darkness : So much more worthy of our pity , as they are less capable of their own : Spend your compassion ( if you please ) upon these deplorable subjects ; But for me , wish me ( if you will ) as free from any imputation of evil , as I was , and am from the thought of it ; wish me in your free champain , where I may have no hedge so much as to confine my eye : wish me happy in the society of so dear and noble a Friend ; but in the mean while , think of me no otherwise , than as a Free Prisoner , And 

Yours thankfully devoted in all faithful observance , I N.  

FINIS . 

Several Tractates written by Dr. Hall B. of Norwich , In and since his Imprisonment and Retiring . Namely , 

1.  The Devout Soul , and Free Prisoner . 
2.  The Remedy of Discontentment , Or , A Treatise of Contentation in whatsoever condition . 
3.  The Peacemaker , laying forth the right way of Peace in matter of Religion . 
4.  The Balm of Gilead , Or , Comforts for the distressed ; both Moral and Divine . 
5.  Christ Mystical , Or , The blessed union of Christ & his Members : To which is addded , An holy Rapture , Or , A Pathetical Meditation of the love of Christ . Also , The Christian laid forth in his whole disposition and carriage . 
6.  A Modest Offer , tendered to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster . 
7.  Select Thoughts in two Decades , with the breathing of the Devout Soul . 
8.  Pax Terris . 
9  Imposition of Hands . 
10.  The Revelation unrevealed — Concerning , The thousand years' reign of the Saints with Christ on Earth . 
11.  Susurrium cum Deo. Or , Holy Selfe-conferences of the Devout Soul , upon sundry choice Occasions . Now in the Press , and never before Printed . 




Dr. Preston  Psa . 19 1 , 2  Psa . 104. 24.  Cant. 5. 6.  Psa . 41. 4.  79. 8.  130 3.  94. 11.  3. 7.  89. 48.  109. 21.  86. 4.  Psal . 71. 10.  86. 11.  70. 6.  60. 11.  71. 23.  31. 17.  40. 14.  5. 8.  119. penult . 68 35.  92. 5.  71. 17.  18. 47.  Psa . 63. 4.  145. 10.  04. 25.  18. 31.  20. 5.  107. 8.  31. 21.  9 10.  16. 12.  8. 4.  115. 1.  Psal . 19 1.  74. 17.  97. 11.  36. 9  39 5.  93. 5.  Psa . 139. 11  139. 2.  51. 7.  17. 5.  90. 12.  39 5.  Luk. 11. 25  Wisd . 1. 4.  Psa . 26. 6.  Ecl. 10.  Esa . 66. 2.  Gen. 18. 27  Pro. 30. 2.  Mat. 3. 11.  Ephes . 3. 8.  Job 38.  Phil. 2. 6 , 7 , 8 , etc.  Rom. 5. 1.  Ps . 103. 8.  Ps . 116. 12 , 13.  Ps . 119. 18 , 21 , etc.  Phil. 1. 21.  Gal. 2. 20.  Cant. 2. 16.  Cant. 4. 9 6. 4 , 5.  Cant. 5. 10.  8. 6.  2. 5.  Psal . 116.  Rom. 3. 4  Psal . 119. 8.  Carolus Borachia romaeus . Acts 19 35.  Eccles . 5. 1.  Judg. 3. 20.  2 Cor. 5. 20  Acts 10. 33.  1 Sam. 25. 24.  Job 13. 17.  Psa . 40. 6.  Serm. ad Eccles . cautelam . 1 Pet. 2. 2.  Eph. 3. 9  Zach. 3  Mat. 5. 23.  

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Hos . 2. 14.  Non enim potest mens attrita & oneribus & importunitatibus gravata , tantum boni peragere , quantum delectata , & oppressionibus solut a. Cornel. ep . 2.  Rufo Coepiscopo . Acts ult . Gen. 36. 22  Magna domus homuli . Psal . 8. 3 , 4.  