EPISTLES , THE THIRD AND LAST VOLUME . 

CONTAINING two Decades . 

By JOSEPH HALL. Doctor of Divinity . 

LONDON Printed for E. Edgar , and A. Garbrand , at the Windmill in Paul's Church yard . 1611.  

TO THE MOST HIGH AND EXCELLENT PRINCE , HENRY , Prince of Wales , all happiness . 

Most Gracious Prince , 

LET me not ( whiles I desire to be dutiful ) seem importunate , in my dedications . I now bring to your Highness these my last , and perhaps most material Letters : wherein , if I mistake not , ( as , how easily are we deceived in our own ? ) the pleasure of the variety shall strive with the importance of matter . There is no worldly thing , I confess , whereof I am more ambitious then of your Highness' contentment , which that you place in goodness , is not more your glory , than our joy : Do so still , and heaven and earth shall agree to bless you , and us in you . For me , after this my officious boldness , I shall betake myself in silence , to some greater work , wherein I may approve my service to the Church , and to your Highness , as her second joy and care . My heart shall be always , and upon all opportunities , my tongue and pen , shall no less gladly be devoted to my gracious Master , as one 

Who rejoice to be your Highnesses ( though unworthy , yet ) faithful and obsequious Servant . JOS . HALL. . 

THE SUM OF THE SEVERAL EPISTLES . 

DECAD . v.  

EP. I  TO my Lord Bishop of Bath and Wels.  Discoursing of the causes and means of the increase of Popery . 1.  


EP. II  To my Lord B. of Worcester Showing the differences of the present Church , from the Apostolical ; and needlesnesse of our conformity thereto in all things . 21.  


EP. III  To my Lady MARY DENNY . Containing the description of a Christian , and his differences from the worldling . 33.  


EP. FOUR  To my L. HONORIA HAY.  Discoursing of the necessity of Baptism ; and the estate of those which necessarily want it . 43.  


EP. v.  To Sir RICHARD LEA , since deceased . Discoursing of the comfortable remedies of all afflictions . 57  


EP. VI  To Master PETER MOULIN Preacher of the Church at Paris . Discoursing of the late French occurrents , and what use God expects to be made of them . 69.  


EP. VII . To M. THOMAS SUTTON . Exciting him , and ( in him ) all others to early and cheerful beneficence : showing the necessity and benefit of good works . 77.  


EP. VIII . To E. B. Dedicated to Sir GEORGE GORING . Remedies against dulness and hartlesnesse in our callings , and encouragements to cheerfulness in labour . 91.  


EP. IX . To S. H. I Discussing this Question . Whether a man and wife after some years mutual , and loving fruition of each other , may upon consent , whether for secular , or religious causes , vow and perform a perpetual separation from each others bed , and absolutely renounce all carnal knowledge of each other for ever . 101 


EP. X.  To M. WILLIAM KNIGHT ; Encouraging him to persist in the holy calling of the ministry , which upon conceit of his insufficiency , and want of affection , he seemed inclining to forsake , and change . 115 


DECAD . VI  

EP. I  TO my Lord DENNY . A particular account how our days are , or should be spent , both common and holy . 1 


EP. II  To M. T. S. Dedicated to Sir FULKE GREVILL . Discoursing how we may use the world without danger . 13 


EP. III  To S. GEORGE FLEETWOOD . Of the remedies of sin , and motives to avoid it . 21 


EP. FOUR  To M. Doctor MILBURNE . Discoursing how far , and wherein Popery destroyeth the foundation . 31.  


EP. v.  Written long since to I W.  Dissuading from separation : and shortly oppugning the grounds of that error . 41.  


EP. VI  To Master I B.  A complaint of the mis-education of our Gentry . 65 


EP. VII . To Master IONAS REIGES BERGIUS in Zealand . Written some while since , concerning some new opinions then broaced in the Churches of Holland ; and under the name of Arminius ( then living : ) persuading all great wits to a study and care of the common Peace of the Church , and dissuading from all affectation of singularity . 75 


EP. VIII . To W. I condemned for murder Effectually preparing him , and ( under his name ) whatsoever Malefactor , for his death . 83.  


EP. IX . To Master JOHN MOLE , of a long time now prisoner under the Inquisition at Rome . Exciting him to his wont constancy , and encouraging him to Martyrdom . 93.  


EP. X.  To all Readers . Containing Rules of good advice for our Christian and civil carriage . 107.  


Errata . 

DECAD . v.  

Page 3. line 11. read setlednes for seelednes . p. 12. l. 16. read their for they , p. 14. l. 4. r. stales for stalls . p. 17. l. 13. r. great , oppugnation for Great oppugnation , p. 23. l. 15. r. person for persons , p. 27. l. 19 r. Fasts for Facts , p. 28. ult r. concluding for concluding , p. 37. l. 9 , r. ingrosses for engross , p. 44. l. 2. read heard for hard , p. 72. l. 10. r. Duels for Doels' , p. 72. l. 20. r. Cotton for Cotten , p. 74. l. 12. r. holy for wholly , p. 84. penult . r. deathbed for dead bed , p. 92. l. 4. r. more weak for more weaker p. 98. 7. r. our price for our pride , p. 104. l. 12. r. then ever forthen never , p. 110. l. 1. r. matrimonial for matrimonicall , p. 115. l. 8. r. I am not more for I am more , p 116. l. r. 20 appose us for oppose us : 

DECAD . VI  

Page 39 l. 6. r. Judges for judge . p. 66. l. 19 r. Ruffians for ruffianlike , p. 73. l. 5. r. glad for galled , p. 87. l. 20. r. let for lets , p. 110. l. 12. r. yield for yields . p. 112. l. 11. r. probation for provation , 

The fifth Decade . 

EPISTLE . I To my Lord Bishop of Bath and Wels.  

EP. I Discoursing of the causes and means of the increase of Popery . 

BY what means the Romish religion hath in these latter times prevailed so much over the world , ( Right Reverend and honourable ) is a consideration both weighty , and useful : for hence may we frame ourselves either to prevent , or imitate them : To imitate them in what we may ; or prevent them in what they should not . I meddle not with the means of their first risings : the munificence of Christian Princes , the honest devotions of wel-meaning Contributers , the division of the Christian world , the busy endeavours of forward Princes , for the recovery of the holy land , with neglect of their own , the ambitious insinuations of that sea , the same and large dominion of those seven hills ; the compacted indulgence , and connivance of some treacherous , of other timorous rulers ; the shameless flattery of parasites , the rude ignorance of Times ; or if there be any other of this kind ; My thoughts and words shall be spent upon the present , and latest age . All the world knows , how that pretended chair of Peter tottered , and cracked , some threescore years ago , threatening a speedy ruin to her fearful usurper : How is it that still it stands , and seems now to boast of some settledness ? Certainly , if hell had not contrived a new support , the Angel had long since said , It is fallen , it is fallen ; and the Merchants , Alas , Alas , the great City . The brood of that lame Loyola shall have this miserable honour , without our envy ; that if they had not been , Rome had not been . By what means , it rests now to inquire . 

It is not so much their zeal for falsehood ; which yet we acknowledge , and admire not . If Satan were not more busy than they , we had lost nothing . Their desperate attempts , bold intrusions , importunate solicitations have not returned empty ; yet their policy hath done more than their force . That Popish world was then foul , and debauched , as in doctrine , so in life ; and now began to be ashamed of itself ; when these holy Fathers , as some Saints dropped out of heaven , suddenly professed an unusual strictness , sad piety , resolved mortification ; and so drew the eyes , and hearts of men after them , that poor fowls began to think it could not be other then divine , which they taught ; other then holy , which they touched . The very times ( not seldom ) give as great advantage , as our own best strength : and the vices of others give glory to those which either are , or appear virtuous . They saw how ready the world was to bite at the bait , and now followed their success , with new helps . Plenty of pretended miracles must bless , on all sides , the in deavours of this new Sect ; and calls for both approbation , and wonder . Those things by the report of their own pens ( other witnesses I see none ) have been done by the ten Patriarcks of the jesuitish Religion , both alive and dead , which can hardly be matched of him , whose name they have usurped . And now the vulgar can say , If these men were not of God , they could do nothing : How can a man that is a sinner do such miracles ? not distrusting either the fame , or the work , but applauding the Authors , for what was said to be done . But now lest the envy of the fact should surpass the wonder , they have learned to cast this glory upon their wooden Ladies , & to communicate the gain unto the whole Religion : Two blocks at Hale and Scherpen-hewell , have said and done more for Popery , than all Friars , ever since Francis wore his breeches on his head . But because that praise is sweet , which arises from the disgrace of a rival , therefore this holy society hath besides , ever wont to honour itself by the brokage of shameless untruths against the adverse part ; not caring how probable any report is , but how odious . A just volume would not contain those willing lies , wherewith they have purposely loaded religion , and us ; that the multitude might first hate us , and then inquire : and these courses are held not tolerable , but meritorious . So the end may be attained , all means are just ; all ways strait . Whom we may , we satisfy : but wounds once given , are hardly healed with out some scars : and commonly accusations are vocal , Apologies dumb . How easy is it to make any cause good , if we may take liberty of tongue , and conscience ? Yet lest some glimpse of our truth and innocence should perhaps lighten the eyes of some more inquisitive Reader , they have by strict prohibitions , whether of books , or conference , restrained all possibility of true informations ; Yea their own writings , wherein our opinions are reported with confutation , are not allowed to the common view , lest if it should appear what we hold , our mere opinion should prevail more than their subtlest answer . But above all , the restraint of God's book hath gained them most ; If that might be in the hands of men , their religion could not be in their hearts ; now , the concealment of Scriptures breeds ignorance , and ignorance superstition . But because forbiddance doth but whet desire , and work a conceit of some secret excellence in things denied ; therefore have they devised to affright this dangerous curiosity , with that cruel , butcherly , hellish Inquisition . Wherein yet there is not less craft than violence . For since they have perceived the blood of Martyrs to be but the seed of the Church , and that these perfumes are more dispersed with beating ; they have now learned to murder without noise , and to bring forth ( if , at least , they list sometimes to make the people privy to some examples of terror ) not men but carcases . Behold , the constant confessions of the dying Saints have made them weary of public executions : None but bare walls shalll now testify the courage and faith of our happy Martyrs . A disguised corpse is only brought forth to the multitude either for laughter , or fear . Yet because the very dead speak for truth in a loud silence ; these spectacles are rare ; and the graves of heretics are become as close as their death . 

Yet lest ( since neither living mouths , nor faithful pens may be suffered to insinuate any truth ) those speeches should perhaps be received from the Ancients , which in us were heretical ; the monuments of unpartial antiquity must be depraved , all witnesses that might speak against them must be corrupted , with a fraudulent violence ; and some of them purged to the death . So whiles ours are debarred , and the Ancients altered , posterity shall acknowledge no adversary . 

What should I speak of those plausible devices ; which they have invented to make superstitious , and foolish Proselytes ? Their proud vaunts of antiquity , universality , succession , and the name of their forefathers , do not only persuade , but amaze , and besot an ignorant heart . The glorious shows of their processions , the gaudy ornaments of their Altars , the pomp and magnificence of the places , and manner of their Services , the triumphs of their great Festivals , are enough to bewitch any childish , simple , or vain beholders . Who knows not that nature is most led by sense ? Sure , children and fools ( such are all mere natural men ) cannot be of any other religion . 

Besides all these , their personal undertake , what for cunning , what for boldness , could promise nothing but success . They can transform themselves into all shapes ; and in these false forms thrust themselves into all Courts , and companies , not oftener changing their habit , than their name . They can take the best opportunities to work upon those which are either most unable to resist , or most like to bestead them . That I may not speak of the wrongs of unseasonable travel : wherein many unsettled heads have met dangers , and solicited errors : who like fond and idle Dinahs' , going abroad to gaze , have been ravished ere they return . Never any bird was so laid for , by the ne●ss and calls of the fowler , as the great heir of some noble family , or some fiery wit , is by these impostors . They know that greatness is both lawless , and commanding ; if not by precept , yet by example : their very silence is persuasory , and imperious . But alas for that other sex : Still the devil begins with Eve ; still his assault is strongest , where is weakest resistance . Simon Magus had his Helena , Nicholas the Deacon had his choros foemineos ( as Hierome calls them . ) Martion had his Factoress at Rome ; Appelles his Philumena , Montanus his Prisca and Maximilla ; Arrius his Constantines-sister , Donatus his Lucilla , Elpidius his Agape , Priscillianus his Galla : and our Jesuits have their painted Ladies ( not dead , but living ) both for objects and instruments . When they saw they could not blow up religion with French powder into heaven , they now try by this Moabitish plot to sink it down to hell . Those silly women , which are laden with sins , and diverse lusts , must now be the stalls of their spiritual fornications : But for that these enterprises want not danger ; that both parts may securely succeed , behold public liberty of dispensations , whether for dissembled religion , or not unprofitable filthiness . These means are ( like the Authors ) dishonest , and godless . Add ( if you please ) hereto , those which pretend more innocent policy : their common dependences upon one commander , their intelligences given , their charges received , their rewards and honours ( perhaps of the Calendar , perhaps of a red hat ) duly conferred . Neither may the least help be ascribed to the conference of studies ; ( the conjoined labours of whole Societies directed to one end , and shrouded under the title of one Author : ) to large maintenances , raised from the deathbeds of some guilty benefactors : from whence flow both infinite numbers , and incomparable helps of Students . Under which head , for the time past , not a few are moved by the remembrance of the bounteous hospitality of the religious ; who having engrossed the world to themselves , seemed liberal in giving something ; like unto some vainglorious thieves , which having robbed wealth Merchants , bestow some pence upon beggars . Further , the smothering , if not composing of their frequent strifes , and confining of brawls within their own thresholds ; with the nice men aging of their known oppositions , hath won many ignorant friends . Lastly , the excellent correspondence of their doctrines unto nature , hath been their best solicitor . We have examined particulars in a former Epistle : wherein we have made it evident , that Popery affects nothing but to make nature either proud , or wanton : it offers difficulties , but carnal ; and such as the greatest lover of himself would easily embrace for an advantage . That we may therefore sum up all ; I need not accuse our carelessness , indifferency , idleness , loose carriage ; in all which , would God we had not aided them , and wronged ourselves ; Nor yet their zeal and forwardness ; worse means are guilty of their gain . In short , the fair outside which they set upon Religion , which sure is the best they have , if not all ; their pretended miracles , wilful untruths , straight prohibitions , bloody & secret inquisitions , depravations of Ancient witnesses , expurgation of their own ; gay and gairish sights , glorious titles , crafty changes of names , shapes , habits , conditions ; insinuations to the great oppugnation of the weaker sex ; falsehood of answers , and oaths , dispensatons for sins , uniting of forces , concealing of differences , largeness of contributions , multitude of actors , and means , accordances to men's natural dispositions : Where we on the contrary care not to seem but to be , disclaim miracles , dare not save the life of religion with a lie ; give free scope to all pens , to all tongues , to all eyes ▪ shed no blood for religion : suffer all writers to speak like themselves ; show nothing but poor simplicity in our devotions , got ever , and look as we are ; teach the truth right-downe in an honest plainness , take no vantage of imbecility : swear true , though we die ; give no hope of indulgence for evil ; study each retired to himself , & the muses ; publish our quarrels and aggravate them ▪ anger nature , and conquer it . Such gain shall be gravel in their throats : such losses to us ( in our not daring to sin ) shall be happy and victorious ; in all other regards are both blame worthy , and recoverable . What dulness is this ? Have we such a King , as in these lists of Controversy , may dare to grapple with that great infallible Vicar , for his triple crown : Such Bishops as may justly challenge the whole Consistory of Rome ; so many learned Doctors , and Divines , as no nation under heaven , more ; so flourishing Universities as Christendom hath none ; such blessed opportunities , such encouragements ; and now when we want nothing else , shall we be wanting to ourselves ? Yea above all these , the God of heaven favours us ; and do we languish ? The cause is his , and in spite of the gates of hell shall succeed , though we were not : our neglect may slacken the pace of truth , cannot stay the passage . Why are we not as busy , as subtle , more resolute ? Such spirits , and such hands as yours ( reverend Lord ) must put life into the cold breasts of this frozen generation , and raise them up to such thoughts and endeavours , as may make the emulation of our adversary's equal to their enmity . 

To my Lord Bishop of Worcester . 

EP. II Showing the differences of the present Church from the Apostolical ; and needlesnesse of our conformity thereto in all things . 

I Fear not to say those men are but superstitiously curious , ( Right Reverend , and honourable ) which would call back all circumstances , to their first patterns . The Spouse or Christ hath been ever clothed with her own rites : And as apparel , so Religion hath her fashions , variable according to ages , and places : To reduce us to the same observations which were in Apostolical use , were no better then to tie us to the sandals of the Disciples , or the seamlesse coat of our Saviour . In these cases , they did , what we need not : and we may , what they did not God meant us no bondage in their example : their Canons bind us whether for manners , or doctrine , not their Ceremonies . Neither Christ , nor his Apostles did all things for imitation : I speak not of miraculous Acts. We need not be silent before a judge , as Christ was ; we need not take a towel , and gird ourselves , and wash our servant's feet , as Christ did ; we need not make tents for our living as Paul , nor go armed as Peter ; nor carry about our wives , as he , and the other Apostles . I acknowledge the ground not only of separation , but Anabaptisme ; and wonder that these conceits do not answer themselves who can choose but see a manifest difference betwixt those laws , which Christ and his great Ambassadors made for eternal use , and those ritual matters , which were confined to place , and time ? Every Nation , every persons sins that observes not those ; These for the most part , are not kept of the most ; and are as well left without sin by us , as used without prescription or necessity by the Authors . Some of them we cannot do ; others we need not : which of us can cast out devils by command ? Who can cure the sick by ointment , and imposition of hands ? The Disciples did it . All those Acts which proceeded from supernatural privilege , ceased with their cause : who now dare undertake to continue them ? Unless perhaps some bold Papists , who have brought in gross magic instead of miraculous authority ; and daub very chrcasses instead of healing diseases . There be more yet , which we need not do : What need we to choose Ministers by Lot ? What need we to disclaim all peculiarity in goods ? What need we to Christen in rivers ; or to meet upon their banks ? What need we to receive God's Supper after our own ? What to lean in each others bosom while we receive it ? what to abhor leaven in that holy Bread ? what to celebrate love feasts upon the receipt ? what to abstain from all strangled and blood ? what to depend upon a maintenance arbitrary , and uncertain ? what to spend our days in a perpetual pererration , as not only the Apostles but the Prophets and Evangelists some ages after Christ ? whosoever would impose all these on us , he should surely make us , not the Sons , but the slaves of the Apostles . God's Church never held herself in such servile terms ; yea Christ himself gave at first some precepts of this nature , which he reversed ere long : when he sent the Disciples to preach , he charges , take not gold , nor silver , nor money in your girdles ; afterwards judas carried the bag . He charges , not to take so much as a staff ; yet after behold two swords : should the Disciples have held their master to his own rule ? Is it necessary that what he once commanded , should be observed always ? The very next age to these Christian Patriarcks , neither would nor durst have so much varied her rites , or augmented them if it had found itself tied either to number , or kind : As yet it was pure , chaste , and ( which was the ground of all ) persecuted . The Church of Rome distributed the sacramental Bread : the Church of Alexandria permitted the people to take it : the Churches of Africa and Rome , mixed their holy wine with water ; other colder regions drank it pure . Some kneeled in their prayers , others fell prostrate ; and some lifted up eyes , hands , feet towards heaven : some kept their Easter according to the jewish use the foureteenth of March ; the French ( as Nicephorus ) the eight of the Calendss of April , in a set solemnity : the Church of Rome the Sunday after the fourteenth Moon ; which yet ( as Socrates truly writes ) was never restrained by any Gospel , by any Apostle . That Romish Victor overcame the other world in this point , with too much rigour ; whose censure therefore of the Asian Churches was justly censured , by Irenaeus . What should I speak of their difference of facts ? there can scarce be more variety in days , or meats . It hath ever been thus seen , according to our Anselmes' rule , that the multitude of different ceremonies in all Churches , hath justly commended their unity in faith . The French Divines preach covered ( upon the same rule which required the Corinthians to be uncoverd ) we bore : The Dutch sit at the Sacrament , we kneel ; Geneva useth wafers , we leavened bread ; they common vestures in Divine service , we peculiar : each is free : no one doth either blames , or over rule others . I cannot but commend those very Novatian Bishops ( though it is a wonder any precedent of peace should fall from schismatics ) who meeting in Council together , enacted that Canon of indifferency , when the Church was distracted with the differences of her Paschall solemnities ; conluding how insufficient , this cause was to disquiet the Church of Christ . Their own issue ( our Separatists ) will needs be unlike them in good ; and strive to a further distance from peace : whiles in a conceit not less idle , them scrupulous , they press us to an uniform comformity in our fashions to the Apostles . Their own practice condemns them : They call for some , and yet keep not all : yet the same reason enforces all , that pleads for some : and that which warrants the forbearance of some , holds for all . Those tools which serve for the foundation , are not of use for the roof . Yea the great master builder choose those workmen for the first stones which he meant not to employ in the walls . Do we not see all Christ's first agents extraordinary Apostles , Evangelists , Prophets ; Prophetesses ? See we not fiery and cloven tongues descending ▪ What Church ever since boasted of such founders ; of such means ? Why would God begin with those which he meant not to continue , but to show us we may not always look for one face of things ? The nurse feeds and tends her child at first ; afterwards he is undertaken by the discipline of a Tutor ; must he be always under the spoon , and ferule , because he began so ? If he have good breeding , it matters not by whose hands . Who can deny , that we have the substance of all those royal Laws , which Christ and his Apostles left to his Church ? what do we how thus importunately catching at shadows ? If there had been a necessity of having what we want , or wanting what we have , let us not so far wrong the wisdom and perfection of the lawgiver , as to think he would not have enjoined that , and forbidden this . His silence in both argues his indifferency , and calls for ours ; which while it is not peaceably entertained , there is clamour without profit , malice without cause , and strife without end . 

To my Lady Mary Denny . 

EP. III Containing the description of a Christian , and his differences from the worldling . 

MADAM . 

IT is true that worldly eyes can see no difference , betwixt a Christian , & another man ; the outside of both is made of one clay , and cast in one mould ; both are inspired with one common breath : Outward events distinguish them not ; those , God never made for evidences of love , or hatred . So the senses can perceive no difference , betwixt the reasonable soul , & that which informs the beast : yet the soul knows there is much more , then betwixt their bodies . The same holds in this : Faith sees more inward difference , than the eye sees outward resemblance . This point is not more high , then material : which that it may appear , let me show , what it is to be a Christian : You that have felt it , can second me with your experience ; and supply the defects of my discourse . He is the living temple of the living God , where the deity is both resident & worshipped . The highest thing in a man is his own spirit ; but in a Christian the spirit of God , which is the God of spirits . no grace is wanting in him ; & those which there are , want not stirring up . Both his hart & his hands are clean : All his outward purity flows from within ; neither doth he frame his soul to counterfeit good actions , but out of his holy disposition , commands and produces them , in the sight of God. Let us begin with his beginning , and fetch the Christian out of his nature , as another Abraham from his Chaldea : whiles the wordling lives and dies , in nature , out of God. The true convert therefore after his wild and secure courses puts himself ( through the motions of gods spirit ) to school unto the law ; there he learns what he should have done , what he could not do , what he hath done , what he hath deserved . These lessons , cost him many a stripe , and many a tear , and not more grief than terror : For this sharp master makes him feel what sin is , and what hell is : and in regard of both , what himself is . When he hath well smarted under the whip of this severe usher , and is made vile enough in himself , then is he led up into the higher school of Christ , & there taught the comfortable lessons of grace ; there he learns , what belongs to a Saviour , what one he is , what he hath done , and for whom , how he became ours , we his ; & now finding himself in a true state of danger , of humility , of need , of desire , of fitness for Christ , he brings home to himself all that he learns , and what he knows he applies . His former Tutor he feared , this he loveth ; that showed him his wounds , yea made them : this binds and heals them : that killed him , this shows him life , and leads him to it . Now at once he hate's himself , defies Satan , trusts to Christ , makes account both of pardon and glory . This is his most precious Faith , whereby he appropriates , yea in grosses Christ jesus to himself : whence he is justified from his sins , purified from his corruptions , established in his resolutions , comforted in his doubts , defended against temptations , overcomes all his enemies . Which virtue , as it is most employed , and most opposed , so carries the most care from the Christian hart , that it be sound , lively growing : Sound , not rotten , not hollow not presumptuous : sound in the Act ; not a superficial conceit , but a true , deep , and sensible apprehension ; an apprehension , not of the brain , but of the heart , and of the heart not approving , or assenting , but trusting , and reposing Sound in the object , none but Christ : he knows , that no friendship in heaven can do him good , without this ; The Angels cannot : God will not : ye believe in the Father , believe also in me . 

Lively ; for it cannot give life , unless it have life ; the faith that is not fruitful is dead : the fruits of faith are good works : whether inward , within the roof of the heart , as love , awe , sorrow , piety , zeal , joy , and the rest ; or outward towards God , or our brethren : obedience and service to the one : to the other relief and beneficence : These he bears in his time : sometimes all , but always some . 

Growing : true faith cannot stand still , but as it is fruitful in works , so it increaseth in degrees ; from a little seed it proves a large plant , reaching from earth to heaven , and from one heaven to another : every shower and every Sun adds something to it . Neither is this grace ever solitary , but always attended royallie : For he that believes what a Saviour he hath , cannot but love him : & he that loves him cannot but hate whatsoever may displease him : cannot but rejoice in him , & hope to enjoy him , and desire to enjoy his hope , and contemn all those vanities which he once desired and enjoyed . His mind now scorneth to grovel upon earth , but soareth up to the things above , where Christ sits at the right hand of God : and after it hath seen what is done in heaven , looks strangely upon all worldly things . He dare trust his faith above his reason , and sense ▪ and hath learned to wean his appetite from craving much : He stands in awe of his own conscience and dare no more offend it , than not displease himself . He fears not his enemies , yet neglects them not ; equally avoiding security , and timorousness : He sees him that is invisible ; and walks with him awfully , familiarly . He knows what he is born to , and therefore digests the miseries of his wardship , with patience : he finds more comfort in his afflictions , than any worldling in pleasures . And as he hath these graces to comfort him within , so hath he the Angels to attend him without ; spirits better than his own , more powerful , more glorious ; These bear him in their arms , wake by his bed , keep his soul while he hath it and receive it when it leaves him . These are some present differences , the greatest are future , which could not be so great , if themselves were not witnesses ; no less than betwixt heaven and hell , torment and glory , an incorruptible crown , and fire unquenchable . Whether Infidels be leeve these things or no , we know them : so shall they , but too late . What remains but that we applaud ourselves in this happiness ; & walk on clearly in this heavenly profession ? acknowledging that God could not do more for us ; & that we cannot do enough for him . Let others boast ( as your Ladyship might with others ) of ancient and noble houses , large Patrimonies , or dowries , honourable commands ; others of famous names , high and envied honours , or the favours of the greatest ; others of valour or beauty , or some perhaps of eminent learning and wit ; it shall be our pride that we are Christians . 

To my Lady Honoria Hay . 

Ep. FOUR Discoursing of the necessity of Baptism ; and the estate of those which necessarily want it . 

MADAM . 

Methinks children are like teeth , troublesome both in the breeding , and losing , & oftentimes painful while they stand : yet such , as we neither would , nor can well be without . I go not about to comfort you thus late , for your loss , I rather congratulate your wise moderation , & Christian care of these first spiritual privileges ; desiring only to satisfy you in what you hard as a witness ; not in what you needed as a mother . Children are the blessings of Parents , and baptism is the blessing of children , and parents : Wherein , there is not only use , but necessity ; Necessity , not in respect so much of the end , as of the precept : God hath enjoined it , to the comfort of parents , and behoof of children : which therefore , as it may not be superstitiously hastened , so not negligently differred . That the contempt of baptism damneth , is past all doubt ; but that the constrained absence thereof , should send infants to hell , is a cruel rashness . It is not their sin to die early : death is a punishment , not an offence ; an effect of sin , not a cause of torment ; they want nothing but time ; which they could not command . Because they could not live a while longer , that therefore they should die everlastingly , is the hard sentence of a bloody religion . I am only sorry , that so harsh an opinion should be graced with the name of a father , so reverend , so divine : whose sentence yet , let no man plead by halves . He who held it impossible for a child to be saved unless the baptismal water were poured on his face , held it also as impossible , for the same infant , unless the sacramental bread were received into his mouth . There is the same ground for both , the same error in both , a weakness fit for forgetfulness ; seeyet how ignorant , or i'll meaning posterity , could single out one half of the opinion for truth : and condemn the other of falsehood . In spite of whom , one part shall easily convince the other ; yea without all force , since both cannot stand , both will fall together , for company . The same mouth , which said , unless ye be born again of water , and the holy Ghost , said also , Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man , and drink his blood : An equal necessity of both . And lest any one should pled different interpretations , the same Saint Austin avers this later opinion also , concerning the necessary communicating of children , to have been once the common judgement of the Church of Rome : A sentence so displeasing , that you shall find the memory of it noted with a black coal , & wiped out in that infamous bill of Expurgations . Had the ancient Church held this desperate sequel , what strange , and yet wilful cruelty had it been in them , to defer baptism a whole yearelong : till Easter , or that Sunday , which hath his name ( I think ) from the white robes of the baptised ? 

Yea what an adventure was it in some , to adjourn it till their age ( with Constantine ) if being unsure of their life , they had been sure the prevention of death would have inferred damnation ? Look unto that legal Sacrament of circumcision , which ( contrary to the fancies of our Anabaptists ) directly answers this evangelical . Before the eight day they could not be circumcised : before the eight day they might die . If dying the seventh day , they were necessarily condemned : either the want of a day is a sin , or God sometimes condemneth not for sin : Neither of them possible , neither according with the justice of the Lawgiver . Or if from this parallel , you please to look either to reason or example , the case is clear . Reason ; no man that hath faith , can be condemned ; for Christ dwells in our hearts by faith : and he in whom Christ dwells cannot be a reprobate . Now it is possible a man may have a saving saith , before baptism : Abraham first believed to justification : then after received the sign of circumcision , as a seal of the righteousness of that faith , which he had when he was uncircumcised : Therefore some dying before their baptism , may , yea must be saved . Neither was Abraham's case singular ; he was the Father of all them also , which believe , not being circumcised : these , as they are his Sons in faith , so in righteousness ; so in salvation : uncircumcision cannot hinder , where faith admitteth ; These following his steps of belief before the sacrament , shall doubtless rest in his bosom , without the sacrament ; without it , as fataly absent , not as willingly neglected . It is not the water , but the faith : not the putting away the filth of the flesh ( saith Saint Peter ) but the stipulation of a good conscience ; for who takes Baptism without a full faith ( saith Hierome ) takes the water , takes not the spirit ; Whence is this so great virtue of the water , that it should touch the body , and cleanse the heart ( saith Austen ) unless by the power of the word , not spoken , but believed ? thou seest water ( saith Ambrose : ) every water heals not , that water only heals which hath the grace of God annexed ; And if there be any grace in the water ( saith Basill ) it is not of the nature of the water , but of the presence of the spirit . Baptism is indeed , as S. Ambrose styles it , the pawn and image of our resurrection , yea ( as Basil ) the power of God to resurrection : but ( as Ignatius expounds this phrase aright ) believing in his death , we are by baptism made partakers of his resurrection . Baptism therefore without faith cannot save a man , and by faith doth save him ; and faith without baptism ( where it cannot be had ; not where it may be had , and is contemned ) may save him : That Spirit which works by means , will not be tied to means . 

Examples . Cast your eyes upon that good thief : good in his death , though in his life abominable : he was never washed in lordan , yet is received into Paradise ; his soble was foul with rapines , and injustice , yea bloody with murders : and yet being scouted only with the blood of his Saviour , not with water of baptism ; it is presented glorious to God. I say nothing of the souls of Traian , and Falconella , mere heathens , living and dying without Christ , without baptism : which yet their honest Legend reports delivered from hell , transported to heaven , not so much as scorched in Purgatory : The one by the prayers of Gregory , the other of Tecla . What partiality is this to deny that to the children of Christians , which they grant to known , infidels ? The promise is made to us , and our seed ; not to those that are without the pale of the Church . Those Innocents' which were massacred for Christ , are by them canonised for Saints , and make one day in their Calendar ( each year ) both holy , and dismal ; whereof yet scarce any lived to know water , none to know baptism . Yea , all Martyrs are here privileged ; who are Christened in their own blood , instead of water : but where hath God said , All that die without baptism , shall die for ever , except Martyrs ? why not , except believers ? It is faith that gives life to Martyrs ; which if they should want , their first death could not avoid the second . Ambrose doubted not to say , his Valentinian was baptised , because he desired it ; not because he had it : he knew the mind of God , who accounts us to have what we unfaynedly wish . 

Children cannot live to desire baptism , if their parents desire it for them , why may not the desire of others be theirs , as well as ( according to Augustine's opinion ) the faith of othenrs believing , and the mouth of others confessing ? In these cases therefore of any souls but our own , it is safe to suspend , and dangerous to pass judgement . Secret things to God : He that made all soulesv , knows what to do with them , neither will make us of counsel : But if we define either way , the errors of charity are inoffensive . we must honour good means and use them , and in their necessary want depend upon him , who can work , beyond , without , against means . 

Thus have I endeavoured your Ladyship's satisfaction in what you heard , not without some scruple . If any man shall blame my choice in troubling you with a thorny , and scholastical discourse , let him know that I have learned this fashion of St. Hierome the Oracle of Antiquity , who was wont to entertain his Paula , and Eustochium , Marcelia , Principia , Hedibia , and other devout Ladies , with learned canuases of the deep points of Divinity . This is not so perplexed , that it need to offend : nor so unnecessary , that it may be unknown . 

To Sir Richard Lea , since deceased . 

EP. v. Discoursing of the comfortable remedies of all afflictions . 

Wise men seek remedies before their disease : sensible patients , when they begin to complain : fools , too late . Afflictions are the common maladies , of Christians : These you feel , and upon the first groans seek for ease . Wherhfore serves the tongue of the learned , but to speak words in season ? I am a scholar of those that can comfort you : If you shall with me , take out my lessons , neither of us shall repent it . You smart and complain , take heed lest too much : There is no affliction not grievous : the bone that was disjointed , cannot be set right without pain . no potion can cure us , if it work not : it works not , except it make us sick : we are contented with that sickness , which is the way to health . There is a vexation without hurt : such is this : We are afflicted , not over-pressed ; needy , not desperate ; persecuted not forsaken , cast down but perish not . How should we , when all the evil in a City comes from the providence of a good God ; which can neither be impotent , nor unmerciful ? It is the Lord , let him do what he william Woe were us if evils could come by chance ; or were let loose to alight where they list : now they are overuled ; we are safe . The destiny of our sorrows is written in heaven by a wise and eternal decree : Behold he that hath ordained , moderates them . A faithful God , that gives anissue with the tentation : An issue , both of their end , and their success . He chides not always , much less striketh ; Our light afflictions are but for a moment , not so long , in respect of our vacancy ; and rest . If we weep sometimes , our tears are precious ; As they shall never be dry in his bottle , so they shall soon be dry upon our cheeks . He that wrings them from us , shall wipe them off : how sweetly doth he interchange our sorrows , and joys , that we may neither be vain , nor miserable ? It is true ; to be struck , once in anger , is fearful : his displeasure is more than his blow : In both , our God is a consuming fire . Fear not , these stripes are the tokens of his love : he is no Son , that is not beaten ; yea till he smart , and cry ; if not till he bleed : no parent corrects another's child , and he is no good parent , that corrects not his own . O rod worthy to be kissed , that assures us of his love , of our adoption ! What speak I of no hurt ? short praises do but discommend , I say more , these evils are good : look to their effects . What is good if not patience ? affliction is the mother of it ; tribulation bringeth forth patience . What can earth or heaven yield better than the assurance of God's spirit ? Afflictions argue , yea seal this to us. Wherein stands perfect happiness , if not in our near resemblance of Christ ? Why was man created happy , but because in God's image ? The glory of Paradise , the beauty of his body , the duty of the creatures , could not give him felicity without the likeness to his creator . Behold , what we lost in our height , we recover in our misery ; a conformity to the Image of the Son of God : he that is not like his elder brother , shall never be coheir with him . Lo his side , temples , hands , feet , all bleeding : his face blubbered ghastly , & spitted on : his skin all pearled with a bloody sweat , his head drooping , his soul heavy to the death : see you the worldling merry , soft , delicate , perfumed , never wrinkled with sorrow , never humbled with afflictions ? What resemblance is here , yea what contrariery ? Ease slayeth the fool ; it hath made him resty , and leaves him miserable . Be not deceived ; no man can follow Christ without his Gross ; much less reach him and if none shall reign with Christ , but these that suffer with him ; what shall become of these jolly ones ? Go now thou dainty worldling , and please thyself in thy happiness , laugh always , and be ever applauded ; It is a woeful felicity that thou shalt find in opposition to thy redeemer : He hath said , woe to them that laugh ; Believest thou , and dost not weep at thy laughter ? and with Solomon , condemn it of madness ? And again , with the same breath , Blessed are ye that weep : who can believe this , and not rejoice in his own tears , and not pity the faint smiles of the godless ? Why blessed ? For ye shall laugh : Behold we that weepon earth , shall laugh in heaven : we that now weep with men , shall laugh with Angels ; while the fleering worldling , shall be gnashing , and howling with devils : we that weep for a time , shall laugh for ever : who would not be content to differ his joy a little , that it may be perpetual , and infinite ? What mad man would purchase this crackling of thorns ( such is the worldlings joy ) with eternal shrieking & torment ? he that is the door and the way , hath taught us , that through many afflictions we must enter into heaven . There is but one passage , and that a straight one : It with much pressure we can get through , and leave but our superfluous rags as torn from us in the crowd ; we are happy . He that made heaven , hath on purpose thus framed it ; wide when we are entered ; and glorious narrow and hard in the entrance : that after our pain , our glory might be sweeter . And if before hand you can climb up thither in your thoughts ; look about you , you shall see no more palms , than crosses : you shall see none crowned , but those that have wrestled : with crosses and so rows , to sweated , yea to blood ; and have overcome . All runs here to the overcommer , and overcoming implies both fight , and success . Gird up your loins therefore , and strengthen your weak knees , resolve to fight for heaven , to suffer in fight , to persist in suffering ; so persisting you shall overcome , and overcoming you shall be crowned . O reward truly great , above desert , yea , above conceit . A crown for a few groans : And eternal crown of life and glory , for a short and moment any suffering : How just is Saint Paul's account , that the afflictions of this present life are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us ? OH Lord let me smart that I may reign ; uphold thou me in smarting , that thou mayest hold me worthy of reigning . It is no matter how vile I be , so I may be glorious . What say you ? would you not be afflicted ? Whether had you rather mourn for a while , or for ever ; One must be chosen : the election is easy : Whether had you rather rejoice for one fit or always ? You would do both . Pardon me ; it is a fond covetousness , and idle singularity to affect it . What ? That you alone may far better than all God's Saints ? That God should strew Carpets for your nice feet only , to walk into your heaven , and make that way smooth for you , which all Patriarches , Prophets , Evangelists , Confessors , Christ himself , have found rugged and bloody ? Away with this self love ; and come down you ambitious Son of Zebedee : and ere you think of sitting near the throne , be content to be called unto the Cup. Now is your trial ; Let your Saviour see how much of his bitter potion you can pledge ; then shall you see how much of his glory he can afford you . Be content to drink of his Vinegar , and gall , and you shall drink new wine with him in his kingdom . 

To Master Peter Moulin , Preacher of the Church at PARIS . 

EP. VI Discoursing of the late French occurrents , and what use God expects to be made of them . 

Since your travels here with us , we have not forgotten you ; but since that , your witty and learned travels in the common affairs of Religion have made your memory both fresh , and blessed . Behold , whiles your hand was happily busy in the defence of our King , the heads and hands of traitors were busy in the massacring of your own . God doth no memorable , and public act , which he would not have talked of , read , construed of all the world . How much more of neighbours , whom scarce a sea severeth from each other ? how much yet more of brethren , whom neither land , nor sea , can sever ? Your dangers , and fears , and griefs have been ours : All the salt water that runs betwixt us , cannot wash off our interest in all your common causes : The deadly blow of that miscreant ( whose name is justly sentenced to forgetfulness ) pierced even our sides . Who hath not bled within himself , to think that he , which had so victoriously outlived the swords of enemies , should fall by the knife of a villain ? and that he should die in the peaceable streets , whom no fields could kill ? that all those honourable and happy triumphs should end in so base a violence ? But o our idleness , and impiety , if we see not a divine hand from above , striking with this hand of disloyalty . Sparrows fall not to the ground without him much less Kings ; One dies by a tyle-sheard , another by the splinters of a Lance , one by Lice , another by a Fly , one by poison , another by a knife ; What are all these but the executioners of that great God , which hath said , ye are Gods , but ye shall die like men ? Perhaps God saw ( that we may guess modestly at the reasons of his acts ) you reposed too much , in this arm of flesh ; or Perhaps he saw this scourge would have been too early , to those enemies , whose sin , though great , yet was not full : or perhaps he saw , that if that great spirit had been deliberately yielded in his bed , you should not have slept in yours : Or perhaps the ancient connivance at those streams of blood , from your too common deels , was now called to reckoning ; or , it may be , that weak revolt from the truth . He who 's the rod was , knows why he struck : yet may it not pass without a note , that he fell by that religion , to which he fell . How many ages might that great monarch have lived ( whatsoever the ripe head of your more than mellow Cotton could imagine ) ere his least finger should have bled , by the hand of an Huguenot ? All religions may have some monsters ; but blessed be the God of heaven , ours shall never yield that good jesuit , either a Mariana to teach treason , or a Ravillac to act it . But what is that we hear ? It is no marvel : That holy Society is a fit Guardian for the hearts of kings : I dare say , none more loves to see them : none takes more care to purchase them . How happy were that Chapel ( think they ) if it were full of such shrines ? I hope all Christian Princes have long , and well learned ( so great is the courtesy of these good Fathers ) that they shall never ( by their wills ) need be troubled with the charge of their own hearts . An heart of a KING in a Jesuits hand , is as proper , as a wafer in a Priests . justly was it written of old , under the picture of Ignatius Loyola , Cavete vobis Principes ; Be wise OH ye Princes , and learn to be the keepers of your own hearts . Yea rather , OH thou keeper of Israel , that neither slumberest nor sleepest , keep thou the hearts of all Christian Kings , whether alive or dead , from the keeping of this traitorous generation ; whose very religion is wholly rebellion , and whose merits bloody . Doubtless , that murderer hoped to have stabbed thousands with that blow , and to have let out the life of religion , at the side of her collapsed Patron : God did at once laugh and frown at his project ; and suffered him to live to see himself , no less a fool then a villain : O the infinite goodness of the wise , and holy governor of the world ; who could have looked for such a calm in the midst of a tempest ? who would have thought that violence could beget peace ? Who durst have conceived that King Henry should die alone ? and that Religion should lose nothing but his person ? This is the Lords doing , and it is marvelous in our eyes . You have now paralleled us : Out of both our fears hath God fetched security : o that out of our security , we could as easily fetch fear : not so much of evil , as of the Author of good ; and yet trust him in our fear , and in both magnify him . Yea , you have by this act gained some converts , against the hope of the agents : neither can I without many joyful congratulationss , think of the estate of your Church ; which every day honour's with the access of new clients ; whose tears and sad confessions make the Angels to rejoice in heaven , & the Saints on earth . We should give you example , if our peace were as plentiful of goodness as of pleasure . But how seldom hath the Church gained by ease ? or lost by restraint ? Bless you God for our prosperity , and we shall praise him for your progress . 

To Master THOMAS SUTTON . 

EP. VII . Exciting him , and ( in him ) all others to early and cheerful beneficence : showing the necessity and benefit of good works . 

SIR , I trouble you not with reasons of my writing , or with excusds : If I do ill , no plea can warrant me ; If well , I cannot be discouraged with any censures . I crave not your pardon , but your acceptation . It is no presumption to give good counsel ; and presents of love fear not to be ill taken of strangers . My pen and your substance are both given us for one end , to do good : These are our talents , how happy are we if we can improve them well : suffer me to do you good with the one that with the other , you may do good to many , and most to yourself . You cannot but know , that your full hand , and worthy purposes have possessed the world with much expectation : what speak I of the world ? whose honest and reasonable claims yet , cannot be contemned with honour , nor disappointed without dishonour . The God of heaven , which hath lent you this abundance , and given you these gracious thoughts of charity ; of piety , looks long for the issue of both : & will easily complain either of too little or too late . Your wealth and your will are both good , but the first is only made good by the second for if your hand were full , and your heart empty , we who now applaud you , should justly pity you , you might have riches , not goods , not blessings : your burden should be greater , than your estate ; and you should be richer in sorrows , then in metals . For ( if we look to no other world ) what gain is it to be the keeper of the best earth ? That which is the common coffer of all the rich mines , we do but tread upon ; and accounted it vile , because it doth but hold , and hide those treasures . Whereas the skilful metalist that findeth , and refineth those precious veins , for public use , is rewarded , is honoured . The very basest Element yields gold ; the savage Indian gets it , the servile prentice works it , the very Midianitish Camel may wear it , the miserable worldling admires it , the covetous lieu swallows it , the unthrifty Ruffian spends it : what are all these the better for it ? Only good use gives praise to earthly possessions . Here in therefore you owe more to God , that he hath given you an heart to do good a will to be as rich in good works , as great in riches . To be a friend to this Mammon , is to be an enemy to God : but to make friends with it , is royal , and Christian . His enemies may be wealthy , none but his friends can either be good , or do good : Dam & accipe , saith the wise man The Christian which must imitate the high pattern of his creator , knows his best riches to be bounty ; God that hath all , gives all ; reserves nothing . And for himself ; he well considers , that God hath not made him an owner , but a servant : and of servants a servant , not of his goods but of the giver ; not a treasurer , but a Steward : whose praise is more to lay out well , then to have received much . The greatest gain therefore that he affects , is an even reckoning , a clear discharge : which since it is obtained by disposing , not by keeping , he count's reservation loss , and just expense his trade , and joy ; he knows , that Well done faithful servant , is a thousand times more sweet a note , than Soul take thine ease ; for that is the voice of the master recompensing , this of the carnal heart presuming : and what follows to the one , but his master's joy ? what to the other , but the loss of his soul ? Blessed be that God which hath given you an heart to fore think this , and in this dry , and dead age , a will to honour him with his own : and to credit his Gospel , with your beneficence ; Lo we are upbraided with barrenness : your name hath been publicly opposed to these challenges , as in whom it shall be seen , that the truth hath friends that can give . I neither distrust , nor persuade you , whose resolutions are happily fixed on purposes of good : only give me leave to hasten your pace a little , and to excite your Christian forwardness , to begin speedily , what you have long and constantly vowed . You would not but do good ; why not now ? I speak boldly , the more speed , the more comfort : Neither the times are in our disposing , nor ourselves : if God had set us a day , and made our wealth inseparable , there were no danger in delaying ; now our uncertainty either must quicken us , or may deceive us. How many have meant well , and done nothing , and lost their crown with lingering ? whose destinies have prevented their desires , and have made their good motions the wards of their executors , not without miserable success : to whom , that they would have done good , is not so great a praise , as it is a dishonour that they might have done it : their wracks are our warnings , we are equally mortal , equally fickle . Why have you this respite of living , but to prevent the imperious necessity of death ? it is a woeful and remediless complaint , that the end of our days hath overrun the beginning of our good works . Early beneficence hath no danger , many joys : for the conscience of good done , the prayers and blessings of the relieved , the gratulations of the Saints , are as so many perpetual comforters , which can make our life pleasant , and our death happy our evil days good , and our good better . All these are lost with delay , few and cold are the prayers for him that may give : & in lieu , our good purposes fore flowed , are become our torments upon our dead-bed . Little difference is betwixt good differred , and evil done : Good was meant , who hindered it , will our conscience say ? there was time enough , means enough , need enough , what hindered ? Did fear of envy , distrust of want ? Alas what bugs are these to fright men from heaven ? As if the envy of keeping , were less then of bestowing : As if God were not as good a debtor , as a giver : he that gives to the poor lendes to God , saith wise Solomon ; If he freely give us what we may lend , and grace to give ; will he not much more pay us what we have lent ; and give us because we have given ? That is his bounty , this his justice ▪ O happy is that man that may be a creditor to his maker : Heaven and earth , shall be empty before he shall want a royal payment . If we dare not trust God whiles we live , how dare we trust men when we are dead ? Men that are still deceitful , and light upon the balance , light of truth , heavy of self-love . How many executors have proved the executioners of honest wills ? how many have our eyes seen , that after most careful choice of trusty guardians , have had their children and goods so disposed , as if the parent's soul could return to see it , I doubt whether it could be happy ? How rare is that man that prefers not himself to his dead friend ? profit to truth ? that will take no vantage of the impossibility of account ? What ever therefore men either show , or promise , happy is that man that may be his own auditor , supervisor , executor . As you love God and yourself , be not afraid of being happy too soon . I am not worthy to give so bold advice , let the wise son of Syrach speak for me . Do good before thou die , and according to thine ability stretch out thine hands , and give : Defraud not thyself of thy good day ; and let not the portion of thy good desires overpass thee : Shalt thou not leave thy travels to another , and thy labours to them that will divide thine heritage ? Or let a wiser than he , Solomon : Say not , tomorrow I will give , if thou now have it : for thou knowest not what a day will bring forth . It hath been an old rule of liberality , he gives twice that gives quickly , whereas slow benefits argue unchearefulnesse , and lose their worth . Who lingers his receipts is condemned as unthriftie : he that knoweth both , saith , it is better to give , then to receive . If we be of the same spirit , why are we hasty in the worse , and slack in the better ? Suffer yourself therefore good Sir , for God's sake , for the Gospel's sake , for the Church's sake , for your soul's sake , to be stirred up by those poor lines , to a resolute and speedy performing of your worthy intentions : and take this as a loving invitation sent from heaven , by an unworthy messenger . You cannot deliberate long of fit objects for your beneficence , except it be more for multitude , than want : the streets , yea the world is full ; How doth Lazarus lie at every door ? how many Sons of the Prophets in their meanely-provided Colleges may say , not , Mors in olla , but Fames ? how many Churches may justly plead , that which our Saviour bade his Disciples , The Lord hath need ? And if this infinite store hath made your choice doubtful , how easy were it to show you , wherein you might oblige the whole Church of God to you , and make your memorial both eternal , and blessed ; or , if you had rather , the whole common wealth ? But now I find myself too bold and too busy , in thus looking toward particularities : God , shall direct you , and if you follow him , shall crown you : howsoever , if good be done , and that be times : he hath what he desired , and your soul shall have more than you can desire . The success of my weak yet hearty counsel , shall make me as rich , as God hath made you with all your abundance . That God bless it to you , and make both our reckon cheerful in the day of our common audit . 

To E. B. Dedicated to Sir GEORGE GORING . 

EP. VIII . Remedies against dulness and hartlesnesse in our callings , and encouragements to cheerfulness in labour . 

IT falls out not seldom ( if we may measure all by one ) that the mind over laid with work , grows dull , and heavy : and now doth nothing , because it hath done too much ; over lavish expense of spirits hath left it heartless : As the best vessel with much motion and vent , becomes flat , and dreggish . And not fewer ( of more weaker temper ) discourage themselves with the difficulty of what they must do : some travellers have more shrunk at the Map then at the way ? Betwixt both , how many sit still with their hands folded ; and wish they knew how to be rid of time ? If this evil be not cured , we become miserable losers , both of good hours , and of good parts . In these mental diseases , Empirics are the best Physicians . I prescribe you nothing but out of feeling : If you will avoid the first : moderate your own vehemency ; suffer not yourself to do all you could do : Rise ever from your desk , not without an appetite . The best horse will tyre soon , if the rein lie ever loose in his neck : Restraints in these cases are encouragements : obtain therefore of yourself to defer , and take new days : How much better is it to refresh yourself , with many competent meals , then to buy one days glutonie : with the fast of many ? And if it be hard to call off the mind , in the midst of a fair and likely flight ; know that all our ease and safety begins at the command of ourselves : he can never task himself well , that cannot favour himself . Persuade your heart that perfection comes by leisure : and no excellent thing is done at once : the rising and setting of many Suns ( which you think slackens your work ) in truth ripens it . That gourd which came up in a night , withered in a day ; whereas those plants which abide age , rise slowly . Indeed , where the heart is unwilling , prorogation hinders : what I list not to do this day , I loathe the next ; but where is no want of desire , delay doth but sharpen the stomach . That which we do unwillingly leave , we long to undertake , & the more our affection is , the greater our intention , and the better our performance . To take occasion by the foretop , is no small point of wisdom ; but to make time ( which is wild and fugitive ) tame and pliable to our purposes , is the greatest improvement of a man : All times serve him , which hath the rule of himself . 

If the second , think seriously of the condition of your being : It is that we were made for ; the bird to fly , and man to labour . What do we here if we repined at our work ? we had not been , but that we might be still busy ; if not in this task we dislike , yet in some other of no less toil : There is no act that hath not his labour , which varies in measure according to the will of the doer . This which you complain of , hath been undertaken by others , not with facility only , but with pleasure ; & what you choose for ease , hath been abhorred of others , as tedious . All difficulty is not so much in the work , as in the Agent . To set the mind on the rack of long meditation ( you say ) is a torment : to follow the swift foot of your hound alday long , hath no weariness : what would you say of him that finds better game in his study , than you in the field , and would accounted your disport his punishment ? such there are , though you doubt and wonder . Never think to detract from your business , but add to your william It is the policy of our great enemy , to drive us with these fears , from that he fore-sees would grow profitable : like as some inhospitall Savages make fearful delusions by sorcery , upon the shore , to fright strangers from landing . Where you find therefore motions of resistance , awaken your courage the more , & know there is some good that appears not ; vain endeavours find no opposition . All crosses imply a secret commodity : resolve then to will because you begin not to will : and either oppose yourself , as Satan opposes you , or else you do nothing . We pay no price to God for any good thing , but labour ; if we higgle in that , we are worthy to lose our bargain . It is an invaluable gain , that we may make in this traffic : for God is bountiful , as well as just , and when he sees true endeavour , doth not only sell , but give : whereas idleness neither gets nor saves , nothing is either more fruitless of good , or more fruitful of evil ; for we do ill whiles we do nothing , and lose , whiles we gain not . The sluggard is senseless , and so much more desperate , because he cannot complain : but ( though he feel it not ) nothing is more precious than time , or that shall abide a reckoning more strict and fearful : yea this is the measure of all our actions , which if it were not abused , our accounts could not be but even with God : so God esteems it ( what ever our pride be ) that he plagues the loss of a short time , with a revenge beyond all times . Hours have wings , and every moment fly's up to the author of time , and carries news of our usage : All our prayers cannot entreat one of them either to return , or slacken his pace : the mispense of every minute is a new record against us in heaven . Sure , if we thought thus , we would dismiss them with better reports , and not suffer them either to go away empty , or laden with dangerous intelligence ; how happy is it that every hour should convey up , not only the message , but the fruits of good , and stay with the Ancient of days , to speak for us before his glorious throne ? know this and I shall take no care for your pains , nor you , for pastime . None of our profitable labours shall be transient , but even when we have forgotten them , shall welcome us into joy : we think we have left them behind us , but they are forwarder than our souls , and expect us where we would be . And if there were no crown for these toils , yet without future respects there is a tediousness in doing nothing . To man especially , motion is natural : there is neither mind , nor eye , nor joint which moveth not : And as company makes way short , hours never go away so merrily , as in the fellowship of work . How did that industrious heathen draw out water by night , and knowledge by day , & thought both short , ever labouring only that he might labour ? Certainly if idleness were enacted by authority , there would not want some , which would pay their mulct , that they might work and those spirits are likest to heaven , which moves always , and the freest from those corruptions , which are incident to nature : The running stream cleanseth itself , whereas standing ponds breed weeds , and mud . These meditations must hearten us to that we must do : whiles we are cheerful , our labours shall strive whether to yield us more comfort , or others more profit . 

To S. H. I  

EP. IX . Discussing this Question . 

Whether a man and wife after some years mutual , and loving fruition of each other , may upon consent , whether for secular , or religious causes , vow and perform a perpetual separation from each others bed , and absalutely renounce all carnal knowledge of each other for ever . 

I Wish not myself any other advocate , nor you any other adversary , than Saint Paul who never gave ( I speak boldly ) a direct precept , if not in this : his express charge whereupon I insisted , is Defraud , not one another , except with consent for a time , that you may give yourselves to fasting and prayer , and then again come together , that Satan tempt you not , for your incontinency . Every word ( if you weigh it well ) opposes your part , and pleads for mine : By consent of all Divines ancient , & modern , ( defrauding ) is refraining from matrimonical conversation : see what a word the Spirit of God hath chosen for this abstinence : never but taken in ill part . But there is no fraud in consent , as Chrysostom , Athanasius , Theophilact , expound it : true ; therefore Saint Paul adds ( unless with consent ) that I may omit to say , that in saying ( unless with consent ) he implies , both that there may be a defrauding without it , and with consent a defrauding , but not unlawful : but see what he adds ( For a time , ) consent cannot make this defrauding lawful , except it be temporary : no defrauding without consent , no consent for a perpetuity . How long then , and wherefore ? Not for every cause , not for any length of time , but only for a while , and for devotion ( ut vacetis , etc. ) Not that you might pray only ( as Chryso stome notes justly ) but that you might ( give yourselves to prayer . ) In our marriage Society ( saith he ) against that paradox of Hierome , we may pray , and woe to us it we do not ; but we cannot ( vacare orationi . ) But we are bidden to pray continually : yet not I hope , ever to fast and pray . Mark how the Apostle adds ( that you may give you selves to fasting and prayer ; ) It is solemn exercise , which the Apostle here intends , such , as is joined with fasting , and external humiliation ; wherein all earthly comforts must be forborn . But what if a man list to task himself continually , and will be always painfully devote : may he then never abstain ? no : ( Let them meet together again ) saith the Apostle , not as a toleration , but as a charge ? But what if they both can live safely thus severed ? This is more than they can undertake : there is danger , saith our Apostle , in this abstinence ( lest Satan tempt you for your incontinency ) what can be more plain . Neither may the married refrain this conversation without consent : neither may they with consent , refrain it for ever . What can you now urge us with , but the examples , and sentences of some Ancients ? Let this stand evicted for the true and necessary sense of the Apostle , and what is this , but to lay men in the balance with God ? I see and confess how much some of the Fathers admitted virginity ; so far , that there wated not some , which both detested marriage as vicious , and would force a single life upon marriage , as commendable : whose authority should move me , if I saw not some of them opposite to others , and others no less to Saint Paul himself . How oft doth Saint Austin redouble that rule , and importunately urge it to his Ecdicia , in that serious Epistle , that without consent the continence of the married , cannot be warrantable : teaching her ( from these words of Saint Paul which he charges her , in the contrary practice , not to have read , heard , or marked ) that if her husband should contain , and she would not , he were bound to pay her the debt of marriage benevolence ; & that God would impute it to him for continence not withstanding . Hence is that of Chrysostome , that the wife is both the servant and the Mistress of her husband , a servant to yield her body , a Mistress to have power of his : who also in the same place determines it forbidden fraud , for the husband , or wife to contain alone : according to that of the Paraphrast Let either both contain , or neither . Hierome contrarily , defines thus : But if one of the two ( saith he ) considering the reward of chastity , will contain , he ought not to assent to the other which contains not , etc. because lust ought rather to come to continency , than continency decline to lust , concluding that a brother , or sister is not subject in such a case ; and that God hath not called us to uncleanness , but to holiness . A strange gloss to fall from the pen of a Father : which yet I durst not say , if it were more boldness for me to descent from him , then for him to descent from all others . He that censures Saint Paul to argue grossly to his Galatians , may as well tax him of an unfit direction to his Corinthians : It shall be no presumption to say , that in this point all his writings bewray more zeal , than truth : whether the conscience of his former slip caused him to abhor that sex ; or his admiration of virginity transported him to a contempt of marriage . Antiquity will afford you many examples of holy men voluntarily sequestered from their wives : Precepts must be our guides , and not patterns . You may tell me of Sozomens' Ammon , that famous Monk , who having persuaded his bride the first day to continuance of virginity , lived with her 18. years in a several bed : and in a several habitation , upon the mountain Nitria , 22. years , you may tell me of jeromes' Malchus , Austin's Ecdicia , and ten thousand others : I care not for their number , and suspect their example : Do but reconcile their practice with Saint Paul's rule ; I shall both magnify and imitate them . I profess , before God and men : nothing should hinder me but this law of the Apostle : whereto consider , I beseech you , what can be more opposite than this opinion , than this course of life . 

The Apostle says , Refrain not but with consent for a time : your words , and their practice saith , Refrain with consent forever : he saith ( meet together again ) you say , never more : he saith ( meet lest you be tempted ) you say , meet not though you be tempted . I willingly grant with Athanasius , that for some set time , especially ( as Anselm interprets it ) for some holy time , we may , and ( in this latter case ) we must forbear all matrimonical acts , & thoughts : not for that they are sinful , but unseasonable . As marriage must be always used chastely , and moderately : so sometimes it must be forgotten . How many are drunk with their own vines , and surfeit of their own fruits ? either immodesty , or immoderation in man or wise , is a dulterous . If yet I shall further yield , that they may conditionally agree , to refrain from each other , so long till they be perplexed with temptations , on either part : I shall go as far as the reach of my warrant , at least perhaps beyond it : since the Apostle charges , Meet again lest you be tempted ; not , meet when you are tempted ? But to say , absolutely , and for ever renounce ( by consent ) the conversation of each , other , what temptation soever assault you , is directly , not beyond , but against Paul's divinity , no less than my assertion is against yours . The ground of all these errors in this head of Matrimony , is an unworthy conceit of some unchristian filthiness in the marriage bed . Every man will not utter , but too many hold that conclusion of Hierome : It is good for a man not to touch a women , therefore to touch her , is evil ; whom I doubt not , but Saint Austin meant to oppose , while he writes , Bonum inquam sunt nuptiae , & contra omnes calumnias possunt sanâ ratione defendi : Marriage ( I say ) is a good thing , and may by sound proof be defended , against all slanders : well may man say that is good , which God saith , is honourable ; and both good and honourable must that needs be , which was instituted by the honourable author of goodness , in the state of man's perfect goodness : Let us take heed of casting shame upon the ordinance of our maker . But there was no carnal knowledge in Paradise . But again , in Paradise God said , increase and multiply : there should have been , if there were not . Those that were naked without shame should have been conjoined without shame , because without sin . Meats and drinks , and acts of marriage ( saith Austin ) ( for these he compares both in lawfulness , and necessity ) are , as they are used , either lawful , venial , or damnable . Meats are for the preservation of man : marriage acts for the preservation of mankind : neither of them are without some carnal delight : which yet , if by the bridle of temperance it be held to the proper , and natural use , cannot be termed lust . There is no ordinance of God , which either is of more excellent use , or hath suffered more abuse in all times : the fault is in men , not in marriage : Let them rectify themselves , their bed shall be blessed . Here need no separation from each other , but rather a separation of brutishnes , & close corruption from the soul ; which whosoever hath learned to remove , shall find the crown of matrimonicall chastity , no less glorious , then that of single continence . 

To Master WILLIAM KNIGHT . 

EP. X. Encouraging him to persist in the holy calling of the ministry , which upon conceit of his insufficiency , and want of affection , he seemed inclining to forsake , and change . 

I am more glad to hear from you , then sorry to hear of your discontentment : whereof , as the cause is from yourself , so must the remedy . We Scholars are the aptest of all others to make ourselves miserable : you might be your own best counsellor were you but indifferent to yourself : It I could but cure your prejudice , your thoughts would heal you : And indeed the same , hand that wounded you , were fittest for this service . I need not tell you , that your calling is honourable ; If you did not think so , you had not complained . It is your unworthiness , that trouble's you : Let me boldly tell you , I know you in this case better than yourself ; you are never the more unsufficient , because you think so : If we will be rigorous , Paul's question ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) will appose us all : but according to the gracious indulgence of him that calls things which are not as if they were , we are that we are , yea , that we ought ; and must be thankful for our any thing . There are none more fearful than the able , none more bold than the unworthy : How many have you seen and heard , of weaker graces ( your own heart shall be the judge ) which have sat without paleness , or trembling , in that holy chair , and spoken as if the words had been their own : satisfying themselves , if not the hearers ? And do you ( whose gifts many have envied ) stand quaking upon the lowest stair ? Hath God given you that unusual variety of tongues , skill of Arts , a stile worth emulation , and ( which is worth all ) a faithful and honest heart ; and do you now shrink back , and say , send by him by whom thou shouldst send ? Give God but what you have ; he expects no more : This is enough to honour him , and crown you . Take heed while you complain of want , lest pride shroud itself under the skirts of modesty ; How many are thankful for less ? You have more than the most ; yet this contents you not ; it is nothing unless you may equal the best , if not exceed ; yea I fear how this might satisfy you , unless you may think yourself such as you would be : What is this but to grudge at the bestower of graces ? I tell you without flattery , God hath great gains by fewer talents : set your heart to employ these , and your advantage shall be more than your masters . Neither do now repent you of the unaduisednesse of your entrance ; God called you to it upon an eternal deliberation , and meant to make use of your suddenness , as a means to fetch you into his work , whom more leisure would have found refractory : Full little did the one Saul think of a kingdom , when he went to seek his Fathers strays in the land of Shalishah ; or the other Saul of an Apostleship , when he went with his commission to Damascus : God thought of both ; & effected what they meant not ; Thus hath he done to you ; Acknowledge this hand , and follow it . He found and gave both faculty & opportunity to enter ; find you but a will to proceed , I dare promise you abundance of comfort . How many of the Ancients , after a forceable Ordination , became not profitable only , but famous in the Church ? But , as if you sought shifts to discourage yourself , when you see you cannot maintain this hold of insufficiency , you fly to alienation of affection ; In the truth whereof , none can contoll you but your own heart ; in the justice of it , we both may , and must . This plea is not for Christians ; we must affect what we ought , in spite of ourselves ; wherefore serves religion if not to make us Lords of our own affections ? If we must be ruled by our slaves , what good should we do ? Can you more dislike your station , than we all naturally distaste goodness ? Shall we neglect the pursuit of virtue , because it pleases not , or rather displease , and neglect ourselves , till it may please us ? Let me not ask whether your affections be estranged , but wherefore ? Divinity is a mistress worthy your service : All other Arts are but drudges to her , alone : Fools may contemn her who cannot judge of true intellectual beauty ; but if they had our eyes ; they could not but be ravished with admiration . You have learned ( I hope ) to contemn their contempt , and so pity their injurious ignorance . She hath chosen you as a worthy client , yea a Favourite , and hath honoured you with her commands , and her acceptations ; who but you would plead strangeness of affection ? How many thousand sue to her ; and cannot be looked upon ? you are happy in her favours , and yet complain : Yea so far , as that you have not stuck to think of a change : no word could have fallen from you more unwelcome . This is Satan's policy to make us out of love with our callings , that our labours may be unprofitable , and our stand tedious . He knows that all changes are fruitless , and that whiles we affect to be other , we must needs be weary of what we are : That there is no success in any endeavour without pleasure ; that there can be no pleasure where the mind longs after alterations . If you espy not this craft of the common enemy , you are not acquainted with yourself : Under what form soever it come , repel it : and abhor the first motion of it , as you love your peace , as you hope for your reward . It is the misery of the most men , that they cannot see when they are happy ; and whiles they see but the outside of others conditions , prefer that which their experience teaches them afterwards to condemn , not without loss and tears . far be this unstablenesse from you , which have been so long taught of God. All vocations have their inconveniences , which if they cannot be avoided , must be digested . The more difficulties , the greater glory : Stand fast therefore , and resolve that this calling is the best , both in itself , and for you : and know that it cannot stand with your Christian courage to run away from these incident evils , but to encounter them . Your hand is at the plough ; if you meet with some tough clods , that will not easily yield to the share , lay on more strength rather ; seek not remedy in your feet by flight , but in your hands , by a constant endeavour . Away with this weak timorousness , and wrongful humility : Be cheerful and courageous in this great work of God ; the end shall be glorious yourself happy , and many in you . 

THE sixth DECADE Of EPISTLES . 

LONDON , 1610.  

The sixth Decade . 

EPIST. I To my LORD DENNY . 

¶ A particular account how our days are , or should be spent , both common and holy . 

Every day is a little life , and our whole life is but a day repeated : whence it is , that old jacob numbers his life by days , and Moses desire's to be taught this point of holy Arithmetic , to number not his years , but his days : Those therefore that dare lose a day , are dangerously prodigal ; those that dare misspend it , desperate . We can best teach others by ourselves : Let me tell your Lordship , how I would pass my days , whether common or Sacred ; that you ( or whosoever others , overhearing me ) may either approve my thriftiness , or correct my errors : To whom is the account of my hours either more due , or more known ? All days are his , who gave time a beginning , and continuance ; yet some he hath made ours , not to command , but to use . In none may we forget him , in some we must forget all , besides him . First therefore , I desire to awake at those hours , not when I will , but when I must : pleasure is not a fit rule for rest , but health : neither do I consult so much with the Sun , as mine own necessity , whither of body , or , in that , of the mind . If this vassal could welserue me waking , it should never sleep : but now , it must be pleased , that it may be serviceable . Now , when sleep is rather driven away , then leaves me ; I would ever awake with God ; my first thoughts are for him , who hath made the night for rest , and the day for travel : and as he gives , so blesses both . If my heart be early seasoned with his presence , it will savour of him all day after . While my body is dressing , not with an effeminate curiosity , nor yet with rude neglect ; my mind addresses itself to her ensuing Task ; bethinking what is to be done , and in what order ; and marshalling ( as it may ) my hours with my work : That done after some whiles Meditation , I walk up to my Masters & companions , my books ; and sitting down amongst them , with the best contentment , I dare not reach forth my hand to salute any of them , till I have first looked up to Heaven , and craved favour of him to whom all my Studies are duly referred : without whom , I can neither profit , nor labour . After this , out of no overgreat variety , I call forth those , which may best fit my occasions ; wherein , I am not too scrupulous of age : Sometimes I put myself to School , to one of those Ancients , whom the Church hath honoured with the name of Fathers ; whose Volumes , I confess , not to open , without a secret reverence of their holiness , and gravity : Sometimes , to those later Doctors , which want nothing but age to make them classical : Always to GOD'S Book . That day is lost , whereof some hours are not improved in those Divine Monuments : others I turn over out of choice , these out of duty . E'er I can have sat unto weariness , my family , having now overcome all household-distractions , invites me to our common devotions ; not without some short preparation . These heartily performed , send me up , with a more strong and cheerful appetite to my former work , which I find made easy to me by intermission , and variety : Now therefore , can I deceive the hours with change of pleasures , that is , of labours . One while mine eyes are busied , another while my hand , & sometimes my mind takes the burden from them both : Wherein , I would imitate the skilfullest Cooks , which make the best dishes with manifold mixtures : one hour is spent in Textuall Divinity , another in Controversy ; histories relieve them both . Now , when the mind is weary of others labours , it begins to undertake her own ; sometimes it meditates , and winds up for future use ; sometimes it lays forth her conceits into present discourse ; sometimes for itself , ofter , for others . Neither know I whether it works or plays in these thoughts : I am sure no sport hath more pleasure , no work more use : Only the decay of a weak body , makes me think these delights insensibly laborious . Thus could I all day , ( as Ringers use ) make myself Music with changes , and complain sooner of the day for shortness , then of the business for toil ; were it not that this faint moniter interrupts me still in the midst of my busy pleasures , and enforces me both to respite & repast I must yield to both ; my body and mind are joined together in these unequal couples , the better must follow the weaker . Before my meals therefore , and after , I let myself loose from all thoughts , and now , would forget that I ever studied : A full mind takes away the body's appetite , no less than a full body makes a dull and unwieldy mind : Company , discourse , recreations , are now seasonable and welcome ; These prepare me for a diet , not gluttonous , but medicinal ; The Palate may not be pleased , but the stomach ; nor that for it own sake : Neither would I think any of these comforts worth respect in themselves , but in their use , in their end ; so far , as they may enable me to better things , If I see any dish to tempt my Palate , I fear a Serpent in that Apple , and would please myself in a wilful denial : I rise capable of more , not desirous not now immediately from my Trencher , to my Book ; but after some intermission . Moderate speed is a sure help to all proceedings , where those things which are prosecuted with violence of endeavour , or desire , either succeed not , or continue not . 

After my latter meal , my thoughts are slight , only my memory may be charged with her Task , of recalling what was committed to her custody in the day , and my heart is busy in examining mine hands and mouth , & all other senses of that day's behaviour . And now the Evening is come , no Tradesman doth more carefully take in his Wares , clear his Shoppeboord , and shut his Windows , than I would shut up my thoughts , & clear my mind . That Student shall live miserably , which like a Camel lies down under his burden . All this done , calling together my family , we end the day with God. Thus do we rather drive away the time before us , then follow it . I grant , neither is my practice worthy to be exemplary , neither are our callings proportionable . The lyves of a Nobleman , of a Courtier , of a Scholar , of a Citizen , of a Countryman , differ no less than their dispositions : yet must all conspire in honest labour . Sweat is the destiny of all trades , whether of the brows , or of the mind . God never allowed any man to do nothing . How miserable is the condition of those men , which spend the time as if it were given them , and not lent : as if hours were waste Creatures , and such as should never be accounted for ; as if GOD would take this for a good Bill of reckoning ; Item , spent upon my pleasures , forty years . These men shall once find , that no blood can privilege idleness ; and that nothing is more precious to God , then , that which they desire to cast away , Time . Such are my common days : but God's day calls for another respect . The same Sun arises on this day , and enlightens it ; yet because that Sun of righteousness arose once upon it , & gave a new life unto the world in it , & drew the strength of God's moral precept unto it , therefore justly do we sing with the psalmist ; This is the day which the Lord hath made . Now , I forget the world , and in a sort , myself ; and deal with my wont thoughts , as great men use , who , at sometimes of their privacy , forbid the access of all suitors . Prayer , Meditation , reading , hearing , preaching , singing , good conference , are the businesses of this day ; which I dare not bestow on any work , or pleasure , but heavenly . I hate superstition on the one side , and looseness on the other ; but I find it hard to offend in too much devotion , easy in profaneness . The whole Week is sanctified by this day , and according to my care of this , is my blessing on the rest . I show your Lordship , what I would do , and what I ought : I commit my desires to the imitation of the weak , my actions to the censures of the Wise and Holy ; my weaknesses to the pardon and redress of my merciful God.  

EPIST. II To Mr. T. S. Dedicated to Sir Fulke Grevill . 

¶ Discoursing how we may use the World without danger . 

How to live out of the danger of the World is both a great & good care , and that which trouble's too few . Some , that the World may not hurt them , run from it ; & banish themselves to the tops of solitary Mountains : changing the Cities , for Deserts , houses , for Gaves , and the society of men for beasts ; and lest their enemy might insinuate himself into their secrecy , have abridged themselves of diet , clothing , lodging , harbour , fit for reasonable creatures ; seeming to have left off themselves , no less than companions . 

As if the World were not every where ; as if we could hide ourselves from the Devil ; as if solitariness were privileged from Temptations ; as if we did not more violently affect restrained delights ; as if these Hieromes did not find Rome in their hart , when they had nothing but rocks & trees in their eye . Hence these places of retyrednesse , founded at first upon necessity mixed with devotion , have proved infamously unclean ; Cells of lust , not of piety . This course is preposterous ; If I were worthy to teach you a better way , learn to be an Hermit at home : Begin with your own heart , estrange and wean it from the love , not from the use of the world : Christianity hath taught us nothing , if we have not learned this distinction ; It is a great weakness not to see , but we must be enamoured : Elisha , saw the secret state of the Syrian court , yet as an enemy : The blessed Angels see our earthly affairs , but as strangers : Moses his body was in the Court of Pharaoh , amongst the delicate Egyptians , his heart was suffering with the afflicted Israelites . Let took part of the fair Meadows of Sodom , not of their sins . Our blessed Saviour saw the glory of all Kingdoms , & contemned them : and cannot the world look upon us Christians , but we are be witched ? We see the Sun daily , & warm us at his beams , yet make not an Idol of it ; doth any man hide his face , lest he should adore it ? All our safety or danger therefore , is from within . In vain is the body an Anachoret , if the heart be a Ruffian : And if that be retired in affections , the body is but a Cipher : Lo than the eyes will look carelessly and strangely in what they see , and the tongue will sometimes answer to that was not asked . We eat and recreate , because we must , not because we would : and when we are pleased , we are suspicious : Lawful delights , we neither refuse , nor dote upon , and all contentments go and come like strangers . That all this may be done , take up your hart with better thoughts ; be sure it will not be empty , if Heaven have forestalled all the rooms , the World is disappointed , and either dares not offer , or is repulsed . Fix yourself upon the glory of that eternity , which abides you after this short pilgrimage . You cannot but contemn what you find in comparison of what you expect . Leave not till you attain to this , that you are willing to live , because ye cannot as yet be dissolved : Be but one half upon earth , let your better part converse above whence it is , and enjoy that whereto it was ordained . Think how little the World can do for you and what it doth , how deceitfully : what stings there are with this Honey , what farewell succeeds this Welcome . 

When this jael brings you Milk in the one hand , know she hath a nail in the other . Ask your heart what it is the better , what the merrier , for all those pleasures where with it hath befriended you : let your own trial teach you contempt ; Think how sincere , how glorious those joys are , which abide you elsewhere , and a thousand times more certain ( though future ) then the present . 

And let not these thoughts be flying , but fixed : In vain do we meditate , if were solve not : when your hart is once thus settled , it shall command all things to advantage . The World shall not betray , but serve it ; and that shall be fulfilled which God promises by his Solomon ; When the ways of a man please the Lord , he will make his enemies also at peace with him . 

Sir , this advice my poverty afforded long since to a weak friend ; I write it not to you , any otherwise , then as Scholars are wont to say their part to their Masters . The world hath long and justly both noted and honoured you for eminence in wisdom and learning , and I above the most ; I am ready with the awe of a Learner , to embrace all precepts from you : you shall expect nothing from me , but Testimonies of respect and thankfulness . 

EPIST. III To S George Fleetwood . 

¶ Of the remedies of sin , and motives to avoid it . 

There is none , either more common , or more troblesom guest , then Sin. Troublesome , both in the solicitation of it , and in the remorse . Before the act , it wearies us with a wicked importunity ; after the act it torment's us with fears , and the painful gnawing of an accusing Conscience : Neither is it more irksome to men , then odious to God ; who indeed never hated any thing but it ; and for it any thing . How happy were we , if we could be rid of it ? This must be our desire , but cannot be our hope ; so long as we carry this body of sin and death about us : yet ( which is our comfort ) it shall not carry us , though we carry it : It will dwell with us , but with no command ; yea , with no peace : We grudge to give it houseroom , but we hate to give it service . This our Hagar will abide many strokes , ere she be turned out of doors ; she shall go at last , and the seed of promise shall inherit alone . There is no unquyetnesse good , but this : and in this case , quietness cannot stand with safety : neither did ever war more truly beget peace , then in this strife of the soul . 

Resistance is the way to victory , and that , to an eternal peace and happiness . It is a blessed care then , how to resist : sin , how to avoid it : and such as I am glad to teach and learn . As there are two grounds of all sin , so of the avoidance of Sin ; Love , and Fear : These if they be placed amiss , cause us to offend : if aright , are the remedies of evil : The Love must be of God ; Fear , of judgement . 

As he loves much , to whom much is forgiven , so he that loves much , will not dare to do that which may need forgiveness . The heart that hath felt the sweetness of God's mercies , will not abide the bitter relish of sin : This is both a stronger motive than Fear , and more Noble ; None but a good heart is capable of this grace : which who so hath received , thus powerfully repelles tentations . 

Have I found my God so gracious to me that he hath denied me nothing , either in earth or heaven : and shall not I so much as deny my own will for his sake ? Hath my dear Saviour bought my soul at such a price , and shall he not have it ? Was he crucified for my sins , and shall I by my sins crucify him again ? am I his in so many bonds , and shall I serve the Devil ? OH God is this the fruit of thy beneficence to me , that I should wilfully dishonour thee ? Was thy blood so little worth , that I should tread it under my feet ? Doth this become him that shall be once glorious with thee ? Hast thou prepared heaven for me , and do I thus prepare myself for heaven ? Shall I thus recompense thy love , in doing that which thou hatest ? Satan hath no Dart ( I speak confidently ) that can pierce this Shield : Christians are indeed to oft surprised , ere they can hold it out : there is no small policy in the suddenness of temptation : but if they have once settled it before their breast , they are safe , and their enemy hopeless . Under this head therefore , there is sure remedy against sin , by looking upwardes , backward , into ourselves , forward . Upwards , at the glorious Majesty , and infinite goodness of that God whom our sin would offend , and in whose face we sin : whose mercies , & whose holiness is such , that if there were no hell , we would not offend . Backward , at the manifold favours , whereby we are obliged to obedience . Into ourselves , at that honourable vocation , wherewith he hath graced us , that holy profession we have made of his calling , and grace , that solemn vow & Covenant , whereby we have confirmed our profession ; the gracious beginnings of that spirit in us , which is grieved by our sins , yea quenched . Forward , at the joy which will follow upon our forbearance , that peace of conscience , that happy expectation of glory , compared with the momentary and unpleasing delight of a present sin ; All these , out of Love ; Fear is a retentive , as necessary , not so ingenuous . It is better to be won , then to be frighted from sin : to be alured , then drawn . Both are little enough in our pronesse to evil : Evil , is the only object of fear . Herein therefore , we must terrify our stubburnnesse , with both evils ; Of loss , and of sense : that if it be possible , the honour of the event may countervail the pleasure of the tentation : Of loss , remembering that now we are about to lose a God ; to cast away all the comforts & hopes of ano her world ; to rob ourselves of all those sweet mercies we enjoyed ; to thrust his spirit out of doors ( which cannot abide to dwell within the noisome stench of sin ) to shut the doors of heaven against ourselves . Of sense ; That thus we give satan a right in us , power over us , advantage against us. That we make God to frown upon us in heaven ; That we arm all his good creatures against us on earth ; That we do as it were take God's hand in ours , & scourge ourselves with all Temporal plagues ; and force his curses upon us , and ours : That we wound our own consciences with sins , that they may wound us with everlasting torments ; That we do both make an hell in our breasts before hand , and open the gates of that bottomless pit , to rereceive us afterwards : That we do now cast Brimstone into the Fire ; and lest we should fail of tortures , make ourselves our own fiends : These , & what ever other terrors of this kind , must be laid to the soul : which , if they be thoroughly urged to an heart , not altogether incredulous , Well may a man ask himself , how he dare sin ? But if neither this Sun of mercies , nor the tempestuous Winds of judgement can make him cast off Peter's cloak of wickedness ; he must be clad with confusion , as with a cloak , according to the Psalmist . 

I tremble to think how many live , as if they were neither beholden to God , nor afraid of him ; neither in his debt , nor danger : As if their heaven and hell were both upon earth ; Sinning not only without shame , but not without malice ; It is their least ill to do evil ; Behold they speak for it , joy in it , boast of it , enforce to it ; as if they would send challenges into heaven , & make love to destruction : Their lewdness calls for our sorrow , and zealous obedience ; that our God may have as true Servants , as enemies : And as we see natural qualities , increased with the resistance of their contraries : so must our grace with others sins : We shall redeem somewhat of God's dishonour by sin , if we shall thence grow holy . 

EPIST. FOUR To Mr. Doctor Milburne . 

¶ Discoursing , how far , and wherein Popery destroyeth the foundation . 

The means in all things is not more safe than hard : whether to find or keep : & as in all other morality , it lieth in a narrow room ; so most in the matter of our censures , especially concerning Religion : wherein we are wont to be either careless , or too peremptory : How far , and wherein Popery raceth the foundation , is worth our inquiry : I need not stay upon words . By foundation , we mean the necessary grounds of Christian faith . This foundation Papistry defaces , by laying a new ; by casting down the old . In these cases , addition destroys : he that obtrudes a new word , no less overthrows the Scripture , than he that denies the old , yea this , very obtrusion denies : he that sets up a new Christ , rejects Christ : Two foundations cannot stand at once : The Ark and Dagon : Now Papistry lays a double how foundation : The one , a new rule of faith , that is , a new word : The other , a new Author , or guide of Faith , that is , a new head besides Christ God never laid other foundation , then in the Prophets and Apostles : upon their Divine writing , he meant to build his Church ; which he therefore inspired , that they might be like ( himself ) perfect and eternal : Popery builds upon an un-written word , the voice of old ( but doubtful ) Traditions . The voice of the present Church , that is , as they interpret it , theirs ; with no less confidence and presumption of certainty , than any thing ever Written by the finger of God ; If this be not a new foundation , the old was none . God never taught this holy Spouse to know any other husband , them Christ ; to acknowledge any other head ; to follow any other Shepherd , to obey any other King : he alone may be enjoyed without jealousy , submitted to without danger , without error believed , served without scruple : Popery offers to impose on God's Church a King , shepherd , head , husband , besides her own : A man ; a man of sin . He must know all things , can err in nothing : direct , inform , animate , command , both in earth and Purgatory , expound Scriptures , canonize Saints , forgive Sins : create new Articles of Faith ; and in all these , is absolute and infallible as his Maker ; who sees not , that if to attribute , these things to the son of God , be to make him the foundation of the Church ; then to ascribe them to another , is to contradict him that said , Other foundation can no man lay , then that which is laid , which is jesus Christ. To lay a new foundation , doth necessarily subvert the old : yet see this further actually done in particulars : wherein yet this distinction may clear the way : The foundation is overthrown two ways ; either in flat terms , when a main principle of faith is absolutely denied : as the deity and consubstantiality of the son by Arrius , the Trinity of persons by Sabellius and Seruetus , the resurrection of the body by Himeneus and Philetus , the last judgement by Saint Peter's Mockers ; Or secondly , by consequent ; when any opinion is maintained , which by just sequel over turneth the truth of that principle , which the defendant professes to hold ; yet so , as he will not grant the necessity of that deduction ▪ so the Ancient M●n●i , of whom jerom speaketh , while they urged Circumcision , by consequent according to Paul's rule , rejected Christ : so the Pelagians , while they defended a full perfection of our righteoushes in ourselves , overthrew Christ's justification : and in effect said , I believe in Christ , and in myself : so some Vbiavitaries , while they hold the possibility of the conversion , and salvation of reprobates , overthrow the Doctrine of God's eternal decree , and immutability . Popery comes in this latter rank ; and may justly be termed heresy , by direct consequent : Though not in their grant , yet in necessary proof and inference . Thus it overthrows the truth of Christ's humanity , while it holds his whole human body locally circumscribed in heaven , & at once ( the same instant ) wholly present in ten thousand places on earth , without circumscription : That whole Christ is in the forms of bread , with all his dimensions , every part having his own place and figure : and yet so , as that he is wholly in every part of the bread . Our justification , while it ascribes it to our own works : The Al-sufficiency of Christ's own Sacrifice , whiles they reiterate it daily by the hands of a Priest . Of his satisfaction , while they hold a payment of our utmost farthings , in a devised Purgatory . Of his mediation , while they implore others to aid them , not only by their intercession , but their merits ; suing not only for their Prays , but their gifts : The value of the Scriptures , whiles they hold them insufficient , obscure , in points essential to salvation , & bind them to an uncertain dependence upon the Church . Besides hundred of this kind , there are heresies in actions , contrary to those fundamental practices which God requires of his : As prohibitions of Scriptures to the Laity : Prescriptions of devotion in unknown tongues : Tying , the effect of Sacraments and Prayers to the external work : Adoration of Angels , Saints , Bread , Relics , Crosses , Jmages : All which , are as so many real undermine of the sacred foundation , which is no less active , then vocal . By this , the simplest may see , what we must hold of Papists ; neither as no Heretics , nor yet so palpable as the worst : If any man ask for their conviction . In the simpler sort , I grant this excuse fair and tolerable : Poor souls , they cannot be any otherwise informed , much less persuaded : whiles in truth of heart , they hold the main principles which they know , doubtless , the mercy of God may pass over their ignorant weakness , in what they cannot know . For the other , I fear not to say , that many of their errors are wilful . The light of truth hath shined out of heaven to them , and they love darkness more than light . In this state of the Church : he shall speak and hope idly , that shall call for a public and universal eviction : How can that be , when they pretend to be judges in their own cause ? Unless they will not be adversaries to themselves , or judge of us , this course is but impossible : As the Devil , so Antichrist , will not yield : both shall be subdued ; neither will treat of peace : what remains , but that the Lord shall consume that wicked man ( which is now clearly revealed ) with the breath of his mouth , & abolish him with the brightness of his coming . Even so , Lord jesus come quickly . This briefly is my conceit of Popery , which I willingly refer to your clear & deep judgement , being not more desirous to teach the ignorant ▪ what I know , then to learn of you what I should teach , & know not . The Lord direct all our thoughts to his glory , & the behoof of his Church . 

EPIST. v. Written long since to Mr. I W.  

¶ Dissuading from separation : & shortly oppugning the grounds of that error . 

IN my former Epistle ( I confess ) I touched the late separation with a light hand : only setting down the injury of it ( at the best ) not discussing the grounds in common ; now your danger draws me on to this discourse : it is not much less thanke-woorthy , to prevent a disease , then to cure it : you confess that you doubt ; I mislike it not , doubting is not more the way to error , then to satisfaction ; lay down first , all pride and prejudice , and I cannot fear you : I never yet knew any man of this way , which hath not bewrayed himself far gone with overweening : and therefore it hath been just with God , to punish their selfe love with error : an humble spirit is a fit subject for truth : prepare you your heart , and let me then answer , or rather God for me ; you doubt whether the notorious sin of one unreformed , uncensured , defile not the whole Congregation ; so as we may not without sin communicate therewith : & why not the whole Church ? wo were us , if we should thus live in the danger of all men : have we not sins enough of our own , but we must borrow of others ? Each man shall bear his own burden : is ours so light , that we call for more weight , & undertake what God never imposed ? It was enough for him that is God & man to bear others iniquities ; it is no task for us , which shrink under the least of our own : But it is made ours , you say ( though another's ) by our toleration & connivance : indeed , if we consent to them ; encourage them , imitate or accompany them in the same excess of riot ; yet more , the public person , that forbears a known sin , sinneth ; but if each man's known sin be every man's , what difference is betwixt the root and the branches ? Adam's sin spread itself to us , because we were in him , stood or fell in him ; our case is not such . Do but see how God scorneth that unjust Proverb of the jews , That the fathers have eaten sour Grapes , and the children's teeth are set on edge ? How much less are strangers ? Is any bond so near as this of blood ? Shall not the child smart for the Parent ; and shall we ( even spiritually ) for others ? You object Achans stealth , & Israel's punishment : an unlike case , & extraordinary : for see how direct God's charge is . Be ye beware of the execrable thing lest ye make yourselves execrable , and in taking of the execrable thing , make also the host of Israel execrable and trouble it . Now every man is made a party , by a peculiar injunction , and not only all Israel is as one man : but every Israelite is a public person in this act ; you cannot show the like in every one , no , not in any : it was a law for the present , not intended for perpetuity : you may as well challenge the Trumpets of Rammes-hornes , and seven days walk unto every siege . Look else , where the Church of Thyatira suffers the Woman jezabel to teach and deceyve . A great sin , Yet to you ( saith the spirit ) the rest of Thyatira , as many as have not this learning : I will put upon you none other burden , but that which you have , hold fast ; He saith not , Leave your Church , but Hold fast your own . Look into the practice of the Prophets , ransack their burdens , and see if you find this there ; yea , behold our best pattern , the son of God. The jewish Rulers in Christ time were notoriously covetous , proud , oppressing , cruel , superstitious , our Saviour feared not polluting , in joining with them ; and was so far from separating himself , that he called & sent others to them . But , a little Leaven Leavens the whole lump : it is true , by the infection of it ; sin , where it is unpunnished , spreadeth ; it so wretch all those whose hands are in it , not others . If we dislike it , detest , resist , reprove , and mourn for it ; we cannot be tainted : the Corinthian love-feasts had gross and sinful disorder : yet you hear not Paul say , Abstain from the Sacrament till-these be reform ; Rather he enjoins the act , and controls the abuse : GOD hath bidden you hear and receive : show me , where he hath said , except others be sinful . Their uncleanness can no more defile you , than your holiness can excuse them . But while I communicate ( you say ) I consent ; God forbid . It is sin not to cast out the deserving ; but not yours : who made you a Ruler & a judge ? The unclean must be separated , not by the people : I Would you have no distinction betwixt private and public persons ? What strange confusion is this ? And what other than the old note of Corah and his company , ye take too much upon you , seeing all the Congregation is holy , every one of them , and the Lord is among them : wherefore , then lift you up yourselves above the congregation of the Lord ? What is ( if this be not ) to make a monster of Christ's body : he is the head , his Church the body , consisting of diverse limbs ? All have their several faculties and employments ; not every one , all ; who would imagine any man so absurd , as to say , that this body should be all tongue , or all hands ; every man a Teacher , every man a Ruler ? As if Christ had said to every man , Go teach , and whose sins ye remit : How Senseless are these two extremes ? Of the Papists , that one man hath the Keys : Of the Brownists , that every man hath them . But these privileges and charges are given to the Church ▪ True ; to be executed by her Governors , the faculty of speech is given to the whole man , but the use of it to the proper Instrument . Man speaketh ; but by his tongue ; if a voice should be heard from his hand , ear , foot , it were unnatural . Now if the tongue speak not when it ought , shall we be so foolish as to blame the hand ? But you say ; If the tongue speak not , or speak ill , the whole man smarteth ; the man sinneth : I grant it , but you shall set the natural body on too hard a rack , if you strain it in all things , to the likeness of the spiritual , or civil . The members of that being quickened by the same soul , have charge of each other , and therefore either stand or fall together : It is not so in these . If then notwithstanding unpunnished sins we may join with the true Church : Whether is ours such ? You doubt , and your solicitors deny : surely if we have many enormities , yet none worse than rash and cruel judgement ; let them make this a colour to depart from themselves : there is no less woe to them that call good , evil : To judge one man is bold and dangerous : judge then , what it is to condemn a whole church : God knows , as much without cause , as without shame , Vain men may libel against the spouse of Christ : her husband never divorced her : no , his love is still above their hatred , his blessings above their censures : Do but ask them , were we ever the true church of God ? If they deny it , Who then were so ? Had God never Church upon earth , since the Apostles time , till Barrow & Greenwood arose ? And even then scarce a number ? nay , when or where was ever any man in the world ( except in the Schools perhaps of Donatus or Novatus ) that taught their Doctrine ; and now still hath he none , but in a blind lane at Amsterdam ? Can you think this probable ? If they affirm it , when ceased we ? Are not the points controverted still the same ? The same Government , the same doctrine ? Their minds are changed , not our estate : Who hath admonished , evinced , eccommunicated us ; and when ? All these must be done ; Will it not be a shame to say , that Francis johnson , as he took power to excommunicate his Brother , and Father ; so had power to excommunicate his Mother , the Church ? How base and idle are these conceits ? Are we then heretics condemned in ourselves , wherein overthroew we the foundation ? What other God , Saviour , Scriptures , justification , Sacraments , Heaven , do they teach beside us ? Can all the Masters of separation , yea can all the churches in Christendom , set forth a more exquisite and worthy confession of Faith , then is contained in the Articles of the Church of England ? Who can hold these , and be heretical ? Or , from which of these are we revolted ? But to make this good , they have taught you to say , that every truth in Scripture is fundamental ; so fruitful is error of absurdities ; Whereof still one breeds another more deformed then itself . That Trophimus was left at Miletum sick , that Paul's Cloak was left at Troas , that Gaius Paul's host , saluted the romans , that Naball was drunk ; or that Thamar baked Cakes , and a thousand of this nature are fundamental : how large is the separatists Creed , that hath all these Articles ? If they say all Scripture is of the same author , of the same authority : so say we , but not of the same use : is it as necessary for a Christian to know that Peter hosted with one Simon a tanner in joppd , as that jesus Christ the son of God was born of the Virgin Mary . What a monster is this of an opinion , that all truths are equal ? that this spiritual house should be all foundation , no walls , no roof ? Can no man be saved but he that knows every thing in scripture ? then both they and we , are excluded : heaven would not have so many , as their Parlour at Amsterdam : Can any man be saved that knows nothing in Scripture ? It is far from them to be so overcharitable to affirm it : you see them that both all truths must not of necessity be known , & some must : & these we justly call fundamental : which who so holdeth , all his hay & stubble ( through the mercy of God ) condemn him not : still he hath right to the church on earth , & hope in heaven : but whither every truth be fundamental , or necessary : discipline ( you say ) is so : indeed necessary to the well-being of a church , no more : it may be true without it , not perfect . Christ compares his spouse to an army with banners : as order is to an army , so is Discipline to the Church : if the troops be not well marshaled in their several ranks , & move not forward , according to the discipline of war , it is an army still : confusion may hinder their success , it cannot bereave them of their name : it is , as beautiful proportion to the body , an hedge to a vineyard , a wall to a City , an hem to a garment , ceiling to an house . It may be a body , vineyard , City , garment , house , without them : it cannot be well and perfect : yet which of our adversaries will say we have no Discipline ? Some they grant , but not the right : as if they said ? Your City hath a Bricke-wall indeed , but it should have one of hewn stone ; your Vineyard is hedged , but it should be paled & ditched : while they cavil at what we want , we thank God for what we have ; and so much we have , in spite of all detraction , as makes us both a true Church , and a worthy one . 

But the main quarrel is against our Ministry , and form of worship : let these be examined ; this is the Circle of their censure . no Church , therefore no Ministry : and no Ministry , therefore no Church : unnatural sons , that spit in the face of those spiritual Fathers that be got them , and the Mother that bore them . What would they have ? Have we not competent gifts from above , for so great a function ? Are we all unlearned , unsufficient ? Not a man that knows to divide the word aright ? As Paul to the Corinth's , is it so that there is not one wise man amongst us ? no man will affirm it : some of them have censured our excess in some knowledge ; none , our defect in all : What then ? Have we not a true desire to do faithful service to God and his Church ? no zeal for God's glory ? Who hath been in our hearts to see this ? Who dare usurp upon God , & condemn our thoughts ? Yea , we appeal to that only judge of hearts , whether he hath not given us a sincere longing for the good of his Zion : he shall make the thoughts of all hearts manifest : and then shall every man have praise of God : if then we have both ability and will to do public good : our inward calling ( which is the main point ) is good and perfect : for the outward , what want we ? Are we not first ( after good trial ) presented & approved by the learned , in our Colleges : examined by our church-governors , ordained by imposition of hands of the eldership , allowed by the congregations , we are set over : do we not labour in word & doctrine ? do we not carefully administer the sacraments of the Lord jesus ? have we not by our public means wone many souls to God ? what should we have & do more ? All this , & yet no true Ministers ? we pass very little to be judged of them , or of man's day : but our ordainers ( you say ) are Antichristian : surely our censurers are unchristian : though we should grant it : some of us were baptised by heretics : is the sacrament annihilated , and must it be redoubled ? How much less ordination , which is but an outward admission to preach the gospel ? God forbid that we should thus condemn the innocent : more hands were laid upon us , than one : & of them , for the principal , except but their perpetual honour , & some few immaterial rites , let an enemy say what they differ , from Superintendents ? & can their double honour make them no elders ? If they have any personal faults , why is their calling scourged ? Look into our Saviour's times : what corruptions were in the very Priesthood ? It was now made annual , which was before fixed & singular . Christ saw these abuses , & was silent : here was much dislike , and no clamour ; we for less , exclaim & separate : even personal offences are fetched into the condemnation of lawful courses . God give both pardon and redress to this foul uncharitableness . Alas ! how ready are we to toss the forepart of our Wallet , whiles our own faults are ready to break our necks behind us : all the world sees and condemns their ordination to be faulty , yea none at all , yet they cry out first on us , craftily ( I think ) lest we should complain : that Church-governors should ordain Ministers , hath been the constant practice of the Church , from Christ's time , to this hour . I except only in an extreme desolation , merely for the first course : that the people should make their Ministers , was unheard of in all ages & Churches till Bolton , Browne , and Barrow : and hath neither colour nor example : Doth not this comparison seem strange and harsh ? Their Tradesmen may make true Ministers , our Ministers cannot : who but they would not be ashamed of such a position ? Or who but you would not think the time misspent in answering it ? no less frivolous are those exceptions that are taken against our worship of God , condemned for false and Idolatrous , whereof Volumes of Apologies are written by others : we meet together , pray , read , hear , preach , sing , administer , and receive Sacraments : wherein offend we ? How many Gods do we pray to ? Or to whom but the true God ? In what words but holy ? whom do we preach but the same Christ with them ? what point of faith , not theirs ? What sacraments but those they dare not but allow ? Where lies our Idolatry , that we may let it out ? In the manner of performing : in set Prayers , Antichristian Ceremonies of crossing , kneeling , etc , For the former : what sin is this ? The Original and truth of Prayer is in the heart : the voice is but as accidental : if the heart may often conceive the same thought , the tongue her servant may often utter it , in the same words : and if daily to repeat the same speeches be amiss , then to entertain the same spiritual desires , is sinful : to speak once without the heart is Hypocritical : but to speak often the same request with the heart , never offendeth . What intolerable boldness is this ; to condemn that in us which is recorded to have been the continual practice of God's Church in all successions ? Of the jews , in the time of Moses , David , Solomon , jehosophat , Ezekiah , jeremie : Of the ancient Christian assemblies , both Greek and Latin , and now at this day of all reform churches in Christendom ; yea , which our Saviour himself so directly allowed , & in a manner prescribed : & the blessed Apostles Paul & Peter in all their formal salutations ( which were no other than set prayers ) so commonly practised : for the other ( lest I exceed a letter ) though we yield them such as you imagine ; worse they cannot be : they are but Ceremonious appendances : the body & substance is sound . Blessed be God that we can have his true Sacraments at so easy a rate , as the payment ( if they were such ) of a few circumstantial in conveniences : How many dear children of God in all ages , even near the Golden times of the Apostles , have gladly purchased them much dearer , & not complained : but see how our Church imposes them : not as to bind the Conscience , otherwise then by the common bond of obedience ; not as actions ; wherein Gods worship essentially consisteth , but as themselves , Ceremonies : comely or convenient , not necessary ; whatsoever : is this a sufficient ground of separation ? How many moderate and wiser spirits have we , that cannot approve the Ceremonies , yet dare not forsake the Church ? And that hold your departure far more evil , than the cause . You are invited to a feast , if but a Napkin or Trencher be misplaced , or a dish ill carved , do you run from the Table , and not stay to thank the host ? Either be less curious , or more charitable . Would God both you , and all other , which either favour the separation , or profess it , could but read over the ancient Stories of the Church , to see the true state of things and times ; the beginnings , proceedings , increases , encounters yeildings , restaurations of the Gospel , what the holy Fathers of those first times , were glad to swallow , for peace ; what they held , practised , found , left : whosoever knows but these things cannot separate : and shall not be contented only , but thankful : God shall give you still more light : in the mean time , upon the peril of my soul , stay , and take the blessed offers of your God , in peace : And since Christ sayeth to you by my hand , will you also go away ? Answer him with that worthy Disciple , Master whether shall I go from thee , thou hast the words of eternal life ? 

EPIST. VI To Mr. I B.  

¶ A complaint of the mis-education of our Gentry . 

I Confess , I cannot honour blood without good qualities , not spare it ; with ill . There is nothing that I more desire to be taught , than what is true Nobility : What thank is it to you that you are born well ? If you could have lost this privilege of Nature , I fear you had not been thus far Noble : That you may not pled desert , you had this before you were ; long ere you could either know or prevent it ; you are deceived if you think this any other than the body of Gentility , the life and soul of it , is in noble and virtuous disposition , in gallantness of spirit , without haughtiness , without insolence , without scornful over lynesse : shortly , in generous qualities , carriage , actions . See your error , and know that this demeanour doth not answer an honest birth : If you can follow all fashions , drink all healths , wear favours and good clothes , consort with Ruffians , companions , swear the biggest Oaths , quarrel easily , fight desperately , game in every inordinate Ordinary , spend your patrimony ere it fall , look on every man betwixt scorn and anger ; use gracefully some gestures of apish compliment ; talk irreligiously , dally with a Mistress , or ( which term is plainer ) hunt after Harlots , take smoke at a Playhouse , and live as if you were made all for sport , you think you have done enough , to merit , both of your blood , and others opinions . Certainly , the world hath no baseness , if this be generosity : Welfare the honest and civil rudeness of the obscure sons of the earth , if such be the graces of the eminent : The shame whereof ( methinks ) is not so proper to the wildness of youth , as to the carelessness or vanity of Parents : I speak it boldly ; our land hath no blemish comparable to the mis-education of our Gentry ; Infancy and youth are the seed-times of all hopes : if those pass unseasonably , no fruit can be expected from our age , but shame and sorrow : who should improve these , but they which may command them : I cannot altogether complain of our first years . How like are we to children , in the training up of our children ? Give a child some painted Babe ; he joys in it at first sight : and for some days will not abide it out of his hand or bosom ; but when he hath sated himself with the new pleasure of that guest , he now ( after a while ) casts it into Corners , forgets it , and can look upon it , with no care : Thus do we by ours . Their first times find us not more fond , then careful : we do not more follow them with our love , then ply them with instruction : When this delight begins to grow stale , we begin to grow negligent . Nothing that I know can be faulted in the ordering of Childhood , but indulgence Foolish Mothers , admit of Tutors , but debar rods ? These , while they desire their Children may learn , but not smart , as is said of Apes , kill their young ones with love ; for what can work upon that age , but fear ? And what fear without correction ? Now at last , with what measure of Learning their own will would vouchsafe to receive , they are too early sent to the Common Nurseries of Knowledge ; There ( unless they fall under careful tuition ) they study in jest , and play in earnest . In such universal means of Learning , all cannot fall besides them ; what their company , what their recreation would either instil or permit , they bring home to their glad parents . Thence are they transplanted to the Collegiate Inns of our common Laws : and there too many learn to be lawless , and to forget their former little . Paul's is their Westminster , their Study , an Ordinary , or Playhouse , or Dancing School ; & some Lambert their Polydon . And now after they have ( not without much expense ) learned fashions and licentiousness , they return home , full of welcomes and gratulations . By this time some blossoms of youth appearing in their face , admonish their Parents to seek them some seasonable match ; Wherein the Father inquires for Wealth , the Son for Beauty , perhaps the Mother for parentage , scarce any for Virtue , for Religion . Thus settled , What is their care , their discourse ; yea , their Trade , but either an Hound , or an Hawk ? And it is well , if no worse : And now , they so live , as if they had forgotten that there were Books : Learning is for Priests , and Pedants ; For Gentlemen , pleasure . Oh! that either wealth , or wit should be cast away thus basely : That ever Reason should grow so debauched , as to think any thing more worthy than knowledge : with what shame and emulation may we look upon other Nations ( whose Apish fashions we can take up in the Channels , neglecting their imitable examples ) and with what scorn do they look upon us ? They have their solemn Academies for all those qualities , which may accomplish Gentility : from which they return richly furnished , both for action and speculation . They accounted knowledge and ability of discourse as essential to great nesse , as blood : neither are they more above the vulgar in birth , then in understanding : They travel with judgement , and return with experience : so do they follow the exercises of the body , that they neglect not the culture of the mind . From hence grows civility , and power , to manage affairs either of justice or State ; From hence encouragement to learning , & reverence from inferiors . For those only can esteem knowledge , which have it ; and the common sort frame either their observance , or contempt out of the example of their leaders . 

amongst them , the sons of Nobles scorn not , either Merchandise , or learned professions ; and hate nothing so much , as to do nothing : I shame & hate to think , that our gallants hold there can be no disparagement , but in honest callings . Thus perhaps I have abated the envy of this reproof , by communicating it to more ; which I had not done , but that the generality of evil importunes redress . I well see that either good or evil descends : In vain shall we hope for the reformation of the many , while the better are disordered . Whom to solicit herein , I know not , but all : How galled should I be , to spend my light to the snuff , for the effecting of this ? I can but persuade and pray ; these I will not fail of : The rest to him that both can amend and punish . 

EPIST. VII . To Mr. jonas Reigesbergius in Zealand . 

¶ Written some while since , concerning some new opinions then broached in the Churches of Holland ; and under the name of Arminius ( then living ) persuading all great wits to a study and care of the common Peace of the Church , and dissuading from all affect ation of singularity . 

I Received lately , a short relation of some new Paradoxes from your Leiden ; you would know what we think : I fear not to be censured , as meddling : your truth is ours : The Sea cannot divide those Churches whom one faith unites . I know not how it comes to pass , that most men , while they too much affect civility , turn flatterers ; and plain truth is most where counted rudeness . He that tells a sick friend he looks i'll , or terms an angry tumour the Gout , or a waterish swelling , Dropsy ; is thought unmannerly . For my part , I am glad that I was not born to feed humours : How ever you take your own evils , I must tell you , we pity you , and think you have just cause of dejection , and we for you : not for any private cares , but ( which touch a Christian nearest ) the Commonwealth of God. Behold , after all those hills of carcases , and streams of blood , your civil sword is sheathed , wherein we neither congratulate , nor fear your peace ; lo now , instead of that , another while , the spiritual sword is drawn and shaken , & it is well if no more . Now the politic State sits still , the church quarrels : Oh! the insatiable hostility of our great enemy , with what change of mischiefs doth he afflict miserable man ? no sooner did the Christian world begin to breath from persecution but it was more punished with Arrianisine : when the red dragon cannot devour the child , he tries to drown the mother ; & when the waters fail , he raises war. Your famous junius had nothing more admirable them his love of peace : when our busy separatists apealed him , with what a sweet calmness did he reject them , & with a grave importunity called them to moderation . How it would have vexed his holy soul ( now out of the danger of passions , to have forseen his chair troblesom . God forbid that the Church should find a challenger , instead of a Champion : Who would think but you should have been taught the benefit of peace , by the long want ? but if your temporal state ( besides either hope , or belief ) hath grown wealth with War , like those Fowls which fatten with hard weather : yet be too sure , that these spiritual broils , cannot but impoverish the Church ; yea , affamish it . It were pity that your Holland should be still the Amphitheatre of the world , on whose Scaffolds , all other Nations should sit , and see variety of bloody shows , not without pity , and horror . If I might challenge aught in that your acute , and Learned Arminius ; I would thus solicit , and conjure him : Alas ! that so Wise a man should not know the worth of peace ; that so noble a Son of the Church , should not be brought to light , without ripping the womb of his Mother ! what mean these subtle Novelties ? If they make thee famous , and the Church miserable ; who shall gain by them ? Is singularity so precious , that it should cost no less , than the safety and quiet of our common mother ? If it be truth thou affectest ; what alone ? Could never any eyes ( till thine ) be blessed with this object ; where hath that Sacred verity hid herself thus long from all her careful Inquisitors , that she now first shows her head to thee unsought ? Hath the Gospel shined thus long , and bright , and left some Corners unseen ? Away with all new truths ; fair and plausible they may be , sound they cannot : some may admire thee for them ; none shall bless thee . But grant that some of these , are no less true , then nice points ; What do these unseasonable Crotchets and quavers trouble the harmonious plain-songs of our peace ? Some quiet error may be better than some unruly truth . Who binds us to speak all we think ? So the Church may be still , would God thou wert wise alone ? Did not our adversary's quarrel enough before , at our quarrels ? Were they not rich enough with our spoils ? By the dear name of our common parents , what meanest thou , Arminius ? Whether tend these new-raised dissensions ? Who shall thrive by them , but they which insult upon us , & rise by the fall of truth ? who shall be undone , but thy brethren ? By that most precious , and bloody ransom of our Saviour , and by that awful appearance , we shall once make before the glorious Tribunal of the son of God , remember thyself , and the poor distracted limbs of the Church , let not those excellent parts , wherewith God hath furnished thee , lie in the narrow way , and cause any weak one , either to fall , or stumble , or err . For God's sake , either say nothing , or the same . How many great wits have sought no By-paths , and now are happy with their fellows . Let it be no disparagement to go with many to heaven . What could he reply to so plain a charge ? no distinction can avoid the power of simple truth . I know he hears not this of me first : Neither that learned and worthy Fran. Gomarus , nor your other grave fraternity of reverend Divines , have been silent in so main a cause . I fear rather too much noise in any of these tumults : There may too many contend ; not entreat . Multitude of suitors , is commonly powerful ; how much more in just motions , But if either he , or you , shall turn me home , and bid me spend my little moisture upon our own brands , I grant there is both the same cause , and the same need . This Counsel is no whit further from us , because it is directed to you : Any Reader can change the person : I lament to see , that every where peace hath not many Clients , but fewer lovers ; yea , even many of those that praise her , follow her not . Of old , the very Novation men , Women , Children , brought stones and mortar ( with the Orthodox ) to the building of the Church of the Resurrection , and joined lovingly with them , against the Arrians : lesser quarrels divide us ; and every division ends in blows , and every blow is returned ; and none of all lights beside the Church : Even the best Apostles dissented ; neither knowledge , nor holiness can redress all differences : True , but wisdom and charity could teach us to avoid their prejudice . If we had but these two virtues ; quarrels should not hurt us , nor the Church by us : But ( alas ) self-love is too strong for both these : This alone opens the floodgates of dissension , and drowns the sweet , but low valley of the Church . Men esteem of opinions , because their own ; & will have truth serve , not govern ; What they have under-taken , must be true : Victory is sought for , not satisfaction ; Victory of the Author , not of the cause : He is a rare man that knows to yield , as well to argue : what should we do then , but bestow ourselves upon that which too many neglect , public peace ; first , in Prayers that we may prevail , then in tears that we prevail not ? Thus have I been bold to chat with you of our greatest and common cares . Your old love , & late Hospital entertainment in that your Island , called for this remembrance ; the rather to keep your English tongue in breath , which was wont not to be the least of your desires . Would God you could make us happy with news not of Truce , but sincere amity & union ; not of Provinces , but spirits . The God of Spirits effect it both here and there , to the glory of his Name and Church . 

EPIST. VIII . To W. I condemned for Murder . 

¶ Effectually preparing him , and ( under his name ) whatsoever Malefactor , for his death . 

IT is a bad cause that robbeth us of all the comfort of friends ; yea , that turns their remembrance into sorrow . None can do so , but those that proceed from ourselves ; For outward evils , which come from the infliction of others , make us cleave faster to our helpers , and cause us to seek and find ease in the very commisseration of those that love us : whereas those griefs which arise from the just displeasure of Conscience , will not abide so much , as the memory of others affection ; or if it do , makes it so much the greater corrasive , as our case is more uncapable of their comfort . Such is yours . You have made the mention of our names tedious to yourself , and yours to us. This is the beginning of your pain , that you had friends : If you may now smart sound from us , for your good , it must be the only joy you must expect , and the final duty we owe to you . It is both vain and comfortless to hear what might have been ; neither would I send you back to what is past , but purposely to increase your sorrow ; who have caused all our comfort to stand in your tears . If therefore our former Counsels had prevailed , neither had your hands shed innocent blood , nor justice yours . Now , to your great sin , you have done the one , and the other must be done to your pain , and we your well-willers , with sorrow and shame live to be witnesses of both . Your sin is gone before , the revenge of justice will follow : Seeing you are guilty , let GOD be just ; Other sins speak , this cryeth ; and will never be silent , till it be answered with itself : For your life ; the case is hopeless ; feed not yourself with vain presumptions , but settle yourself to expiate another's blood with your own . Would God your desert had been such , that we might with any comfort have desired you might live . But now , alas , your fact is so heinous , that your life can neither be craved without injustice , nor be protracted without inward torment . And if our private affection should make us deaf to the shouts of blood , and partiality should teach us to forget all care of public right , yet resolve , there is no place for hope . Since than you could not live guiltless , there remains nothing but that you labour to die penitent ; and since your body cannot be saved alive , to endeavour that your soul may be saved in death . Wherein , how happy shall it be for you , if you shall yet give care to this my last advice ; too late indeed for your recompense to the World , not too late for yourself . You have deserved death , and expect it ; Take heed lest you so fasten your eyes upon the first death of the body , that you should not look beyond it , to the second , which alone is worthy of trembling , worthy of tears . 

For this , though terrible to Nature , yet is common to us , with you . You must die : What do we else ? And what differs our end from yours , but in haste and violence ? And who knows whether in that ? It may be a sickness as sharp , as sudden , shall fetch us hence : It may be the same death , or a worse , for a better cause : Or if not so , There is much more misery in linger : He dies easily , that dies soon : But the other , is the utmost vengeance that GOD hath reserved for his enemies : This is a matter of long fear , and short pain . A few pangs let's the soul out of prison ; but the Torment of that other is everlasting ; after ten thousand years scorching in that flame , the pain is never the nearer to his ending . no time gives it hope of abating ; yea , time hath nothing to do with this eternity . You that shall feel the pain of one minutes dying , think what pain it is to be dying for ever and ever . This , although it be attended with a sharp pain , yet is such as some strong spirits have endured without show of yeildance . I have herd of an Irish Traitor , that when he lay pining upon the wheel with his bones broke , asked his friend if he changed his countenance at all : caring less for the pain , than the show of fear . Few men have died of greater pains , than others have sustained and live . But that other over-whelms both body and soul , and leaves no room for any comfort in the possibility of mitigation . here , men are executioners , or diseases ; there fiends . Those devils that were ready to tempt the graceless unto sin , are as ready to follow the damned with tortures . Whatsoever become of your carcase , save your soul from these flames : and so manage this short time you have to live , that you may die but once . This is not your first sin ; yea , God hath now punished your former sins with this : A fearful punishment in itself , if it deserved no more : your conscience ( which now begins to tell truth ) cannot but assure you , that there is no sin more worthy of hell , then murder ; yea , more proper to it . Turn over those holy leaves ( which you have too much neglected , & now smart for neglecting ) you shall find Murderers among those that are shut out from the presence of God : you shall find the Prince of that darkness , in the highest stile of his mischief , termed a Manslayer . Alas ! how fearful a case is this , that you have heerein-resembled him , for whom Topheth was prepared of old , and imitating him in his action , have endangered yourself to partake of his torments . O , that you could but see what you have done , what you have deserved ; That your heart could bleed enough within you , for the blood your hands have shed : That as you have followed Satan our common enemy in sinning , so you could defy him in repenting : That your tears could disappoint his hopes of your damnation . What an happy unhappiness shall this be to your sad friends , that your better part yet lives ? That from an ignominious place , your soul is received to glory ? Nothing can effect this but your Repentance , and that can do it . Fear not to look into that horror , which should attend your sin , and be now as severe to yourself , as you have been cruel to another . Think not to extenuate your offence with the vain Titles of manhood ; what praise is this , that you were a valiant Murderer ? Strike your own breast ( as Moses did his Rook ) and bring down Rivers of tears to wash away your bloodshed . Do not so much fear your judgement , as abhor your sin ; yea , yourself for it : And with strong cries lift up your guilty hands to that God whom you offended , and say : Deliver me from blood-guiltines OH Lord Let me tell you , as without repentance there is no hope , so with it , there is no condemnation . True penitence is strong , & can grapple with the greatest sin , yea with all the powers of hell . What if your hands be red with blood ? Behold , the blood of your Saviour , shall wash away yours : If you can bathe yourself in that ; your Scarlet soul shall be as white as Snow . This course alone shall make your Cross the way to the Paradise of God. This plaster can heal all the sores of the foul , if never so desperate : Only , take heed that your heart be deep enough pierced , ere you lay it on ; else under a seeming skin of dissimulation , your soul shall fester to death . Yet joy us with your true sorrow , whom you have grieved with your offence ; & at once comfort your friends , and save your soul . 

EPIST. IX . To Mr. john Mole , of a long time now prisoner under the Inquisition at Rome . 

¶ Exciting him to his wont Constancy , and encouraging him to Martyrdom . 

What passage can these lines hope to find into that your strait and curious thraldom ? Yet who would not adventure the loss of this pains for him , which is ready to lose himself for Christ ? what do we not owe to you which have thus given yourself for the common faith ? blessed be the name of that God who hath singled you out for his Champion , & made you invincible : how famous are your bonds ? How glorious your constancy ? O , that out of your close obscurity , you could but see the honour of your suffering , the affections of God's Saints , & in some , an holy envy at your distressed happiness . Those walls cannot hide you : no man is attended with so many eyes from earth & heaven : The Church your Mother beholds you , not with more compassion , than joy : Neither can it be said , how she at once pities your misery , and rejoices in your patience : The blessed Angels look upon you with gratulation and applause . The adversaries with an angry sorrow to see themselves overcome by their captive , their obstinate cruelty over-matched with humble resolution , and faithful perseverance . Your Saviour sees you from above , not as a mere spectator , but as a patient with you , in you , for you ; yea , as an agent in your endurance & victory , giving new courage with the one hand , and holding out a Crown with the other ; Whom would not these sights encourage ? who now can pity your solitariness ? The hearts of all good men are with you . Neither can that place be but full of angels , which is the continual object , of so many Prayers , yea the God of heaven was never so near you , as now ye are removed from men . Let me speak a bold , but true word . It is as possible for him to be absent from his Heaven , as from the prisons of his Saints . The glorified spirits above sing to him ; the persecuted souls below , suffer for him , and cry to him ; he is magnified in both , present with both ; the faith of the one , is as pleasing to him , as the triumph of the other ; Nothing obliges us men so much , as smarting for us ; words of defence are worthy of thanks , but pain is esteemed above recompense . How do we kiss the wounds which are taken for our sakes , and profess that we would hate ourselves , if we did not love those that dare bleed for us : How much more shall the God of mercies be sensible of your sorrows , and crown your patience ? To whom you may truly sing that ditty of the Divine Psalmist , Surely for thy sake am I slain continually , and am counted as a Sheep for the slaughter . What need I to stir up your constancy , which hath already amazed , and wearied your persecutors ? no suspicion shall drive me hereto ; but rather the thirst of your praise . He that exhorts to persist in well-doing , whiles he persuades , commendeth . Whether should I rather send you , then to the sight of your own Christian fortitude ? which neither Prayers , nor threats , have been able to shake : here stands on the one hand , Liberty , Promotion , Pleasure , life , and ( which easily exceeds all these ) the dear respect of wife and children ( whom your only resolution shall make Widow and Orphans ) these with smiles , and vows , and tears , seem to importune you . On the other hand , bondage , solitude , horror , death ( and the most linger of all miseries ) ruin of posterity : these with frowns and menaces labour to affright you : Betwixt both , you have stood unmooved ; fixing your eyes either right forward upon the cause of your suffering , or upwards upon the Crown of your reward : It is an happy thing when our own actions may be either examples , or arguments of good . These blessed proceedings call you on to your perfection ; The reward of good beginnings prosecuted , is doubled ; neglected , is lost . How vain are those temptations , which ( would make you a loser of all this praise ; this recompense ? Go on therefore happily ; keep your eyes where they are , and your heart cannot be , but where it is , and where it ought : Look still , for what you suffer , & for whom : For the truth , or Christ : what can be so precious as truth ? Not life itself . All earthly things are not so vile to life , as life to truth ; Life is momentary , Truth eternal ; Life is ours , the Truth , Gods : O happy purchase , to give our life for the Truth . What can we suffer too much for Christ ? He hath given our life to us ; he hath given his own life for us. What great thing is it , if he require what he hath given us , if ours for his ? Yea , rather , if he call for what he hath lent us ; yet not to bereve but to change it ; giving us Gold for our clay , glory for our corruption . Behold that Saviour of yours weeping , & bleeding , & dying for your alas ! our souls are too straight for his sorrows ; we can be made but pain for him ; He was made sin for us : we sustain for him , but the impotent anger of men , he struggled with the infinite wrath of his Father for us. O , who can endure enough for him , that hath passed through Death and hell for his Soul ? Think this , and you shall resolve with David , I will be yet more vile for the Lord The worst of the despite of men , is but Death ; and that , if they inflict not , a disease will ; or if not that , Age. here is no imposition of that which would not be but an hastening of that which will be : An hastening , to your gain . For behold , their violence shall turn your necessity , into Virtue and profit . Nature hath made you mortal , none but an enemy can make you a Martyr ; you must die , though they will not ; you cannot die for Christ , but by them : How could they else devose to make you happy ? Since the giver of both lives hath said , He that shall lose his life for my sake , shall save it . Lo , this alone is lost with keeping , and gained by loss . Say you were freed , upon the safest conditions , and returning : ( As how welcome should that news be , more to yours , then to yourself . ) Perhaps , death may meet you in the way , perhaps overtake you at home : neither place , nor time , can promise immunity from the common destiny of men : Those that may abridge your hours , cannot lengthen them ; and while they last , cannot secure them from vexation ; yea themselves shall follow you into their dust ; and cannot avoid what they can inflict ; death shall equalie tyrannize by them , and over them : so their favours are but fruitless , their malice gainful . For , it shall change your prison into heaven , your Fetters into a Crown , your jailours' to Angels , your misery into glory . Look up to your future estate , and rejoice in the present : Behold the Tree of Life , the hidden Manna , the Sceptre of Power , the Morningstar , the white garment , the new name , the Crown , and Throne of Heaven are addressed for you . Overcome and enjoy them : o glorious condition of Martyrs , whom conformity in death , hath made like their Saviour in blessedness ; whose honour is to attend him for ever , whom they have joyed to imitate . What are these which are arrayed in long white robes , and whence came they ? These are ( says that Heavenly Elder ) they which came out of great Tribulation , and washed their long Robes , and have made their long Robes white , in the blood of the Lamb . 

Therefore they are in the presence of the Throne of GOD , and serve him day and night in the Temple : and he that sitteth on the Throne , will dwell among them , and Govern them , and lead them unto the livelie Fountains of waters , and GOD shall wipe all tears from their eyes . 

All the elect have Seals in their foreheads : But Martyrs have Palm in their hands : All the elect have White Robes ; Martyrs , both white and long . White , for their Glory , long for the largeness of their Glory . Once red with their own blood ; now white with the blood of the Lamb : There is nothing in our blood , but weak obedience ; nothing but merit in the Lambes-bloud . Behold , his merit makes our obedience Glorious . You do but sprinkle his feet with your blood ; Lo , he washes your long white Robes , with his . Every drop of your blood is answered with a stream of his ; and every drop of his , is worth Rivers of ours : Precious in the sight of the Lord , is the Death of his Saints : Precious in prevention ; Precious in acceptation , precious in remuneration . O , give willingly that which you cannot keep , that you may receive what you cannot lose . The way is steep , but now you breath towards the top . Let not the want of some few steps , lose you an eternal rest . Put too the strength of your own Faith ; The Prayers of God's Saints shall further your pace ; & that gracious hand that sustains heaven and earth , shall uphold , and sweetly draw you up to your glory . Go on to credit the gospel with your perseverance , and show the false-hearted Clients of that Romayne-court , that the Truth yields real and hearty professors ; such as dare no less smart , then speak for her . 

Without the walls of your restraint , where can you look beside encouragements of suffering ? Behold in this , how much you are happier than your many predecessors . Those have found friends , or wives , or children , the most dangerous of all tempters . Suggestions of weakness , when they come masked with love , are more powerful to hurt . But you , all your many friends , in the valour of their Christian love , wish rather a blessed Martyr , than a living and prosperous revolter : yea , your dear wife ( worthy of this honour , to be the wife of a Martyr ) prefers your faith , to her affection ; and in a courage beyond her Sex , contemns the worst misery of your loss ; professing she would redeem your life with hers , but that she would not redeem it with your yeildance : and while she looks upon those many pawns of your chaste love , your hopeful Children , wishes rather to see them fatherless , than their Father unfaithful : The greatest part of your sufferings are hers . She bears them with a cheerful resolution . She divides with you in your sorrows , in your patience ; she shall not be divided in your glory : For us we shall accompany you , with our Prayers , and follow you with our thankful commemorations ; vowing to write your name in red Letters , in the Calendars of our hearts ; and to Register it in the monuments of perpetual Records , as an example to all posterity , The memorial of the just shall be blessed . 

EPIST. X. To all Readers . 

¶ Containing Rules of good advice for our Christian and civil carriage . 

I Grant , Brevity where it is neither obscure nor defective , is very pleasing , even to the daintist judgments . no marvel therefore , if most men desire much good counsel in a narrow room ; as some affect to have great personages , drawn in little Tablets , or , as we see worlds of Countries described in the compass of small Maps : Neither do I unwillingly yield to sollowe them ; for both the powers of good advice are the stronger , when they are thus united ; and brevity makes counsel more portable for memory , and readier for use . Take these therefore for more ; which as I would fain practise , so am I willing to commend . Let us begin with him who is the first and last : Inform yourself aright concerning God , without whom , in vain do we know all things : Be acquainted with that Saviour of yours , which paid so much for you on earth , and now sues for you in heaven ; without whom , we have nothing to do with God , nor he with us. Adore him in your thoughts , trust him with your self : Renew your sight of him every day ; and his of you : Ouerlook these earthly things , & when you do at any time cast your eyes upon heaven , think , there dwells my Saviour , there I shall be . Call yourself to often reckonings , cast up your debts , payments , graces , wants expenses , employments , yield not to think your set Devotions troublesome : Take not easy denialles from yourself ; yea , give peremptory denials to yourself ; He can never be good that flatters himself : hold nature to her allowance ; and let your will stand at courtesy : happy is that man , which hath obtained to be the Master of his own heart : Think all Gods outward favours and provisions the best for you ; your own abilities , and actions the meanest . Suffer not your mind to be either a Drudge or a wanton ; exercise it ever , but overlay it not : In all your businesses look through the world , at God ; whatsoever is your level , let him be your scope : Every day take a view of your last , and think either it is this , or may be : Offer not yourself either to honour , or labour ; let them both seek you : Care you only to be worthy , and you cannot hide you from God ; so frame yourself to the time & company , that you may neither serve it ; nor sullenly neglect it ; and yield so far , as you may neither betray goodness , nor countenance evil . Let your words be few , and digested ; It is a shame for the tongue to cry the heart mercy , much more to cast itself upon the uncertain pardon of others ears . There are but two things which a Christian is charged to buy , and not to sell , Time and Truth ; both , so precious , that we must purchase them at any rate . So use your friends , as those which should be perpetual , may be changeable ; while you are within yourself , there is no danger : but thoughts once uttered must stand to hazard . Do not hear from yourself , what you would be loath to hear from others . In all good things give your eye and ear the full scope , for they let into the mind ; restrain the tongue , for it is a spender ▪ few men have repent them of silence : In all serious matters take counsel of days , & nights and friends & let leisure ripen your purposes : neither hope to gain aught by suddenness : The first thoughts may be confident , the second are wiser . Serve honesty ever , though without apparent wages : she will pay sure , if slow : As in apparel , so in actions , know not what is good , but what becomes you : how many warrantable acts have mishapen the Authors . Excuse not your own ill , aggravate not others : and if you love peace , avoid Censures , comparisons , contradictions : out of good men choose acquaintance , of acquaintance , friends , of friends ; familiars ▪ after probation admit them , & af●e● admittance cha●ge them not . Age commendeth friendship . Do not always your best ; it is neither wise , nor safe for a man ever to stand upon the top of his strength ▪ If you would be above the expectation of others 〈…〉 yourself . 〈…〉 after your p●●●● ; not after your mind ▪ 〈◊〉 To where you may deny ; except upon Confidence of de●●●● , or hope to require ▪ Either frequent ●●li●ss , or complaints , are wearisome to any friend : Rather smother your griefs and wants a● you may , then be either querulous , or importunate . Let not your face belie your heart , nor always tell tales out of it ; he is fit to live amongst friends or enemies , that can be ingenuously close : Give freely , sell thriftily : Change seldom your place , never your state : either 〈…〉 conveniences , or swallow them , rather theen you should run from yourself to avoid them . 

In all your reckonings for the world , cast up some crosses that appear not ; either those will come , or may : Let your suspicions be charitable ; your trust fearful ▪ your censures sure , Give way to the anger of the great : The Thunder and Cannon will abide no fence . As in throngs we are afraid of loss ; so while the world comes upon you , look well to your soul ; There is more danger in good , then in evil : I fear the number of these my rules ; for Precepts are wont ( as nails ) to drive out one another : but these , intended to scatter amongst many : and I was loath that any guest should complain of a niggardly hand ; Dainty Dishes are wont to be sparingly served out ; homely ones , supply in their bigness , what they want in their worth . 

FINIS . 





Index Expurg . Homil. in 1.  Cor. 7.  De bono coniugij , cap. 19  De bono . coniug . c. 9 etc.  16.  