Susurrium cum deo Soliloqvies : or , holy self-conferences of the devout soul , upon sundry choice occasions , with humble addresses to the throne of grace . 

Together with the souls farewell to earth , and approaches to heaven . 

The second edition . By jos. Hall , b. Norwich . 

London , printed by will : hunt , and are to be sold by George lathum junior , at the sign of the Bishop's head in st Paul's churchyard . 1651.  

The authors supplicatory dedication . 

To thee only , oh my God , who hast put these holy thoughts into my soul , do i most humbly desire to dedicated both myself and them ; earnestly beseeching thee graciously to accept of both : and that thou wouldst be pleased to accompany and follow these my weak practical devotions , with a sensible blessing in every reader . Let these good meditations not rest in the eye , but descend into the bosom of the perusers : and effectually work in their hearts , that warmth of pious affections , which i have here presumed to exemplify in mine ; to the glory of thy great name , and our mutual comfort , in the day of the glorious appearing of our Lord Jesus . Amen . 

The heads of the several soliloquies . 

1.  the best prospect . 
2.  the happy Parting , 
3.  heavenly conversation . 
4.  love unchangeable . 
5.  the happiest object . 
6.  unchangeable duration . 
7.  trust upon trial . 
8.  angelical familiarity . 
9  the unanswerable Christian . 
10.  hellish hostility . 
11.  false joy . 
12.  true light . 
13.  bosom-discourse . 
14.  the insensible fetters . 
15.  Satan's prevalence . 
16.  leisurely growth . 
17.  allowable variety . 
18.  misconstructions of holiness . 
19  two heavens in one . 
20.  the stock employed . 
21.  love of life . 
22.  equal distribution . 
23.  the body's subjection . 
24.  the ground of unproficiency . 
25.  the sure refuge . 
26.  the light burden . 
27.  joy intermitted . 
28.  universal interest . 
29.  the spiritual Bedleem . 
30.  the difference of actions 
31.  the necessity of labour . 
32.  acquaintance with heaven . 
33.  the all-sufficient knowledge . 
34.  poor greatness . 
35.  acceptation of desires . 
36.  heavenly joys . 
37.  mixed contentments . 
38.  true wealth . 
39  false light . 
40.  the haste of desire . 
41.  death's remembrancers . 
42.  faith's victory . 
43.  the unfailing friend . 
44.  quiet humility . 
45.  sure mercies . 
46.  dangerous prosperity . 
47.  cheerful obedience . 
48.  heavenly accordance . 
49.  divine bounty . 
50.  sweet use of power . 
51.  the power of conscience . 
52.  proud poverty . 
53.  the happiest society . 
54.  honey from the rock . 
55.  sure earnest . 
56.  heavenly manna . 
57  the heart's treasure . 
58.  the narrow way . 
59  God's various proceedings . 
60.  the waking guardian . 
61.  the sting of guiltiness . 
62.  beneficial want . 
63.  interchange of conditions . 
64.  the rule of devotion . 
65.  hell's triumph . 
66.  dumb homage . 
67.  indifferency of events . 
68  the transcendent love . 
69.  choice of seasons . 
70.  the happy return home . 
71.  the confinements of age . 
72.  sin without sense . 
73.  the extremes of devotion . 
74.  the sick man's vows . 
75.  the suggestions of a false heart . 
76.  sacred melody . 
77.  blemishes of the holy function . 
78.  the blessed reward . 
79.  presages of judgement . 
80.  unwearied motion , and rest eternal . 
June the 26th , 1650.  

I have perused these divine and holy soliloquies between God and the faithful soul , and do find them to be so pious and profitable , so sweet and comfortable , and full of pious and spiritual devotion , that i judge them well worthy to be printed and published . 

John Downame . 

Self-conference . 

Soliloq . I. the best prospect . 

Oh my God , i shall not be worthy of my eyes , if i think i can employ them better , than in looking up to thy heaven : and shall i not be worthy to look up to heaven , if i suffer my eyes to rest there , and not look through heaven at thee , the almighty maker and ruler of it ; who dwellest there in all glory and majesty ; and if seeing thee i do not always adore thee , and find my soul taken up with awful and admiring thoughts concerning thee : i see many eyes have looked curiously upon that glorious frame else they could not have made so punctual observation of the fire , and motion of those goodly globes of light , which thou hast placed there , as to foretell all their conjunctions , and oppositions , for many hundred years before ; but , while they look at the motions , let me look at the mover ; wondering , not without ravishment of spirit , at that infinite power and Wisddome , which keeps up those numberless and immense bodies in so perfect a regularity , that they all keep their just stations , and times , without the least varying from the course which thou settedst them in their first creation ; so while their observation makes them the wiser , mine shall make me the holier . Much variety of objects hast thou given us , here below , which do commonly take up our eyes ; but it shall be my fault , if all those do not rather lead my thoughts to thee , than withdraw them from thee ; since thy power and majesty is clearly conspicuous in them all . Oh God , while i have eyes , let me never but see thee in all things , let me never but enjoy thee ; let me see thee here as thou Mayest be seen , by the eye of faith , till i May see , as i am seen , hereafter , in glory : let me see thee as through a glass darkly here on earth , till i May come to see thee face to face in heaven . 

Soliloq . Ii the happy parting . 

i have lived divers years longer than holy David did ; yet i can truly say with him ; if that psalm were his which hath the title of Moses ; we have brought our years to an end , as it were a tale that is told : me thinks , oh my soul , it is but yesterday since we met ; and now we are upon parting ; neither shall we , i hope , be unwilling to take leave ; for what advantage can it be to us to hold out longer together ? One piece of me cannot but grow more infirm with use and time ; and thereupon must follow a decay of all faculties , and operations : where the tools are grown bad and dull , what work can be exquisite ? Thou seest it then necessary , and inevitable that we must yield to age , and grow worse with continuance . 

And what privilege can mere time give us in our duration ? We see the basest of stones last longer than the durablest plants ; and we see trees hold out longer than any sensitive creatures ; and divers of those sensitive creatures outlast man , the Lord of them all : neither are any of these held more excellent because they wear out more hours : we know Henoch was more happy that was fetched away at three hundred sixty five years , than Methuselah at nine hundred sixty and nine : difference of age doth nothing but pull down a side where there are not supplies of increasing abilities . Should we continue our partnership many years longer , could we hope for more health and strength of body , more vigour of understanding and judgement , more heat of good affections ? And can we doubt that it will be elsewhere better with us ? Do we not know what abides for us above ? Are we not assured that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved , we have a building of God , an house not made with hands , eternal in the heavens . Why therefore , oh , why , should ye be loath to part upon fair terms ? Thou , oh my soul , to the possession of that happy mansion , which thy dear saviour hath from eternity prepared for thee in his father's house : and thou , oh my body , to that quiet repository of thy grave , till ye both shall happily meet in the blessed resurrection of the just , never , never to be severed ? 

Soliloq . Iii heavenly conversation . 

It matters not a little with whom we hold our familiar conversation ; for commonly we are transformed into the dispositions and manners of those whose company we frequent : we daily see those who by haunting the society of drunkards , and debauched persons , have from civil and orderly men grown into extremity of lewdness ; and on the contrary , those who have consorted themselves with the holy and virtuous , have attained to a gracious participation of their sanctity : why shouldst thou not then , oh my soul , by a continual conversation with God , and his angels , improve to an heavenly disposition ? Thou canst not , while thou art here , but have somewhat to do with the world ; that will necessarily intrude into thy presence , and force upon thee businesses unavoidable ; and thy secular friends May well look to have some share in thy sociable entertainments : but these are but goers and comers , easily and willingly dismissed , after some kind interlocutions : the company that must stick by thee is spiritual , which shall never leave thee , if thou have the grace to apply thyself to them upon all occasions . 

Thou Mayst hold fair correspondence with all other not offensive companions ; but thy entireness must be only with these . 

Let those other be never so faithful , yet they are uncertain ; be their will never so good , yet their power is limited ; these are never but at hand , never but able , and willing to make and keep thee happy . Oh my God , thou seest how subject i am to distractions ; oh hold me close to thee : let me enter into the same company here in my pilgrimage , which i shall for ever enjoy hereafter in my home . 

Solilo . Iv. love unchangeable . 

Our younger years are wont to be delightted with variety , and to be much affected to a change , although to the worse : the child is better pleased with his new coat , though the old be far handsomer : whereas age and experience fixeth our desires and teacheth us to set the greatest value upon those good things wherewith we have been longest acquainted . 

Yea , it is the general disposition of nature to be cloyed with continue blessings , and upon long fruition to complain of that good which we first commended for pleasing , and beneficial : what could relish better with the Israelites the first morning than the angel's food which fell down from heaven every day about their camp ? the taste whereof was like to wafers made with honey : if we stay but a while , we shall , ere many years , hear them calling for the onions and garlic of Egypt ; and crying out : now our soul is dried away ; there is nothing but this manna before our eyes . our wanton appetite is apt to be weary of the best blessings , both of earth and heaven , and to nauseate with store : neither is any thing more tedious to us , than the enjoined repetition of a daily-tasked devotion . But contrarily , grace endears all blessings to us by their continuance , and heightens our affections , where they are rightly placed , by the length of the time of their enjoying . Oh God , it is thy mercy that thou hast vouchsafed to allow me an early interest in thee , even from my tender years , : the more and longer i have known thee , the more cause have i still found to love thee , and adore thee ; thou art ever one and unchangeable ; oh make thou my heart so ; devote thou me wholly unto thee ; and by how much cooler my old age is in all other affections , inflame it so much the more in my love to thee . 

Solil . V. the happiest object . 

If we could attain to settle in our thoughts a right apprehension of the majesty of God , it would put us unto the comfortable exercise of all the affections that belong to the soul : for surely , if we could conceive aright of his omnipotent power , and transcending glory , and incomprehensible infiniteness , we could not but tremble before him , and be always taken up with an adoring fear of him : and , if we could apprehend his infinite goodness both in himself and to mankind , we could not but be ravished with a fervent love to him , and should think ourselves happy , that we Might be allowed to love such a God ; and if we could conceive of that absolute beauty of his holiness , and blissful presence , we could not but be inflamed with a longing desire to enjoy such a God ; and if we could apprehend all these ; we could not be but both transported with an unspeakable joy , that we have a sure interest in a God so holy , so good , so almighty , so glorious , and strike with an unexpressible grief , that we should either offend him , or suffer ourselves to want but for a moment the feeling presence of that all-sufficient , and all-comprehending majesty : on the contrary , those men begin at the wrong end , who go about to draw their affections to God first , and then after seek to have their minds enlightened with right conceits of his essence and attributes : who meeting with those occurrent temptations , which mainly cross them in their desires and affections , are strait set off from prosecuting their good motions , and are as new to seek of a God , as if they had never bent their thoughts towards heaven . Oh God , let it be the main care of my life , to know thee , and whom thou hast sent Jesus Christ thy son my saviour . I cannot through thy mercy fail of an heavenly disposition of soul while i am here , and of a life of eternal glory with thee hereafter . 

Solilo . Vi . Unchangeable duration . 

In the first minute wherein we live , we enter upon an eternity of being ; and , though at the first , through the want of the exercise of reason , we cannot know it ; and afterwards , through our inconsideration , and the bewitching businesses of time , we do not seriously lay it to heart , we are in a state of everlastingness ; there must upon the necessity of our mortality be a change of our condition , but with a perpetuity of our being ; the body must undergo a temporary dissolution , and the soul a remove , either to bliss or torment ; but both of them , upon their meeting , shall continue in an unchangeable duration , for ever and ever : and if we are wont to slight transitory and vanishing commodities , by reason of their momentany continuance , and to make most account of things durable ; what care and great thoughts ought i to bestow upon myself , who shall outlast the present world ; and how ought i to frame my life so , as it May fall upon an eternity infinitely happy and glorious ? 

Oh God , do thou set off my heart from all these earthly vanities , and fix it above with thee . As there shall be no end of my being , so let there be no change of my affections ; let them beforehand take possession of that heaven of thine , whereto i am aspiring : let nothing but this clay of mine be left remaining upon this earth whereinto it is mouldering ; let my spiritual part be ever with thee whence it came , and enter upon that bliss which knows neither change nor end . 

Soliloq . Vii . Trust upon trial . 

What a providence there is over all the creatures in the world , which both produceth them to their being , and overrules , and carries them on , to and in their dissolution without their knowledge , or intended cooperation ; but for those whom God hath endued with the faculty of ratiocination , how easy is it to observe the course of the divine proceedings with them , how that all-wise God contrives their affairs and events quite beyond , and above the power of their weak projections ; how he prevents their desires , how he fetches about inexpected and improbable occurrences to their hindrance , or advantage ; sometimes blessing them with success , beyond all their hopes , sometimes blasting their projects , when their blossoms are at the fairest ? Surely , if i look only in a dull stupidity upon the outsides of all accidents , that befall me , and not improve my reason and faith to discern , and acknowledge that invisible power , that order them to his own , and their ends , i shall be little better than brutish ; and if upon the observation of all that good hand of God , sensibly leading me on , in all the ways of my younger , and riper age , in so many feeling and apparent experiments of his gracious provisions and protections , i shall not have learned to trust him with the small remainder of my days , and the happy close of that life which he hath so long , and mercifully preserved , the favours of a bountiful God shall have been cast away upon a barren , and unthankful heart . Oh God , i am such as thou hast made me , make up thy good work in me , and keep me that i do not mar myself with my wretched unbelief , i have tried thee to the full ; oh that i could cast myself wholly upon thee ; and trust thee both with my body and soul , for my safe passage to that blessed home ; and for the perfect accomplishment of my glory , in thine . 

Soliloq . Viii . Angelical familiarity . 

There is no reason to induce a man to think that the good angels are not as assiduously present with us , for our good , as the evil angels are for our hurt ; since we know that the evil spirits cannot be more full of malice to work our harm , than the blessed angels are full of charity , & well-wishing to mankind ; and the evil are only let loose to tempt us by a permission of the almighty , whereas the good are by a gracious delegation from God encharged with our custody ; now , that the evil spirits are ever at hand , ready upon all occasions to present their services to us for our furtherance to mischief , appears too plainly in their continual temptations which they inject into our thoughts ; in their real and speedy operations with the spells and charms of their wicked clients , which are no less effectually answered by them , immediately , upon their practice , than natural causes are by their ordinary and regular productions . It must needs follow therefore , that the good angels are as close to us , and as inseparable from us : and though we see neither , yet he that hath spiritual eyes perceives them both , and is accordingly affected to their presence . If then wicked men stick not to go so far as to endanger , and draw on their own damnation , by familiarly conversing with malignant spirits ; why should not i for the unspeakable advantage of any soul affect an awfully-familiar conversation with those blessed angels which i know to be with me ? The language of spirits are thoughts : why do not i entertain them in my secret cogitations , and hold an holy discourse with them in mental allocutions ; and so carry myself as that i May ever hold fair correspondence with those invisible companions , and May expect from them all gracious offices , of holy motions , careful protection , and at last an happy conveyance to my glory ? Oh my soul , thou art a spirit , as they are ; do thou ever see them , as they see thee ; and so speak to them , as they speak to thee ; and bless thy god for their presence , and tuition ; and take heed of doing aught that May cause those heavenly guardians to turn away their faces from thee as ashamed of their charge . 

Soliloq . Ix. . The unanswerable Christian . 

It is no small grief to any good heart that loves the Lord Jesus in sincerity , to see how utterly unanswerable the greater sort of men that bear the name of Christ are to the example and precepts of that Christ whose name they bear : he was humble and meek , they proud and insolent ; he bade us love our enemies , they hardly can love their friends ; he prayed for his persecutors , they curse ; he that had the command of all , cared not to possess any thing , they not having right to much , would possess all ; he bade us give our coat also to him that takes our cloak , they take both coat and cloak from him that hath it ; he bade us turn our cheek for the other blow , they will be sure to give two blows for one ; he paid obedience to a foster father , and tribute to Caesar , they despise government ; his trade was only doing good , spending the night in praying , the day in preaching and healing ; they debauch their time , revelling away the night , and sleeping away , or mispending the day ; he forbade oaths , they not only swear and forswear , but blaspheme too ; he bade us make friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness , they make Mammon their god ; he bade us take up his cross , they impose their own ; he bade us lay up our treasure in heaven , they place their heaven in earth ; he bids us give to them that ask , they take violently from the owners ; he bade us return good for evil , they for good return evil ; he charged his disciple to love one another , they nourish malice and rancour against their brethren ; he left peace for a legacy to his followers , they are apt to set the world on fire : his business was to save , theirs to destroy . Oh God , let rivers of waters run down mine eyes because they do no better keep the law of thy gospel . Give grace to all that are called by thy name , to walk worthy of that high profession whereto they are called : and keep me thy unworthy servant that i May never deviate from that blessed pattern which thou hast set before me : oh let me never shame that great name that is put upon me : let me in all things approve myself a Christian in earnest ; and so conform myself to thee , in all thy example and commands , that it May be no dishonour to thee to own me for thine . 

Soliloq . x. hellish hostility . 

I cannot but observe how universal it is in all kinds for one creature to prey upon another , the greater fishes devour the less , the birds of rapine feed upon the smaller fowls , the ravenous wild beasts sustain themselves with the flesh of the weaker and tamer cattle ; the dog pursues the hare , the cat the mouse ; yea the very mole under the earth hunts for the worm , and the spider in our window for the fly : whether it pleased God to ordain this antipathy in nature , or whether man's sin brought this enmity upon the creature i inquire not , this i am sure of ; that both God hath given unto man ( The Lord of this inferior world ) leave and power , to prey upon all these his fellow-creatures ; and to make his use of them , both for his necessity , and lawful pleasure ; and that the god of this world is only he that hath stirred up men to prey upon one another ; some to eat their flesh , as the savage Indian's ; others to destroy their lives , estates , good names : this proceeds only from him that is a murderer from the beginning . Oh my soul , do thou mourn in secret to see the great enemy of mankind so woefully prevalent as to make the earth so bloody a shambles to the sons of men ; and to see Christians so outrageously cruel to their own flesh : and oh thou that art the Lord of hosts , and the god of peace , restrain thou the violent fury of those which are called by thy name , and compose these unhappy quarrels amongst them that should be brethren . Let me ( If it May stand with thy blessed will ) once again see peace smile o'er the earth , before i come to see thy face in glory . 

Soliloq . Xi . False joy . 

Amongst these public blusters of the world , i find many men that secretly applaud themselves in the conceit of an happy peace which they find in their bosom : where all is calm and quiet ; no distemper of passions , no fear of evil , no sting of remorse , no disturbance of doubts ; but all smoothness of brow , and all tranquillity of mind ; whose course of life , yet , without any great enquiry hath appeared to be not over-strict and regular . I hear them boast of their condition , without any envy of their happiness , as one that had rather hear them complain of their inward unquietness , than brag of their peace . Give me a man that after many secret bickerings , and hard conflicts in his breast , upon a serious penitence , and sense of reconciliation with his God hath attained to a quiet heart , walking constionably and close with that majesty with whom he is atoned ; i shall bless and emulate him as a meet subject of true joy : for spiritually there is never a perfect calm but after a tempest ; the wind and earthquake and fire make way for the soft voice . but i pity the flatteries , and self-applause of a careless and impenitent heart : this jollity hath in it much danger , and without some change , death . Oh saviour , i know thou cam'st to send fire on the earth ; yea fire into these earthen bosoms , whereof the very best hath combustible matter enough for thee to work upon ; and what will i ( Thou sayst ) if it be already kindled ; oh blessed Jesus , my will agrees with thine ; i desire nothing in the world more than that this fire of thine May flame up in my soul , and burn up those secret corruptions which have lain smothering within me : set me at full variance with myself , that i May be at peace with thee . 

Soliloq . Xii . True light . 

thou hast taught us , oh saviour , that even the light of man May be darkness , and that the light endarkned causeth the greatest darkness : neither can it be otherwise ; since the very obscuring of the light maketh some kind of darkness , the utter extinction of it must needs make the darkness absolute . Now what is darkness but a mere privation of light : there is but a double spiritual light , the absence whereof causeth darkness : thine evangelist hath justly said of thee , thou art the true light , that enlightnest every man that cometh into the world ; thy psalmist hath said of thy divine oracles , thy word is a lantern unto my feet , and a light unto my steps ; whosoever wants both , or either of these , cannot but be in darkness , yea his pretended light cannot but be darkness itself . 

I see , oh Lord , there is much of this dark light in the world ; in one i observe a kind of glow-wormelight , which in a summer's evening shines somewhat bright , but he that should offer to light his candle at it would be much deceived ; this is justly a dark light , since it shines not at all by day , neither is at all communicable to another , no not to the bearer itself : in another , i see the light of a dark lantern ; which casts out some gleams of light , but only to him that bears it ; even this man's light is darkness also , to all the world besides himself : in a third i see a resemblance of that meteoricall light , which appears in moorish places , that seems fire , but is nothing but a slimy glittering exhalation , causing both the wonder and error of the traveller ; leading him , through the impulsive motion of the air , into a ditch ; and of this kind i find too much variety ; all of them agreeing in this , that they pretend visions and revelations of the spirit even for contrary projections . Oh saviour , what light soever is not derived from thee , is no better than darkness : thou hast sufficiently revealed thyself and thy will to us in thy word ; as for any new lights ( Except it be a clearer manifestation of the old ) oh Lord give me the grace not to follow them : i find a double light to proceed from thee , one which is a general light , that enlightens every man that comes into the world ; the other a special light of thy spirit illuminating the soul of every believer with a right apprehension of thee and heavenly things : oh do thou shine into my soul with this heavenly light of thine ; and if this be not enough to make me happy , ( Without the acce•sion , and with the rejection of other new lights ) let me sit in perpetual darkness . 

Soliloq . Xiii . Bosom-discourse . 

Oh Lord , if i had the skill , and grace to be ever communing with my own heart , and with thee , i should never want either work , or company , never have cause to complain of solitariness , or tedious hours : for there is no time wherein there is not some main business to be done between thee and my soul ; one while finding my heart dull and stupid , i should have cause to rouse it up by some quickening meditation ; another while finding it dejected with some inexpected cross , i should be cheering it up with some comfortable applications : one while finding it distracted with some scrupulous doubts , i should be labouring to settle it in just resolutions ; another while perceiving it to incline towards idle thoughts , i should be cheeking it with a seasonable reprehension : one while , finding it faint and flacke in holy duties , i should chide it into a more sensitive vigour ; another while , finding it more cheerful in the performances of devotion , i should encourage it with the assurance of a gracious acceptation : one while i should find cause to fortify it against temptations ; another while to erect it after a foil : one while to conflict ; another to triumph : one while to examine my condition ; another while either to deplore , or congratulate it : one while i should find time to sue to thee my god for the supply of some want ; another while to bless thee for favours received : one while to bemoan my wretchedness , another while to adore thy infinite greatness : one while to renew my vows ; another while to beg pardon for my omissions : one while to seek thee with tears and due humiliation ; another while to rejoice in thy great salvation : the varieties of my ever-changing condition , while i am in this vale of misery , cannot want the perpetual employment of a busy soul . Oh God , let me be dumb to all the world , so as i May ever have a tongue for thee , and my own heart . 

Soliloq . Xiv . The insensible fetters . 

What a subtle devil we have to deal with ? He will be sure to give the sinner line enough , so he May be sure to hold him : he shall have his full scope and freedom to all honest , and religious practices ; so as by some one secret sin that evil spirit May have power over his soul , both to ensnare , and retain it : he cares not how godly we seem , how conscionable we are in all other actions , so as he May still in one dear sin keep us fast entangled : whereupon it often comes to pass , that not only the eyes of the world , but even our own are too often deceived in the judgement of our spiritual estate : we profess strict holiness ; and give good proofs , upon occasion , of a tender , and well-guided conscience , so as this glorious show wins us the reputation of rare virtue and exemplary piety : yet still that wicked devil hath a tie upon our heel : there is some peccadillio of smothered lust , or concealed pride , or zealous cruelty , and uncharitableness , that gives him the command of our souls at pleasure : and this shall no less fetch us within his power and mercy , than if we were locked up under a thousand chains . Oh God , thou who art infinite both in wisdom and power , do thou enable me not only to resist the power , but to avoid the wiles of that cunning spirit : let me give him no advantage by the close entertainment of any bosom sin : let my holiness and obedience be as universal , as either thy commands , or his mischievous intentions . 

Soliloq . Xv . Satan's prevalence . 

How busy and prevalent Satan is , in this present age , above all former times , appears too plainly in those universal broils , and combustions which he hath raised all the world over ; whereof no nation of the whole known habitable earth is at this day free ; in the strange number and variety of sects , schisms , heresies , set on foot by him , everywhere ; the like whereof were never heard of , in the preceding times of the church ; in the rifeness of bold and professed atheism ; and most clearly , in the marvellous multitude of witches abounding in all parts . Heretofore one of those clients of hell in a whole country was hooted at as a strange monster ; now , hundred are discovered in one shire ; and ( If fame deceive us not ) in a village of fourteen houses in the North parts are found so many of this damned breed : heretofore , only some barbarous , and wild deserts ; or some rude uninhabited coasts , as of Lapland , and Finland , &c. were thought to be haunted with such miscreant guests ; now the civilest , and most religious parts are frequently pestered with them : heretofore some silly poor and ignorant old women were thus deluded by that infernal impostor ; now we have known those of both sexes which have professed much knowledge , holiness , devotion , drawn into this damnable practice : what shall we say to all these over-pregnant proofs of the unusually prevailing power of hell ? Certainly , either Satan is now let loose ( According to the prediction of the holy evangelist in Pathmos ) towards the end of the world : or because he finds his time but short , he rageth thus extremely ; as if what he must lack in time , he would make up in fury : but , oh blessed God , thine infinite wisdom and omnipotence , knows how to make a just advantage of that increased power , and success , which thou hast permitted to this great enemy of mankind ; thy justice is hereby magnified in thy just judgements , upon the wicked ; and thy mercy in the gain that hence accrues to thy chosen ; for certainly , thy true saints would not be so eminently holy , if Satan were not so malicious : thou who in natural causes are wont to work by contraries , ( So as inward heat is ordinarily augmented by the extremity of an ambient cold ) canst , and wilt do so much more in spiritual ; what thy visible church loseth in the number of formal professors , is abundantly made up in the vigorous graces of thy real saints . Still and ever do thou so order and overrule these busy workings of the powers of darkness , that thou Mayest repay thine unreclaimeable enemies with judgements , and heighten the piety , vigilancy and zeal of thy faithful ones . 

Soliloq . Xvi . Leisurely growth . 

We are all commonly impatient of leisure ; and apt to over-hasten the fruition of those good things we affect : one would have wealth , but he would not be too long in getting it ; he would have golden showers rain down into his lap , on the sudden : another would be wise and learned ; yet he cannot abide to stay for grey hairs , or to spend too much oil in his tedious lucubrations : one would be free , but he would not wear out an apprenticeship : another would be honourable , but he would neither serve long , nor hazard much : one would be holy , but he would not wait too long at the door-posts of God's house , nor lose too many hours in the exercise of his stinted devotions : another , would be happy , but he would leap into heaven suddenly , not abiding to think of a leisurely towering up thither by a thousand degrees of ascent , in the slow proficiency of grace . Whereas the great God of heaven , that can do all things in an instant , hath thought good to produce all the effects of natural agency not without a due succession of time . When i look into my garden , there i see first a small spire look out of the earth , which in some month's time grows into a stalk ; then after many day's expectation , branches forth into some leaves ; at last appears the hope of a flower , which ripened with many suns and showers , arises to its perfection , and at last puts forth its seed for a succeeding multiplication . 

If i look into my orchard , i see the well-grafted scions yield first a tender bud ; itself after many years is bodied to a solid stock , and under the patience of many hard winters , spreads forth large arms ; at last being grown to a meet age of vegetation , it begins to grace the spring with some fair blossoms , which falling off kindly , give way to a weak Embryon of fruit ; every day now adds something to the growth , till it attain in autumn to a full maturity : why should i make account of any other course in my spiritual proceedings ? Oh God , i shall be always ready to censure my slow pace in grace , and holy obedience , and shall be ever ambitious of aspiring higher in thy gracious favour ; but when i shall have endeavoured my utmost , i shall wait with humble patience upon thy bountiful hand ; as one that desires thankfully to acknowledge the little that i have received , and meekly to attend thy good pleasure for what i May receive . So thou bring me to heaven , take what time , and keep what pace thou pleasest . 

Soliloq . Xvii . Allowable variety . 

It is a great and insolent wrong in those men , who shall think to reduce all dispositions , and forms of devotion and usages to their own ; since in all these there May be much variety ; and all those different fashions May receive a gracious acceptation in heaven : one thinks it best to hold himself to a set form of invocation ; another deems it far better to be left free to his arbitrary and unpremeditated expressions : one pleases himself with this notion of that omnipotent deity whom he implores ; another thinks that May be more proper , and affective : one thinks this posture of body May be the meetest for his humble address to the throne of grace , or to the table of the heavenly manna ; another likes that better : one is for a long prayer ; another for short ejaculations : one desires to raise up his spirits ( With the prophet ) by the aid of an harmonious melody ; another holds them better fixed in a sad silence : one holds it best to set forth God's service in a solemn state and magnificence ; another approves better of a simple and inceremonious devotion : one requires a sacred place , and a peculiar habit , as best becoming God's public worship ; another makes no difference of either room , or dress : one makes scruple of coming otherwise than fasting to the Lord's table : another conceives it more seasonable after a love-feast : one thinks his Christian liberty allows him the moderate scope to all not-unlawful recreations : another's austerity interdicts all pastimes : one judgeth this hair , and that attire not lawful only , but comely : another thinks he espies sin in both : oh God , as thou hast ever showed thyself justly severe in the avenging of sin , so i know thee graciously indulgent in allowing thy servants much latitude in the free use of all that thou hast not prohibited , in imitation whereof , give me an heart holily zealous to abhor every thing that is truly evil , and charitably affected to the favourable censure of all usages that are merely indifferent . Let my main care be to look to the sincerity of my soul , and to the sure grounds of warrant for my actions ; for other circumstantial appurtenances , where thou art pleased to be liberal , let me not be strait-handed . 

Soliloq . Xviii . Misconstructions of holiness . 

It is no marvel if there be nothing that undergoes more variety of constructions from the lookers on , than holiness ; for that being an inward gracious disposition of the soul , conformed to God , in all the renewed faculties thereof , lies so close in the bosom , that it can only be guessed at by such uncertain emanations of words , and actions , as flow from it to the ears , and eyes of others : the particular graces and affections of love , fear , hope , joy , godly sorrow , zeal , and the rest break forth apparently in such symptoms , and effects as May win a certainty of belief from the beholders , neither indeed are easily concealed from the view of others : all these May be read in the face : but , if the heart itself could be seen , and that curiously dissected , yet even thus could not holiness be discovered . Beside the closeness , every man is apt to measure his judgement of holiness , by a false rule of his own , whereby it comes to pass that it is so commonly mistaken . One thinks him holy that forsakes the world , and retires into some wild desert , or mures up himself in an Anchorites cell : another judges him holy that macerates his body with fasting , that disciplines his hide with whips and hair clothes , that lies hard , and fares hard : that abstai from all that relates to flesh in his lent , and embers : that passionately hugs his crucifix , and tosses his beads , and duly observes his shrifts , and canonical hours : now this man that in their way is in danger of canonization for a saint , is by the professor of an opposite holiness decried to hell for superstition and idolatry : one styles him holy , who segregates himself from the contagious communion of formal Christians , professing to serve his god in a purer way of worship ; rejecting all stinted forms of prayer and psalmony ; spitting at the mention of an hierarchy , allowing no head sacred , but by the imposition of what we miscall , laic hands ; abandoning all ceremonies of human institution ; abiding no circumstances of divine worship but apostolical : another allows him only holy , who is already a citizen of the new Jerusalem , advanced to such an entireness with God as that he is no less than glorified ; he hath left the scriptures below him as a weak and dead letter , and is far above all whatsoever ordinance ; yea ( Which i tremble to report ) above the blood of Christ himself . A third reputes him only holy , who having left the society of all churches as too impure , stands now alone , waiting for some miracles from heaven to settle his resolution . Now , Lord , after all these and many more weak and idle misprisions , upon the sure and unfailing grounds of truth ( Thy word is truth ) i know that man to be truly holy , whose understanding is enlightened with right apprehensions of thee and heavenly things ; whose will and affections are rightly disposed to thee , so as his heart is wholly taken up with thee ; whose conversation is so altogether with thee , that he thinks all time lost , wherein he doth not enjoy thee , and a sweet and heavenly communion with thee ; walking perpetually with thee ; and labouring in all things to be approved of thee . Oh God , do thou work me up to this temper , and keep me still in it ; and then , however i May differ in a construction of holiness from others , that think themselves more perfect , howsoever , i May be censured as defective in my judgement or affections , yet i do , not without sound and sensible comfort , know , that my judge is in heaven , and my witness in my bosom . 

Soliloq . Xix . Two heavens in one . 

I was wont to say , it is in vain for a man to hope for , and impossible for him to enjoy a double heaven ; one below , and another above : since our sufferings here one earth must make way for our future glory : but , now i find it in a better sense , very feasible for a true Christian to attain both : for , as we say , where the Prince resides , there is the court : so surely , where the supreme and infinite majesty pleases to manifest his presence , there is heaven : whereas therefore God exhibits himself present two ways , in grace , and in glory ; it must follow , that the gracious presence of God makes an heaven here below , as his glorious presence makes an heaven above . Now it cannot but fall out , that as the lower material heaven comes far short of the purity of the superior regions , being frequently overcast with clouds , and troubled with other both watery and fiery meteors : so this spiritual heaven below , being many times darkened with sad desertions , and blustered with temptations , cannot yield that perfection of inward peace , and happiness , which remains for us above this sphere of mutability : yet affords us so much fruition of God as May give us a true title , and entrance into blessedness . I well see , oh God , it is no paradox to say that thy saints reign with thee here on earth ; though not for a thousand years , yet during the time of their sojourning here below ; not in any secular splendour and magnificence , not in bodily pleasures , and sensual contentments : yet in true spiritual delectation , in the joys of the holy ghost unspeakable , and full of glory . Oh my God , do thou thus set my foot over the threshold of thy heaven : put thou my soul into this happy condition of an inchoate blessedness : so shall i cheerfully spend the remainder of my days in a joyful expectation of the full consummation of my glory . 

Soliloq . Xx . The stock employed . 

What are all excellencies without respect of their use ? How much good ground is there in the world , that is neither cultured nor owned ? What a world of precious metals lies hide in the bowels of the earth , which shall never be coined ? What store of rich pearls and diamonds are hoarded up in the earth and sea , which shall never see the light ? What delicacies of fouls and fish do both elements afford , which shall never come to the dish ? How many great wits are there in the world , which lie willingly concealed ? whether out of modesty , or idleness , or lack of a wished opportunity . Improvement gives a true value to all blessings : a penny in the purse is worth many pounds , yea talents in an unknown mine : that is our good which doth us good . Oh God , give thou me grace to put out my little stock to the public bank ; and faithfully to employ those poor faculties thou hast given me , to the advantage of thy name , and the benefit of thy church ; so besides the gain of others , my pounds shall be rewarded with cities . 

Soliloq . Xxi . Love of life . 

We are all naturally desirous to live ; and though we prize life above all earthly things , yet we are ashamed to profess that we desire it for its own sake , but pretend some other subordinate reason to affect it . One would live to finish his building , or to clear his purchase ; another to breed up his children , and to see them well-matched : one would fain outlive his trial at law ; another wishes to outwear an emulous corrival : one would fain outlast a lease , that holds him off from his long-expected possessions ; another would live to see the times amend , and a re-establishment of a public peace : thus we that would be glad to give skin for skin , and all things for life , would seem to wish life for any thing , but itself : after all this hypocrisy , nature above all things would live ; and makes life the main end of living ; but grace has higher thoughts , and therefore though it holds life sweet and desirable , yet entertains the love of it upon more excellent , that is , spiritual terms . Oh God , i have no reason to be weary of this life , which , through thy mercy , long acquaintance hath endearead to me ( Though sauced with some bitter disgusts of age ; ) but how unworthy shall i approve myself of so great a blessing , if now , i do not more desire to continue it for thy sake , than my own ? 

Soliloq . Xxii . Equal distribution 

It was a most idle question which the philosophers are said to have proposed to Barnabas the colleague of saint Paul : why a small gnat should have six legs , and wings beside ; whereas the elephant , the greatest of beasts , hath but four legs , and no wings ? What pity it is that those wise Masters were not of the counsel of the almighty , when he was pleased to give a being to his creature ; they would surely have devised to make a winged elephant , and a corpulent gnat : a feathered man , and a speaking beast . Vain fools , they had not learned to know and adore that infinite wisdom wherein all things were made : it is not for that incomprehensible majesty and power to be accountable to wretched man for the reasons of his all-wise , and mighty creation ; yet so hath he contrived it , that there is no part of his great workmanship , whereof even man cannot be able to give an irrefragable reason , why thus framed , not otherwise . What were more easy than to say , that six legs to that unwieldy body had been cumbersome , and impeditive of motion , that the wings for so massy a bulk had been useless . 

I admire thee , oh God , in all the works of thy hands ; and justly magnify not only thine omnipotence both in the matter and form of their creation ; but thy mercy and wisdom in the equal distribution of all their powers and faculties , which thou hast so ordered , that every creature hath some requisite helps , no creature hath all : the fowls of the air , which are ordained for flight , hast thou furnished with feathers to bear them up in that light element ; the fish , with smooth scales and fins for their more easy gliding through those watery regions : the beasts of the field , with such limbs and strong hides as Might fit them for service : as for man , the Lord of all the rest , him thou hast endued with reason , to make his use of all these : whom yet thou hast so framed , as that in many qualities thou hast allowed the brute creatures to exceed their Master : some of them are stronger than he ; some of them swifter than he , and more nimble than he : he were no better than a mad man that should ask , why man should not fly as well as the bird , and swim as well as the fish , and run as fast as the hart ? Since that one faculty of reason wherewith he is furnished is more worth than all the brutish excellencies of the world put together . Oh my God , thou that hast enriched me with a reasonable soul , whom thou Mightest have made the brutest of thy creatures , give me the grace so to improve thy gift , as May be most to the glory and advantage of thy own name ; let me in the name and behalf of all my brute fellow-creatures bless thee for them ; and both for them and myself in a ravishment of spirit cry out with the psalmist ; oh Lord my God , how wonderful and excellent are thy works , in wisdom hast thou made them all . 

Soliloq . Xxiii . The body's subjection . 

bodily exercise , saith the apostle , profits little : little sure in respect of any worth that it hath in itself ; or any thank that it can expect from the almighty : for what is it to that good and great God , whether i be full or fasting , whether i wake or sleep , whether my skin be smooth or rough , ruddy or pale , white or discoloured ; whether my hand be hard with labour , or soft with ease ; whether my bed be hard , or yielding ; whether my diet be course , or delicate : but though in itself it avail little ; yet so it May be , and hath been , and aught to be improved , as that it May be found exceedingly beneficial to the soul : else the same apostle would not have said , i keep under my body , and bring it into subjection , lest that by any means , when i have preached to others , i myself should be a castaway . In all the records of history , whom do we find more noted for holiness , than those who have been most austere in the restraints of bodily pleasures and contentments ? In the mount of Tabor who should meet with our saviour in his transfiguration , but those two eminent saints , which had fasted an equal number of days with himself ? And our experience tells us , that what is detracted from the body is added to the soul . For the flesh and spirit are not more partners , than enemies ; one gains by the others loss : the pampering of the flesh , is the starving of the soul : i find an unavoidable emulation between these two parts of myself . Oh God , teach me to hold an equal hand betwixt them both ; let me so use them , as holding the one my favourite , the other my drudge ; not so humouring the worse part , as to discontent the better ; nor so wholly regarding the better , as altogether to discourage the worse : both are thine , both by gift , and purchase ; enable thou me to give each of them their deuce , so as the one May be fitted with all humble obsequiousness to serve ; the other to rule and command with all just authority , and moderation . 

Soliloq . Xxiv . The ground of vnproficiency . 

Where there is defect in the principles , there can be no possibility of prevailing in any kind : should a man be so foolish as to persuade his horse that it is not safe for him to drink in the extremity of his heat ; or to advise a child that it is good for him to be whipped , or in a case of mortal danger , to have a fontinell made in his flesh , how fondly should he misspend his breath ? bebecause the one wants the faculty , the other the use of reason . So if a man shall sadly tell a wild sensualist , that it is good for him to bear the yoke in his youth ; that it is meet for him to curb and cross his unruly appetite ; that the bitterest cup of afflictions ought to be freely taken off , as the most sovereign medicine of the soul ; that we ought to bleed and die for the name of Christ ; that all the suffering of the present times are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us ; his labour is no less lost , than if he had made an eloquent oration to a deaf man ; because this carnal hearer lacks that principle of grace and regeneration which only can enable him to apprehend and relish these divine counsels : i see , oh God , i see too well , how it comes to pass that thy word sounds so loud , and prevails so little ; even because it is not joined with faith in the hearers : the right principle is missing , which should make the soul capable of thy divine mysteries : faith is no less essential to the true Christian , than reason is to man , or sense to beast : oh do thou furnish my soul with this heavenly grace of thine ; and than all thy sacred oracles shall be as clear to my understanding , as any visible object is to my sense . 

Soliloq . Xxv . The sure refuge . 

Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof , saith our saviour : lo , every day hath its evil , and that evil is load enough for the present , without the further charge of our anticipated cares . Surely the life of man is conflicted with such a world of crosses succeeding each other , that if he have not a sure refuge to flee unto , he cannot choose but be quite over-laid with miseries : one while his estate suffers , whether through casualty , or oppression ; another while his children miscarry , whether by sickness , or death , or disorder : one while his good name is impeached ; another while his body languishes : one while his mind is perplexed with irksome suits ; another while his soul is wounded with the sting of some secret sin : one while he is fretted with domestical discontents ; another while distempered with the public broils : one while the sense of evils torments him ; another while the expectation . Miserable is the case of that man , when he is pursued with whole troops of mischiefs , hath not a fort wherein to succour himself : and safe and happy is that soul , that hath a sure and impregnable hold whereto he May resort . Oh the noble example of holy David ; never man could be more perplexed than he was at his Ziklag ; his city burned , his whole stock plundered , his wives carried away , his persons cursing , his soldier's mutining , pursued by Saul , cast off by the Philistines ; helpless , hopeless : but David fortified himself in the Lord his god : there , there , oh Lord , is a sure help in the time of trouble , a safe protection in the time of danger , a most certain remedy of all complaints : let my dove get once into the holes of that rock , in vain shall all the birds of prey hover over me for my destruction . 

Soliloq . Xxvi . The light burden . 

Why do we complain of the difficulty of a Christian profession , when we hear our saviour say , my yoke is easy , and my burden is light ? Certainly he that impoposed it , hath exactly poised it , and knows the weight of it to the full : it is our fault if we make or account that heavy , which he knows to be light : if this yoke and burden be heavy to our sullen nature , yet to grace they are light : if they be heavy to fear , yet they are light to love : what is more sweet and easy than to love ? and love is all the burden we need to take up : for love is the fulfilling of the law ; and the Evangelical law is all the burden of my saviour . Oh blessed Jesus , how willingly do i stoop under thy commands : it is no other than my happiness that thou requirest ; i shall be therefore my own enemy , if i be not thy servant : hadst thou not bidden me to love thee , to obey thee , thine infinite goodness , and perfection of divine beauty would have attracted my heart to be spiritually enamoured of thee ; now thou bidst me to do that which i should have wished to be commanded ; how gladly do i yield up my soul to thee ? Lay on what load thou pleasest ; since the more i bear , the more thou enablest me to bear , and the more i shall desire to bear : the world hath so clogged me this while , with his worthless and base lumber , that i have been ready to sink under the weight , and what have i got by it , but a lame shoulder , and a galled back ? Oh do thou free me from this unprofitable , and painful luggage ; and ease my soul with the happy change of thy gracious impositions ; so shall thy yoke not be easy only but pleasing , so shall thy fulfilled will be so far from a burden to me , that it shall be my greatest delight upon earth , and my surest and comfortablest evidence for heaven . 

Soliloq . Xxvii . Joy intermitted . 

What a lightsomeness of heart do i now feel in myself , for the present , out of a comfortable sense of thy presence , oh my God , and the apprehension of my interest in thee ? Why should it not be thus always with me ? Surely thine apostle bids me rejoice continually , and , who would not wish to do so ? for there is little difference betwixt joy and happiness ; neither was it guessed ill by him that defined that man only to be happy that is always delighted ; and certainly , there is just cause , why i should be thus always affected : thou , oh my God , art still and always the same : yea the same to me , in all thy gracious relations , of a merciful father , a loving saviour , a sweet comforter : yea thou art my head , and i am a limb of thy mystical body . Such i am , and shall ever be ; thou canst no more change , than not be : and for me , my crosses and my sins are so far from separating me from thee , that they make me hold of thee the faster . But , alas , though the just grounds of my joy be steady ; yet my weak disposition is subject to variableness ; while i carry this flesh about me , my soul cannot but be much swayed with the temper of my body ; which sometimes inclines me to a dull listlessness , and a dumpish heaviness of heart , and sadness of spirit ; so as i am utterly unapt to all cheerful thoughts , and find work enough to pull my affections out of this stiff clay of the earth , and to raise them up to heaven . Besides , this joy of the holy ghost is a gift of thy divine bounty , which thou dispensest , when , and how thou pleasest ; not always alike to thy best favourites on earth : thou that givest thy sun and rain , dost not command thy clouds always to be dropping , nor those beams to shine continually upon any face : there would be no difference betwixt the proceedings of nature and grace , if both produced their effects in a set and constant regularity : and what difference should i find betwixt my pilgrimage , and my home , if i should here be taken up with a perpetuity of heavenly joy ? should i always thus feelingly enjoy thee , my life of faith should be changed into a life of sense : it is enough for me , oh God , that above in those regions of bliss , my joy in thee shall be full and permanent : if in the mean while it May please thee , that but some flashes of that celestial light of joy May frequently glance into my soul : it shall suffice if thou give me but a taste of those heavenly pleasures , whereon i shall once liberally feast with thee to all eternity . 

Soliloq . Xxviii . Universal interest . 

It was a noble praise that was given to that wise heathen , that he so carried himself as if he thought himself born for all the world : surely the more universal a man's beneficence is , so much is it more commendable ; and comes so much nearer to the bounty of that great God , who openeth his hand , and filleth all things living with plenteousness : there are too many selfish men , whose spirits as in a close retort , are cooped up within the compass of their own concernments ; whose narrow hearts think they are born for none but themselves : others that would seem good natured men , are willing enough to enlarge themselves to their kindred ; whom they are careful to advance with neglect of all others , however deserving ; some yet , more liberal minded , can be content to be kind and openhanded to their neighbours ; and some perhaps reach so far , as to profess a readiness to do all good offices to their countrymen ; but here their largesse finds its utmost bounds : all these dispositions are but enclosures ; give me the open champain of a general and illimited benefacture : is he rich ? he scatters his seed abroad by whole handfuls over the whole ridge , and doth not drop it down between his fingers into the several furrows ; his bread is cast upon the waters also : is he knowing and learned ? He smothers not his skill in his bosom : but freely lays it out upon the common stock ; not so much regarding his private contentment , as the public proficiency : is he deeply wise ? He is ready to improve all his cares and counsels to the advancement and preservation of peace , justice , and good order amongst men . Now although it is not in the power of any but persons placed in the highest orb of authority , actually to oblige the world to them ; yet nothing hinders but that men of meaner rank May have the will to be thus universally beneficent , and May in preparation of mind be zealously affected to lay themselves forth upon the common good : oh Lord ; if thou hast given me but a private and short hand , yet give me a large and public heart . 

Soliloq . Xxix . The spiritual Bedleem . 

He that with wise Solomon affects to know not wisdom only , but madness and folly , let him after a serious observation of the sober part of the world , obtain of himself to visit Bedleem , and to look into the several cells of distracted persons ; where , it is a world to see what strange varieties of humours , and passions shall present themselves to him : here he shall see one weeping , and wring his hands for a meerely-imaginary disaster ; there another , holding his sides in a loud laughter , as if he were made all of mirth : here one mopishly stupid , and so fixed to his posture , as if he were a breathing statue ; there another apishly active and restless : here one ragingly fierce , and wreaking his causeless anger on his chain ; there another gloriously boasting of a mighty stile of honour , whereto his rags are justly entitled ; and when he hath wondered a while at this woeful spectacle , let him know and consider that this is but a slight image of those spiritual frenzies , wherewith the world is miserably possessed ; the persons affected believe it not ; surely should i go about to persuade any of these guests of Bedleem , that in deed , he is mad , and should therefore quietly submit himself to the means of cure , i should be more mad than he : only dark rooms , and cords , and Ellebore are meet receipts for these mental distempers ; in the mean while , the sober and sad beholders too well see these men's wits out of the socket , and are ready out of Christian charity , to force upon them due remedies , who cannot be sensible of their own miseries . 

Now having learned of the great doctor of the gentiles to distinguish man into spirit , soul , and body , ( Whereof the body is as the earthly part , the soul as the ethereal , the spirit as the heavenly : the soul animal , the spirit rational , the body merely organical , ) it is easy for him to observe that as each of these parts exceeds other in dignity , so the distemperatures thereof is so much greater , and more dangerous , as the part is more excellent ; when therefore he shall hear the prophet Hosea say , the spiritual man is mad , he cannot think that charge less than of the worst of frenzies : and such indeed they are which have been epidemical to all times : could they pass for any other than sottishly mad , that would worship cats , and dogs , and serpents ? so did the old Egyptians , who thought themselves the most deeply learned of all nations . Could they be less mad than they , that of the same tree , would make a block for their fire , and a god for their adoration ? so did Isaiah's idolaters . Could they be any better , who when they had melted their earrings , and with their own hands had shaped a golden calf , could fall down and worship it , and say , these be thy gods , oh Israel , which brought thee out of the land of Egypt ? so did they which should have known themselves God's peculiar persons . Could they be any other than mad men , that thought there was one God of the hills , another of the valleys ? so did the Syrian courtiers . Could they be any other than stark mad that would lance , and gash their own flesh , because their block did not answer them by fire ? so did the Baalites . lastly , could they be other than the maddest of men , who would pass their own children through the fire , and burn them to ashes in a pretence of devotion ? so did the clients of Moloch . yea , what speak i of the times of ignorance ? even since the true light came into the world , and since the beams of his glorious gospel shined on all faces , there hath been no less need of dark rooms and manacles than before : can we think them other than notoriously mad , that having good clothes to their backs , would needs strip them off , and go stark naked ? so did the Adamites of old , about the year of our Lord , 194.  So did certain Anabaptists of Holland at Amsterdam in the year 1535. so did the cynical saint Francis in the streets of assissium . could they be other than mad which would worship Cain , Judas , the sodomites ? So did those good Devotionists which were called Caiani , about the year 159.  Nay , were they not worse than mad , who if we May believe Hosius , and Lindanus , and Prateolus , worshipped the devil ten times every day ? so did those heretics which were in the last age called Demoniaci . could they be better than mad which held that beasts have reason as well as man , that the elements have life , that plants have sense , and suffer pain in their cutting up ? so did the manichees . could they be other than blasphemously mad , that held there are two gods , one good the other evil , and that all creatures were made by the latter ? so did the gnostics . were there ever mad men in the world , if they were not such who would beseech , yea force passengers to do them the favour to cut their throats , in a vain affectation of the praise of martyrdom ? so did the circumcellions , a faction of Donatists in the year 349.  But above all other , did not those surpass in madness , who allowed of all heresies , and professed to hold all opinions true ? so did Rhetorus and his followers : St.  Augustine's charity sticks at the belief of so impossible a tenet ; i must crave leave to wonder at his reason : for ( Saith he ) many opinions being contradictory to cach other , no man that is compos mentis can think both parts can be verifiable : as if it could be supposed that a Rhetorius , thus opening , could be any other than beside all his wits : surely had he been himself , so impossible an absurdity could not have fallen from him : neither could any of these forecited practices or opinions have been incident into any but brains highly distempered . But what do we raking in the ashes of these old forgotten lunatics ; would to God we had not work more than enough to look for the prodigious frenzies of the present age , than which there were never since the world began either more or worse , 

Can there be under the cope of heaven a madder man , than he that can deny there is a God ? such a monster was rare and hooted at in the times of paganism : the heathen orator tells us of but two in those dark ages before him , that were so far forsaken of their wits ; and we know that the old Athenians , when a bold pen durst but question a deity , sentenced the book to the fire , and the author to exile . But now , alas , i am ashamed to say that this modern age under so clear beams of the gospel hath bred many professed atheists , who have dared , not in their heart only , as in David's time , but with their blasphemous lips to deny the god that made them . 

And are the frenzies of those insolent souls any whit less wild and outrageous , that dare boast themselves to be God ; and stick not to style themselves absolutely deified ? avowing that the soul in their body is the only Christ , or God in the flesh ; that all the acts of their beastly and abominable lusts are the works of righteousness ; that it is their perfection , and the highest pitch of their glory to give themselves up to all manner of abominations , without any reluctation ; that there is no hell , but a dislike of , and remorse for , their greatest villainies : now show me amongst the savagest of pagans' any one that hath been thus desperately brainsick , and let me be branded for a slanderer . 

What should i need to instance in any more , or to contract a large volume of hereseology ? In short , there is no true heretic in the world , that is not in some degree a madman ; and this spiritual madness is so much worse than the natural , as in other regards , so especially in this ; that whereas that distemper of the brain contains itself in its own bounds , without any danger of diffusion to others , the spiritual , is extremely contagious , spreading its infection to the peril of all that come within the air of it . 

In this sad case what is to be done ? Surely we May , as we do , mourn for the miserable distractions of the world ; but it is thou only , oh Lord , that canst heal them . Oh thou , that art the great and sovereign physician of souls ; that after seven years' brutality , restoredst the frantic Babylonian to his shape and senses , look down mercifully upon our Bedleem , and restore the distracted world to their right temper once again : as for those that are yet sound , keep them oh God , in their right wits unto the end , preserve them safe from all the pestilent taintures of schism and heresy : and for me , the more insight thou givest me into , and the more sense of , these woeful distempers , so much the more thankful do thou make me to thine infinite goodness , that thou hast been graciously pleased to keep me within compass . And oh , do thou still and ever keep me within the compass of thy revealed will , and all just moderation ; and suffer me not to be miscarried into any of those exorbitances of judgement which May prove a trouble to thy church , and a scanned all to thy name . 

Soliloq . Xxx . The difference of actions . 

There is great difference in sins , and actions whether truly or seemingly offensive ; there are gnats , and there are camels ; neither is there less difference in consciences : there are consciences so wide and vast , that they can swallow a camel ; and there are consciences so strait , as that they strain at a gnat ; yea , which is strange to observe , those very consciences which one while are so dilated that they strain not at a camel , another while are so drawn together by an anxious scrupulousness that they are ready to be choked with a gnat . 

How palpably was this seen in the chief priest and Pharisees and elders of the Jews : the small gnat of entering into the judgement hall of the Roman governor , would by no means down with them ; that heinous act would defile them , so as they should not eat the Passeover ; but in the mean time the huge camel of the murder of the Lord passed down glib , and easily through their throats : they are ready to choke with one poor ear of corn pulled on a Sabbath by an hungry passenger ; yet whole houses of widows , the while , pass down their gorges with ease : an unwashen had or cup was piacular ; while within their hearts are full of extortion and excess . I wish the present age did not abound with instances : it is the fashion of hypocrites to be seemingly scruplous in small things , while they make no conscience at all of the greatest : and to be so much less conscionable of greater matters of the law , judgement , mercy and faith ; as they are more scrupulously punctual in their mint , anise , and cummin . Oh God , i would not make more sins than thou hast made ; i desire to have an heart wisely tender , not fondly scrupulous ; let my soul endure no fetters but thine ; if indifferent things May be my gnats , let no known sin be other than a camel to me ; and let me rather choke in the passage , than let down such a morsel . 

Soliloq . Xxxi . The necessity of labour . 

The great and wise God that hath been pleased to give to all creatures their life and being , without their endeavour or knowledge , hath yet ordained not to continue their being , without their own labour , and cooperation ; so as he hath imposed upon them all a necessity of painstaking for their own preservation : the wild beasts of the desert must walk abroad , and forage far for their prey ; the beasts of the field must earn their pasture with their work , and labour in very feeding to fill a large maw with picking up those several mouthfuls , whereby they are sustained ; the fowls of several kinds must fly abroad to seek their various diet , some in the hedges , some in the fields , some in the waters ; the bee must with unwearied industry gather her stock of wax and honey out of a thousand flowers ; neither know i any that can be idle and live : but man , as he is appointed to be the Lord of all the rest , so he is in a special manner born to labour ; as he upon whom the charge lies to provide both for himself , and all the creatures under his command ; being not more impotent than they in his first entrance into the world , than he is afterwards by the power of his reason more able to govern them , and to order all things that May concern both their use , and conservation . How willingly , oh Lord , should i stoop to this just condition of my creation ? Labour is my destiny , and labour shall be my trade : something i must always do ; both out of thy command , and my own inclination ; as one whose not un-active spirit abhors nothing more than the torment of doing nothing : oh God , do thou direct me to , and employ me in , those services that May be most for thy glory , for the good of others , and my own discharge and comfort . 

Soliloq . Xxxii . Acquaintance with heaven . 

What an high favour is it in the great God of heaven , that he is pleased to stoop so low as to allow wretched man here upon earth to be acquainted with so infinite a majesty ? yet in the multitudes of his mercies , this hath he condescended unto : so far hath he yielded to us , as that he is pleased we should know him ; and to that end he hath clearly revealed himself to mankind , and more than so , he is willing and content that we should enjoy him , and should continually make a comfortable use of his presence with us ; that we should walk with him , and impart all our secret thoughts and counsels to him ; that we should call for his gracious aid upon all our occasions ; that we should impart all our wants and fears and doubts to him , with expectation of a merciful and sure answer , and supply from heaven ; yea , that he should invite us , silly wretches , to his presence , and calls us up to the throne of grace , and encourage us poor souls , dejected with the conscience of our unworthiness , to put up our suits boldly to his merciful hands ; yea , that he should give this honour to dust and ashes as to style us his friends : how shamefully , unthankful , and how justly miserable shall i be , if i make not an answerable use of so infinite a mercy ? Oh God , how utterly unworthy shall i be of this grace , if notwithstanding these merciful proffers and solicitations , i shall continue a willing stranger from thee , and shall make no more improvement of these favours than if they had never been rendered ? Oh let me know thee , let me acknowledge thee , let me adore thee , let me love thee , let me walk with thee , let me enjoy thee ; let me , in an holy and awful familiarity be better and more entirely acquainted with thee than with the world , than with myself ; so i shall be sure to be happy here , and hereafter glorious . 

Soliloq . Xxxiii . The all-sufficient knowledge . 

I find much inquiry of curious wits , whether we shall know one another in heaven ; there is no want of arguments on both parts , and the greatest probabilities have seemed to be for the affirmative : but , oh Lord , whether or no we shall know one another , i am sure we shall all thy glorified saints know thee ; and in knowing thee we shall be infinitely happy ; and what would we more ? Surely , as we find here , that the sun puts out the fire , and the greater light ever extinguisheth the less : so why May we not think it to be above ? When thou art all in all to us , what can the knowledge of any creature add to our blessedness ? And if when we casually meet with a brother , or a son before some great Prince , we forbear the ceremonies of our mutual respects , as being wholly taken up with the awful regard of a greater presence ; how much more May we justly think , that when we meet before the glorious throne of the god of heaven , all the respects of our former earthly relations must utterly cease , and be swallowed up of that beatifical presence , divine love , and infinitely blessed fruition of the almighty . 

Oh God , it is my great comfort here below to think and know that i have parents , or children , or brothers and sisters , or friends already in possession of glory with thee , and to believe assuredly that in my time i shall be received to the association of their blessedness : but if upon the dissolution of this earthly tabernacle , i May be admitted to the sight of thy all-glorious essence , and May set eye upon the face of my blessed saviour , now sitting at the right hand of thine incomprehensible majesty , attended with those million of his heavenly angels , i shall neither have need , nor use of enquiring after my kindred , according to the flesh . What can fall into my thoughts or desires , beside , or beyond that which is infinite ? 

Soliloq . Xxxiv . Poor greatness . 

I cannot but look with much pity mixed with smiles upon the vain worldling , that sets up his rest in these outward things , and so pleases himself in this condition , as if he thought no man happy but himself : how high he looks , how big he speaks , how proudly he struts ? with what scorn and insultation doth he look upon my dejectedness ? the very language of his eye is no other than contempt , seeming to say , base indigent , thou art stripped of all thy wealth , and honour ; thou hast neither flocks , nor herds , nor lands , nor manors , nor bags , nor barne-fulls , nor titles , nor dignities , all which i have in abundance ; no man regards thy meanness ; i am observed with an awful veneration . Be it so , great Sir , think i ; enjoy you your height of honour , and heaps of treasure , and ceremonies of state , while i go shrugging in a threadbare coat , and am glad to feed on single dishes , and to sleep under a thatched roof ; but let me tell you , set your all against my nothing , if you have set your heart upon these gay things , were you the heir of all the earth , i would be loath to change conditions with your eminence ; and will take leave to tell you , that at your best , you shall fall within my commiseration : it is not in the power of all your earthly privileges to render you other than a miserable vassal : if you have store of gold , alas , it is but made up into feetters and manacles ; and what is all your outward bravery but mere matter of opinion ? I shall show you an Indian slave , that shall no less pride himself in a bracelet of glass beads , that you can in your richest jewels of rubies and diamonds : all earthly things are as they are valued : the wise and almighty maker of these earthen mines , esteems the best metals , but as thick clay ; and why should we set any other price of them than their creator ? And if we be wont to measure the worth of all things by their virtues and uses , and operations , what is it that your wealth can do ? Can it free you from cares ? can it lengthen your sleeps ? can it keep you from headaches , from gouts , dropsies , fevers and other bodily distempers ? can it ransom you from death ? can it make your account easier in the great day of reckoning ? Are you ever the wiser , ever the holier , ever the quieter for that which you have purchased with tears , and blood ? And were it so precious as you imagine , what hold have you of it ? what assurance to enjoy it , or yourself but one hour ? As for despised me , i have wealth that you know not of ; my riches are invisible , invaluable , interminable : God all-sufficient is mine ; and with him all things : my treasure is not locked up in earth , or in heaven , but fills both : my substance is sure ; not obnoxious to plunder or loss , or diminution : no man hath bled , no widow or orphan hath wept for my enriching ; the only difference is this ; you are miserable , and think yourself happy ; i am happy whom you think miserable : how ever our thoughts May bear us out in both for a while , yet at the last , except truth itself can deceive us , the issue must fall on my side . Oh God , be thou my portion , and the lot of mine inheritance , let the scum of the world spit in my face as the most despicable of all creatures , i am above the despite of men and devils , and am secretly happy , and shall be eternally glorious . 

Soliloq . Xxxv . Acceptation of desires . 

What a comfort it is to us weak wretches that we have to deal with a merciful God , that measures us not by our performances , but by the truth of our desires : David had a goodmind to build God an house , his hands were too bloody to lay the foundation of so holy a fabric ; yet God takes it as kindly from him , as if he had finished the work ; and rewards the intention of building an house to his name ; with the actual building of an house to David for ever . Good Ezekiah knew how easy and welcome a suit he made , when after all endeavours of sanctifying the persons , for the celebration of that great Passeover , he prayed , the Lord pardon every one that prepareth his heart to seek God , the Lord God of his fathers , though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary . Alas , we cannot be but lame in all our obediences : what can fall from defective causes , but imperfect effects ? If we pray , we are apt to entertain unmeet notions of the infinite spirit to whom we address our supplications , and sudden glances of wand'ring thoughts ; if we read or hear , we are subject to vain distractions ; if we approach God's table , our souls fail of that exact preparation & purity wherewith they should be decked , when they come to that celestial banquet ; if we do the works of justice , or mercy , it is not without some light touch of self-respect ; & well May we say with the blessed apostle , the good that i would , i do not : we should therefore find just cause of discouragement in ourselves , if our best actions were to be weighed by their own worth ; and not by our better intentions : but that gracious God , who puts good desires into us , is so ready to accept of them , that he looks not so much at what we have done , as at what we wished to have done ; and without respect to our defect , crowns our good affections . All that i can say for myself , oh my God , is , that the desire of my heart is to please thee in all things : my comfort then is , though my abilities fail in the performance , yet thy mercies cannot fail in my acceptation . 

Soliloq . Xxxvi . Heavenly joys . 

Doubtless , oh God , thou that hast given to men , even thine enemies , here upon earth , so excellent means to please their outward senses ; such beautiful faces , and admirable flowers to delight the eye ; such delicate scents from their garden , to please the smell ; such curious confections , & delicate sauces , to please the taste ; such sweet music from the birds , and artificial devises of ravishing melody from the art of man , to delight the ear ; hast much more ordained transcendent pleasures , and infinite contentments for thy glorified saints above . My soul , while it is thus clogged and confined , is too straight to conceive of those incomprehensible ways of spiritual delectation , which thou hast provided for thy dear chosen ones , triumphing with thee in thy heaven : oh teach me to wonder at that which i cannot here attain to know , and to long for that happiness which i there hope to enjoy with thee for ever . 

Soliloq . Xxxvii . Mixed contentments . 

What a fool were i , if i should think to find that , which Solomon could not ; contentment upon earth ? his greatness , wealth and wisdom gave him opportunity to search , where my impotency is shut out : were there any thing under heaven free from vanity and vexation , his curious inquisition could not have missed it . 

No , alas , all our earthly contentments are like a Jewish Passeover , which we must eat with sour herbs : have i wealth ? I cannot be void of cares : have i honour ? I cannot be rid of envy : have i knowledge ? He that increaseth knowledge , increaseth sorrow , saith the kingly preacher : have i children ? it were strange , if without crosses : have i pleasures ? not without a sting : have i health ? not without the threats of disease : have i full diet ? not without the inconveniences of satiety : have i beauty ? not without a snare to my soul . Thus it is in all our sublunary comforts ; i cannot have the rose , but i must be content with the prickles : pure and absolute pleasure dwells elsewhere , far above the reach of this vale of misery . Oh God , give me to seek it there only : not without a contemptuous neglect of all those deceitful vanities which would withdraw my soul from thee ; and there let me find it , while i am here by faith , when i remove hence by personal fruition : in the mean time , let me take what thou givest me with patience , and thankfulness : thankfulness for the meat , and patience with the sauce . 

Soliloq . Xxxviii . True wealth . 

All a man's wealth or poverty is within himself : it is not the outward abundance or want that can make the difference . Let a man be never so rich in estate , yet if his heart be not satisfied , but he is still whining , and scraping and pining for more , that man is miserably poor ; all his bags cannot make him other than a stark beggar . On the other side , give me a man of small means whose mind is thoroughly content with his little , and enjoys his pittance with a quiet and thankful heart , that man is exceeding rich ; all the world cannot rob him of his wealth . It is not having , by which we can measure riches , but enjoying : the earth hath all treasures in it , yet no man styles it rich : of these which the world call goods of fortune , only opinion sets the value : gold and silver would be metals whether we think them so , or not ; they would not be riches , if men's conceit and institution did not make them such . Oh my soul , be not thou carried away with the common error to covet and admire those things which have no true worth in themselves : if both the Indies were thine , thou shouldst be no whit the wealthier ; labour for those riches whereby thy stock May be advanced : the great Lord of all , who knows best where his wealth lies , and where thou shouldst hoard up thine , hath told thee where to seek it , where to lay it : lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth , where moth and rust doth corrupt , and where thieves break thorough and steal ; but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven : there thou shalt be sure to find it entire , free from plunder , and all danger of diminution . Oh God , give me to covet that my mind May be rich in knowledge , that my soul May be rich in grace , that my heart May be rich in true contentation ; as for this pelf of the world , let it make them miserable that admire it . 

Soliloq . Xxxix . False light . 

Looking forth one starry evening , my eye met with a glorious light , that seemed fairer than its fellows : while i was studying what planet it Might be , it suddenly glided down , and vanished . Oh God , how can we hope to avoid delusions upon earth , when even the face of heaven May thus deceive us ? It is no otherwise in the firmament of the church : how many have there been , that have seemed eternally fixed in that high sphere , which have proved no other than base meteors , gilded with fair beams ; they appeared stars , their substance was but slime . Woe were to the earth , if a true star should fall ; yea , i doubt whether the fabric of heaven would stand , if one of those glorious lights should drop down : if therefore the star wormwood shall fall , and embitter the waters , he shall show himself to be but a false star , and a true impostor ; else , heaven should fall as soon as he . Oh my God , give me grace to know the truth of my substance and the firmness of my station : let me hate all counterfeit exhalations ; let me know myself the least and most insensible star in thy galaxy ; so shall i be happy in thee , and thou shalt be by me glorified . 

Soliloq . Xl . The haste of desire . 

How slowly the hours seem to pace when we are big with the desire and expectation of any earthly contentment ? we are ready to chide the time for standing still , when we would over-hasten the fruition of our approaching comfort : so the schoolboy longs for his playday , the apprentice for his freedom , the ward for his livery , the bride for her nuptials , the heir for his inheritance : so approvedly true is that of wise Solomon , hope deferred makes the heart sick . Were it not , oh my soul , for that wretched infidelity , which cleaves so close unto thee , thou couldst not but be thus affected to thy heaven ; and shouldst be yet so much more , as the joys there are infinitely more exquisite than which this earth can afford : surely thou dost but flatter me with the overweening conceit of the firm apprehension of my faith ; while i find thee so cool in the longing desires of thy glorification : what ? hast thou no stomach to thy happiness ? Hath the world benumbed thee with such a dull stupidity that thou art grown regardless and insensible of eternal blessedness ? Oh shake off this lethargic heaviness of spirit , which hath possessed thee , and rouse up thyself to those ardent desires of glory which have sometimes inflamed thee : yea , Lord , do thou stir up that heavenly fire that now lies raked up in the embers of my soul , and ravish my heart with a longing desire of thy salvation . 

Soliloq . Xli . Death's remembrancers . 

Every thing that i see furnishes me with fair monitions of my dissolution : if i look into my garden , there i see some flowers fading , some withered ; if i look to the earth , i see that mother , in whose womb i must lie ; if i go to church , the graves that i must step over in my way , show me what i must trust to ; if i look to my table , death is in every dish , since what i feed on did once live . If i look into my glass , i cannot but see death in my face ; if i go to my bed , there i meet with sleep the image of death ; and the sheets , which put me in mind of my winding up . If i look into my study ; what are all those books , but the monuments of other dead authors ? Oh my soul , how canst thou be unmindful of our parting , when thou art plied with so many monitors ? Cast thine eyes abroad into the world , what canst thou see but killing and dying ? Cast thine eyes up into heaven , how canst thou but think of the place of thy approaching rest ? How justly then May i say with the apostle , by our rejoicing which i have in Christ Jesus , i die daily : and , Lord , as i daily die in the decay of this frail nature ; so let me die daily in my affection to life , in my preparation for death . Oh do thou fit me for that last , and happy change . Teach me so to number my days that i apply my heart to wisdom , and address it to ensuing glory . 

Soliloq . Xlii . Faith's victory . 

We are here in a perpetual warfare , and fight we must ; surely , either fight , or die ; some there are that do both ; that is according as the quarrel is , and is managed : there are those that fight against God ; these meddling with so unequal a match , cannot look to prevail . Again , the flesh warreth against the spirit ; this intestine rebellion cannot hope to prosper ; but if with the chosen vessel , i can say , i have fought a good fight , i can neither lose life , nor miss of victory : and what is that good fight ? Even the same apostle tells me , the fight of faith ; this is the good fight indeed , both in the cause and managing , & the issue : lo this faith it is , that wins God to my side , that makes the almighty mine ; that not only engages him in my cause , but unites me to him ; so as his strength is mine : in the power of his might therefore i cannot but be victorious over all my spiritual enemies by the only means of this faith : for Satan ; this shield of faith is it that shall quench all the fiery darts of that wicked one . For the world ; this is the victory that overcomes the world ; even our faith . 

Be sure to find thyself furnished with this grace ; and than say , oh my soul , thou hast Marched valiantly : the powers of hell shall not be able to stand before thee ; they are mighty and have all advantages of a spiritual nature , of long duration , and experience ; of place , of subtlety : yet this conquering grace of faith is able to give them the foil , and to trample over all the powers of darkness . Oh my Lord God , do thou arm and fortify my soul with a lively and steadfast faith in thee , i shall not fear what man or devil can do unto me : settle my heart in a firm reliance upon thee , and turn me loose to what enemy thou pleasest . 

Soliloq . Xliii . The unfailing friend . 

Next to the joy of a good conscience , there is no greater comfort upon earth , than the enjoyment of dear friends ; neither is there any thing more sad than their parting ; and by how nearer their relations are , so much greater is our sorrow in foregoing them : what moan ▪ did good David make , both for Absalon as a son , ( Though ungracious ) and for Jonathan as a friend : surely , when our dear ones are pulled away from us , we seem to have limbs torn away from our bodies ; yet this is a thing must be looked for ; we are given to each other , ( Or lent rather ) upon condition of parting , either they must leave us , or we them ; a parting there must be , as sure as there was a meeting : it is our fault if we set our hearts too much upon that , which May , yea , which must be lost . Be wise , oh my soul , and make sure of such friends as thou canst not be bereaved of : thou hast a God , that hath said , i will not leave thee nor forsake thee : it was an easy suit , and already granted which the holy psalmist made : cast me not off in the time of old age , forsake me not when my strength faileth : and again , when my father and my mother forsake me ( In their farewell to a better world ) yet than the Lord will take me up . It is an happy thing to have immortal friends : stick close unto them , oh my soul , and rejoice in them evermore , as those that shall sweetly converse with thee here , and shall at last , receive thee into everlasting habitations . 

Soliloq . Xliv . Quiet humility . 

He is a rare man that is not wise in his own conceit ; and that says not within himself , i see more than my neighbours : for we are all born proud , and self-opinionate ; and when we are come to our imaginary maturity , are apt to say with Zedechiah , to those of better judgement than our own , which way went the spirit of God from me to speak unto thee ? Hence have arisen those strange varieties of wild paradoxes , both in philosophy and religion , wherewith the world abounds everywhere . When our fancy hath entertained some uncouth thought , our selfe-love is apt to hatch it up , our confidence to broach it , and our obstinacy to maintain it ; and ( If it be not too monstrous ) there will not want some credulous fools to abet it : so as the only way both to peace and truth , is true humility ; which will teach us to think meanly of our own abilities , to be diffident of our own apprehensions and judgments , to ascribe much to the reverend antiquity , greater sanctity , deeper insight of our blessed predecessors . This only will keep us in the beaten road , without all extravagant deviations to untrodden by-paths : teach me , oh Lord , evermore to think myself no whit wiser than i am ; so shall i neither be vainly irregular , nor the church troublesomely unquiet . 

Soliloq . Xlv . Sure mercies . 

There is nothing more troublesome in human society than the disappoint of trust , and failing of friends : for besides the disorder that it works in our own affairs , it commonly is attended with a necessary deficiency of our performances to others : the leaning upon a broken reed gives us both a fall and a wound : such is a false friend , who after professions of love , and real offices , either slinks from us , or betrays us : this is that which the great pattern of patience so bitterly complains of , as none of his least afflictions , my kinsfolk have failed me , and my familiar friends have forgotten me . It went to the heart of David , that his own familiar friend , in whom he trusted , which did eat of his bread , should lift up his heel against him : and surely , those that are staunch , and faithful in themselves , cannot but be so much the more deeply affected with the perfidious dealing of others ; and yet also so much the more , as their confidence and entireness was greater ; this was that which heightened the vexation of that man who is so famous for the integrity of his heart . it was thou , oh man , mine equal , my guide , my acquaintance ; we took sweet counsel together , and walked to the house of God in company . And still our daily experience gives us miserable instances in this kind : he hath had little to do in the world that hath not spent many a sigh upon others faithlesness . 

And now , oh my soul , the more sad proof thou hast had of the untrusty disposition and carriage of men , the more it concerns thee to betake thyself , in all zealous & absolute affiance , unto the sure protection and never-failing providence of thy God ? the God who being truth itself , never did , never can forfeit his trust to any soul that relied upon his most certain promises , upon his promised mercies , upon his merciful and just performances . 

My soul wait thou only upon God ; for my expectation is from him ; he only is my rock , and my salvation ; in God is my salvation and my glory , the rock of my strength , and my refuge is in God . It shall not trouble thee to send men false , while thou hast such a true God to have recourse unto . 

Soliloq . Xlvi . Dangerous prosperity . 

It was a just and needful precaution , oh God , which thou gavest of old to thine Israel . when thou shalt have eaten , and art full , then beware lest thou forget the Lord : there was not so great fear of forgetting thee , while they were in an hungry and dry wilderness , although even there they did too often forget themselves , in an ungracious murmuring against thee and their leaders ; the greatest danger of their forgetting thee would be , ( Thou knewest ) when they should come to be pampered in the land that flowed with milk and honey : there it was that accordingly jesurum waxed fat and kicked ; there being grown thick and covered with fatness , he forsook God which made him , and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation . Nothing is more difficult than to keep ourselves from growing wanton by excess ; whereas nature kept low is capable of just obedience : like as in the body also , a full feed breeds superfluous and vicious humours , whereas a spare diet keeps it both clean and healthful . Do not i see , oh Lord , even the man that was after thine own heart while thou kepst him in breath , with the prosecution of an unjust Master , how tenderly conscientious he was ; remorsed in himself for but cutting off a lap of the robe of his causeless pursuer : who yet when he came to the full scope of his ease , and courtly jollity , made no scruple of the adulterous bed of fair Bathsheba , or the bloody murder of a faithful Uriah . who was i , oh Lord , that i should promise myself an immunity from the peril of a prosperous condition under which thy holier servants have miscarried . It was thy goodness and wisdom who fore-seest not what shall be only , but what Might be also , in prevention of the danger of my surfeit , to take away the dish , whereon i Might have overfed . Oh God , i do humbly submit to thy good pleasure ; and contentedly rest upon thy providence , which hast thought fit rather to secure me in the safe use of my little , than to exercise me with the temptations of a bewitching plenty . 

Soliloq . Xlvii . Cheerful obedience . 

It is not so much the work that God stands upon as the mind of the worker . The same act May be done with the thank and advantage of one agent , and with frowns and disrespect to another . If we do our business grudgingly , and because we must , out of the necessity of our subsistence , we shall have as much thank to sit still : it is our own need that sets our hands on work , not our obedience : so as herein we are our own slaves , not God's servants ; whereas , if we go about the works of our calling cheerfully , offering them up to God , as our willing sacrifice in an humble compliance with his commands , and an awful and comfortable expectation of his gracious acceptance , we are blessed in our holy endeavours , and cannot fail of an euge from our Master in heaven . Alas , Lord , it is but little that i can do , and , without thy enabling , nothing . 

Thou that vouchsafest to give me an abilitation to the work , put into me also good affections to thee in performing of it : let me do thy will here , as thy angels do in heaven , with all gracious readiness , and alacrity ; and be no less glad that i shall do it , than that it is done : so while carnal hearts shall languish under their forced tasks , my labour shall be my pleasure ; and i shall find unspeakable comfort both in the conscience of my act , and the crown of my obedience . 

Soliloq . Xlviii heavenly accordance . 

As our condition here upon earth is different ; so must our affection needs be also : that which is one man's joy is another's grief ; one man's fear is another man's hope : neither can it be otherwise , while our occasions draw us to so manifest contradictions of disposition : these diversities and contrarieties of inclination and desire , are the necessary symptoms of our wretched mortality ; and the nearer we grow to the perfection of our blessedness , the more shall we concentrate in the united scope of all our actions , and affections , which is the sole glory of our creator : know then , oh my soul , that the closer thou canst gather up thyself in all the exercise of thy faculties , and proposals of thy desires , to the only respect of the honour of that great and good God which gave thee thy being , thou aspirest so much nearer to thy heaven , where all the blessed saints and angels agree together in one perpetual employment of praising their maker ; and sweetly accord in that one most perfect ditty and note of an eternal allelujah to him that sits upon the throne of that celestial glory . 

Oh God , do thou draw in my heart more and more from this variety of earthly distractions , and fix it upon this one heavenly work : put me upon that blessed task here below , which shall never know any end , but endure for ever in heaven . 

Soliloq . Xlix . Divine bounty . 

Had not the apostle said so , yet our own sense and experience would have told us , that every good and perfect gift is from above , and cometh down from the father of lights : for sure , from below it cannot come . How should any perfect gift arise from the region of all imperfection ? How should evil afford any good ? What is below but earth and hell ? whereof the one yields nothing but torment , the other nothing but misery , and sin : if therefore it be pefect , or good , ( Since nothing can give what it hath not ) it must needs come from above : and from whom above ? Not from those lightsome bodies of the stars , whose influences cannot reach unto the soul , whose substance is not capable of any spiritual power , whether to have , or give perfect gifts : not from the blessed spirits , which are angels of light : they May help , through God's gracious appointment , to convey blessings to us , they neither will or can challenge an original and primary interest in the blessings which they convey . Only therefore from the father of lights ; who as he is light , so is the author of all whatsoever light , both inward and outward , spiritual and sensible : and as light was the first good and perfect gift which he bestowed on the world , so it well May employ all the spiritual blessings conferred on the creature : so as he that said , let there be light ; said also , let this man be wise ; let that be learned ; let that other be gracious and holy : whence then , oh whence can i look for any good thing , but from thy hands , oh my God , who givest to all men liberally and upbraidest not : whose infinite treasure is not capable of any diminution ; since the more thou givest , thy store is not the less , thy glory more . Thou dost not sell thy favours , as we men are apt to do , looking through our small bounty , at an expected retribution ; but thou givest most freely , most absolutely : neither dost thou lend thy best blessing , as looking to receive them back again , but so conveyest them to us , as to make them our own for ever : since therefore thy gifts are so free , that all thy heavenly riches May be had for asking ; how worthy shall i be to want them if i do not sue for them to the throne of thy grace ; yet even this ( Since it is a good thing ) i cannot do without thee . Oh then give thou me the grace that i May be ever begging faithfully of thee ; and give me the graces that i beg for . 

Soliloq . L. sweet use of power . 

I see that great , wise , and holy God , who Might most justly make use of his absolute power , yet proceeds sweetly with his creature in all his ways : he Might force some to salvation in spite of their wills ; he Might damn others merely for his pleasure , without respect to their sin : but he doth not , he will not do either of these ; but goes along graciously and gently with us , inviting us to repentance , and earnestly tendering to us the means of salvation on the one side with effectual persuasions , and strong motives , and kindly inclinations to an answerable obedience ; on the other side , laying before us the fearful menaces of his judgements denounced against sinners , urging all powerful dissuasions , and using all probable means to divert us from all the ways of wickedness ; and when those prevail not , justly punishing us for our wilful disobedience , impenitence , and infidelity . 

Oh God , how should we learn of thee to proceed with all our fellow-creatures , ( But much more with our Christian brethren ) not according to the rigour of any pretended prerogative of power , but in all merciful tenderness , in all gentle and fair means of their reclamation on the one side , & on the other , in an unwilling and constrained severity of necessary justice . 

And how much doth it concern thee , oh my soul , not to stay till thy god shall drag thee to repentance and salvation , but gladly to embrace all those happy opportunities , and cheerfully to yield to all those merciful solicitations , which thy God offers thee for thy full conversion ; and carefully to avoid those ways of sin and death which he hath under so dreadful denunciations graciously warned thee to shun : else thy god is cleared both in his justice and mercy , and thy perdition is of thyself . 

Soliloq . Li. the power of conscience . 

It is a true word of the apostle , God is greater than our conscience ; and surely , none but he : under that great God , the supreme power on earth is the conscience . Every man is a little world within himself ; and in this little world there is a court of judicature erected , wherein next under God the conscience sits as the supreme judge , from whom there is no appeal ; that passeth sentence upon us , upon all our actions , upon all our intentions ; for our persons , absolving one , condemning another ; for our actions , allowing one , forbidding another : if that condemn us , in vain shall all the world besides acquit us ; and if that clear us , the doom which the world passeth upon us , is frivolous ▪ and ineffectual . I grant this judge is sometimes corrupted with the bribes of hope , with the weak fears of loss , with an undue respect of persons , with powerful importunities , with false witnesses , with forged evidences , to pass a wrong sentence upon the person , or cause ; for which he shall be answerable to him that is higher than the highest ; but yet this doom , ( Though reversible by the tribunal of heaven ) is still obligatory on earth : so as it is my fault that my conscience is misled ; but it is not my fault to follow my conscience . How much need have i therefore , oh my God , to pray that thou wouldst guide my conscience aright ; and keep this great judge in my bosom from corruption and error ? and what need hath this intestine arbiter of mine to take special care that he May avoid all misinformations that May mislead his judgement , and all the base suggestions of outward advantage , or loss that May deprave his affections ? And , oh thou , that only art greater than my conscience , keep me from doing aught against my conscience : i cannot disobey that but i must offend thee ; since that is but thine officer under thee , and only commands for thee . 

Soliloq . Lii . Proud poverty . 

That which wise Solomon observed in the temporal estates of men , holds no less true in the spiritual : there is that maketh himself rich , yet hath nothing ; there is that maketh himself poor , yet hath great riches : on the one side , we meet with a proud but beggarly Laodicean , that says , i am rich , and increased with goods , and have need of nothing ; which will not know that he is wretched , and miserable , and poor , and blind , and naked ; this man when the means of further grace are tendered him , can say , as Esau did of the proffered herds , i have enough my brother ; and with the bragging Pharisee can boast of what he is not , and of what he is ; of what he hath , of what he doth ; admiring his own nothing , and not caring to seek for more , because he thinks he hath all ; this fond justiciary can overdo his duty , and supererogate ; contemning the poverty of souls better furnished than his 〈◊〉 ; and laying his merits in the dish of the almighty . 

On the other side , there is an humble soul , that is secretly rich in all spiritual endowments ; full of knowledge , abounding in grace , which out of the true poverty of spirit under-values himself , and makes no show of aught but a bemoaned disability : as we have seen those grounds wherein the richest mines are treasured , bewray nothing but barrenness in their outside . 

Oh my soul , what estimation soever others May set upon thee , thou art conscious enough of thy own wants ; be thankful for the little thou hast , and abased for the much thou lackest ; and if thou wilt needs be advancing thyself above others , let it be in the contestation of thy greater humbleness , and lower dejection . Thy grace shall be no less because thou thinkst it so : but shall rather multiply by a modest diminution . 

And , oh blessed Lord , thou who resistest the proud , and givest grace to the humble , give me more humility , that i May receive more grace from thee ; and thou whose gracious rain shelves down from the steep mountains , and sweetly drenches the humble valleys ; depress thou my heart more and more with true lowliness of spirit , that the showers of thy heavenly grace May soak into it , and make it more fruitful in all good affections , and all holy obedience . 

Soliloq . Liii . The happiest society . 

I find , oh Lord , some holy men that have gone aside from the world , into some solitary wilderness , that they Might have their full scope of enjoying thee freely , without any secular avocations ; who no doubt improved their perfect leisure to a great entireness of conversation with thee . Surely i could easily admire the report of their holiness , and emulate their mortified retiredness , if i did not hear them say , the wolf dwells in the wood , and that they could as soon leave themselves , as the world behind them . There is no desert so wild , no mountains or rocks so craggy , wherein i would not gladly seek thee , oh my God , and which i would not willingly climb up to find thee , if i could hope that solitude would yield a spiritual advantage of more enjoying thee . But , alas , i find our weak powers are subject to an unavoidable lassitude ; and we can no more contemplate always those divine objects , than our bodily eyes are able to fix themselves on the body of the sun in his brightest splendour : so as , if our minds should not be sometime taken off with a safe variety of cogitations , we should be overwhelmed with thy glory , and with too much light blinded : by this means it comes to pass that these small interspirations set an edge upon our reassumed speculations , and renewed devotions : although also in the mean time , i should hate all secular diversions , if they should take thee for a moment quite out of my sight ; if i did not find that i May still refer them to thee , and enjoy thee in them . Oh God , do thou so fix my soul upon thee , that what ever occasion shall take me up , i May never be out of thy blessed society , and make me so insensible of the noise of the world , that even in the midst of the market i May be still alone with thee . 

Soliloq . Liv. honey from the rock . 

Oh God , thou didst miraculously refresh thy murmuring Israel of old with water out of the rock , in that dry wilderness ; and now i hear thee say , if they had harkened to thy voice , and walked in thy ways , with honey out of the rock thou wouldst have satisfied them . Lo , that which thou wouldst have done to thine ancient persons , if they had obeyed thee , thou hast abundantly performed to thine Evangelical Israel . With honey out of the rock hast thou satisfied them ; the rock that followed them was Christ my saviour : lo , out of this rock hath flowed that honey whereby our souls are satisfied ; out of his side ( Saith the evangelist ) came water and blood , this rock of our salvation affordeth both what Israel had , and Might have had . Surely , oh my God , there can be no honey so sweet , as the effect of the precious blood of my saviour to the soul of the believer ; by that blood we have eternal redemption from death , and remission of all our sins ; by that blood are we justified in the sight of our God , and saved from the wrath to come ; by that blood we have our peace made in heaven , and are fully reconciled to our God ; by that blood we are cleansed and purged from all our iniquity ; by that blood we are sanctified from our corruptions ; by that blood we receive the promise and possession of an eternal inheritance . Oh the spiritual honey so sweet , that the material honey is but bitterness to it ! Jonathan of old did but dip his spear in the honey of the wood , and but with one lick of that sweet moisture had his eyes cleared , and his spirits revived ; oh God , let me but taste , and see how sweet the Lord Jesus is , in all his gracious promises , in all his merciful and real performances , i shall need no more to make me happy . Thy Solomon bids me to eat honey : lo , this is the honey that i desire to eat of ; give me of this honey and i shall receive both clearness to my eyes , and vigour of my spirits to the foiling of all my spiritual enemies . This is nothe honey whereof i am bidden not to eat too much : no , Lord , i can never eat enough of this celestial honey ; here i cannot surfeit ; or , if i could , this surfeit would be my health . Oh God , give me still enough of this honey out of the rock , so shall my soul live , and bless thee , and be blessed of thee . 

Soliloq . Lv . Sure earnest . 

Oh my God , what a comfortable assurance is this which thou hast given to my soul ? Thou hast , in thy great mercy , promised and agreed to give me heaven ; and now because thou dost not put me into a present possession , thou hast given me earnest of my future inheritance ; and this earnest is that good spirit of thine , which thou hast graciously put into my soul . Even we men , whose stile is deceitful upon the balance , think ourselves sure when in civil transactions we have received an earnest of the bargain ; and much more when we have taken that small piece of coin , as part of the bargained payment ; how then can i fear to fail thee , my God , whose title is faithful and true ; whose word is yea , and amen . It is ordinary with the world to cheat my soul with fair promises , and faithless engagements of yielding me those contentments , which it neither can , nor meant to perform . but for thee , oh Lord , heaven and earth shall pass away , but not one jot of thy word shall pass unfulfilled : hadst thou then , but given me that word of thine , i durst have set my soul upon it , with all firm confidence ; but now that thou hast seconded thy word with thy earnest , what place can be left for my doubt ? What then , what is it that thou canst stick at , oh my soul ? Canst thou make question of the truth of the earnest ? Thou knowest that thou canst not ; the stamp is too well known to be misdoubted ; the impressions are full and inimitable ; this seal cannot be counterfeit ; the graces of the spirit which thou hast received , thou feelest to be true and real ; thou findest in thyself a faith , though weak , yet sincere ; an unfeigned repentance joined with an hearty detestation of all thy sins ; a fervent love of that infinite goodness that hath remitted them , a conscionable care to avoid them , a zealous desire to be approved to God in all thy ways : flesh and blood cannot have wrought these graces in thee ; it is only that good spirit of thy God , which hath thus sealed thee to the day of redemption . 

Walk on therefore , oh my soul , confidently and cheerfully in the strength of this assurance , and joyfully expect the full accomplishment of this happy contract from the sure hands of thy god : let no temptation stagger thee in the comfortable resolutions of thy future glory ; but say boldly with that holy patriarch , oh Lord i have waited for thy salvation . 

Soliloq . Lvi . Heavenly manna . 

Victory itself is the great reward of our fight ; but what is it , oh God that thou promisest to give us as the reward of our victory ? even the hidden manna : surely were not this gift exceeding precious , thou wouldst not reserve it for the remuneration of so glorious a conquest . Behold that material and visible manna , which thou sentest down from heaven , to stop the mouths of murmuring Israel , perished in their use ; and if it were reserved but to the next day , putrified , and instead of nourishing , annoyed them ; but the hidden manna , that was laid up in the ark , was incorruptible , as a lasting monument of thy power , and mercy to thy persons ; but now , alas , what is become both of that manna , and of that ark ? Both are vanished ( Having passed through the devouring jaws of time ) into mere forgetfulness . It is the true spiritual manna that came down from the highest heaven , and ascending thither again is hidden therein the glorious ark of eternity , that thou wilt give to thy conqueror : that is it , which being participated of here below , nourisheth us to eternal life ; and being communicated to us above , is the full consummation of that blessed life , and glory . Oh give me so to fight that i May overcome , that so overcoming , i May be feasted with this manna . Thou that art , and hast given me thyself , the spiritual manna , which i have fed on by faith ; and the symbolical manna , whereof i have eaten sacramentally ; give me of that heavenly manna , whereof i shall partake in glory : it is yet an hidden manna , hide from the eyes of the world , yea in a sort from our own ; hide in light inaccessible : for our life is hide with Christ in God ; but shall then be fully revealed : for it shall then not only cover the face of the earth round about the tents of Israel . but spread itself over the face of the whole heaven , yea fill both heaven and earth . I well thought , oh my God , that if heaven could afford any thing more precious than other , thou wouldst lay it up for thy victor : for it is an hard service that thy poor infantry here upon earth are put unto ; to conflict with so mighty , so malicious , so indefatigable enemies ; and therefore the reward must be so much the greater , as the warfare is more difficult . Oh do thou who art the great Lord of hosts , give me courage to fight , perseverance in fighting , and power to overcome all my spiritual enemies , that i May receive from thee this hidden manna , that my soul May live for ever , and May for ever bless thee . 

Soliloq . Lvii . The heart's treasure . 

It is a sure word of thine , oh saviour , that where our treasure is , there our hearts will be also ; neither can we easily know , where to find our hearts , if our treasure did not discover them : now , Lord , where is my treasure ? Surely i am not worthy to be owned of thee , if my treasure be anywhere but in heaven : my lumber and luggage May be here on earth , but my treasure is above ; there thou hast laid up for me the richest of thy mercies , even my eternal salvation : yea Lord , what is my richest treasure but thyself ? in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge , yea of infinite glory are laid up for all thine : all things that this world can afford me , are but mere pelf in comparison of this treasure ; or , if the earth could yield aught that is precious , yet i cannot call that treasure . Treasure implies both price , and store of the dearest commodities : never so great abundance of base things cannot make a treasure ; neither can some few pieces of the richest metals be so accounted ; but where there is a large congestion of precious jewels , and metals , there only is treasure : if any at all , surely very little , and mean is the wealth which i can promise myself here ; perhaps some brass farthing , or light and counterfeit coin , mere earthy dross , which May load but cannot enrich my soul ; my only true riches are above with thee ; and where then should my heart be but there ? My hand and my brain too must necessarily be sometimes here below , but my heart shall be still with my treasure in heaven . It is wont to be said , that however the memory of old age is short , yet that no old man ever forgot where he laid up his treasure . Oh God , let not that celestial treasure which thou hast laid up for me , be at any time out of my thoughts ; let my eye be ever upon it ; let my heart long for the full possession of it ; and so joy in the assured expectation of it ; that it May disrelish all the contentments , and contemn all the crosses which this world can afford me . 

Soliloq . Lviii . The narrow way . 

Oh saviour , i hear thee say , i am the way , the truth , and the life ; and yet again , thou ( Who art truth itself ) tellest me , that the way is narrow , and the gate straight that leadeth unto life : surely , thou who art the living way , art exceeding large ; so wide that all the world of believers enter into life by thee only : but the way of our walk towards thee is straight and narrow ; not , but that thy commandment in itself is exceeding broad ; for Lord , how fully comprehensive it is of all moral and holy duties ? and what gracious latitude hast thou given us in it of our obedience ? and how favourable indulgence and remission in case of our failings ? But narrow in respect of the weakness and insufficiency of our obedience ? It is our wretched infirmity that straitens our way to the . Lo , heaven , which is thy all-glorious mansion , when we are once entered into it , how infinitely large and spacious it is ; even this lower contignation of it , at how marvelous distance it archeth in this globe of air , and earth , and waters ? and how is that again surrounded with several heights of those lightsome regions , unmeasurable for their glorious dimensions ? But the heaven of heavens , the seat of the blessed , is yet so much larger , as it is higher in place , and more eminent in glory ; yet thou wouldst have the way to it narrow , and the gate of it straight : and even thus it pleaseth thee to ordain in the dispensation of all thine inferior blessings ; learning dwells fair within , but the entrance is straight through study , watching , bending of brains , wearing of spirits : the house of honour is sumptuous and goodly within , but the gate is straight that leads into it ; which is through danger , attendance , plots of emulation : wealth hath large elbowroom of lodging , but the gate is straight ; hard labour , careful thrift , racking of thoughts , painful adventures . How much more wouldst thou have it thus in the best of all blessings , the eternell fruition of heaven ? And why is this way narrow , but because it is untracked , and untrodden ? If i May not rather say the way is untracked and found by few , because it is narrow , and not easy to tread in . Surely grace is the way to glory , and that path is not for every foot : the straighter and narrower it is , oh my God , the more let me strive and shoulder to enter into it . What vain quarrels do we daily hear of for the way ; but Lord enable me to strive for this way even to blood : and if thou have been pleased to set me a deep way , or a rough way through many tribulations , to that happy and eternal life , let me pass it with all cheerful resolution . How oft have i not grudged to go a foul way to a friend's house , where i knew my entertainment kind and cordial ? Oh let me not think much to come to those thy everlasting mansions of bliss , through tears and blood . The end shall make an abundant amends for the way ; if i suffer with thee , i shall reign with thee . 

Soliloq . Lix . God's various proceedings . 

What strange varieties do i find in the workings of God with men : onewhere i find him gently , and plausibly inviting men to their conversion ; another-where , i find him frighting some others to heaven : some he trains up in a goodly education , and without any eminent change , calls them forth to an exemplary profession of his name ; some others he chooseth out of a life notoriously lewd , to be the great patterns of a sudden reformation ; one that was only formal in his devotion without any true life of grace , is , upon a grievous sickness , brought to a lively sense of godliness ; another comes to God's house with a purpose to sleep or scoff , and through the secret operation of God's spirit working with his word , returns full of true compunction of heart , with tears in his eyes , and resolutions of present amendment of life : one that was proud of his own righteousness is suffered to fall into some foul sin , which shames him before men , and is thus brought down to an humble acknowledgement of his own frailty ; another , that was cast down with a sad despair of God's mercy , is raised up by the fall of an unbroken glass , or by some comfortable dream , or by the seasonable word of a cheerful friend : one is called at the sixt hour , another not till the eleventh ; one by fair and probable means , another by contraries ; so as even the work of Satan himself hath been made the occasion of the conversion of his soul . Oh God , thy ways are infinite , and past finding out : it is not for us to prescribe thee what to do , but humbly to adore thee in what thou dost . Far be it from me , so to cast myself upon thy all-working providence , as to neglect the ordinary means of my salvation : enable me cheerfully to endeavour what thou requirest , and then take what way thou pleasest ; so that thou bringst me to the end of my hope , the salvation of my soul . 

Soliloq . Lx . The waking guardian . 

It is a true word which the psalmist said of thee , oh God ; thou that keepest Israel , neither slumberest , nor sleepest : fond tyrants think that thou winkest at their cruel persecutions of thy church , because thou dost not speedily execute vengeance upon them , whereas , if the fault were not in their eyes , they should see thine wide open , and bent upon them for their just destruction ; only thou thinkst fit to hold thy hand for a time from the infliction of judgement , till the measure of their iniquity be full , and then they shall feel to their cost , that thou sawest all their secret plots and conspiracies against thine Israel . the time was , oh saviour , when in the days of thine human infirmity thou sleptest in the stern of the ship , on a pillow , when the tempest raged and the waves swollen ; yet even then when thy disciple awoke thee and said , Lord save us we perish , thou rebukedst them sharply , with , why are ye fearful , oh ye of little faith ? Their danger was apparently great , but yet thou tellest them their fear was causeless , and their faith weak , that they could not assure themselves that thy presence ( Though sleeping ) was a sufficient preservative against the fury of winds and waters : how much more now , that being in the height of thine heavenly glory , and ever intentively vigilant for the safeguard of thy chosen ones , May we rest secure of thy blessed protection , and our sure indemnity ? Oh God , do thou keep my eyes ever open , that i May still wait upon thee , for thy gracious tuition , and the merciful accomplishment of thy salvation : thou seest i have to do with those enemies that are never but waking , never but seeking all advantages against my soul ; what can they do when thine eye is ever over me for good ? Oh then let mine eyes be ever unto thee , oh God my Lord ; in thee let me still put my trust : so shalt thou keep me from the snares that they have laid for me , and the grins of the workers of iniquity . 

Soliloq . Lxi . The sting of guiltiness . 

Guiltiness can never think itself sure ; if there were no fiends to torment it , like a bosom-devil , it would ever torture itself : no guard can be so sure , no fort so strong as to secure it from terrors . The first murderer after his bloody fratricide , when there is no mention of any man ( Beside his father ) upon earth , yet can say , it shall come to pass that every one that findeth me shall slay me ; and i marvel that he added not ; if none else will do it , i shall do that deadly office to myself : he was sure he could meet with none but brethren or nephews ; and even the face of those was now dreadful to him : he that had been so cruel to him that had lain in the same womb with himself , fears that no neereness of blood can shield him from the violence of the next man . 

Conscience when once exasperated , needs not stay for an accuser , a witness , a solicitor to enforce the evidence , a judge ; but itself alone acts all these parts , and ofttimes also the executioners to boot . It was a just question of the wisest of men , a wounded spirit who can bear ? But there are divers and different degrees of the wounds of spirit : all are painful , some mortal ; as in the body , there May be some wounds in the outward and fleshly part , which have more pain than peril , but those of the principal , and vital parts are not more dolorous than dangerous , and often deadly : so it is in the soul , there are wounds of the inferior and affective faculties , as grief for crosses , vexation for disappointment of hopes , pangs of anger for wrongs received , which May be cured with seasonable remedies ; but the wounds of conscience inflicted by the sting of some heinous sin , which lies belching within us , carries in it horror , despair , death . Oh God , keep me from blood-guiltiness , and from all crying and presumptuous sins ; but if ever my frailty should be so foully tainted , do thou so work upon my soul , as that my repentance May walk in equal paces with my sin , ere it can aggravate itself by continuance . Apply thy sovereign plaster to my soul while the wound is green , and suffer it not to fester inwardly through any impenitent delay . 

Soliloq . Lxii . Beneficial want . 

It is just with thee , oh God , when thou seest us grow wanton , and unthankfully neglective of thy blessings , to withdraw them from us , that by the want of them we May feel both our unregarded obligations , and the defects of our duty : so we have seen the nurse , when the child begins to play with the dug , to put up the breast out of sight . I should not acknowledge how precious a favour health is , if thou didst not sometimes interchange it with sickness ; nor how much i am bound to thee for my limbs , if i had not sometimes a touch of lameness : thirst gives better relish to the drink , and hunger is the best sauce to our meat . Nature must needs affect a continuance of her welfare ; neither is any thing more grievous to her , than these cross interceptions of her contentments : but thou , who art wisdom itself , knowest how fit it is for us , both to smart for our neglect of thy familiar mercies , and to have thy blessings more endeared to us by a seasonable discontinuance . Neither dost thou want to deal otherwise in the managing of thy spiritual mercies . If thy spouse , the faithful soul , shall ( Being pampered with prosperity ) begin to grow secure and negligent , so as at the first knock of her beloved , she rise not up to open to him , but suffers his head to be filled with dew , and his locks with the drops of the night ; she soon finds her beloved withdrawn and gone : she May then seek him , and not find him ; she May call , and receive no answer ; she May seek him about the streets , and in stead of finding him lose her veil , and meet with blows and wounds from the watchmen . Oh God , keep thou me from being resty with ease ; hold me in a continual tenderness of heart : continue me in a thankful , and awful use of all thy favours : but , if at any time thou seest me decline to a careless obduration , and to a disrespective forgetfulness of thy mercies , do thou so chastise me with the fatherly hand of thy afflictions , and so work me to a gracious use of thy desertions , that my soul May seek thee with more vigour of affections , and May recover thee with more sensible comfort . 

Soliloq . Lxiii . Interchange of conditions . 

It is not for nothing , oh my God , that thou hast protracted my time so long , and hast given me so large experience of thy most wise and holy dealing with myself and others . Doubtless it is , that i Might see , and feel , and observe , and teach the gracious changes of thy carriage towards thy poor sinful creatures upon earth . Thou dost not hold us always under the rod , ( Though we well deserve a perpetual correction ) as considering our miserable impotence , and aptness to an heartless dejection ; thou dost not always keep our hearts raised up to the jollity of a prosperous condition , as knowing our readiness to presume , and to be carried away with a false confidence of our unmoveableness ; but graciously interchangest thy favours with our sufferings : when thou seest us ready to faint , and to be discouraged with our adversity , thou takest off thy hand , and givest us a comfortable respiration from our miseries ; when thou seest us puffed up with the vain conceit of our own worth , or success , thou takest us down with some heavy cross . When thou findest us overlaid with an unequal match , and ready to be foiled in the fight , thou givest us breath , and puttest new strength into our arms , and new courage into our hearts ; when thou findest us insolent with our victory , thou sham'st us by an unexpected discomfiture . 

And as for the outward estate of the nations and kingdoms of the earth , thou whirlest them about in a perpetual , yet constant vicissitude ; peace breeds plenty , plenty wantonness and pride , pride animosity , from thence follows war , war produces vastation and want , poverty causeth industry , and ( When nothing is left to strive for ) peace , an industrious peace brings plenty again , and in this gyre thou hast ordained the world still to turn about . 

Be not too much moved then , oh my soul , when thou findest thyself hard pressed with afflictions , and conflicted with strong temptations , but bear up constantly in the strength of thy faith , as being assured , that having rid out this storm , thou shalt be blessed with an happy calm ; neither be thou lifted up too much when thou findest thyself carried on with a fair gale of prosperity , since thou know'st not what tempests May suddenly arise ; and many hopeful vessel hath been sunk in sight of the port : and when thou seest the world everywhere full of woeful combustions , be not overmuch dismayed with the sight and sense of these public calamities , but wait patiently upon that divine providence ; which , after those revolutions of change , shall happily reduce all things to their determinate posture : to which purpose , oh God , do thou fix my heart firmly upon thee ; do thou keep me from the evil of prosperity , from dejectedness in affliction , from the prevalence of temptation , from misprision of thy providence : work me to that due temper which thy Solomon hath prescribed me ; in the day of prosperity be joyful ; but in the day of adversity consider : God also hath set the one over against the other , to the end that man should find nothing after him . 

Soliloq . Lxiv . The rule of devotion . 

Thy will , oh God , as it is always holy , so in what thou hast decreed to do with us , is secret , and in what thou wouldst have us do to thee , is revealed : it is thy revealed will that must regulate both our actions , and our prayers . It May be that i May lawfully sue to thee for what thou hast decreed not to grant : as Samuel ceased not to pray for thy favour to that Saul , whom thou hadst rejected ; and many an Israelite prayed for rain in that three years and an half , wherein thou hadst commanded the clouds to make good the prophecy of thine Elias ; yea , thine holy apostle prayed thrice to have the messenger of Satan taken off from him ; and heard no answer , but , my grace is sufficient for thee : so , Lord , we pray for the removal of thy judgements from this sinful and deplored nation , which for aught we know , and have cause to fear , thou hast decreed to ruin and de••station ; and many a good soul prays for a comfortable sense of thy favour , whom thou thinkest fit to keep down for the time in a sad desertion ; and i thy unworthy servant May pray to be freed from those temptations , wherewith thou seest it fit that my faith should be still exercised . Oh God , give me the grace to follow thy revealed will , and to submit myself to thy secret . What thou hast commanded , i know i May do ; what thou hast promised , i know i May trust to ; what thou hast in a generality promised to do , May in some particular cases by the just decree of thy secret counsel be otherwise determined : if i ask what thou hast decreed to do , i know i cannot but obtain ; if i ask what thou hast warranted ( Notwithstanding the particular exception of thy secret will ) though i receive it not , yet i receive not pardon only , but acceptation . Oh God , give me grace to steer myself , and my prayers by thy revealed will ; and humbly to stoop to what the event shows to have been thy secret will . 

Soliloq . Lxv . Hell's triumph . 

Thou hast told us , oh saviour , that there is joy in the presence of thine angels , for a sinner's repentance ; those blessed spirits are so far from envying our happiness , that as they endeavour it here , so they congratulate it in heaven : and we well know , that these good spirits do not more rejoice in the conversion of a sinner , than the evil spirits do in the miscarriage of a convert . The course of the holy obedience of thy servants here is doubtless a pleasing object to thine angels , neither are those malignant spirits less pleased with the wicked practices of their vassals ; but the joy arises to both from the contrary condition of those parties , over which they have prevailed : the allegiance of a good subject ( Though wel-accepted ) yet is no news to a gracious sovereign ; but the coming in of some great rebel is happy tidings at the court : on the contrary , where there is a rivality of sovereignty , for a professed enemy to do hostile actions , is no other than could be expected ; but for a subject or a domestic servant to be drawn into the conspiracy , is not more advantage than joy to the intruder . Oh God , thou hast mercifully called me out of the world to a profession of thy name ; i know what eyes those envious spirits have ever upon me : oh do thou lead me in thy righteousness because of mine enemies ; if thine angels have found cause to joy in my conversion , oh do thou keep me from making music in hell by my miscarriage . 

Soliloq . Lxvi . Dumb homage . 

How officious , oh God , do i see thy poor dumb creatures to us ? how do they fawn , or crouch , as they see us affected ? how do they run and fetch , and carry , and draw at our command ? how do they bear our stripes with a trembling unresistance ? how readily do they spend their strength , and their lives in our service ? how patiently do they yield us their milk and their fleeces for our advantage ? and lie equally still to be shorn , or slain at our pleasure ? expecting nothing from us in the mean time but a bare sustenance , which , if it be denied them , they do not fall furiously upon their cruel Masters , but meekly bemoan themselves in their brutish language , and languish , and die ; if granted them , they are fattened for our use . I am ashamed , oh God , i am ashamed to see these thy creatures so obsequiously pliant unto me , while i consider my disposition and deportment towards thee my creator : alas , Lord , what made the difference betwixt me and them , but thy mere good pleasure ? thou Mightest have made them rational , and have exchanged my reason for their brutality ; they are my fellows by creation , and owe both their being and preservation to the same hand with myself : thou art the absolute Lord of both , to whom i must be accountable for them ; they are mine only by a limited substitution from thee ; why then should they be more obedient to my will , than i am to thine ; since they have only sense to lead them in their way , i have both reason and faith to teach me my duty . Had i made them , i could but require of them their absolute submission : why should i then exact of them , more than i am ready to perform unto thee ? Oh God , thou that hast put them under my hand , and me under thy own , as thou hast made me their Master for command , so let me make them my Masters to teach me obedience . 

Soliloq . Lxvii . Indifferency of events . 

Thou givest us daily proofs , oh God , of the truth of that observation of wise Solomon , that all things come alike to all , and that no man knows love or hatred by all that is before them : in these outward things thy dearest friends have not fared better than thine enemies ; thy greatest enemies have not suffered more than thy beloved children . When therefore i look abroad , and see with what heavy afflictions thou art pleased to exercise thy best favourites upon earth , i cannot but stand amazed to see what horrible torments of all kinds have been undergone by thy most precious martyrs , whose patience hath overcome the violence of their executioners : and to see those extreme tortures which some of thy faithful servants have endured in the beds of their sickness ; one torn , and drawn together with fearful convulsions , another shrieking under the painful girds of an unremovable stone ; one wrung in his bowels with pangs of colic , and turning of guts , another possessed with a raging gout in all his limbs ; one whose bladder after a painful incision is ransacked , another whose leg or arm is cut off to prevent a mortal gangrene : i cannot but acknowledge how just it Might be in thee , oh God , to mix the same bitter cup for me ; and how merciful it is , that knowing my weakness thou hast forborn hitherto to load me with so sad a burden . What thou hast in thine eternal council determined to lay upon me , thou only knowest . If thou be pleased to continue thy gracious indulgence to me still , make me truly thankful to thee for health and ease , as the greatest of thy outward favours ; but let me not build upon them , as the certain evidences of thy better mercies : and if thou think fit to interchange them with a vicissitude of sickness and pain , let me not misconstrue thy severe chastisements as arguments of thy displeasure : but still teach me to fear thee in my greatest prosperity , and to love thee in my greatest sufferings ; and to adore thine infinite wisdom , justice , and mercy in both . 

Soliloq . Lxviii . The transcendent love . 

How justly do i marvel , oh God , to see what strength of natural affection thou hast wrought in poor brute creatures towards their Masters , and towards their own mates , towards their dams and their young : we have plentiful instances of those whom death could not separate from their beloved guardians , some that have died for their Masters , some with them ; some that have fearlessly hazarded their own lives for the preservation of their young ones , some that have fed their aged dams with that food which they have spared from their own maws amongst the rest how remarkable is that comparison of thine , oh saviour , wherein thou wert pleased to set forth thy tender care of thine Israel by the resemblance of an hen gathering her chickings under her wings ? how have i seen that poor fowl , after the patience of a painful hatching , clocking her little brood together ? and when she hath perceived the puttock hovering over her head , in a varied note calling them hastily under the wing of her protection , and there covertly hiding them not from the talons only , but from the eye of that dangerous enemy , till the peril hath been fully over ; after which she calls them forth to their liberty and repast , and with many a careful scrape discovers to them such grains of food as May be fit for them , contenting herself to carve for them with neglect of her own sustenance . Oh God , thou who hast wrought in thy silly creatures such an high measure of indulgence and dearness of respect towards their tender brood , how infinitely is thy love and compassion towards the children of men , the great masterpiece of thy creation ? How past the admiration of men and angels , is that transcendent proof of thy divine love , in the more than marvelous work of our redemption ? How justly glorifiable is thy name in the gracious , and sometimes miraculous , preservation of thy children ? In the experience whereof , if i forbear to magnify thee , or dare not to trust thee , how can i be but unworthy to be owned of thee , or blessed by thee ? 

Soliloq . Lxix . Choice of seasons . 

How regularly , oh God , hast thou determined a set season for all thy creatures , both for their actions and their use ? The stork in the heaven , saith thy prophet Jeremy , knoweth her appointed times , and the turtle and the crane , and the swallow observe the time of their coming : who hath seen the * stork before the calends of August , or a swallow in the winter ? Who hath heard the nightingale in the heat of harvest ? or the bittern bearing her base in the coldest months ? Yea the fish in the sea know and observe their due seasons , and present us with their shoals only when they are wholesome and useful ; the herring doth not furnish our market in the spring , nor the salmon , or mackerel in winter : yea the very flies both have and keep their days appointed ; the silkworm never looks forth of that little cell of her conception , till the mulberry puts forth the leaves for their nourishment ; and who hath ever seen a butterfly , or an harnet in winter ? yea there are flies we know appropriate to their own months , from which they vary not : lastly , how plain is this in all the several varieties of trees , flowers , herbs ? The almond tree looks out first , the mulberry last of all other ; the tulip , and the rose , and all other the sweet ornaments of the earth are punctual in their growth and fall : but as for man , oh God , thou hast in thy infinite wisdom endued him with that power of reason , whereby he May make choice of the fittest seasons of all his actions . thou that hast appointed a time for every purpose under heaven , hast given him wit to find and observe it . Even lawful acts unseasonably done , May turn evil ; and acts indifferent , seasonably performed , May prove good , and laudable . The best improvement of morality , or civility , May shame us , if due time be not as well regarded , as substance : only grace , piety , true virtue can never be unseasonable . There are no seasons in eternity ; there shall be one uniform and constant act of glorifying thee : thy angels and saints praise thee above , without change or intermission ; the more we can do so on earth , the nearer shall we approach to those blessed spirits . Oh God , let my heart be wholly taken up evermore with an adoration of thine infinite majesty , and let my mouth be ever sounding forth of thy praise ; and let the hosannahs , and hallelujahs which i begin here , know no measure but eternity . 

Soliloq . Lxx . The happy return home . 

Every creature naturally affects a return to the original whence it first came . The pilgrim , though faring well abroad , yet hath a longing homeward ; fountains and rivers run back with what speed they May to the sea whence they were derived ; all compound bodies return to their first elements ; the vapours rising up from the earth , and waters , and condenssed into clouds , fall down again to the same earth , whence they were exhaled ; this body that we bear about us , returns at last to that dust whereof it was framed : and why then , oh my soul , dost not thou earnestly desire to return home to the god that made thee ? Thou knowest thy original is heavenly , why are not thy affections so ? What canst thou find here below worthy to either withdraw , or detain thee from those heavenly mansions ? Thou art here in a region of sin , of misery and death ; glory waits for thee above : fly then , oh my soul , fly hence to that blessed immortality ; if not as yet in thy dissolution : ( For which thou must wait on the pleasure of thy dear maker & redeemer ) yet in thy thoughts , in thy desires and affections ; soar thou up thither , and converse there with that blessed God and father of spirits , with those glorious orders of angels , and with the souls of just men made perfect ; and if the necessity of these bodily affairs must needs draw thee off for a time , let it be not without reluctation and hearty unwillingness , and with an eager appetite of quick return to that celestial society . It will not be long ere thou shalt be blessed with a free , and uninterrupted fruition of that glorious eternity : in the mean time do thou prepossess it in thy heavenly dispositions ; and contemning this earth , wherewith thou art clogged , aspire to thy heaven , and be happy . 

Soliloq . Lxxi . The confinements of age . 

Dost thou not observe , oh my soul , how time and age confines , and contracts , as our bodies , so our desires and motions here upon earth , still into narrower compasses ? When we are young the world is but little enough for us ; after we have seen our own island , we affect to cross the seas , and to climb over Alps , and pyrennes , and never think we have roved far enough ; when we grow ancient , we begin to be well-pleased with rest ; now long and unnecessary journeys are laid aside . If business call us forth , we go , because we must ; as for the visits of friendship , one sun is enough to measure them , with our returns ; and still , the older we grow , the more we are devoted to our home ; there we are content to sit still , and enjoy the thoughts of our youth , and former experience , not looking farther than a kind neighbourhood : but , when age hath stiffened our joints , and disabled our motions , now , our home-pastures , and our gardens become our utmost boundaries ; from thence a few years more confine us to our own floor ; soon after that , we are limited to our chamber , and at last to our chair , then to our bed , and , in fine , to our coffin . These natural restrictions , oh my soul , are the appendences of thy weary partner , this earthly body : but for thee , the nearer thou drawest to thy home , the more it concerns thee to be sensible of a blessed enlargement of thy estate and affections ▪ hitherto thou art immured in a straight pile o• clay ; now , heaven itself shall be but wide enough for thee : the world hath hitherto taken thee up•… which ( Though large is yet but finite ; ) now , thou art upon the enjoying of that god who alone is infinite , in all that he is : oh how inconsiderable is the restraint of the worse part , in comparison of the absolute enlargement of the better ? Oh my God , whose mercy knows no other limits than thy essence , work me in this shutting up of my days to all heavenly dispositions , that while my outward man is so much more lessened , as it draws nearer to the centre of its corruption , my spiritual part May be so much more dilated , in , and towards thee , as it approacheth nearer towards the circumference of thy celestial glory . 

Soliloq . Lxxii . Sin without sense . 

Alas , Lord , how tenderly sensible i am of the least bodily complaint that can befall me ? If but a tooth begin to ache , or a thorn have rankled in my flesh , or but an angry corn vex my toe , how am i incessantly troubled with the pain ? how feelingly do i bemoan myself ? how carefully do i seek for a speedy remedy ? which till i feel , how little relish do i find in my wont contentment ? But for the better part , which is so much more tender , as it is more precious , with what patience ( Shall i call it , ) or stupidity , do i endure it wounded ( Were it not for thy great mercy ) no less than mortality ? Every new sin ( How little soever ) that i commit , fetches blood of the soul ; every willing sin stabs it ; the continuance wherein festers inwardly ; and , without repentance , kills . Oh God , i desire to be ashamed , and humbled under thy hand for this so unjust partiality ; which gives me just cause to fear that sense hath yet more predominance in me than faith . I do not so much sue to thee to make me less sensible of bodily evils , ( Whereof yet too deep a sense differs little from impatience ) as to make me more sensible of spiritual : let me feel my sin more painful than the worst disease ; and rather than wilfully sin , let me die . 

Soliloq . Lxxiii . The extremes of devotion . 

I acknowledge it to be none of thy least mercies , oh God , that thou hast vouchsafed to keep me within the due lines of devotion ; not suffering me to wander into those two extremes , which i see and pity in others . Too many there are , that do so content themselves in mere formalities , that they little regard how their heart is affected with the matter of their prayers : so have i grieved to see poor misdevout souls under the papacy , measuring their orisons , not by weight , but by number ; not caring which way their eye strayed , so their lips went ; resting well paid that God understood them , though they understood not themselves : too near approaching whereunto , are a world of well-meaning ignorant souls at home , that care only to pray by rote , not without some general intentions of piety , but so , as their hearts are little guilty of the motion of their tongues ; who , while they would cloak their carelessness , with a pretence of disability of expressing their wants to God , Might learn that true sense of need never wanted words to crave relief : every beggar can with sufficient eloquence importune the passenger for his alms . Did they not rather lack an heart than a tongue , they could not be defective in bemoaning themselves to heaven for what they lack ; especially , while we have to do with such a God , as more esteems broken clauses made up with hearty sighs , than all the compliments of the most curious eloquence in the world . 

On the other side there are certain zealous Devotionists , which abhor all set forms , and fixed hours of invocation , teaching ( And so practising ) that they May not pray , but when they feel a strong impulsion of God's spirit to that holy work ; whereupon it hath come to pass , that whole days , yea , weeks , have gone over their heads , unblessed by their prayers ; who Might have taken notice , that , under the law , God had his regular course of constant hours for his morning and evening sacrifices ; that the ancient saints under the old testament , held close to David's rule , evening and morning , and at noon to pray and cry aloud ; so as the very lions could not fright Daniel from his task : and even after the veil of the temple was rent , Peter and John went up together to God's house , at the ninth hour , to evening prayer . Yea , what stand we upon this ? when the apostle of the gentiles charges us , to pray continually : not that we should in the midst of a sensible indisposedness of heart fall suddenly into a fashionable devotion ; but that by holy ejaculations , and previous meditation , we should make way for a feeling invocation of our God , whose ears are never but open to our faithful prayers . If we first ( Though silently ) pray that we May pray , the fervour of our devotion shall grow upon us in praying : these holy waters of the sanctuary , that at first did but wet the soles of our feet , shall , in their happy process , rise up to our chins . I thank thee , oh God , that thou hast given me a desire to walk even between these extremities : as i would be ever in a praying disposition to thee , so i would not willingly break hours with thee ; i would neither sleep nor wake without praying ; but i would never pray without feeling . If my heart go not along with forms of words , i do not pray , but babble ; and if that be bent upon the matter of my suit , it is all one to thee , whether the words be my own , or borrowed . Let thy good spirit ever teach me to pray , and help me in praying : let that ever make intercessions for me with groanings which cannot be expressed ; and then , if thou canst , send me away empty . 

Soliloq . Lxxiv . The sick man's vows . 

The answer was not amiss , which Theodoricus Bishop of Coleine is said to have given to Sigismond the Emperor , who demanding how he Might be directed the right way to heaven , received answer ; if thou walk so , as thou promisedst in thy painful fit of the stone , or gout . Our extremities commonly render us holy : and our pain is prodigal of those vows , which our case is as niggardly in performing . The distressed mariner , in the peril of a tempest , vows to his saint a taper as big as the mast of his ship ; which upon his coming to shore , is shrunk into a rush-candle . There was never a more stiffnecked persons than that , which should have been God's peculiar , yet , upon every new plague , how do they crouch and creep to the power , which their murmurs provoked ? And we daily see desperation makes those votaries , whom health dispenseth with , as the losest of libertines . Were it essential to prosperity , thus to pervert and debauch us , it were enough to make a good heart out of love with welfare , since the pleasure and profit of the best estate is far too short of recompensing the mischief of a depraved jollity : but now , the fault is in our own wretched indisposition ; the blessing is God's , the abuse is ours . Is the sun to be blamed that the traveller's cloak swelts him with heat ? Is the fruit of the grape guilty of that drunkenness which follows upon a sinful excess ? Can we not feed on good meat without a surfeit ? And whose fault is it but ours , if we forget the engagements of our sick beds ? Rather than health should make us godless , how much better were it for us to be always sick ? Oh my God , i do acknowledge , and bewail this wretched frailty of our corrupt nature ; we are not the same men sick and whole ; we are apt to promise thee fair , and to pay thee with disappointment ; and are ready to put off our holy thoughts with our biggins : it is thou only that canst remedy this sickness of our health , by working us to a constant mortification . Oh do thou ever bless thy servant , either with sanctified crosses , or a temperate prosperity . 

Soliloq . Lxxv . The suggestions of a false heart . 

Surely , if thousands of souls perish by the flattery of others , more perish by their own ; while their natural self-love soothes them with plausible , but untrue suggestions , concerning their estate : is the question concerning grace ? the false heart tells a man he is stored to superfluity , and excess ; when he is indeed more bare and beggarly than the proud pastor of Laodicea . is the question of sin ? It proclaims him , not innocent only but a saint ; it tells him his hands are pure , when he is up to the elbows in blood ; that his tongue is holy , when it is foul with perjury and blasphemy ; that his eye is honest and chaste , when it is full of adultery ; that his soul is clean , when it is defiled with abominable lusts , or with cruel rancour , and malice . Is the question concerning virtue ? It tells a man he is just , when he is all made up of rapine , and violent oppression ; that he is eminently wise , when he hath not wit enough to know himself a fool ; that he is free handed and munificent , when he sticks not to rob beggars ; that he is piously religious , while he pulls down churches : thus is the man still hide from himself , and is made to see another in his own skin : he cannot repent , because he thinks himself faultless ; he cannot amend , because he is ever at the best : his only ease and advantage is , that he is carried hoodwinked into hell . If the question be concerning some scrupulous act to be done or omitted , now self-respect plays its prizes at all weapons ; what shifting and traversing there is to avoid the dint of a present danger ? what fine colours , and witty equivocations doth the soul find out , to cozen itself into a safe offence . If the question be of a sinful act already committed , what a shuffling there is to face it out by a stout justification ? maugre conscience , it was not lawful only , but ( Such as the circumstances were ) expedient also ; and if it be so foul , that an apology is too odious , yet an extenuation cannot but be admitted : be it amiss , yet , not heinous , not unmeet for pardon . One would think hell should have little need of the fawning assentation of others , when men carry so dangerous parasites in their own bosoms : but sure both together must needs help to persons that region of darkness . Take heed , oh my soul , how thou givest way to these flattering thoughts , whether arising from thy own breast , or injected by others ; and know , thou art never in more danger , than when thou art most applauded : look upon thine estate , and actions with unpartial and severe eyes ; behold thine own face , not in the false glass of opinion , and mercenary adulation , but in the true and perfect glass of the royal law of thy creator ; that shall duly represent unto thee , whether the beauty of thy graces , or the blemishes of thy manifold imperfections ; that alone shall tell thee how much thou art advanced in a gracious proficiency , and how shamefully defective thou art in what thou oughtedst to have attained : judge of thyself by that unfailing rule , and be indifferent what thou art judged of by others . 

Soliloq . Lxxvi . Sacred melody . 

What a marvailously cheerful service was that , oh God , which thou requiredst , and hadst performed , under the law : here was not a dumb and silent act in thy sacrifices , a beast bleeding before thy altar , and a smoke , and flame arising out of it ; here was not a cloudy perfume quietly ascending from the golden altar of thine incense : but , here was the merry noise of most melodious music , singing of psalms , and sounding of all harmonious instruments . the congregation were upon their knees , the Levites upon their stage sweetly singing , the priests sounding the trumpets , together with cymbals , harps , psalteries , making up one sound in praising and thanking the Lord . Me thinks i hear , and am ravished to hear in some of thy solemn days , an hundred and twenty of thy priests sounding with trumpets ; thy Levites in greater number , singing aloud with the mixture of their musical instruments ; so as not the temple only , but the heaven rings again ; and even in thy daily sacrifices , each morning and evening , i find an heavenly mirth ; music , if not so loud , yet no less sweet , and delicate ; no fewer than twelve Levites Might be standing upon the stage every day singing a divine ditty over thy sacrifice ; psalteries not fewer than two , nor more than six ; pipes , not fewer than two , nor more than twelve ; trumpets two at the least , and but one cymbal ; so proportioned by the Masters of thy chore , as those that meant to take the heart through the ear : i find where thy holy servants , David , Solomon , Hezekiah , ( Doubtless by thy gracious direction , yea , by thy direct command * ) both appointed , and made use of these melodious services ; i do not find where thou hast forbidden them : this i am sure of , since thou art still and ever the same , under both law and gospel , that thou both requirest , and delightest in the cheerful devotions of thy servants ; if we have not the same sounds with thy legal worshippers , yet we should still have the same affections . As they Might not wait upon thee , sorrowful ; so it is not for us to praise thee with drooping and dejected spirits . Oh God , do thou quicken my spiritual dulness in thy holy service ; and when i come to celebrate thy great name , while the song is in my mouth , let my heart be the stage , wherein trumpets and psalteries , and harps shall sound forth thy praise . 

Soliloq . Lxxvii . Blemishes of the holy function . 

I cannot but bless myself at the sight of that strange kind of curiosity , which is reported to have been used in the choice of those , who were of old admitted to serve at the altar ; if Levi must be singled out from all Israel , yet thousands must be refused of the tribe of Levi : we are told , that , notwithstanding that privilege of blood , no less than an hundred and forty blemishes Might exclude a man from this sacred ministration ; whereof nineteen in the eyes , nine in the ears , twenty in the feet ; such an holy niceness there was in the election of the legal priesthood , that , if there were not found an exact symmetry of all parts of the body , & not comeliness only , but a perfection of outward form in those levitical candidates , they Might by no means be allowed to serve in the sanctuary ; they Might have place in some out-roomes , and cleave wood for the altar ; and Might claim a portion in the holy things ; but they Might not meddle with the sacred utensils , nor set foot upon the floor of the holy place . It was thy charge , oh God , that those sons of Aaron , which drew near to thee , should be void of blemish ; thou , which wouldst have the beasts of thy sacrifice free from bodily imperfection , wouldst much more have thy sacrificers so : the generality of the command was thine ; the particularities of the numbers are traditional : and well Might the care of these outward observations agree with the pedagogy of that law , which consisted in external rites ; but we well know , it was the inward purity of the heart , and integrity of an unspotted life , that thou meantest to aim at , under the figure of these bodily perfections , which , if it were wanting , it was not a skin-deep beauty , and exquisiteness of shape , that could give a son of Aaron an allowed access to thine altar : Hophni and Phinehas , the ill sons of good Eli , were outwardly blemishlesse , else they had not been capable of so holy a•… attendance ; but their insolences and beastliness made them more loathsome to thee , than if they had been lepers , or monsters of outward deformity : and can we think that thou hast less regard to the purity of the Evangelical ministry , than thou formerly hadst of the legal ? Can we think the spiritual blemishes of thine immediate servants under the gospel , can be a less eyesore to thee , than the external blemishes of thy priesthood under the law ? Oh that my head were waters , and mine eyes a fountain of tears , that i Might weep night and day for the enormities of those , who profess to wait on thy Evangelical sanctuary ? My sorrow and piety cannot but bewail them to thee , though my charity forbids me to blazon them to the world . oh thou , that art as the refiners fire , and the fuller's soap , do thou purify all the sons of thy spiritual Levi : do thou purge them as gold and silver , that they May offer unto the Lord an offering of righteousness ; then shall the offerings of our Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant to the Lord , as in the days of old , and as in former years . 

Soliloq . Lxxviii . The blessed reward . 

When Paulinus came first into this island , to preach the gospel , to our then-pagan ancestors , King Edwin thought good to consult with his priests , and nobles , whether it were best to give any entertainment to the Christian religion , which was by that stranger preached , and recommended to his persons . 

Up starts one Coifi , the archpriest of those heathen idols , and freely says ; there is no virtue or goodness , oh King , in this religion , which we have hitherto embraced ; there is none of all thy subjects , that hath more studiously addicted himself to the service and worship of our gods , than myself ; yet i am sure there are many that have prospered better , and have received more favours from thee , than i have done ; and if our gods could do any thing , they would rather have been beneficent to me , that have most carefully served them : it remains then , that if these new doctrines , which are preached to us , be found upon examination , to be better , and more available , that without all delay we do readily receive , and welcome them . Thus spoke a true idols priest , that knew no ell whereby to measure religion , but profit ; no proof of a just cause , but success ; no conviction of injustice , but miscarriage . Yea , even thine altars , oh righteous God , were never quit of some such mercenary attendants , who seek for only gain in godliness : if the Queen of heaven afford them better penny worths and more plenty than the King of heaven , she shall have their cakes , and their incense , and their hearts to boot . I know thee , oh Lord , to be a munificent rewarder of all that serve thee ; yet if thou shouldst give me no wages , i will serve thee ; if thou shouldst pay me with hunger and stripes , and prisons , and death , i will serve thee . Away base thoughts of earthly remuneration , i will honour and serve thee , oh God , for thine own sake , for thy services sake ; yet i have no reason not to regard thine infinite bounty ; it is no less than a crown that thou hast promised me ; and that i shall humbly aspire unto , and expect from thee , not as in the way of my merit , but of thy mere mercy ; my service is free in a zealous and absolute consecration to thee , thy hand is more free in my so gracious retribution : if thou be pleased to give thy servant such a weight of glory , the glory of that gift is thine : my service is out of my just duty , thy reward is of thy grace , and divine beneficence . Do thou give me to do what thou bidst me , and then deal with me as thou wilt . As the glory of thy name is the drift of all my actions , so the glory that thou givest me cannot but redound to the glory of thine infinite mercy . Blessed be thy name in what thou givest , while thou makest me blessed in what i receive from thee . 

Soliloq . Lxxix . Presages of judgement . 

Seldom ever do we read of any great mutation in church or state , which is not ushered in , with some strange prodigies ; either raining of blood , or apparitions of comets , or airy armies fighting in the clouds , or sea-monsters appearing , or monstrous births of men , or beasts , or bloody springs breaking out , or direful noises heard ; or some such like uncouth premonitors ; which the great and holy God sends purposely to awaken our security , and to prepare us either for expectation , or prevention of judgements ; wherein , the mercy of God marvellously magnifies itself towards sinful mankind , that he wills not to surprise us with unwarned evils , but would have his punishments anticipated by a seasonable repentance : but of all the foretokens of thy fearfullest plagues prepared for any nation , oh God , there is none so certain , as the prodigious sins of the persons committed with an high hand against heaven , against so clear a light , so powerful convictions . The monstrous and unmatchable heresies , the hellish blasphemies , the brutish incests , the savage murders , the horrible sacrileges , perjuries , sorceries of any persons , can be no other than the professed harbingers of vengeance ; these are our showers of blood ; these are our ill-boding comet ; these are our mishapen births ; which an easy augury Might well construe to portend our threatened destruction . 

the prophet did not more certainly foretell , when he heard of an hand-broad cloud arising from the sea , that a vehement rain was coming , than God's seers Might foreknow , when they saw this dark cloud of our sins mounting up towards heaven , that a tempest of judgement must necessarily follow . 

But , oh thou god of infinite mercy and compassion , look down from heaven upon us , and behold us from the habitation of thy holiness : where is thy zeal , and thy strength , the sounding of thy bowels , and of thy mercies towards us ? Are they restrained ? If so , it is but just ; for surely we are a sinful nation , a persons laden with iniquity : we have seen our tokens , and have felt thy hand ; yet we have not turned to thee from our evil ways : to us therefore justly belongeth confusion of faces , because we have sinned against thee : but to thee , oh Lord our God , belong mercies and forgivenesses , though we have rebelled against thee ; oh spare , spare the remnant of thy persons : let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy chosen inheritance . oh my God , hear the prayer of thy servant , and his supplications , and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate : oh Lord hear , oh Lord forgive , oh Lord hearken , and defer not for thine own sake , oh my God . 

Soliloq . Lxxx . Unwearied motion , and rest eternal . 

I see thy heavens , oh God , move about continually , and are never weary of their revolution ; whereas all sublunary creatures are soon tired with their motions , and seek for ease , in their intermissions : even so , oh my soul , the nearer thou growest to celestial , the more constant shall thy courses be , and the freer from that lassitude that hangs upon thine earthly part . As it is now with me , thou seest , i soon find an unavoidable defatigation in all things . 

I am weary of labour , and , when that is done , i am no less weary of doing nothing ; weary of the day , and more weary of the night ; weary of all postures ; weary of all places ; weary of any one ( If never so pleasing ) employment ; weary , even of varieties ; weary of those , which some men call , recreations ; weary of those ( Wherein i find most delight ) my studies . But , oh my soul , if thou be once soundly heavenized in thy thoughts , and affections , it shall be otherwise with thee ; then thou shalt be ever ( Like this firmament ) most happily restless ; thou shalt then find ever work enough to contemplate that infinite deity , who dwells in the light inaccessible ; to see ( With ravishment of spirit ) thy dear saviour in his glorified humanity , adored by all the powers of heaven ; to view the blessed orders of that celestial hierarchy , attending upon the throne of majesty ; to behold , and admire the unspeakable , and incomprehensible glory of the saints : these are objects , with the sight whereof thine eye shall never be satisfied , much less cloyed : besides that the hopes and desires of enjoying so great felicity , and the care of so composing thyself , as that thou Mayest be ever readily addressed for the fruition of it , shall wholly take thee up , with such contentment , that all earthly pleasures shall be no better than torments in comparison thereof . Oh , then my soul , since ( As a spark of that heavenly fire ) thou canst never be but in motion , fix here above , where thy movings can be no other than pleasing , and beatifical . 

And as thou , oh my God , hast a double heaven , a lower heaven for motion , and an empyreal heaven for rest ; one , patent to the eye , the other visible to our faith : so let my soul take part with them both ; let it ever be moving towards thee , and in thee , ( Like this visible heaven ) and ( Since the end of all motion is rest ) let it ever rest with thee , in that invisible region of glory . So let it move ever to thee while i am here , that it May ever rest with thee in thine eternal glory hereafter . Amen . 

Finis . 

The souls farewell to earth , and approaches to heaven . 

By j.h. b.n.  

The souls farewell to earth , and approaches to heaven . 

Sect. i.  

Be thou ever , oh my soul , holily ambitious ; always aspiring towards thine heaven ; not entertaining any thought that makes not towards blessedness : for this cause therefore put thyself upon thy wings , and leave the earth below thee ; and when thou art advanced above this inferior world , look down upon this globe of wretched mortality , and despise what thou wast , and hadst ; and think with thyself : there was i not a sojourner , so much , as a prisoner , for some tedious years ; there have i been thus long tugging with my miseries , with my sins ; there have my treacherous senses betrayed me to infinite evils both done and suffered : how have i been there tormented with the sense of others wickedness , but more of my own ? What insolence did i see in men of power ? What rage in men of blood ? What gross superstition in the ignorant ? What abominable sacrilege in those that would be zealous ? What drunken revelings , what sodomitical filthiness , what hellish profanations in Atheous ruffians ? What perfidiousness in friendship , what cozenage in contracts , what cruelty in revenges ; shortly , what an hell upon earth ? Farewell then sinful world , whose favours have been no other than snares , and whose frowns no less than torments : farewell for ever ; for , if my flesh cannot yet clear itself of thee , yet my spirit shall ever know thee at a distance ; and behold thee no otherwise than the escaped mariner looks back upon the rock whereon he was lately split . Let thy bewitched clients adore thee for a deity , all the homage thou shalt receive from me shall be no other than defiance , and if thy glorious shows have deluded the eyes of credulous spectators , i know thee for an impostor : deceive henceforth those that trust thee , for me , i am out of the reach of thy fraud , out of the power of thy malice . 

Thus do thou , oh my soul , when thou art raised up to this height of thy fixed contemplation , cast down thine eyes contemptuously upon the region o• thy former miseries , and be sure ever to keep up in a constant ascent towards blessedness ; not suffering thyself to stoop any more upon these earthly vanities : for , tell me seriously , when the world was disposed to court thee most of all , what did it yield thee but unsound joys sauced with a deep anguish of spirit ; false hopes shutting up in an heart-breaking disappointment ; windy proffers mocking thee with sudden retractions ; bitter pills in sugar ; poison in a golden cup . It showed thee perhaps stately palaces , but stuffed with cares ; fair and populous cities , but full of toil and tumult ; flourishing churches , but annoyed with schism , and sacrilege ; rich treasures , but kept by ill spirits ; pleasing beauties , but baited with temptation ; glorious titles , but surcharged with pride ; goodly semblances with rotten insides ; in short , death disguised with pleasures and profits . 

If therefore heretofore thy unexperience have suffered thy feathers to be belimed with these earthly entanglements , yet now , that thou hast happily cast those plumes , and quit thyself of these miserable encumbrances ; thou Mayest soar aloft above the sphere of mortality ; and be still towering up towards thine heaven ; and as those that have ascended to the top of some Athos or Tenariffe see all things below them in the valleys small , and scarce , in their diminution , discernible ; so shall all earthly objects in thy spiritual exaltation seem unto thee ; either thou shalt not see them at all , or at least so lessened , as that they have to thee quite lost all the proportion of their former dimensions . 

Sect. ii  

It will not be long , oh my soul , ere thou shalt absolutely leave the world in the place of thine habitation , being carried up by the blessed angels to thy thy rest and glory ; but in the mean time , thou must resolve to leave it in thy thoughts , and affections : thou Mayst have power over these even before the hour of thy separation ; and these rightly disposed have power to exempt thee beforehand from the interests of this inferior world , and to advance thine approaches to that world of the blessed . While thou art confined to this clay , there is naturally a luggage of carnality that hangs heavy upon thee , and sways thee down to the earth , not suffering thee to mount upward to that bliss whereto thou aspirest ; this must be shaken off , if thou wouldst attain to any capacity of happiness ; even in this sense , flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God : it behoves thee to be , so far as this composition will admit , spirituallized , ere thou canst hope to attain to any degree of blessedness . 

Thy conjunction with the body doth necessarily clog thee with an irrational part , which will unavoidably force upon thee some operations of its own ; and thy senses will be interposing themselves in all thy intellectual employments , proffering thee the service of their guidance in all thy proceedings : but if thou lov'st eternity of blessedness , shake them off as importunate suitors ; gather up thyself into thine own regenerated powers , and do thy work without , and above them . It is enough that thou hast at first taken some hint from them of what concerns thee ; as for the rest , cast them off as unnecessary , and impertinent ; the prosecution whereof is too high , and too internal for them to intermeddle with : thou hast now divine and heavenly things in chase , whereof there cannot be the least sent in any of these earthly faculties . Divest thyself therefore ( What thou possibly Mayest ) of all materiality both of objects , and apprehensions ; and let thy pure , renewed , and illuminated intellect work only upon matter spiritual , and celestial ; and above all , propose unto thyself , and dwell upon that purest , perfectest , simplest , blessedest object , the glorious and incomprehensible deity : there thou shalt find more than enough to take up thy thoughts to all eternity . Be thou , oh my soul , ever swallowed up in the consideration of that infinite self-being essence , whom all create spirits are not capable sufficiently to admire : behold and never cease wondering at the majesty of his glory . Thy bodily eyes dazzle at the sight of the sun , but if there were as many suns as there are stars in the firmament of heaven , their united splendour were but darkness to their all-glorious creator : thou canst not yet hope to see him as he is : but lo thou beholdest where he dwells in light inaccessible ; the sight of whose very outward verge is enough to put thee into a perpetual ecstasy . It is not for thee as yet to strive to enter within the veil ; thine eyes May not be free where the angels hide their faces ; what thou want'st in sight , oh my soul , supply in wonder . Never any mortal man , oh God , durst sue to see thy face , save that one entire servant of thine , whose face thy conference had made shining and radiant ; but even he ( Though enured to thy presence ) was not capable to behold such glory , and live : far be it from me , oh Lord , to presume so high ; only let me see thee as thou hast bidden me ; and but so , as not to behold thee ( After thy gracious revelation ) were my sin : let me see , even in this distance , some glimmering of thy divine power , wisdom , justice , mercy , truth , providence , and let me bless and adore thee in what i see . 

Sect. iii  

Oh the infiniteness of thine almighty power , which thou not haste , but art , beyond the possibility of all limitations of objects or thoughts : in us , poor finite creatures , our power comes short of our will ; many things we fain would do , but cannot ; and great pity it were that there should not be such a restraint upon our unruly appetites ; which would otherwise work out the destruction both of others , and ourselves . But , oh God , thy power is beyond thy will ; thou canst do more than thou wilt : thou couldst have made more worlds when thou mad'st this one ; and even this one , which thou hast made , Lord , how glorious a one it is : lo , there needs no other demonstration of thine omnipotence . Oh what an heaven is this which thou hast canopied over our heads ? how immensely capacious ? how admirably beautiful ? how bestudded with goodly globes of light ? Some one whereof hath in it such unspeakable glory , as that there have not wanted nations , ( And those not of the savagest ) which have misworshipped it for their god : and if thou hadst made but one of these in thy firmament , thy workmanship had been above our wonder ; for even this had surpassed the whole frame of this lower world ; but now as their quality strives with their greatness , so their magnitude strives with their number , which of them shall more magnify the praise of their almighty creator ; and these three are no less than matched by the constant regularity of the perpetual motion of those mighty bodies ; which having walked their daily rounds about the world above this five thousand six hundred and sixty years , yet are so ordered by thy inviolable decree , that they have not varied one inch from their appointed line , but keep their due course and just distance each from other : although not fixed in any solid orb , but moving singly in a thin and yielding sky , to the very same point whence they set forth . And if the bodily and visible part of thine heavenly host , oh God , be thus unconceivably glorious , where shall we find room to wonder at those spiritual and living powers which inhabit those celestial mansions , and attend upon the throne of thy majesty : the thousand thousands of thy blessed angels , archangels , cherubin , Seraphin , thrones , principalities , dominions , which in thy presence enjoy a bliss next to infinite ? any one of which if we could see him , were enough to kill us with his glory : not one of those million of mighty spirits , but were able to destroy a world : oh then how infinitely transcendent is that power of thine , which hast both create all this heavenly hierarchy , and so movest in them , that only in and by thee they are thus potent . 

Yea , Lord , let me but cast mine eyes down to this earth i tread upon , and view thy wonders in the deep , how manifestly do these proclaim thy divine omnipotence ? When i see this vast globe of earth , and waters , dreadfully hanging in the midst of a liquid air , upheld by nothing but by the powerful word ; when i see the rage of the swelling waves ( Naturally higher than the shores they beat upon ) restrained to their bounds by thine overruling command : when i see the earth beautifully garnished with marvelous variety of trees , herbs , flowers ; richly stuffed with precious metals , stones , minerals : when i see ( Besides a world of men ) the numberless choice and differences of the substance , forms , colours , dispositions , of beasts , fowls , fishes , wherewith these lower elements are peopled , how can i be but dissolved into wonder of thine almighty power ? 

Sect. iv.  

Neither is thy power , oh God , either more , or more thyself than thy wisdom , which is no less essential to thee , than infinite . What have we to do , silly and shallow wretches , with that incomprehensible wisdom which is intrinsical to thy divine nature ; the body of that sun is not for our weak eyes to behold : it is enough for me if i can but see some rays of that heavenly light which shines forth so gloriously upon thy creature : in the framing and governing whereof , whether thy power or wisdom did and do more exhibit itself , thou only canst judge . Oh the divine architecture of this goodly fabric of heaven , and earth , raised out of nothing to this admirable perfection ! What stupendous artifice of composition is here ! What exquisite symmetry of parts , what exact order of degrees , what marvelous analogy betwixt beasts , fishes , plants , the natives of both elements ! Oh what a comprehensive reach is this of thine omniscience , which at once in one act beholdest all the actions and events of all the creatures that were , are , or shall be in this large universe ? What a contrivance of thine eternal counsel , which hast most wisely and holily ordered how to dispose of every creature thou hast made , according to the pleasure of thy most just will ? What a sway of providence is this that governs the world ? overruling the highest , and stooping to the meanest piece of thy creation ? concurring with , and actuating the motions and operations of all second causes of whatsoever is done in heaven , or in earth ? Yea , Lord , how wonderful are those irradiations of knowledge and wisdom , which thou hast beamed forth upon thine intelligent creatures , both angels and men ? As for those celestial spirits which see thy face continually , it is no marvel if they be illuminated in a degree far above human apprehension ; but that the rational soul of man , even in this woeful pilgrimage below , notwithstanding the opacity of that earth wherewith it is encompassed , should be so far enlightened , as that it is able to know all the motions of the heavens , the magnitudes and distances of stars , the natures , properties , influences of the planets , the instant of the eclipses , conjunctions and several aspects of those celestial bodies ; that it can discover the secret treasures of earth and sea ; and knows to unlock all the close cabinets both of art and nature ; oh God , what is this but some little gleam of that pure and glorious light , which breaks forth from thine infiniteness upon thy creature : yet were the knowledge of all men on earth , and all the angels in heaven , multiplied a thousand fold , how unable were it being united together , to reach unto the height of thy divine counsels , to fathom the bottom of thy most wise and holy decrees ? so as they must be forced to cry out with that saint of thine , who was rapt into the third heaven , oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God how unsearchable are his judgements , and his ways past finding out ! 

Sect. v.  

But with what a trembling adoration , oh my soul , must thou needs look upon the infinite justice of thy god ; whose inviolable rule is to render to every man according to his works . Alas , the little good thou wert able to do , hath been allayed with so many , and great imperfections , that it can expect no retribution but displeasure ; and for the many evils whereof thou art guilty , what canst thou look for but the wages of sin , death ? not that temporary , and natural only , which is but a separation of thee , a while , from thy load of earth ; but the spiritual and eternal separation from the presence of thy God , whose very want is the height of torments . Lo , whatever become of thee , God must be himself : in vain shouldst thou hope that for thyself he will abate aught of his blessed essence , of his sacred attributes : that righteous doom must stand , the soul that sins shall die : hell claims his due ; justice must be satisfied ; where art thou now , oh my soul ? what canst thou now make account of but to despair and die ? surely , in thyself , thou art lost : there is no way with thee but utter perdition . But look up , oh soul , look up above the hills whence cometh thy salvation ; see the heavens opening upon thee ; see what reviving , and comfortable rays of grace and mercy shine forth unto thee from that excellent glory ; and out of that heavenly light hear the voice of thy blessed saviour , saying to thee , oh Israel , thou hast destroyed thyself , but in me is thy help . Even so , oh Jesu , in thee , only in thee is my help : wretched man that i am ; in myself i stand utterly forfeited to death and hell : it is thou that hast redeemed me with no less ransom than thy precious blood . Death was owing by me , by thee it was paid for me , so as now my debt is fully discharged , and my soul clearly acquitted : who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect ? it is God that justifieth ; who is he that condemneth ? It is Christ that died , yea rather that is risen again . Lo now the rigor of thine inviolable justice is taken off by thine infinite mercy ; the sum that i could never pay , is by the power of that faith which thou hast wrought in me , set off to my all-sufficient surety , & by thy divine goodness graciously accepted as mine ; i have paid it in him , he hath paid it for me ; thy justice is satisfied , thy debtor freed , and thy mercy magnified . 

Sect vi . 

There are no bounds to be set unto thy thoughts , oh my soul , since whatsoever thy God either is , or hath done comes within thy prospect : there , besides the great work of his creation , thou Mayest dwell upon the no less almighty work of his administration of this universal world , whereof the preservation and government is no less wonderful than the frame ; there thou shalt see the marvelous subordination of creatures , some made to rule , others to obey ; the powerful influences of the celestial bodies upon the inferior ; the continual transmutation of elements , forsaking their own places and natures to serve the whole ; forms dying , matter perpetual ; all things maintained by a friendly discord of humours , out of which they are raised ; the circular revolution of fashions , occurrences , events ; the different and opposite dispositions of men overruled to such a temper ; that yet government is continue in the hands of few , society and commerce with all : shortly , all creatures while they do either naturally , or voluntarily act their own part , doing unawares the will of their creator . 

But that which May justly challenge thy longer stay , and greater wonder , is the more-than-transcendent work of man's redemption ; the mysteries whereof the holy angels have desired to look into , but could never yet sufficiently conceive or admire : that the son of God , the Lord of glory , coeternal , coequal to his father , God blessed for ever , should take upon him an estate lower than their own ; should clothe his deity with the rags of our flesh ; should stoop to weak and miserable manhood , and in that low and despicable condition , should submit himself to hunger , thirst , weariness , temptation of devils , despite of men , to the cruelty of tormentors , to agonies of soul , to the pangs of a bitter , ignominious , cursed death , to the sense of his father's wrath for us wretched sinners , that had made ourselves the worst of creatures , enemies to God , slaves to Satan , is above the reach of all finite apprehension . Oh never-to-bee-enough-magnified mercy ! thou didst not , oh saviour , when thou sawest mankind utterly lost , and forlorn , content thyself to send down one of thy cherubin , or Seraphin , or some other of thy heavenly angels to undertake the great work of our deliverance ( As well knowing that task too high for any create power ) but wouldst , out of thine infinite love and compassion , vouchsafe , so to abase thy blessed self , as to descend from the throne of thy celestial glory to this dungeon of earth ; and not leaving what thou hadst , and what thou wast , to assume what thou hadst not , man ; and to disparage thyself by being one of us , that we Might become like unto thee , coheirs of thy glory and blessedness . Thou that art the eternal son of God , wouldst condescend so low , as to be man ; that we who are worms and no men Might be advanced to be the sons of God ; thou wouldst be a servant , that we Might reign ; thou wouldst expose thyself to the shame and disgrace of thy vile creatures here , that thou Mightst raise us up to the height of heavenly honour with thee our God , and thy holy angels ; thou wouldst die for a while , that we Might live eternally . 

Pause here a while , oh my soul , and do not wish to change thy thoughts ; neither earth nor heaven can yield thee any of higher concernment , of greater comfort : only withal , behold the glorious person , of that thy blessed mediator , after his victories over death and hell , sitting triumphant in all the majesty of heaven , adored by all those million of celestial spirits , in his glorified humanity ; and ( What thou Mayst ) enjoy the vision of him by faith , till thou shalt be everlastingly blessed with a clear , and present intuition . Long after that day ; and be ever careful in the mean time to make thyself ready for so infinite an happiness . 

Sect. vii . 

And now , oh my soul , having left below thee all the trivial vanities of earth ; and fixed thyself ( So far as thy weak eyes will allow thee ) upon thy god , and saviour , in his almighty works , and most glorious attributes , it will be time for thee ( And will not a little conduce to thy further address towards blessedness ) to fasten thyself upon the sight of the happy estate of the saints above , who are gone before thee to their bliss , and have ( Through God's mercy ) comfortably obtained that which thou aspirest unto : thou that wert guided by their example , be likewise heartened by their success : thou art yet a traveller , they comprehensors ; thou art panting towards that rest which they most happily enjoy ; thou art sweeting under the cross , while they sit crowned in an heavenly magnificence . See the place wherein they are , the heaven of heavens , the paradise of God : infinitely resplendent , infinitely delectable ; such as no eye can behold , and not be blessed : shouldst thou set thy tabernacle in the midst of the sun , thou couldst not but be encompassed with marvelous light ; yet even there it would be but as midnight with thee in comparison of those irradiations of glory which shine forth above in that empyreal region ; for thy God is the sun there : by how much therefore those divine rays of his exceed the brightest beams of his creature ; so much doth the beauty of that heaven of the blessed surpass the create light of this inferior & starry firmament . Even the very place contributes not a little to our joy , or misery ; it is hard to be merry in a goal ; and the great Persian monarch thought it very improper for a courtier to be of a sad countenance within the verge of so great a royalty . The very devils conceive horror at the apprehension of the place of their torment , and can beseech the overruling power of thy saviour not to command them to go out into the deep . No man can be so insensate to think there can be more dreadfulness in the place of those infernal tortures , than there is pleasure and joy in the height of that sphere of blessedness ; sith we know we have to do with a God that delights more in the prosperity of his saints , than in the cruciation , and howling of his enemies . How canst thou then , oh my soul , be but wholly taken up with the sight of that celestial Jerusalem , the beauteous city of thy God , the blessed mansions of glorified spirits ? Surely , if earth could have yielded any thing more fair , and estimable than gold , pearls , precious stones , it should have been borrowed to resemble these supernal habitations : but , alas , the lustre of these base materials doth but darken the resplendence of those divine excellencies . With what contempt now , dost thou look down upon those muddy foundations of earth , which the low spirits of worldlings are wont to admire ? and how feelingly dost thou bless and emulate the spirits of just men made perfect , who are honoured with so blissful an habitation . 

But what were the place , oh my soul , how goodly & glorious soever in itself , if it were not for the presence of him whose being there makes it heaven ? Lo there the throne of that heavenly majesty , which filling and comprehending the large circumference of this whole , both lower and superior world , yet there keeps and manifests his state , with the infinite magnificence of the King of eternal glory : there he in an ineffable manner communicates himself to blessed spirits , both angels and men : and that very vision is no less to them than beatifical : surely , were the place a thousand degrees lower in beauty and perfection than it is , yet that presence would render it celestial ; the residence of the King was wont to turn the meanest village or castle , into a court : the sweet singer of Israel saw this of old , and could say , in thy presence is the fullness of joy ; and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore . It is not so in these earthly and finite excellencies : a man May see mountains of treasure , and be never a whit the richer ; and May be the witness and agent too in another's honour ( As Haman was of mardochees ) and be so much more miserable ; or May view the pomp and splendour of mighty Princes , and be yet still a beggar : but the infinite graces of that heavenly King are so communicative , that no man can see him but must be transformed into the likeness of his glory . 

Sect. viii . 

Even thy weak and imperfect vision of such heavenly objects , oh my soul , are enough to lay a foundation of thy blessedness ; and how can there choose but be raised thence as a further degree towards it , a sweet complacency of heart in an appropriation of what thou seest ; without which nothing can make thee happy ? Let the sun shine never so bright , what is this to thee if thou be blind ? Be the God of heaven never so glorious , yet if he be not thy god : be the saviour of the world never so merciful , yet if he be not merciful to thee : be the heaven never so full of beauty and majesty , yet if thou have not thy portion in that inheritance of the saints in light ; so far will it be from yielding thee comfort , that it will make a further addition to thy torment . What an aggravation of misery shall it be to those that were children of the kingdom , that from that outer darkness whereinto they are cast , they shall see aliens come from the East and West , and sit down with Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven ? Cease not then , oh my soul , till by a sure and undefaisible application , thou hast brought all these home to thyself ; and canst look upon the great God of heaven , the gracious redeemer of the world , the glory of that celestial paradise as thine own . Let it be thy bold ambition , and holy curiosity to find thy name enrolled in that eternal register of heaven : and if there be any one room in the many mansions of that celestial Jerusalem , lower and less resplendent than other , thither do thou find thyself ( Through the great mercy of thy God ) happily designed . It must be the work of thy faith that must do it : that divine grace is it , the power whereof can either fetch down heaven to thee , or carry thee beforehand up to thy heaven ; and not affix thee only to thy God , and saviour , but unite thee to him , and ( Which is yet more ) ascertain thee of so blessed an union . 

Neither can it be but that from this sense of appropriation there must necessarily follow a marvellous contentment , and complacency in the assurance , of so happy an interest . Lord , how do i see poor worldlings please themselves in the conceit of their miserable proprieties ? one thinks , is not this my great Babylon which i have built ? Another , are not these my rich mines ? Another , is not this my royal and adored magnificence ? And how are those unstable minds transported with the opinion of these great ( But indeed worthless ) peculiarities ; which after some little time moulder with them into dust ? How canst thou then , be , but pleasingly affected , oh my soul , with the comfortable sense of having a God , a saviour , an heaven of thine own ? For in these spiritual and heavenly felicities , our right is not partial and divided , as it useth to be in secular inheritances ; so as that every one hath his share distinguished from the rest , and parceled out of the whole ; but here each one hath all ; and this blessed patrimony is so communicated to all saints , as that the whole is the propriety of every one 

Upon the assurance therefore of thy God's gracious promises made to unsavoury true believer , find thou thyself happily seized of both the King , and kingdom of heaven , so far as thy faith can as yet feoff thee in both ; and delight thyself above all things in these unfailing pledges of thine instant blessedness , and say with the holy mother of thy redeemer , my soul doth magnify the Lord ; and my spirit rejoiceth in God my saviour . 

Sect. ix. . 

From this feeling complacency in the owning of thy right to glory and happiness , there cannot but arise a longing desire of the full possession thereof : for thou canst not so little love thyself , as what thou knowest thou hast a just title unto , and withal apprehendest to be infinitely pleasing and beneficial , not to wish that thou Mayst freely enjoy it . If thou have tasted how sweet the Lord is , thou canst not but long for more of him , yea , for all : it is no otherwise even in carnal delights , the degustation whereof is wont to draw on the heart to a more eager appetition ; much more in spiritual ; the pleasures whereof as they are more pure , so they are of the heavenly-minded with far greater ardency of spirit affected . The covetous man's heart is in his bags ; what he hath doth but augment his lust of more ; and the having of more doth not satiate but enlarge his desires ; he that loveth silver , shall not be satisfied with silver ; nor he that loveth abundance with increase : but these celestial riches are so much more allective , as they are more excellent , than those which are delved out of the bowels of the earth . Oh my soul , thou hast through the favour of thy God sipped some little of the cup of immortality , and tasted of that heavenly manna the food of angels ; and canst thou take up with these slight touches of blessedness ? Thou hast ( Though most unworthy ) the honour to be contracted to thy saviour here below ; thou knowest the voice of his spouse , draw me and we shall run after thee ; stay me with flagons , comfort me with apples , for i am sick of love ; make haste my beloved , and be thou like to a roe , or to a young hart upon the mountains of spices : where is thy love if thou have not fervent desires of a perpetual enjoyment ? if thou do not earnestly wish for a full consummation of that heavenly match ? Oh my Lord and saviour , as i am not worthy to love thee ; so i were not able to love thee ( How amiable soever ) but by thee . Oh thou that hast begun to kindle this fire of heavenly love in me , raise thou it up to a perfect flame ; make me not only sick of thy love , but ready and desirous to die for thee , that i May enjoy thee : oh let me not endure that any worldly heart should be more enamoured of these earthly beauties , which are but varnished rottenness , than i am of thee who art of absolute and infinite perfections ; and bestowest them in being loved . 

Oh when shall the day be , wherein thou wilt make up these blessed nuptials ; and endow me with a full participation of that glory wherewith thou art invested , from , and to all eternity ? whereto have all thy sweet favours , and gracious love-tokens tended , but to this issue of blessedness ? Oh do thou crown all thy mercies in me , and me with immortality . 

Sect. x.  

Upon this desire of fruition , ( If thou wouldst be truly happy ) there must follow a constant prosecution of that desire : for if thy wishes be never so fervent , yet if they be only volatile and transient , they shall be able to avail thee little ; slight and flickering motions of good , if they be not followed with due endeavours , sort to no effect . Content not thyself therefore , oh my soul , that thou hast entertained into thyself some affective thoughts of thy beatitude ; but settle thyself in firm resolutions to pursue , and perpetuate them : let them not call in as strangers , but dwell in thee as inmates , never to be , by any secular occasions , dislodged . These morning dews of holy dispositions , which are ready to be exhaled with every gleam of worldly prosperity , as they find little acceptance from God , so they are able to afford small comfort to thee ; as whose condition is such , that they leave thee more disconsolate in their vanishing , than they yielded thee pleasure in their momentany continuance . Be thou able to say with holy David , my heart is fixed , oh God , my heart is fixed ; and then thou Mayest well add , i will sing and give praise ; otherwise thy distracted thoughts will admit no cause of sound joy . In this case it false out with thee , oh my soul , as with some fond child , who eagerly following a bee in hope of her bag , sees a gay butterfly cross his way ; and thereupon leaves his first chase , and runs after those painted wings ; but in that pursuit seeing a bird fly close by him , he leaves the fly in hope of a better purchase ; but in the mean time is disappointed of all , and catcheth nothing . It mainly behoves thee therefore to keep up thy cogitations and affections close to these heavenly objects ; and to check them whensoever thou perceivest an inclination to their wand'ring : like as the careful huntsman , when he finds his hound offering to follow after a new game , rates him off ; and holds him to his first sent . Whither are ye straying , oh my thoughts ? what means this sinful and lossefull inconstancy ? Can ye be happier in a change ? Is there any thing in this miserable world that can be worthy to carry you away from the hopes and affectations of blessedness ? Have ye not full often complained of the worthlessness , and satiety of these poor vanities here below ? Have ye not found their promises false , their performances unsatisfactory , their disappointment irksome ? Away than ye frivolous temptations , and solicit those minds that are low , and empty like yourselves : for me , i disdain your motions ; and being taken up with higher employments , scorn to descend to your base suggestions , which tend to nothing but mere earthliness . 

But ( As there is no fire which will not go out if it be not fed ) it cannot be enough that thou hast entertained these gracious resolutions , unless thou do also supply and nourish them with holy meditations , devout prayers , continual ejaculations , and the due frequentation of all the holy ordinances of thy god ; without which , if they shall languish through thy neglect , thou shalt find double more work , and difficulty , in reviving them , than there could have been in maintaining , and upholding them in their former vigour . Be not therefore wanting to thyself in the perpetual exercise and improvement of all those holy means , that May further and perfect these heavenly longings after salvation ; thy god shall not be wanting to thee in blessing thee with an answerable success . 

Sect. xi . 

It is the just praise of the marvelous bounty of thy God , oh my soul , that he will fulfil the desires of them that fear him . If therefore thou canst hunger and thirst , after righteousness , if thy heart can yearn after heaven , he shall be sure to satisfy thee with goodness ; and not only shall bring thee home at the last to that land of promised blessedness , but in the mean time also put thee into an inchoate fruition of happiness ; which is the next degree of thine ascent to heaven . 

That which is complete May be the surest rule of knowing and judging of that which is imperfect : wherein doth the perfection of heavenly bliss consist , but in a perpetual enjoying the presence of God , in a clear vision of the divine essence , in a perfect union with God , and an eternal participation of his life and glory ? Now as grace is glory begun , and glory is grace consummate , so dost thou , oh my soul ( Being wrought to it by the power of the spirit of thy God ) even in this life ( How weakly soever ) enter upon all these acts and privileges of beatitude : even here below thou art never out of the presence of thy god ; and that presence can never be other than glorious ; and that it is not beatifical here , is not out of any deficiency in it , but in thine own miserable incapacity ; who , while thou abidest , in this vale of tears , and art clogged with this flesh , art no fit subject of so happy a condition . Yea that blessed presence is ever comfortably acknowledged by thee , and enjoyed with such contentment and pleasure that thou wouldst not part with it for a world , and that thou justly accountest all earthly delights but mere vexations to that alone ; whom have i in heaven but thee ? and what do i desire on earth in comparison of thee ? a Balaam could say ( How truly soever ) i shall see him , but not now ; i shall behold him , but not nigh : but , Lord , i see thee even now ; i behold thee so nigh me , that i live in thee , and would rather die than live without thee ; i see thee , though weakly and dimly , yet truly and really ; i see thee as my God all-sufficient , as my powerful creator , my merciful redeemer , my gracious comforter ; i see thee the living God , the father of lights , the god of spirits , dwelling in light inaccessible , animating , filling , comprehending this glorious world ; and do awfully adore thine infiniteness . Neither do i look at thee with a trembling astonishment , as some dreadful stranger , or terrible avenger ; but i behold thy majesty so graciously complying with my wretchedness , that thou admittest me to a blessed union with thee : i take thee at thy word , oh dear saviour , even that sweet word of impetration , which thou wert pleased to utter unto thy coeternal father , immediately before thy meritorious passion , i pray not for these alone ; but for them also which shall believe on me through their word ; that they all May be one , as thou , father , art in me , and i in thee ; that they May be one in us : and the glory which thou gavest me , i have given them , that they May be one even as we are one ; i in them , and thou in me , that they May be made perfect in one ; and that the world May know that thou hast sent me , and hast loved them , as thou hast loved me . I know thou couldst not but be heard in all that thou prayedest ; and therefore i take what thou suedst for , as done . Lord , i do believe in thee , unite thou me to thee : make me one spirit with thee : it is no presumption to sue and hope for what thou hast prayed for , and promised to perform : oh make me according to the capability of my weak humanity , partaker of thy divine nature ; vouchsafe to allow me , even me poor wretched soul , to say of thee , i am my beloved's , and my beloved is mine : and by virtue of this indissoluble union , why shouldst thou not , oh my soul , find thyself endowed with a blessed participation of that heavenly life and glory , which is in , and with him ? In that thou art united to thy body , thou impartest to it vegetation , sense , motion ; and givest it a share in the exercise of all thy noble faculties : how much more entire and beneficial is the spiritual union of thy God , and thee ? Alas , that bond of natural conjunction is easily dissolved by ten thousand ways of death : this heavenly knot is so fast tied , that all the powers of hell cannot unloose it ; and the blessings communicated to thee by this divine match are so much more excellent , as the infinite giver of them is above thy meanness : lo , now thou art actually interessed in all that thy god is , or hath ; his kingdom is thine , his glory is thine to all eternity . 

Sect. xii . 

And what now can follow , oh my soul , upon the apprehension of thus enjoying the presence of thy God , and the vision of so blessed an object ; and thine union with him , and participation of him , but a sensible ravishment of spirit with a joy unspeakable , and full of glory ? Heretofore , if some great friend should have brought me to the court , and having showed me the splendour and magnificence of that seat of majesty , should have brought me in to the sight of his royal person ; and should have procured me not only a familiar conference with him , but the entire affection of a favourite ; and from thence there should have been heaped upon me , titles of honour , and large revenues , and ( Yet higher ) a consociation of princely dignity : how should i have been transported with the sense of so eminent an advancement ? how great and happy should i have seemed , not more in others eyes , than in my own ? what big thoughts had hereupon swollen up my heart in the days of my vanity ? But , alas , what poor things are these in comparison of those heavenly promotions ? I Might have been brought into the stateliest court of this world ; and have been honoured not only with the presence , but the highest favours , of the best and greatest of Kings , and yet have been most miserable : yea , which of those monarchs , that have the command , and dispensation of all greatness , can secure himself from the saddest infelicities ? But these spiritual prerogatives are above the reach of all possible misery ; and can , and do put thee ( In some degree ) into an unfailing possession both real and personal of eternal blessedness . I cannot wonder that Peeter when with the other two disciple upon mount Tabor , he saw the glorious transfiguration of my saviour , was out of himself for the time , and knew not what he said ; yet , as not thinking himself and his partners , any otherways concerned , than in the sight of so heavenly a vision , he mentions only three tabernacles , for Christ , Moses , Elias , none for themselves ; it was enough for him , if without doors he Might be still blessed with such a prospect : but how had he been wrapped from himself , if he had found himself taken into the society of this wondrous transformation , and interessed in the communion of this glory ? 

Thy renovation , and the power of thy faith , oh my soul , puts thee into that happy condition ; thou art spiritually transfigured into the similitude of thy blessed saviour , shining with his righteousness and holiness ; so as he is glorified in thee , and thou in him ; glorified , not in the fullness of that perfection which will be , but in the pledge and earnest of what shall , and must be hereafter . Oh then , with what unspeakable joy , and jubilation , dost thou entertain thy happiness ? How canst thou contain thyself any longer within these bounds of my flesh , when thou feelest thyself thus initiated into glory ? Art thou in heaven and know'st it not ? Know'st thou not that he who is within the entry , or behind the screen , is as truly within the house , as he that walks in the hall , or sits in the parlour ? And canst thou pretend to be within the verge of heaven , and not rejoice ? What is that makes heaven , but joy and felicity ? thy very thought cannot separate these two , no more than it can sever the sun and light : for both these are equally the originals and fountains of light and joy ; from whence they both flow , and in which both are complete ; there is no light which is not derived from the sun ; no true joy but from heaven : as therefore the nearer to the body of the sun , the more light and heat , so the nearer to heaven , the more excess of joy . And certainly , oh my soul , there is nothing but infidelity , can keep thee from an exuberance of joy , and delight in the apprehension of heaven . 

Can the weary traveller after he hath measured many tedious miles , and passed many dangers both by sea and land , and felt the harsh entertainments of a stranger , choose but rejoice to draw near in his return to a rich , and pleasant home ? Can the ward , after an hard pupillage choose but rejoice that the day is coming wherein he shall freely enjoy all his lordly revenues and royalties ? Can a Joseph choose but find himself inwardly joyed , when out of the dungeon he shall be called up , not to liberty only , but to honour ; and shall be arrayed with a vesture of fine linen ; and graced with Pharaoh's ring , and chain ; and set in his second chariot , and in the next chair to the throne of Egypt ? And canst thou apprehend thyself now approaching to the glory of the heaven of heavens , a place and state of so infinite contentment and happiness , and not be ecstasied with joy ? There , there shalt thou , oh my soul , enjoy a perfect rest from all thy toils , cares , fears ; there shalt thou find a true vital life , free from all the encumbrances of thy miserable pilgrimage ; free from the dangers of either sins , or temptations ; free from all anxiety and distraction ; free from all sorrow , pain , perturbation ; free from all the possibility of change , or death : a life wherein there is nothing but pure and perfect pleasure ; nothing but perpetual melody of angels and saints , singing sweet allelujahs to their God ; a life which the most glorious deity both gives , and is : a life wherein thou hast the full fruition of the ever-blessed godhead , the continual society of the celestial spirits , the blissful presence of the glorified humanity of thy dear saviour : a life wherein thou hast ever consort with the glorious company of the apostles , the goodly fellowship of the patriarchs , and prophets , the noble army of martyrs and confessors , the celestial synod of all the holy fathers , and illuminated doctors of the church ; shortly , the blessed assembly of all the faithful professors of the name of the Lord Jesus , that having finished their course , sit now shining in their promised glory : see there that yet-unapproachable light , that divine magnificence of the heavenly King ; see that resplendent crown of righteousness , which decks the heads of every of those saints , and is ready to be set on thine , when thou hast happily overcome those spiritual powers , wherewith thou art still conflicting ; see the joyful triumphs of these exsulting victors ; see the measures of their glory different , yet all full , and the least unmeasurable ; lastly , see all this happiness not limited to thousands , nor yet million of years , but commeasured by no less than eternity . And now , my soul , if thou have received the infallible engagement of thy God , [ in that having believed , thou art sealed with that holy spirit of promise , which is the earnest of thine inheritance , until the full redemption of thy purchased possession ] if , through his infinite mercy , thou be now upon the entering into that blessed place and state of immortality , forbear ( If thou canst ) to be raised above thyself with the joy of the holy ghost , to be enlarged towards thy god with a joy unspeakable and glorious : see if thou canst now breathe forth any thing but praises to thy God , and songs of rejoicing ; bearing evermore a part in that heavenly ditty of the angels ; blessing , and glory , and wisdom , and thanksgiving , and honour , and power , and Might be unto our god for ever , and ever . 

Sect xiii . 

And now what remains , oh my soul , but that thou do humbly and faithfully wait at the gate of heaven for an happy entrance ( At the good pleasure of thy God ) into those everlasting mansions . I confess , should thy merits be weighed in the balance of a rigorous justice , another place ( Which i cannot mention without horror ) were more fit for thee , more due to thee : for , alas , thou hast been above measure sinful , and thou knowest the wages of sin , death . but the god of my mercy hath prevented thee with infinite compassion : and in the multitudes of his tender mercies hath not only delivered thee from the nethermost hell , but hath also vouchsafed to translate thee to the kingdom of his dear son ; in him thou hast boldness of access to the throne of grace ; thou , who in thyself art worthy to be a child of wrath , art in him adopted to be a coheir of glory ; and hast the livery and seisin given thee beforehand of a blessed possession ; the full estating wherein i do in all humble awfulness attend . All the few days therefore of my appointed time will i wait at the threshold of grace until my changing come ; with a trembling joy , with a longing patience , with a comfortable hope . Only , Lord , i know there is something to be done , ere i can enter ; i must die , ere i can be capable to enjoy that blessed life with thee : one stroke of thine angel must be endured in my passage into thy paradise ; and lo , here i am before thee ready to embrace the condition ; even , when thou pleasest , let me bleed once to be ever happy . Thou hast , after a weary walk through this roaring wilderness , vouchsafed to call up thy servant to mount Nebo , and from thence aloof off , to show me the land of promise , a land that flows with milk and honey ; do thou but say , die thou on this hill , with this prospect in mine eye , and do thou mercifully take my soul from me , who gavest it to me ; and dispose of it where thou wilt in that region of immortality . Amen , amen . Come Lord Jesu , come quickly . 

Behold , Lord , i have by thy providence dwelled in this house of clay more than double the time wherein thou wert pleased to sojourn upon earth ; yet i May well say with thine holy patriarch , few and evil have been the days of the years of my pilgrimage : few in number , evil in condition : few in themselves , but none at all to thee , with whom a thousand years are but as one day . But had they been double to the age of Methusaleh , could they have been so much as a minute to eternity ? Yea , what were they to me ( Now that they are past ) but as a tale that is told and forgotten . 

Neither yet have they been so few , as evil . Lord what troubles and sorrows hast thou let me see , both my own and others ? What vicissitudes of sickness and health ? What ebbs and flows of condition ? How many successions and changes of Princes both at home , and abroad ? What turnings of times ? What alterations of governments ? What shiftings and downfalls of favourites ? What ruins and desolations of kingdoms ? What sacking of cities ? What havocks of war ? What frenzies of rebellions ? What underminings of treachery ? What cruelties and barbarisms in revenges ? What anguish in the oppressed and tormented ? What agonies in temptations ? what pangs in dying ? These i have seen , and in these i have suffered : and now , Lord , how willing i am to change time for eternity , the evils of earth , for the joys of heaven , misery for happiness , a dying life for immortality ? 

Even so , Lord Jesus , 

Take what thou hast bought ; receive my soul to thy mercy , and crown it with thy glory . Amen . Amen . Amen . 

Finis . 

A catalogue of the several books written by the author in and since his retiring , namely , 

1.  The devout soul , and free prisoner . 
2.  The remedy of discontentment , or , a treatise of contentation in whatsoever condition . 
3.  The peacemaker , laying forth the right way of peace in matter of religion . 
4.  The balm of Gilead , or , comforts for the distressed ; both moral and divine . 
5.  Christ mystical , or , the blessed union of Christ and his members . 

To which is added , 

An holy rapture , or , a pathetical meditation of the love of Christ . also , the Christian laid forth in his whole disposition and carriage . 


6.  A modest offer , tendered to the assembly of divines at Westminster . 
7.  Select thoughts in two decades , with the breathing of the devout soul . 
8.  pax terris . 
9  Imposition of hands . 
10.  The revelation unrevealed — concerning , the thousand years' reign of the saints with Christ on earth . 
11.  Satan's fiery darts quenched , or , temptations repelled ; in 3 decades . 
12.  Resolutions and decisions of divers practical cases of conscience ; in 4 decades . 

Select thoughts , one century , with the breathing of the devout soul . 


13.  susurrium cum deo , &c.  this present tract , newly reprinted . 




1 cor. 13.12 . euthym in praefat.  Psalmorum . psal. 90.9 . gen. 5.2.24.27 . 2 cor. 5.1 . exo. 16.13 . Deut. 8.3 . Exo. 16.31 . num. 11.6 . heb. 1. ult. psal. 119.136 . 1 kin. 19  luk. 12.49 . mat. 6.23 . John 1.9 . psa. 119.105 . Clement . de gestis petri . 1 tim. 4.8 . 1 cor. 9.27 . rom. 8.18 . 1 sam. 30.6  Cato . 1 thes. 5.23 . hos. 9 ▪ 7.  esa. 44.16 . exod. 32.4  2 kin. 20.23 . 1 kin. 18.28 . 2 kin. 23.11 . cicer. de natur. deorum , initio . heart bleedings for professors abominations ; set forth under the hands of 16 churches of Christ baptised into the name of Christ . p. 5.6 , 7. &c.  joh. 18.28 . mat. 23.25  2 Chro ▪ 30.18 , 19 ▪  rom. 7.19 ▪  mat. 6.19 . pro. 13.12 . 1 cor. 15.31 . 2 tim. 4.7 . 1 tim. 6.2 . eph. 6.16 . 1 ioh. 5.4 . psal. 71.9 . psal. 27.10 . 1 kin. 22.24 . Job 19.14 . psal. 41.9 . psal. 55.13 , 14.  psal. 61.7 . deut. 6.11 , 12.  deut. 32.15 . 1 sam. 24.5  iam. 1.17 . iam. 1.5 . prov. 13.7 . rev. 3.17 . psal. 81.16 . 1 cor. 10.  heb. 9.12 . Eph. 1.7 . rom. 5.9 . col. 1.20 . heb. 9.22 . heb. 13.12 , 14. 1 pet. 1.2 . heb. 9.15 . 1 sam. 14.29 . pro. 14.23 . pro. 25.16 . eph. 1.14 . mat. 24.35  colos. 3.  psal. 119.  psal. 12.14 . mat. 8.24 , 25 , &c. mat. 4.37 . Luk. 8.13 . psa. 141.8 . gen. 4 14.  cant. 5.2.3.4.5.6.7.8 . eccle. 7.14 . 1 cor. 12.  luk. 15.10 . psal. 5.8 . eccl. 9.1 , 2.  mat. 23.37 . ier. 8.7 . * oecolampad . in locum ierem.  eccl. 3.1 . psal. 55.17 . act. 2.1 . 1 thes. 5.17 . rom. 8.26 . Aeneas sylv. de reb. gest ▪ alph.  2 chro. 29.25 , 28. 2 chro. 5.12 , 13.  Mamonides in cle. hamikdash . c. 3 * Chro ▪ 29.25 , 28.  Maymon . in giath hamikdash . ier. 9.1 . mal. 3.2 . mal. 3.4 . Beda eccles. Hister . l. 2. cap. 13.  ier. 44.17 , 18.  1 King , 18.44 . esa. 63.15 . esa. 1.4 . dan. 9.8 . 9  dan. 9.16 . 17.  dan. 9.19 . 

rom. 11.33  Ose . 13.9 . rom. 8.33 . 34.  1 pet. 1.12 . Bernard . serm. de passione domini . rev. 21.23  nehe. 2.2 . luk. 8.31 . heb. 12.23  mat. 8.11 . Dan , 4.30 . luk. 1.46.47 . eccl. 5.10 . cant. 1.4 . 2.5 . 8.14 . psal. 57.7 . psal. 145.19  psal. 73.24 . num. 24.17 . ioh. 17.20 . 21.  22.  23.  1 cor. 6.17 . 2 pet. 1.4 . can. 6.3 . mar. 9.6 . Luk. 9.33 . rom. 12.2 eph. 4.24 . ioh. 17.10 . 2 thes. 1.12 . eph. 1.13 . 14.  1 thes. 1.6 . rev. 7.12 . psal. 59.10 . psal. 86.13 . col. 1.13 . gen. 47.9 . 




















