HOLY Observations . 

LIB . I  

ALSO Some few of DAVID'S Psalms Metaphrased , for a taste of the rest . 

By JOS . HALL. . 

AT LONDON Printed by H. L. for Samuel Macham : and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard , at the sign of the Bullhead . 1607.  

To the right Honourable , EDWARD Lord Denny , Baron of Waltham , my most bountiful Patron , Grace & PEACE . 

Right Honourable : 

This advantage a scholar hath above others , that he cannot be idle , and that he can work without instruments ▪ For , the mind enured to contemplation will set itself on work , when other occasions fail : and hath no more power not to study then the eye which is open hath , not to see something ; in which business it carries about his own Library , neither can complain to want books while it enjoyeth itself . 

I could not then neglect the commodity of this plentiful leisure in my so easy attendance here ; but ( though besides my course , and without the help of others writings ) must needs busy myself in such thoughts as I have here given account of , to your Lordship : such , as I hope will not be unprofitable nor unwelcome to their Patron , to their Readers . I send them forth from hence , under your honourable name ; to show you that no absence , no employment can make me forget my due respect to your Lordship : to whom ( next under my gracious Master ) I have deservedly bequeathed myself and my endeavours . Your goodness hath not wont to magnify itself more in giving them in receiving such like holy presents : the knowledge whereof hath entitled you to more labours of this nature ( if I have numbered aright ) then any of your Peers . I misdoubt not either your acceptation , or their use . That GOD , who hath above all his other favours given your Lordship even in these careless times , an heart truly religious , give you an happy increase of all his heavenly graces by my unworthy service . To his gracious care I daily commend your Lordship with my Honourable Lady ; wishing you both , all that little joy earth can afford you , and fullness of glory above . 

Non-such . july 3  Your Lo : Most humbly devoted for ever , In all duty and observance , jos . Hall.  

HOLY Observations . 

AS there is nothing sooner dry than a tear ; so there is nothing sooner out of season them worldly sorrow : which if it be fresh and still bleeding , finds some to comfort and pity it ; If stale and skinned over with time , is rather entertained with smiles then commiseration : But the sorrow of repentance comes never out of time . All times are alike unto that eternity , whereto we make our spiritual moans : That which is past , that which is future , are both present with him . It is neither weak nor uncomely , for an old man to weep for the sins of his youth . Those tears can never be shed either too soon , or too late . 

2 

Some men live to be their own executors for their good name ; which they see ( not honestly ) buried , before themselves die . Some other of great place , and ill desert , part with their good name & breath , at once . There is scarce a vicious man whose name is not rotten before his carcase . Contrarily , the good man's name is oft times that heyr to his life ; either born after the death of the parent , for that envy would not suffer it to come forth before : or perhaps so well grown up in his life time , that the hope thereof is the staff of his age , and joy of his death . A wicked man's name may be feared awhile ; soon after , it is either forgotten or cursed : The good man's either sleepeth with his body in peace , or waketh ( as his soul ) in glory . 

3 

oft times those which show much valour while there is equal possibility of life , when they see a present necessity of death , are found most shamefully timorous . Their courage was before grounded upon hope : that , cut off , leaves them at once desperate and cowardly : whereas men of feebler spirits meet more cheerfully with death ; because though their courage be less , yet their expectation was more . 

4 

I have seldom seen the son of an excellent and famous man , excellent : But , that an ill bird hath an ill egg , is not rare ; children possessing as the bodily diseases , so the vices of their Parents . Virtue is not propagated : Vice is ; even in them which have it not reigning in themselves : The grain is sown pure , but comes up with chaff & husk . Hast thou a good son ? He is Gods , not thine . Is he evil ? Nothing but his sin is thine : Help by thy prayers and endeavours to take away that which thou hast given him , and to obtain from God that which thou hast , & canst not give : Else thou mayst name him a possession ; but thou shalt find him a loss . 

5 

These things be comely & pleasant to see ; & worthy of honour from the beholder : A young Saint , an old Martyr , a religious soldier , a conscionable Statesman , a great man courteous ▪ a learned man humble , a silent woman , a child understanding the eye of his Parent , a merry companion without vanity , a friend not changed with honour , a sick man cheerful , a soul departing with comfort and assurance . 

6 

I have oft observed in merry meetings solemnly made , that somewhat hath fallen out cross , either in the time , or immediately upon it ; to season ( as I think ) our immoderation in desiring or enjoying our friends : and again , eventes suspected have proved ever best ; God herein blessing our awful submission with good success . In all these human things , indifferency is safe . Let thy doubts be ever equal to thy desires : so thy disappointment shall not be grievous , because thy expectation was not peremptory . 

7 

You shall rarely find a man eminent in sundry faculties of mind , or sundry manuarie trades . If his memory be excellent , his fantasy is but dull : if his fancy be busy and quick , his judgement is but shallow : If his judgement be deep , his uttrance is harsh : which also holds no less in the activities of the hand . And , if it hap that one man be quallifyed with skill of diverse trades , and practise this variety , you shall seldom find such one thriving in his estate : with spiritual gifts it is otherwise ; which are so chained together , that who excels in one hath some eminency in more , yea in all . Look upon faith : she is attended with a Bevie of Graces : He that believes , cannot but have hope : if hope , patience . He that believes and hopes must needs find joy in God : if joy , love of God ; he that loves God , cannot but love his brother : his love to God breeds piety & care to please , sorrow for offending , fear to offend . His love to men , fidelity & Christian beneficence : vices are seldom single ; but virtues go ever in troops : they go so thick , that sometimes some are hid in the crowd ; which yet are , but appear not : They may be shut out from sight ; they cannot be severed . 

8 

The Heaven ever moves , and yet is the place of our rest : Earth ever rests , and yet is the place of our trouble : Outward motion can be no enemy to inward rest ; as outward rest may well stand with inward unquietness . 

9 

None live so ill , but they content themselves in somewhat : Even the beggar likes the smell of his dish . It is a rare evil that hath not something to sweeten it , either in sense or in hope : Otherwise men would grow desperate , mutinous , envious of others , weary of themselves . The better that thing is wherein we place our comfort , the happier we live : and the more we love good things , the better they are to us. The Worldlings comfort , though it be good to him because he love's it ; yet because it is not absolutely and eternal good , it fails him : wherein the Christian hath just advantage of him , while he hath all the same causes of joy refined and exalted ; besides more and higher , which the other knows not of : The worldling laughs more , but the Christian is more delighted . These two are easily severed : thou seest a goodly picture , or an heap of thy gold : thou laughest not , yet thy delight is more than in a jest that shaketh thy spleen : As grief , so joy is not less when it is least expressed . 

10 

I have seen the worst natures , & most depraved minds not affecting all sins : but still some they have condemned in others , and abhorred in themselves : One exclaims on covetousness , yet he can too well abide riotous good fellowship : Another inveighes against drunkenness and excess , not caring how cruel he be in usury and oppression . One cannot endure a rough and quarrellous disposition , yet gives himself over to unclean & lascivious courses : Another hate's all wrongs , save wrong to God. One is a civil Atheist , another a religious Usurer , a third an honest Drunkarde , a fourth an unchaste justicer , a fifth a chaste Quarrel . I know not whether every devil excel in all sins : I am sure some of them have denomination from some sins more special . Let no man applaud himself for those sins he wanteth , but condemn himself rather for that sin he hath . thou censurest another man's sin , he thine ; GOD curseth both . 

11 

Gold is the heaviest of all metals : It is no wonder that the rich man is usually carried downward to his place . It is hard for the soul , clogged with many weights , to ascend to heaven : It must be a strong and nimble soul that can carry up itself , and such a load ; yet Adam and Noah flew up thither with the double Monarchy of the worlds the patriarchs with much wealth , maoie holy Kings with massy Crowns and Sceptres . The burden of covetous desires is more heavy to an empty soul than much treasure to the full . Our affections give poise or lightness to earthly things . Either abate of thy load if thou find it too pressing , whether by having less , or loving less : or add to thy strength & activity , that thou mayst yet ascend . It is more commendable , by how much more hard , to climb into heaven with a burden . 

12 

A Christian in all his ways must have three guides : Truth , Charity , Wisdom : Truth to go before him ; Charity & Wisdom on either hand . If any of the three be absent , he walks amiss . I have seen some do hurt by following a truth uncharitably : And others while they would salve up an error with love , have failed in their wisdom , and offended against justice . A charitable untruth , and an uncharitable truth , and an unwise menaging of truth or love , are all to be carefully avoided of him that would go with a right foot in the narrow way . 

13 

GOD brought man forth at first , not into a Wilderness , but a Garden ; yet than he expected best service of him . I never find that he delights in the misery , but in the prosperity of his servants . Cheerfulnes pleases him better than a dejected and dull heaviness of heart . If we can be good with pleasure he grudgeth not our joy : If not , it is best to stint ourselves ; not for that these comforts are not good , but because our hearts are evil : falting not their nature but our use and corruption . 

14 

The homeliest service that we do in an honest calling , though it be but to plow , or dig , if done in obedience , & conscience of God's commandment , is crowned with an ample reward ; whereas the best works for their kind ( preaching , praying , offering evangelical sacrifices ) if without respect of God's injunction and glory , are loaded with curses : God loveth adverbs ; & cares not how good , but how well . 

15 

The golden infancy of some hath proceeded to a brazen youth , and ended in a leaden age : All human maturities have their period : Only grace hath none . I durst never lay too much hope on the forward beginnings of wit and memory , which have been applauded in children . I knew they could but attain their vigour ; and that if sooner , no whit the better : for the earlier is their perfection of wisdom , the longer shall be their witless age . Seasonableness is best in all these things which have their ripeness and decay : We can never hope too much of the timely blossoms of grace , whose spring is perpetual , and whose harvest begins with our end . 

16 

A man must give thanks for somewhat which he may not pray for . It hath been said of Courtiers , that they must receive injuries & give thanks . God cannot wrong his , but he will cross them ▪ those crosses are beneficial ; all benefits challenge thanks : Yet I have read that God's children have with condition prayed against them , never for them . In good things we pray both for them , and their good use : in evil , for their good use , not themselves : Yet , we must give thanks for both . For , there is no evil of pain which God doth not ; nothing that God doth , is not good ; no good thing but is worthy of thanks . 

17 

One half of the world knows not how the other lives : and therefore the better sort pity not the distressed ; and the miserable envy not those which fare better , because they know it not . Each man judges of others condition , by his own . The worst sort would be too much discontented , if they saw how far more pleasant the life of others is : And if the better sort ( such we call those which are greater ) could look down to the infinite miseries of inferiors , it would make them either miserable in compassion , or proud in conceit . It is good , sometimes , for the delicate rich man to look into the poor man's cupboard : and seeing God in mercy gives him not to know their sorrow by experience , to know it yet in speculation : This shall teach him more thanks to God , more mercy to men , more contentment in himself . 

18 

Such as a man's prayer is for another , it shall be in time of his extremity for himself : For , though he love himself more than others , yet his apprehension of God is alike for both . Such as his prayer is in a former extremity , it shall be also in death : this way , we may have experience even of a thing future : If God have been far off from thee in a fit of thine ordinary sickness , fear lest he will not be nearer thee in thy last : what differs that from this , but in time ? Correct thy dulness upon former proofs : or else at last thy devotion shall want life before thy body . 

19 

Those that come to their meat as to a medicine ( as Augustine reports of himself ) live in an austere & Christian temper , & shall be sure not to joy too much in the creature , nor to abuse themselves : Those , that come to their medicine as to meat , shall be sure to live miserable and die soon : To come to meat as meat , if without a gluttonous appetite & palate , is allowed to Christians : To come to meat as to a sacrifice unto the belly , is a most base & brutish idolatry . 

20 

The worst that ever were , even Cain and judas have had some ●autorss that have honoured them for Saints : And the Serpent that beguiled our first Parents hath in that name had divine honour and thanks . Never any man trod so perilous and deep steps , but some have followed , and admired him . Each master of heresy hath found some clients ; even he , that taught all men's opinions were true : Again , no man hath been so exquisite , but some have detracted from him , even in those qualities which have seemed most worthy of wonder to others . A man shall be sure to be backed by some , either in good or evil , and by some shouldered in both . It is good for a man not to stand upon his Abbetters , but his quarrel ; and not to depend upon others , but himself . 

21 

We see thousands of Creatures die for our use , and never do so much as pity them : why do we think much to die once for God ? They are not ours so much as we are his ; nor our pleasure so much to us as his glory to him : their lives are lost to us , ours but changed to him . 

22 

Much ornament is no good sign : Painting of the face argues an ill complexion of body , a worse mind . Truth , hath a face both honest and comely , and looks best in her own colours : but , above all , divine truth is most fair , and most scorneth to borrow beauty of man's wit or tongue : she loveth to come forth in her native grace like a Princely Matron ; and count's it the greatest indignity , to be dallied with as a wanton Strumpet : She looks to command reverence , not pleasure : she would be kneeled to , not laughed at ; To prank her up in vain dresses and fashions , or to sport with her in a light and youthful manner , is most abhorring from her nature : they know her not , that give her such entertainment ; and shall first know her angry , when they do know her . Again she would be plain , but not base , not sluttish : She would be clad not garishly , but not in rags : She likes as little to be set out by a base foil , as to seem credited with gay colours . It is no small wisdom to know her just guise , but more to follow it ; and so to keep the mean , that while we please her , we discontent not the beholders . 

23 

In worldly carriage so much is a man made of , as he takes upon himself : but such is God's blessing upon true humility , that it still procureth reverence . I never saw Christian less honoured for a wise neglect of himself : If our dejection proceed from the conscience of our want , it is possible we should be as little esteemed of others , as of ourselves : But if we have true graces , and prise them not at the highest ; others shall value both them in us , and us for them , and with usury give us that honour we with held modestly from ourselves . 

24 

He , that takes his full liberty in what he may , shall repent him : how much more in what he should not ? I never read of Christian that repented him of too little worldly delight . The surest course I have still found in all earthly pleasures , To rise with an appetite , and to be satisfied with a little . 

25 

There is a time when Kings go not forth to warfare : Our spiritual war admits no intermission : it knows no night , no winter , abides no peace , no truce . This calls us not into a garrison , where we may have ease and respite , but into pitched fields continually : we see our enemies in the face always , and are always seen and assaulted : ever resisting , ever defending , receiving and returning blows . If either we be negligent or weary , we die : what other hope is their while one fights , & the other stands still ? We can never have safet●● & peace , but in victory . There must our resistance be courageous and constant , whe●● both yielding is death , and all treatyes of peace mortal . 

26 

Neutrality in things good or evil is both odious , and prejudicial ; but in matters of an indifferent nature is safe and commendable : Herein taking of parts , maketh sides , and breaketh unity . In an unjust cause of separation , he that favoureth both parts , may perhaps have least love of either side ; but hath most charity in himself . 

27 

Nothing is more absurd than that Epicurean resolution , Let us eat and drink , to morrow we shall die : As if we were made only for the paunch , & lived that we might live : yet there was never any natural man found savour in that meat which he knew should be his last : whereas they should say ; Let us fast and pray , to morrow we shall die : For , to what purpose is the body strengthened that it may perish ? whose greater strength makes our death more violent . no man bestows a costly roof on a ruinous tenement : That man's end is easy & happy whom death finds with a weak body , and a strong soul . 

28 

Sometimes , even things in themselves naturally good , are to be refused for those , which ( being evil ) may be an occasion to a greater good . Life is in itself good , and death-evill : Else David , Elias and many excellent Martyrs would not have fled , to hold life , and avoid death ; Nor Ezekiah have prayed for it , nor our Saviour have bidden us to flee for it , nor God promised it to his for a reward ; yet if in some cases we hate not life , we love not God , nor our souls . Herein , as much as in any thing , the perverseness of our nature appears , that we wish death , or love life upon wrong causes : we would live for pleasure , or we would die for pain ; job for his sores , Elias for his persecution , jonas for his gourd would presently die , and will needs outface God that it is better for him to die , then to live : wherein we are like to garrison soldiers , that while they live within safe walls , and show themselves once a day rather for ceremony & pomp , then need or danger , like warrefare well enough ; but if once called forth to the field , they wish themselves at home . 

29 

Not only the least but the worst is ever in the bottom : what should God do with the dregss of our age ? when sin will admit thee his Client no longer , than God shall be beholden to thee for thy service : Thus is God dealt-with in all other offerings ; The worst & least sheaf must be Gods Tenth : The deformedst or simplest of our Children must be God's Ministers : The uncleanlyest and most careless house must be God's Temple ; the idlest and sleepyest hours of the day must be reserved for our prayers ; The worst part of our age for Devotion . We would have God give us still of the best , and are ready to murmur at every little evil he sends us : yet , nothing is bad enough for him , of whom we receive all . Nature condemns this inequality : and tells us , that he which is the author of good , should have the best ; and he which gives all should have his choice . 

30 

When we go about an evil business , it is strange how ready the devil is to set us forward ; how careful that we should want no furtherances : So that if a man would be lewdly witty , he shall be sure to be furnished with store of profane jests , wherein a loose heart hath double advantage of the conscionable . If he would be voluptuous , he shall want neither objects nor opportunities . The currant passage of ill enterprises is so far from giving cause of encouragement , that it should justly fright a man to look back to the author ; and to consider that he therefore goes fast , because the Devil drives him . 

31 

In the choice of companions for our conversation , it is good dealing with men of good natures : for , though grace exerciseth her power in bridling nature , yet ( sith we are still men , at the best ) some swinge she will have in the most mortyfied . Austerity , sullenness , or strangeness of disposition , and whatsoever qualities may make a man unsociable , cleave faster to our nature , than those which are morally evil . True Christian love may be separated from acquaintance , and acquaintance from entireness : These are not qualities to hinder our love , but our familiarity . 

32 

Ignorance as it makes bold , intruding men carelessly into unknown dangers ; so also it makes men ofttimes causelessly fearful . Herod feared Christ's coming , because he mistook it : If that Tyrant had known the manner of his spiritual regiment , he had spared both his own fright and the blood of others . And hence it is , that we fear Death , because we are not acquainted with the virtue of it . Nothing but innocence & knowledge can give sound confidence to the heart . 

33 

Where are diverse opinions , they may be all false ; there can be but one true : and that one Truth ofttimes must be fetched by piecemeal out of diverse branches of contrary opinions . For , it falls out not seldom , that Truth is through ignorance or rash vehemency scattered into sundry parts ; and , like to a little silver melted amongst the ruins of a burned house , must be tried out from heaps of much superfluous ashes . There is much pains in the search of it ; much skill in finding it : the value of it once found requytes the cost of both . 

34 

Affectation of superfluity , is in all things a sign of weakness : As , in words he that useth circumlocutions to express himself , shows want of memory , and want of proper speech : And much talk argues a brain feeble & distempered : what good can any earthly thing yield us beside his use ? and what is it but vanity to affect that which doth us no good ? and what use is in that which is superfluous ? It is a great skill to know what is enough , and great wisdom to care for no more . 

35 

Good things , which in absence were desired , now offering themselves to our presence are scarce entertained ; or at least not with our purposed cheerfulness . Christ's coming to us and our going to him are in our profession well esteemed , much wished : But when he singleth us out by a direct message of death , or by some fearful sign giveth likelihood of a present return , we are as much affected with fear , as before with desire . All changes , although to the better , are troublesome for the time , until our settling : There is no remedy hereof but inward prevention : Our mind must change , before our estate be changed . 

36 

Those are greatest enemies to religion , that are not most irreligious . Atheists , though in themselves they be the worst , yet are seldom found hot Persecuters of others : whereas those which in some one fundamental point be heretical , are commonly most violent in oppositions . One hurts by secret infection , the other by open resistance : One is careless of all truth , the other vehement for some untruth . An Atheist is worthy of more hatred , an Heretic of more fear ; both , of avoidance . 

37 

Ways if never used cannot but be fair ; if much used are made commodiously passable ; if before oft used , and now seldom , they become deep and dangerous . If the hart be not at all enured to meditation , it findeth no fault with itself ; not for that it is innocent , but secure ; If often , it findeth comfortable passage for his thoughts ; If rarely , and with intermission , tedious and troublesome . In things of this nature , we only escape complaint , if we use them either always or never . 

38 

Our sensual hand holds fast whatsoever delight it apprehendeth : our spiritual hand easily remitteth ; because appetite is stronger in us them grace : whence it is that we so hardly deliver ourselves of earthly pleasures , which we have once entertained ; and with such difficulty draw ourselves to a constant course of faith , hope , and spiritual joy , or to the renewed acts of them once intermitted . Age is naturally weak , and youth vigorous ; but in us the old man is strong , the new faint and feeble : the fault is not in grace , but in us : Faith doth not want strength , but we want faith . 

39 

It is not good in worldly estates for a man to make himself necessary . For , herupon he is both more toiled , and more suspected : but in the sacred Commonwealth of the Church , a man cannot be engaged too deeply by his service : The ambition of spiritual well-doing , breeds no danger . He that doth best , and may worst be spared , is happiest . 

40 

It was a fit comparison of worldly cares , to thorns : For , as they choke the word , so they prick our souls : Neither the word can grow up amongst them , nor the heart can rest upon them : Neither body nor soul can find ease while they are within , or close to us : Spiritual cares are as sharp ; but more profitable ; they pain us , but leave the soul better . They break our sleep , but for a sweeter rest : we are not well but either while we have them , or after we have had them . It is as impossible to have spiritual health without these , as to have bodily strength with the other . 

41 

In temporal good things , it is best to live in doubt ; not making full account of that , which we hold in so weak a tenure . In spiritual , with confidence ; not fearing that which is warranted to us by an infallible promise & sure earnest . He life's most contentedly , that is most secure for this world , most resolute for the other . 

42 

God hath in nature given every man inclinations to some one particular calling ; which if he follow , he excels ; if he cross , he proves a non-proficient , & changeable : But all men's natures are equally indisposed to grace , and to the common vocation of Christianity : we are all born heathens . To do well ; nature must in the first be observed and followed , in the other crossed and overcome . 

43 

Goodman , is a title given to the lowest ; whereas all Titles of Greatness , Worship , Honour , are observed and attributed with choice . The speech of the World betrays their mind & shows the common estimation of goodness compared with other qualities . The World therefore is an i'll Herald , and unskilful in the true styles : It were happy that goodness were so common ; and pity that it either should not stand with greatness , or not be preferred to it . 

44 

amongst all actions Satan is ever busiest in the best , and most in the best part of the best ; as in the end of Prayer when the heart should close up itself with most comfort . He never fears us , but when we are well employed : and the more likelihood he sees of our profit , the more is his envy , and labour to distract us. We should love ourselves , as much as he hate's us ; and therefore strive so much the more towards our good , as his malice striveth to interrupt it . We do nothing , if we contend not , when we are resisted . The good soul is ever in contradiction ; denying what is granted , and contending for that which is denied ; suspecting when it is gayne-saide , and fearing liberty . 

45 

God forewarns ere he try , because he would be prevented : Satan steals upon us suddenly by temptations , because he would soil us. If we relent not upon God's premonition , and meet not the lingering pace of his punishments to forestall them , he punisheth more by how much his warning was more evident and more large ; Gods trials must be met when they come : Satan's must be seen before they come ; and if we be not armed ere we be assaulted , we shall be foiled ere we can be armed . 

46 

It is not good to be continual in denunciation of judgement : The noise , to which we are accustomed ( though loud ) wakes us not ; whereas a less if unusual stirreth us : The next way to make threatenings contemned , is to make them common . It is a profitable rod that strikes sparingly , and frights somewhat oftener than it smiteth . 

47 

Want of use causeth disabilitie , and custom perfection . Those that have not used to pray in their closet , cannot pray in public , but coldly and in form . He that discontinues meditation shall be long in recovering ; whereas the man enured to these exercises ( who is not dressed till he have prayed , nor hath supped till he have meditated ) doth both these well , and with ease . He , that intermittes good duties , incurs a double loss : of the blessing that followeth good ; of the faculty of doing it . 

48 

Christianity is both an easy yoke , and an hard ; hard to take up , easy to bear when once taken . The heart requires much labour , ere it can be induced to stoop under it ; and finds as much contentment when it hath stooped . The Worldling thinks Religion servility : but , the Christian knows whose slave he was , till he entered into this service ; and that no bondage can be so ill , as freedom from these bonds . 

49 

It is a wonder how full of shifts nature is ; Ready to turn over all good purposes . If we think of death , she suggests secretly , Tush it shall not come yet : If of judgement for sin , this concerns not thee ; it shall not come at all : If of heaven and our labour to reach it ; Trouble not thyself , it will come soon enough alone : Address thyself to pray ; it is yet unseasonable , stay for a better opportunity : To give alms ; thou knowest not thy own future wants : To reprove ; what neeedest thou thrust thyself into wilful hatred ? Every good action hath his letter : He can never be good , that is not resolute . 

50 

All Arts are Maids to Divinity ; therefore they both veil to her , and do her service : and she like a grave mistress controls them at pleasure : Natural philosophy teacheth , that of nothing can be nothing made ; and , that from the privation to the habit is no return : Divinity takes her up , for these ; and , upon supernatural principles , teaches her a Creation , a Resurrection . Philosophy teaches us to follow sense , as an infallible guide ; Divinity tells her , that faith is of things not seen . Logic teaches us first to discourse , then to resolve : Divinity , to assent without arguing . Civil law teacheth , that long custom prescribeth : Divinity that old things are passed ; Moral Philosophy that tallying of injuries is justice : Divinity , that good must be returned for ill ; Policy , that better is a mischief then an inconvenience : Divinity , that we may not do evil that good may ensue . The School is well ordered , while Divinity keeps the chair : but , if any other skill usurp it , and check their mistress , there can follow nothing but confusion and Atheism . 

51 

Much difference is to be made betwixt a revolter , and a man trained up in error . A jew and an Arryan both deny Christ's deity : yet this opinion is not in both punished with bodily death . Yea , a revolt to a less error is more punishable than education in a capital heresy . Errors of judgement , though less regarded than errors of practice , yet are more pernicious : but none so deadly as theirs that once were in the truth . If truth be not sued to , it is dangerous ; but if forsaken , desperate . 

52 

It is an ill argument of a good action not well done , when we are glad that it is done . To be affected with the comfort of the conscience of well performing it , is good : but merely to rejoice that the act is over , is carnal . He never can begin cheerfully , that is glad he hath ended . 

53 

He that doth not secret service to GOD with some delight , doth but counterfeit in public . The truth of any act or passion is then best tried , when it is without witness . Openly , many sinister respects may draw from us a form of religious duties : secretly , nothing but the power of a good conscience . It is to be feared , God hath more true & devout service , in closerts , them in churches . 

54 

Words and diseases grow upon us with years . In age we talk much , because we have seen much , and soon after shall cease talking for ever : We are most diseased , because nature is weakest , and death which is near , must have harbingers : such is the old age of the World. no marvel , if this last time be full of writing , and weak discourse ; full of sects and heresies , which are the sicknesses of this great and decayed body . 

55 

The best ground untilled soon runs out into rank weeds . Such are Gods Children ; Overgrown with security ere they are aware , unless they be well exercised both with God's plough of affliction , and their own industry in meditation . A man of knowledge that is either negligent , or uncorrected , cannot but grow wild and godless . 

56 

With us vilest things are most common ; But with GOD the best things are most frequently given . Grace which is the noblest of all God's favours , is unpartially b●●●●wed upon all willing ●eceiverss ; whereas Nobility of blood and height of place , blessings of an inferior nature , are reserved for few . Herein the Christian follows his Father ; his prayers which are his richest portion he communicates to all ; his substance according to his ability , to few . 

57 

God therefore gives , because he hath given ; making his former favours , ●●●●mentss for more : Man therefore shuts his hand , because he hath opened it . There is no such way to procure more from God , as to urge him with what he hath done . All Gods blessings are profitable and excellent ; not so much in themselves , as that they are inducements to greater . 

58 

Gods immediate actions are best , at first . The frame of his creation how exquisite was it under his hand ! afterwards , blemished by our sin : man's endeavours are weak in their beginnings , and perfitter by degrees . no science , no device hath ever been perfect in his cradle ; or at once hath seen his birth and maturity : of the same nature are those actions which God worketh mediately by us according to our measure of receipt . The cause of both is , on the one side the infiniteness of his wisdom and power which cannot be corrected by any second assays : On the other , our weakness helping itself by former grounds and trials . He is an happy man that detractes nothing from God's works , and adds most to his own . 

59 

The old saying is more common than true ; that those which are in hell know no other heaven : for this makes the damned perfectly miserable , that out of their own torment , they see the felicity of the saints ; together with their impossibility of attaining it . Sight without hope of fruition is a torment alone : Those that here might see God and will not , or do see him obscurely and love him not , shall once see him with anguish of soul & not enjoy him . 

60 

Sometimes evil speeches come from good men , in their unaduisednesse ▪ and , sometimes , even the good speeches of men may proceed from an ill spirit . no confession could be better than Satan gave of Christ : It is not enough to consider what is spoken , or by whom ; but whence , & for what . The spirit is ofttimes tried by the speech : but othertimes the speech must be examined by the spirit ; and the spirit , by the rule of an higher word . 

61 

Greatness puts high thoughts , & big words , into a man ; whereas the dejected mind takes , carelessly , what offers itself . Every worldling is base-minded ; & therefore his thoughts creep still low upon the earth . The Christian both is & knows himself truly great ; and thereupon mindeth and speaketh of spiritual , immortal , glorious , heavenly things . So much as the soul stoopeth to earthly thoughts ; so much is it unregenerate . 

62 

Long acquaintance as it maketh those things which are evil , to seem less evil ; so it makes good things which at first were unpleasant , delightful . There is no evil of pain , nor no moral good action , which is not harsh at the first . Continuance of evil , which might seem to weary us , is the remedy and abatement of weariness : & the practice of good , as it profiteth , so it pleaseth . He that is a stranger to good and evil , finds both of them troublesome . GOD therefore doth well for us , while he exerciseth us with long afflictions : and we do well to ourselves while we continually busy ourselves in good exercises . 

63 

Sometimes it is well taken by men , that we humble ourselves lower than there is cause . Thy servant JACOB , saith that good Patriarch ; to his brother , to his inferior . And no less well doth God take these submiss extenuations of ourselves ; I am a worm & no man : Surely I am more foolish than a man , & have not the understanding of a man in me . But I never find , that any man bragged to GOD although in a matter of Truth , and within the compass of his desert , and was accepted . A man may be too lowly in his dealing with men , even unto contempt : with God he cannot ; but the lower he falleth , the higher is his exaltation . 

64 

The soul is fed as the body , starved with hunger as the body , requires proportionable diet and necessary variety , as the body . All ages and statures of the soul bear not the same nourishment . There is milk for spiritual infants , strong meat for the grown Christian . The spoon is fit for one , the knife for the other . The best Christian is not so grown that he need to scorn the spoon : but the weak Christian may find a strong feed dangerous . How many have been cast away with spiritual surfeits ; because being but newe-borne they have swallowed down big morselles of the highest mysteries of godliness , which they never could digest ; but together with them have cast up their proper norishment . A man must first know the power of his stomach , ere he know how with safety and profit to frequent Gods Ordinary . 

65 

It is very hard for the best man , in a sudden extremity of death , to satisfy himself in apprehending his stay , and reposing his heart upon it : for the soul is so oppressed with sudden terror , that it cannot well command itself , till it have digested an evil . It were miserable for the best Christian , if all his former prayers and meditations did not serve to aid him in his last strait , and meet together in the centre of his extremity : yielding though not sensible relief , yet secret benefit to the soul ; whereas the worldly man in this case , having not laid up for this hour , hath no comfort from God , or from others , or from himself . 

66 

All external good or evil is measured by sense : neither can we accounted that either good or ill , which doth neither actually avail , nor hurt us : spiritually this rule holds not . All our best good is insensible . For , all our future ( which is the greatest ) good , we hold only in hope ; and the present favour of God we have many times , and feel not . The stomach finds the best digestion even in sleep when we least perceive it ; and whiles we are most awake , this power worketh in us either to further strength or disease , without our knowledge of what is done within : And on the other side , that man is most dangerously sick , in whom nature decays without his feeling , without his complaint . To know ourselves happy , is good : but woe were to us Christians , if we could not be happy , and know it not . 

67 

There are none that ever did so much mischief to the Church , as those that have been excellent in wit & learning . Others may be spiteful enough , but want power to accomplish their malice . An enemy that hath both strength & craft is worthy be feared . None can sin against the Holy-ghost , but those which have had former illumination . Tell not me what parts a man hath , but what grace : honest sottishness is better than profane eminence . 

68 

The entertainment of all spiritualll events must be with fear or hope ; but , of all earthly extremities , must be with contempt or derision . For , what is terrible , is worthy of a Christians contempt ; what is pleasant , to be turned over with a scorn . The mean requires a mean affection betwixt love & hatred . We may not love them , because of their vanity : we may not hate them , because of their necessary use . It is an hard thing to be a wise host ; and to fit our entertainment to all comers : which if it be not done , the soul is soon wasted , either for want of customers , or for the misrule of ill guests . 

69 

God and man build in a contrary order . Man lays the foundation first , then adds the walls , the roof last . God began the roof first , spreading out this vault of heaven , ere he laid the base of the earth . Our thoughts must follow the order of his workmanship . Heaven must be minded first ; earth afterwards : and so much more , as it is seen more . Our meditation must herein follow our sense : A few miles give bounds to our view of earth ; whereas we may near see half the heaven at once . He that thinks most both of that which is most seen , and of that which is not seen at all , is happiest . 

70 

I have ever noted it a true sign of a false heart , To be scrupulous and nice in small matters , negligent in the main : whereas the good soul is still curious in substantial points , and not careless in things of an inferior nature ; accounting no duty so small as to be neglected , and no care great enough for principal duties : not so tithing mint and cummin , that he should forget justice and judgement ; nor yet so regarding judgement and justice , that he should contemn mint & cummin . He that thus misplaces his conscience , will be found either hypocritical or superstitious . 

71 

It argues the world full of Atheists , that those offences which may impeach human society , are entertained with an answerable hatred and rigour : Those which do immediately wrong the supreme majesty of God , are turned over with scarce so much as dislike . If we conversed with God as we do with men , his right would be at least as precious to us as our own . All that converse not with God are without God : not only those that are against God , but those that are without God are Atheists . We may be too charitable : I fear not to say , that these our last times abound with honest Atheists . 

72 

The best thing corrupted , is worst : An ill man is the worst of all creatures , an ill Christian the worst of all men , an ill professor the worst of all Christians . 

73 

Naturally life is before death , and death is only a privation of life : Spiritually it is contrary : As PAUL saith of the grain , so may we of man in the business of his Regeneration . He must die before he can live ; yet this death presupposes a life that was once , and should be . God chooses to have the difficultest , first : we must be content with the pain of dying , ere we feel the comfort of life . As we die to nature , ere we live in glory : So , we must die to sin , ere we can live to Grace . 

74 

Death did not first strike Adam the first sinful man : nor Cain the first hypocrite ; but Abel the innocent and righteous . The first soul that met with death , overcame death : the first soul that parted from earth , went to Heaven . Death argues not displeasure : because he whom God loved best , dies first ; and the murderer is punished with living . 

75 

The lives of most are misspent , only for want of a certain end of their actions . Wherein , they do as unwise Archers , shoot away their arrows they know not at what mark : They live only out of the present , not directing themselves and their proceedings to one universal scope : whence they alter upon all change of occasions , and never reach any perfection ; neither can do other but continue in uncertainty , and end in discomfort . Others aim at one certain mark , but a wrong one . Some ( though fewer ) level at the right end , but amiss . To live without one main and common end , is idleness and folly . To live to a false end is deceit and loss : True Christian wisdom both shows the end , and finds the way . And as cunning Politicss have many plots to compass one and the same design by a determined succession : so the wise Christian , failing in the means , yet still fetcheth about to his steadie end with a constant change of endeavours : Such one only lives to purpose , and at last reputes not that he hath lived . 

76 

The shipwreck of a good conscience is the casting away of all other excellencies . It is no rare thing to note the soul of a wilful sinner stripped of all her graces , and by degrees exposed to shame : so those , whom we have known admired , have fallen to be level with their fellows ; and from thence beneath them , to a mediocrity ; and afterwards to sottishness and contempt , below the vulgar . Since they have cast away the best , it is just with God to take away the worst ; and to cast off them in lesser regards , which have rejected him in greater . 

77 

It hath ever been counted more noble and successful , to set upon an open enemy in his own home , then to expect till he set upon us , whiles we make only a defensive war . This rule serves us for our last enemy Death : whence that old demand of Epicure is easily answered ; whether it be better Death should come to us , or that we should meet him in the way : meet him in our minds , ere he seize upon our bodies . Our cowardliness , our unpreparation is his advantage : whereas true boldness , in confronting him , dismays and weakens his forces . Happy is that soul that can send out the scouts of his thoughts beforehand , to discover the power of Death afar off ; and then can resolutely encounter him at unwares upon advantage : such one lives with security , dies with comfort . 

78 

Many a man sends others to heaven , and yet goes to hell himself : and not few having drawn others to hell , yet themselves return by a late repentance , to life . In a good action it is not good action , it is not good to search too deeply into the intention of the agent , but in silence to make our best benefit of the work : In an evil , it is not safe to regard the quality of the person , or his success , but to consider the action abstracted from all circumstances , in his own kind . So we shall neither neglect good deeds because they speed not well in some hands , nor affecta prosperous evil . 

78 

God doth some singular actions , wherein we cannot imitate him ; some wherein we may not ; most wherein he may and would fain be followed . He fetcheth good out of evil ; so may we turn our own & others sins to private or public good : we may not do evil for a good use ; but we must use our evil once done , to good . I hope I shall not offend , to say , that the good use which is made of sins is as gainful to God , as that which arises from good actions . Happy is that man , that can use either his good , well , or his evil . 

79 

There is no difference betwixt anger and madness , but continuance : for , raging ▪ anger is a short madness . What else argues the shaking of the hands and lips , paleness or redness , or swelling of the face , glaring of the eyes , stammering of the tongue , stamping with the feet , unsteadie motions of the whole body , rash actions which we remember not to have done , distracted and wild speeches ? and madness again is nothing but a continued rage , yea some madness rageth not : such a mild madness is more tolerable than frequent and furious anger . 

80 

Those that would keep state , must keep aloof off ; especially if their qualities be not answerable in height to their place . For , many great persons are like a well-wrought picture upon a course cloth ; which afar off shows fair , but near hand the roundness of the thread mars the good workmanship . Concealment of gifts , after some one commended act , is the best way to admiration , and secret honour : but he that would profit , must vent himself oft and liberally , and show what he is , without all private regard . As therefore , many times , honour follows modesty , unlooked for ; so , contrarily , a man may show no less pride in silence and obscurity , than others which speak and write for glory . And that other pride is so much more the worse , as it is more unprofitable : for , whereas those which put forth their gifts , benefit others while they seek themselves ; these are so wholly devoted to themselves , that their secrecy doth no good to others . 

81 

Such as a man's delights and cares are in health , such are both his thoughts and speeches commonly on his deathbed : The proud man talks of his fair suits , the glutton of his dishes , the wanton of his beastliness , the religious man of heavenly things . The tongue will hardly leave that , to which the heart is enured . If we would have good motions to visit us while we are sick , we must send for them familiarly in our health . 

82 

He is a rare man that hath not some kind of madness reigning in him : One a dull madness of melancholy , another a conceited madness of pride , another a superstitious madness of false devotion , a fourth of ambition , or covetousness , a fifth the furious madness of anger ; a sixth the laughing madness of extreme mirth , a seaventh a drunken madness , an eightth of outrageous lust , a ninth the learned madness of curiosity , a tenth the worst madness of profaneness and Atheism . It is as hard to reckon up all kinds of madnesses , as of dispositions . Some are more noted and punished than others ; for that the mad in one kind doth as much condemn another , as the sober man condemns him . Only that man is both good , and wise and happy , that is free from all kinds of frenzy . 

75 

There be some honest errors , wherewith I never found that God was offended ; That an husband should think his own wife comely , although ill-favoured in the eyes of others ; that a man should think more meanly of his own good parts then of weaker in others ; to give charitable ( though mistaken ) constructions of doubtful actions and persons ( which are the effects of natural affection , humility , love ) were never censured by God : Herein alone we err , if we err not . 

84 

no marvel if the worldling escape earthly afflictions . God corrects him not ; because he loves him not . He is base-born and begot : God will not do him the favour to whip him . The world afflicts him not ; because it loves him . For each one is indulgent to his own . God uses not the rod where he means to use the sword ; The pillory or scourge is for those malefactors which shall escape execution . 

85 

Weak stomaches which can not digest large meals , feed oft and little : For our souls , that which we want in measure , we must supply in frequency . We can never fully enough comprehend in our thoughts the joys of heaven , the meritorious sufferings of Christ , the terrors of the second death : therefore we must meditate of them often . 

86 

The same thoughts do commonly meet us in the same places ; as if we had left them there till our return . For that the mind doth secretly frame to itself me morative heads , whereby it recalls easily the same conceits : It is best to employ our mind there , where it is most fixed . Our devotion is so dull , it cannot have too many advantages . 

87 

I find but one example , in all scripture , of any bodily cure which our Saviour wrought by degrees : Only the blind man , whose weak faith craved help by others , not by himself , saw men first like trees , then in their true shape . All other miraculous cures of Christ were done at once , and perfect at first . Contrarily , I find but one example of a soul sully healed ( that is ) sanctified and glorified , both in a day ; all other by degrees and leisure . The steps of grace are soft & short . Those external miracles he wrought immediately by himself ; and therefore no marvel if they were absolute like their Author . The miraculous work of our regeneration he works together with us ; He giveth it efficacy : we give it imperfection . 

SOME few of David's Psalms Metaphrased , for a taste of the rest . 

By J. H.  

AT LONDON , Printed by H. L. for Samuel Macham . 1607.  

TO MY LOVING and learned Cousin , Mr SAMVEL BURTON , Archdeacon of Gloucester . 

Indeed , my Poetry was long sithence out of date , & yielded her place to graver studies : but whose vain would it not revive to look into these heavenly songs ? I were not worthy to be a Divine , if it should repent me to be a Poet with DAVID , after I shall have aged in the Pulpit : This work is holy and strict , & abides not any youthful or heathenish liberty ; but requires hands free from profaneness , looseness , affectation . It is a service to God and the Church by so much more carefully to be regarded , as it is more common . For , who is there that will not challenge a part in this labour ? and that shall not find himself much more affected with holy measures rightly composed ▪ Wherefore I have oft wondered , how it could be offensive to our adversaries , that these divine ditties which the spirit of GOD wrote in verse , should be sung in verse ; and that an Hebrew Poem should be made English . For , if this kind of composition had been unfit , God would never have made choice of numbers , wherein to express himself ▪ Yea , who knows not , that some other Scriptures , which the spirit hath indicted in prose , have yet been happily & with good allowance put into strict numbers ? If histories tell us of a wanton Poet of old , which lost his eyes while he went about to turn MOSES into verse ; yet every student knows with what good success and commendation NONNUS hath turned JOHN'S gospel into Greek Heroics ; And APOLLINARIUS that learned Syrian , matched with BAZIL and GREGORY ( who lived in his time ) in the terms of this equality , that BAZILS' speech was 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , but APOLLINARIES 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , wrote , as SVIDAS reports , all the Hebrew scripture in heroics , as Sozomen ( somewhat more restrainedly ) all the Archaiology of the jews , till SAULS' government , in 24. parts ; or as SOCRATES yet more particularly , all MOSES in Heroics , and all the other histories in divers metres : but how ever his other labours lie hid , his Metaphrase of the Psalms is still in our hands with the applause of all the learned : besides the labours of their own FLAMINIUS & ARIAS MONTANUS ( to seek for no more ) which have worthily bestowed themselves in this subject . Neither do I see how it can be offensive to our friends , that we should desire our english Metaphrase bettered . I say nothing to the disgrace of that we have : I know how glad our adversaries are of all such advantages ; which they are ready enough to find out without me , ever reproachefully upbraiding us with these defects . But since our whole Tralation is now universally revised ; what inconvenience or show of innovation can it bear , that the verse should accompany the prose ? especially since it is well known how rude & homely our English Poësy was in those times , compared with the present ; wherein , if ever , it seeth her full perfection . I have been solicited by some revered friends to undertake this task ; as that which seemed well to accord with the former exercises of my youth , and my present profession . The difficulties I found many , the work long & great ; yet not more painful than beneficial to God's Church . Whereto as I dare not profess any sufficiency ; so will I not deny my readiness , and utmost endeavour , if I shall be employed by Authority : wherefore , in this part , I do humbly submit myself to the grave censures of them , whose wisdom menageth these common affairs of the Church : and am ready either to stand still or proceed , as I shall see their Cloud or Fire go before or behind me . Only ( howsoever ) I shall for my true affection to the Church , wish it done by better workmen . Wherein as you approve , so further my bold but not unprofitable motion , and commend it unto greater cares : as I do you to the greatest . 

Non-such july , 3.  Your loving Kinsman , JOS . HALL. . 

Psal . 1.  In the tune of 148.  Psalms ; Give laud unto the Lord  

1 Who hath not walked astray , 
In wicked men's advice , 
Nor stood in sinner's way ; 
Nor in their companies 
That scorners are , 
As their fit mate , 
In scoffing chair , 
Hath ever sat ; 
2 But in thy laws divine , 
OH Lord sets his delight , 
And in those laws of thine 
Studies all day and night ; 
O , how that man 
Thrice blessed is ! 
And sure shall gain 
Eternal bliss . 
3 He shall be like the tree , 
Set by the water-springs , 
Which when his seasons be 
Most pleasant fruit forth-brings : 
Whose boughs so green 
Shall never fade , 
But covered been 
With comely shade . 
So , to this happy wight , 
All his designs shall thrive : 
4 Whereas the man unright , 
As chaff which winds do drive , 
With every blast 
Is tossed on high , 
Nor can at last 
In safety lie . 
5 wherefore , in that sad doom , 
They dare not rise from dust : 
Nor shall no Sinner come 
To glory of the just . 
For , God will grace 
The just-mans' way ; 
While sinners race 
Runs to decay . 
Psal . 2.  In the tune of the 125.  Psalm ; Those that do put their conf . 

Why do the Gentiles tumults make , 
And nations all conspire in vain , 
And earthly Prince's counsel take 
Against their God ; against the reign 
Of his dear Christ ? let us , they sane , 
Break all their bonds : & from us shake 
Their thraldoms yoke , & servile chain . 
While thus alas they fond spoke , 
He that aloft rides on the skies , 
Laughs all their lewd device to sco● 
5 And when his wrathful rage shall 〈◊〉 , 
With plagues shall make the all forlorn , 
And in his fury thus replies ; 
6 But I , my King with sacred horn 
Anointing , shall in princely guise 
His head with royal crown adorn . 
Upon my Zion's holy mount 
His Empires glorious seat shall be . 
And I thus raised shall far recount 
The tenor of his true decree : 
7 My Son thou art , said God , I thee 
Begat this day by due account : 
Thy sceptre , do but ask of me , 
All earthly kingdoms shall surmount . 
All nations , to thy rightful sway , 
will subject ; from furthest end 
9 Of all the world : and thou shalt bray 
Those stubborn foes that will not bend , 
With iron mace ( like potter's clay ) 
10 In pieces small : ye Kings attend ; 
And ye , whom others want obey , 
Learn wisdom , and at last amend . 
11 See , ye serve God , with greater dread 
Than others you : and in your fear 
Rejoice the while ; and ( lowly spread ) 
12 Do homage to his son so dear : 
Lest he be wroth , and do you dead 
13 Amids your way . If kindeled 
His wrath shall be ; OH blessed those , 
That do on him their trust repose . 
Psal . 3.  As the 113.  Psalm ; ye Children which , etc.  

1 AH Lord ! how many be my foes ! 
How many are against me rose , 
2 That to my grieved soul have said , 
Tush : God shall him no succour yield ; 
3 while thou Lord art my praise , my shield 
And dost advance my careful head . 
4 Loud with my voice to God I cried : 
His grace unto my suit replied , 
From out his Zions holy hill . 
5 I laid me down , slept , rose again . 
For thou OH Lord dost me sustain , 
And sav'st my soul from feared ill . 
6 Not if ten thousand armed foes 
My naked side should round enclose , 
Would I be thereof ought dreaded . 
Up Lord and shield me from disgrace : 
7 For thou hast broke my foeman's face , 
And all the wickeds teeth hast shed . 
8 From thee OH God is safe defence ; 
Do thou thy free beneficence 
Upon thy people largely spread . 
Psal . 4.  As the x. Commandments ; Attend my People . 

1 Thou witness of my truth sincere , 
My God unto my poor request 
Vouchsave to lend thy gracious ear : 
thou hast my soul from thrall released . 
2 Favour me still , and deign to hear 
Mine humble suit . OH wretched wights , 
3 How long will ye mine honour dear 
Turn into shame through your despites ? 
Still will ye love what thing is vain , 
4 And seek false hopes ? know them at last , 
That God hath chose & will maintain 
His favourite , whom ye disgraced . 
God will regard mine instant moan . 
5 Oh! tremble then , and cease offending ; 
And , on your silent bed alone , 
Talk with your hearts , your ways amending . 
6 Offer the truest sacrifice 
Of broken hearts ; on God besetting 
7 Your only trust . The most device 
The ways of worldly treasure getting : 
But thou , OH Lord , lift up to me 
The light of that sweet looks of thine ; 
8 So shall my soul more gladsome be , 
then theirs with all their corn & wine . 
9 So I in peace shall lay me down , 
And on my bed take quiet sleep ; 
whiles thou , OH Lord , shalt me alone 
From dangers all securely keep . 
Psal . 5.  In the tune of 124.  Psalm ; Now Israel may say , etc.  

1 Bow down thine ear 
Lord to these words of mine , 
And well regard 
the secret plaints I make . 
2 My King , my God , 
to thee I do betake 
My sad estate 
o do thine ear incline 
To these loud cries 
that to thee poured been . 
3 At early morn 
thou shalt my voice attend : 
For , at day break , 
I will myself address 
Thee to implore , 
and wait for due redress . 
4 thou dost not Lord 
delight in wickedness ; 
Nor to bad men 
will't thy protection lend . 
5 The boasters proud 
cannot before thee stay : 
thou hat'st all those 
that are to sin devoted : 
6 The lying lips , 
& who with blood are spotted , 
thou dost abhor , 
and wilt for ever slay : 
7 But I unto 
thine house shall take the way , 
And through thy grace 
abundant shall adore , 
With humble fear 
within thine holy place . 
8 Oh! lead me Lord 
within thy righteous trace : 
Even for their sakes 
that malice me so sore , 
Make smooth thy paths 
my dimmer eyes before . 
9 Within their mouth 
no truth is ever found : 
Pure mischief is 
their heart : a gaping tomb 
10 Is their wide throat ; 
& yet their tongues still sound 
11 With smoothing words . 
OH Lord give them their doom , 
And let them fall , 
in those their plots profound . 
In their excess 
of mischief them destroy 
12 That rebels are ; 
so those that to thee fly 
Shall all rejoice 
and sing eternally : 
13 And whom thou dost 
protect , and who love thee , 
And thy dear name , 
in thee shall ever joy . 
● Since thou with bliss 
the righteous dost reward , 
And with thy grace 
as with a shield him guard . 
Psal . 6.  As the 50.  Psalm ; The mighty God , etc.  

Let me not Lord 
be in thy wrath reproved : 
Oh! scourge me not· 
when thy fierce rage is moved . 
2 Pity me , Lord , 
that do with languor pine : 
Heale me whose bones 
with pain dissolved been ; 
3 Whose weary soul 
is vexed above measure . 
O Lord how long 
shall I'bide thy displeasure ! 
4 Turn thee OH Lord , 
rescue my soul distressed ; 
5 And save me , of thy grace . 
Amongst those that rest , 
In silent death 
can none remember thee : 
And in the grave 
how shouldst thou praised be ? 
6 Weary with sighs , 
all night I caused my bed 
To swim : with tears 
my couch I watered . 
7 Deep sorrow hath 
consumed my dimmed eyes , 
Sunk in with grief 
at these lewd foes of mine : 
8 But now hence , hence , 
vain plotters of mine ill : 
The Lord hath heard 
my lamentations shrill ; 
9 God heard my suit 
and still attends the same : 
10 Blush now , my foes , 
and fly with sudden shame . 
Psal . 7.  As the 112.  Psalm ; The man is blessed that God doth fear . 

1 ON thee , OH Lord my God , relies 
Mine only trust : from bloody spite 
Of all my raging enemies 
Oh! let thy mercy me acquit ; 
2 Lest they like greedy Lions rend 
My soul , whiles none shall it defend ▪ 
3 O Lord ! if I this thing have wrought , 
If in my hands be found such ill : 
4 If I with mischief ever sought 
To pay good turns ; or did not still 
Do good unto my causeless foe , 
That thirsted for my overthrow ; 
● then let my foe , in eager chase , 
Ore take my soul , and proudly tread 
My life below ; and with dis-grace 
In dust lay down mine honour dead . 
6 Rise up in rage , OH Lord , eftsoon 
Advance thine arm against my fo'ne : 
And wake for me till thou fulfil 
My promised right ; so shall glad throngs 
Of people flock unto thine hill . 
For their sakes then revenge my wrongs , 
And rouse thyself . Thy judgements be 
O'er all the world : Lord judge thou me ; 
As truth and honest innocence 
thou findest in me , Lord judge thou 〈◊〉 
9 Settle the just with sure defence : 
Let me the wicked's malice see 
10 Brought to an end . For thy just eye 
Doth hearts and inward reinss descry 
11 My safety stands in God ; who shields 
The sound in hart : whose doom each day 
12 To just men and contemners yields 
13 Their due . Except he change his way 
His sword is whet , to blood intended , 
His murdering bow is ready bent . 
14 Weapons of death he hath addressed 
And arrows keen to pierce my foe , 
15 Who late bred mischief in his breast ; 
But when he doth on travel go , 
●6 Brings forth a lie . Deep pits he delves , 
And falls into his pits himselue . 
●7 Back to his own head shall rebound 
His plotted mischief ; and his wrongs 
28 His crown shall craze : But I shall sound 
Iehouah's praise with thankful songs , 
And will his glorious name express , 
And tell of all his righteousness . 
Psal . 8.  As the 113.  Psalm ; ye Children , etc.  

1 How noble is thy mighty name , 
OH Lord o'er all the world's wid● frame 
Whose glory is advanced on hie 
Above the rolling heavens rack ! 
2 How for the graceless scorners sake , 
To still th' avenging enemy , 
Hast thou by tender infant's tongue , 
The praise of thy great name made strong , 
While they hang sucking on the breast ▪ 
3 But when I see thine heaven's bright , 
The Moon & glittering stars of night ▪ 
By thine almighty hand addressed ; 
Oh! what is man , poor silly man , 
That thou so mindest him , & dost deign 
To look at his unworthy seed ! 
thou hast him set not much beneath 
thine Angels bright ; & with a wreath 
Of glory hast adorned his head . 
thou hast him made high soverayne 
Of all thy works ; & stretched his reign 
Unto the herds , and beasts untame , 
To fowls , and to the scaly train , 
That glideth through the watery main . 
How noble each-where is thy name ! 
Psal . 9  

To the tune of that known song , beginning ; Preserve us Lord.  

1 Thee & thy wondrous deeds , OH God 
With all my soul I sound abroad 
2 My joy , my triumph is in thee , 
Of thy dread name my song shall be , 
3 OH highest God : since put to flight , 
And fallen and vanished at thy sight , 
4 Are all my foes ; for thou hast passed 
Just sentence on my cause at last : 
And sitting on thy throne above , 
A rightful judge thyself dost prove : 
The troops profane thy checks have stroid 
And made their name for ever void . 
● where 's now , my foes , your threatened wrack ? 
So well you did our city's sack , 
And bring to dust ; whiles that ye say , 
Their name shall die as well as they . 
● Lo , in eternal state God sits , 
And his by throne to justice fits : 
Whose righteous hand the world shall wield 
And to all folk just doom shall yield . 
The poor from high find his relief , 
The poor in needful times of grief : 
10 Who knows thee Lord , to thee shall cleave , 
That never dost thy client's leave . 
11 Oh! sing the God that doth abide , 
On Zion mount ; and blazon wide 
12 His worthy deeds . For , he pursues 
The guiltless blood with vengeance due : 
He mind's their case ; nor can pass o'er 
Sad clamours of the wronged poor . 
13 Oh! mercy Lord ; thou that dost save 
My soul from gates of death & grave : 
Oh! see the wrong my foes have done ; 
14 That I thy praise , to all that gone , 
Through daughter Zions beauteous gate 
With thankful songs may loud relate ▪ 
And may rejoice in thy safe aid . 
Behold : the Gentiles , whiles they made 
A deadly pit my soul to drown , 
Into their pit are sunken down ; 
In that close snare they hid for me , 
Lo their own feet entangled be . 
16 By this just doom the Lord is known , 
That th' ill are punished with their own . 
17 Down shall the wicked backward fall 
To deepest hell , and nations all 
18 That God forget ; nor shall the poor 
Forgotten be for evermore . 
The constant hope of souls oppressed 
19 Shall not aye die . Rise from thy rest , 
O Lord , let not men base and rude 
Prevail : judge thou the multitude 
20 Of Lawless pagans' : strike pale fear 
Into those breasts late stubborn were : 
And let the Gentiles feel and find , 
They been but men of mortal kind . 
Psal . 9  As the 51.  Psalm ; OH Lord consider 

1 Why standest thou Lord aloof so long 
& hidest thee in due times of need 
2 whiles lewd men proudly offer wrong 
Unto the poor ? In their own deed , 
And their device let them be caught . 
3 For lo , the wicked braves and boasts 
In his vile and outrageous thought , 
And blesseth him that ravens most . 
4 On God he dares insult : his pride 
Scorns to inquire of powers above , 
But his stout thoughts have still denied 
5 There is a God ; His ways yet prove 
Ay prosperous : thy judgements hie 
Do far surmount his dimmer sight . 
6 Therefore doth he all foes defy : 
His heart saith ; I shall stand in spite , 
Nor ever move ; nor danger ' bide . 
7 His mouth is filled with curses foul , 
And with close fraud : His tongue doth hide 
8 Mischief & i'll : he seeks the soul 
Of harmless men in secret wait , 
And in the corners of the street , 
Doth shed their blood ; with scorn and hate 
His eyes upon the poor are set . 
9 As some fell Lion in his den , 
He closely lurks the poor to spoil , 
He spoils the poor and helpless men , 
When once he snares them in his toil . 
10 He croucheth low in cunning wile , 
And bows his breast ; whereon whole throngs 
Of poor , whom his fair shows beguile , 
Fall to be subject to his wrongs . 
11 God hath forgot , ( in soul he says ) 
He hides his face to never see . 
12 Lord God arise ; thine hand up-raise : 
Let not thy poor forgotten be . 
13 Shall these insulting wretches scorn 
Their God ; and say thou wilt not care ? 
14 thou seest , ( for all thou hast forborn ) 
thou seest what all their mischiefs are ; 
That to thine hand of vengeance just 
thou mayst them take : the poor distressed 
Rely on thee with constant trust , 
The help of Orphans and oppressed . 
15 Oh! break the wickeds arm of might , 
And search out all their cursed trains , 
And let them vanish out of sight . 
16 The Lord as King for ever reigns . 
From forth his coasts , the heathen sect 
17 Are rooted quite : thou Lord attendest 
To poor men's suits ; thou dost direct 
Their hearts : to them thine ear thou bendest ; 
18 That thou mayst rescue , from despite , 
The woeful fatherless , and poor : 
That , so , the vain and earthen wight 
On us may tyrannize no more . 
FINIS . 

