AN HOLY PANEGYRIC . 

A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross upon the anniversarie Solemnity of the happy Inauguration of our Dread Sovereign Lord King JAMES , Mar. 24. 1613.  

By J. H. D. D.  

LONDON Printed by john Pindley for SAMVEL MACHAM . 1613.  

TO THE RIGHT Honourable , Sir JOHN SWINERTON , Knight , Lord Mayor of the City of London , All grace and happiness . 

Right Honourable , Mine own forwardness ( whereof it repenteth me not ) hath sent forth other of my labours unbidden ; but this , your effectual importunity hath drawn forth into the common light . It is an holy desire that the eye may second the ear in any thing that may help the soul : and we , that are fishers of men , should be-wanting to ourselves , if we had not baits for both those senses . I pled not the disadvantage of a dead letter , in respect of that life which elocution puts into any discourse Such as it is , I make it both public and yours . I have caused my thoughts , so near as I could to go back to the very terms wherein I expressed them , as thinking it better to fetch those words I have let fall , then to follow those I must take up . That therefore which it pleased your Lo to hear with such patient attention , and with so good affection to desire , I not unwillingly suffer abroad ; that these papers may speak that permanently to the eyes of all our countrymen , which in the passage found such favour in the ears of your citizens , and such room in so many heart's . Besides your first and vehement motion for the press , your known love to learning deserves a better acknowledgement , and no doubt finds it from more worthy hands . And if my gratulation would add any thing , those should envy you which will not imitate you . For the rest , God give your Lo. a wise , understanding , & courageous heart , that you may prudently & strongly menage these wild times , upon which you are fallen : and by your holy example and powerful endeavours , help to shorten these reins of licentiousness : That so this city , which is better taught then any under heaven , may teach all other places how to live ; & may honour that profession which hath made it renowned , and all God's Church joyful : The welfare and happiness whereof , and your Lo. in it , is unfeignedly wished , by 

Your Lordships humbly devoted , jos. HALL. . 

AN HOLY Panegyric . 

1.  SAM . 12. 24 , 25.  

Therefore fear you the Lord , and serve him in truth with all your hearts , and consider how great things he hath done for you . But if you do wickedly , ye shall perish both ye and your King.  

I Hold it no small favour of God ( right Honourable & beloved ) that he hath called me to the service of this day ; both in the name of such a people , to praise him for his Anointed , and in his name to praise his Anointed to his people . The same hand that gives the oportunite , vouchsafe to give success to this business . That which the lews sinned in but desiring , it is our happiness to enjoy . I need not call any other witness then this day , wherein we celebrate the blessing of a King , and ( which is more ) of a King higher than other Princes by the head and shoulders . And if other years had forgotten this tribute of their loyalty and thankfulness , yet the example of those ancient Roman Christians ( as Eusebius and Sozomen reporr ) would have taught us , that the tenth complete year of our Constantine , deserves to be solemn & jubilar . And if our ill nature could be content to smother this mercy in silence , the very Lepers : of Samaria should rise up against us & say , We do not well ; this is a day of good tidings , & we hold our peace . My discourse yet shall not be altogether laudatory , but as Samuels , led in with exhortation , and carried out with threatening . For this Text is a composition of duties , favours , dangers : of duties which we o●●e , of favours received , of dangers threatened . The duties that God Idokes for of us , come before the mention of the favours we have received from him , ( though after their receipt ) to teach us , that as his mercy , so our obedience should be absolute : and the danger follows both , to make us more careful to hold the favours , and perform the duties ; And me thinks there cannot be a more excellent mixture . If we should hear only of the favours of God , nothing of our duties , we should fall into conceitednesse : if only of our duties without recognition of his savours , we should prove uncheerfull ; and if both of these , without mention of any danger , we should presume on our favours , and be slack in our duties . prepare therefore your Christian ears and hearts for this threefold cord of God , that ( through his blessing ) these duties may draw you to obedience , the dangers to a greater awe , and the favours to further thankfulness . 

The goodness of these outward things is not such as that it can privilege every desire of them from sin Monarchy is the best of governments , & likest to his rule , that sits in the assembly of Gods. One God , one King , was the acclamation of those ancient Christians : and yet it was mis-desired of the Israelites : We may not ever desire that which is better in itself , but that which is better for us ; Neither must we follow our conceit in this judgement , but the appointment of God : Now , though God had appointed in time , both a Sceptre and a Law giver to juda , yet they sinned in mending the pace of God , and spurring on his decree . And if they had stayed his leisure ; so that they had desired that which was best in itself , best for them , appointed by God , and now appointed , yet the manner and ground offended : For out of an humour of innovation , out of discontent , out of distrust , out of an itch of conformity to other Nations , to ask a King , it was not only a sin as they confess : vers . 29. but ( ragnah rabbah ) a great wickedness as Samuel tells them . vers . 17. and ( as oftentimes we may read God's displeasure in the face of the heaven ) he shows it in the weather . God thunders and reinss in the midst of wheat harvest . The thunder was fearful , the rain in that hot climate and season strangely unseasonable : both to be in the instant upon Samuels speech , was justly miraculous . The heathen Poets bring in their feigned God thundering in applause ; I never find the true God did so . This voice of God broke these Cedars of Lebanon , and made these Hinds to calf : and now they cry Peccavimus , ver . 19 If ever we will stoop , the judgements of God will bring us on our knees . Samuel takes vantage of their humiliation , and according to the golden sentence of that Samian wiseman , that bids us lay weight upon the laden , ( how ever Hierom take it in another sense ) he jades them with these three duties ; Fear , service , consideration . 

Fear and service go still together . Serve the Lord in fear , saith David . Fear the Lord and serve him , saith joshua ; And , fear ever before service , for that unless our service proceed from fear , it is hollow and worthless . One says well , that these inward dispositions are as the kernel ; outward acts are as the shell ; he is but a deaf nut therefore , that hath outward service , without inward fear ; Fear God ( saith Solomon ) first , and then , keep his commandments . Behold , the same tongue that bade them not fear , vers . 20. now bids them fear ; and the same spirit that tells us they feared exceedingly ( vers . 18. ) now enjoins them to fear more . What shall we make of this ? Their other fear was at the best Initial ; for now they began to repent ; and as one says of this kind of fear , that it hath two eyes fixed on two diverse objects , so had this of theirs . One eye looked upon the rain and thunder ; the other looked up to the God that sent it ; The one of these it borrowed of the slavish or hostile fear ( as Basil calls it , ) the other of the filial ; for the slavish fear casts both eyes upon the punishment ; the filial looks with both eyes on the party offended . Now than Samuel would rectify and perfect this affection , and would bring them from the fear of slaves , through the fear of penitents , to the fear of sons : and indeed one of these makes way for another . It is true that perfect love thrusts out fear : but it is as true , that fear brings in that perfect love , which is joined with the reverence of sons . Like as the needle or bristle ( so one compares it ) draws in the thread after it , or as the potion brings health . The compunction of fear ( saith Gregory ) fits the mind for the compunction of love . We shall never rejoice truly in God , except it be with trembling : Except we have quaked at his thunder , we shall never joy in his sun shine . How seasonably therefore doth Samuel , when he saw them smitten with that guilty and servile fear , call them to the : reverential fear of God ; Therefore fear ye the Lord ? It is good striking , when God hath stricken ; there is no fishing so good as in troubled waters . The conscience of man is a nice and sullen thing , and if it be not taken at fit times , there is no meddling with it . Tell one of our gallants in the midst of all his jollity and revels , of devotion , of piety , of judgements ; he hath the Athenian question ready , What will his babbler say ? Let that man alone till God have touched his soul with some terror , till he have cast his body on the bed of sickness , when his feather is turned to a kerchief , when his face is pale , his eyes sunk , his hands shaking , his breath short , his flesh consumed , now he may be talked with , now he hath learned of Eli to say , speak Lord for thy servant heareth . The convexe or out-bowed side of a vessel will hold nothing ; it must be the hollow and depressed part that is capable of any liquor . O , if we were so humbled with the varieties of God's judgements as we might , how savoury should his counsels be , how precious & welcome would his fear be to our trembling hearts ? whereas now , our stubborn sencelesnesse frustrates ( in respect of our success , though not of his decree ) all the threatenings and executions of God.  

There are two main affections , Love , and Fear , which as they take up the soul where they are , and as they never go a sunder , ( for every love hath in it a fear of offending and foregoing ; and every fear implies a love of that , which we suspect may miscarry ) so each of them fulfils the whole law of God. That love is the abridgement of the Decalogue both our Saviour , and his blessed Apostle have taught us : It is as plain of Fear ; The title of job is , A just man , and one that feared God ; justice is expressed by Fear . For what is justice , but a freedom from sin ? And the fear of the Lord hate's evil , saith Solomon . Hence Moses his 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 thou shalt fear , is turned by our Saviour ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) thou shalt worship , or adore . And that which esay saith , In vain they fear me , our Saviour renders , In vain they worship me ; as if all worship consisted in Fear . Hence it is probable that God hath his name in two languages from ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , ) Fear , and the same word in the Greek signifies both Fear & Religion . And Solomon when he says The fear of the Lord is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the beginning ( as we turn it , ) of wisdom , says more than we are a ware of ; for the word signifies as well Caput or Principatum ; the head or top of wisdom ; yea ( saith Siracides ) it is the crown upon the head ; it is the root of the same wisdom , whereof it is the top-branch , saith the same Author . And surely this is the most proper disposition of men towards God ; for though God stoop down so low as to vouchsafe to be loved of men , yet that infinite inequality , which there is between him and us , may seem not to allow so perfect a fitness of that affection , as of this other , which suits so well betwixt our vileness , and his glory , that the more disproportion there is betwixt us , the more due & proper is our fear . Neither is it less necessary than proper , for we can be no Christians without it ; whether it be ( as Hemingius distinguishes it well ) timor cultus , or culpae , either our fear in worshipping , or our fear of offending ; the one is a devout fear , the other a careful fear . The latter was the Corinthians fear , whose godly sorrow when the Apostle had mentioned , he adds , Yea what indignation , yea what fear , yea what desire ? The former is that of the Angels , who hide their faces with their wings ; yea of the Son of God , as man , who fell on his face to his father . And this is due to God , as a father , as a master , as a benefactor , as a God infinite in all that he is . Let me be bold to speak to you , with the Psalmist , Come ye children , harken to me , and I will teach you the fear of the Lord What is it therefore to fear God ; but to acknowledge the glorious ( the invisible ) presence of God in all our ways , with Moses his eyes 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : to be awefully affected at his presence with Jacob ( quam tremendus ? ) to make an humble resignation of ourselves to the holy will of God with Eli , It is the Lord ; and to attend reverently upon his disposing with David , Here I am , let him do to me , as seemeth good in his eyes . This is the fear of the Lord There is nothing more talked of , nothing less felt . I appeal from the tongues of men to their hands ; the wise heathen taught me to do so , Uerbarebus proba . The voice of wickedness is actual , saith the Psalmist , wickedness saith there is no fear of God before his eyes . Behold wheresoever is wickedness , there can be no fear of God ; these two cannot lodge under one roof , for the fear of God drives out evil ( saith Ecclesiasticus . ) As therefore Abraham argues well from the cause to the effect ; Because the fear of God is not in this place , therefore they will kill me : So David argues back from the effect to the cause , They imagine wickedness on their bed , etc. therefore the fear of God is not before them . I would to God this argument were not too demonstrative . brethren , our life's shame us. If we feared the Lord , durst we dally with his name , durst we tear it in pieces ? Surely we contemn his person , whose name we contemn . The jews have a conceit , that the sin of that Israelite which was stoned for blasphemy , was only this , that he named that ineffable name of four letters jehovah . Shall their fear keep them from once mentioning the dreadful name of God , and shall not our fear keep us from abusing it ? durst we so boldly sin God in the face , if we feared him ? durst we mock God with a formal flourish of that , which our heart tells us we are not , if we feared him ? durst we be Christians at Church , Mammonists at home , if we feared him ? Pardon me , if in a day of gratulation , I hardly temper my tongue from reproof ; for as the jews had ever some malefactor brought forth to them in their great feast ; so it shall be the happiest piece of our triumph and solemnity , if we can bring forth that wicked profaneness , wherewith we have dishonoured God , & blemished his Gospel , to be scourged , and dismissed with all holy indignity . From this fear , let us pass as briefly , through that which we must dwell in all our lives , the service of God. This is the subject of all sermons , mine shall but touch at it . You shall see how I hasten to that discourse , which this day & your expectation calls me to . 

Divine Philosophy teaches us to refer , not only our speculations , but our affections to action . As therefore our service must be grounded upon fear , so our fear must be reduced to service . What strength can these Masculine dispositions of the soul yield us , if with the Israelites brood they be smothered in the birth ? Indeed the worst kind of fear is that we call servile ; but the best fear , is the fear of servants . For there is no servant of God , but fears filially . And again God hath no son but he serves . Even the natural son of God , was so in the form of a servant , that he served indeed ; and so did he serve that he endured all sorrow , and fulfilled all righteousness . So every Christian is a son and heir to the King of heaven , and his word must be , I serve . We all know what service means . For we all are , or were ( I imagine ) either servants of masters , or servants of the public , or masters of servants , or all these . We cannot therefore be ignorant either what we require of ours , or what our superiors require of us. If service consisted only in wearing of liveries , in taking of wages , in making of courtesies , and kissing of hands , there were nothing more easy , or more common . Albina of us wear the cognizance of our christianity in our baptism , all live upon God's trencher in our maintenance , all give him the compliments of a fashionable profession . But , be not deceived , the life of service is work ; the work of a Christian is obedience to the Law of God. The Centurion when he would describe his good servant in the Gospel , needed say no more but this ; I bid him do this , and he doth it . Service then briefly is , nothing but a readiness to do as we are bidden ; and therefore both Solomon , and he that was greater than Solomon , describes it by keeping the commandments ; and the chosen vessel gives an everlasting rule : His servants ye are to whom ye obey . Now I might distinguish this service into habitual , and actual . Habitual ; for as the servant , while he eats or sleeps , is in service still ; so are we to God : Actual , whether universal in the whole carriage of our lives ( which Zacharie tells us is in holiness , and righteousness , holiness to God , righteousness to men ) or particular , either in the duties which are proper to GOD , Invocation and Attendance on his ordinance ( which by an excellence is termed his service ) or in those which are proper to us , as we are pieces of a Family , Church , commonwealth ; the stations whereof GOD hath so disposed , that we may serve him in serving one another . And thus you see I might make way for an endless discourse ; but it shall content me ( passing over this world of matter ) to glance only at the generality of this infinite theme . 

As every obedience serves God , so every sin makes God serve us. One said wittily , that the angry man made himself the judge , and God the executioner . There is no sin that doth not the like . The glutton makes God his cator , and himself the guest , and his belly his god , especially in the newfound feasts of this age , wherein profuseness and profaneness strive for the table's end . The lascivious man makes himself the lover , and ( as Vives says of Mahumet ) God the Pander . The covetous man makes himself the Usurer , and God the broker . The ambitious makes God his state , and Honour his God. Of every sinner doth God say justly , seruire me fecisti . thou hast made me to serve with thy sins . There cannot be a greater honour for us then to serve such a master , as commands heaven , earth , & hell : Whom it is both dishonour and baseness not to serve . The hyest stile that King David could devose to give himself ( not in the phrase of a frivolous French compliment , but in the plain speech of a true Israelite ) was , Behold I am thy servant ; and he that is Lord of many servants of the Devil , delights to call himself the servant of the servants of God. The Angels of heaven rejoice to be our fellows in this service . But there cannot be a greater shame then to see servants ride on horseback , and Princes walking as servants on the ground . I mean to see the GOD of heaven made a lackey to our vile affections , and in the lives of men , to see God attend upon the world , brethren , there is service enough in the world , but it is to a wrong master . In mea patria Deus venture , ( as Hierome said ; ) Every worldling is a Papist in this , that he gives 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 service , to the creature , which is the lowest respect that can be ; Yea so much more humble than ( latria ) as it is more absolute , and without respect of recompense . Yea , I would it were uncharitable to say , that many besides the savages of Calcutta , place Satan in the throne , and God on the footstool . For as Witches and Sorcerers converse with evil spirits in plausible and familiar forms , which in ugly shapes they would abhor ; so many a man serves Satan under the forms of gold and silver , under the images of Saints and lightsome Angels ; under glittering coats , or glorious titles , or beauteous faces , whom they would defy as himself . And as the freeborn Israelite might become a servant , either by forfeiture upon trespass , or by sale , or by spoil in war ; so this accursed servitude is incurred the same ways , by them which should be Christians . By forfeiture : for though the debt and trespass be to God , yet ( tradet lictori ) he shall deliver the debtor to the jailor . By sale , as Ahab sold himself to work wickedness : sold under sin , saith the Apostle . By spoil . Beware lest any man make a spoil of you 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 saith Paul to his Colossians . Alas what a miserable change do these men make , to leave the living God , which is so bountiful , that he rewards a cup of cold water with eternal glory , to serve him that hath nothing to give but his bare wages ; and what wages ? The wages of sin is death ; And what death ? not the death of the body , in the severing of the soul , but the death of the soul , in the separation from God ; there is not so much difference betwixt life and death , as there is betwixt the first death and the second . O woeful wages of a desperate work . Well were these men , if they might go unpaide , and serve for nothing ; but as the mercy of God will not let any of our poor services to him go unrewarded ; so will not his justice suffer the contrary service go unpaid ; in flaming fire rendering vengeance to them that know not God , and those that obey not the Gospel of our Lord jesus . Beloved , as that worthy Bishop said on his deathbed , we are happy in this , that we serve a good Master ; how happy shall it be for us if we shall do him good service , that in the day of our account we may hear , Euge serve bone , well done good servant , enter into thy master's joy . 

Now he that prescribes the act ( service , ) must also prescribe the manner ; ( Truly , totally . ) God cannot abide we should serve him with a double heart ( an heart & an heart ) that is hypocritically . Neither that we should serve him with a false heart , that is , niggardly and unwillingly : but against doubling , he will be served in truth , and against haluing , he will be served with all the heart . To serve God and not in truth is mockery . To serve him truly and not with the whole heart is a base dodging with God. This 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 eyeservice is a fault with men : but let us serve God , but while he sees us , it is enough . Behold he sees us every where . If he did not see our heart , it were enough to serve him in the face ; and if the heart were not his , it were too much to give him a part of it ; but now that he made this whole heart of out's , it is reason he should be served with it ; and now that he sees the inside of the heart , it is madness not to serve him In truth . Those serve God , not in truth , which as Seneca says of some auditors , come to hear , not to learn : which bring their tablets to write words , not their hearts for the finger of God to write in . Whose eyes are on their Bible , whiles their heart is on their Count-book ; which can play the Saints in the Church , Ruffians in the Tavern , Tyrants in their houses , Cheators in their shops ; those Dames which under a cloak of modesty and devotion hide nothing but pride , and fiendishnesse . Those serve God , not with all their heart ; whose bosom is like Rachel's tent , that hath ( Teraphim ) Idols hid in the straw ; or rather like a Philistines Temple , that hath the Ark and Dagon under one roof ; That come in ever with Naamans' exceptives , Only in this : Those that have let down the world like the spies into the bottom of the well of their heart , and cover the mouth of it with where : I mean , that hide great oppressions , with the show of small beneficences : Those which like Salomon's false Courtesan , cry ( Diutdatur ) and are willing to share themselves betwixt God and the world . And certainly , this is a noble policy of the Devil , because he knows he hath no right to the heart , he can be glad of any corner ; but with all he knows , that if he have any , he hath all ; for where he hath any part , God will have none . This base-mindednesse is fit for that evil one . God will have all , or nothing . It was an heroical answer , that Theodoret reports of Valentinian , whom when the soldiers had chosen to be Emperor , they were consulting to have another joined with him . no ( my soldiers ) said he , it was in your power to give me the Empire , while I had it not : but now when I have it , it is not in your power to give me a partner . We ourselves say , the bed and the throne can abide no rivals . May we not well say of the heart , as Lot of Zoar , Is it not a little one ? Alas it is even too little for God ; what do we think of taking an Inmate into this cottage ? It is a favour and happiness , that the God of glory will vouchsafe to dwell in it alone . Even so ( OH God ) take thou up these rooms for thyself ; and enlarge them for the entertainment of thy spirit : Have thou us wholly , and let us have thee . Let the world serve itself . OH let us serve thee , with all our hearts . 

God hath set the heart on work to fear , the hands on work to serve him , now ( that nothing may be wanting ) he sets the head on work to consider ; and that , not so much the judgements of God , ( yet those are of singular use , and may not be forgotten ) as his mercies , What great things he hath done for you , not against you . He that looked upon his own works , and saw they were good , and delighted in them , delights that we should look upon them too , and applaud his wisdom , power , and mercy , that shines in them . Even the least of God's works are worthy of the observation of the greatest Angel in heaven , but ( the magnalia dei ) the great things he hath done , are more worthy of our wonder , of our astonishment . Great things indeed that he did for Israel ; he meant to make that Nation a precedent of mercy ; that all the world might see what he could do for a people . Heaven and earth conspired to bless them . What should I speak of the wonders of Egypt ? Surely I know not whether their preservation in it , or deliverance out of it , were more miraculous . Did they want a guide ? himself goes before them in fire . Did they want a shelter ? his cloud is spread over them for a covering . Did they want way ? The sea itself shall make it ; and be at once a street , and a wall to them . Did they want bread ? Heaven itself shall pour down food of Angels . Did they want meat to their bread ? The wind shall bring them whole drifts of quails into their tents . Do they want drink to both ? The very Rock shall yield it them . Do they want suits of apparel ? Their very clothes shall not wax old on their backs . Do they want advise ? God himself shall give his vocal Oracle between the Cherubins . Do they want a law ? God shall come down upon Sinai , and deliver it in fire , thundering , smoke , earthquakes , and write it with his own finger , in tables of stone . Do they want habitations ? God shall provide them a land that flows with milk and honey . Are they persecuted ? God stands in fire between them & their harms . Are they stung to death ? The brazen serpent shall cure them . Are they resisted ? The walls of jericho shall fall down alone ; hailstones brain their enemies . The Sun shall stand still in heaven , to see joshuahs' revenge and victory . O great and mighty things that God did for Israel ! 

And if any Nation under heaven could either parallel or second Israel in the favours of God , this poor little Island of ours is it . The cloud of his protection hath covered us. The blood-red sea of persecution hath given way to us , and we are passed it dry-shod . The true Manna from heaven is reigned down abundantly about our tents . The water of Life gusheth forth plenteously to us : The better law of the Gospel is given us from heaven by the hands of his Son : The walls of the spiritual jerocho are fallen down before us , at the blast of the trumpets of God ; and cursed be he that goes about to build them up again . Now therefore , that we may come more close to the task of this day ; Let me say to you , as Samuel to his Israelites , Consider with me what great things the Lord hath done for us : and as one wished that the envious had eyes in every place , so could I seriously wish , that all which have ill will at our Zion , had their ears with me but one hour , that if they belong not to God , they might burst with judas , which repined with judas at this seasonable cost of the precious ointment of our praises . 

If I should look back to the ancient mercies of God , and show you that this kingdom ( though divided from the world ) was one of the first that received the Gospel : That it yielded the first Christian Emperor that gave peace and honour to the Church : The first and greatest lights that shone forth in the darkest of Popery , to all the world ; and that it was the first kingdom that shook Antichrist fully out of the saddle . I might find just matter of praise and exultation , but I will turn over no other Chronicles but your memory . This day alone hath matter enough of an eternal gratulation . For this is the communis terminus , wherein Gods favours meet upon our heads ; which therefore represents to us , both what we had , and what we have . The one to our sense , the other to our remembrance . This day was both Queen Elizabeth's Initium gloriae , and King James his Initium regni . To her Natalitium salutis , as the passion-dayes of the Martyrs were called of old ; and Natalis Imperij to him . These two names show us happiness enough to take up our hearts and tongues for ever . And first , why should it not be our perpetual glory and rejoicing , that we were her subjects ? O blessed Queen , the mother of this Nation , the nurse of this Church , the glory of womanhood , the envy and example of foreign Nations , the wonder of times , how sweet and sacred shall thy memory be to all posterities ? how is thy name not Parables of the dust as the jews speak ; not written in the earth as Jeremy speaks , but in the living earth of all loyal hearts , never to be razed . And though the foul mouths of our Adversaries stick not to call her miseram foeminam , as Pope Clement did ; nor to say of her , as Euagrius says uncharitably of justinian the great lawgiver ( ad supplicia iusto dei iudicio apud inferos luenda profecta est ; ) and those that durst bring her on the stage living , bring her now dead ( as I have heard by those that have seen it ) into their processions , like a tormented Ghost , attended with fiends and firebrands , to the terror of their ignorant beholders : Yet , as we saw she never prospered so well , as when she was most cursed by their Pius . 5. so now we hope she is rather so much more glorious in heaven , by how much they are more malicious on earth . These arrogant wretches , that can at their pleasure fetch Solomon from heaven to hell , and Traian and Falconella from hell to heaven ; Campian and Garnet from earth to heaven , Queen Elizabeth from earth to hell , shall find one day that they have mistaken the keys , and shall know , what it is to judge , by being judged . In the mean time , in spite of the gates of Rome , Memoria iustae in benedictionibus . To omit those virtues which were proper to her sex , by which she deserved to be the Queen of women , how excellent were her Masculine graces of learning , valour , wisdom , by which she might justly challenge to be the Queen of men . So learned was she , that she could give present answers , to Ambassadors in their own tongues , or if they listed to borrow of their neighbours , she paid them in that they borrowed . So valiant , that her name like Ziscaes' drum , made the proudest Romanists to quake . So wise that whatsoever fell out happily against the common Adversary in France , Netherlands , Ireland , it was by themselves ascribed to her policy . What should I speak of her long and successful government , of her miraculous preseruations , of her famous victories , wherein the waters , winds , fire and earth fought for us , as if they had been in pay under her , of her excellent laws , of her careful executions . Many daughters have done worthily , but thou surmountest them all . Such was the sweetness of her government , and such the fear of misery in her loss , that many worthy Christians desired their eyes might be closed before hers ; and how many thousands therefore welcomed their own death , because it prevented hers . Every one pointed to her white hairs , & said with that peaceable Leontius , When this snow melts there will be a flood . Never day except always the fifth of November , was like to be so bloody as this ; not for any doubt of Title ( which never any loyal heart could question , nor any disloyal ever did , besides Dolman ) but for that our Esavites comforted themselves against us , and said , The day of mourning for our mother will come shortly , then will we slay our brethren . What should I say more ? lots were cast upon our land ; and that honest Politician ( which wanted nothing but a gibbet to have made him a Saint ) Father Parsons , took pains to set down an order , how all English affairs should be marshaled , when they should come to be theirs . Consider now the great things that the Lord hath done for us. Behold this day , which should have been most dismal to the whole Christian world , he turned to the most happy day , that ever shone forth to this Island . That now we may justly insult with those Christians of Antioch ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) Where are your prophecies , OH ye fond Papists ? Our snow lies here melted , where are those floods of blood that you threatened ? Yea , as that blessed soul of hers gained by this change of an immortal crown , for a corruptible ; so ( blessed be the name of our God ) this land of ours hath not lost by that loss . Many think that this evening the world had his beginning . Surely a new and golden world began this day to us , and ( which it could not have done by her loins ) promises continuance ( if our sins interrupt it not ) to our posterities . I would the flattery of a Prince were treason ; in effect it is so : ( for the flatterer is ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) a kind murderer . ) I would it were so in punishment . If I were to speak before my sovereign King and master , I would praise God for him , not praise him to himself . A preacher in Constantine's time saith Eusebius ( ausus est imperatorem in os beatum dicere ) presumed to call Constantine an happy Emperor to his face ; but he went away with a check ; such speed may any parasite have , which shall speak , as if he would make Princes proud , & not thankful . A small praise to the face may be adulation , ( though it be within the bounds : ) a great praise in absence , may be but justice . If we see not the worth of our King , how shall we be thankful to God that gave him ? Give me leave therefore freely to bring forth the Lords Anointed before you , and to say with Samuel , See you him whom the Lord hath chosen . 

As it was a great presage of happiness to Mauritius the Emperor , that an ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) a familiar Devil removing him from place to place in his swathing bands , yet had no power to hurt him ; So , that those early conspiracies , wherewith Satan assaulted the very cradle of our dear Sovereign , prevailed not , it was a just bodement of his future greatness and beneficial use to the world . And he that gave him life and crown together , and miraculously preserved them both : gave him graces fit for his Deputy on earth , to wield that crown , and improove that life to the behoof of Christendom . Let me begin with that ( which the heathen man required to the happiness of any state ) his learning & knowledge , wherein I may safely say he exceedeth all his 105. predecessors . Our Conqueror King William ( as our Chronicler reports ) by a blunt proverb that he was wont to use against unlearned Princes made his son Henry a Beau-clerc to those times . But a candle in the dark will make more show , than a bonfire by day . In these days so lightsome for knowledge to excel ( even for a professed student ) is hard , and rare . Never had England more learned Bishops , and Doctors ; which of them ever returned from his Majesty's discourse without admiration ? What King christened hath written so learned volumes ? To omit the rest , his last ( of this kind ) wherein he hath so held up Cardinal Bellarmine , and his master Pope Paulus , is such , that Plessis and Mouline ( the two great lights of France ) profess to receive their light in this discourse , from his beams ; and the learned jesuit Salkeild , could not but be converted with the necessity of those demonstrations ; and I may boldly say , Popery ( since it was ) never received so deep a wound from any work , as from that of His. What King ever moderated the solemn acts of an University in all professions , and had so many hands clapped in the applause of his acute , and learned determinations ? Briefly , such is his entire acquaintance with all sciences , and with the Queen of all , Divinity , that he might well dispute with the infallible Pope Paulus 5 for his triple crown ; and I would all Christian quarrels lay upon this duel . His justice in governing matcheth his knowledge how to govern ; for as one that knows the commonwealth cannot be unhappy , wherein ( according to the wise heathens rule ) law is a Queen , and will a subject , he hath ever endeavoured to frame the proceedings of his government to the laws , not the laws to them . Witness that memorable example , whereof your eyes were witnesses . I mean the unpartial execution of one of the ancientest Barons of those parts , for the murder of a mean Subject . Wherein not the favour of the block might be yielded , that the dishonour of the death might be no less than the pain of the death . Yet who will not grant his Mercy to be eminent amongst his virtues , when Parsons himself yields it ? And if a virtue so continuing , could be capable of excess , this might seem so in him . For , that which was said of Anastasius the Emperor , that he would attempt no exploit ( though never so famous ) if it might cost the price of Christian blood , and that which was said of Mauricius , that by his goodwill he would not have so much as a Traitor die ; and that of Vespasian , that he wept even for just executions ; and lastly that of Theodosius , that he wished he could recall those to life again that had wronged him ; may in some sense , be justly verified of our merciful Sovereign . I pray GOD the measure of this virtue may never hurt himself , I am sure the want of it shall never give cause of complaint to his adversaries . But among all his Heroical Graces , which commend him as a man , as a Christian , as a King ; Piety and firmness in Religion calls me to it , and will not suffer me to defer the mention of it any longer . A private man unsettled in opinion , is like a loose tooth in the head , troublesome and useless , but a public person unstayed , is dangerous . Resolution for the truth is so much better than knowledge , by how much the possessing of a treasure , is better than knowing where it is . With what zeal did his Majesty fly upon the blasphemous novelties of Vorstius ? How many solicitations , threats , promises , proffers hath he trampled under his feet in former times , for but a promise of an indifferent connivencie at the Romish religion ? Was it not an answer worthy of a King , worthy of marble and brass , that he made unto their agent for this purpose , in the times of the greatest peril of resistance . That all the crowns and kingdoms in this world should not endure him to change any jot of his profession ? Hath he not so engaged himself in this holy quarrel , that the world confesses Rome had never such an Adversary ? and all Christian Princes rejoice to follow him as their worthy leader , in all the battles of God ; and all Christian churches in their prayers and acclamations , style him , in a double right , Defender of the faith , more by desert , than inheritance . 

But because as the Sunbeams , so praises are more kindly , when they are cast oblique upon their objects then when they fall directly ; let me show you him rather in the blessings we receive from him , then in the graces which are in him . And not to insist upon his extinguishing of those hellish feudes in Scotland , & the reducing of those barbarous borderers to civility and order , ( two acts worthy of eternity , and which no hand but his could do ) Consider how great things the Lord hath done for us , by him , in our Peace , in our freedom of the Gospel , in our Deliverance . 

Continuance detracts from the value of any favour . Little do we know the price of peace . If we had been in the coats of our forefathers , or our neighbours , we should have known how to esteem this dear blessing of GOD. O , my dear brethren , we never knew what it was to hear the murdering pieces about our ears ; to see our churches and houses flaming over our heads ; to hear the fearful cracks of their falls mixed with the confused out-cries of men , kill , encouraging to kill , or resist , dying ; and the shriekings of women and children ; we never saw tender babes snached from the breasts of their mothers , now bleeding upon the stones , or sprawling upon the pikes ; and the distracted mother ravished , ere she may have leave to die . We never saw men and horses lie wallowing in their mingled blood , and the ghastly visages of death deformed with wounds . The impotent wife hanging with tears on her armed husband , as desirous to die with him , with whom she may not live . The amazed run to and from of those that would fain escape , if they knew how , and the furious pace of a bloody victor ; The rifling of houses for spoil , and every soldier running with his load , and ready to fight with other for our booty ; Themiserable captive driven manacled before the usulting enemy . Never did we know how cruel an Adversary is , and how burdensome an helper is in war . Look round about you . All your neighbours have seen and tasted these calamities . All the rest of the world have been whirled about in these woeful tumults : only this Island , hath like the centre stood unmoveable . Only this Isle hath been like Nilus , which when all other waters overflow , keeps within the banks . That we are free from these & a thousand other miseries of war , Whether should we ascribe it , but next under God , to his Anointed , as a King , as a King of Peace ? For both Anarchy is the mother of division , as we see in the state of Italy , wherein , when they wanted their King , all ran into civil broils ; The Venetians with them of Ravenna , Verona and Vincentia , with the Paduans and Taruisians ; Theophilus Pisans and Florentines , with them of Luca and Sienna ; and besides ; every King is not a Peacemaker : Ours is made of Peace . There have been Princes , which , as the Antiochians said of julian , ( taking occasion by the Bull which he stamped in his coin ) have gored the world to death . The breasts of some Princes have been like a Thunder-cloud , whose vapours would never leave working till they have vented themselves with terror to the world ; Ours , hath nothing in it , but a gracious rain to water the inheritance of God. Behold He , even He alone , like to Noah's Dove , brought an Olive of peace to the tossed Ark of Christendom ; He like another Augustus , before the second coming of CHRIST hath becalmed the world , and shut the iron gates of war ; and is the bond of that peace he hath made . And if the Peacemaker both doth bless and is blessed ; how should we bless him , and bless God for him , and hold ourselves blessed in him ? 

Now what were peace without religion , but like a Nabals sheepshearing ; like the fatting of an Epicurian hog ; the very festival revel's of the Devil . But for us ; we have Gloria in excelsis Deo , sung before our Pax in terris ; in a word , we have Peace with the Gospel . Machiavelli himself could say in his Discourses , that two continued successions of virtuous Princes ( fanno grandi effetti ) cannot but do great matters . We prove it so this day ; wherein religion is not only warmed but locked in her seat so fast , that the gates of hell shall never prevail against it . There have been Princes , and that in this land , which ( as the heathen Politician compared his Tyrant ) have been like to ill Physicians , that have purged away the good humours , and left the bad behind them ; with whom any thing hath been lawful , but to be religious . Some of your grey hairs can be my witnesses . Behold , the evils we have escaped , show us our blessings . Here hath been no dragging out of houses , no hiding of Bibles , no creeping into woods , no Bonnering or Butchering of God's Saints , no rotting in dungeons , no casting of infants out of the mother's belly into the mother's flames ; nothing but God's truth abundantly preached , cheerfully professed , encouraged , rewarded . What Nation under heaven yields so many learned Divines ? What times ever yielded so many preaching Bishops ? When was this City ( the City of our joy ) ever so happy this way , as in these late successions ? whither can we ascribe this health of the Church , and life of the Gospel , but , next to GOD , to His example , His countenance , His endeavours . Wherein I may not omit how right he hath trod in the steps of that blessed Constantine , in all his religious proceedings . Let us in one word parallel them . Constantine caused fifty Volumes of the Scriptures to be fair written out in parchment , for the use of the Church . King james hath caused the books of Scriptures to be accurately translated , and published by thousands . Constantine made a zealous edict against Novatians , Valentinians , Marcionites . King james , besides his powerful proclamations and sovereign laws hath effectually written against Popery , and Vorstianisme . Constantine took away the liberty of the meetings of heretics : King james hath by wholesome laws inhibited the assemblies of Papists and seismatickes . Constantine sat in the midst of his Bishops , as if he had been one of them . King james besides his solemn conferences , vouchsaves ( not seldom ) to spend his meals in discourse with his Bishops , and other worthy Divines . Constantine charged his sons ( ut planè & sine fuco Christiani essent ) that they should be Christians in earnest . King james hath done the same in learned and Divine precepts which shall live till time be no more . Yea , in their very coins is a resemblance . Constantine had his picture stamped upon his metals , praying . King james hath his picture with a prayer about it . OH Lord protect the Kingdoms which thou hast united . Lastly , Constantine built Churches ; one in Jerusalem , another in Nicomedia . King James hath founded one College , which shall help to build and confirm the whole Church of God , upon earth . Ye wealth Citizens that love jerusalem , cast in your store after this royal example , into the sanctuary of God , and whiles you make the Church of God happy , make yourselves so . brethren , if we have any relish of Christ , any sense of heaven , let us bless God for the life of our soul , the Gospel , and for the spirit of this life , his Anointed . 

But where had been our peace , or this freedom of the Gospel , without our Deliverance ? & where had our deliverance been without him ? As it was reported of the Oak of Mamre , that all religions rendered their yearly worship there . The jews , because of Abraham their Patriarch , the Gentiles because of the Angels that appeared there to Abraham . The christians because of Christ that was there seen of Abraham , with the Angels ; So was there to King james in his first beginnings , a confluence of all sects , with papers in their hands , and ( as it was best for them ) with a Rogamus domine , non pugnamus , like the subjects of Theodosius . But our cousins of Samaria , when they saw that Salomon's yoke would not be lightened , soon flew off in a rage . What portion have we in David ? And now those , which had so soft looked up to heaven in vain , resolve to dig down to hell for aid . Satan himself met them , and offered ( for saving of their labour ) to bring hell up to them . What a world of Sulphur had he provided against that day ? What a brewing of death was tuned up in those vessels ? The murderous Pioners laughed at the close felicity of their project ; and now beforehand seemed in conceit to have heard the crack of this hellish thunder , and to see the mangled carcases of the heretics flying up so suddenly , that their souls must needs go upward towards their perdition ; the streets strawed with legs and arms ; and the stones braining as many in their fall , as they blew up in their rise . Remember the children of Edom , OH Lord , in the day of jerusalem , which said , Down with it , down with it , even to the ground . OH daughter of Babel , worthy to be destroyed , blessed shall he be that serveth thee , as thou wouldst have served us. But he that sits in heaven laughed as fast at them ; to see their presumption that would be sending up bodies to heaven before the resurrection , and preferring companions to Elias in a fiery Chariot ; and said ( ut quid fremuerunt ? ) Consider now how great things the Lord hath done for us ; The snare is broken , and we are delivered . But how ? As that learned Bishop well applied Solomon to this purpose , Divinatio in labijs regis . If there had not been a a divination in the lips of the King , we had been all in jaws of death . Under his shadow we are preserved alive , as jeremie speaketh . It is true , God could have done it by other means , but he would do it by this , that we might own the being of our lives to him , of whom we held our well-being before . O praised be the God of heaven for our deliverance ! Praised be God for his Anointed , by whom we were delivered . Yea how should we call to our fellow creatures ; The Angels , Saints , heavens , elements , meteors , mountains , beasts , trees , to help us praise the Lord for this mercy . And ( as the Oath of the Roman soldiers ran ) how dear and precious should the life of our Caesar be to us , above all earthly things ? How should we have the base unthankfulness of those men , which can say of him , as one said of his Saint Martin , Martinus bonus in auxilio , charus in negotio ; who whiles they owe him all grudge him any thing . Away with the mention of outward things : all the blood in our body is due to him , all the prayers & well-wishes of our souls are due to him , How solemnly Festival should this day be to us , and to our posterities for ever ? How cheerfully , for our peace , our religion , our Deliverance , should we take up that acclamation which the people of Rome used in the Coronation of Charles the great , Carolo jacobo a Deo coronato , magno & pacifico Britannorum Imperatori , vita & victoria . To Charles james crowned of God , the great and peaceable Emperor of Brittany , Life and Victory . And let GOD , and his people say Amen . 

These were great things indeed , that God did for Israel ; great that he hath done for us ; Great for the present , not certain for the future . They had not , no more have we , the blessings of God by entail , or by lease . Only at the good will of the Lord ; and that is , during our good behaviour . Sin is a forfeiture of all favours . If you do wickedly , you shall perish . It was not for nothing , that the same word in the original signifies both sin and punishment ; These two are inseparable . There is nothing but a little priority in time between them . The Angels did wickedly , they perished by their fall from heaven . The old world did wickedly , they perished by waters from heaven . The Sodomites did wickedly , they perished by fire from heaven . Corah and his company did wickedly , they perished by the earth . The Egyptians did wickedly , they perished by the Sea. The Canaanites did wickedly , they perished by the sword of Israel . The Israelites did wickedly , they perished by pestilence , serpents , Philistines . What should I run myself out of breath , in this endless course of examples ? There was never sin but it had a punishment , either in the Actor , or in the Redeemer . There was never punishment , but was for sin . Heaven should have no quarrel against us ; Hell could have no power over us , but for our sins . Those aye they that have plagued us , those are they that threaten us.  

But what shall be the judgement ? Perishing . To whom ? To you and your King. He doth not say , If your King do wickedly you shall perish , as sometimes he hath done . Nor if your King do wickedly he shall perish , although Kings are neither privileged from sins , nor from judgements . Nor if you do wickedly , you only shall perish ; but if ye do wickedly , ye and your King shall perish . So near a relation is there betwixt the King and Subject , that the sin of the one reaches to the judgement of the other , and the judgement of the one , is the smart of both . The King is the head ; the Commons the stomach ; if the head be sick , the stomach is affected . David sins , the people die . If the stomach be sick , the head complains . For the transgression of the people are many Princes . What could have snatched from our Head that sweet Prince , of fresh and bleeding memory , ( that might justly have challenged Othoes' name , Mirabilia mundi ) now in the prime of all the world's expectation , but our traitorous wickednesses ? His Christian modesty upon his deathbed could charge himself . ( no , no , I have sins enough of mine own to do this : ) But this very accusation did clear him , and burden us. OH glorious Prince , they are our sins that are guilty of thy death , and our loss . We have done wickedly , thou perishedst . An harsh word for thy glorified condition . But such a perishing , as is incident to Saints ; ( for there is a Perire de medio , as well as a Perire a fancy , ) a perishing from the earth , as well as a perishing from God. It was a joyful perishing to thee . Our sins have advantaged thy soul , which is partly therefore happy , because we were unworthy of thee ; but they have robbed us of our happiness in thee . O our treacherous sins , that have offered this violence to that sweet hopeful sacred person ! And do they not yet still conspire against him that is yet dearer to us , the root of these goodly branches , the breath of our nostrils , the Anointed of God ? brethren , let me speak it confidently . As every sin is a Traitor to a man's own soul , so every wicked man is a Traitor to his King. Yea every one of his crying sins is a false hearted rebel that hides ponder and pocket-dags for the precious life of his Sovereign . Any state's man may learn this even of Machiavelli himself , which I confess when I red , I thought of the Devil confessing Christ . That the giving of God his due is the cause of the greatness of any state ; and contrarily , the neglect of his service the cause of ruin ; and if any profane Zosimus shall doubt of this point , I would but turn him to Euagrius his Discourse to this purpose , where he shall find instances of enough particulars . What ever politic Philosophers have distinguished , betwixt bonus vir , and civis , I say , that as a good man cannot be an ill Subject , so a lewd man can no more be a good Subject , then evil can be good . Let him sooth , and swear what he will , his sins are so many treasons against the Prince and State , for Ruin is from iniquity , saith Ezechiel . Alas , what safety can we be in , when such miscreants lurk in our houses , jet in our streets ; when the Country , City , Court , is so full of these spiritual conspiracies ? ye that are Magistrates ; not for God's sake only , but for your King's sake , whose deputies ye are , as he is Gods ; not for religion only , but for very policy , as you tender the dear life of our gracious sovereign ; as you regard the sweet peace of this State , and Kingdom ; the welfare of this Church ; Yea , as ye love your own life , peace , welfare , Rouse up your spirits , awaken your Christian courage , and set yourselves heartily against the traitorly sins of these times , which threaten the bane of all these . Cleanse ye these Augean stables of our drunken Taverns , of our profane stages , and of those blind Vaults of professed filthiness , whose steps go down to the Chambers of Death ; yea , to the deep of Hell. And ye , my holy brethren , the messengers of God , if there be any sons of thunder amongst you , if ever ye rattled from heaven the terrible judgements of God against sinners , now do it ; for ( contrary to the natural ) the deep winter of iniquity is most seasonable for this spiritual thunder . Be heard above , be seen beneath . Outface sin , outpreach it , outlive it . We are stars in the right hand of God , let us be like any stars save the Moon , that hath blots in her face ; or the star wormwood , whose fall made bitter waters ; or Saint judes' planets , that wander in irregularities . Let the light of our lives shine in the faces of the world ; and dazzle them whom it shall not guide . then shall we with authority speak what we do , when we do that which we speak . We can never better testify our thankful and loyal respects to so good a King , in whose favour is our life , and by whose grace we are upheld against the unworthy affronts of this sacrilegious age , then by crying down , by living down those sins which threaten our happiness in him . And ye , beloved Christians , whose faces seem worthily to congratulate the joy of this day , if ye would approve yourselves good subjects to our King , labour to be good subjects to His King , the King of heaven . Away with those rebellious wickednesses which may be prejudicial to our peace . In vain shall we testify our loyalty by these outward ceremonies of rejoicing , if we be faulty in the substance . To what purpose shall we ring our bells , if in the mean time we hold fast Salomon's ( funes peccatorum ) cords of sin ; yea the Prophet's cart-ropes of iniquity ; and thereby pull down judgement upon our heads ? To what purpose shall we kindle Bonfiérs in our streets , if we kindle the flames of God's displeasure against us by our sins ? To what purpose shall ye feast one another in your houses , if you shall feast the fiends of hell with your wilful sins ? Daemonum cibus ebrietas , Hierome saith well , Drunkenness , luxury , fornication , and every sin is the very diet and dainties of the Devil . For God's sake therefore , for your King's sake , for your own soul's sake , Be good , that you may be loyal . O my brethren , let us not with old Toby suffer our eyes to be blinded with the Swallows dung of this world . Let us not dare to make a willing shipwreck of conscience , for the venture of a little ballast of gain . Away with our pride , usury , oppression , false weights , false oaths , false faces ; Do no more wickedly , that we perish not . 

They are our sins which as they threaten to lose us our best friend above , ( the God of our salvation ) so they hearten our adversaries against us on earth . Their hopes , their designs , their wickedness to us , hath been professed to be built upon ours to God. If they did not see we did evil , they durst not hope we could perish . Authority hath wisely and seasonably taken order for disarming of wilful Recusants . What should weapons do in the hands of disloyalty ? O that it could take order to strip us of our sins , which will else arm God and his creatures against us ! The gates of Rome , the gates of hell , could not hurt us , if we did not hurt ourselves . O that we could so love ourselves , as to part with all our plausible and gainful evils , that we would this day renew our holy covenants with God , and keep them for ever ! How would he still feed us with the finest of the wheat ? How would he that ( as this day ) when we feared a tempest , gave us an happy calm , prevent a tempest in our calm when we fear not ? How safely should our children play , & we feast in our streets ? How memorable a pattern of mercy should this Hand be to all posterities ? What famous Trophies of victory would he erect over all Antichristianisme amongst us ? How freely and loud should the Gospel of God ring every where in the ears of the generations yet unborn ? How sure should we be , long and long to enjoy so gracious , and dear a Sovereign , so comfortable a peace , so happy a government ? even till this Eve of the Annunciation of the first coming of Christ , overtake the Day of the Annunciation of his second coming , for our redemption . Which God for his mercy's sake , for his Christ's sake vouchsafe to grant to us ▪ 

Amen . 

FINIS . 





Decimum quem que annum Imperatores Romani magna festivitate celebrant . Sozom. l 1. 24.  Idem Euseb . de vita Const . Juxta Homer . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 etc.  Psal . 29.  Jnter 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Pythagorae Oneratis superponendum onus ; id est , ad virtutem incedentibus augmentanda praecepta ; Tradentes se otio relinquendos . Hier. advers . Ruffin . Psal . 2.  josh . 24. 14.  Eccl. ult.  job. de Combis Compend . Theol.  Greg. 3.  Dial. c. 34.  Compunctio formidinis tradit animum compunctioni dilectionis . Pro. 8. 13.  Deut. 6. 13.  Mat. 4. 11  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 isay 29. 13.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Mat. 15. 9  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Plut. Caesare . Act. 23. 10.  Heb. 5. 9  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Eccles . 1. 23.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Eccl. 1. 6.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . v. 20.  Hem. in Ps . 25.  2.  Cor. 7. 11.  Psal . 34. 11.  Heb. 11.  Sic semper Deum praesentem intelligit ac si ipsum qui praesens est in sua essentia vide . rit . Bern. form . bon . vitae . 2.  Sam. 15. 26.  Senec. Epist . Psal . 36. 1.  Ecclus' . 1. 26.  Rom. 6. 16.  Luke 1. 75.  Lud. vives de verit . Relig. l. 4  esay 43. 24.  Non reputes magnum quod Deo seruis , sed maximum reputa , quod ipse dignatur te in seruum assumere sibi . Bernard . Psal . 116.  Revel . ult.  Eccles . 10. 7.  In mea n. patria Deus venture est , & in diem vivitur & sanctior est ille qui ditior est . Hier. ad Chrematium . Mat. 18. 34.  1.  Kin. 21. 20.  Col. 2. 8.  1.  These . 1. 8.  Ambrose . Ep. 108.  Quidam veniunt ut audiant non ut discant , Aliqui cum pugillaribus veniunt non ut res excipiant sed verba . Theod. l. 4. c. 4.  job 13. 4.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Euagr. l. 5. c. 1.  Didymus veridicus . Onimiùm dilecta Deo cui militat aether : & coniurati veniunt ad classica venti . Claud.  Pro. 31. 29.  Soz l. 3. c. 19 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; etc.  Dolm. p. 1. p. 216 p. 2. p. 117.  Theod. 3. 15.  Euseb . de vitae Const . l. 4. c. 4.  1.  Sam. 10. 24.  Euagr. l. 5. 6. 21  Malmesbur . Plato . Euagr. l. 3. c. 34  Euagr. pomell 6. c. 1  Sueton. Vesp . Socr. l. 7. c. 22  Watson . B. Barl. answer to Parsons . p 115. E. Com. Northamp . lib.  1  Tum vero & genitus morientum & sanguine in alto . Armaque corporaque & permisti caede virorli Semianimes voluuntur equi . Virg. Aen. 11.  Nam cum trisiis hyems alias produxerit undas , Tum Nilum retinent ripae . Claud. Epigr.  Otho . Fris . l. 7. c. 29.  Socr. l. 7. c. 22  2  Discors . l. 1. c. 20 Due continuove successions di principi virtuosos fanno grandi effetti . Plato 8. de Repub.  Euseb . de vitae Const . l. 4. c. 36.  Lib 3. 61. 62.  Lib. 3. 63.  Lib. 1. c. 37.  In media istorum frequentia accongressu adesse & una considere non dedignatus . Basil . dor . Lib. 4. 15.  Lib. 3. 43.  & 24  3  Socr. l. 2. c. 3.  Ribera in prophet . min. ex joseph . Antiq. lib. 9 ult. Samaritani judaeos cognatos appellare soliti quamdivillis bene erat . At ubi contra , etc.  1.  King. 12.  Flectere si nequeo , etc.  Psal 137. 7.  Pro. 16 10.  B. Barlow pag. 350.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 

Suet. addit neque me liberosque meos cariores habebo quam Caium & eius sorores . 

Clodoveus Otho Firs . l. 4. c. 32.  Fris . l. 5. c. 31.  Otho . 3.  Fris. 6. 26.  Ossernanza del culto diviao ecagione della grandezza delle . 

Cosi il dispregio diqua , etc. Discorsd . 1. c. 11 

Euagr. l. 3. c. 41.  Ezec. 7. 19  Pro. 7. 27. 9 18  Reu. 8. 11.  jud. 13.  Cum imperio doceiur quod prius agitur quam dicatur . Greg. 23. in job.  Pro. 5. 22.  Hier. de filio prodigo . Daemonum cibus ebrietas , luxuria , fornicatio & universa vitia . Dum nontiniet in sereno patitur tempestatem . Hier. dial . advers . Pelag.  