THE BREATHE OF THE Devout Soul.  

LONDON , Printed , 1648.  

THE BREATHE OF THE Devout Soul.  

I  

Blessed Lord God ; thou callest me to obedience ; and fain would I follow thee : but what good can this wretched heart of mine be capable of , except thou put it there ? thou knowest I cannot so much as wish to think well without thee ; I have strong powers to offend thee ; my sins are my own ; but whence should I have any inclination to good but from thee , who art only , and all good ? Lord , work me to what thou requirest , and then require what thou wilt . 

II  

Lord God , whither need I go to seek thee ? thou art so with me , as that I cannot move but in thee . I look up to heaven ; there I know thy Majesty most manifests itself ; but withal , I know that being here thou art never out of thy heaven , for it is thy presence only that makes heaven : O give me to enjoy thee in this lowest region of thine heavenly habitation ; and as in respect of my natural being , I live and move in thee , so let me not live and move spiritually , but with thee , and to thee . 

III  

whither now , OH whither do ye rove OH my thoughts ? Can ye hope to find rest in any of these sublunary contentments , Alas ? how can they yield any stay to you , that have no settlement in themselves ? Is there not enough in the infinite good to take you up ; but that ye will be wand'ring after earthly varities ▪ O my Lord , how justly mightest thou cast me off with scorn , for casting any affective glances upon so base a rival ? Truly Lord , I am ashamed of this my hateful inconstancy ; but it is thou only that must remedy it ; OH thou that art the father of mercies pity my wildness , and weak distractions : Take thou my heart to thee , it is thine own ; keep it with thee , tie it close to thee by the cords of love , that it may not so much as cast down an eye upon this wretched and perishing world . 

FOUR  

Lord , I confess to my shame , thou art a great loser by me ; for , besides my not improving of thy favours , I have not kept even-reckoning with thee ; I have not justly tallied up thy inestimable benefits : Thy very privative mercies are both without , and beyond my account ; for every evil that I am free from , is a new blessing from thee ; That I am out of bondage , that I am out of pain and misery , that I am out of the dominion of sin ; out of the tyranny of Satan , out of the agonies of an afflicted soul ; out of the torments of hell : Lord , how unspeakable mercies are these ? Yet , when did I bless thee for any of them ? Thy positive bounties I can feel , but with a benumbed and imperfect sense . Lord , do thou enlarge , and intenerate my heart ; make me truly sensible , as of my good received ; so of my escaped evils ; and take thou to thyself the glory of them both . 

v.  

Ah my Lord God , what heats and colds do I feel in my soul ? Sometimes I find myself so vigorous in grace , that no thought of doubt dare show itself ; and me thinks I durst challenge my hellish enemies ; another while I feel myself so dejected and heartless , as if I had no interest in the God of my salvation , nor never had received any certain pledges of his favour : What shall I say to this various disposition ? Whether , Lord , is it my wretchedness to suffer myself to be robbed of thee , for the time , by temptation ? or whether is this the course of thy proceedings in the dispensation of thy graces to the sons of men ; that thou wilt have the breathe of thy Spirit , as where , so how , and when thou pleasest ? Surely , OH my God , if I did not know thee constant to thine everlasting mercies , I should be utterly disheartened with these sad intervals ; now , when my sense fails me , I make use of my faith ; and am no less sure of thee , even when I feel thee not , then when I find the clearest evidences of thy gracious presence . Lord , shine upon me with the light of thy countenance ( if it may be ) always ; but , when ever that is clouded , strengthen thou my faith ; so shall I be safe , even when I am comfortless . 

VI  

OH my God , I am justly ashamed to think what favours I have received from thee , and what poor returns I have made to thee : Truly Lord , I must needs say , thou hast thought nothing either in earth , or in heaven too good for me ; and I , on the other side , have grudged thee that weak● and worthless obedience which thou hast required of me : Alas , what pleasure could I have done to thee who art infinite , if I had sacrificed my whole self to thee , as thou commandest ? thou art , and wilt be thyself , though the world were not ; it is I , I only that could be a gainer by this happy match ; which in my own wrong I have unthankfully neglected ; I see it is not so much what we have , as how we employ it : OH thou , that hast been so bountiful , in heaping thy rich mercies upon me , vouchsafe to grant me yet one gift more ; give me grace and power to improve all thy gifts to the glory of the giver ; otherwise , it had been better for me to have been poor , then ingrateful . 

VII . 

Ah Lord , What struggling have I with my weak fears ? how do I anticipate my evils by distrust ? What shall I do when I am old ? How shall I be able to endure pain ? How shall I pass through the horrid gates of death ? O my God , Where is my faith that I am thus surprised ? Had I not thee to up-hold , and strengthen my soul , well might I tremble and sink under these cares ; but now , that I have the assurance of so strong an helper , as commands all the powers of heaven , earth , and hell , what a shame is it for me to give so much way to my wretched infidelity , as to punish myself with the expectation of future evils ? O for the victory that overcomes the world , even our faith ; thou OH God , art my refuge and strength , a very present help in trouble ; therefore will I not fear though the earth be removed , and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea.  

VIII . 

Lord , I made accounted my days should have been but an inch ; but thou hast ▪ made them a span long ; having drawn out the length of a crazy life beyond the period of my hopes : It is for something , sure , that thou hast thus long respited me from my grave , which looked for me many years ago : Here I am , OH my God , attending thy good pleasure ; thou knowest best what thou hast to do with me ; Dispose of me as thou wilt ; Only make me faithful in all thy services ; resolute to trust myself with thee in all events ; careful to be approved of thee in all my ways ; and crown my decayed age with such fruits as may be pleasing to thee , and available to the good of many ; Lastly , let me live to thee , and die in thee . 

IX . 

How oft , Lord , have I wondered to see the strange carriage of thine administration of these earthly affairs ; and therein to see thy marvellous wisdom , power , goodness , in fetching good out of evil ! Alas , we wretched men are apt enough to fetch the worst of evils , out of the greatest good , turning the grace of thee our God into wantonness : but how have I seen thee , of liveless stones to raise up children to Abraham , of sinners to make Saints ? out of a desperate confusion to fetch order ; out of a bloody war , an happy peace ; out of resolutions of revenge , love ; out of the rock , water ; out of a persecuter , an Apostle ? How can I be discouraged with unlikelihoods , when I see thee work by contraries ? It is not for me , OH my God , to examine or pre-judge thy counsels ; take what ways thou wilt , so thou bring me to thine own end ; all paths shall be direct that shall lead me to blessedness . 

X.  

How many good purposes , OH my God , have I taken up , & let fall to the ground again without effect ? how teeming hath this barren womb of my heart been of false conceptions ? but especially , when thy hand hath been smart and heavy upon me in mine affliction , how have I tasked myself with duties , and revived my firm resolutions of more strict obedience , which yet upon the continuance of my better condition , I have slackened ? Lord , it is from thee that I purposed well ; it is from my own sinful weakness that I failed in my performances ; If any good come me , the will and the deed must be both thine ; The very preparations of the heart are from thee ; and if I have devised my way , it must be thou that directest my steps : OH God , do thou ripen and perfect all the good motions that thou puttest into my soul ; and make my health but such as my sickness promised . 

XI . 

Every man , Lord , is unwilling that his name should die ; we are all naturally ambitious of being thought on when we are gone ; those that have not living monuments to perpetuate them , affect to have dead ; if Absalon have not a son , he will yet erect a pillar : yet when we have all done , time eats us out at the last ; There is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for ever ; seeing that which now is , in the days to come shall all be forgotten . OH God , let it be my care and ambition , what ever become of my memory here below , that my name may be recorded in Heaven . 

XII . 

Thy wise providence , OH God , hath so ordered it , that every man's mind seeks and finds contentment in some thing ; otherwise it could not be ( since we must meet with so frequent crosses in the world ) but that man's life would be burdensome to him ; one takes pleasure in his hawk or hound ; another in his horses and furnitures ; one in fair buildings ; another in pleasant walks and beautiful gardens ; one in travailing abroad ; another in the enjoying of the profits and pleasures of his home ; one in the increase of his wealth ; another in the titles of his honour ; one in a comfortable wife , another in loving and dutiful children ; but when all is done , if there be not somewhat else to uphold the heart in the evil day , it must sink . OH God , do thou possess my soul of thee ; let me place all my felicity in the fruition of thine infinite goodness ; so I am sure the worst of the world hath not power to render me other then happy . 

XIII . 

OH Lord God , under how opposite aspects do I stand ▪ from the world ? how variously am I construed by men ? One pity's my condition , another praises my patience ; One favours me out of the opinion of some good that he thinks he sees in me ; another dislikes me for some imagined evil : What are the eyes , or tongues of men to me ? Let me not know what they say , or think of me , and what am I the better or worse for them ? they can have no influence upon me without my own apprehension : All is in what terms I stand with thee , my God ; if thou be pleased to look upon me with the eye of thy tender mercy and compassion , What care I to be unjustly browbeaten of the world ? If I may be blessed with thy favour , let me be made a gazingstock to the world , to Angels , and to men . 

FOURTEEN . 

Speak Lord , for thy servant heareth : What is it which thou wouldst have me do that I may find rest to my soul ? I am willing to exercise myself in all the acts of piety which thou requirest ; I am ready to fast , to pray , to read ▪ to hear , to meditate , to communicate , to give alms , to exhort , admonish , reprove , comfort where thou bid'st me ; and if there be any other duty appertaining to devotion , or mercy , let me serve thee in it : But , alas , OH my God , howsoever I know these works are in themselves wellpleasing unto thee , yet as they fall from my wretchedness , they are stained with so many imperfections , that I have more reason to crave pardon for them , then to put confidence in them ; and if I could perform them never so tightly , yet one sin is more then enough to dash all my obedience . I see then , OH Lord , I well see there is no act that I can be capable ●o do unto thee , wherein I can find any repose ▪ it must be thine act to me , which only can effect it ; It is thy gracious word , Come unto me all ye that labour , and are heavy laden , and I will give you rest ; Lo this rest must be thy gift , not my earning ; and what can be fi●er than gift ? thou givesh it then , but to those that come to thee ; not to those that come not ; To those that come to thee laden and labouring under the sense of their own wretchedness ; not to the proud , and careless ; OH Saviour , thy sinner is sufficiently laden with the burden of his iniquities ; lad thou me yet more with true penitent sorrow for my sins ; and enable me then to come unto thee by a lively faith ; Take thou the praise of thine own work ; Give me the grace to come ; and give me rest in coming . 

xv.  

OH blessed Saviour , What strange variety of conceits do I find concerning thy thousand year's reign ? What riddles are in that pprophecy ; which no human tongue can aread ? where to fix the beginning of that marvellous millenary , and where the end ; and what manner of reign it shall be , whether temporal , or spiritual ; on earth , or in heaven ; undergoes as many constructions , as there are pens that have undertaken it ; and yet ( when all is done ) I see thine Apostle speaks only of the souls of thy martyrs , reigning so long with thee ; not of thy reigning on earth so long with those Martyrs ; How busy are the tongues of men , how are their brains taken up with the indeterminable construction of this enigmatical truth ? when , in the mean time , the care of thy spiritual reign in their hearts , is neglected ; OH my Saviour , whiles others weary themselves with the disquisition of thy personal reign here upon earth for a thousand years ; let it be the whole bent and study of my soul , to make sure of my personal reign with thee in heaven to all eternity . 

XVI . 

Blessed be thy name , OH God , who hast made a good use even of hell itself ; How many Atheous hearts have been convinced by the very operations of Devils ? Those which would with the stupid Saducees , persuade themselves there are no spirits ; yet when they have sensibly found the marvellous effects wrought even by the base instruments of Satan ; they have been forced to confess , Doubtless there is a God that rules the world ; for so great powers of evil spirits must necessarily evince the greater powers of good ; It is of thy wise and holy dispensation that thy good Angels do not so frequently exhibit themselves , and give so visible demonstrations of their presence to thy Saints , as the evil Angels do to their Vassals , though they are ever as present , and more powerful ; What need they ; when thou so mightily over-rulest those malignant spirits , that thou forcest from them thine own glory , and advantage to thy chosen ? Lord , how much more shall all thy other creatures serve to thy praise , when thy very hellish enemies shall proclaim thy justice , goodness , omnipotence . 

XVII . 

Speculation , OH Lord , is not more easy than practice is difficult ; how many have we known , who , as it was said of the Philosophers of old , know how to speak well , but live ill ; How many have written books of Chemistry , and given very confident directions for the finding out of that precious stone of the Philosophers , but how many have indeed made gold ? Practice is that which thou , OH God , chiefly requirest and respectest ; who hast said , If ye know these things , blessed are ye if you do them ; Knowledge puffeth up , but love edifieth : OH Lord do thou enlighten mine eyes with the knowledge of thy will ; but above all , do thou rectify my affections , guide my feet into the ways of thy commandments ; apply my heart to fulfil thy statutes always ; and Prospero thou the work of my hands upon me , OH prospero thou my handiwork . 

XVIII . 

How oft have I wondered , OH Lord , at the boldness of those men , who knowing they must shortly die , yet dare do those things which will draw upon them eternity of torments ? What shall I say , but , The fool hath said in his heart , there is no God ; Surely , men love themselves well enough ; and would be loath to do that , which would procure them an inevitable misery and pain ; Did they therefore believe there were another world , and that they must be called to a strict reckoning for all their actions , and be doomed to an everlasting death for their wicked deeds , they durst not , they could not do those acts which should make them eternally miserable : Let me say to the most desperate ruffian ; there is poison in this cup , drink this draught and thou diest ; he would have the wit to keep his lips close , and cast the potion to the ground ; were it not for their infidelity , so would men do to the most plausible ( but deadly ) offers of sin . OH Lord , since I know thy righteous judgements ; teach me to tremble at them ; restrain thou my feet from every evil way ; and teach me so to walk , as one that looks every hour to appear before thy just , and dreadful Tribunal . 

XIX 

The longer I live , OH my God , the more do I wonder at all the works of thine hands : I see such admirable artifice in the very least and most despicable of all thy creatures , as doth every day more and more astonish my observation : I need not look so far as Heaven for matter of marvel ( though therein thou art infinitely glorious ) whiles I have but a spider in my window , or a bee in my garden , or a worm under my feet : every one of these overcomes me with a just amazement ; yet can I see no more than their very outsides ; their inward form which gives them their being , and operations , I cannot pierce into ; the lesle I can know , OH Lord , the more let me wonder ; and the lesle I can satisfy myself with marvailing at thy works , the more let me adore the majesty and omnipotence of thee that wroughtest them . 

xx.  

Alas , my Lord God , what poor , weak , imperfect services are those ( even at the best ) that I can present thee withal ! How lean , lame , and blemished sacrifices do I bring to thine altar ! I know thou art worthy of more than my soul is capable to perform ; and fain would I tender thee the best of thine own : but , what I would that I do not ; yea , cannot do : Surely , had I not to do with an infinite mercy , I might justly look to be punished for my very obedience : But now Lord my impotence redounds to the praise of thy goodness ; for were I more answerable to thy justice the glory of thy mercy would be so much lesle eminent in my remission , & acceptance ; Here I am before thee , to await thy good pleasure ; thou knowest whether it be better to give me more ability , or to accept of that poor ability thou hast given me ; but since , when thou hast given me most ▪ I shall still , and ever stand in need of thy forgiveness ; Let my humble suit be to thee always ▪ rather for pardon of my defects , then for a supply of thy graces . 

XXI . 

OH my God ; how do I see many profane and careless souls spend their time in jollity and pleasure ▪ The harp and the Viol , the Tabret and the pipe , and wine are in their feasts ; whiles I that desire to walk close with thee , in all conscionable obedience , droop and languish under a dull heaviness , and heartless dejection : I am sure I have a thousand times more cause of joy and cheerfulness , than the merriest of all those wild and jovial spirits ; they have a world to play withal , but I have a God to rejoice in ; their sports are trivial and momentary ; my joy is serious , and everlasting : One ▪ dram of my mirth is worth a pound of theirs ▪ But , I confess , OH Lord , how much I am wanting to myself in not stirring up this holy fire of spiritual joy ; but suffering it to lie raked up under the dead ashes of a sad neglect : OH thou , who art the God of hope , quicken this heavenly affection in my soul ; and fill me with all joy and peace in believing ; make my heart so much more light than the worldlings , by how much my estate is happier . 

XXII . 

What shall I do Lord ? I strive and tug ( what I may ) with my natural corruptions , and with the spiritual wickednesses in high places which set upon my soul ; but sometimes I am foiled , and go halting out of the field ; it is thy mercy that I live , being so fiercely assaulted by those principalities , and powers ; it were more than wonder if I should escape such hands without a wound : Even that holy servant of thine who striven with thine Angel for a blessing , went limping away , though he prevailed ; what marvel is it that so weak a wretch as I , striving with many evil Angels for the avoidance of a curse , come off with a maim , or a scar ? But blessed be thy name , the wounds that I receive are not mortal ; and when I fall , it is but to my knees ▪ whence I rise with new courage and hopes of victory ; thou who art the God of all power , and keepest the keys of hell and death , hast said , Resist the Devil , and he will flee from you ; Lord , I do and will by thy merciful aid still and ever resist ; make thou my faith as steadfast , as my will is resolute ; O still teach thou my hands to war , and my fingers to fight ; arm thou my soul with strength , and at last according to thy gracious promise , crown it with victory . 

XXIII . 

O Lord God ; how ambitious , how covetous of knowledge is this soul of mine ? as the eye is not satisfied with seeing , nor the ear filled with hearing ; no more is the mind of man with understanding ; yea , so insatiable is my heart , that the more I know , the more I desire to know ; and the lesle I think I know : Under heaven there can be no bounds set to this intellectual appetite : OH do thou stop the mouth of my soul with thy self , who are infinite ; Whom have I in heaven but thee ? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee : Alas , Lord , if I could know all creatures , with all their forms , qualities , workings ; if I could know as much as innocent Adam , or wise Solomon ; Yea more , if I could know all that is done in earth or heaven , what were my soul the better , if it have not attained the knowledge of thee : Since , as the Preacher hath most wisely observed , In much wisdom is much grief , and he that increaseth knowledge , increaseth sorrow ; O then , set off my heart from affecting that knowledge whose end is sorrow ; and fix it upon that knowledge , which brings everlasting life : And this is life eternal , to know thee the only true God ; and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent . 

XXIV . 

OH my God , what miserable uncertainties there are in these worldly hopes ! But yesterday I made account of an eminent advantage of my estate , which now ends in a deep loss . How did we lately feed ourselves with the hope of a firm and during peace , which now shuts up in too much blood ? How confidently did I rely upon the promised favour of some great friends , which now leave me in the suds , as the scom of ( a miscalled ) fortune ? In how slippery places , OH Lord , do our feet stand ? If that may be said to stand which is ever sliding , never fixed ; And not more ●●ippery , then brittle ; so as there is not more danger of falling , then of sinking : With thee , OH God , with thee only , is a constant immutability of happiness ; There let me seek it , there let me find it ; and overlooking all the fickle objects of this vain world , let my soul pitch itself upon that blessed immortality which ere long it hopes to enjoy with thee . 

XXV . 

Lord God , What a wearisome circle do I walk in here below ; I sleep , and dress , and work , and eat , and work again , and eat again , and undress , and sleep again ; and thus wearing out my time find ▪ a satiety in all these , troublesome ; Lord , when shall I come to that state , wherein I shall do nothing but enjoy thee ; do nothing but praise thee ; and in that one work shall find such infinite contentment , that my glorified soul cannot wish to do any other ? and shall therein alone bestow a blessed eternity ? 

XXVI . 

OH God , how troublesome and painful do I find this Sun of thine , whose scorching beams beaten upon my head ? and yet , this excellent creature of thine is that , to which , under thee , we are beholden for our very life ; and it is thy great blessing to the earth , that it may enjoy these strong and forceable rays from it ; O , Who shall be able to endure the burning flames of thy wrath , which thou intendest for the punishment , and everlasting torment of thine enemies ? And if men shall blaspheme the name of thee the God of heaven , for the great heat of that beneficial creature , what shall we think they will do for that fire which shall be consuming them to all eternity ? Lord keep my soul from those flames , which shall be ever burning , and never , either quenched , or abated . 

XXVII 

Which way , OH Lord , which way can I look , and not see some sad examples of misery : One wants his limbs with Mephibosheth , another his sight with Bartimeus , a third with Lazarus wants bread , and a whole skin ; One is pained in his body , another plundered of his estate , a third troubled in mind ; one is pined in prison , another tortured on the rack , a third languisheth under the loss of a dear son , or wife or husband ; Who am I Lord , that , for the present , I enjoy an immunity from all these sorrows ? I am sure none groans under them that hath deserved them more : It is thy mercy , thy mere mercy , OH my good God , that any of these calamities have fallen beside me ; O make me truly thankful for thine infinite goodness ; and yet only so sensible of thy gracious indulgence this way ; as that when any of these evils shall seize upon me , I may be no more dejected in the sense of them , than I am now overjoyed with the favour of their forbearance . 

XXVIII . 

OH blessed God , what variety of gifts hast thou scattered amongst the sons of men ? To one thou hast given vigour of body , to another agility , beauty to a third ; to one depth of judgement , to another quickness of apprehension ; to one readiness and rarity of invention ; to another tenacity of memory ; to one the knowledge of liberal arts , to another the exquisiteness of manuary skill ; to one worldly wealth , to another honour ; to one a wise heart , to another an eloquent tongue ; to one more then enough , to another contentment with a little ; to one valour , to another sagacity : These favours , OH Lord ▪ thou hast promiscuously dispersed amongst both thy friends , and enemies : but o , how transcendent are those spiritual mercies which thou hast reserved for thine own ; the graces of heavenly wisdom , lively faith , fervent charity , firm hope , joy in the holy Ghost and all the rest of that divine beavye . For any competency of the least of thy common blessings I desire to be thankful to thy bounty ; ( for which of them , OH God , can I either merit or requite ? ) but o for a soul truly and eagarly ambitious of those thy best mercies ; O let me ever long for them , and ever be insatiable of them ; O do thou fill my heart with the desire of them , and let that desire never find itself filled . 

XXIX . 

How comfortable a style is that , OH God , which thine Apostle gives to thine Heaven , whiles he calls it the inheritance of the Saints in light ? None can come there but Saints ; the ●oomess of this lower wo●d are taken up , commonly , with wicked men , with beasts , with Devils ; but into that heavenly Jerusalem no unholy thing can enter ; Neither can any Saint be excluded thence ; each of them have not only a share , but an entire right to thy glory : And how many just titles are there , OH Saviour , to that region of blessedness ; It ▪ is thy Father's gift , it is thy purchase , it is thy Saint's inheritance ; theirs only in thy right ; by thy gracious adoption they are sons , and as sons , heirs : coheirs with thee of that blessed Patrimony ; so feoffed upon them , so possessed of them , that they can never be disseized : And ▪ Lord , how glorious an inheritance it is ! An inheritance in light : In light incomprehensible , in light inaccessible : Lo , the most spiritual of all thy visible creatures is light ; and yet this light is but the effect , and emanation of one of thy creatures ▪ the Sun ; and serves only for the illumination of this visible world ; but that supernal light is from the Al-glorious beams of thy Divine Majesty , diffusing themselves to those blessed spirits , both Angels , and Souls of thy Saints , who live in the joyful fruition of thee , to all eternity : Alas , Lord , we do here dwell in darkness , and under an uncomfortable opacity , whiles thy face is clouded from us with manifold temptations there above , with thee , is pure light , a constant noon-tide of glory ; I am here under a miserable and obscure wardship ; O teach me to despise the best of earth ; and ravish my soul with a longing desire of being possessed of that blessed inheritance of the Saints in light . 

XXX . 

What outward blessing can be sweeter than civil peace ? What judgement more heavy than that of the sword ? Yet , OH Saviour , there is a peace which thou disclaimest ; and there is a sword which thou challengest to bring ▪ Peace with our corruptions is war against thee ; and that war in our bosoms , wherein the spirit fights against the flesh , is peace with thee OH let thy good Spirit raise and foment this holy and intestine war more and more within me . And as for my outward spiritual enemies ; how can there be a victory without war ; and how can I hope for a crown without victory ? OH do thou ever gird me with strength to the battle ; enable thou me to resist unto blood ; make me faithful to the death , that thou mayst give me the crown of life . 

XXXI . 

OH Lord God ; how subject is this wretched heart of mine to repining , and discontentment ? If it may not have what it would , how ready it is ( like a froward child ) to throw away what it hath . I know and feel this to be out of that natural pride which is so deep rooted in me ; for could I be sensible enough of my own unworthiness , I should think every thing too good , every thing too much for me : my very being , OH Lord , is more than I am ever able to answer thee ; and how could I deserve it when I was not ? but that I have any helps of my wel-beeing here ; or hopes and means of my being glorious hereafter , how far is it beyond the reach of my soul ? Lord , let me find my own nothingness ; so shall I be thankful for a little , and , in my very want , bless thee . 

XXXII . 

Where art thou , OH my God ? whither hast thou withdrawn thyself ? it is not long , since I found thy comfortable presence with my soul ; now I miss thee , and mourn and languish for thee : Nay , rather , where art thou OH my soul ? my God is where he was ; neither can be any other than himself ; the change is in thee , whose inconstant disposition varies continually , and cannot find itself fixed upon so blessed an object . It will never be better with me , OH my God , until it shall please thee to establish my heart with thy free Spirit ; and to keep it close to thee , that it may not be carried away with vain distractions , with sinful temptations : Lord my God , as thou art always present with me , and canst no more be absent , than not be thyself ; so let me be always with thee , in an humble , and faithful acknowledgement of thy presence ; as I can never be out of thine allseeing eye ; so let mine eyes be ever bend upon thee who art invisible ; thou that hast given me eyes , improve them to thy glory and my happiness . 

XXXIII . 

My bosom , OH Lord , is a Rebeccaes' ▪ womb , there are twins striving within it ; a Jacob and Esau , the old man and the new : whiles I was in the barren state of my unregeneration all was quiet within me ; now this strife is both troublesome , and painful ; so as nature is ready to say , If it be so , why am I thus ? But withal , OH my God , I bless thee for this happy unquietness ; for I know there is just cause of comfort in these inward struggle ; my soul is now not unfruitful , and is conceived with an holy feed which wrestles with my natural corruptions ; and if my Esau have got the start in the priority of time ; yet my Jacob shall follow him hard at the heel , and happily supplant him ▪ And though I must nourish them both , as mine , yet I can , through thy grace , imitate thy choice ; and say with thee , Jacob have I loved , and Esau have I hated ; Blessed God , make thou that word of thine good in me , That the elder shall serve the younger . 

XXXIV . 

Alas , my Lord God , how small matters trouble me ? every petty occurrence is ready to rob me of my peace ; so as , me thinks , I am like some little cockboat in a rough Sea , which every billow topples up and down , and threats to sink : I can chide this weak pusillanimity in myself ; but it is thou that must redress it : Lord , work my heart to so firm a setledness upon thee , that it may never be shaken ; no not with the violent gust● of temptation ; much less with the easy gales of secular mis-accidents : Even when I am hardest pressed , in the multitude of the sorrows of my heart , let thy comforts refresh my soul ; but for these sleight crosses , o teach me to despise them , as not worthy of my notice , much lesle of my vexation : Let my heart be taken up with thee , and then , what care I whether the world smile or frown . 

XXXV . 

What a comfort it is , OH ▪ Saviour , that thou art the first fruits of them that sleep : Those that die in thee , do but sleep : thou saidst so , once , of thy Lazarus ; and mayst say so of him again ; he doth but sleep still ▪ His first sleep was but short , this latter , though longer , is no lesle true ; out of which he shall no lesle surely awake at thy second call , than he did before at thy first ; His first sleep and waking was singular , this latter is the same with ours ; we all lie down in our bed of earth , as sure to wake , as ever we can be to shut our eyes ; In , and from thee , OH blessed Saviour , is this our assurance ; who art the first fruits of them that sleep : The first handful of the first fruits was not presented for itself , but for the whole field , wherein it grew ▪ The virtue of that oblation extended itself to the whole crop : Neither didst thou , OH blessed Jesus , rise again for thyself only , but the power and virtue of thy resurrection reaches to all thine ; so thy chosen Vessel tells as : Christ the first fruits , afterwards they that are Christ's at his coming ▪ So as , though the resurrection be of all the dead , both just and unjust ; yet to rise by the power of thy resurrection , is so proper to thine own , as that thou , OH Saviour , hast styled it the resurrection of the just ; whiles the rest shall be dragged out of their graves by the power of thy Godhead to their dreadful judgement : Already therefore , OH Jesus , are we risen in thee : and as sure shall rise in our own persons ; The Loco-motive faculty is in the head ; thou who art our head art risen , we who are thy members must , and shall follow : Say then , OH my dying body , say boldly unto Death , Rejoice not over me , OH mine enemy , for though I fall , yet I shall rise again : Yea , Lord , the virtue of thy first fruits diffuseth itself , not to our rising only , but to a blessed immortality of these bodies of ours : for , as thou didst rise immortal and glorious , so shall we by , and with thee ; Who shalt change these vile bodies , and make them like to thy glorious body . The same power that could shake off death , can put on glory and Majesty : Lay thee down therefore , OH my body , quietly and cheerfully ; and look to rise in another hue ; thou art sown in corruption , thou shalt be raised in incorruption ; thou art sown in dishonour , thou shalt be raised in glory ; thou art sown in weakness , but shalt be raised in power . 

XXXVI . 

In this life , in this death of the body ; OH Lord , I see there are no degrees , though differences of time ; The man that died yesterday is as truly dead , as Abel the first man that died in the world ▪ and Methuselah that lived nine hundred sixty nine years , did not more truly live , than the child that did but salute , and leave the world ; but in the life to come , and the second death , here are degrees ; degrees of blessedness to the glorified , degrees of torments to the damned ; the least whereof is unspeakable , unconceivable : O thou that art the Lord of life and death , keep my soul from those steps that go down to the chambers of death ; and once set it ( for higher I dare not sue to go ) but over the threshold of glory and blessedness . 

XXXVII . 

OH Lord my God , I am as very a Pilgrim as ever walked upon thy earth ; Why should I look to be in any better condition than my neighbours , than my forefathers ? Even the best of them , that were most fixed upon their inheritance , were no other than strangers at home : It was not in the power of the world to naturalise them , much lesle to make them enroll themselves free-denizons here below ; they knew their country , which they sought , was above ; so infinitely rich , and pleasant , that these earthly regions which they must pass through , are , in comparison , worthy of nothing but contempt . 

My condition is no other than theirs ; I wander here in a strange country ; What wonder is it , if I meet with foreigner's fare , hard usage , and neglect ? Why do I intermeddle with the affairs of a nation that is not mine ? Why do I clog myself in my way with the base and heavy lumber of the world ? Why are not my affections homeward ? Why do I not long to see and enjoy my father's house ? OH my God , thou that hast put me into the state of a Pilgrim , give me a Pilgrim's heart ; set me off from this wretched world wherein I am ; let me hate to think of dwelling here ; Let it be my only care how to pass through this miserable wilderness to the promised land of a blessed eternity . 

XXXVIII . 

One Talon at the least , OH Lord , hast thou put into my hand ; and that sum is great to him that is not worth a dram ; but , alas , what have I done with it ? I confess I have not hid it in a napkin ; but have been laying it out to some poor advantage ; yet surely the gain is so unanswerable , that I am afraid of an Audit ▪ I see none of the approved servants in the Gospel brought in an increase of lesle value than the receipt ; I fear I shall come short of the sum . OH thou , who justly holdest thyself wronged with the style of an austere master , vouchsafe to accept of my so mean improvement ; and thou , who valuedst the poor widows mites above the rich gifts cast into thy Treasury , be pleased to allow of those few pounds that my weak endeavours could raise from thy stock and mercifully reward thy servant , not according to his success , but according to his true intentions of glorifying thee . 

THIRTY-NINE . 

What a word is this which I hear from thee , OH Saviour ; Behold I stand at the door and knock ! thou which art the Lord of life , God blessed for ever , to stand and knock at the door of a sinful heart ! O what a praise is this of thy mercy and long suffering ? What a shame to our dull neglect and graceless ingratitude ? For a David to say I waited patiently upon the Lord ; Truly my soul waits upon God ; it is but meet and comely ; for it is no other than the duty of the greatest Monarches on earth , yea , of the highest Angels in Heaven to attend their Maker ; but for thee the great God of Heaven to wait at the door of us sinful dust and ashes , what a condescension is this , what a longanimity ? It were our happiness , OH Lord , if upon our greatest suit and importunity we might have the favour to entertain thee into our hearts ; but that thou shouldst importune us to admit thee , and shouldst wait at the posts of our doors , till thine head be filled with dew , and thy locks with the drops of the night , it is such a mercy , as there is not room enough in our souls to wonder at . In the mean time what shall I say to our wretched unthankfulnes ; and impious negligence ? thou hast graciously invited us to thee , and hast said ; knock and it shall be opened ; and yet thou continuest knocking at our doors , and we open not ; willingly delaying to let in our happiness ; we know how easy it were for thee to break open the brazen doors of our breasts , and to come in ; but the Kingdom of Heaven suffers not violence from thee , though it should suffer it from us ; thou wilt do all thy works in a sweet and gracious way ; as one who will not force , but win love ; Lord , I cannot open unless thou that knock'st for entrance , wilt be pleased to enable me with strength to turn the key , and to unbolt ▪ this unwieldy bar of my soul . OH do thou make way for thyself by the strong motions of thy blessed Spirit , into the inmost rooms of my heart ; and do thou powerfully incline me to mine own happiness : else , thou shalt be ever excluded , and I shall be ever miserable . 

XLI . 

In what pangs couldst thou be , OH Asaph , that so woeful a word should fall from thee , Hath God forgotten to be gracious ? Surely , the temptation went so high , that the next step had been blasphemy ; Had not that good God , whom thy bold weakness questions for forgetfulness , in great mercy remembered thee and brought thee speedily to remember thyself and him , that which thou confessest to have been infirmity , had proved a sinful despair : I dare say for thee , that word washed thy cheeks with many a tear , and was worthy of more ; For , OH God , What can be so dear to thee as the glory of thy mercy ? There is none of thy blessed attributes which thou desirest to set forth so much unto the sons of men , and so much abhorrest to be disparaged by our detraction , as thy mercy : thou canst , OH Lord , forget thy displeasure against thy people ; thou canst forget our iniquities , and cast our sins out of thy remembrance ; but thou canst no more forget to be gracious , than thou ●anst cease to be thyself ; OH my God , I sin against thy justice hourly , and thy mercy interposes for my remission ; but o keep me from sinning against thy mercy ; What plea can I hope for , when I have made my Advocate mine enemy ? 

XLI . 

How happy , OH Lord , is the man that hath thee for his God ? He can want nothing that is good ; he can be hurt by nothing that is evil ; his sins are pardoned , his good endeavours are accepted ; his crosses are sanctified ; his prayers are heard ; all that he hath are blessings , all that he suffers are advantages ; his life is holy , his death comfortable , his estate after death glorious ; O that I could feel thee to be my God ; that I could enjoy an heavenly communion with thee ▪ In vain should earth or hell labour to make me other then blessed . 

XLII . 

How just a motion is this of thine , OH thou sweet , singer of Israel ; OH love the Lord , all ye his Saints ; Surely they can be no Saints that love not such a Lord ; Had he never been good to them , yet that infinite goodness which is in himself , would have commanded love from Saints : Yet , how could they have been Saints , if he had wholly kept his goodness to himself ? In that then he hath made them Saints , he hath communicated his goodness to them , and challengeth all love from them ; and being made such , how infinitely hath he obliged them with all kinds of mercies ? How can ye choose OH ye Saints but love the Lord ? What have ye , what are ye , what can ye be , but from his mere bounty ? They are slight favours that he hath done you for the world ; in these his very enemies share with you ; How transcendent are his spiritual obligations ! Hath he not given you his Angels for your attendants ; himself for your Protector ; his Son out of his bosom for your Redeemer ; his Spirit for your Comforter ; his heaven for your inheritance ? If gifts can attract love ; OH my God , Who can have any interest in my heart but thy blessed self , that hast been so infinitely munificent to my soul ? Take it to thee , thou that hast made and bought it ; enamour it thoroughly of thy goodness ; make me sick of love ; yea let me die for love of thee , who hast loved me unto death that I may fully enjoy the perfection of thy love , in the height of thy glory . 

XLIII . 

Lord , how have I seen men miscarried into those sins , the premonition whereof they would have thought incredible , and their yeildance thereto , impossible ? How many Hazaels hath our very age yielded , that if a Prophet should have foretold their acts , would have said , Is thy servant a dog that he should do these great things ? O my God , why do not I suspect myself ? What hold have I of myself more than these other miserable examples of human frailty ? 

Lord God , if thou take off thy hand from me , what wickedness shall escape me ? I know I cannot want a tempter ; and that tempter cannot want either power , or malice , or skill , or vigilance or baits , or opportunities ; and for my self , I find too well , that of myself I have no strength to resist any of his temptations : OH for thy mercy's sake , uphold thou me with thy mighty hand ; stand close to me in all assaults ; show thyself strong in my weakness : Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins ; Let them not have dominion over me ; then ( only ) shall I be upright , and shall be innocent from the great transgression . 

XLIV . 

It is thy title , OH Lord , and only thine , that thou givest songs in the night : The night is a sad and dolorous season ; as the light contrarily is the image of cheerfulness ; like as it is in bodily pains and aches , that they are still worst towards night ; so it is in the cares and griefs of mind ; then they assault us most when they are helped on by the advantage of an uncomfortable darkness : Many men can give themselves songs in the day of their prosperity ; who can but howl in the night of their affliction ; but for a Paul and Silas to sing in their prison at midnight ; for an Asaph to call to remembrance his song in the night , this comes only from that Spirit of thine , whose peculiar style is the Comforter : And surely , as music sounds best in the night , so those heavenly notes of praise which we sing to thee our God in the gloomy darkness of our adversity , cannot but be most pleasing in thine ears : thine Apostle bids us ( which is our ordinary wont ) when we are merry to sing , when afflicted , to pray ; but if when we are afflicted we can sing , ( as also when we are merriest we can pray ) that ditty must needs be so much more acceptable to thee , as it is a more powerful effect of the joy of thy Holy Ghost ; OH my God , I am conscious of my own infirmity ; I know I am naturally subject to a dull and heavy ▪ dumpishness , under whatsoever affliction ; thou that art the God of all comfort , remedy this heartless disposition in me ; pull this lead out of my bosom ; make me not patient only , but cheerful under my trials , fill thou my heart with joy , and my mouth with songs in the night of my tribulation . 

XLV . 

It is a true word , OH Lord , that thy Seer said of thee long ago ; The Lord seeth not as man seeth : Man sees the face , thou seest the heart ; man sees things as they seem , thou seest them as they are ; many things are hid from the eyes of men , all things lie open and displayed before thee . What a madness than were it in me to come disguised into thy presence ▪ & to seek to hide my counsels from thine all-seeing eyes ? I must be content , Lord , to be deluded here by fair appearances ; for I may not offer to look into the bosoms of men , which thou hast reserved for thyself ; it is only the outside that I can judge by ; Yea , OH God , if I shall cast my eyes inward , and look into my own breast , even there I find myself baffled at home ; The heart of man is deceitful above all things ; who can know it ? None but those piercing eyes of thine can discover all the windings and turnings of that intricate piece . What would it avail me , OH Lord , to mock the eyes of all the world with asemblance of holiness , whilst thou shouldst see me false and filthy ? Should I be censured by a world of men , when I am secretly allowed by thee , I could contemn it , yea glory in their unjust reproach ; But if thine eye shall note me guilty , to what purpose is all the applause of men ? OH thou that art the God of truth ; do thou open , and dissect this close heart of mine ; search every fiber that is in , or about it ; and if thou findest any ill blood there , let it out ; and if thou findest any hollowness , fill it up ; and so work upon it , that it may be approved of thee that madest it ; as for men , it shall be alike to me whether they spend their breath or save it ▪ 

XLVI . 

Lord God , What a world of treasure hast thou hid in the bowels of the earth , which no eye of man ever did , or shall , or can see ? What goodly plants hast thou brought forth of the earth , in wild , unknown regions , which no man ever beheld ? What great wits hast thou shut up in a willing obscurity , which the world never takes notice of ? In all which thou showest , that it is not only the use and benefit of man which thou regardest in the great variety of thy creation , and acts of administration of the world , but thine own glory , and the fulfilling of thine own good pleasure ; and if only the Angels of heaven be witnesses of thy great works , thou canst not want a due celebration of thy praise ; It is just with thee , OH God , that thou shouldst regard only thy blessed self , in all that thou dost , or hast done ; for all is thine , and thou art all : O that I could sincerely make thee the perfect scope of all my thoughts , of all my actions ; that so we may both meet in one and the same happy end , thy glory in my eternal blessedness . 

XLVII . 

Indeed , Lord , as thou sayest , the night cometh when no man can work ; What can we do , when the light is shut in , but shut our eyes , and sleep ? When our senses are tied up , and our limbs laid to rest , what can we do , but yield ourselves to a necessary repose ? OH my God , I perceive my night hastening on apace , my Sun draws low , the shadows lengthen , vapours rise , and the air begins to darken ; Let me bestir myself for the time ; let me lose none of my few hours ▪ Let me work hard a while ; because I shall soon rest everlastingly . 

XLVIII . 

thou seest , Lord , how apt I am to contemn this body of mine ; Surely when I look back upon the stuff whereof it is made , no better than that I tread upon ; and see the loathsomeness of all kinds that comes from it ; and feel the pain that it oft times puts me to , and consider whither it is going , and how noisome it is above all other creatures upon the dissolution ; I have much ado to hold good terms with so unequal a partner ; But on the other side ; when I look up to thy hand , and ●●e how fearfully and wonderfully thou hast made it ▪ what infinite cost thou hast bestowed upon it , in that thou hast not thought thine own blood too dear to redeem it ▪ that thou hast so far honoured it , as to make it the Temple of thy holy Ghost ; and to admit it into a blessed communion with thyself ; and hast decreed to do so great things for it hereafter ; even to cloth it with immortality , and to make it like unto thy glorious body ; I can bless thee for so happy a mate ; and with patience digest all these necessary infirmities ; and now I look upon this flesh , not as it is , withered and wrinkled ; but as it will be , shining and glorified . OH Lord , how vile so ever this clay is in itself ; yet make me in thine interest and my hopes so enamoured of it , as if I did already find it made celestial . O that my faith could prevent my change , and anticipate my ensuing glory . 

XLIX . 

Lord , what a dreadful favour was that which thou show'dst to thy Prophet Elijah , to send a fiery chariot for him , to convey him up to Heaven ! I should have thought that the sight of so terrible a carriage should have fetched away his soul beforehand , and have left the body grovelling on the earth : But that good Spirit of thine , which had fore-signified that fiery rapture , had doubtless fore-armed thy servant with an answerable resolution to expect , and undergo it : Either he knew that chariot , how ever fearful in the appearance , was only glorious , and not penal ; Or else he cheerfully resolved that such a momentany pain in the change would be followed with an eternity of happiness : OH God , we are not worthy to know whereto thou hast reserved us : Perhaps thou hast appointed us to be in the number of those , whom thou shalt find alive at thy second coming ; and then the case will be ours ; we shall pass through fire to our immortality : or , if thou hast ordained us to a speedier dispatch , perhaps thou hast decreed that our way to thee shall be through a fiery trial . OH God , what ever course thou in thine holy wisdom hast determined for the fetching up my soul from this vale of misery , and tears , prepare me thoroughly for it ; and do thou work my heart to so lively a faith in thee , that all the terrors of my death may be swallowed up in an assured expectation of my speedy glory : and that my last groans shall be immediately seconded with eternal Allelujahs , in the glorious Chore of thy Saints and Angels in Heaven . Amen . 

Amen . 

FINIS . 





1 Joh. 5. 4.  Psal . 46. 1. 2.  Psal . 39 6.  Judas 4.  prov. 16. 1.  prov. 16. 9  Eccles 2. 16.  Matth. 11. 28.  1 Cor. 8. 1.  Psal . 119. 112.  Psal 90. 17.  Rom. 7. 15.  Jsa . 5. 12.  Rom. 15. 13.  Ephes . 6. 12.  Psal . 144 ▪ 1.  Eccles . 1. 8.  P● . 73. 25.  Eccles . 1. 18.  Joh. 17. 3.  rev. 16. 9  Rom. 8. 17.  Ps . 51. 12.  Gen. 25. 22.  1 Cor. 15. 23.  Act. ●4 . 15.  Luk. 14. 14.  Micah 7. 8.  Phil. 3. 21.  1 Cor. 15. 42 , 43.  Heb. 11. 13 , 14 , 15.  Luk. 19 16. 17 , 18 , 19  Ps . 40. 1.  Ps . 62. 1.  Cant. 5. 2.  P● . 77 ▪ 9  Micha . 7. 18 , 19  Psal . 31. 23.  2 Kings . 8. 13.  Psal . 19 13.  Job 35. 10.  Eccles . 11. 7.  Act. 16. 25.  Ps . 77. 6.  1 Sam. 16. 7.  