THE RIGHTEOUS MAMMON : 

An Hospitall-sermon Preached in the solemn Assembly of the CITY on Monday in Easter-weeke 1618.  

By JOS HALL. D. of D.  

LONDON , Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter . 1618.  

TO MY MUCH HONOURED FRIEND Sr HENRY BAKER Knight & Baronet . 

SIR , 

amongst many to whom my poor labonrs owe much for their acceptation , I know none that can challenge so deep a debt as yourself . If others have tasted of my well-meant papers , you have fed heartily on them ; and so made them your own , that your memory may compare with others eyes , and your practice with the speculation of others : Neither have your hand or tongue been niggardly dissemblers of your spiritual gain . Unto you therefore ( to whose name I had long since in my desires devoted my next ) do I send this mean present : A Sermon importunately desired of many : That which the present Auditors found useful , the Press shall communicate to posterity ; The gain of either , or both is no less mine : I doubt not but you have already so acted that part of this discourse which concerneth you , that the direction I give to others is but an history of what you have done . And go on happily ( worthy Sir ) in those your holy courses which shall lead you to immortality ; and so use your riches that they may be made up into a crown for your head in a better world : My hearty well-wishes shall not be wanting to you , and your virtuous Lady , as whom you have obliged to be justly 

Worcester April 14.  Yours Jos. HALL. . 

1 TIM . 6. 17.  

Charge them that are rich in this world , that they be not high minded , nor trust in uncertain riches , but in the living God , who giveth us richly all things to enjoy . etc.  

THOSE things which are excellent , and beneficial in their use , are dangerous in their miscarriage : It were lost labour for me to persuade you how good riches are : your pains and your cares are sufficient proofs of your estimation ; And how deadly the abuse of them is , many a soul feels that cannot return to complain ; There is nothing more necessary therefore , for a Christian heart , than to be rectified in the menaging of a prosperous estate ; and to learn so to be happy here , that it may be more happy hereafter ; A task which this Text of ours undertakes , and ( if ye be not wanting to it and yourselves ) will be sure to perform : What should I need to entreat your attention ( Right Honourable , right Worshipful , and beloved ) to a business so nearly concerning you ? The errand is Gods ; the use of it yours . 

I never held it safe to pull Scripture in pieces : These words fall alone into their parts . Timothy is set upon the spiritual Bench , and must give the charge . A charge , to whom ? Of what ? To whom ? To the rich : Of what ? what they must avoid , what they must endeavour : What must they avoid ? Hy-mindednesse , & Trust in wealth : What are the duties they must labour unto ? Confidence in God ; Beneficence to men : And every one of these is backed with a reason to enforce it : Why should they not be hy-minded ? Their wealth is but in this world ; Why should they not trust in riches ? They are uncertain . Why should they trust in God ? He is a living God , and a liberal God : Why should they extend their beneficence to men ? By this they lay up to themselves a sure foundation : Here is work enough you see for my discourse , and your practice : The God of heaven bless it in both our hands . 

Charge hath janus-like ) a double aspect ; one that looks up to S. Paul , the other that looks down to Timothy , and from him , to the rich : In the first there is Apostolical superiority ; for ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) Charge thou , refers to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 verse 13.  I Charge thee ; so Paul charges Timothy to charge the rich ; He that gives the Charge , if he be not the chief of the Bench , yet he is greater than the jury ; The first foundation of the Church is laid in an inequality ; and hath ever since so continued ; There can be no harmony where all the strings or voices are of one tenor ; In the latter , as it looks on Timothy , it carries in it Episcopal power , evangelical sufficiency : Episcopal power ; for this Charge is by the vulgar turned , and the Translation of the Syriac , Praecipe , command ; and so do we translate it in the first of this Epistle , and the third verse ; Timothy was left at Ephesus ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) to command . 

The rich are commonly great ; Nobility in the account of God is joined with wealth ; Curse not the King in thy thought , nor the Rich in thy Bedchamber , saith Solomon ; so Dives at whose gates Lazarus lay is by some no mean ones guessed to be Herod , or some other King ; and so are jobs friends termed by the seventy ▪ Yea the rich is not only a little King amongst his neighbours , but Dives , quasi Diws ; as a petty God to his underlings , and yet even the rich man that ( as Solomon notes ) speaks with command unto others , he must be spoken to with command . Command the rich . That foolish shaveling soared too hie a pitch , when in his imperious Bull he mands the Angels : Francis of Assize and he , were both of a Diet ; But we may safely say that all powers below the Angels , are liable to our spiritual Charge ; and this Command implies obedience ; Else , to what purpose do we command and go without ? Christ gave us the keys ; ( for that which the Romanists would pled out of Origen , of Claves coeli , The keys of heaven to the rest , and Claves coelorum , The keys of the heavens to Peter is a distinction without a difference ) ; What becomes of them ? That I may not say on some of our hands they are suffered to rust for want of use ; on others , ( as the Pontificians ) the wards are altered , so as they can neither open nor shut ; Sure I am that ( if they be not lost on our behalf whether in disuse , or abuse ) the power of them is lost in the hearts of many : They have secret picklocks of their own making , Presumption and security , whereby they can open heaven gates though double locked by our censures , and shut the gates of hell at pleasure , which their own sins have opened wide to receive them ; What use is there of us , but in our chair ? and there , but to be heard , and seen ? Even in this sense spectaculo facti sumus ; we are to gaze on , not to employ : Now ye are full , now ye are rich , ye reign as Kings without us ; we are weak , ye are strong ; ye are honourable , but we are despised ; It was well noted by one , that the good father of the prodigal , though he might himself have brought forth the prime robe ; or have led his son into his wardrobe to take it , yet he commands his servants to bring it forth ( Proferte stolam ) because he would bring means into credit ; because he would have his sons beholden to his servants for their glory . It is a bold word , but a true one , Ye shall never wear the long white robe , unless his servants your ministers bring it , and put it on . He that can save you without us , will not save you but by us : He hath not tied himself to means , man he hath ; He could create you immediately to himself , but he will have you begotten by the immortal seed of your spiritual fathers : Woe be to you therefore , if our word have lost the power of it in you : you have lost your right in heaven : Let us never come there if you can come thither ordinarily without us. The words of the wife ( saith Solomon ) are like goads , like nails ; But if these goads light upon the skin of a Leviathan , who esteems iron as straw , and brass as rotten wood ; If these nails meet with iron , or marble in their driving , that they turn again ; What shall we say but our Gospel is hid to them that perish ; and woe unto your souls , for ye have rewarded evil to yourselves . 

Hitherto the power employed in this charge ; the sufficiency followeth : This Euangelicus must be parangelicus ; Like as the forerunner of Christ had a charge for all sorts , so must his followers ; So hath Timothy in this Epistle , A charge for wives , for Bishops , for Deacons , for widows , for servants , and here for the rich ; He must charge ; and how shall he charge , if he have neither shot nor powder ? It is no brag to say that no Nation under heaven since the Gospel looked forth into the world , ever had so many , so learned teachers as this ISLAND hath at this day . Hierom said of old to his Paulinus , De Hierosôlymis & de Britannia aequaliter patet aula coelestis ; Heaven is as open in Britain as in Jerusalem ; It holds well if you take it for a prophetical comparison betwixt jerusalem as it had been , and Britain as it should be : jerusalem the type of God's Church upon earth , in the glory of all her legal magnificence was never more blessed , than this Church of ours : For the Northern part of it beyond the Twede , we saw not , we heard not of a Congregation ( whereof indeed there is not so great frequency ) without a preaching Minister ; and though their maintenance hath been generally but small , yet their pains have been great , and their success suitable : And now lately , his sacred Majesty in his last year's journey ( as if the sun did out of compassion go beyond his Tropic line , to give heat unto the Northern climate ) hath so ordered it , that their means shall be answerable to their labours ; so as both Pastors and people profess themselves mutually blessed in each other ; and bless GOD and their KING for this blessedness : As for the learning and sufficiency of those Teachers ( whether Prelates or Presbyters ) our ears were for some of them sufficient witnesses , and we are not worthy of our ears , if our tongues do not thankfully proclaim it to the world . As for this Southern part , when I consider the face of our Church in an universality , me thinks I see the firmament in a clear night , bespangled with goodly stars of all magnitudes , that yield a pleasing diversity of light unto the earth ; But withal , through the incomparable multitude of Cures , and the incompetent provision of some , we cannot but see some of our people ( especially in the utmost skirts ) like to those that live under the Southern pole , where the stars are thinner set ; & some stars there are in our Hemisphere , like those little sparkles in the Galaxy , or Milky circle , wherein ye can scarce discern any light ; The desire of our hearts must be that every Congregation , every soul might have a Timothy to deliver the charge of God powerfully unto it ; even with S. Paul's change of note ; That every one which hath a charge were ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) able to give the charge ; and every hearer ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) ready to take it : Wherein I cannot but thankfully congratulate the happiness of this famous City , which if in other riches it equalise the best , I am sure in this it exceeds all . There is not a City under the cope of heaven so wealth in the spiritual provision ; yea there are whole countries in Christendom , that have not so many learned Preachers , as are within these walls and liberties ; Hear this , ye Citizens , and be not proud , but thankful ; Others may exceed you in the glory of outward structure , in the largeness of extent , in the uniform proportion of streets , or ornaments of Temples , but your pulpits do surpass theirs ; & if preaching can lift up Cities unto heaven , ye are not upon earth ; Happy is it for you if ye be as well fed as taught , and woe be to you if you do not think yourselves happy . 

Charge then , but whom ? The rich : Man that came naked out of the womb of the earth , was even then so rich , that all things were his ; Heaven was his roof or Canopy , earth his floor , the sea his pond , the Sun and Moon his torches , all creatures his vassals : And if he lost the fullness of this lordship by being a slave to sin , yet we have still Dominium gratificum , as Gerson terms it ; Every son of Abraham is heir of the world : But to make up the true reputation of wealth ( for thus , we may be as having all things , and possessing nothing ) another right is required besides spiritual , which is a civil and human right ; wherein I doubt not but our learned Wiclef , and the famous Archbishop of Armach , and the more famous Chancellor of Paris ( three renowned Divines of England , France , and Ireland have had much wrong , whiles they are accused to teach , that men in these earthly things have no tenure but grace , no title but Charity : which questionless they intended in foro interiori , in the Consistory of God , not in the Common-pleas of men ; in the Courts , not of Law , but of Conscience ; in which only it may fall out , that the Civil owner may be a spiritual usurper , and the spiritual owner may be a civil beggar . God frames his language to ours , and speaking according to that Ius Gentium , whereon the division of these earthly possessions are grounded , he calls some Rich , others , poor : Those heretics which called themselves Apostolic ( as some body doth now at Rome ) before the time of Epiphanius & Augustine , which taught the unlawfulness of all earthly proprieties ; seconded in Austin's time , by our countryman Pelagius , and in our times by some of the illuminate Elders of Munster ; are not worth confutation ; or , if they were , our Apostle hath done it to our hands , in this one word , Rich ; for there can be neither Rich nor poor in a community ; Neither doth he say , Charge men that they be not rich , but Charge the rich that they be not hye-minded . 

With these , let us couple our ignorant Votaries , that place holiness in want ; with whom , their very crosses cannot deliver their coin from sin ; which , to make good the old rule , that it is better to give then to receive , give all they have away at once , for but a licence to beg for ever . Did these men ever hear that the Blessing of God maketh rich ? That the wings of riches carry them up to heaven ? That the crown of the wise is their wealth ? Do they not know that if Lazarus were poor , yet Abraham was rich , and Pium pauperem suscepit sinus divitis ; It was the happiness of poor Lazarus that he was lodged in the bosom of rich Abraham . I am no whit afraid , ( o ye rich Citizens ) lest this paradox of our holy Mendicants shall make you out of love with your wealth ; I fear some of you would be rich , though ye might not ; Now we tell you from him , whose title is Rich in mercy , that ye may be at once Rich and holy ; In divitijs cupiditatem reprehendit , non facultatem saith Austen : It is a true word of the son of Sirach , which I would have you carry home with you , and write it as a fit Motto , in your Countinghouse ; Bona est substantia , si non sit peccatum in conscientia ; Substance doth well in the hand , if there be not evil in the heart . Ecclesiasticus 13. 25.  

Charge the Rich ; Who are they ? There is nothing wherein is greater mesprison . One man in a Laodicean conceitednes thinks himself rich , when he hath nothing ; Another , in a covetous humour thinks he hath nothing , when he is rich ; and how easy is it for another man to mistake us , if we may thus easily mistake ourselves ? I fear some of you are like the Pageants of your great solemnities , wherein there is the show of a solid body , whether of a Lion , or Elephant , or Unicorn , but if they be curiously looked into , there is nothing but cloth , and sticks , and air ; Others of you contrarily are like a dissembling Covent , that professes poverty , & purchases Lordships ; The very same did Solomon observe in his time , in the great Burgomasters of jerusalem Pro. 13. 7.  For the avoiding of both extremes , let us inquire who is rich . And though greatness and riches be in the rank of those things , which are held to have no absolute determination , but consist rather in respect & comparison ( for a rich Farmer is yet poor to a rich Merchant , and a rich Merchant is but poor to a Prince , and he to some great Emperor ; That great Mammonist would say he is rich that can maintain an Army , a poor man would say according to that Italian inscription , He is rich that wants not bread ) ; Yet certainly there are certain general stakes and bounds , which divide betwixt poverty and competence , betwixt competency and wealth ; As there were variety of shekels among the jews , yet there was one shekell of the Sanctuary that varied not ; Who then is rich ? I must give you a double answer ; One will not serve ; The one according to true morality , the other according to vulgar use : In the first he is rich that hath enough , whether the world think so or not ; Even Esau though he were poor in grace , yet in estate he was rich , I have enough my brother ; And he that said , Soul thou hast goods enough for many years , was almost so ; It was not his fault that he thought he had enough , but that he meant to lie down , and wallow in it . A man's wealth or poverty is mostwhat in himself ; And though nature have professed to read unto heathen men this lesson of wise moderation , yet it hath been seldom seen that any thing but true piety , hath taught them to take it out ; Godliness is great gain with contentment : Victus & vestitus divitiae Christianorum , saith Hierom : Food and raiment are the Christians wealth ; Those men therefore , which are still in the horse leeches note , sucking and craving ; which like Pharaohs lean kine are ever feeding , and never the fatter , are as far from true wealth , as they would be from poverty , and further I am sure they cannot be , and not further from wealth then godliness ; Having is the measure of outward wealth , but it is thinking that must measure the inward ; thoughts , I say , of contentment , cheerfulness , and thankfulness , which if ye want , it is not either or both the Indieses that can make you rich . 

In the latter , he is rich that hath more than enough , whether he think so or no ▪ He that hath the possession ( whether civil , or natural ) of more than necessary : Now if necessary and superfluous seem as hard to define as rich ; know there are just limits for both the●●● Superfluous is defined by necessary ; for what is 〈◊〉 necessary , is superfluous : There is then a double necessary ; One of nature , the other of estate : That is necessary to nature without which we cannot live , that to estate , without which we cannot live well : That is necessary to estate , which were superfluous to nature ; and that which were superfluous to nature , is not so much as necessary to estate ; Nature goes single , and bears little breadth ; Estate goes ever with a train ; The necessity of nature admits little difference , especially for quantities ; the necessity of estate requires as many diversities , as there are several degrees of human conditions , and several circumstances in those degrees . justly therefore do the Schoolmen and Casuists teach , that this necessary to the decency of estate doth not confist in puncto individuo , but hath much latitude ; That is necessary to scarlet , which to russet were superfluous ; that is but necessary to a Nobleman , which to an Esquire were superfluous ; That were superfluous to a Pere , which to a Prince is but necessary : That is necessary to the father of a family , which to a single man were superfluous : Neither doth this necessity look only to the present , but to the future ; not to what may be ( which were an endless prospect ) but to what must be , the marriage of a daughter , the education of a son , the honest provision for posterity : He that in a just estimate can go beyond the bounds of this necessary , enters into the superfluous estate , and may well pass with the world for rich . 

Such a one is rich ; let him look how he became so : That God which can allow you to be rich , will not allow you always to your wealth : He hath set up a golden goal , to which he allows you all to run , but ye must keep the beaten road of honesty , justice , charity , and truth ; if ye will leave this path , and will be crossing over a shorter cut through byways of your own , ye may be rich with a vengeance . The heathen Poet ( one of them whom S. Paul cited ) could observe ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) which Solomon translates to us Prou. 28. 20.  He that makes haste to be rich shall not be innocent . If you have filled your bags with fraud , usury , extortion , this gain may be honey in your mouth , but it will be gravel in your throat , and poison in your soul : There are some means of wealth in an ill name , as those two trusty servants of Mammon , use and brocage ; there are others as bad as they , little said to : Since I speak to Citizens , let me be bold to say , there is not so errand usury in letting of money , as in sale of wares . This oppression is both more , & more universal . There are two maxims that do usually misled men of Traffic , all the world over ; The one i , Res valet quanti vendi potest , A thing is worth what it may be sold for ; The other , Caveat emptor , At the buyers peril : The one is in regard of the price , the other in regard of the quality of the wares . In the first , whereas our Casuists have set three prices , low , mean , rigorous , they super add a fourth , excessive ; and think they may lawfully get what they can : Whereas they shall once find , that as the rigorous price is a strain of charity , so the excessive is a violation of justice ; neither doth this gain differ aught from theft , but that it is honested by a fair cozenage . In the second ; It matters not how defective the measure be , how vicious the substance , how false the kind , let this be the buyers care ; no man is bound to buy , no man can do wrong to himself ; Such wares must be put off , ( perhaps not to customers ) with concealment of faults , if not with protestations of faultlesnes . In Salomon's time , It is naught , it is naught said the buyer , & when he was gone apart , he boasted ; But now , It is good , it is good , saith the seller , and when the buyer is gone , he boasteth of his deceit . Let me appeal to your bosoms , if these two , Excess of price , and Deficiency of worth have not been the most serviceable factors to bring in some of your wealth ; And let me tell you , if these be guilty of your gains , you may mis-name your trades , Mysteries , but sure these tricks are mysteries of iniquity . It were envious and infinite to arraign the several sciences of their adulteration and fraud ; let me rather shut them all up together in that fearful sentence of wise Solomon , Vhe gathering of treasures by a deceitful tongue , is a vanity tossed to and from of them that seek death : and ( if ye please ) read on in the next verse , The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them . Search your chests , search your hearts ( o all ye that hear me this day ) and if any of you find any of this adulterine gold amongst your heaps , away with it , as ye love yourselves , away with it ; Else know that ( as Chrysostome wittily ) ye have locked up a thief in your countinghouse , which will carry away all , and if ye look not to it the sooner , your souls with it . 

Rich , In this world , not Of it . As S. john distinguisheth of being in the Church , and being of it , so doth S. Paul of the world ; Those are the rich of the world which are worldlings in heart , as well as in estate ; Those are rich in the world , whose estate is below , whose hearts are above : The rich of the world are in it , but the rich in the world are not of it : Marvel not there should be so much difference in little particles ; The time was when this very difference of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , set the the whole world together by the ears in the controversy of Eutyches , and Dioscorus ; and here , you see there is no less distance between them , then betwixt heaven and earth : If Timothy , or S. Paul either , should have charged the rich of the world he had charmed a deaf adder ; Yea perhaps even with this charge ( like a rusty or ill-wrought piece ) they had recoiled in his face with those Athenians , What will this babbler say ? The Prophet is a fool , the spiritual man is mad , as they say in the Prophet : There is no good to be done on a worldly heart ; it is both hard and cold ; Let the Smith strike a bar new-come out of the fire ( though it be iron ) it bows , let him strike on his anvil never so long , there is no impression , but rather a rebound of the stroke : The maker of all hearts tells us , that the unregenerate man hath Cor lapideum , an heart of stone , and to what purpose do we with our venerable Countryman preach to an heap of stones ? Will ye have the reason why we preach ourselves hoarse and dead , and prevail not ? The world is in men's ears , the world is in their hearts ; and they are not in the world , but of it ; and there can be nothing in them that are of the world , but that which is enmity to God ; and that which God repays with enmity , so as there is no way for them but perishing with the world : It is for those only whose hearts are not in their bags , to receive the charge from God for their wealth , and to return glory to him by it : To these ( whereof I hope here are many before me ) must Timothy's charge , and my speech be directed : Let these hear their condition first , and then their duty : Their condition , They are rich , but In this world ; For distinction , for limitation ; one implies the estate of their riches , the other the time . 

Their estate , as learned Beza , that they are but worldly riches . The very word imports that there are other riches , not of the world ; as Austen distinguishes of Pauper in animo , and in sacculo ; poor in mind , and in purse ; so may we of the rich : There is a spiritual wealth , as well as a secular ; and so true and precious is the spiritual , that the secular wealth is but stark beggary to it ; This outward wealth is in acres of earth , in the bowels of the earth , the fruits of the earth , beasts of the earth ; and all of it is valued by pieces of earth , and one mouthful of earth makes an end of all ; Who knows not that Earth is the basest piece of the world , and yet earth is at the end of all these riches , and all of them end in the earth : See what it is that the world dotes and dreams of ( for these earthly hopes , as the divine Philosopher said , are but dreams of the waking ) even Nebuchadnezzars' image , a composition of metals , and the foot of all is clay . Earthly men tread upon their felicity , and yet have not the wit to contemn it and to seek a better , which is the spiritual wealth ; the cabinet whereof is the soul , and the treasure in it , God himself . O happy resolution of that blessed Father , Omnis mihi copia , quae Deus meus non est , egestas est , All wealth besides my God , is penury . Ambiant terrena , saith another , Let the Gentiles seek after earthly things which have no right to heavenly , let them desire the present , which believe not the future ; The Christians wealth is his Saviour , and how can he complain of measure that hath the author of all ? What should I need to say more of the Christian heart , He is rich in God ; and therefore well may he sing that contented ditty of the Psalmist , Funes ceciderunt mihi in praeclaris , My lot is fallen in a good ground , and I have a goodly heritage : O that it could be our ambition that Nazianzen reports of his Philagrius , lutum contemnere , to scorn this base and ( pardon an homely word ) dirty God of the world , and to aspire unto the true riches ; and when Satan shall offer to grease us in the fist to remit but a little of the rigour of a good conscience , we could cast it in his face with S. Peter's indignation , Thy gold and thy silver perish with thee . 

The estate of wealth is not more described by this world , than the time ; For ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) when it is absolutely spoken , be , as the Philosopher ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) yet when it is restrained with a ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) it is scarce a time ; and at the most , is turned justly seculum à sequendo , as Isidore . Like as the same word in the Hebrew that signifies eternity , at other times signifies but fifty years , the compass of a jubilee ; So as ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) is but the space of human life , which how short soever , is the utmost extent of the use of worldly riches . Wealth is like unto words , by imposition , not natural ; for commodities are as they are commonly valued ; we know bracelets of glass , and copper chains , and little bells , and such like trifles are good merchandise somewhere , though contemptible with us ; and those things which the Indians regard not , Europe holds precious : What are coins where their use and valuation ceases ? The Patars , and Souses , and Deniers , and Quart-d'escus that are currant beyond the water , serve but for counters to us : Thus it is with all our wealth : Consider I beseech you that all our Crowns , and Soveraynes , and Pieces , and halfe-peeces , and Ducats , and double Ducats are currant but to the brim of the grave , there they cease ; and we justly laugh at the folly of those Eastern pagans' , which put coin into the dead man's hand for his provision in another world : What should we do therefore , if we will be provident travellers , but make over our money here , to receive it by exchange in the world to come ; It is our Saviour's counsel , Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon , that they may receive you into everlasting habitations : And as a Father says sweetly , If ye will be wise merchants , thrifty and happy usurers , part with that which ye cannot keep , that you may gain that which ye cannot lose ; Which that ye may do , both in preparation of mind , and ( when need is ) in a charitable abdication , hearken to the Duties which GOD lays upon you . The removal of evil must make room for good ; First therefore our Apostle would have our hearts cleared of evil dispositions , then settled in good : The evil dispositions that do commonly attend wealth , are Pride and Misconfidence : Against these our Apostle bendeth his charge ; That they be not hye-minded ; That they trust not in uncertain riches . 

For the first ; It is strange to see how this earthly dross , which is of itself heavy , and therefore naturally sinks downward , should raise up the heart of man ; and yet it commonly carries a man up , even to a double pitch of Pride , one above others , the other above himself , Above others in contempt , above himself in overweening ; The poor and proud is the Wiseman's monster , but the proud and rich are no news : It is against all reason that metals should make difference of reasonable men , of Christians ; for as that wise Lawgiver said , A free man can be valued at no price ; Yet Solomon noted in his time , The rich rules the poor ; not the wise ; and Siracides in his , The rich speaks proudly , and what fellow is this ? and S. james in his , The man with the gold ring looks to sit hyest . And not to cast back our eyes , Do ye not see it thus in our times ? If a man be but worth a foot-cloth , how big he looks on the inferior passengers ? and if he have purchased a little more land , or title than his neighbours , you shall see it in his garb ; If he command , it is imperiously , with sirrah , and fellow ; If he salute , it is overly , with a surly and silent nod ; if he speak , it is oracles ; if he walk , it is with a grace ; if he control , it is in the kill accent ; if he entertain , it is with insolence , and whatsoever he doth , he is not as he was , nor , as the Pharisee says , like other men . He looks upon vulgar men , as if they were made to serve him , and should think themselves happy to be commanded ; and if he be crossed a little , he swells like the sea in a storm ; Let it be by his equal , he cares more for an affront , then for death , or hell ; Let it by his inferior , ( although in a just cause ) that man shall be sure to be crushed to death for his presumption : And alas when all is done , after these hie terms , all this is but a man , and ( God knows ) a foolish one too , whom a little earthly trash can affect so deeply . 

Neither doth this pride raise a man more above others , then above himself ; And what wonder is it if he will not know his poor neighbours , which hath forgotten himself ? As Saul was changed to another man presently upon his anointing , so are men upon their advancement ; and according to our ordinary proverb , Their good and their blood rises together ; Now it may not be taken as it hath been ; Other carriage , other fashions are fit for them ; Their attire , fare , retinue , houses , furniture displease them , new must be had ; together with coaches , and lackeys , and all the equipage of greatness : These things ( that no man mistake me ) I mislike not ; they are fit for those that are fit for them . Charity is not straitlaced , but yields much latitude to the lawful use of indifferent things ; ( although it is one of Salomon's vanities that servants should ride on horseback , and he tells us it becomes not a swine to be ringed with gold ) but it is the heart that makes all these evil ; when that is puffed up with these windy vanities , and hath learned to borrow that part of the Devil's speech , All these things are mine ; and can say with him that was turned into a beast , Is not this great Babel that I have built , or with that other pattern of pride , I sit as a Queen , I am , and there is none beside me , now all these turn into sin . 

The bush that hangs out , shows what we may look for within ; whither doth the conceit of a little inheritance transport the Gallants of our time ? OH God , what a world of vanity hast thou reserved us to ? I am ashamed to think that the Gospel of Christ should be disgraced with such disguised clients . Are they Christians , or Antics in some Carnevale , or children's puppets that are thus dressed ? Pardon , I beseech you , men , brethren , and fathers , this my just and holy impatience , that could never express itself in a more solemn assembly ( although I perceive those whom it most concerns , are not so devout as to be present ) . Who can without indignation look upon the prodigies , which this mis-imagination produces in that other sex , to the shame of their husbands , the scorn of religion , the damnation of their own souls . Imagine one of our forefathers were alive again , and should see one of these his gay daughters walk in Cheapside before him ; what do you think he would think it were ? Here is nothing to be seen but a verdingale , a yellow ruff , and a periwig , with perhaps some feather waving in the top ; three things for which he could not tell how to find a name : Sure , he could not but stand amazed to think what new creature the times had yielded since he was a man : And if then he should run before her , to see if by the fore-side he might guess what it were , when his eyes should meet with a powdered firzle , a painted hide shadowed with a fan not more painted , breasts displayed , and a loose lock erring wantonly over her shoulders , betwixt a painted cloth , and skin , how would he yet more bless himself to think , what mixture in nature could be guilty of such a monster . Is this ( thinks he ) the flesh and blood , is this the hair , is this the shape of a woman ? or hath nature repent of her work since my days , and begun a new frame ? It is no marvel if their forefathers could not know them ; God himself that made them , will never acknowledge that face he never made , the hair that he never made theirs , the body that is ashamed of the maker , the soul that thus disguises the body ; Let me therefore say to these Dames , as Benet said to Totilaes' servant , Depone filia quod portas , quia non est tuum ; Lay down that ye wear , it is none of your own : Let me persuade them ( for that can work most ) that they do all this in their own wrong : All the world knows that no man will rough cast a marble wall , but mud , or unpolisht rag : That beauty is like truth , never so glorious , as when it goes plainest ; that false art in stead of mending nature , mars it : But if none of our persuasions can prevail ; Hear this ye garish popingayes of our time , if you will not be ashamed to clothe yourselves in this shameless fashion , God shall clothe you with shame and confusion : Hear this , ye plaister-faced jezebels , if you will not leave your daubing and your hie washeses , God shall one day wash them off with fire and brimstone . 

I grant , it is not wealth alone that is accessary to this pride ; there are some that ( with the Cynic , or that worse dog , the patched Cistertian ) are proud of rags ; there are others , that are rich of nothing but clothes , somewhat like to Nazianzens' country of Ozizala , that abounded in flowers , but was barren of corn ; Their clothes are more worth than all the rest ; as we use to say of the Elder , that the flower of it , is more worth than all the tree besides ; but if there be any other causes of our hye-mindednesse , wealth is one , which doth ordinarily lift up our heads , above ourselves , above others ; and if there be here any of these empty bladders , that are puffed up with the wind of conceit , give me leave to prick them a little ; and first , let me tell them they may have much , and be never the better ; The chimnye overlookes all the rest of the house , is it not ( for all that ) the very basest piece of the building ? The very heathen man could observe ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 etc. ) That God gives many a man wealth for their greater mischief ; As the Israelites were rich in Quails , but their sauce was such , that famine had been better ; little cause had they to be proud that they were fed with meat of Princes , with the bread of Angels , whiles that which they put into their mouths , God fetched out of their nostrils . Haman was proud that he alone was called to the honour of Esters feast , this advancement raised him fifty cubits higher , to a stately gibbet ; If your wealth be to any of you an occasion of falling , if your gold be turned into fetters , it had been better for you to have lived beggars . Let me tell them next , of the folly of this Pride ; They are proud of that which is none of theirs . That which law , and case-divinitie speaks of life , that man is not dominus vitae suae sed custos , is as true of wealth : Nature can tell him in the Philosopher , that he is not Dominus but Colonus , not the Lord but the farmer : It is a just observation of Philo , that God only by a propriety is styled the possessor of heaven and earth , by Melchisedech , in his speech to Abraham ; We are only the Tenants , and that at the will of the Lord ; At the most ( if we will as Divines ) we have ius ad rem , not dominium in rem , right to these earthly things , not lordship over them ; but right of favour from their proprietary , and Lord in heaven , and that liable to an account : Do we not laugh at the groom that is proud of his Master's horse , or some vain whiffler , that is proud of a borrowed chain ? So ridiculous are we to be puffed up with that , whereof we must needs say , with the poor man , of the hatchet , Alas master it is but borrowed ; and whereof our account shall be so much more great , and difficult , as our receipt is more ; Hath God therefore jaded you with these earthly riches , be ye like unto the full ear of corn , hang down your heads in true humility towards that earth from which you came : And if your stalk be so stiff , that it bears up above the rest of your ridge , look up to heaven , not in the thoughts of pride , but in the humble vows of thankfulness , and be not hye-minded , but fear . 

Hitherto of the hye-mindednesse that follows wealth ; Now where our pride is , there will be our confidence ; As the wealth therefore may not be proud of their riches , so they may not trust in them ; What is this trust , but the setting of our hearts upon them , the placing of our joy and contentment in them ; in a word , the making of them our best friend , our patron , our idol , our God ? This the true and jealous God cannot abide , and yet nothing is more ordinary ; The rich man's wealth is his strong City , saith Solomon , and where should a man think himself safe but in his fort ? He sees Mammon can do so much , and hears him talk of doing so much more , it is no marvel if he yield to trust him , Mammon is so proud a boaster , that his clients which believe in him , cannot choose but be confident of him ; For what doth he not brag to do ? Silver answers to all , saith Solomon ; That we grant ; although we would be loath it could answer to Truth , to justice , to judgement : But yet more , he vaunts to procure all , to pacify all , to conquer all ; He says he can procure all , secular offices , titles , dignities ; yea ( I would I might not say in some sacrilegious and perjured wretches ) the sacred promotions of the Church ; and ye know that old song of the Pope , and his Roman traffic , Claves , Altaria , Christum : Yea foolish Magus makes full accounted the Holy Ghost himself may be had for money : He says he can pacify all ; A gift in the bosom appeaseth wrath ; yea he says ( look to it ye that sit in the seats of judicature ) he can sometimes bribe off sins , and pervert judgement : He says he can overcome all , according to the old Greek verse , Fight with silver lances , and you cannot fail of victory ; yea he would make us believe he thought this a bait to catch the son of God himself withal ( All these will I give thee ) , briefly he says according to the French proverb , Silver does all ; And let me tell you indeed , what Mammon can do ; He can bar the gates of heaven , he can open the gates of hell to the unconscionable soul , and help his followers to damnation : This he can do ; but for other things , howsoever with us men , the foolish Silversmiths may shout out , Great is Mammon of the worldlings , yet if we weigh his power aright , we shall conclude of Mammon ( as Paracelsus doth of the Devil ) that he is a base and beggarly spirit : For what I beseech you , can he do ? Can he make a man honest ? can he make him wise ? can he make him healthful ? Can he give a man to live more merrily , to feed more heartily , to sleep more quietly ? Can he buy off the gout , cares , death , much less the pains of another world ? nay , doth he not bring all these ? Go to then , thou rich man ; God is offended with thee , and means to plague thee with disease and death ; Now try what thy bags can do ; Begin first with God , & see whether thou canst bribe him with thy gifts , and buy off his displeasure ; Wherewith shalt thou come before the Lord and bow thyself before the hie God ? will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams , or with ten thousand rivers of oil ? The silver is mine , and the gold is mine , saith the Lord of hosts , Haggai 2.  If that speed not , go to the sergeant of God , death ; see if thou canst fee him , not to arrest thee ; He looks thee sternly in the face , and tells thee with Ehud he hath a message to thee from God ; and bids thee with the Prophet set thine house in order , for thou must die ; Yet , if he hear thee not , go to the under-bayliffe of Death , disease , see if he can be wrought to forbear thee ; he answers thee with Laban , This thing is proceeded of the Lord I cannot therefore say to thee evil or good . In sum , Disease will summon thee unto death ; Death will arrest thee to the judgement seat of God , God will pass his doom upon thee , and in all these riches avail not in the day of wrath : And who would be so mad as to trust a friend that he knows will be sure never to fail him , but when he hath most need ? Take heed therefore , as ye love your souls , how ye bestow your Trust upon riches ; Ye may use them , and serve yourselves of them ; yea ye may enjoy them in a Christian moderation ; God will allow it you : That praise which the Jesuits College at Granado gives of their Sanchez , that ( though he lived where they had a very sweet garden ) yet he was never seen to touch a flower , and that he would rather die then eat salt , or pepper , or aught that might give relish to his meat ; like as that of some other Monks , that they would not see the sun , nor shifted their clothes , nor cleanse their teeth , carries in it more superstition and austerity and slovenry , than wit or grace : wherefore hath God made his creatures but for use ? This niggardliness is injurious to the bounty of their maker ; we may use them , we may not trust to them ; we may serve ourselves of them , we may not serve them ; we may enjoy them , we may not over-ioy in them ; So must we be affected to our goods , as Theoderic the good King of Aquitaine , was with his play , In bonis iactibus tacet , in malis ridet , in neutris irascitur , in utrisque philosophatur ; In good casts he was silent , in ill , merry ; in neither angry , a philosopher in both . But if we will be making our wealth a rival unto God , now the jealousy of God shall burn like fire ; this is the way to bring a curse upon our riches , and us ; If we lean upon this reed , it shall break , and run into our hand ; and he that trusteth in riches shall fall . Prou. 11. 28.  

Now as the disdainful rival will be sure to cast reproaches upon his base competitor ; so doth God , that we may see how unworthy riches are of our trust , he tells us they are uncertain , yea uncertainty itself . Were our wealth tied to our life , it were uncertain enough ; what is that but a flower , a vapour , a tale , a dream , a shadow , a dream of a shadow , a thought , as nothing ? What are great men but like hailstones , that leap up on the Tiles , & strait fall down again , & lie still , & melt away ? But now , as we are certain that our riches determine with our uncertain life ( for goods and life are both in a bottom , both are cast away at once ; ) so we cannot be certain they will hold so long ; Our life fly's hastily away , but many times our riches have longer wings , and out-flie it ; It was a witty observation of Basil that wealth rolls along by a man , like as an heady stream glides by the banks ; Time will molder away the very bank it washeth , but the current stays not for that , but speeds forward from one elbow of earth unto another ; so doth our wealth even while we stay , it is gone gone In our penal laws , there are more ways to forfeit our goods , than our lives ; On our hie ways , how many favourable thieves take the purse , and save the life ? And generally , our life is the tree , our wealth is the leaves , or fruit ; the tree stands still when the leaves are fallen , the fruit beaten down ; Yea many a one is like the Pinetree , which ( they say ) if his bark be pulled off lasts long , else it rots ; so doth many a man live the longer for his losses ; If therefore life and wealth strive whether is more uncertain , wealth will sure carry it away . job was yesterday the richest man in the East ; to day he is so needy that he is gone into a proverb , As poor as job : Belisarius the great and famous Commander , to whom Rome owed her life twice at least , came to Date obolum Belisario ; one halfpenny to Belisarius . What do I instance ? This is a point wherein many of you Citizens , that are my auditors this day , might rather read a lecture unto me ; You could tell me how many you have known , reputed in your phrase , goodmen , which all on the sudden have shut up the shop windows , & broken for thousands ; You could reckon up to me a catalogue of them , whom either casualty of fire , or inundation of waters , or robbery of thieves , or negligence of servants , or suretyship for friends , or oversight of reckonings , or trusting of customers , or unfaithfulnes of Factors , or inexpected falls of markets , or piracy by sea , or unskilfulnes of a pilot , or violence of tempests have brought to an hasty poverty ; and could tell me that it is in the power of one gale of wind to make many of you either rich Merchants , or beggars : O miserable uncertainty of this earthly pelf , that stands upon so many hazards , yea that falls under them ! who would trust it ? who can dote upon it ? what madness is it in those men , which ( as Menot says ) like unto hunters , that kill an horse of price , in the pursuit of an hare worth nothing , endanger yea cast away their souls upon this worthless and fickle trash . Glasses are pleasing vessels , yet because of their brittlenesse , who esteems them precious ? All Salomon's state was not comparable to one Tulip , his royal crown was not like the Crown Imperial of our Gardens ; and yet because these are but flowers , whose destiny is fading and burning , we regard them thereafter ; no wise man bestows much cost in painting mud-walls . What mean we ( my beloved ) to spend our lives and hearts upon these perishing treasures ? It was a wise meditation of Nazianzen to his Asterius ; that good is to no purpose if it continue not ; yea there is no pleasant thing in the world , saith he , that hath so much joy in the welcome , as it hath sorrow in the farewell : Look therefore upon these heaps , o ye wise-hearted Citizens , with careless eyes , as those things whose parting is certain , whose stay is uncertain ; and say with that worthy father , By all my wealth , and glory , and greatness this alone have I gained , that I had something to which I might prefer my Saviour . And know that as Abraham whiles he was in his own country ( it is Cyrills' note ) had never God appearing to him , save only to bid him go forth , but after , when he was gone forth , had frequent visions of his maker ; So whiles in our affections we remain here below in our coffers , we cannot have the comfortable assurances of the presence of God ; but if we can abandon the love and trust of these earthly things , in the conscience of our obedience , now God shall appear to us , and speak peace to our souls ; and never shall we find cause to repent us of the change . Let me therefore conclude this point with that divine charge of our Saviour , Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth , where mothe and rust do corrupt , and thieves break thorough and steal , but lay up for yourselves treasure in heaven . 

Thus much of the negative part of our charge ; Wherein we have dwelled so long , that we may scarce sojourn in the other . Trust not , but Trust ; The heart of man is so conscious of his own weakness , that it will not go without a prop ; and better a weak stay than none at all ; Like as in matter of policy , the very state of Tyranny is preferred to the want of a King ; The same breath therefore that withdraws one refuge from us , substitutes a better ; and in steed of riches , which is the false God of the world , commends to us the True and living God of heaven and earth ; Even as some good Carpenter raises up the studds , and in steed of a rotten groundsell lays a sound ; The same trust than must we give to God , which which we may not give to riches ; The object only is changed , the act is not changed . Him must we esteem above all things , to him must we look up in all , on him must we depend for all both protection , and provision ; from his goodness and mercy must we acknowledge all , and in him must we delight with contempt of all ; and this is to Trust in God. It was a sweet ditty of the Psalmist , which we must all learn to sing , Bonum est considere in Domino , It is good to trust in the Lord : Good , in respect of him , and good for us. For him , It is one of the best pieces of his glory , to be Trusted to : as , with us , joseph holds Potiphar cannot do him a greater honour , then in Trusting him with all ; And his glory is so precious , that he cannot part with that to any creature ; All other things he imparts willingly , and reserves nothing to himself but this : Being , life , knowledge , happiness are such blessings , as are eminently , originally , essentially in God , and yet , Being , he gives to all things , Life to many , Knowledge to some kinds of creatures , happiness to some of those kinds , as for riches , he so gives them to his creature , ●hat he keeps them not at all to himself ; But as for his glory ( whereof our trust is a part ) he will not endure it communicated to Angel , or man ; not to the best guest in heaven , much less to the dross of the earth ; Whence is that curse not without an indignation , Cursed be the man trusts in man ; that maketh flesh his arm , yea or spirit either , besides the God of spirits ; Whom have I in heaven but thee ? Herein therefore we do justice to God , when we give him his own , that is , his glory , our confidence . 

But the greatest good is our own ; and God shows much more mercy to us in allowing and enabling us to trust him , than we can do justice in trusting him ; For alas he could in his just judgement glorify himself in our not Trusting him , in taking vengeance of us for not glorifying him : Our goodness reaches not to him ; but his goodness reaches down to us in that our hearts are raised up to confidence in him . For , what safety , what unspeakable comfort is there in Trusting to God ? When our Saviour in the last words of his divine-farewell-sermon to his Disciples would persuade them to confidence , he says ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) : and so doth the Angel to Paul in prison ; a word that signifies Boldness ; implying that our confidence in God causeth Boldness and courage ; And what is there in all the world that can work the heart to so comfortable and unconquerable resolution as our reposall upon God ? The Lord is my trust , whom then can I fear ? In the Lord put I my trust , how say ye then to my soul , flee hence as a bird to the hills ? Yea how oft doth David infer upon this Trust , a non confundar , I shall not be ashamed ; And this case is general , That they that put their trust in the Lord are as mount Zion that cannot be moved ; Faith can remove mountains , but the mountains that are raised on faith , are unremovable . Here is a stay for you ( o ye wealth and great ) worthy of your trust ; If ye were Monarches on earth , or Angels in heaven , ye could be no way safe but in this trust ; How easy is it for him to enrich , or impoverish you , to hoist you up to the seats of honour , or to spurn you down ? What mines , what Princes can raise you up to wealth , against him , without him ? He can bid the winds and seas favour your vessels , he can bid them sink in a calm . The rich and the poor meet together , God is the maker of both ; Ye may trade , and toil , and cark , and spare , and put up , and cast about , and at last sit you down with a sigh of late repentance and say , Except the Lord build the house , they labour in vain that build it ; It is in vain to rise early , and lie down late , and eat the bread of sorrow . Unto how many of you may I say with the prophet Haggai , Ye have sown much , and bring in little ; Ye eat and have not enough , ye drink , but ye are not filled , ye clothe you , but ye be not warm ; and he that earneth much , puts his gains into a broken bag . And whence is all this ? Ye looked for much , and lo it came to little ; when ye brought it home I did blow upon it , saith the Lord of hosts . Behold how easy a thing it is for the God of heaven to blast all your substance ; yea not only to diminish , but to curse it unto you , and to make you weary of it , and of yourselves . O cast yourselves therefore into those Almighty hands , seek him in whom only you shall find true rest and happiness ; Honour him with your substance , that hath honoured you with it ; Trust not in riches , but trust in GOD.  

It is motive enough to your Trust , that he is a God ; all arguments are enfolded in that one ; yet this text gives you certain explicit enforcements of this confidence ; Every one of these reasons ( implying a secret kind of disdainful comparison betwixt the true God and the false ) persuade you to trust in God ; riches are but for this world , the true God is Lord of the other , and begins his glory where the glory of the world ends : therefore Trust in him . riches are uncertain , the true GOD is Amen , the first and the last ; ever like himself , therefore trust in him . riches are but a liveless and senseless mettle , the true God is a living God , therefore trust in him . riches are but passives in gift , they cannot bestow so much as themselves , much less ought besides themselves , the true God gives you all things to enjoy , therefore Trust in him ; the two latter , because they are more directly stood upon , and now fall into our way , require a further discourse . 

( El-chai ) The living God , is an ancient and usual title to the Almighty ; especially when he would disgrace an unworthy rival . As S. Paul in his speech to the Lystrians , opposes to their vain Idols , the living GOD. Vivo ego , As I live , is the oath of God for this purpose , as Hierom noteth , neither do I remember any thing besides his holiness , and his life that he swears by : When Moses asked God's name , he described himself by , I am ; He is , he lives ; and nothing is , nothing lives absolutely , but he ; all other things by participation from him . In all other things , their life and they are two ; but God is his own life , and the life of God is no other than the living God : And because he is his own life , he is eternal ; for ( as Thomas argues truly against the Gentiles ) Nothing ceases to be but by a separation of life , and nothing can be separated from itself ; for every separation is a division of one thing from another ; Most justly therefore is he which is absolute , simple , eternal in his being , called the living God : Although , not only the life that he hath in himself , but the life that he gives to his creatures challengeth a part in this title ; A glimpse whereof perhaps the Heathen saw , when they called their jupiter , ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) from ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) which signifies to live : In him we live ( saith S. Paul to his Athenians ) . As light is from the Sun , so is life from God , ( which is the true soul of the world , and more ; for without him it could not be so much as a carcase ; and spreads itself into all the animate creatures . Life ( we say ) is sweet ; and so it is indeed ; the most excellent and precious thing that is derived from the common influence of God. There is nothing before life , but Being ; and Being makes no distinction of things ; for that can be nothing , that hath no Being ; Life makes the first and greatest division ; Those creatures therefore , which have life , we esteem far beyond those , that have it not , how noble soever otherwise ; Those things therefore which have the perfitest life must needs be the best ; Needs than must it follow that he which is life itself , who is absolute , simple , eternal , the fountain of all that life which is in the world , is most worthy of all the adoration , joy , love , and confidence of our hearts , and of the best improvement of that life which he hath given us. Trust therefore in the living GOD. Covetousness ( the spirit of God tells us ) is Idolatry , or ( as our old Translation turns it ) worshipping of Images . Every stamp or impression in his coin is to the covetous man a very Idol ; And what madness is there in this Idolatry , to dote upon a base creature , and to bestow that life which we have from God , upon a creature that hath no life in itself , and no price but from men : Let me then persuade every soul that hears me this day , as jacob did his household , Put away the strange Gods that are among you , & be clean ; and as S. Paul did his Lystrians ; O turn away from these vanities unto the living God.  

The last attractive of our Trust to God is his mercy , and liberality ; Who gives us richly all things to enjoy : A theme , wherein ye will grant it easy to lose ourselves . First God not only hath all in himself , but he gives to us , He gives , not somewhat ( though a crust is more than we are worthy of ) but all things . And not a little of all , but richly ; and all this , not to look on , but to enjoy ; Every word would require not a several hour , but a life to meditate of it ; and the tongue not of men , but Angels to express it . It is here with us , as in a throng ; we can get neither in nor out ; But as we use to say of Cares , so it shall be with our discourse , that the greatness of it shall procure silence ; and the more we may say of this head , the less we will say : It shall content us only to top these sheaves , since we cannot stand to thresh them out . 

whither can ye turn your eyes to look beside the bounty of God ? If ye look upward ; His mercy reaches to the heavens . If downward ; The earth is full of his goodness , and so is the broad sea . If ye look about you ; What is it that he hath not given us ? Air to breath in , fire to warm us , water to cool us , clothes to cover us , food to nourish us , fruits to refresh us , yea delicates to please us ; beasts to serve us , Angels to attend us , heaven to receive us , and which is above all , his own Son to redeem us. Lastly , if ye look into yourselves ; Hath he not given us a soul to inform us , senses to inform our soul , faculties to furnish that soul . Understanding , the great survayer of the secrets of nature , and grace ; Fantasy and Invention the master of the works ; Memory the great keeper or Master of the rolls of the soul , a power that can make amends for the speed of Time , in causing him to leave behind him those things , which else he would so carry away , as if they had not been : Will , which is the Lord Paramount in the state of the soul , the commander of our actions ; the elector of our resolutions . judgement , which is the great Counsellor of the will : Affections , which are the servants of them both . A body fit to execute the charge of the soul , so wondrously disposed , as that every part hath best opportunity to his own functions ; so qualified with health arising from proportion of humours that like a watch kept in good tune it goes right , and is fit to serve the soul , & maintain itself . An estate that yields all due conveniences for both soul , and body ; seasonable times , rain , & sunshine ; Peace in our borders ; competency , if not plenty of all commodities , good laws , religious , wise , just governors , happy and flourishing days , and above all the liberty of the Gospel . Cast up your books , o ye Citizens , & sum up your receipts , I am deceied if he that hath lest shall not confess his obligations infinite . There are three things especially wherein ye are beyond others , and must acknowledge yourselves deeper in the books of God , than the rest of the world ; Let the first be the clear deliverance from that woeful judgement of the Pestilence . O remember those sorrowful times , when every month swept away thousands from among you ; When a man could not set forth his foot but into the jaws of death ; when piles of carcases were carried to their pits as dung to the fields ; when it was cruelty in the sick to admit visitation , and love was little better than murderous ; And by how much more sad and horrible the face of those evil times looked , so much greater proclaim you the mercy of God , in this happy freedom which you now enjoy ; that you now throng together into God's house without fear , and breath in one another's face without danger : The second is the wonderful plenty of all provisions both spiritual and bodily ; You are the Sea , all the rivers of the land run into you ; Of the land ? yea of the whole world , Sea and land conspire to enrich you . The third is the privilege of careful government ; Your charters as they are large and strong , wherein the favour of Princes hath made exceptions from the general rules of their municipal laws , so your form of administration is excellent , and the execution of justice exemplary , and such as might become the mother City of the whole earth . For all these you have reason to ask , Quid retribuam with David ; What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits ? and to excite one another unto thankfulness with that sweet singer of Israel , O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness : and ( as beneficence is a binder ) these favours of God call for your confidence : What should you do but ever trust that God , whom you have found so gracious ? Let him be your God , be ye his people for ever ; and let him make this free and open challenge to you all ; If there be any power in heaven , or in earth that can do more for you then he hath done let him have your hearts and yourselves . 

And thus from that duty we owe to God in our confidence , and his beneficence to us , we descend to that beneficence which we owe to men ; expressed in the variety of four Epithets , Doing good , being rich in good works , ready to distribute , willing to communicate ; all to one sense ; all is but beneficence : The scriptures of God lest any Atheist should quarrel at this waste , have not one word superfluous ; Here is a redoubling of the same words without fault of Tautology ; a redoubling of the same sense in diverse words , without idleness . There is fervour in these repetitions , not looseness ; as it was wont for this cause to be observed both in Counsels , and acclamations to Princes , how oft the same word was reiterated , that by the frequency they might judge of the vehemence of affection . It were easy to instance in many of this kind , as especially Exod. 25. 35.  Psal . 89. 30.  joh. 1. 20. and so many more , as that their mention could not be void of that superfluity which we disclaim . This heap of words therefore shows the vehement intention of his desire of good works , and the important necessity of their performance ; and the manner of this expression enforces no less , Charge the rich , that they do good , and be rich in doing good . Hearken than ye rich men of the world ; it is not left arbitrary to you , that you may do good if you will , but it is laid upon you as your charge and duty ; You must do good works , and woe be to you if you do not . This is not a counsel , but a precept ; Although I might say of God , as we use to say of Princes , his will is his command ; The same necessity that there is of Trusting in God , the same is in Doing good to men . Let me sling this stone into the brazen foreheads of our adversaries , which in their shameless challenges of our religion dare tell the world , we are all for faith , nothing for works ; and that we hold works to salvation as a parenthesis to a clause , that it may be perfect without them : Heaven and earth shall witness the injustice of this calumniation ; and your consciences shall be our compurgators this day , which shall testify to you , both now , and on your deathbeds , that we have taught you there is no less necessity of good works , then if you should be saved by them ; and that though you cannot be saved by them , as the meritorious causes of your glory , yet that you cannot be saved without them , as the necessary effects of that grace which brings glory . 

It is an hard sentence of some Casuists ( concerning their fellows ) that but a few rich men's Confessors shall be saved ; I imagine , for that they daub up their consciences with untempered mortar , and soothe them up in their sins ; Let this be the care of them whom it concerneth ; For us , we desire to be faithful to God , and you ; and tell you roundly what you must trust to ; Do good therefore ye rich , if ever ye look to receive good ; if ever ye look to be rich in heaven , be rich in good works upon earth : It is a shame to hear of a rich man that dies , and makes his will of thousands , and bequeathes nothing to pious and charitable uses : God and the poor are no part of his heir ; We do not hover over your expiring souls on your deathbeds , as Ravens over a carcase ; we do not beg for a Covent , nor fright you with Purgatory , nor chaffer with you , for that invisible treasure of the Church whereof there is but one Key-keeper at Rome ; but we tell you that the making of friends with this Mammon of unrighteousness is the way to eternal habitations : They say of Cyrus that he want to say he laid up treasures for himself , whiles he made his friends rich ; but we say to you , that you lay up treasures for yourselves in heaven , whiles you make the poor your friends upon earth : We tell you there must be a Date , ere there can be a Dabitur ; that he which gives to the poor , lends upon use to the Lord ; which pays large increase for all he borrows ; and how shall he give you the interest of glory , where he hath not received the principal of beneficence ? How can that man ever look to be God's heir in the kingdom of heaven , that gives all away to his earthly heirs , and lends nothing to the God of heaven ? As that witty Grecian said of extreme tall men , that they were Cypresse-trees 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 etc. fair and tall , but fruitless , so may I say of a straithanded rich man ; And these Cypresses are not for the garden of paradise ; none shall ever be planted there but the fruitful : And if the first paradise had any trees in it only for pleasure , I am sure the second , which is in the midst of the new jerusalem , shall have no tree that bears not twelve fruits , yea whose very leaves are not beneficial ; Do good therefore o ye rich , and show your wealth to be , not in having , but in doing good . And if GOD have put this holy resolution into any of your hearts , take this with you also , from him ; Do not talk , and purpose , and project , but execute ; Do not so do good that we may thank your deathbed for it , and not you : Late beneficence is better than none , but so much as early beneficence is better than late ; He that gives not till he dies , shows that he would not give , if he could keep it , and God loves a cheerful giver ; That which you give thus , you give it by your Testament , I can scarce say you give it by your will : The good man's praise is , Dispersit , dedit , he disperses his goods , not , he left them behind him ; and his distribution is seconded with the retribution of God , His righteousness endureth for ever , Psal . 112. 9  Our Saviour tells us that our good works are our light , Let your light so shine , that men may see your good works ; which of you let's his light go behind him , and hath it not rather carried before him , that he may see which way it goes , and which way himself goes by it ? Do good therefore in your life , that you may have comfort in your death , and a crown of life after death . 

Now all this have I spoken , not for that I have aught ( as S. Paul says ) whereof to accuse my Nation ; Blessed be God , as good works have abounded in this age , so this place hath superabounded in good works . Be it spoken to the glory of that God , whose all our good works are , to the honour of the Gospel , to the conviction of that lewd slander of Solifidianisme . LONDON shall vie good works with any City upon earth ; This day and your ears are abundant witnesses ; As those therefore that by an handful guess at the whole sack , it may please you by this years brief to judge of the rest ; Wherein I do not fear least Envy itself shall accuse us of a vainglorious ostentation ; Those obstreperous benefactors that ( like to hens which cannot lay an egg but they must cackle strait ) give no alms but with trumpets , lose their thanks with God ; Alms should be like oil , which though it swim aloft when it is fallen , yet makes no noise in the falling ; not like water , that still sounds where it lights : But howsoever private beneficence should not be acquainted with both the hands of the giver , but silently expect the reward of him that seeth in secret , yet God should be a great loser , if the public fruits of charity should be smothered in a modest secrecy : To the praise therefore of that good GOD , which gives us to give , and rewards us for giving , to the example of posterity , to the honour of our profession , to the encouragement of the well-deserving , and to the shame of our malicious adversaries , hear what this year hath brought forth . 

Here followed a brief memorial of the charitable acts of the City this year last passed . etc.  

And if the season had not hindered , your eyes should have seconded your ears in the comfortable testimony of this beneficence , Euge etc.  Well done good and faithful servants ; Thus should your profession be graced , thus should the incense of your alms ascend in pillars of holy smoke into the nostrils of God ; thus should your talents be turned into Cities : This colour is no other than celestial , and so shall your reward be ; Thus should the foundation be laid of that building , whose walls reach up unto heaven , whose roof is finished and laid on , in the heaven of heavens , in that immortality of glory , which the God of all glory , peace , and comfort hath provided for all that love him ; Unto the participation whereof the same God of ours mercifully bring us , through the son of his love , jesus Christ the righteous , to whom with the Father , and the Holy Ghost , one infinite and incomprehensible God be given all praise , honour , and glory now and forever . 

Amen . 





Charge  Maldona● could incline to that . in locum . Es . 3. 9  Somewhat above eight hundred . The Rich ▪  Rom. 4. 13.  Titulun Charitatis Dom. à Soto de justitia & jure . Menander . Pro. 21. 6 , 7.  I● this world . Austen .  world .  ever-being   Now.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 That they be not eye-minded . Theodericus refer . Cassiodore . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 etc. Arist . Sene● . Gen. 14.  And that they trust not  Keys , Altars , Christ . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . etc.  Micha 6.  Collegium Granatense Praef. ad lectorem con●●● . vitam R. P. Tho. Sanchez . prae●●● . Operi Morali in praecepta Decal . C. Sol. Apollin . Sidon . Epist . de Theoder . In uncertain riches . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . etc. Basil . in Ps . 61.  But ( trust ) in God.  Joh. 16. ult.  Prou. 22.  The living . Gen. 35.  ● . Who gives us richly all things to enjoy . Above 30000 in one year . That they do good , and be rich in good works . Revel . 22. 2.  