PHARISAISME AND CHRISTIANITY : Compared and set forth in a Sermon at Paul's Cross , May 1. 1608.  By I H. Upon MATTH . 5.20  

. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseiss , you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven . 



LONDON , Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood for Samuel Macham , and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bulhead . ANNO 1608.  

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God , and my very good Lord , THOMAS Lord Bishop of LONDON , I H. wishes all grace and happiness . 

RIGHT REVEREND and HONOURABLE , 

I Know there is store of Sermons extant ; The pulpit scarce affordeth more than the Press . I add to the number , and complain not : In all good things abundance is an easy burden . If the soul may feed itself with variety , both by the ear , and by the eye , it hath no reason to find fault with choice . But if any weaker stomach ( as in our bodily Tables ) shall fear to surfeit at the sight of too much , it is easy for that man to look off , and to confine his eyes to some few : who cannot much sooner abate to himself , than multiply to another ? Let not his nice sullenness prejudice that delight and profit which may arise to others from this number . For me , I dare not be so envious , as not to bless God for this plenty , and seriously to rejoice that God's people may thus liberally feast themselves by both their senses : neither know I for whether more ; The sound of the word spoken pierceth more , the letter written endureth longer ; the ear is taught more suddenly , more stirringly : the eye with leisure and continuance . According to my poor ability I have desired to do good both ways , not so much fearing censures , as caring to edify . This little labour submisselie offers itself to your Lordship , as justly yours : being both Preached at your call , and ( as it were ) in your charge , and by one under the charge of your fatherly jurisdiction , who unfainedlie desire's by all means to show his true heart to God's Church , together with his humble thankfulness to your Lordship ; and professeth still to continue 

Your Lordships in all humble duty and observance JOS . HALL. . 

MATTH . chap. 5. vers . 20.  

Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseiss , ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven . 



THE curious Doctors of the jews had reduced all God's statute-law to six hundred and thirteen precepts ; so many as there are days in the year , and members in the body . It was an honest & ( which were strange ) a Christian conceit of one of their Rabbins , that David abridges all these to eleven in his Psal . 15.  esay to six , in his 33.15 . Micha● yet lower to three , in his 6.8 . esay yet again to two , in his 56 1.  Habacue to one , The just man shall live by faith . So ye see , the Law ends in the Gospel ; and that Father said not a miss , The Law is the Gospel foretold ▪ and the Gospel is the Law fulfilled . These two are the freehold of a Christian ; and what but they ? 

The jews of these times perverted the Law , rejected the Gospel . Our Saviour therefore that great Prophet of the World ( as it was high time ) clears the Law , delivers and settles the Gospel : well approving in both these , that he came not to consume , but to consummate the Law. Wherein ( as Paul to his Corinth's ) he had a great door , but many adversaries : amongst these were the great masters of Israel ( so our Saviour terms the Phariseiss ) and their fellows , and yet their rivals , the Scribes : both so much harder to oppose , by how much their authority was greater . 

Truth hath no room till falsehood be removed ; Our Saviour therefore ( as behoved ) first shows the falsehood of their Glosses , and the hollowness of their profession ; and if both their life and Doctrine be naught ; what free part is there in them ? And lo both of these so faulty , that Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseiss , ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven . 

What were the men ? What was their righteousness ? What wanted it ? follow me , I beseech you , in these three , and if my discourse shall seem for a while , more thorny and perplexed , remedy it with your attention . 

Those things which are out of the ken of sense or memory , must be fetch 't from Story . The Sect ( or order whether ) of the Phariseiss ceased with the Temple ; since that , no man reads of a Pharisie ; and now is grown so far out of knowledge , that the modern jews are more ready to learn of us who they were : There is no point , wherein it is more difficult , to avoid variety , yea ostentation of reading ; without any curious traversing of opinions , I study for simple truth , as one that will not lead you out of the rode-way to show you the turnings . Scribes were ancient ; Esra is called ( Sopher mahir ) a prompt Scribe . As long before him , soever since they continued till Christ's time ; but in two ranks ; some were 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : others 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : Some popular , others legal : Some the peoples , others , Gods : The one Secretaries , Recorders , Notaries , as 2.  Chron. 24.11 . ( Sopher hamelec ) the King's Scribe : The other Doctors of the Law of God : The Law of the Lord is with us , in vain made he it , the pen of the Scribe is in vain . 

As the Phariseiss were ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; ) Lawmasters : so these are the same which Luc. 11.45 . are called ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) interpreters of the Law. Thomas to some not mean Critics , it seems these should be a third sort ; which consider not , that our Saviour on purpose addressing his speech to the Phariseiss , fell by the way upon the Scribes , and being admonished by one of them , as of an oversight , now avers right down of the Scribes , what before he had but indifferently glanced at . What they were , is plain by Ezraes' pulpit ; and Moses his chair . These and Phariseiss differed not much ; they agreed in some good , but in more evil . But the profession of Phariseiss , because it is more obscure , you shall give me leave to fetch somewhat further . 

There were , saith old Egesippus ( as Eusebius cites him ) diverse opinions in the Circumcision ; which all crossed the tribe of juda : Essens , Galileans , Emerobaptists , Masbutheans , Samaritans , Phariseiss , Sadduces . It were easy to help him with more , Sebuaeans , Cannaeans , Sampsaeans ; and if need were , yet more . Where are those waverers , that stagger in their trust to the Church , because of different opinions , receiving that rotten argument of profane Celsus against the Christians ? Says the Papists , One saith I am Caluins , another , I am Luther's . We disclaim , we defy these titles , these divisions : we are one in truth : would God we were yet more one : It is the lace and fringe of Christ's garment , that is questioned amongst us , the cloth is sound . But what ? Was the jewish Church before Christ , God's true Church , or not ? If it were not , which was it ? If it were : lo that here rend in more than eight parts , and one of them differing from itself in eighteen opinions ; and yet as Irenaeus well observes , before Christ , there were neither so many heresies , nor so blasphemous . 

Show me a Church on earth without these wrinkles of division , and I will never seek for it in heaven : although to some Pharisaisme seems rather a several order , than a sect : but S. Luke that knew it better , hath ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) the Sect of the Phariseiss . When the profession began , no history recordeth . Some would fain fetch them from esay 65.5 . Touch me not , for I am holier than thou . But these strain too far ; for in the verse before , the same men eat swines-flesh ; which to the Phariseiss is more than piacular . Hear briefly , their name , their original , their office . Their name ( though it might admit of other probable derivations , yet ) by consent of all Hebrew Doctors ( I have a great Author for it ) is fetch 't from separation ; though upon what grounds , all agree not ; doubtless for the perfection of their doctrine , and austerity of life . Their original is more intricate ; which after some scanning , I have thus learned of some great Masters of jewish Antiquities . Before there was any open breach in the old jewish Church ; there were two general , and diverse conceits about God's service : One , that took up only with the Law of God ; and if they could keep that , thought they needed no more ; neither would they sapere supra scriptum ; be wiser than their maker ; These were called ( Karraim ) of which sort there are diverse at this day in Constantinople , and other where , at deadly feode with the other jews , which they now call Rabbinistes . 

The other , that thought it small thanks to do only what they were bidden ; God's Law was too straight for their holiness : It was nothing , unless they did more than content God , earn him ( for these were Popish jews ) and supererogate of him . These were therefore called ( Chasidim ) Holy : above the Law : they plied God with unbidden oblations , gave more than needed , did more than was commanded : Yet so , as both parts pleased themselves , resisted not the other : The more frank sort upbraided not the other , with too much niggardliness ; neither did the straiter-handed envy the other for too much lavishness . Would God we could do thus ; They agreed though they differed : But now , when these voluntary services began to be drawn into Canons , ( as Scaliger speaketh ) and that which was before but arbitrary , was imposed as necessary , ( necessary for belief , necessary for action ) questions arose , and the rent began in the jews : Those dogmatic Doctors which stoned for supererogation , and traditions above Law , were called ( Peruschim ) Phariseiss ; separate from the other in strict judgement , in superfluous holiness : These as they were the brood of those ( Chasidim ) whom we find first mentioned in the Maccabees by the corrupt name of Asideans ; so from them again , in a second succession proceeded ( as their more refined issue ) the Essens , both Collegiate and Eremitical : These Phariseiss then , were a fraternity or College of extraordinary devotion ; whose rule was Tradition , whose practice voluntary austereness : To them the Scribes joined themselves , as the purer jews , for Paul calls them [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ] the most exquisite sect ; yea , and ( as josephus ) the best expositors ; willingly expounding the Law according to their Traditions : and countenancing their Traditions by the forced senses of the Law. Both which professions were greatly enlarged and graced , by two famous Doctors Sammai and Hillel ( whom some , though falsely , would have the founders of them ) not long before Christ's time ; for old Hillel of 120. years , protracted his days by likely computation , to ten years after Christ's birth . How Hierome fetcheth their names with more wittiness , than probability , from Dissipating & Profaning the Law ; and what bicker and deadly quarrels were even amongst themselves in those two famous houses ; & what were the four expositions of the Law which they followed , I list not now to discourse . Their employment was expounding the Law and urging Traditions ; therefore their auditors had wont to say , when they called one another to Church ( as S. Hierome tells us ) [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ] The wise , that is , the Phariseiss , expound to day . Whence perhaps , that may be interpreted of S. Paul to the Corinth's , Where is the wise ? where is the Scribe ? So did the Scribes too ; but the difference was , that the Scribes were more Textuall ; the Phariseiss more Traditional : therefore observe , that the Scribe finds fault with the suspicion of blasphemy ; the Pharise with unwashen hands : the Scribes ( their Doctors ) excelled for learning , the Phariseiss for piety . Their attire was the same , and their fashions , but the Phariseiss had [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ] more sway ; and were more strict & Cappucine-like ; professed more years' continency ; and in a word , took more pains to go to hell . These did so carry away the hearts of the jews , that there was no holy man , which was not termed a Pharise ; and therefore among the seven kinds of Phariseiss in their Talmud , they make Abraham a Pharisei of Love ; job a Pharise of Fear . And if from the men you cast your eyes upon their righteousness , you cannot but wonder at the curiosity of their zeal . Wherein look ( I beseech you ) first at their devotion , than their holy carriage , lastly their strict observation of the Law.  

Such was their devotion that they prayed [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ] as a Father saith : oft and long , thrice a day was ordinary : at nine , twelve , and three a clock : yea their progenitors ( whom they would scorn not to match ) divided the day into three parts : whereof one was bestowed on Prayer , the next on the Law , the third on their work : See here : God had 2. parts of 3. themselves but one : besides at their meals what strictness ? Their very disciples were taught ( to shame us Christians ) if they had forgotten to give thanks , to return from the field to the board to say grace . For divine service ; the Decalogue must be read once a day of every man ; the Scribes say the first watch , the Phariseiss , any hour of the night : Others , twice ; without moving eye , hand , foot ; in a clean place , free from any excrement , & four cubits distant from any sepulchre . For-fasting , they did it twice a week ; not Popishly ( which Wickleffe justly calls Foole-fasting ) but in earnest ; on Monday & Thursday . Besides ( to omit their alms , which were every way proportionable to the rest ) what miserable penance did they wilfully ? they beaten their heads against the walls , as they went , till blood came : whence one of their seven Phariseiss is called ( Kizai ) a Pharise drawblood : they put thorns in their skirts , to sting themselves ; they lay on planks , on stones , on thorns : and Banus that Heremitical Pharise drenched himself oft , night and day in cold water [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ] for chastity ; or ( if you read it without an aspiration ) it signifies for folly rather : what could that apish and stigmatical Friar have done either more or worse ● . This was their devotion . The holiness of their carriage was such , that they avoided every thing that might carry any doubt of pollution ; they would not therefore converse with any different religion ; and this law went currant amongst them : He that eats a Samaritans' bread , be as he that eats swines-flesh : An Hebrew midwife might not help a gentile ; not books , not wax , not incense might be sold to them . Yea no familiarity might be suffered with their own vulgar . For whereas there were three ranks among the jews ; the wise , ( those were the Phariseiss ) their Disciples , and the ( populus terrae ) as they called them , this was one of the six reproaches to a novice of the Phariseiss , To eat with the vulgar sort : and lest ( when they had been abroad ) they should have been touched by any , contrary to the warning of their phylacteries , they scour themselves at their return ; and eat not unless they have washed [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ] that is , accurately , as the Syriac ; oft , as Erasmus ; or with the gripped fist , as Beza following Hierome . And not with every water ( mark the niceness ) but with that only which they had drawn up with their own labour : and to make up the measure of their pretended sanctimony , they vowed continency , not perpetual ( as our Romanists urge ) but for eight or ten years . Thus they did unbidden ; how strictly did they perform what was enjoined ? no men so exact in their tithes . I pay tithes of all , saith the boasting Pharise : Of all ( as a great Doctor noteth ) it was more than he needed : God would have a Sabbath kept ; they over-keep it . They would not on that day stop a running vessel , not lay an apple to the fire , not quench a burning , not knock on a Table to still a child ; what should I note more ? not rub or scratch in public . God commands them to wear ( Totaphoth ) phylacteries : they do ( which our Saviour reproves ) [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ] enlarge them : and these must be written with right lines in a whole parchment of the hide of a clean beast ▪ God commands to celebrate and roast the Passeover , they will have it done ( in an excess of care ) not with an iron but a wooden spit , and curiously choose the wood of Pomegranate : God commanded to avoid Idolatry ; they taught their Disciples , if an image were in the way , to fetch about some other ; if they must needs go that way to run : and if a thorn should light in their foot ( near the place ) not to kneel , but sit down to pull it out , lest they should seem to give it reverence . I weary you with these jewish niceties . Consider then how devout , how liberal , how continent , how true-dealing , how zealous , how scrupulous , how austere these men were , and see if it be not a wonder , that our Saviour thus brandeth them ; Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseiss , ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven : That is , If your doctrine be not more righteous , you shall not be entered of the Church : if your holiness be not more perfect , you shall not enter into heaven : behold , God's kingdom below and above is shut upon them . 

The poor jews were so besotted with the admiration of these two , that they would have thought if but two men must go to heaven , the one should be a Scribe , the other a Pharise . What strange news was this from him that kept the keys of David , that neither of them should come there ? It was not the person of these men , not their learning , not wit , not eloquence , not honour they admired so much , but their righteousness : and lo nothing but their righteousness is censured ▪ Herein they seemed to exceed all men : herein all that would be saved must exceed them . Do but think how the amazed multitude stared upon our Saviour , when they heard this Paradox . Exceed the Phariseiss in righteousness ? It were much for an Angel from Heaven . What shall the poor sons of the earth do if these woorthies be turned away with a repulse ? yea perhaps , yourselves all that hear me this day , receive this not without astonishment and fear , whiles your consciences secretly comparing your holiness with theirs , find it to come as much short of theirs , as theirs of perfection . And would to God you could fear more , & be more amazed with this comparison ; for ( to set you forward ) must we exceed them or else not be saved ? if we let them exceed us , what hope , what possibility is there of our Salvation ? E'er we therefore show how far we must go before them , look back with me ( I beseech you ) a little , and see how far we are behind them . 

They taught diligently , and kept Moses his chair warm : How many are there of us , whom the great master of the Vineyard may find loitering in this public marketplace , and shake us by the shoulder with a Quid statis otiosi ? Why stand you here idle ? 

They compassed sea and land ( Satan's walk ) to make a proselyte : we sit still and frieze in our zeal , and loose proselytes with our dull and wilful neglect . They spent one quarter of the day in prayer : How many are there of us that would not think this an unreasonable service of God : we are so far from this extreme devotion of the old Euchitae , that we are rather worthy of a censure with those Spanish Priests for our negligence : how many of you citizens can get leave of Mammon to bestow one hour of the day in a set course upon God ? How many of you Lawyers , are first clients to God , ere you admit others , clients to you : how many of you have your thoughts fixed in Heaven , ere they be in Westminster ? Alas , what dulness is this ? what injustice ; all thy hours are his , and thou wilt not lend him one of his own for thine own good . They read , they recited the Law , ( some ) twice a day ; never went without some parts of it about them ; But to what effect ? There is not one of our people ( saith josephus ) but answers to any question of the Law as readily as his own name ; how shall their diligence upbraid yea condemn us 〈◊〉 Alas how do our Bible's gather dust for want of use , while our Chronicle , or our Statute-booke , yea perhaps our idle and scurrilous playbooks are worn with turning . O how happy were our forefathers , ( whose memory is blessed for ever ) if they could with much cost and more danger get but one of Paul's Epistles in their bosoms ; how did they hug it in their arms , hide it in their chest , yea in their heart ! How did they eat , walk , sleep , with that sweet companion , & in spite of all persecution never thought themselves well , but when they conversed with it in secret ! Lo now these shops are all open we buy them not ; these books are open we read them not , and we will be ignorant because we william The Sun shines and we shut our windows . It is enough for the miserable Popish laity to be thus dark , that live in the perpetual night of Inquisition ; shall this be the only difference betwixt them and us ; that they would read these holy leaves , and may not , we may and will not ? There is no ignorance to the wilful . I stand not upon a formal and verbal knowledge , that was never more frequent , more flourishing . But if the main grounds of Christianity were thoroughly settled in the hearts of the multitude , we should not have so much cause of shame and sorrow , nor our adversaries of triumph and insultation : show less therefore for God's sake , and learn more ; & ballast your wavering hearts with the sound truth of godliness , that you may fly steddilie thorough all the tempests of errors : Make God's Law of your learned counsel with David , and be happy . Else if you will needs love darkness , you shall have enough of it : you have here inward darkness , there outward ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . ) This is your own darkness , that his of whom the Psalmist ; He sent darkness and it was dark : Dark indeed : A thick and terrible darkness , joined with weeping and gnashing . I urge not their awful reverence in their devotion , our sleepy or wild carelessness ; their austere and rough discipline of the body , our wanton pampering of the flesh ; though who can abide to think of a chaste Pharise and a filithy Christian : a temperate Pharise , and a drunken Christian ? How shamefully is this latter vice ( especially ) grown upon us with time ? we knew it once in our ordinary speech appropriated to beggars , now gallants fight for it . This beastliness had wont be bashful , now it is impudent ; once children were wont to shout at a drunkard ( as some soul wonder ) now not to be drunk is quarrel enough among men , among friends : Those knees that we were wont to bow to the God of Heaven , are now bend to Bacchus in a Paganish , bestial , devilish devotion . To leave the title of Christians , for shame let us be either men or beasts . My speech hastens to their holy and wise strictness of carriage ; wherein I can never complain enough of our inequality : They hated the presence , the fire , the fashion , the books of a gentile , of a Samaritan ; neither was there any hatred lost on the Samaritans part ; for if he had but touched a jew , he would have thrown himself into the water clothes and all : both of them equally sick of a Noli me tangere : Touch me not , for I am holier . esay 65.  

Our Romish Samaritans haunt our tables , our closerts , our ears ; we frown not , we dislike not : We match , converse , confer , consult with them carelessly , as if it were come to the old stay of that indifferent Appelles in Eusebius ; Sateros est credere in crucifixum : but that which I most lament , and ye , Fathers and brethren , if my voice may reach to any whom it concerneth , in the bowels of Christ let me boldly ( though most unworthy ) move your wisdoms , your care to redress it . Our young students ( the hope of posterity ) newly crept out of the shell of Philosophy , spend their first hours in the great Doctors of Popish controversies ; Bellarmine is next to Aristotle : yea our very ungrounded Artisans , young Gentlemen , frail Women , buy , read , traverse promiscuously the dangerous writings of our subtlest Jesuits . What is the issue ? Many of them have taken poison , ere they know what milk is ▪ & when they have once tasted this bane , they must drink and die . O what pity , what vexation is it to a true heart , to see us thus ●obed of our hopes ; them of their souls ! I have heard , yea I have seen and envied the cautelous severity of our Adversaries , which upon though deepest pains forbid the sale , yea the sight of those Authors , which they term infectious ; where was ever Calvin publicly bought in one of their Churchyards ? Where ever read without licence , without security ? I censure not this as the peculiar fault of this place ; would God this open remissness were not a common evil , and had not spread itself wide thorough all those Churches that are gone out of Babylon . Let no man tell me of the distinction of that old Canonist : something 's ( saith he ) we read , lest they should be neglected , as the Bible ; some lest they should be unknowen , as Arts and Philosophy ; some that they may be rejected , as Heretical books . True ▪ But let them read that can 〈◊〉 , that can confute ; we distrust not our cause , but their weak judgements . A good Apothecary 〈◊〉 make a good medicine of a strong poison ; must children therefore be allowed that box ? I know how unworthy I am to advise ; only I throw down myself at your feet and beseech you ; that our losses and their examples may make us no less wise in our generation . 

I follow the comparison ; They paid tithes of all they had , not a potherbe , but they tithed it . Hear this ye sacrilegious patrons , the merchants of souls , the pirates of the Church , the enemies of religion ; they tithed all , you nothing ; they paid to their Levites , your Levites must pay to you : Your cures must be purchased , your tithes abated or compounded for : OH the shame of religion ! How too justly may I usurp of you that of Seneca : Petty sacrileges are punished , while great ones ride in triumph ? Never excuse it with pretence of Ceremony ; Moses never gave so strict a charge for this as Paul ; [ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ] Communicate all thy goods with thy teacher ; All , with an emphasis . Welfare yet the honest Phariseiss , whose rule was : ( Decima ut Dives fias ) Tithe and be rich : If ever thou be the fatter for this gravel , or the richer with that thou stealest from God , let me come to beg at thy door . 

Woe to you spiritual robbers . Our blind forefathers clothed the Church , you despoil it : their ignorant devotion shall rise in judgement against your ravening covetousness . If robbery , simony , perjury will not carry you to hell : hope still that you may be saved . They gave plentiful alms to the poor we in stead of filling their bellies , grind their faces . What excellent Laws had we lately enacted that there should be no beggar in Israel ? Let our streets , ways , hedges witness the execution . Thy liberality relieves some poor . It is well . But hath not thy oppression made more ? Thy usury , extorting , racking , enclosing , hath wounded whole Villages , and now thou befriendest too or three with the plasters of thy bounty . The mercies of the wicked are cruel . They were precise in their Sabbath , we so lose in ours , as if God had no day : See whether our Taverns , streets , hy-ways descry any great difference . These things I vowed in myself to reprove ; if too bitterly , ( as you think ) pardon ( I beseech you ) this holy impatience : and blame the foulness of these vices , not my just vehemency . And you ( Christian hearers ) than which no name can be dearer be persuaded to ransack your secure hearts ; and if there be any of you whose awaked conscience strikes him for these sins , and places him below these jews in this unrighteousness , if you wish or care to be saved , think it high time , as you would ever hope for entrance into God's kingdom , to strike yourselves on the thigh , and with amazement and indignation to say , What have I done ? to abandon your wicked courses ; to resolve , to vow , to strive unto a Christian and conscionable reformation . Paul a Pharise was according to the righteousness of the Law unreprovable yet if Paul had not gone from Gamaliels' feet , to Christ's , he had never been saved : unreprovable and yet rejected ▪ Alas , my brethren , what shall become of our gluttony , drunkenness , pride , oppression , bribing , cozenages , adulteries , blasphemies , and ourselves for them ? God and men reprove us for these : what shall become of us ? If the civilly righteous shall not be saved , where shall the notorious sinner appear ? A Christian below a jew ? For shame , where are we ? where is our emulation ? Heaven is our goal , we all run ▪ lo the Scribes and Phariseiss are before thee ; what safety can it be to come short of those that come short of heaven ? Except your righteousness , etc.  

You have seen these Scribes and Phariseiss ; their righteousness and our unrighteousness . See now with like patience , their unrighteousness that was , and our righteousness that must be , wherein they failed , and we must exceed . They failed then in their Traditions and Practice . May I say they failed , when they exceeded ? Their Traditions exceeded in number and prosecution , faulty in matter . 

To run well , but out of the way ( according to the Greek proverb ) is not better than to stand still . Fire is an excellent thing , but if it be in the top of the chimney , it doth mischief rather . It is good to be zealous in spite of all scoffs , but ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) In a good thing . If they had been as hot for God , as they were for themselves , it had been happy : but now in vain they worship me ( saith our Saviour ) teaching for doctrines the Traditions of men . Hence was that axiom received currently amongst their jewish followers : There is more in the words of the wise , than in the words of the law : More ; that is , more matter , more authority : and from this principally arises and continues that mortal quarrel betwixt them and their ( Karraim ) and ( Minim ) unto this day . A great jesuit ( at lest that thinks himself so ) writes thus in great earnest : The Phariseiss ( saith he ) may not unfitly be compared to our Catholics . Some men speak truth ignorantly , some unwillinglie ; Caiphas never spoke truer , when he meant it not : one egg is not liker to another , than the Tridentine fathers to these Phariseiss in this point , besides that of freewill , merit , full performance of the Law , which they absolutely received from them : For mark ; With the same reverence & devotion do we receive and respect Traditions , that we do the books of the Old and New Testament , say those fathers in their fourth session : Hear both of these speak and see neither , if thou canst discern whether is the Pharise , refuse me in a greater truth . Not that we did ever say with that Arrian in Hilary : We debar all words that are not written ▪ or would think fit with those fanatical Anabaptists of Munster , that all books should be burned besides the Bible : some Traditions must have place in every Church ; but their place : they may not take wall of Scripture : Substance may not in our valuation give way to circumstance . God forbid . If any man expect that my speech on this opportunity should descend to the discourse of our contradicted ceremonies , let him know that I had rather mourn for this breach than meddle with it . God knows how willingly I would spend myself into persuasions if those would avail any thing : but I well see that tears are fitter for this theme than words . The name of our Mother is sacred and her peace precious . As it was a true speech cited from that father by Bellarmine : The war of Heretics is the peace of the Church : so would God our experience did not invert it upon us ▪ The war of the Church is the peace of Heretics . Our discord is their music ; our ruin their glory : O what a fight is this , brethren strive while the enemy stands still , and laughs and triumphs . If we desired the grief of our common mother , the languishing of the Gospel , the extirpation of religion , the loss of posterity , the advantage of our adversaries , which way could these be better effected than by our dissensions . That Spanish Prophet in our age ( for so I find him styled ) when King Philip asked him how he might become master of the Low-countrieses , answered ; If he could divide them from themselves . According to that old Machiavellian principle of our Jesuits , Divide and Rule . And indeed it is concord only ( as the Posy or Mot of the united States runs ) which hath upheld them in a rich and flourishing estate against so great and potent enemies . Our Adversaries already brag of their victories ; and what good heart can but bleed to see what they have gained since we dissented , to foresee what they will gain ? They are our mutual spoils that have made them proud and rich . If you ever therefore look to see the good days of the Gospel , the unhorsing and confusion of that strumpet of Rome , for God's sake , for the Church's sake , for our own soul's sake , let us all compose ourselves to peace and love : O pray for the peace of jerusalem ; that peace may be within her walls , and prosperity within her palaces . 

For the matter of their Traditions our Saviour hath taxed them in many particulars ; about washings , oaths , offerings , retribution : whereof he hath said enough when he hath termed their doctrine , the Leaven of the Phariseiss , that is , sour and swelling . S. Hierome reduces them to two heads : They were Turpia , anilia ; some so shameful that they might not be spoken ; others idle & dotish ; both so numerous that they cannot be reckoned . Take a taste for all ; and to omit their real traditions , hear some of their interpretative . The Law was , that no Leper might come into the Temple ; their Tradition was , that if he were let down thorough the roof , this were no irregularity . The Law was , a man might not carry a burden on the Sabbath ; their Traditional gloss ; if he carried aught on one shoulder it was a burden ; if on both , none . If shoes alone , no burden ; if with nails , not tolerable . Their stint of a Sabbaths journey was a thousand cubits ; their gloss was , That this is to be understood without the walls , but if a man should walk all day thorough a city as big as Ninevie , he offends not . The Church of Rome shall vie strange glossems and ceremonious observations with them , whether for number or for ridiculousnesse . The day would fail me if I should either epitomise the volume of their holy rites , or gather up those which it hath omitted . The new elected Pope in his solemn Lateran procession must take copper money out of his Chamberlains lap , and scatter it among the people , and say ; Gold and silver have I none . Seven years' penance is enjoined to a deadly sin ; because Miriam was separated seven days for her Leprosy ; and God says to Ezekiel , I have given thee a day for a year . Christ said to Peter , Launch forth into the deep : therefore he meant that Peter's successor should catch the great fish of Constantine's donation . But I favour your ears . That one I may not omit , how S. Hierome , whom they fond term their Cardinal , compares some Popish fashions of his time with the Pharisaical ; who when he had spoken of their purple fringes in the four corners of their ( Tallin ) and the thorns which these Rabbins tie in their skirts , for penance , and admonition of their duty : Hoc apud nos ( saith he ) superstitiosae mulierculae in paruulis Euangelijs , in crucis ligno & istiusmodi rebus factitant : that is , Thus superstitious old wives do amongst us with little Gospels of john , with the wood of the Cross , and the like . Thus that father directly taxeth this Romish use , who if he were now alive , and should hear their Church groaning under the number of Ceremonies more than the jewish , would ( besides holy Austin's complaint ) redouble that censure of our Saviour , Woe to you Scribes , Phariseiss , hypocrites , for ye bind heavy burdens , and grievous to be born , and lay them on men's shoulders . I forbear to speak of the erroneous opinions of these jewish masters concerning that Pythagorean transanimation or passage of the soul from one body to another ( a point which the jews had learned from them : Mat. 16.14 . ) concerning the not-rising up of the wicked Astronomical destiny , freewill , merit of works , perfection of obedience ; in every of which it were easy to lose myself and my speech . I haste to their main unrighteousness ; which was not so much the planting of these stocks , which God never set , as the graffing of all holiness and God's service upon them ; a fashionable observation of the outward letter , with neglect of the true substance of the Law ; a vainglorious ostentation of piety and perfection ; and more care to be thought than to be good ; a greater desire to be great , than good ; cruelty and oppression coloured with devotion . My speech now towards the closure shall draw itself up within these two lists ; of their Hypocrisy , their Worldliness : Hypocrisy in Fashionablenesse and Ostentation ; Worldliness in Covetousness , Ambition . Only stir up yourselves a while and suffer not your Christian attention to fail in this last act . 

Some of their Rabbins say well , that God requires two things concerning his Law , Custody and Worke. Custody in the heart ; work in the execution ; These unsound and overly Phariseiss did neither . It was enough if they kept the Law in their hands ; so they had a formal show of godliness it was enough : if the outside of the platter were clean they cared for no more . God had charged them to bind the Law to their hand , and before their eyes , Deut. 6. wherein , as jerome and Theophylact well interpret it , he meant the meditation and practice of his Law : they , like unto the foolish patient , which when the physician bids him take that prescript , eats up the paper ; if they could get but a list of parchment upon their left arm next their heart , and another scroll to tie upon their forehead , and four corners of fringe , or ( if these be denied ) ●●●ved thread in their hand , thought they might ▪ say with Saul , Blessed be thou of the Lord , I have done the commandment of the Lord That Opus operatum of the Papists ( for I still parallel them ) is not more false Latin than false Divinity ▪ it is not the outside of thy obedience that God cares for , it never so holy , never so glorious ; it is enough that men are cozened with these flourishes : the heart and the reins are those that God looks after what cares a good market-man how good the fleece be , when the liver is rotten . God doth not regard fashion so much as stuff . thou deceivest thyself if thou think those shows that bleared the eyes of the world , can deceive him . God shall smite thee thou whited wall , God shall smite thee . Dost thou think he sees not how smoothly thou hast daubed on thine whorish complexion ? He sees thee a far off , and hate's thee while thy parasites applaud thy beauty . I speak not of this carrion-flesh which thou wantonly infectest with the false colours of thy pride , which God shall once wash off with rivers of brimstone . I speak of thy painted soul , and thy counterfeit obedience . Give me leave , ( yea let me take it ) to complain that we are fallen into a cold and hollow age wherein the religion of many is but fashion , and their piety gilded superstition ; Men care only to seem Christians ; If they can get God's livery on their backs , and his name in their mouths , they outface all reproofs . How many are there which if they can keep their Church , give an alms , bow their knee , say their prayers , pay their tithes , and once a year receive the Sacrament ( it matters not how corrupt hearts , how filthy tongues , how false hands they bear ) can say in their hearts with Esau , I have enough my Brother ? As if God cared for this thy vain formality ; as if he hated thee not so much more than a Pagan , by how much thou wouldst seem more good . Be not deceived ; If long devotions , sad looks , hard penances , bountiful alms would have carried it ( without the solid substance of godliness ) these Scribes and Phariseiss had never been shut out of Heaven . Consider this therefore ( dear brethren ) none but your own eyes can look into your hearts : we see your faces , the world sees your lives , yourselves see your souls : if your lives be not holy , your heart's sound , though your faces were like Angels , you shall have your portion with Devils . Tell not me thou hearest , praiest , talkest , believest : how livest thou ? what dost thou ? Show me thy faith by thy works , saith james. It was an excellent answer that good Moses gave to Lucius in the Church-story : The faith that is seen is better than the faith that is heard ; and that of Luther not inferior , that faith doth pinguescere operibus ? grow fat and well liking with good works : it is a lean starved carcase of faith thou pretendest without these . If profession be all , the Scribes and Phariseiss are before thee ; ransack thy heart , and find sound affection to God , firm resolutions to goodness , true hatred of sin ; ransack thy life , and find the truth of works , the life of obedience ; then alone thy righteousness exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseiss , and thou shalt enter into Heaven . Their ostentation follows ; wherein it is strange to consider , how those that cared not to be good should desire yet to seem good : so did these Phariseiss : They would not fast without a smeared face ; not give an alms without a trumpet ; not pray without witnesses , Scribes , Phariseiss , hypocrites , they did act a religious part , but play devotion . They were nothing beside the stage : all for sight , nothing for substance . Would God this vice of hypocrisy had either died with them , or had only hereditarily descended to their successors : Satan will not let us be thus happy . I see no man's heart , but I dare boldly say the world is full of hypocrisy . By their fruits you shall know them ( saith our Saviour : ) By their fruits ; not by the blossoms of good purposes , nor the leaves of good profession , but by the fruits of their actions . Not to speak , how our mint and cummin hath encroached upon judgement and justice . Search yourselves ( ye Citizens : ) Now , you draw near to God with your lips , with your ears , where is your heart ? here your devour attention seems to cry , The Lord is God : how many are there of you , that have any God at home ? how many that have a false God ? God at Church : Mammon in your shops ? I speak not of all ; God forbid . This famous City hath in the darkest , in the wantonest times , afforded ( and so doth ) many , that have done God honour , honesty to the Gospel : but how many are there of you that under smooth faces have foul consciences ? fair words , false measures , forsworn valuations , adulterate wares , gripping usuries have filled many of your coffers , and festered your souls : you know this , & yet like Salomon's courtesan you wipe your mouths , and it was not you : Your alms are written in Church-windowes , your defraudings in the sand ; all is good save that which appears not ; how many are there every where , that shame religion by professing it ? whose beastly life makes God's truth suspected ; for as , howsoever the Samaritan , not the jew , relieved the distressed traveller , yet the jews religion was true , not the Samaritans ; so in others , truth of causes must not be judged by acts of persons ; yet , as he said , It must needs be good that Nero persecutes ; so who is not ready to say ; It cannot be good that such a mis-creant professes ? Woe to thee Hypocrite ; thou canst not touch , not name goodness , but thou defilest it ; God will plague thee for acting so high a part : See what thou art , and hate thyself ; or ( if not that ) yet see how God hate's thee ; he that made the heart , says thou art no better than an handsome tomb ; the house of death . Behold here a green turf or smooth marble , or engraven brass , and a commending Epitaph ; all sightly : but what is within ? an unsavoury , rotten carcase . Thomas thou wert wrapped in gold and perfumed with never so loud prayers , holy semblances , honest protestations ; yet thou art but noisome carrion to God : Of all earthly things God cannot abide thee ; and if thou wouldst see how much lower yet his detestation reaches , know that when he would describe the torments of hell , he calls them ( as their worst title ) but the portion of Hypocrites . Wherefore cleanse your hands ye sinners , and purge your hearts ye double-minded : For unless your righteousness exceed the hypocritical righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseiss , ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven . 

My speech must end in their Covetousness and Ambition : A pair of heinous vices I join them together : for they are not only brethren , but twins ; yet so as the elder here also serves the younger . It is ambition that blows the fire of Covetousness . Oppression gets wealth ; that wealth may procure honour . Why do men labour to be rich , but that they may be great ? Their Covetousness was such , that their throat ( an open sepulchre ) swallowed up whole houses of Widows . Whence their goods are called by our Saviour ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) not 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : as if they were already in their bowels : and which was worst of all , while their lips seemed to pray , they were but chewing of that morsel . Their Ambition such , that they womanishly brawled and shouldered for the best seat ; the highest piew : A title , a wall , a chair , a cap , a knee , these were goodly cares for them that professed gravity , humility , mortification . Let me boldly say , jerusalem never yielded so very Phariseiss as Rome . These old disciples of Sammai and Hillel were not Phariseiss in comparison of our jesuits . From judgement ( you see ) I am descended to practise , wherein it no less easily made good that these are more kindly Phariseiss , than the ancient . A poor Widow's Cottage filled the paunch of an old Pharise ; How many fair Patrimonies of devout young Gentlemen Druryed by them ( pardon the word , it is their own ; the thing I know and can witness ) have gone down the throat of these Loyalists , let their own Quodlibet & Catechism report . What speak I of secular inheritances ? these eyes have seen no mean houses of devotion and charity swallowed up by them . As for their ambitious insinuations , not only all their own religious enviously cry down , but the whole world sees and ring's of . What oar of State can stir without their rowing ? What kingdom either stands or falls without their intermeddling ? What noble family complains not of their proling and stealth ? And all this with a face of sad piety and stern mortification . Yea what other is their great Master but the king of Phariseiss ? who under a pretence of simple piety , challenges without shame to have devoured the whole Christian world , the natural inheritances of secular Princes , by the foisted name of Peter's Patrimony , and now in most infamous and shameless ambition calls great Emperors to his stirrup , yea to his footstool . But what wander we so far from home ? Vae nobis miseris ( saith S. Hierome ) ad quos Pharisaeorum vitia tranfierunt ; ( Woe to us wretched men to whom the Phariseiss vices are derived . ) The great Doctor of the Gentiles long ago said , All seek their own , and not the things of God ; and is the world mended with age ? would God we did not find it a sure rule ; that ( as it is in this little world ) the older it grows , the more diseased , the more covetous : we are all too much the true sons of our great Grandmother ; and have each of us an Eaveses sweet tooth in our heads , we would be more than we are ; and every man would be either ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) or ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : ) either the man , or somebody . If a number of your consciences were ripp 't , oh ye that would be Christian Gentlemen , Lawyers , Citizens , what do we think would be found in your maws ? here the devoured patrimony of poor Orphans ; there the Commons of whole Townships : here the impropriate goods of the Church ; there piles of usury : here bribes , and unlawful fees ; there the raw and indigested gobbets of simony : yea would God I might not say , but I must say it with fear , with sorrow , even of our sacred and divine profession , that which our Saviour of his twelve , Ye are clean , but not all . The multitude of our unregarded charges , and souls dying and starved , for want of spiritual provision , ( while they give us bodily ) would condemn my silence for too partial . In all conditions of men ( for particulars are subject to envy & exception ) the daughters of the horseleech had never such a fruitful generation : They cry still , Give , Give : Not give alone , that is , the bread of sufficiency , but give , give ; that is , more than enough . But what is more than enough ? What is but enough ? What is not too little for the insatiable gulf of human desires ? Every man would engross the whole world to himself , and with that ambitious conqueror fears it will be too little : and how few Agurs are there , that pray against too much ? From hence it is , that ye Courtiers grate upon poor trades with hard Monopolies . Hence ye Merchants load them with deep and unreasonable prices , and make them pay dear for days . Hence ye great men wring the poor sponges of the Commonalty into your private purses ; for the maintenance of pride and excess . Hence ye cormorant cornemongers hatch up a dearth in the time of plenty . God sends grain , but many times the Devil sends garners . The earth hath been no niggard in yielding : but you have been lavish in transporting , and close in concealing . Never talk of our extreme frosts : we see God's hand , and kiss the rod ; but if your hearts , your charity were not more frozen than ever the earth was , mean housekeepers should not need to beg , nor the meanest to starve for want of bread . Hence lastly , our loud oppressions of all sorts cry to heaven , and are answered with threats , yea with variety of vengeances . Take this with thee yet , oh thou worldling , which hast the greedy-worm under thy tongue with Esaies' dogs , and never hast enough . thou shalt meet with two things as unsatiable as thyself ; the Grave and Hell ; and thou , whom all the world could not satisfy , there be two things whereof thou shalt have enough : Enough mould in the grave , enough fire in hell . 

I love not to end with a judgement ; and as it were to let my Sun set in a cloud . We are all Christians , we should know the World , what it is , how vain , how transitory , how worthless . We know where there are better things , which we profess ourselves made for , and aspiring to : Let us use the world like itself , and leave this importunate wooing of it to Heathens and Infidels , that knew no other heaven , no other God ; Or if you like that counsel better ; Be Covetous : Be Ambitious . Covet spiritual gifts . 1.  Cor. 14.1 . Never think you have grace enough ; desire more , seek for more : this alone is worth your affections , worth your cares : Be still poor in this , that you may be rich ; be rich that you may be full ; be full that you may be glorious . Be Ambitious , of favour , of honour , of a kingdom ; of God's favour , of the honour of Saints , of the Kingdom of glory . whither , he that hath bought it for us , and redeemed us to it , in his good time , safely and happily bring us. To that blessed Saviour of ours , together with the Father , and his good Spirit : the God of all the world , our Father , Redeemer , and Comforter , be given all praise , honour and glory now and for ever . Amen . 

THE PASSION-SERMON , PREACHED AT PAULES-CROSSE , on Good-friday . Apr. 14. 1609.  

By I H.  

AT LONDON Printed by H. I for Eleanor Edgar , and Samuel Macham : and are to be sold at the shops in Paules-churchyard . ANNO 1609.  

Errata . 

Page 17. livre : 8.  Christian Read Christians 
Page 42. livre : 1. life Read light 
Page 47. livre : 5. in agony Read in agone . Latin . 
Page 50. livre : 6. suffer , so long Read suffer : so long 
PEA : 74. pomell : 9 forbeareth to be short Read forbeareth : To be sho●● 
Page 92 livre : 18 my men . Read by men . 
TO THE ONLY HONOUR AND GLORY OF GOD MY DEAR AND BLESSED SAVIOUR ( WHICH HATH DONE AND SUFFERED ALL THESE THINGS FOR MY SOUL ) HIS WEAK AND UNWORTHY SERVANT HUMBLY DESIRE'S TO consecrate HIMSELF AND HIS POOR LABOURS : BESEECHING HIM TO ACCEPT AND BLESS THEM TO THE PUBLIQVE good ; and to the praise of his own glorious NAME . 

To the READER . 

I Desire not to make any Apology for the edition of this my Sermon : It is motive enough , that herein I affect a more public , and more enduring good , Spiritual niceness is the next degree to unfaithfulness : This point cannot be too much urged , either by the tongue , or press . Religion and our souls depend upon it ; yet are our thoughts too much beside it . The Church of Rome so fixes herself ( in her adoration ) upon the cross of Christ , as if she forgot his glory : Many of us so conceive of 〈◊〉 glorious , that we neglect the meditation of his Cross , the way to his glory , and ours . If we would proceed aright , we must pass from his Golgotha , to the mount of Olives , and from thence to heaven ; and there seek and settle our rest . According to my weak ability , I have led this way in my speech ; beseeching my Readers to follow me with their hearts , that we may overtake him which is entered into the true sanctuary , even the highest heavens , to appear now in the sight of God for us.  

JOHN . 19 verse 30.  

When jesus therefore had received the Vinegar , he said ; It is finished : and bowing the head , he gave up the ghost . 



THE bitter and yet victorious passion of the son of GOD ( right honourable and beloved Christians ) as it was the strangest thing that ever befell the Earth : So , is both of most sovereign use , & looks for the most frequent & careful meditation . It is one of those things which was once done , that it might be thought of for ever . Every day therefore must be the Good-friday of a Christian : who , with that great Doctor of the Gentiles , must desire to know nothing but jesus Christ , and him crucified . 

There is no branch or circumstance in this wonderful business , which yields not infinite matter of discourse . Acc●●ding to the solemnity of this 〈◊〉 & place , I have chosen to commend unto your Christian attention , our Saviour's Farewell to Nature ( for his reviuing was above it ) in his last word , in his last act . His last word , It is finished ; his last act , He gave up the ghost : That which he said , he did . If there be any Theme that may challenge and command our ears & hearts , this is it : for , behold ; the sweetest word that ever Christ spoke , and the most ●●●●●ious act that ever he 〈◊〉 met together in this his last breath . In the one , ye shall see him triumphing ; yielding in the other , yet so as he overco●●● Imagine therefore , that 〈◊〉 Christ jesus , in this day of his passion ( who is every day here crucified before your eyes ) advanced upon the chariot of his Cross ; and now , after a weary conflict , cheerfully overlooking the despite and shame of men , the wrath of his Father , the law , sin , death , hell ; which all lie gasping at his foot : & than you shall conceive with what spirit he faith Consummatumest ; It is finished . What is finished ? Shortly ; All the prophecies that were of 〈…〉 legal observations , that pre●●●gured him ; His own sufferings ; Our salvation . The prophecies are accomplished ; The ceremonies abolished ; His sufferings ended ; Our sal●●tion wrought . These four heads shall limit this first part of my speech : only let them find & leave you attentive . 

Even this very word is prophesied of : All things that are written of me , have an end , saith Christ . What end ? this , It is finished : This very end hath his end here . What therefore is finished ? Not this prediction only of his last draught ; as Augustine : that were too particular . Let our Saviour himself say ; All things that are written of me by the Prophets . It is a sure and convertible rule ; Nothing was done by Christ which was not foretold ; nothing was ever foretold by the Prophets of Christ , which was not done . It would take up a life , to compare the Prophets and Evangelists ; the predictions and the history ; & largely to discourse , how the one foretells , and the other answers : let it suffice to look at them , running . Of all the Evangelists , S. Matthew hath been most studious , in making these references and correspondences : with whom , the burden or undersong of every event , is still ( ut impleretur . ) That it might be fulfilled . Thus hath he noted ( if I have reckoned them aright ) two and thirty several prophecies concerning Christ ; fulfilled in his birth , life , death : 

☞ ☜ ☞ ☜ esay 7.14 . Mat. 1.23 . Zach. 9.9 . Mat. Ibid.  Mic. 5.2 . Mat. 2.6 . jere. 7.11 . Mat. 21.13 . esay 11.1 . Mat. 2.25 . Psalm . 8.2 . Mat. 21.16 . jer. 31.15 . Mat. 2.18 . esay 5.8 . Mat. 21.33 . judg. 13.5 . Mat. 2. ult.  Psa . 118.22 . Mat. 21.44 . Esa . 40.3 . Mat. 3.2 . Psal . 110.1 . Mat. 22.44 . esay 9.1 . Mat. 4.15 esay 8.14 . Mat. 21.44 . Leu. 14.4 . Mat. 8.4 . Psal . 41.9 . Mat. 26.31 . esay 53.4 . Mat. 8.17 Esa . 53.10 Mat. 26.54 . esay 61.1 . Mat. 11.4 Zach. 13.7 . Mat. 26.31 . esay 42.1 . Mat. 12.17 . Lam. 4.20 . Mat. 26.56 . jona 1.17 . Mat. 12.40 . esay . 50.6 Mat. 26.67 . esay 6.9 . Mat. 13.14 Zac. 11.13 . Mat. 27.9 . Psal . 78.2 . Mat. 13.35 Psal . 22.18 . Mat. 27.35 . Es . 35.5.6 . Mat. 15.30 . Psal . 22.2 . Mat. 27.46 . Es . 62.11 . Mat. 21.5 . Psal . 69.22 . Mat. 27.48 . 

To which , S. john adds many more . Our speech must be directed to his Passion : omitting the rest , let us insist in those . He must be apprehended : it was fore-prophecied ; The Anointed of the Lord was taken in their nets , saith jeremy : But how ? He must be sold ; for what ? thirty silver pieces : and what must those do ? Buy a field : all foretold ; And they took thirty silver pieces , the price of him that was valued , & gave them for the Potter's field , saith Zachary ( miswritten jeremy ; by one letter mistaken in the abbreviation ) . By whom ? that child of perdition , that the Scripture might be fulfilled . Which was he ? It is foretold ; He that eateth bread with me , saith the Psalmist . And what shall his disciples do ? Run away ; so saith the prophecy : I will smite the Shepherd , and the sheep shall be scattered , saith Zachary . What shall be done to him ? He must be scourged and spit upon : behold , not those filthy excrements could have light upon his sacred face without a prophecy ; I hid not my face from shame and spitting , saith esay . What shall be the issue ? In short ; he shall be led to death : it is the prophecy ; The messias shall be slain , saith Daniel . What death ? He must be lift up ; Like as Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness : so shall the son of man be lift up . Chrysostome saith well , that some actions are parables ; so may I say , some actions are prophecies : such are all types of Christ : & this with the foremost . Lift up ? whither ? To the Cross : it is the prophecy ; Hanging upon a tree , saith Moses . How lift up ? Nailed to it : so is the prophecy ; Foderunt manus , they have pierced my hands and my feet , saith the Psalmist . with what company ? two thiefs ; With the wicked was he numbered , saith esay : Where ? without the gates , saith the prophecy . What becomes of his garments ? they cannot so much as cast the dice for his coat , but it is prophesied ; They divided my garments , and on my vestures cast lots , saith the Psalmist . He must die then on the Cross : but how ? voluntarily . Not a bone of him shall be broken . What hinders it ? lo , there he hangs , as it were neglected , & at mercy ; yet all the raging jews , no , all the devils in hell , cannot stir one bone in his blessed body : It was prophesied in the Easter-lambe , and it must be fulfilled in him that is the true Passeover , in spite of fiends and men . How then ? he must be thrust in the side : behold , not the very spear could touch his precious side being dead , but it must be guided by a prophecy ; They shall see him whom they have thrust-thorough , saith Zacharie . What shall he say the while ? Not his very words but are forespoken : his complaint , Eli Eli lamma sabactani , as the Chalde ; or 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 as the Hebrew , Psalm 22 , 2.  His resignation ; In manus tuas , Juto thy hands I commend my spirit ; Psalm 31 , 5.  His request ; Father , forgive them : He prayed for the transgressors , saith esay . And now , when he saw all these prophecies were fulfilled ; knowing that one remained , he said , I thirst . Domine , quid satis ? faith one ; OH LORD , what thirstest thou for ? A strange hearing ; that a man , yea , that GOD and MAN , dying , should complain of thirst . 

could he endure the scorching flames of the wrath of his Father , the curse of our sins , those tortures of body , those horrors of soul ; and doth he shrink at his thirst ? no , no : he could have born his drought ; he could not bear the Scripture not fulfilled . It was not necessity of Nature , but the necessity of his Father's decree , that drew forth this word , I thirst . They offered it before : he refused it . Whether it were an ordinary potion for the condemned , to hasten death ( as in the story of M. Antony ) which is the most received construction : or whether it were that jewish potion , whereof the Rabbins speak ; whose tradition was , that the malefactor to be executed , should after some good counsel from two of their Teachers , be taught to say ; Let my death be to the remission of all my sins ; and then , that he should have given him a bowl of mixed wine , with a grain of Frankincense , to bereave him both of reason and pain . 

I durst be confident in this later ; the rather , for that Saint Mark calls this draught 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : Myrrhe-wine ; mingled ( as is like ) with other ingredients . And Montanus agrees with me in the end , ad stuporem & mentis alienationem ▪ A fashion which Galatine observes out of the Sanhedrim , to be grounded upon Proverbs 31 , 6.  Give strong drink to him that is ready to perish . I leave it modestly in the midst ; let the learneder judge . Whatsoever it were , he would not die till he had complained of thirst , and in his thirst tasted it : Neither would he have thirsted for , or tasted any but this bitter draught ; that the Scripture might be fulfilled ; They gave me Vinegar to drink : And lo , now , Consummatum est ; All is finished . 

If there be any jew amongst you , that like one of johns' unseasonable Disciples , shall ask , Art thou he , or shall we look for another ? he hath his answer ; Ye men of Israel , why stand you gazing and gaping for another messias ? In this alone , all the prophecies are finished ; & of him alone , all was prophesied that was finished . Paul's old rule holds still , To the Jews a stumbling block ; and that more ancient curse of David , Let their table be made a snare ; And Stevens two brands stick still in the flesh of these wretched men : One in their neck ; stiffnecked : the other in their hart ; uncircumcised : the one , Obstinacy ; the other , Unbelief : stiffenecks indeed , that will not stoop and relent with the yoke of sixteen hundred years judgement and servility : uncircumcised hearts , the film of whose unbelief , would not be cut off with so infinite convictions . O mad & miserable Nation ! Let them show us one prophecy that is not fulfilled ; let them show us one other , in whom all the prophecies can be fulfilled , & we will mix pity with our hate : If they cannot , and yet resist ; their doom is past ; Those mine enemies , that would not have me to reign over them , bring them hither , and slay them before me . So let thine enemies perish , OH Lord  

But what go I so far ? even amongst us ( to our shame ) this riotous age hath bred a monstrous generation ; ( I pray God I be not now in some of your bosoms that hear me this day ) compounded , much like to the Turkish religion ; of one part , Christian ; another , jew ; a third , worldling ; a fourth , Atheist : a Christian face , a jews hart , a worldlings life , & therefore Atheous in the whole ; that acknowledge a God , & know him not ; that profess a Christ , but doubt of him ; yea , believe him not : The fool hath said in his hart there is no Christ . What shall I say of the semen ? they are worse than devils ▪ that yielding evil spirit , could say , jesus I know ; and these miscreants are still in the old tune of that tempting devil ; Si tu es filius Dei , if thou be the Christ. O God , that after so clear a Gospel , so many miraculous confirmations , so many thousand martyrdons , so many glorious victories of truth , so many open confessions of Angels , men , devils , friends ; enemies ; such conspirations of heaven & earth , such universal contestations of all ages and people ; there should be left any spark of this damnable infidelity in the false hearts of men ! Behold then , ye despisers , and wonder , and vanish away : whom have all the Prophet's foretold ? or what have the prophecies of so many hundred , yea , thousands of years foresaid , that is not with this word finished ? Who could foretell these things , but the spirit of God ? Who could accomplish them , but the son of God ? He spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets , saith Zacharie : he hath spoken , & he hath done ; one true GOD in both . no other spirit could foresay these things should be done ; none other power could do these things , thus foreshowed : this word therefore , can fit none but the mouth of God our Saviour , It is finished . We know whom we have believed ; thou art the Christ , the son of the living GOD. Let him that loves not the Lord jesus , be accursed to the death . 

Thus the prophecies are finished : Of the legal Observations , with more brevity ▪ Christ is the end of the law : What law ? Ceremonial ; Moral . Of the moral ; it was kept perfectly by himself , satisfied fully for us : of the ceremonial ; it was referred to him , observed of him , fulfilled in him , abolished by him . There were nothing more easy then to show you how all those jewish ceremonies looked at Christ : how Circumcision , Passover , the Tabernacle , both outer and inner , the Temple , the Laver , both the Altars , the Tables of Showbread , the candlesticks , the Veil , the Holy of holies , the Ark , the Propitiatory , the pot of Manna , Aaron's rod , the high Priest , his order and line , his habits , his inaugurations , his washings , annointing , sprinkling , offer , the sacrifices 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and what ever jewish rite ; had their virtue from Christ , relation to him , and their end in him . This was then their last gasp ; for , now strait they died with Christ : now the veil of the Temple rend : As Austen well notes , out of Mathew's order ; It tore then , when Christ's last breath passed . That conceit of Theophylact is witty ; that as the jews were wont to rend their garments when they heard blasphemy : so the Temple , not enduring these execrable blasphemies against the Son of God , tore his veil in pieces . But that is not all : the veil rend , is the obligation of the ritual law canceled ; the way into the heavenly Sanctuary opened ; the shadow giving room to the substance : in a word , it doth that which Christ saith ; Consummatum est . Even now then the law of ceremonies died : It had a long and solemn burial , as Augustine saith well ; perhaps figured in Moses , who died not lingeringly , but was thirty days mourned for . What means the Church of Rome , to dig them up , now rotten in their graves ? and that , not as if they had been buried , but sown , with a plentiful increase : yea , with the inverted usury of too many of you Citizens ; ten for one . It is a grave and deep censure of that resolute Hierome ; Ego è contrario loquar , etc.  I say , saith he , and in spite of all the world dare maintain , that now the jewish ceremonies are pernicious , and deadly : & whosoever shall observe them , whether he be Jew or Gentile , in barathrun diaboli devolutum ; shall fry in hell for it . Still Altars ? still Priests ? sacrifices still ? still washings ? still unctions ? sprinkling , shaving , purifying ? still all , and more than all ? Let them hear but Augustine's censure ; Quisquis nunc , etc.  Whosoever shall now use them , as it were raking them up out of their dust ; he shall not be pius deductor corporis , sed impius sepulturae violator : an impious & sacrilegious wretch , that ransacks the quiet tombs of the dead . 

I say not that all ceremonies are dead ; but the Law of ceremonies , and of jewish . It is a sound distinction of them , that profound Peter Martyr hath in his Epistle , to that worthy Martyr , Father , Bishop , Hooper : Some are typical , foresignifying Christ to come : some , of order and decency . Those are abrogated , not these . The jews had a fashion of prophesying in the Churches ; so the Christians from them , as Ambrose : the jews had an eminent pulpit of wood ; so we : they gave names at their circumcision ; so we at Baptism : they sung psalms melodiously in Churches ; so do we : they paid & received tithes ; so do we : they wrapped their dead in linen , with odours ; so we : the jews had sureties at their admission into the church ; so we . These instances might be infinite , the Spouse of Christ cannot be without her laces , & chains , and borders . Christ came not to dissolve order . But thou Lord , how long ? how long shall thy poor Church find her ornaments , her sorrows ? and see the dear sons of her womb , bleeding about these apples of strife ? let me so name them , not for their value ( even small things , when they are commanded , look for no small respect ) but for their event : the enemy is at the gates of our Syracuse ; how long will we suffer ourselves , taken up with angles and circles in the dust ▪ Yemen , brethren , fathers , help ; for God's sake put to your hands , to the quenching of this common flame : The one side by humility , and obedience ; the other , by compassion ; both by prayers and tears . Who am I , that I should revive to you the sweet spirit of that divine Augustine ? who , when he heard & saw the bitter contentions betwixt two grave and famous Divines , jerome , and Ruffian ; Heu mihi , saith he , qui vos alicubi simul invenire non possum ! Alas , that I shall never find you two together ! how I would fall at your feet , how I would embrace them , and weep upon them , and beseech you ; either of you for other , and each for himself ; both of you for the church of GOD ; but especially , for the weak , for whom Christ died : who , not without their own great danger , see you two fight in this Theatre of the world . Yet let me do , what he said he would do ; beg for peace , as for life : by your filial piety to the Church of GOD , whose ruins follow upon our divisions ; by your love of God's truth ; by the graces of that one blessed Spirit , whereby we are all informed & quickened ▪ by the precious blood of that son of GOD , which this day , and this hour , was shed for our redemption , be inclined to peace and love : & though our brains be different , yet let our hearts be one . It was , as I heard , the dying speech of our late reverend , worthy , and gracious Diocesan , Modò me moriente vivat ac floreat Ecclesia ; Oh! yet if , when I am dead , the Church may live and flourish . 

What a spirit was here ? what a speech ? how worthy never to die ? how worthy of a soul so near to his heaven ? how worthy of so happy a succession ? ye whom God hath made inheritors of this blessed care , which do no less long for the prosperity of Zion , live you to effect , what he did but live to wish ▪ all peace with ourselves , and war with none but Rome and Hell. And if there be any weyward Separatist , whose soul professeth to hate peace ; I fear to tell him Paul's message , yet I must : Would to God those were out off that trouble you . How cut off ? As good Theodosius said to Demophilus , a contentious Prelate ; Situ pacem fugis , etc. of thou fly peace , I will make thee fly the Church . Alas ! they do fly it : that which should be their punishment , they make their contentment : how are they worthy of pity ? As Optatus , of his Donatists' , they are brethren , might be companions , and will not . O wilful men ! whither do they run ? from one Christ to another ? Is Christ divided ? We have him ; thanks be to our good God : and we hear him daily ; and whither shall we go from thee ? thou hast the words of eternal life . 

Thus the Ceremonies are finished : Now hear the end of his sufferings , with like patience and devotion . His death is here included ; it was so near , that he spoke of it as done ; and when it was done , all was done . How easy is it to lose ourselves in this discourse ▪ how hard , not to be overwhelmed with matter of wonder ; and to find either beginning , or end ! His sufferings found an end ; our thoughts cannot . Lo ; with this word , he is happily waded out of those deeps of sorrows , whereof our conceits can find no bottom : yet let us , with Peter , gird our coa●e , and cast ourselves a little into this sea . 

All his life was but a perpetual Passion : In that he became man , he suffered more than we can do , either while we are men , or when we cease to be men : he humbled , yea , he emptied himself . We , when we cease to be here , are clothed upon . 2.  Cor. 5 ▪ We both win by our being , & gain by our lesse ; he lost , by taking our more or less to himself , that is , manhood . For , though ever as God , I and my Father are one ; yet as man , My Father is greater than J. That man should be turned into a beast , into a worm , into dust , into nothing ; is not so great a disparagement , as that GOD should become man ▪ and yet it is not finished ; it is but begun . But what man ? If , as the absolute Monarch of the world , he had commanded the vassalage of all Emperors and Princes , & had trod on nothing but Crowns and Sceptres , and the necks of Kings , and bidden all the Potentates of the earth to attend his train ; this had carried some port with it , suitable to the heroical majesty of God's Son . no such matter : here is neither form nor beauty ; unless perhaps ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) the form of a servant : you have made me to serve , with your sins . Behold ▪ he is a man to God ; a servant to man ; and , be it spoken with holy reverence , a drudge to his servants . He is despised and rejected of men ; yea ( as himself , of himself ) a worm , and no man , the shame of men , & contempt of the people . Who is the King of glory ? the Lord of hosts he is the King of glory . Set these two together ; the King of glory ; the shame of men : the more honour , the more abasement . Look back to his cradle ; there you find him rejected of the Bethlemites ; born & laid alas how homely , how unworthily : sought for by Herod , exiled to Egypt , obscurely brought up in the cottage of a poor foster-father , transported & tempted by Satan , derided of his kindred , blasphemously traduced by the jews , pinched with hunger , restless , harbourlesse , sorrowful , persecuted , by the Elders and Pharisees , sold by his own servant , apprehended , arraigned , scourged , condemned ; & yet it is not finished . Let us , with that Disciple , follow him a far off ; & passing over all his contemptuous usage in the way , see him brought to his Cross . Still the further we look , the more wonder ; every thing adds to this ignominy of suffering , and triumph of overcoming . Where was it ? not in a corner , as Paul saith to Festus : but in jerusalem ; the eye , the hart of the world . Obscurity abateth shame ; public notice heightens it : Before all Israel , & before this sun , saith GOD to David , when he would throughly shame him : In jerusalem , which he had honoured with his presence , taught with his preachings , astonished with his miracles , bewailed with his tears ; OH Jerusalem , Jerusalem , how oft would I , and thou wouldst not ! OH yet if in this thy day ! Cruelty and unkindness , after good desert , afflict so much more , as our merit hath been greater . Whereabouts ? without the gates : in Caluary ; among the stinking bones of execrable malefactors . Before , the glory of the place bred shame ; now , the vileness of it . When ? but in the Passeover ; a time of greatest frequency , and concourse of all jews and proselytes : An holy time : when they should receive the figure , they reject the substance : when they should kill & eat the sacramental Lamb , in faith , in thankfulness , they kill the Lamb of GOD , our true Passeover , in cruelty and contempt . With whom ? The quality of our company , either increases or lessens shame . In the midst of thiefs ( saith one ) as the Prince of thiefs . There was no guile in his mouth , much less in his hands : Yet behold , he that thought it no robbery to be equal with Go● , is made equal to robbers and murderers ; yea , superior in evil . What suffered he ? As all lives are not alike pleasant : so all deaths are not equally fearful : there is not more difference betwixt some life & death , then betwixt one death & another . See the Apostles gradation : He was made obedient to the death , even the death of the Cross . The Cross , a linger , tormenting , ignominious death . The jews had four kinds of death for malefactors ; the towel , the sword , fire , stones ; each of these above other in extremity . Strangling with the towel , they accounted easiest : the sword worse than the towel : the fire worse than the sword : stoning worse than the fire : but this Roman death was worst of all . Cursed is every one that hangs on tree . Yet ( as jerome well ) he is not therefore accursed , because he hangs ; but therefore he hangs , because he is accursed . He was made ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) a curse for us. The curse was more than the shame : yet the shame is unspeakable ; and yet not more than the pain . Yet all that die the same death , are not equally miserable : the very Thiefs fared better in their death , than he . I hear of no irrision , no inscription , no taunts , no insultation on them : they had nothing but pain to encounter ; he , pain and scorn . An ingenuous & noble nature , can worse brook this them the other ; any thing rather than disdainefulnesse , and derision : especially , from a base enemy . I remember , that learned Father begins Israel's affliction , with Ismaels' persecuting laughter . The jews , the soldiers , yea , the very thiefs flouted him , and triumphed over his misery : his blood cannot satisfy them , without his reproach . Which of his senses now was not a window to let in sorrow ? His eyes saw the tears of his Mother and friends , the unthankful demeanour of mankind , the cruel despite of his enemies : his ears heard the revile & blasphemies of the multitude : & ( whether the place were noisome to his scent ) his touch felt the nails ; his taste , the gall . Look up , OH all ye beholders , look upon this precious body , & see what part ye can find free ? That head which is adored , and trembled at by the Angelical spirits , is all raked , & harrowed with thorns : that face , of whom is said , thou art fa●rer than the children of men , is all besmeared with the filthy spittle of the jews , and furrowed with his tears : those eyes , clearer than the sun , are darkened with the shadow of death : those ears , that hear the heavenly consorts of Angels , now are filled with the cursed speakings and scoffs of wretched men : those lips that spoke as never man spoke , that command the spirits both of life & darkness , are scornfully wet with vinegar & gall : those feet that trample on all the powers of hell ( his enemies are made his footstool ) are now nailed to the footstool of the Cross : those hands that freely sway the sceptre of the Heavens , now carry the reed of reproach , and are nailed to the tree of reproach : that whole body , which was conceived by the holy Ghost , was all scourged , wounded , mangled : This is the outside of his sufferings . Was his heart free ? O no : the inner part , or soul of this pain , which was unseen , is as far beyond these outward and sensible , as the soul is beyond the body ; God's wrath beyond the malice of men : these were but lo●e sticks to what his soul endured ! OH all ye that pass by the way , behold and see , if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow : Alas ! Lord , what can we see of thy sorrows ? we cannot conceive so much as the heinousness and desert of one of those sins which thou barest : we can no more see thy pain , than we could undergo it , only this we see , that what the infinite sins of almost infinite men , committed against an infinite Majesty , deserved in infinite continuance ; all this thou in the short time of thy Passion hast sustained . We may behold and see ; but all the glorious spirits in heaven cannot look into the depth of this suffering . Do but look yet a little into the passions of this his Passion : for , by the manner of his sufferings , we shall best see what he suffered . Wise and resolute men , do not complain of a little : holy Martyrs have been racked , & would not be loosed ; what shall we say if the Author of their strength , God and man , be wray passions ? what would have overwhelmed men , would not have made him shrink ; and what made him complain , could never have been sustained by men . What shall we then think , if he were affrighted with terrors , perplexed with sorrows , and distracted with both these ? And lo , he was all these : for , first , here was an amazed fear ; for million of men to despair , was not so much as for him to fear : and yet it was no slight fear ; he began 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to be astonished with terrors Which in the days of his flesh , offered up prayers , & supplications , with strong cries and tears , to him that was able to help him ; and was heard in that he feared . Never man was so afraid of the torments of hell , as Christ ( standing in our room ) of his Father's wrath . Fear is still suitable to apprehension : Never man could so perfectly apprehend this cause of fear . He felt the chastisements of our peace : yea , the curse of our sins ; & therefore might well say with David ; I suffer thy terrors with a troubled mind : yea , with job , The arrows of God are in me ; & the terrors of God fight against me . With fear ; there was a deiecting sorrow 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ▪ My soul is on all sides heavy to the death . His strong cries , his many tears , are witnesses of this Passion . He had formerly shed tears of pity , and tears of love ; but now of anguish : he had before sent forth cries of mercy ; never of complaint till now . When the son of God weeps and cries , what shall we say or think ? yet further , betwixt both these and his love , what a conflict was there ? It is not amiss distinguished , that he was always in agony ; but now in 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , in a struggling passion of mixed grief . Behold : this field was not without sweat and blood ; yea , a sweat of blood ▪ OH what man or Angel , can conceive the taking of that heart , that without all outward violence , merely , out of the extremity of his own Passion , bled ( through the flesh and skin ) not some faint dew , but solid drops of blood ? no thorns , no nails fetched blood from him , with so much pain as his own thoughts . He saw the fierce wrath of his Father , and therefore feared ▪ he saw the heavy burden of our sins to be undertaken ; and thereupon , besides fear , justly grieved : he saw the necessity of our eternal damnation , if he suffered not ; if he did suffer , of our redemption : and therefore his love encountered both grief and fear . In itself , he would not drink of that cup : in respect of our good , and his decree , he would and did ; and while he thus striveth , he sweats and bleeds . There was never such a combatte , never such a bloodshed ; and yet it is not finished . I dare not say with some Schoolmen ▪ that the sorrow of his Passion , was not so great as the sorrow of his compassion : yet that was surely exceeding great . To see the ungracious carelessness of mankind , the slender fruit of his sufferings , the sorrows of his mother , disciples , friends ; to foresee from this watch-towre of his Cross , the future temptations of his children , desolations of his Church ; all these must needs strike deep into a tender hart . These he still sees & pities , but without passion ; then , he suffered , in seeing them . 

Can we yet say any more ? Lo , all these sufferings are aggravated by his fullness of knowledge , & want of comfort : for , he did not shut his eyes , as one saith , when he drunk this cup he saw how dreggish , and knew how bitter it was . Sudden evils afflict , if not less , shorter . He foresaw and foresaid every particular he should suffer , so long as he foresaw he suffered : the expectation of evil , is not less than the sense ▪ to look long for good , is a punishment ; but for evil , is a torment . no passion works upon an unknown object : as no love , so no fear is of what we know not ▪ Hence men fear not hell , because they foresee it not : if we could see that pit open before we come at it , it would make us tremble at our sins , and our knees to knock together , as Baltasars' ; & perhaps , without faith , to run mad at the horror of judgement . He saw the burden of all particular sins to be laid upon him : every dram of his father's wrath , was measured out to him , ere he touch● this potion : this cup was full ; & he knew that it must be wringd , not a drop left : it must be finished . OH yet , if as he foresaw all his sorrows , so he could have seen some mixture of refreshing ! But I found none to comfort me ; no , none to pity me . And yet , it is a poor comfort that arises from pity . Even so , OH Lord , thou treadest this winepress alone ; none to accompany , none to assist thee . I remember , Ruffinus in his Ecclesiastical story reports , that one Theodorus , a Martyr , told him , that when he was hanging ten hours upon the rack , for religion , under julians' persecution , his joints distended and distorted , his body exquisitelie tortured with change of executioners ; so as never age , saith he , could remember the like : he felt no pain at all , but continued indeed all the while in the sight of all men , singing & smiling . For , there stood a comely young man by him on his jibbet ( an Angel rather , in form of a man ) which with a clean towel , still wiped off his sweat , & poured cool water upon his racked limbs : wherewith he was so refreshed , that it grieved him to be let down . Even the greatest torments are easy , when they ●●ue answerable comforts : but a wounded & comfortless spirit , who can bear ? If yet but the same messenger of GOD , might have attended his Cross , that appeared in his agony ; & might have given ease to their Lord , as he did to his servant ! And yet , what can the Angels help , where God will smite ? Against the violence of men , against the fury of Satan , they have prevailed in the Cause of GOD , for men : they dare not , they cannot comfort where God will afflict . When our Saviour had been wrestling with Satan , in the end of his Lent , than they appeared to him , and served ▪ but now , while about the same time , he is wrestling with the wrath of his Father for us , not an Angel dare be seen , to look out of the windows of heaven to relieve him : for men ; much less could they if they would ; but what did they ? Miserable comforters are ye all ; the soldiers ; they stripped him , scorned him with his purple , crown , reed ; spat on him , smote him : the passengers ; they reviled him ; and insulting , wagged their heads and hands at him ; Hey , thou that destroiest the temple , come down , etc.  The Elders and Scribes alas ! they have bought his blood , suborned witnesses , incensed Pilate , preferred Barrabas , undertaken the guilt of his death , cried out , Crucify , crucify ; Ho! thou that savedst others . His disciples ; alas ! they forsook him : one of them forswears him ; another runs away naked , rather than he will stay and confess him . His mother , and other friends : they look on indeed , and sorrow with him ; but , to his discomfort . Where the grief is extreme , and respects near , partnership doth but increase sorrow . Paul chides this love : What do you weeping , and breaking my heart ? The tears of those we love , do either slacken our hearts , or wound them . Who then shall comfort him ? Himself ? Sometimes our own thoughts find a way to succour us , unknown to others : no , not himself . Doubtless ( as Aquinas ) the influence of the higher part of the soul , was restrained from the aid of the inferior ; My soul is filled with evils . Psalm . 87 , 4.  Who then ? his Father ? here , here was his hope : If the Lord had not holpen me , my soul had almost dwelled in silence ▪ I and my Father are one . But now ( alas ! ) he , even he , delivers him into the hands of his enemies ; when he hath done , turns his back upon him as a stranger ; yea , he woundeth him as an enemy . The Lord would break him . esay , 53 , 10.  Yet any thing is light to the soul , whiles the comforts of God sustain it : who can dismay , where God will relieve ? But here , My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ? What a word was here , to come from the mouth of the Son of GOD ? My disciples are men , weak & fearful ; no marvel if they forsake me . The jews are themselves , cruel and obstinate . Men are men , graceless , and unthankful . Devil's are , according to their nature , spiteful and malicious . All these do but their kind , and let them do it : but thou , OH Father , thou that hast said ; This is my well-beloved son , in whom I am well pleased : thou of whom I have said , It is my Father that glorifies me : what ? forsaken me ? Not only brought me to this shame , smitten me , unregarded me ; but , as it were , forgotten , yea , forsaken me ? What , even me , my Father ? How many of thy constant servants have suffered heavy things ! yet in the multitudes of the sorrows of their hearts , thy presence and comforts have refreshed their soul . Hast thou relieved them , and dost thou forsake me ▪ me , thine only , dear , natural , eternal son ! OH ye heavens & earth , how could you stand , whiles the Maker of you thus complained ! Ye stood ; but , partaking after a sort of his Passion : the earth trembled & shaken , her rocks tore , her graves opened , the heavens withdrew their light ; as not daring to behold this sad and fearful spectacle . 

O dear Christians ! how should these earthen and rocky hearts of ours shake , and re●d in pieces at this meditation ? how should our faces be covered with darkness , and our joy be turned into heaviness ? All these voices , and tears , and sweats , and pangs , are for us ; yea , from us. Shall the Son of God thus smart for our sins , yea , with our sins ; and shall not we grieve for our own ? shall ●ee weep to us in this Marketplace , and shall not we mourn ? Nay , shall he sweated and bleed for us , and shall not we weep for ourselves ? Shall he thus lamentably shrieke-out , under his Father's wrath , and shall not we tremble ? Shall the heavens and earth suffer with him , & we suffer nothing ? I call you not to a weak & idle pity of our glorious Saviour : to what purpose ? His injury , was our glory . no , no ; ye daughters of Jerusalem , weep not for me : but weep for yourselves : For our sins , that have done this ; not for his sorrow that suffered it : not for his pangs , that were ; but for our own that should have been , & ( if we repent not ) shall be . O how grievous , how deadly are our sins , that cost the son of God ( besides blood ) so much torment ? How far are our souls gone , that could not be ransomed with any easier price ? That that took so much of this infinite Redeemer of men , God & man , how can it choose but swallow up & confound thy soul , which is but finite and sinful ? If thy soul had been in his soul's stead , what had become of it : it shall be , if his were not in stead of thine . This weight , that lies thus heavy on the Son of God , & wrung from him these tears , sweat , blood , and these unconceivable groans of his afflicted spirit , how shall it choose but press down thy soul to the bottom of hell ? & so it will do : if he have not suffered it for thee , thou must and shalt suffer it for thyself . Go now thou lewd man , and make thyself merry with thy sins ; laugh at the uncleanenesses , or bloodinesse of thy youth : thou little knowest the price of a sin : thy soul shall do ; thy Saviour did , when he cried out , to the amazement of Angels , and horror of men ; My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me . But now no more of this ; It is finished : the greater conflict , the more happy victory . Well doth he find and feel of his Father , what his type said before , He will not chide always , nor keep his anger for ever . It is fearful ; but in him , short : eternal to sinners ; short to his Son , in whom the Godhead dwelled bodily . Behold : this storm , wherewith all the powers of the world were shaken , is now over . The Elders , Pharisees , judas , the soldiers , priests , witnesses , judges , thiefs , executioners , devils , have all tired themselves in vain , with their own malice ; and he triumphs over them all , upon this throne of his Cross : His enemies are vanquished , his Father satisfied , his soul with this word , at rest and glory ; It is finished . Now there is no more betraying , agonies , arraignments , scourge , scoffing , crucifying , conflicts , terrors , all is finished . Alas beloved , and will we not yet let the Son of God be at rest ? do we now again go about to fetch him out of his glory , to scorn and crucify him ? I fear to say it : God's spirit dare , and doth ; They crucify again to themselves the Son of God , and make a mock of him . To themselves ; not in himself : that they cannot , it is no thank to them ; they would do it . See and consider : the notoriously-sinfull conversations of those that should be Christians , offer violence unto our glorified Saviour : they stretch their hands to heaven , and pull him down from his Throne , to his Cross : they tear him with thorns , pierce him with nails , load him with reproaches . thou hatest the jews , spettest at the name of judas , railest on Pilate , condemnest the cruel butchers of Christ : yet , thou canst blaspheme , & swear him quite over ; curse , swagger , lie , oppress , boil with lust , scoff , riot , and livest like a debauched man ; yea , like an human beast ; yea , like an unclean devil . Cry Hosanna as long as thou will't ; thou art a Pilot , a jew , a judas , an executioner of the Lord of life : and so much greater shall thy judgement be , by how much thy light , & his glory , is more . O , beloved , is it not enough that he died once for us ? Were those pains so light , that we should every day redouble them ? Is this the entertainment , that so gracious a Saviour hath deserved of us by dying ? Is this the recompense of that infinite love of his , that thou shouldst thus cruelly vex and wound him with thy sins ? Every of our sins is a thorn , and nail , and spear to him . While thou pourest down thy drunken carouses , thou givest thy Saviour a potion of gall : while thou despisest his poor servants , thou spett'st in his face : while thou puttest on thy proud dresses , & liftest up thy vain heart with high conceits , thou settest a Crown of thorns on his head : while thou wringest and oppressest his poor children , thou whippest him , & drawest blood of his hands and feet . thou hypocrite , how darest thou offer to receive the Sacrament of God , with that hand , which is thus imbrued with the blood of him whom thou receivest ? In every Ordinary , thy profane tongue walks , in the disgrace of the religious & conscionable . thou makest no scruple of thine own sins , and scornest those that do : Not to be wicked , is crime enough . Hear him that saith , Saul , Saul , why persecutest thou me ? Saul strikes , at Damascus : Christ suffers in heaven . thou strikest : Christ jesus smarteth , & will revenge . These are the ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) afterings of Christ's sufferings : in himself it is finished ; in his members it is not , till the world be finished . We must toil , and groan , and bleed ; that we may reign : if he had not done so , It had not been finished . This is our warfare : this is the region of our sorrow and death . Now are we set upon the sandy pavement of our Theatre , and are matched with all sorts of evils ; evil men , evil spirits , evil accidents ; & ( which are worst ) our own evil hearts : tentations , crosses , persecutions , sicknesses , wants , infamies ; death ; all these must , in our courses , be encountered by the law of our profession . What should we do but strive and suffer , as our General hath done , that we may reign as he doth , and once triumph in our Consummatum est ? God & his Angels sit upon the Scaffolds of Heaven , & behold us : our Crown is ready ; our day of deliverance shall come ; yea , our redemption is near ▪ when all tears shall be wiped from our eyes ; & we that have sown in tears , shall reap in joy . In the mean time , let us possess our souls , not in patience only , but in comfort : let us adore and magnify our Saviour in his sufferings , and imitate him in our own ▪ our sorrows shall have an end ; our joys shall not : our pains shall soon be finished ; our glory shall be finished , but never ended . 

Thus his sufferings are finished ; now together with them , Man's salvation . Who knows not , that man had made himself a deep debtor , a bankrupt , an outlaw to GOD ? Our sins are our debts ; and by sins , death . Now , in this word and act , our sins are discharged , death endured , and therefore we cleared . The debt is paid , the score is crossed , the Creditor satisfied , the Debtors acquitted ; and , since there was no other quarrel , saved . We are all sick , and that mortally : Sin is the disease of the soul . Quot vitia , tot febres , faith Chrysostome ; so many sins , so many Fevers , & those pestilent . What wonder is it that we have so much plague , while we have so much sin ? Our Saviour is the Physician ; The whole need not the Physician , but the sick . Wherein ? He heals all our infirmities : he heals them after a miraculous manner ; not by giving us receipts , but by taking our receipts for us. A wonderful Physician ; a wonderful course of cure . One while he would cure us by abstinence ; our superfluity , by his forty day's emptiness : according to that old rule ▪ Hunger cures the diseases of Gluttony . Another while , by exercise : He went up and down from City to City ; and in the day was preaching in the Temple ; in the night , praying in the Mount. then , by diet ; Take , eat , this is my body : and , Let this cup pass . After that yet , by sweat : such a sweat as never was a bloody one : yet more by incision ; they pierced his hands , feet , side : and yet again by potion ; a bitter potion , of vinegar and gall . And lastly , which is both the strangest and strongest receipt of all , by dying ; Which died for us ; that whether we wake or sleep , we should live together with him . We need no more , we can go no further ; there can be no more physic of this kind : there are cordials after these , of his Resurrection and Ascension ; no more penal receipts . By this blood we have Redemption , Ephes . 1 , 7.  justification , Rom. 3 , 24.  Reconciliation , Colos . 1 , 20.  Sanctification , 1.  Pet. 1 , 2.  Entrance into glory , Hebr. 10 , 19  Is it not now finished● Woe were us , if he had left but one mite of satisfaction upon our score , to be discharged by our souls : and woe be to them that derogate from Christ , that they may charge themselves ; that botch up these alsufficiently meritorious sufferings of Christ , as imperfect , with the superfluities of flesh and blood . Maledictus homo , qui spem ponit in homine ▪ We may not with patience see Christ wronged by his false friends : As that heroical Luther said in the like ▪ Cursed be the silence that here forbeareth to be free & short . here be two injuries intolerable ; both give Christ the lie upon his Cross : It is finished . no ; somewhat remains : the fault is discharged , not the punishment . Of punishments , the eternal is quit , not the temporal ▪ It is finished by Christ : no , there wants yet much ; the satisfactions of Saints applied by his Vicar : add men's sufferings to Christ's , them the treasure is full ; till than it is not finished . 

Two qualities strive for the first place in these two opinions ; Impiety , and Absurdity : I know not whether to prefer . For Impiety ; here is GOD taxed of injustice , unmercifulnesse , insufficiency , falsehood . Of injustice ; that he forgives a sin , and yet punishes for that which he hath forgiven : unmercifulnesse ; that he forgives not while he forgives , but doth it by halves : insufficiency ; that his ransom must be supplied by men : falsehood ; in that he saith , It is finished , when it is not . For Absurdity ; how gross & monstrous are these Positions ? that at once the same sin should be remitted & retained ; that there should be a punishment , where there is no fault ; that what could strike off our eternal punishment , did not wipe off the temporal ; that he which paid our pounds , sticks at our far things ; that GOD will retain what man may discharge ; that it is , and is not finished . 

If there be any opinions whose mention confutes them , these are they . None can be more vain ; none had more need of solidity : for , this prop beares-up alone , the weight of all those million of Indulgences which Rome creates and sells to the world . That Strumpet would well-near go naked , if this were not . These spiritual treasures , fetch in the temporal : which yet our reverend and learned Fulke , justly calls a most blasphemous and beggarly principle : it brings in whole Chests , yea mines of Gold ( like the Pope's Indieses ) ; and hath not so much as a rag of proof to cover it ; whether of Antiquity , of Reason , of Scripture . Not of Antiquity ; for , these jubilee Proclamations began but about three hundred years ago . Not of Reason : how should one mere man pay for another , dispense with another , to another , by another ? Not of Scripture : which hath flatly said ; The blood of Jesus Christ , his son , purgeth us from all sin : and yet I remember , that acute Sadeel hath taught me , that this practice is according to Scripture : What Scripture ? He cast the money-changers out of the Temple , and said ; ye have made my house a den of thiefs . Which also joachim , their prophetical Abbot , well applies to this purpose . Some modest Doctors of Lovan , would fain have minced this Antichristian blasphemy : who began to teach , that the passions of the Saints are not so by Indulgences applied , that they become true satisfactions ; but that they only serve to move God , by the sight of them , to apply unto us Christ's satisfaction . But these meal-mouthed Divines , were soon charmed ; four several Popes ( as their Cardinal confesseth ) fell upon the neck of them , and their opinion ; Leo the tenth , Pius the fifth , Gregory the thirteenth , and Clemens the sixth : & with their furious Bulls , bellow out threats against them , and toss them in the air for heretics ; and teach them , upon pain of a curse , to speak home with Bellarmine ; Passionibus sanctorum expiari delicta : and strait , Applicari nobis sanctorum passiones ad redimendas poenas , quas pro peccatis Deo debemus : that by the sufferings of Saints , our sins are expiate ; and that , by them applied , we are redeemed from those punishments which we yet owe to GOD. Blasphemy , worthy the tearing of garments : how is it finished by Christ , if men must supply ? O blessed Saviour ! was every drop of thy blood enough to redeem a world , and do we yet need the help of men ? How art thou a perfect Saviour , if our brethren also must be our redeemers ? O ye blessed Saints , how would you abhor this sacrilegious glory ! and with those holy Apostles , yea , that glorious Angel , say ; Vide ne seceris ; and with those wise Virgins ; Lest there will not be enough for us & you got to them that sell , and buy for yourselves . For us , w● enure not their multitude ; Let them h●ue as many Saviors' as Saints , and as many Saints us men● we kno●e with Ambrose ; Christ● press●●●tore non eguit ; Christ's passion needs no helper : & therefore , with that worthy Martyr , dare say ; None but Christ ; ●one but Christ● Let our Toules die , if he cannot save them ; let them not fear their 〈…〉 or 〈◊〉 , if he have finished ▪ He● 〈…〉 , thou languishing and afflicted so●●e to There is 〈◊〉 one of thy sinne● but it is paid for ; not one o●● thy debts in the 〈◊〉 of God but it had ●ffect ; not one farthing of all thine infinite ransom is unpaid● Alas ! thy sins ( thou sayst ) are ever before thee , and God's indignation goes still over thee ; & thou goest mourning all the day long ▪ and with that pattern of distress , criest out in the bitterness of thy soul , I have sinned , what shall I do to thee● OH ▪ thou preserver of men ? What shouldst thou do ? Turn , and believe . Now thou art stung in thy conscience with this fiery serpent , look up with the eyes of 〈◊〉 to this b●azen serpent , Christ jesus , & behealed . Behold , his head is humbly bowed down in a gracious respect to thee , his a●mss are stretched out lovingly to embrace thee ▪ yea , o● precious side is open to receive● thee , and his tongue interpret all these to thee for thine endless comfort ; It is finished . There is no more accusation , judgement , death , hell for thee : all these are no more to thee , then if they were not . Who shall condemn ? it is Christ which is de●d . I know , how ready every man is to reach forth his hand to this d●le of grace , and how angry to ●e beaten from this doo● of mercy . We are all easily persuaded to hope well , because we love ourselves well ▪ Which of all us in this gr●●t congregation take● exceptions to himself , and thinks ▪ I know there 〈◊〉 want in my Saviour , there is want in me ▪ He hath finished ; but I believe not , I repent not . Every presumptuous and hard 〈◊〉 , so 〈◊〉 at Christ , as if he had finish for 〈◊〉 , as if he had broken down the gates of hell , and loosed the bands of death , and had made forgiveness as 〈◊〉 as life ; Prosper●●● 〈…〉 saith wise Solomon , East 〈◊〉 the foolish , and the prosperity , of fool's 〈◊〉 them , you , 〈…〉 prosperity . thou saw'st , God 〈◊〉 merciful , thy 〈…〉 b●ous , 〈◊〉 Passion absolute ▪ All these , & ye● thou mayst be condemned . Merciful , not ●ni●s● ; bountiful , not lavish , absolutely sufficient for all , not effectual to all . Whatsoever God is , what are 〈◊〉 i He 〈◊〉 i● the doubts 〈◊〉 fa●st-well ; Christ is 〈◊〉 good Shepherd ; Wherein ▪ H●● gives his l●fe ; but fo● whom ? 〈◊〉 his sheep . What is this to 〈…〉 while thou ar● secure , profane , impenitent ▪ th● a● 〈…〉 a 〈◊〉 My sheep he●re my voice ; What is his voice but his preceptor where is thine obedience to his commandments ▪ If t● will't not heard his Law , n● not ●arken ●o his Gospel 〈…〉 no more mercy for thee , ●he● i● there were no Saviour . He ha●● finished ; for those in 〈…〉 hath begun . If thou have to beginnings of gra●● as yet , hope not for ever finishing of salvation ; Come to me , all ye that are heavy lade●● , saith Christ ●hou shalt get nothing , if thou come when he calls thee not . thou art not called , and canst not be refreshed , unless thou be laden : not with sin ( this alone keeps thee away from God ) but with conscience of sins ▪ A broken and a co●●rite hear● , OH God , thou wilt not despise . Is thy heart wounded with thy sin ▪ doth grief and hatred strive within thee , whether shall be more ? are the desires of thy soul with God ? dost thou long for holiness , complain of thy imperfections , struggle against thy corruptions ▪ thou art the man , fear not . It is finished . That law which thou wouldst have kept , & couldst not ; thy Saviour could , and did keep for thee : that salvation which thou couldst never work-out alone ( alas poor impotent creatures ▪ what can we do towards heaven without him , which cannot move on earth but in him ? ) he alone for thee hath finished . Look up therefore boldly to the throne of GOD ; and , upon the truth of thy repentance & faith , knows , that there is no quarrel against thee in heaven ▪ nothing but peace and joy ; All is finished . He would be spetted on , that he might wash thee ; he would be covered with scornful robes , that thy sins might be covered ; he would be whipped , that thy soul might not be scourged eternally ; he would thirst , that thy soul might be satisfied ; he would bear all his Father's wrath , that thou mightst beat none ; he would yield to death , that thou mightst never taste of it ; he would be in sense for a time as forsaken of his Father , that thou mightst be received for ever . 

Now bid thy soul return to her rest ; and enjoin it ▪ David's task ; Praise the Lord , OH my soule● , and , What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits ? I will take the Cup of salvation , and call upon the name of the Lord And , as ravishe from thyself with the sweet apprehension of this mercy , call all the other creatures to the fellowship of this joy , with that divine esay ; Rejoice , OH ye● heavens , for the Lord hath done it ; shout yea lower 〈◊〉 of the earth , 〈…〉 into praises ye● mountains , for the Lord hath 〈…〉 Jacob , and will be glorified in Jsraell . And , even now begin that heavenly song , which shall never e●d , with those glorified Saints ; Praise , and 〈◊〉 , and glory , and power , be to him that s●●eth upon the throne , 〈◊〉 the Lamb for evermore . 

Thus , our speech of Christ's last words , is finished . His last act accompanied his words ; our speech must follow it : let it not want your devout and careful attention ; He bowed , and gave up the Ghost . 

The Cross was a slow death , and had more pain them speed ; whence , a second violence must dispatch the crucified ; their bones must be broken , that their hearts might break . Our Saviour stays not Death's leisure , but willingly and courageously meets him in the way : and like a Champion that scorns to be overcome , yea , knows he cannot be , yieldeth in the midst of his strength , that he might by dying vanquish death . He bowed , and gave up ▪ Not bowing , because he had given up , but because he would . He cried with a loud voice , saith Matthew . Nature was strong , he might have lived ; but he gave up the Ghost , and would die , to show himself . Lord of Life and Death . O wondrous example ! he that gave life to his enemies , gave up his own : he gives them to live , that persecute and hate him ; and himself will die the while , for those that hate him . He bowed , & gave up : not they . They might crown his head ; they could not bow it : they might vex his spirit ; not take it away : they could not do that without leave ; this they could not do , because they had no lea●e . He alone would bow his head , and give up his Ghost ; 〈◊〉 have power to lay down my life : Man gave him not his life , man could not bereave it : no man takes it from me . Alas who could ? The High-priests forces , when they came against him armed ; he said but I am he● ; they st● ▪ fall backward ▪ How easy 〈◊〉 breath dispersed his enemies ! whom he might as easily have bidden the earth , yea , hell to swallow , or fire from heaven to devour . Who commanded the devils , & they obeyed ; could not have been attached my men . He must give not only leave , but power to apprehend himself ; else they had not lived to take him . He is laid hold of ; Peter ●ight N-ab Pu●●● ; saith Christ , Thinkest thou that I cannot pray to my Father , and he will give me more than 12 legions of Angels ? What an Army were here ? more them threescore & twelve thousand Angels ; and every Angel able to subdue a world of men . He could , but would not be rescued , he is led by his own power , not by his enemies : and stands now before Pilate , like the scorn of men , crowned , robbed , scourged , with an Ec●e Homo : Yet thou couldst have no power against me , 〈◊〉 i● were given thee from above . 

Behold ; he himself must give Pilate power against himself ; else he could not be condemned . He will be condemned , lifted up , nailed ; yet no death without himself . He shall give his soul an offering for sinne● esay ▪ 53 , 10.  no action , that favours of constraint , can be meritorious : he would deserve , therefore he would suffer and die . He bowed his head , and gave up the Ghost , OH gracious and bountiful Saviour ! he might have kept his soul within his ●eeths , in spite of all the world ; the weakeness of God , is stronger than men : and if he had but spoken the word , the heavens and earth should have vanished away before him ; but , he would not . Behold ; when he saw , that impotent man could not take away his soul , he gave it up , 〈◊〉 would die , that we might live . See here a Saviour , that can contemn his own life for ours , and cares not to be dissolved in himself ▪ that we might be united to his Father . Ski●●e for skibbe , saith the devil , 〈◊〉 all that he hath , a man will give for his life . Lo , here , to prove Satan a liar , skin , and life ▪ and all , hath Christ jesus given for us. We are besotted with the earth . & make base shifts to live ; one with a mai●ed body , another with a perfu●●d soul , a third with a rotten name : and how many had 〈…〉 neglect their soul● then their life and 〈…〉 and 〈…〉 ▪ then die● ▪ It is a shame it● tells many of us Christians 〈◊〉 op●n life , and ●●●●●ble and ●a●h ▪ and she 〈◊〉 solve so 〈◊〉 in 〈◊〉 excess of love , ●o●ard● 〈◊〉 〈…〉 as Peter denies Christ ●i● , & forswears him 〈…〉 grains of incense ●nto the Idols ●ire E●ius , 〈…〉 thrice ; Spir● 〈…〉 , a● despairs ; ●de● me live ●aith the 〈…〉 Whith●● d●st thou 〈◊〉 ●hy self 〈…〉 and ●do● us 〈…〉 wouldst thou 〈◊〉 with thyself 〈◊〉 ▪ thou hast not thus learned Christ● 〈…〉 voluntarily for thee , thou wilt not be forced to die for him : he gave up the Ghost for thee ; thou wilt not let others take it from thee for him : thou wilt not let him take it for himself . 

When I look back to the first Christians , and compare their zealous contempt of death , with our backwardness ; I am at once amazed & ashamed : I see there even women ( the feebler sex ) running with their little ones in their arms , for the preferment of martyrdom ; and ambitiously striving for the next blow . I see holy & tender virgins , choosing rather a sore and shameful death , then honourable espousalls . I hear the blessed Martyrs , entreating their Tyrants and tormentors for the honour of dying : Ignatius , amongst the rest , fearing lest the beasts will not devour him , and vowing the first violence to them , that he might be dispatched . And , what less courage was there , in our memorable & glorious forefathers of the last , of this age ? and do we , their cold and feeble offspring , look pale at the face of a fair and natural death ; abhor the violent , though for Christ ? Alas ! how have we gathered rust with our long peace ? Our unwillingness , is from inconsideration , from distrust . Look but up to Christ jesus upon his Cross , and see him bowing his head , and breathing out his soul ; and these fears shall vanish . He died , & wouldst thou live ? He gave up the ghost , and wouldst thou keep it ? Whom wouldst thou follow , if not thy Redeemer ▪ If thou die not , if not willingly , thou goest contrary to him , and shalt never meet him . Thomas thou shouldst every day die a death for him , thou couldst never requite his one death : and dost thou stick at one ? Every word hath his force , both to him and thee . He died , which is Lord of Life , and commander of Death ; thou art but a tenant of life , a subject of death . And yet it was not a dying , but a giving up ; not of a vanishing and airy breath , but of a spiritual soul , which after separation , hath an entire life in itself . He gave up the Ghost . He died , that hath both overcome and sanctified , and sweetened death . What fearest thou ? he hath pulled out the sting and malignity of death 〈◊〉 thou be a Christian , carry it in thy bosom , it hurts thee not dar'st thou not trust thy Redeemer ? If he had not died , death had been a Tyrant ; now he is a slave . OH Death , where is thy sting ? OH Grave , where is thy victory ? Yet the Spirit of God saith not he died , but gave up the Ghost . The very heathen Poet saith ; He durst not say that a good man dies . It is worth the noting ( me thinks ) that when S. Luke would describe to us the death of Ananias and Sapphira , he saith ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) he expired : but when S. john would describe Christ's death , he saith ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) he gave up the Ghost . How gave he it up and whither ? How ? so as after a sort he retained it : his soul parted from his body ; his Godhead was never distracted , either from soul or body . This union is not in nature ; but in person . If the natures of Christ could be divided each would have his subsistence ; so there should be more persons . God forbid : one of the natures therefore , may have a separation in itself ; the soul from the body : one nature cannot be separate from other , or either nature from the person . If you cannot conceive , wonder : the Son of GOD hath wedded unto himself our humanity , without all possibility of divorce ; the body hangs on the Cross , the soul is yielded ; the Godhead is eviternally united to them both ; acknowledges , sustains them both . The soul in his agony feels not the presence of the Godhead ▪ the body , upon the Cross , feels not the presence of the soul . Yet , as the Fathers of Chalcedon say truly ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) indivisibly , inseparably is the Godhead , with both of these , still and ever , one and the same person . The Passion of Christ ( as Augustine ) was the sleep of his Divinity : so , I may say ; The death of Christ , was the sleep of his Humanity . If he sleep , he shall do well ; said that disciple , of Lazarus . Death was too weak to dissolve the eternal bonds of this heavenly conjunction . Let not us Christians go too much by sense ; we may be firmly knit to God , & not feel it . thou canst not hope to be so near to thy God as Christ was , united personally : thou canst not fear , that God should seem more absent from thee , than he did from his own Son ; yet was he still one with both body & soul , when they were divided from themselves . When he was absent to sense , he was present to faith ▪ when absent in vision , yet in union one and the same : so will he be to thy soul when it is at worst . He is thine , and thou art his : if thy hold seem loosened , his is not ▪ When temptations will not let thee see him , he sees thee , and possesses thee ; only believe thou against sense , above hope : and though he kill thee , yet trust in him . whither gave he it up ? Himself expresses ; Father , into thy hands : and , This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise . It is justice to restore whence we receive ; Into thy hands . He knew where it should be both safe & happy : true ; he might be bold ( thou sayest ) as the Son with the Father . The servants have done so ; David before him , Steven after him . And lest we should not think it our common right , Father , saith he , I will that those thou hast given me , may be with me , even where I am : he wills it ; therefore it must be . It is not presumption , but faith to charge God with thy spirit , neither can there ever be any believing soul so mean , that he should refuse it : all the fear is in thyself ; how canst thou trust thy jewel with a stranger ? What sudden familiarity is this ? God hath been with thee , and gone by thee ; thou hast not saluted him : and now in all the hast thou bequeathest thy soul to him . On what acquaintance ? How desperate is this carelessness ▪ 

If thou have but a little money , whether thou keep it , thou layest it up in the Temple of Trust ; or whether thou let it ; thou art sure of good assurance , sound bonds . If but a little land , how carefully dost thou make firm conveyances to thy desired heirs ? If goods , thy will hath taken secure order who shall enjoy them ; we need not teach you Citizens to make sure work for your estates ▪ If children , thou disposest of them in trades , with portions : only of thy soul ( which is thyself ) thou knowest not what shall become . The world must have it no more ; thyself wouldst keep it , but thou knowest thou canst not : Satan would have it ; and thou knowest not whether he shall : thou wouldst have God have it ; and thou knowest not whether he will : yea , thy hart is now ready with Pharaoh , to say ; Who is the Lord ? OH the fearful and miserable estate of that man , that must part with his soul , he knows not whither ! Which , if thou wouldst avoid ( as this very warning shall judge thee if thou do not ) be acquainted with GOD in thy life , that thou mayst make him the Guardian of thy soul , in thy death . Given up it must needs be ; but to him that hath governed it if thou have given it to Satan in thy life ; how canst thou hope God will in thy death entertain it ? Did you not hate me , and expel me out of my father's house ; how then come ye to me now in this time of your tribulation ; said jeptha , to the men of Gilead . no , no : either give up thy soul to God while he calls for it in his word , in the provocations of his love , in his afflictions , in the holy motions of his spirit to thine : or else when thou wouldst give it , he will none of it , but as a judge , to deliver it to the Tormentor . 

What should God do , with an unclean , drunken , profane , proud , covetous soul ? Without holiness , it is no seeing of GOD : Departed from me , ye wicked ; I know ye not ; go to the Gods you have served . See how GOD is even with men : they had in the time of the Gospel , said to the holy one of Israel ; Departed from us : now in the time of judgement , he saith to them ; Departed from me . They would not know God when they might ; now God will not know them when they would . Now therefore ( beloved ) if thou wouldst not have GOD scorn the offer of thy deathbed , fit thy soul for him in thy health ; furnish it with grace ; enure it to a sweet conversation with the God of heaven : then mayst thou boldly give it up ; & he shall as graciously receive it , yea , fetch it by his Angels to his glory . 

He gave up the Ghost . We must do as he did ; not all with the same success . Giving up , supposes a receiving , a returning . This inmate that we have in our bosom , is sent to lodge here for a time ; may not dwell here always . The right of this tenure , is the Lords , not ours . As he said of the hatchet ; It is but lent , it must be restored : It is ours to keep ; his to dispose and require . See and consider both our privilege and charge ; It is not with us as with brute Creatures : we have a living Ghost to inform us , which yet is not ours , ( and , alas , what is ours , if our souls be not ? ) but must be given up ; to him that gave it . 

Why do we live , as those that took no keep of so glorious a guest ? as those that should never part with it ; as those that think it given them to spend ; not to return with a reckoning ? 

If thou hadst no soul , if a mortal one , if thine own , if never to be required , how couldst thou live but sensuallie ? O remember but who thou art , what thou hast , and whither thou must ; and thou shalt live like thyself while thou art , and give up thy Ghost confidently when thou shalt cease to be ▪ Neither is there here more certainty of our departure then comfort . Carries this with thee to thy deathbed ; and see if it can refresh thee , when all the world cannot give thee one dram of comfort . Our spirit is our dearest riches : if we should lose it , here were just cause of grief . Howl and lament , if thou thinkest thy soul perishes : it is not forfeited , but surrendered . How safely doth our soul pass through the gates of death , without any impeachment , while it is in the hands of the Almighty ? Woe were us , if he did not keep it while we have it ; much more when we restore it . We give it up to the same hands that created , infused , redeemed , renewed , that do protect , preserve , establish , and will crown it : I know whom I have believed ; and I am persuaded , that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day . OH secure and happy estate of the godly ! OH blessed exchange of our condition : while our soul dwells in our breast , how is it subject to infinite miseries ? distempered with passions , charged with sins , vexed with tentations ; above , none of these : how should it be otherwise ? This is our pilgrimage , that our home : this our wilderness , that our land of promise : this our bondage , that our kingdom . Our impotency causeth this our sorrow . 

When our soul is once given up , what evil shall reach unto heaven , and wrestle with the Almighty ? Our loathnesse to give up , comes from our ignorance and infidelity . no man goes unwillinglie to a certain preferment ; I defute to be dissolved , saith Paul : I have served thee , I have believed thee , and now : I come to thee , saith Luther : The voices of Saints , not of men . If thine heart can say thus , thou shalt not need to entreat with old Hilarion , Egredere me● anima , egredere ; quid ●i●as ? Go thy ways forth my soul , go forth : what fearest thou ▪ but it shall fly up alone cheerfully from thee ; and give up itself , into the arms of GOD , as a faithful Creator and Redeemer . This earth is not the element of thy soul ; it is not where it should be : It shall be no less thine , when it is more the owners . Think now seriously of this point ; God's Angel is abroad , and strikes on all sides , we know not which of ●urtur●●ess shall be the next : we are sure we carry death's en●u● ▪ within us. If we be ready , our day cannot come too soon . Stir up thy soul to an heavenly cheerfulness , like thy Saviour : Know but whither thou art going ; and thou canst not but with divine Paul , say from our Saviour's mouth , even in this sense ; It is a more blessed thing to give , then to receive . GOD cannot abide an unwilling guest . Give up that spirit to him , which he hath given thee ; and he will both receive what thou givest , and give it thee again , with that glory and happiness which can never be conceived , and shall never be ended . Even so , Lord JESUS , Come quickly . 

Gloria in excelsis Deo.  





Petr. Galatin . de arcan . fidei Cath. ad finem . 

Ex glos . Rab. Sh●lom●h . 

Lex est Euamgelium praedictum : Euangelium lex completa . 1.  Cor. 16.9  joh. 3.  Art thou a Master in Israel ? Esr . 6.7 . jer. 8.8 . Neh. 8.4 . Matt. 23.2 . Cleric : judaeorum : saith jerome . Euseb . eccls . hist . l. 4 c. 22 Erant in circumcisione diversae sententiae qua maximè tribui judae adversabantur , etc.  Vid jos . Scalig resp . ad Serarium . Orig. lib. 5. advers . Cells . Christian●s non habere veram Religionem , quòd in varias sectas divisi essent . Domus Sammai & Hillel . Ar. Mont. in Euang.  Ante adventum Christi , non tot & tam blasphemae harese ▪ Irem . lib. 5.  Act. 15.5 . In eam consentiunt omnes Hebraei , teste Bahal Haruch , Pagnin . in 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Ar. Montanus . jos . Seal . I Drus●● , etc.  1.  Mac. 2.47  Act. 26.5 . Eruditius caeteris legem 〈◊〉 Pher. jos●● . ● de bello jud. c. 4.  An old saying , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Descipuli Sammai occidebant descipulos Hillel . Epiphan . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 4.  In nomen Mosie , 
Aciba , 
Anna , 
Filiorum 
Assamonai . 
Higher Algasiae the 11. quaestionib . 1.  Cor. 1.20 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Scriba lectionarij quasi Scripturarij vel Textuarij ; Pharisaei 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Drus . Matth. 9  Eodem habitis cum Scribis muliebri passio , latis crepidis , & calceamentorum ligulis procedentes . Epiphan . Meahavah . Epiph.  Chasidim . Prac. Mosaica cum ex pos . Rabbinorum à Munster . ed  Ibid.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Epiphan . Hier. in Mat. 23.  Acutissimas in eyes spinas ligabant , ut amb●lantes & sedentes pungerentur & admonerentur officij . Josephus . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . etc.  Qui comedit panem samariticum a●st ●omederet sui●●am . Precept . Mos . cum expos . Rab.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : in the new Testament , the common people . 

Vnum ex sex opprobrijs vitandis à discipulis sa●ientum , Comessatio cum populo terrae . Ar. Mont. in Euang. Epiphan . 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Mar. 7.3 . Prae. Mos . cum expos . Rab.  Epiphan . l. 1.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Epiph. Montan. in locum . Prae. Mos . cum expos . Vox Egypti●ca . Versus quidam ex lege Mosis in pergameno scripti . scz . 14. priores . 13 Exod. 4.5.6.7.8.9 . 6.  Deut. Pag● . Quòd ferrum vim assandi habet . Prat. Mos . cum Expos . Ibid.  Mat. 23.3 . Correcti à Concilio Toletan . Bellar  Quilibet nostrûm de lege interr●gatus facilius quam nomen suum respondet . jos . contr . App. l. 2.  Mat. 8.12 . Choshec Aphelah : Tenebra cal●ginis . In aquam se cum vestibus ●●mergunt ●hi contigerint auquem ●xa●ia gen●e : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 etc. Epiph.  Barthol . ●fixiensis . Mat. 23.23 . Gal. 6.6 . Phil. 3.6 . Gal. 4.18 . Pl●● est in verbis sapientum quam in verbis legis . Galatin . Serarius . Non mali comparari Pharisaeos Catholicis . Pari pietatis affectu & reverentia Traditiones unà cum libris veteris & novi Testamenti sustipimus & veneramur : Decr. 1  Sess . 4.  Nolo verba qu● scripta non sunt legi  Bellum Haeresicorum pax est Ecclesiae ex Hilario Bellar  Esconedo . Concordiâ res parua crescunt , etc.  Nostrâ miseriâ tu es magnus . de Pomp. mi●●●  In Mar. 23.  Prae. Mos . cum expos . Rab.  Ibid.  Ibid.  Sacrarun C●remoniarum lib. 1. accipit de gremi● Camerarij pecuniam , ubi nihil tamen est argenti ; spargensque in populo d●cit : Aurum & argentum non est mihi , quod antem habeo hoc tibido . Can●n . Penitential . pag. 1.  Num. 12 
Ezec. 4.  
Luc. 5.  Otho Fristugensis in praf●● . In Mat. 23.  Mat. 23.4 . Vide Drufinus de tribus sectis Jud.  Alia doctrina Pharisa●rum qua est nisi legis secundum carnem obseruatio ? Hier. in Gal. 1.  2.  Tim. 3.5 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Si haec prohibea●tur , fil●● 〈◊〉 ponent in man● . Praec . Mos . cum expos . Socrates eccls . hist . jam. 4.8 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Luc. 11.41 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Mat. 23.6 .   A word which the Seminaries report ( in their Quodlibet ) usual amongst them , to signify Beguiled & wiped of their inheritance ; from the example of M. Henry Drury of Law shall in Suffolk so defeated by the Jesuits . 

As at Winno●-berg in Flanders near Dunkirk , where a rich legacy given by a charitable Lady for the building of an Hospital , was cunningly turned to the maintenance of Jesuits . 

Sacr. cerem l. 1. de Conse Benedict . & Coron Pontif. Postea imperator s● praesaeus est stapha● equi Papalis tenet , & dein ducit equum per fraenum aliquantuium . And afterwards : Dum Imperator haec officia prastat , debet Papa modesté recusare , tandem cum aliquibus bonis verbis recipiendo permittit , aliquantul●●● progredi , etc.  That is , while the Emperor doth these services to the Pope of holding his stirrup , and leading his horse by the bridle the Pope ought modestly to refuse , but at last with some good words , he suffers him to go on a while ; and then at last stays himself , etc.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Act. 8.9 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Give me not poverty nor riches . Prou. 30.8 . 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Sit mors mea in remissionem omnium iniquitatum mearum . Vt us●● rationis tollatur . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Aug. add Higher Don volunt & judaei esse & Christiani , nec judaei sunt , ne● Christiani . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Ex quo apparet , tunc scissun esse cum Christus emisit spiritum . Ceremoniae sicut defuncta corpora a necessariorum officijs deducenda erant ad sepulturam , non simulatè , sed religiosè , nec deserenda continuò . Augustin . Ego è contrario loquar , & reclamante mundo liberâ voce pro nuncien , ceremonias judaeorun perniciosas esse , et mortiferas , & quicunque eas obseruaverit sive ex judaeis , sive ex Gentibus , in barathrun diaboli devolutum . Hier.  Quisquis nunc ea celebrare voluerit , tanquam sopitos cineres eruens , non erit pius etc.  Si tu pacem fugis , ego te ab Ecclesia fuger●mando . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Psal . 24 , 10  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Acts. 26.27 . & In medio latronum tanquam latronum imma●issimus . Luther . Caput angelicis spiritibus tremebundun spinis coronatur . etc. Bernard . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Vt nulla unquam aetas similem memi●erit . Psalm 94.17 . 1.  These . 5.10 . Maledictum silentium , quod hîc connivet . Negotiatores terrae sunt ipsi Sacerdotes , qui vendunt orationes & missas pro denarijs : ●acientes domum orationis , apothecam negotiationis . In Revel . l. 10. p. 5.  Bellar. l. 1. d● Indulgent . Revel . 5.  Quod emitti●ur voluntarium est : quod amit●itur necessarium . Ambro.  Quod si venire noluerint , ego vim faciam ut devorer . Si per singulos dies pro eo moreremur qui nos dilexit , non sic debitum exolueremus . Chrysost . Acts. 5.5 . Quantuncunqute deieceris , humilior non eris Christ . Hieron . Vt contra : Nullam animam recipio , quae 〈◊〉 nolente separatur à corpore . Hieron . 