THREE TRACTATES , The Devout Soul.  
The Free-prisoner . 
The Remedy of Discontent . 


To which may be added The Peacemaker . 

BY JOS. HALL. , D. D. and B. N.  

LONDON . 

Printed by M. Flesher , for NAT : BUTTER . 

M. DC . XLVI . 

TO ALL CHRISTIAN READERS , Grace and Peace . 

That in a time when we hear no noise but of drums & Trumpets , and talk of nothing but arms , and sieges , and battles , I should write of Devotion , may seem to some of you strange and unseasonable ; to me , contrarily , it seems most fit and opportune : For when can it be more proper to direct our address to the Throne of Grace , then when we are in the very jaws of Death ? Or when should we go to seek the face of our God , rather , then in the needful time of trouble ? 

Blessed be my God , who in the midst of these woeful tumults , hath vouchsafed to give me these calm , and holy thoughts ; which I justly suppose , he meant not to suggest , that they should be smothered in the breast wherein they were conceived , but with a purpose to have the benefit communicated unto many ; Who is there that needs not vehement excitations , and helps to Devotion ? and when more than now ? In a tempest the Mariners themselves do not only cry every man to his God , but awaken Jonah , that is fast asleep under the hatches , and chide him to his prayers . Surely , had we not been failing in our Devotions , we could not have been thus universally miserable ; That duyy , the neglect whereof is guilty of our calamity , must in the effectual performance of it , be the means of our recovery . Be but devout , and we cannot miscarry under judgements ; Woe is me , the tears of penitence , were more fit to quench the public flame , than blood . How soon would it clear up above head , if we were but holily affected within ? could we send our zealous Ambassadors up to heaven , we could not fail of an happy peace . I direct the way ; God bring us to the end ; For my own particular practice ; God is witness to my soul , that ( as one , the sense of whose private affliction is swallowed up of the public ) I cease not daily to ply the Father of mercies with my fervent prayers , that he would , at last , be pleased , after so many streams of blood , to pass an act of Pacification in heaven : And what good heart can do otherwise ? brethren , all ye that love God , and his Church , and his Truth , and his Anointed , and your Country , and yourselves , and yours , join your forces with mine , and let us by an holy violence make way to the gates of heaven with our Petition , for mercy and peace ; and not suffer ourselves to be beaten off from the threshold of Grace , till we be answered with a condescent . He , whose goodness is wont to prevent our desires , will not give denials to our importunities . 

Pray , and Farewell . Norwich . March 20. 1643.  

THE DEVOUT SOUL . 

SECT . I  

Devotion is the life of Religion , the very soul of Piety , the highest employment of grace ; and no other than the prepossession of heaven by the Saints of God here upon earth ; every improvement whereof is of more advantage and value to the Christian soul , than all the profits and contentments which this world can afford it . 

There is a kind of Art of Devotion ( if we can attain unto it ) whereby the practice thereof may be much advanced : We have known indeed some holy souls , which out of the general precepts of piety , and their own happy experiments of God's mercy , have , through the grace of God , grown to a great measure of perfection this way ; which yet might have been much expedited , and completed , by those helps , which the greater illumination and experience of others might have afforded them : Like as we see it in other faculties ; there are those , who out of a natural dexterity , and their own frequent practice , have got into a safe posture of defence , and have handled their weapon with commendable skill , whom yet the Fence-school might have raised to an higher pitch of cunning : As nature is perfited , so grace is not a little furthered , by Art ; since it pleaseth the wisdom of God , to work ordinarily upon the soul , not by the immediate power of miracle , but in such methods , and by such means , as may most conduce to his blessed ends . It is true , that our good motions come from the Spirit of God ; neither is it less true , that all the good counsels of others proceed from the same Spirit ; and that good Spirit cannot be cross to itself ; he therefore that infuses good thoughts into us , suggests also such directions , as may render us apt both to receive and improve them : If God be bounteous , we may not be idle , and neglective of our spiritual aids . 

SECT . II  

TWO you tell me ( by way of instance in a particular act of Devotion ) that there is a gift of prayer , and that the Spirit of God is not tied to rules ; I yield both these ; but withal , I must say there are also helps of prayer , and that we must not expect immediate inspirations : I find the world much mistaken in both ; They think that man hath the gift of prayer , that can utter the thoughts of his heart roundly unto God , that can express himself smoothly in the phrase of the holy Ghost , and press God with most proper words , and passionate vehemence : And surely this is a commendable faculty , wheresoever it is : but this is not the gift of prayer ; you may call it , if you will , the gift of Elocution . Do we say that man hath the gift of pleading , that can talk eloquently at the Bar , that can in good terms loud and earnestly importune the Judge for his Client ; and not rather he that brings the strongest reason , and quotes his books , and precedents with most truth , and clearest evidence , so as may convince the Jury , and persuade the Judge ? Do we say he hath the gift of preaching , that can deliver himself in a flowing manner of speech , to his hearers , that can cite Scriptures , or Fathers , that can please his auditory with the flowers of Rhetoric ; or rather , he , that can divide the Word aright , interpret it sound , apply it judiciously , put it home to the conscience , speaking in the evidence of the Spirit , powerfully convincing the gainsayers , comforting the dejected , and drawing every soul nearer to heaven ? The like must we say for prayer ; the gift whereof he may be truly said to have , not that hath the most rennible tongue , ( for prayer is not so much a matter of the lips , as of the heart ) but he that hath the most illuminated apprehension of the God to whom he speaks , the deepest sense of his own wants , the most eager longings after grace , the ferventest desires of supplies from heaven ; and in a word , whose heart sends up the strongest groans and cries to the Father of mercies . 

Neither may we look for Enthusiasms , and immediate inspirations ; putting ourselves upon God's Spirit , in the solemn exercises of our invocation , without heed , or meditation ; the dangerous inconvenience whereof hath been too often found in the rash , and unwarrantable expressions , that have fallen from the mouths of unwary suppliants ; but we must address ourselves with due preparation , to that holy work ; we must digest our suits ; and fore-order our supplications to the Almighty ; so that there may be excellent and necessary use of meet rules of our Devotion . 

He , whose Spirit helps us to pray , and whose lips taught us how to pray , is an alsufficient example for us : all the skill of men , and Angels , cannot afford a more exquisite model of supplicatory Devotion , than that blesser Saviour of ours gave us in the mount ; led in by a divine , and heart-raising preface , carried out with a strong and heavenly enforcement ; wherein an awful compellation makes way for petition ; and petition makes way for thanksgiving ; the petitions marshaled in a most exact order , for spiritual blessings , which have an immediate concernment of God , in the first place ; then for temporal favours , which concern ourselves , in the second ; so punctual a method had not been observed by him that heareth prayers , if it had been all one to him , to have had our Devotions confused , and tumultuary . 

SECT . III  

There is commonly much mistaking of Devotion as if it were nothing but an act of vocal prayer , expiring with that holy breath , and revived with the next task of our invocation ; which is usually measured of many , by frequency , length , smoothness of expression , lowdnesse , vehemence ; Whereas , indeed , it is rather an habitual disposition of an holy soul , sweetly conversing with God , in all the forms of an heavenly ( yet awful ) familiarity ; and a constant entertainment of ourselves here below with the God of spirits , in our sanctified thoughts , and affections ; One of the noble exercises whereof , is our access to the throne of grace in our prayers ; whereto may be added , the ordering of our holy attendance upon the blessed word and sacraments of the Almighty : Nothing hinders therefore , but that a stammering suppliant may reach to a more eminent devotion , than he that can deliver himself in the most fluent and pathetical forms of Elocution ; and that our silence may be more devout than our noise . We shall not need to send you to the Cells or cloisters for this skill ; although it will hardly be believed , how far some of their contemplative men have gone in the Theory hereof ; Perhaps , like as Chemists give rules for the attaining of that Elixir , which they never found ; for sure they must needs fail of that perfection they pretend , who err commonly in the object of it , always in the ground of it , which is faith ; stripped , by their opinion , of the comfortablest use of it , certainty of application . 

SECT . iv.  

AS there may be many resemblances betwixt Light and Devotion , so this one especially , that as there is a light universally diffused through the air , and there is a particular recollection of light into the body of the sun , and stars ; so it is in Devotion ; There is a general kind of Devotion that goes through the renewed heart and life of a Christian , which we may term Habitual , and Virtual ; and there is a special , and fixed exercise of Devotion , which we name Actual . 

The soul that is rightly affected to God , is never void of an holy Devotion ; where ever it is , what ever it doth , it is still lifted up to God , and fastened upon him , and converses with him ; ever serving the Lord in fear , and rejoicing in him with trembling . 

For the effectual performance whereof , it is requisite first , that the heart be settled in a right apprehension of our God ; without which , our Devotion is not thankless only , but sinful : With much labour therefore , and agitation of a mind illuminated from above , we must find ourselves wrought to an high , awful , adorative , and constant conceit of that incomprehensible Majesty , in whom we live , and move , and are ; One God , in three most glorious persons , infinite in wisdom , in power , in justice , in mercy , in providence , in all that he is , in all that he hath , in all that he doth ; dwelling in light inaccessible , attended with thousand thousands of Angels ; whom yet we neither can know , ( neither would it avail us if we could ) but in the face of the eternal Son of his Love , our blessed Mediator God and Man ; who sits at the right hand of Majesty in the highest heavens ; from the sight of whose glorious humanity , we comfortably rise to the contemplation of that infinite Deity , whereto it is inseparably united ; in and by him , ( made ours by a lively Faith ) finding our persons , and obedience accepted , expecting our full redemption , and blessedness . Here , here must our hearts be unremovably fixed ; In his light must we see light : no cloudy occurrences of this world , no busy employments , no painful sufferings must hinder us from thus seeing him that is invisible . 

SECT . v.  

Neither doth the devout heart see his God aloof off , as dwelling above , in the circle of heaven , but beholds that infinite Spirit really present with him ; The Lord is upon thy right hand , saith the Psalmist ; Our bodily eye doth not more certainly see our own flesh , than the spiritual eye sees God close by us ; Yea , in us ; A man's own soul is not so intimate to himself , as God is to his soul ; neither do we move by him only , but in him : What a sweet conversation therefore , hath the holy soul with his God ? What heavenly conferences have they two , which the world is not privy to ; whiles God entertains the soul with the divine motions of his Spirit ; the soul entertains God with gracious compliances ? Is the heart heavy with the grievous pressures of affliction ? the soul goes in to his God , and pours out itself before him in earnest bemoaning , and supplications ; the God of mercy ansers the soul again , with seasonable refresh of comfort : Is the heart secretly wounded and bleeding with the conscience of some sin ? it speedily betakes itself to the great Physician of the soul , who forthwith applies the balm of Gilead for an unfailing and present cure : Is the heart distracted with doubts ? the soul retires to that inward Oracle of God for counsel , he returns to the soul an happy setlement of just resolution : Is the heart deeply affected with the sense of some special favour from his God ? the soul breaks forth into the passionate voice of praise and thanksgiving ; God returns the pleasing testimony of a cheerful acceptation : O blessed soul , that hath a God to go unto upon all occasions ; O infinite mercy of a God , that vouchsafes to stoop to such entireness with dust and ashes . It was a gracious speech of a worthy Divine upon his deathbed , now breathing towards heaven , that he should change his place , not his company : His conversation was now beforehand with his God , and his holy Angels ; the only difference was , that he was now going to a more free and full fruition of the Lord of life , in that region of glory above , whom he had truly ( though with weakness and imperfection ) enjoyed in this vale of tears . 

SECT . VI  

Now , that these mutual respects may be sure not to cool with intermission , the devout heart takes all occasions both to think of God , and to speak to him . There is nothing that he sees , which doth not bring God to his thoughts . Indeed there is no creature , wherein there are not manifest footsteps of omnipotence ; Yea , which hath not a tongue to tell us of its Maker . The heavens declare the glory of God , and the firmament showeth his handiwork ; One day telleth another , and one night certifieth another : Yea , OH Lord , how manifold are thy works ! in wisdom hast thou made them all : The earth is full of thy riches , so is the great and wide sea , where are things creeping innumerable , both small and great beasts : Every herb , flower , spire of grass , every twig and leaf ; every worm and fly ; every scale and feather ; every billow and meteor , speaks the power and wisdom of their infinite Creator ; Solomon sends the sluggard to the Ant ; esay sends the Jews to the Ox and the Ass ; Our Saviour sends his Disciples to the Ravens , and to the Lilies of the field ; There is no creature of whom we may not learn something ; we shall have spent our time ill in this great school of the world , if in such store of Lessons , we be non-proficients in devotion . Vain Idolaters make to themselves images of God , whereby they sinfully represent him to their thoughts and adoration ; could they have the wit and grace to see it , God hath taken order to spare them this labour , in that he hath stamped in every creature such impressions of his infinite power , wisdom , goodness , as may give us just occasion to worship and praise him with a safe and holy advantage to our souls : For the invisible things of God from the Creation of the world , are clearly seen , being understood by the things that are made , even his eternal power and Godhead . And indeed , wherefore serve all the volumes of Natural history , but to be so many Commentaries upon the several creatures , wherein we may read God ; and even those men who have not the skill , or leisure to peruse them , may yet out of their own thoughts , and observation , raise from the sight of all the works of God sufficient matter to glorify him . Who can be so stupid as not to take notice of the industry of the Bee , the providence of the Ant , the cunning of the Spider , the reviving of the Fly , the worms endeavour of revenge , the subtlety of the Fox , the sagacity of the hedgehog ; the innocence and profitablenesse of the sheep , the laboriousnesse of the Ox , the obsequiousness of the Dog , the timorous shifts of the Hare , the nimbleness of the Dear , the generosity of the Lion , the courage of the Horse , the fierceness of the Tiger ; the cheerful music of Birds , the harmlesnesse of the Dove , the true love of the Turtle , the Cock's observation of time , the Swallows architecture ; shortly , ( for it were easy here to be endless ) of the several qualities , and dispositions of every of those our fellow-creatures , with whom we converse on the face of the earth ; and who that takes notice of them , cannot fetch from every act , and motion of theirs , some monition of duty , and occasion of devout thoughts ? Surely , I fear many of us Christians , may justly accuse ourselves as too neglective of our duty this way ; that having thus long spent our time in this great Academy of the world , we have not , by so many silent documents , learned to ascribe more glory to our Creator ; I doubt those creatures , if they could exchangetheir brutality with our reason , being now so docible as to learn of us so far as their sense can reach , would approve themselves better scholars to us , than we have been unto them . 

Withal , I must add that the devout soul stands not always in need of such outward monitors , but finds within itself , sufficient incitements to raise up itself to a continual minding of God ; and makes use of them accordingly ; and , if at any time , being taken up with importunate occasions of the world , it finds God missing but an hour , it chides itself for such neglect , and sets itself to recover him with so much more eager affection : as the faithful Spouse in the Canticles , when she finds him whom her soul loved , withdrawn from her for a season , puts herself into a speedy search after him , and gives not over till she have attained his presence . 

SECT . VII . 

Now as these many monitors both outward and inward , must elevate our hearts very frequently , to God ; so those raised hearts must not entertain him with a dumb contemplation , but must speak to him in the language of spirits : All occasions therefore must be taken of sending forth pious and heavenly ejaculations to God ; The devout soul may do this more than an hundred times a day , without any hindrance to his special vocation : The Huswife at her Wheel , the Weaver at his Loom , the Husbandman at his Plough , the Artificer in his Shop , the Traveller in his way , the Merchant in his Warehouse may thus enjoy God in his bufiest employment ; For , the soul of man is a nimble spirit ; and the language of thoughts needs not take up time ; and though we now , for example's sake , cloth them in words , yet in our practice we need not . Now these Ejaculations may be either at large , or Occasional : At large , such as those of old Jacob , OH Lord I have waited for thy salvation ; or that of David , OH save me for thy mercy's sake : And these , either in matter of Humiliation , or of Imploration , or of Thanksgiving . In all which , we cannot follow a better pattern than the sweet singer of Israel , whose heavenly conceptions we may either borrow , or imitate . 

In way of Humiliation , such as these . Heal my soul , OH Lord , for I have sinned against thee . O remember not my old sins , but have mercy upon me . If thou wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss , OH Lord who may abide it ? Lord thou knowest the thoughts of man that they are but vain ; OH God , why abhorrest thou my soul , and hidest thy face from me ? 

In way of Imploration . Up Lord , and help me OH God ; O let my heart be sound in thy statutes , that I be not ashamed . Lord , where are thy old loving mercies ? O deliver me , for I am helpless , and my heart is wounded within me . Comfort the soul of thy servant , for unto thee , OH Lord , due I lift up my soul . Go not far from me OH God. OH knit my heart unto thee that I may fear thy Name . thou art my helper and redeemer , OH Lord make no long tarrying . O be thou my help in trouble , for vain is the help of man O guide me with thy counsel , and after that receive me to thy glory . My time is in thy hand , deliver me from the hands of mine enemies . O withdraw not thy mercy from me , OH Lord Led me , OH Lord , in thy righteousness because of mine enemies . OH let my soul live , and it shall praise thee . 

In way of Thanksgiving : O God , wonderful art thou in thine holy places . O Lord , how glorious are thy works ! and thy thoughts are very deep . O God , who is like unto thee ! The Lord liveth , and blessed be my strong helper . Lord , thy loving kindness is better than life itself . All thy works praise thee , OH Lord , and thy Saints give thanks unto thee . O how manifold are thy works ! in wisdom hast thou made them all . Who is God but the Lord , and who hath any strength except our God ? We will rejoice in thy salvation , and triumph in thy Name , OH Lord. O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness . O how plentiful is thy goodness , which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee ! thou Lord hast never failed them that seek thee . In thy presence is the fullness of joy , and at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore . Lord , what is man that thou art mindful of him ? Not unto us Lord , not unto us , but unto thy Name give the praise . 

SECT . VIII . 

Occasional Ejaculations are such , as are moved upon the presence of some such object as carries a kind of relation or analogy to that holy thought which we have entertained . Of this nature I find that , which was practised in S. Basils' time ; that , upon the lighting of candles , the manner was to bless God in these words , Praise be to God the Father , and the Son , and the Holy Ghost ; which that Father says was anciently used ; but who was the Author of it he professeth to be unknown : to the same purpose was the Lucernarium , which was a part of the evening office of old ; For which there may seem to be more colour of reason , then for the ordinary fashion of apprecation , upon occasion of our sneesing ; which is expected , and practised by many , out of civility : Old and reverend Beza was wont to move his hat with the rest of the company , but to say withal , Gramercy Madame la Superstition ; Now , howsoever in this , or any other practice , which may seem to carry with it a smack of superstition , our devotion may be groundless and unseasonable , yet nothing hinders but that we may take just and holy hints of raising up our hearts to our God. As when we do first look forth , and see the heavens over our heads , to think , the Heavens declare thy glory , OH God. When we see the day breaking , or the Sun rising , The day is thine , and the night is thine , thou hast prepared the light and the Sun. When the light shines in our faces , thou deckest thyself with light as with a garment ; or , Light is sprung up for the righteous . When we see our Garden embellished with flowers , The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord When we see a rough sea , The waves of the sea rage horribly , and are mighty ; but the Lord that dwelleth on high , is mightier than they . When we see the darkness of the night , The darkness is no darkness with thee . When we rise up from our bed , or our seat , Lord thou knowest my down-sitting , and my uprising ; thou understandest my thoughts afar off . When we wash our hands , Wash thou me , OH Lord , and I shall be whiter than snow . When we are walking forth , O hold thou up my goings in thy paths , that my footsteps slip not . When we hear a passing bell : O teach me to number my days , that I may apply my heart to wisdom : or , Lord , let me know my end , and the number of my days . 

Thus may we dart out our holy desires to God , upon all occasions ; Wherein , heed must be taken that our Ejaculations be not , on the one side , so rare , that our hearts grow to be hard and strange to God , but that they may be held on in continual acknowledgement of him , and acquaintance with him ; and , on the other side , that they be not so over-frequent in their perpetual reiteration , as that they grow to be ( like that of the Romish votaries ) fashionable ; which if great care be not taken , will fall out , to the utter frustrating of our Devotion . Shortly , let the measure of these devout glances be , the preserving our hearts in a constant tenderness , and godly disposition ; which shall be further actuated upon all opportunities , by the exercises of our more enlarged , and fixed Devotion : Whereof there is the same variety that there is in God's services , about which it is conversant . 

There are three main businesses wherein God accounts his service , here below , to consist ; The first is , our address to the throne of Grace , and the pouring out of our souls before him in our prayers : The second is , the reading and hearing his most holy Word ; The third is , the receipt of his blessed Sacraments ; In all which there is place and use for a settled Devotion . 

SECT . IX . 

TO begin with the first work of our actual , and enlarged Devotion : Some things are pre-required of us , to make us capable of the comfortable performance of so holy and heavenly a duty ; namely , that the heart be clean first , and then that it be clear : clean from the defilement of any known sin ; clear from all entanglements and distractions : What do we in our prayers , but converse with the Almighty ? and either carry our souls up to him , or bring him down to us ? now , it is no hoping , that we can entertain God in an impure heart : Even we men loathe a nasty and sluttish lodging ; how much more will the floly God abhor an habitation spiritually filthy ? I find that even the unclean spirit made that a motive of his repossession , that he found the house swept and garnished : Satan's cleanliness is pollution ; and his garnishment , disorder and wickedness ; without this he finds no welcome ; Each spirit looks for an entertainment answerable to his nature ; How much more will that God of spirits , who is purity itself , look to be harboured in a cleanly room ? Into a malicious soul wisdom shall not enter , nor dwell in the body that is subject unto sin ; What friend would be pleased that we should lodge him in a Lazar-house ? or who would abide to have a toad lie in his bosom ? Surely , it is not in the verge of created nature to yield any thing that can be so noisome and odious to the sense of man , as sin is to that absolute , and essential Goodness : His pure eyes cannot endure the sight of sin ; neither can he endure that the sinner should come within the sight of him ; Away from me , ye wicked , is his charge , both here , and hereafter . It is the privilege and happiness of the pure in heart , that they shall see God ; see him both in the end , and in the way ; enjoying the vision of him , both in grace , and in glory : this is no object for impure eyes : Descend into thyself therefore , and ransack thy heart , who ever wouldst be a true Client of Devotion ; search all the close windings of it , with the torches of the law of God ; and if there be any iniquity found lurking in the secret corners thereof , drag it out and abandon it ; and when thou hast done , that thy fingers may retain no pollution , say with the holy Psalmist ; I will wash my hands in innocence , so will I go to thine Altar . Presume not to approach the Altar of God , there to offer the sacrifice of thy Devotion , with unclean hands : Else thine offering shall be so far from winning an acceptance for thee , from the hands of God ; as that thou shalt make thine offering abominable . And if a beast touch the Mount , it shall die . 

SECT . X.  

AS the soul must be clean from sin , so it must be clear and free from distractions . The intent of our devotion is to welcome God to our hearts ; now where shall we entertain him , if the rooms be full thronged with cares , and turbulent passions ? The Spirit of God will not endure to be crowded up together with the world in our straight lodgings ; An holy vacuity must make way for him in our bosoms . The divine pattern of Devotion , in whom the Godhead dwelled bodily , retires into the Mount to pray ; he that carried heaven with him , would even thus leave the world below him . Alas , how can we hope to mount up to heaven in our thoughts , if we have the clogs of earthly cares hanging at our heels ! Yea , not only must there be a shutting out of all distractive cares , and passions , which are professed enemies to our quiet conversing with God in our Devotion , but there must be also a denudation of the mind from all those images of our fantasy ( how pleasing soever ) that may carry our thoughts aside from those better objects : We are like to foolish children , who when they should be steadfastly looking on their books , are apt to gaze after every butterfly , that passeth by them ; here must be therefore a careful intention of our thoughts , a restraint from all vain , and idle roving , and an holding ourselves close to our divine task : whiles Martha is troubled about many things , her devouter sister , having chosen the better part , plies the one thing necessary , which shall never be taken from her ; and whiles Martha would feast Christ with bodily fare , she is feasted of Christ with heavenly delicacies . 

SECT . XI . 

After the heart is thus cleansed , and thus cleared , it must be in the next place decked with true humility , the cheapest , yet best ornament of the soul . If the wise man tell us , that pride is the beginning of sin ; surely , all gracious dispositions must begin in humility . The foundation of all high and stately buildings must be laid low : They are the lowly valleys that soak in the showers of heaven , which the steep hills shelve off , and prove dry and fruitless . To that man will I look ( saith God ) that is poor , and of a contrite spirit , and trembleth at my Word : Hence it is , that the more eminent any man is in grace , the more he is dejected in the sight of God ; The father of the faithful comes to God under the style of dust and ashes : David under the style of a worm and no man : Agur the son of Jakeh , under the title of more brutish than any man ; and one that hath not the understanding of a man : John Baptist , as not worthy to carry the shoes of Christ after him ; Paul , as the least of Saints , and chief of sinners : On the contrary , the more vile any man is in his own eyes , and the more dejected in the sight of God , the higher he is exalted in God's favour : Like as the Conduict-water , by how much lower it falls , the higher it riseth . When therefore we would appear before God , in our solemn devotions , we must see that we empty ourselves of all proud conceits , and find our hearts fully convinced of our own vileness , yea nothingnesse in his sight . Down , down with all our high thoughts ; fall we low before our great and holy God ; not to the earth only , but to the very brim of hell , in the conscience of our own guiltiness ; for though the miserable wretchedness of our nature may be a sufficient cause of our humiliation , yet the consideration of our detestable sinfulness is that which will depress us lowest in the sight of God.  

SECT . XII . 

IT is fit the exercise of our Devotion should begin in an humble confession of our unworthiness . Now for the effectual furtherance of this our self-dejection , it will be requisite to bend our eyes upon a threefold object ; To look inward into ourselves , upward to heaven , downward to hell . First , to turn our eyes into our bosoms , and to take a view ( not without a secret self-loathing ) of that world of corruption that hath lyen hidden there ; and thereupon to accuse , arraign , and condemn ourselves before that awful Tribunal of the Judge of heaven , and earth ; both of that original pollution , which we have drawn from the tainted loins of our first parents ; and those innumerable actual wickednesses derived therefrom ; which have stained our persons and lives . How can we be but thoroughly humbled , to see our souls utterly overspread with the odious and abominable leprosy of sin : We find that Vzziah bore up stoutly a while , against the Priests of the Lord , in the maintenance of his sacrilegious presumption , but when he saw himself turned Lazar , on the sudden , he is confounded in himself , and in a depth of shame hastens away from the presence of God to a sad , and penitential retiredness . We should need no other arguments to loathe ourselves , than the sight of our own faces , so miserably deformed with the nasty and hateful scurf of our iniquity : Neither only must we be content to shame , and grieve our eyes with the foul nature and condition of our sins , but we must represent them to ourselves in all the circumstances that may aggravate their heinousness . Alas , Lord , any one sin is able to damn a soul ; I have committed many , yea numberless : they have not possessed me single , but , as that evil spirit said , their name is Legion ; neither have I committed these sins once , but often ; thine Angels ( that were ) sinned but once , and are damned for ever ; I have frequently reiterated the same offences , where then ( were it not for thy mercy ) shall I appear ? neither have I only done them in the time of my ignorance , but since I received sufficient illumination from thee ; It is not in the dark that I have stumbled , and fallen , but in the midst of the clear light and sunshine of thy Gospel , and in the very face of thee my God ; neither have these been the ships of my weakness , but the bold miscarriages of my presumption ; neither have I offended out of inconsideration , and inadvertency , but after and against the checks of a remurmuring conscience ; after so many gracious warnings , and fatherly admonitions , after so many fearful examples of thy judgements , after so infinite obligations of thy favours . 

And thus having looked inward into ourselves , and taken an impartial view of our own vileness , it will be requisite to cast our eyes upward unto heaven , and there to see against whom we have offended ; even against an infinite Majesty , and power , an infinite mercy , an infinite justice ; That power and Majesty which hath spread out the heavens as a Curtain , and hath laid the foundations of the earth so sure that it cannot be moved ; who hath shut up the sea with bars and doors , and said , Hitherto shalt thou come and no further , and here shalt thou stay thy proud waves ; who doth whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth ; who commands the Devils to their chains , able therefore to take infinite vengeance on sinners . That mercy of God the Father , who gave his own Son out of his bosom for our redemption ; That mercy of God the Son , who , thinking it no robbery to be equal unto God , for our sakes made himself of no reputation , and took upon him the form of a servant ; and being found in fashion as a man , humbled himself , and became obedient to the death , even the accursed death of the cross ; That mercy of God the holy Ghost , who hath made that Christ mine , and hath sealed to my soul the benefit of that blessed redemption ; Lastly , that justice of God , which as it is infinitely displeased with every sin , so will be sure to take infinite vengeance on every impenitent sinner . 

And from hence it will be fit and seasonable for the devout soul , to look downward into that horrible pit of eternal confusion ; & there to see the dreadful , unspeakable , unimaginable torments of the damned ; to represent unto itself the terrors of those everlasting burnings ; the fire and brimstone of that infernal Tophet ; the merciless and unweariable tyranny of those hellish executioners ; the shrieks , and howl , and gnash of the tormented ; the unpitiable , interminable , unmitigable tortures of those ever-dying , and yet never-dying souls . By all which , we shall justly affright ourselves into a deep sense of the dangerous and woeful condition wherein we lie in the state of nature and impenitence , and shall be driven with an holy eagerness to seek for Christ , the Son of the everliving God , our blessed Mediator ; in and by whom only , we can look for the remission of all these our sins , a reconcilement with this most powerful , merciful , just God , and a deliverance of our souls from the hand of the nethermost hell . 

SECT . XIII . 

IT shall not now need , or boot to bid the soul which is truly apprehensive of all these , to sue importunately to the Lord of life for a freedom , and rescue from these infinite pains of eternal death , to which our sins have forfeited it ; and for a present happy recovery of that favour , which is better than life . Have we heard , or can we imagine some heinous Malefactor , that hath received the sentence of death , and is now bound hand , and foot , ready to be cast into a den of Lions , or a burning furnace , with what strong cries , and passionate obsecrations he plies the Judge for mercy ? we may then conceive some little image of the vehement suit , and strong cries of a soul truly sensible of the danger of God's wrath deserved by his sin , and the dreadful consequents of deserved imminent damnation ; Although wha● proportion is there betwixt ● weak creature , and the Almighty ; betwixt a moment , and eternity ? 

Hereupon therefore followe● a vehement longing ( uncapable of a denial ) after Christ ; an● fervent aspirations to that Saviour , by whom only we receive a full and gracious deliverance from death and hell ; and a full pardon and remission of all ou● sins ; and , if this come not the sooner , strong knock 's at the gates of heaven , even so lou● that the Father of mercies cannot but hear and open : Neve● did any contrite soul beg of God , that was not prevented by his mercy ; much more doth he condescend when he is strongly entreated ; our very entreaties are from him , he puts into us those desires which he graciously answers ; now therefore doth the devout soul see the God of all comfort to bow the heavens , and come down with healing in his wings ; and hear him speak peace unto the heart thus thoroughly humbled ; Fear not , thou shalt not die but live . Be of good cheer , thy sins are forgiven thee . Here therefore comes in that divine grace of Faith , effectually apprehending Christ the Saviour , and his infinite satisfaction and merits ; comfortably applying all the sweet promises of the Gospel ; clinging close to that all-sufficient Redeemer ; and in his most perfect obedience emboldening itself , to challenge a freedom of access to God , and confidence of appearance before the Tribunal of heaven ; and now the soul clad with Christ's righteousness , dares look God in the face , and can both challenge and triumph over all the powers of darkness : For , being justified by faith , we have peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord  

SECT . FOURTEEN . 

BY how much deeper the sense of our misery and danger is , so much more welcome and joyful is the apprehension of our deliverance ; and so much more thankful is our acknowledgement of that unspeakable mercy : The soul therefore that is truly sensible of this wonderful goodness of its God ; as it feels a marvellous joy in itself , so it cannot but break forth into cheerful and holy ( though secret ) gratulations : The Lord is full of compassion , and mercy , long suffering , and of great goodness ; he keepeth not his anger for ever ; he hath not dealt with me after my sins , nor rewarded me after mine iniquities : What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits towards me ? I will take the cup of salvation , and call upon the Name of the Lord I will thank thee , for thou hast heard me , and hast not given me over to death , but art become my salvation . OH speak good of the Lord all ye works of his ; Praise thou the Lord , OH my soul . 

SECT . xv.  

The more feelingly the soul apprehends , and the more thankfully it digests the favours of God in its pardon , and deliverance , the more freely doth the God of mercy impart himself to it ; and the more God imparts himself to it , the more it love's him , and the more heavenly acquaintance and entireness grows betwixt God , and it ; and now that love which was but a spark at first , grows into a flame , and wholly takes up the soul . This fire of heavenly love in the devout soul , is , and must be heightened more and more , by the addition of the holy incentives of divine thoughts , concerning the means of our freedom & deliverance . And here , offers itself to us that bottomless abyss of mercy in our Redemption , wrought by the eternal Son of God , Jesus Christ the just , by whose stripes we are healed ; by whose blood we are ransomed ; where none will befit us but admiring and adoring notions . We shall not disparage you , OH ye blessed Angels , and Archangels of heaven , if we shall say , ye are not able to look into the bottom of this divine love , wherewith God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son , that whosoever believeth in him should not perish , but have everlasting life : None , o , none can comprehend this mercy , but he that wrought it . Lord ! what a transcendent , what an infinite love is this ? what an object was this for thee to love ? A world of sinners ? Impotent , wretched creatures , that had despited thee , that had no motive for thy favour but deformity , misery , professed enmity ? It had been mercy enough in thee , that thou didst not damn the world , but that thou shouldst love it , is more than mercy . It was thy great goodness to forbear the acts of just vengeance to the sinful world of man , but to give unto it tokens of thy love , is a favour beyond all expression : The least gift from thee had been more than the world could hope for ; but that thou shouldst not stick to give thine only begotten Son , the Son of thy love , the Son of thine essence , thy coequal , coeternal Son , who was more than ten thousand worlds , to redeem this one forlorn world of sinners , is love above all comprehension of men and Angels . What diminution had it been to thee and thine essential glory , OH thou great God of heaven , that the souls that sinned should have died and perished everlastingly ? yet so infinite was thy loving mercy , that thou wouldst rather give thy only Son out of thy bosom , then that there should not be a redemption for believers . 

Yet , OH God , hadst thou sent down thy Son to this lower region of earth , upon such terms , as that he might have brought down heaven with him , that he might have come in the port and Majesty of a God , clothed with celestial glory , to have dazzled our eyes , and to have drawn all hearts unto him ; this might have seemed , in some measure , to have sorted with his divine magnificence ; But thou wouldst have him to appear in the wretched condition of our humanity : Yet , even thus , hadst thou sent him into the world , in the highest estate , and pomp of royalty , that earth could afford , that all the Kings and Monarches of the world should have been commanded to follow his train , and to glitter in his Court ; and that the knees of all the Potentates of the earth should have bowed to his Sovereign Majesty , and their lips have kissed his dust , this might have carried some kind of appearance of a state next to divine greatness ; but thou wouldst have him come in the despised form of a servant : And thou , OH blessed Jesus , waste accordingly willing , for our sakes , to submit thyself to nakedness , hunger , thirst , weariness , temptation , contempt , betraying , agonies , scorn , buffeting , scourge , distension , crucifixion , death : OH love above measure , without example , beyond admiration ! Greater love ( thou sayest ) hath no man , than this , that a man lay down his life for his friends ; But , o , what is it then , that thou , who wert God and man , shouldst lay down thy life , ( more precious than many worlds ) for thine enemies ! Yet , had it been but the laying down of a life , in a fair and gentle way , there might have been some mitigation of the sorrow of a dissolution ; there is not more difference betwixt life and death , than there may be betwixt some one kind of death , and another ; thine , OH dear Saviour , was the painful , shameful , cursed death of the cross ; wherein yet , all that man could do unto thee was nothing to that inward torment , which in our stead , thou enduredst from thy Father's wrath ; when in the bitterness of thine anguished soul , thou cried'st out , My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ? Even thus , wast thou content to be forsaken , that we wretched sinners might be received to mercy ; OH love stronger than death , which thou vanquishedst ! more high , than that hell is deep , from which thou hast rescued us ! 

SECT . XVI . 

The sense of this infinite love of God cannot choose but ravish the soul , and cause it to go out of itself , into that Saviour who hath wrought so mercifully for it ; so as it may be nothing in itself , but what it hath , or is , may be Christ's . By the sweet powers therefore of Faith and Love the soul finds itself united unto Christ , feelingly , effectually , indivisibly : so as that it is not to be distinguished betwixt the acts of both : To me to live is Christ , saith the blessed Apostle ; and elsewhere , I live , yet not I , but Christ liveth in me , and the life which now I live in the flesh , I live by the faith of the Son of God , who loved me , and gave himself for me ; My beloved is mine , and I am his , saith the Spouse of Christ in her Bridal song . OH blessed union , next to the hypostatical , whereby the human nature of the Son of God is taken into the participation of the eternal Godhead . 

SECT . XVII . 

Out of the sense of this happy union ariseth an unspeakable complacency and delight of the soul in that God and Saviour , who is thus inseparably ours , and by whose union we are blessed ; and an high appreciation of him above all the world ; and a contemptuous under — valuation of all earthly things , in comparison of him ; And this is no other than an heavenly reflection of that sweet contentment , which the God of mercies takes in the faithful soul ; thou hast ravished my heart , my sister , my Spouse , thou hast ravished my heart with one of mine eyes . thou art beautiful , OH my Love , as Tirzah , comely as Jerusalem ; Turn away thine eyes from me , for they have overcome me . How fair is thy love , my sister , my Spouse ? How much better is thy love then wine , and the smell of thine ointments better than all spices . And the soul answers him again in the same language of spiritual dearness ; My beloved is white and ruddy ; the chiefest among ten thousand . Set me as a seal upon thine heart , as a seal upon thine arm , for love is as strong as death : And as in an ecstaticall qualm of passionate affection ; Stay me with flagons , and comfort me with apples , for I am sick of love . 

SECT . XVIII . 

Upon this gracious complacency will follow an absolute self-resignation , or giving up ourselves to the hands of that good God , whose we are , & who is ours ; and an humble contentedness with his good pleasure in all things ; looking upon God with the same face , whether he smile upon us in his favours , or chastise us with his loving corrections ; If he speak good unto us ; Behold the servant of the Lord ; be it unto me according to thy word ; If evil , It is the Lord , let him do whatsoever he will : Here is therefore a cheerful acquiescence in God ; and an hearty reliance , and casting ourselves upon the mercy of so bountiful a God ; who having given us his Son , can in and with him deny us nothing . 

SECT . XIX . 

Upon this subacted disposition of heart will follow a familiar ( yet awful ) compellation of God ; and an emptying of our souls before him in all our necessities . For that God , who is infinitely merciful , yet will not have his favours otherwise conveyed to us then by our supplications : the style of his dear ones is , His people that prayeth , and his own style is , The God that heareth prayers : To him therefore doth the devout heart pour out all his requests with all true humility , with all fervour of spirit , as knowing , that God will hear neither proud prayers , nor heartless : wherein his holy desires are regulated by a just method ; First , suing for spiritual favours , as most worthy ; then for temporal , as the appendences of better ; and in both , aiming at the glory of our good God , more than our own advantage : And in the order of spiritual things , first and most for those that are most necessary , and essential for our souls health , then for secondary graces , that concern the prosperity and comfort of our spiritual life : Absolutely craving those graces that accompany salvation , all others , conditionally , and with reference to the good pleasure of the munificent Giver ; Wherein , heed must be taken , that our thoughts be not so much taken up with our expressions , as with our desires ; and that we do not suffer ourselves to languish into an unfeeling length , and repetition of our suits : Even the hands of a Moses , may in time grow heavy ; so therefore must we husband our spiritual strength , that our devotion may not flag with overtyring , but may be most vigorous at the last . And as we must enter into our prayers , not without preparatory elevations , so must we be careful to take a meet leave of God , at their shutting up : following our supplications , with the pause of a faithful , and most lowly adoration ; and as it were sending up our hearts into heaven , to see how our prayers are taken ; and raising them to a joyful expectation of a gracious and successful answer from the father of mercies . 

SECT . xx.  

Upon the comfortable feeling of a gracious condescent , follows an happy fruition of God in all his favours ; so as we have not them so much , as God in them ; which advanceth their worth a thousand fold , and as it were brings down heaven unto us ; whereas , therefore , the sensual man rests only in the mere use of any blessing , as health , peace , prosperity , knowledge , and reaches no higher ; the devout soul , in , and through all these , seas , and feels a God that sanctifies them to him , and enjoys therein his favour , that is better than life ; Even we men are wont , out of our good nature , to esteem a benefit , not so much for its own worth , as for the love , and respect of the giver : Small legacies for this cause find dear acceptation ; how much more is it so betwixt God and the devout soul ? It is the sweet apprehension of this love that makes all his gifts , blessings . Do we not see some vain churl , though cried down by the multitude , herein secretly applauding himself , that he hath bags at home ? how much more shall the godly man find comfort against all the crosses of the world , that he is possessed of him that possesseth all things ; even God Al-sufficient ; the pledges of whose infinite love he feels in all the whole course of Gods dealing with him . 

SECT . XXI . 

Out of the true sense of this inward fruition of God , the devout soul breaks forth into cheerful thanksgiving to the God of all comfort , praising him for every evil that it is free from ; for every good thing it enjoyeth : For , as it keeps a just Inventory of all God's favours , so it often spreads them thankfully before him , and lays them forth ( so near as it may ) in the full dimensions ; that so , God may be no loser by him in any act of his beneficence . Here therefore every of God's benefits must come into account ; whether eternal , or temporal , spiritual or bodily , outward or inward , public or private , positive or privative , past or present , upon ourselves or others . In all which , he shall humbly acknowledge both Gods free mercy , and his own shameful unworthiness ; setting off the favours of his good God the more , with the foil of his own confessed wretchedness , and unanswerableness to the least of his mercies . 

Now as there is infinite variety of blessings from the liberal hand of the Almighty , so there is great difference in their degrees ; For , whereas there are three subjects of all the good we are capable of ; The Estate , Body , Soul ; and each of these do far surpass other in value , ( the soul being infinitely more worth than the body , and the body far more precious than the outward estate ) so the blessings that appertain to them , in several , differ in their true estimation accordingly . If either we do not highly magnify God's mercy for the least , or shall set as high a price upon the blessings that concern our estate , as those that pertain to the body , or upon bodily favours , as upon those that belong to the soul , we shall show ourselves very unworthy , and unequal partakers of the Divine bounty . But it will savour too much of earth , if we be more affected with temporal blessings , then with spiritual and eternal . By how much nearer relation then , any favour hath to the Fountain of goodness , and by how much more it conduceth to the glory of God , and ours in him ; so much higher place should it possess in our affection and gratitude . no marvel therefore if the Devout Heart be raised above itself and transported with heavenly raptures , when , with Stephen's eyes , it beholds the Lord Jesus standing at the right hand of God , fixing itself upon the consideration of the infinite Merits of his Life , Death , Resurrection , Ascension , Intercession , and finding itself swallowed up in the depth of that Divine Love , from whence all mercies flow into the Soul ; so as that it runs over with passionate thankfulness , and is therefore deeply affected with all other his mercies , because they are derived from that boundless Ocean of Divine goodness . Unspeakable is the advantage that the soul raises to itself by this continual exercise of thanksgiving ; for the grateful acknowledgement of favours , is the way to more ; even amongst men ( whose hands are short and straight ) this is the means to pull on further beneficence ; how much more from the God of all Consolation , whose largest bounty diminisheth nothing of his store ? And herein the Devout Soul enters into its Heavenly Task ; beginning upon earth those Hallelujahs , which it shall perfect above in the blessed Chore of Saints and Angels , ever praising God , and saying ; Blessing , and Glory , and Wisdom , and Thanksgiving , and Honour , and Power , and Might , be unto our God for ever and ever . 

Amen . 

SECT . XXII . 

None of all the services of God can be acceptably , no not unsinfully performed without due devotion ; as therefore in our prayers & thanksgiving , so in the other exercises of Divine Worship , ( especially , in the reading and hearing of God's Word , and in our receipt of the blessed Sacrament ) it is so necessary , that without it , we offer to God a mere carcase of religious duty , and profane that Sacred Name we would pretend to honour . First then , we must come to God's Book , not without an holy Reverence , as duly considering both what and whose it is ; Even no other , than the Word of the everliving God , by which we shall once be judged . Great reason have we therefore , to make a difference betwixt it , and the writings of the holiest men , even no lesle than betwixt the Authors of both : God is true , yea , truth itself : and that which David said in his haste , S. Paul says in full deliberation , Every man is a Liar . Before we put our hand to this Sacred Volume , it will be requisite to elevate our hearts to that God whose it is , for both his leave and his blessing : Open mine eyes , saith the sweet Singer of Israel , that I may behold the wondrous things of thy Lan. Lo , David's eyes were open before to other objects ; but when he comes to God's Book , he can see nothing , without a new act of apertion : Letters he might see , but Wonders he could not see , till God did unclose his eyes , and enlighten them . It is not therefore for us , presumptuously to break in upon God , and to think by our natural abilities to wrist open the precious Caskets of the Almighty ; and to fetch out all his hidden treasure thence , at pleasure ; but we must come tremblingly before him , and in all humility crave his gracious admission . I confess I find some kind of envy in myself , when I read of those scrupulous observances of high respects given by the Jews to the Book of God's Law : and when I read of a Romish Saint , that never read the Scripture but upon his knees , and compare it with the careless neglect whereof I can accuse myself , and perhaps some others : Not that we would rest in the formality of outward Ceremonies of reverence , wherein it were more easy to be superstitious then devout ; but that our outward deportment may testify , and answer the awful disposition of our hearts : whereto we shall not need to be excited , if we be thoroughly persuaded of the Divine Original , and authority of that Sacred Word . It was motive enough to the Ephesians zealously to pled for , and religiously to adore the Image of their Diana , that it was the Image that fell down from Jupiter . Believe we , and know , that the Scripture is inspired by God ; and we can entertain it with no other than an awful address , and we cannot be Christians if we do not so believe . 

Every clause therefore of that God-inspired Volume , must be , as reverently received by us , so seriously weighed , and carefully laid up ; as knowing , that there is no tittle therein without his use . What we read , we must labour to understand ; what we cannot understand , we must admire silently , and modestly inquire of . There are plain Truths , and there are deep Mysteries . The bounty of God hath left this Well of Living-water open for all : what runs over is for all comers ; but every one hath not wherewith to draw . There is no Christian that may not enjoy God's Book , but every Christian may not interpret it ; those shallow Fords that are in it , may be waded by every Passenger , but there are deeps wherein he that cannot swim , may drown . How can I without a Guide ? said that Ethiopian Eunuch : wherefore serves the tongue of the Learned , but to direct the Ignorant ? Their modesty is of no lesle use than the others skill . It is a woeful condition of a Church when no man will be ignorant . 

What service can our eyes do us in the ways of God without our thoughts ? our diligent and frequent reading , therefore , must be attended with our holy meditation : we feed on what we read , but we digest only what we meditate of : What is in our Bible , is Gods ; but that which is in our hearts , is our own : By all which our care must be , not so much to become wiser , as to become better , labouring still to reduce all things to godly practice . 

Finally , as we enter into this task with the lifting up of our hearts for a blessing , so we shut it up in the ejaculations of our thanksgiving to that God , who hath blessed us with the free use of his Word . 

SECT . XXIII . 

Our eye is our best guide to God our Creator , but our ear is it that leads us to God our Redeemer . How shall they believe except they hear ? Which that we may effectually do , our devotion suggests unto us some duties before the act , some in the act , some after the act . 

It is the Apostles charge , that we should be swift to hear , but heed must be taken , that we make not more haste then good speed : we may not be so forward as not to look to our foot when we go to the House of God , lest if we be too ready to hear , we offer the sacrifice of Fools . What are the foot of the soul , but our affections ? If these be not set right , we may easily stumble , and wrench at God's threshold . Rash actions can never hope to prospero ; as therefore to every great Work , so to this , there is a due preparation required ; and this must be done by meditation first , then by prayer . Our meditation first sequesters the heart from the world , and shakes off those distractive thoughts , which may carry us away from these better things : for what room is there for God , where the world hath taken up the lodging ? We cannot serve God and Mammon . then secondly , it seizes upon the heart for God , fixing our thoughts upon the great business we go about ; recalling the greatness of that Majesty into whose presence we enter , and the main importance of the service we are undertaking ; and examining our intentions wherewith we address ourselves to the work intended ; I am now going to God's House ; wherefore do I go thither ? Is it to see , or to be seen ? Is it to satisfy my own curiosity in hearing what the Preacher will say ? Is it to satisfy the law , that requires my presence ? Is it to please others eyes , or to avoid their censures ? is it for fashion ? is it for recreation ? or is it with a sincere desire to do my soul good , in gaining more knowledge , in quickening my affections ? Is it in a desire to approve myself to my God , in the conscience of my humble obedience to his command , and my holy attendance upon his Ordinance ? And where we find our ends amiss , chiding and rectifying our obliquities ; where just and right , prosecuting them towards a further perfection . 

Which that it may be done , our meditation must be seconded by our prayers . It is an unholy rudeness to press into the presence of that God whom we have not invoked : Our prayer must be , that God would yet more prepare us for the work , and sanctify us to it , and bless us in it ; that he would remove our sins , that he would send down his Spirit into our hearts , which may enable us to this great service ; that he would bless the Preacher in the delivery of his sacred message , that he would be pleased to direct his messenger's tongue to the meeting with our necessities ; that he would free our hearts from all prejudices and distractions ; that he would keep off all temptations , which might hinder the good entertainment , and success of his blessed Word : Finally , that he would make us truly teachable , and his ordinance the power of God to our salvation . 

In the act of hearing , Devotion calls us to Reverence , Attention , Application . Reverence to that great God , who speaks to us , by the mouth of a weak man ; for , in what is spoken from God's Chair , agreeable to the Scriptures , the sound is man's , the substance of the message is Gods. Even an Eglon , when he hears of a message from God , riseth out of his seat . It was not Saint Paul's condition only , but of all his faithful servants , to whom he hath committed the word of reconciliation ; They are Ambassadors for Christ ; as if God did beseech us by them , they pray us in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God : The Embassy is not the bearers , but the kings ; and if we do not acknowledge the great King of heaven in the voice of the Gospel , we cannot but incur a contempt . 

When therefore we see God's messenger in his Pulpit , our eye looks at him , as if it said with Cornelius , We are all here present before God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God ; whence cannot but follow together with an awful disposition of mind , a reverend deportment of the body ; which admits not a wild and roving eye , a drowsy head , a chatting tongue , a rude and indecent posture ; but composes itself to such a site as may befit a pious soul in so religious an employment . Neither do we come as authorised Judges to sit upon the preacher , but as humble Disciples to sit at his feet . 

SECT . XXIV . 

Reverence cannot but draw on Attention ; We need not be bidden to hang on the lips of him whom we honour . It is the charge of the Spirit , Let him that hath an ear hear ; Every one hath not an ear , and of those that have an ear , every one heareth not ; The soul hath an ear as well as the body ; if both these ears do not meet together in one act , there is no hearing : Common experience tells us that when the mind is otherwise taken up , we do no more hear what a man says , then if we had been deaf , or he silent . Hence is that first request of Abig●il to David ; Let thine handmaid speak to thine ears , and hear the words of thine handmaid ; and Job so importunately urgeth his friends : Hear diligently my speech and my declaration with your ears . The outward ear may be open , and the inward shut ; if way be not made through both , we are deaf to spiritual things . Mine ear hast thou bored , or digged , saith the Psalmist ; the vulgar reads it , my ears hast thou perfected : Surely our ears are grown up with flesh ; there is no passage for a perfect hearing of the voice of God , till he have made it by a spiritual perforation . 

And now that the ear is made capable of good counsel , it doth as gladly receive it ; taking in every good lesson , and longing for the next : Like unto the dry and chopped earth , which soaks in every silver drop , that falls from the clouds , and thirsteth for more , not suffering any of that precious liquor to fall beside it . 

SECT . XXV . 

Neither doth the devout man care to satisfy his curiosity , as hearing only that he might hear ; but reducts all things to a saving use ; bringing all he hears , home to his heart , by a self-reflecting application ; like a practiser of the art of memory , referring every thing to its proper place ; If it be matter of comfort , There is for my sick bed , There is for my outward losses , There for my drooping under afflictions , There for the sense of my spiritual desertions ; If matter of doctrine , There is for my settlement in such a truth , There for the conviction of such an error , There for my direction in such a practice ; If matter of reproof , he doth not point at his neighbour , but deeply charges himself ; This meets with my dead-heartednesse and security , This with my worldly mindedness , This with my self-love and flattery of mine own estate , This with my uncharitable censoriousnesse , This with my foolish pride of heart , This with my hypocrisy , This with my neglect of God's services , and my duty ; Thus in all the variety of the holy passages of the Sermon , the devout mind is taken up with digesting what it hears ; and working itself to a secret improvement of all the good counsel that is delivered , neither is ever more busy , then when it sits still at the feet of Christ . I cannot therefore approve the practice ( which yet I see commonly received ) of those , who think it no small argument of their Devotion , to spend their time of hearing , in writing large notes from the mouth of the Preacher ; which however it may be an help for memory in the future , yet cannot ( as I conceive ) but be some prejudice to our present edification ; neither can the brain get so much hereby , as the heart loseth . If it be said , that by this means , an opportunity is given for a full rumination of wholesome Doctrines afterwards : I yield it , but withal , I must say that our after-thoughts can never do the work so effectually , as when the lively voice sounds in our ears , and beats upon our heart ; but herein I submit my opinion to better judgements . 

SECT . XXVI . 

The food that is received into the soul by the ear , is afterwards chewed in the mouth thereof by memory , concocted in the stomach by meditation , and dispersed into the parts by conference and practice ; True Devotion finds the greatest part of the work behind ; It was a just answer that John Gerson reports , given by a Frenchman , who being asked by one of his neighbours if the Sermon were done ; no saith he , it is said , but it is not done , neither will be , I fear , in haste . What are we the better if we hear and remember not ? if we be such auditors as the Jews were wont to call sieves , that retain no moisture that is poured into them ? What the better if we remember , but think not seriously of what we hear ; or if we practise not carefully what we think of ? Not that which we hear is our own , but that which we carry away : although all memories are not alike , one receives more easily , another retains longer ; It is not for every one to hope to attain to that ability , that he can go away with the whole fabric of a Sermon , and readily recount it unto others ; neither doth God require that of any man , which he hath not given him ; Our desires and endeavours may not be wanting where our powers fail ; It will be enough for weak memories if they can so lay up those wholesome counsels which they receive , as that they may fetch them forth when they have occasion to use them ; and that what they want in the extent of memory , they supply in the care of their practice ; Indeed that is it , wherein lies the life of all religious duties , and without which 〈…〉 the Philosopher 〈…〉 virtue , I must say of true godliness , that it consists in action ; Our Saviour did not say , Blessed are ye if ye know these things ; But , If ye know these things , blessed are ye if ye do them . The end of our desire of the sincere milk of the Gospel , is , that we may grow thereby in the stature of all Grace , unto the fullness of God.  

SECT . XXVII . 

The highest of all God's services are his Sacraments ; which therefore require the most eminent acts of our Devotion . The Sacrament of initiation , which in the first planting of a Church is administered only to those of riper age and understanding , calls for all possible reverence , and religious addresses of the receivers ; wherein the Primitive times were punctually observant , both for substance , and ceremony ; now , in a settled and perpetuated Church , in which the virtue of the Covenant descends from the parent to the child , there seems to be no use of our preparatory directions : Only , it is fit that our Devotion should call our eyes back , to what we have done in our infancy , and whereto we are ever obliged ; that our full age may carefully endeavour to make our word good , and may put us in mind of our sinful failing . That other Sacrament of our spiritual nourishment , which our Saviour ( as his farewell ) left us for a blessed memorial of his death and passion , can never be celebrated with enough Devotion . far be it from us to come to this feast of our God , in our common garments ; the soul must be trimmed up , if we would be meet guests for the Almighty . The great Master of the feast will neither abide us to come naked , nor ill clad : Away therefore , first with the old beastly rags of our wont corruptions : Due examination comes in first , and thoroughly searches the soul , and finds out all the secret nastiness , and defilements that it hides within it ; and by the aid of true penitence , strips it of all those loathsome clouts , wherewith it was polluted ; Sin may not be clothed upon with grace ; Joshuahs' filthy garments must be plucked off , ere he can be capable of precious robes : Here may be no place for our sinful lusts , for our covetous desires , for our natural infidelity , for our malicious purposes , for any of our unhallowed thoughts ; The soul clearly devested of these and all other known corruptions , must in the next placae in stead thereof , be furnished with such graces and holy predispositions , as may fit it for so heavenly a work . amongst the grace's requisite , Faith justly challengeth the first place , as that which is both most eminent , and most necessarily presupposed to the profitable receipt of this Sacrament ; for whereas the main end of this blessed banquet is the strengthening of our faith , how should that receive strength , which hath not being ? to deliver these sacred viands to an unbeliever , is to put meat into the mouth of a dead man : Now therefore must the heart raise up itself to new acts of believing , and must lay faster hold on Christ , and bring him closer to the soul ; more strongly applying to itself , the infinite merits of his most perfect obedience , and of his bitter death and passion ; and erecting itself to a desire and expectation of a more vigorous : and lively apprehension of its omnipotent Redeemer . Neither can this faith be either dead , or solitary ; but is still really operative , and attended ( as with other graces , so ) especially with a serious repentance ; whose wonderful power is , to undo our former sins , and to mould the heart and life to a better obedience : A grace so necessary , that the want of it ( as in extreme corruption of the stomach ) turns the wholesome food of the soul into poison ; An impenitent man therefore coming to God's board , is so far from benefiting himself , as that he eats his own judgement : Stand off from this holy table , all ye that have not made your peace with your God ; or that harbour any known sin in your bosom ; not to eat is uncomfortable , but to eat in such a state is deadly ; yet rest not in this plea , that ye cannot come because ye are unreconciled ; but ( as ye love your souls ) be reconciled that you may come . 

Another Grace necessarily pre-required is charity to our brethren , and readiness to forgive ; For this is a communion , as with Christ the head , so with all the members of his mystical body : This is the true Love-feast of God our Saviour , wherein we profess ourselves inseparably united both to him & his ; If there be more hearts than one at God's table , he will not own them ; These holy elements give us an Emblem of ourselves : This bread is made up of many grains , incorporated into one mass ; and this wine is the confluent juice of many clusters ; neither do we partake of several loaves , or variety of liquors , but all eat of one bread , and drink of one cup. Here is then no place for rancour and malice ; none for secret grudge and heartburning ; Therefore , if thou bring thy gift to the Altar , and there remember'st that thy brother hath aught against thee , leave there thy gift , and go thy way ; first be reconciled to thy brother , and then come and offer thy gift . 

Neither may we do as those two emulous Commanders of Greece did , who resolved to leave their spite behind them at mount Athos , and to take it up again in their return ; here must be an absolute , and free acquitting of all the back-reckoning of our unkindness , that we may receive the God of peace into a clear bosom . 

SECT . XXVIII . 

Besides these graces there are certain holy predispositions so necessary that without them our souls can never hope to receive true comfort in this blessed Sacrament ; whereof the first is an hungering and thirsting desire after these gracious means of our salvation : What good will our meat do us without an appetite ? surely without it , there is no expectation of either relish , or digestion ; as therefore those that are invited to some great feast , care first to feed their hunger ere they feed their body ; labouring by exercise to get a stomach , ere they employ it ; so it concerns us to do here : and , as those those that are listlesse , and weak stomached , are wont to whet their appetite with sharp sauces , so must we by the tart applications of the law , quicken our desires of our Saviour here exhibited . 

could we but see our sins , and our miseries by sin ; could we see God frowning , and hell gaping wide to swallow us , we should not need to be bidden to long for our deliverer ; and every pledge of his favour would be precious to us . 

Upon the apprehension of our need of a Saviour and so happy a supply thereof presented unto us , must needs follow a renewed act of true thankfulness of heart to our good God , that hath both given us his dear Son to work our redemption , and his blessed Sacrament to seal up unto us our redemption thus wrought and purchased ; And with souls thus thankfully elevated unto God , we approach with all reverence , to that heavenly table , where God is both the Feast-master , and the Feast . What intention of holy thoughts , what fervour of spirit , what depth of Devotion must we now find in ourselves ? Doubtless , out of heaven no object can be so worthy to take up our hearts . What a clear representation is here of the great work of our Redemption ? How is my Saviour by all my senses here brought home to my soul ? How is his passion lively acted before mine eyes ? For lo , my bodily eye doth not more truly see bread and wine , than the eye of my faith sees the body and blood of my dear Redeemer ; Thus was his sacred body torn and broken ; Thus was his precious blood poured out for me ; My sins ( wretched man that I am ) helped thus to crucify my Saviour ; and for the discharge of my sins would he be thus crucified : Neither did he only give himself for me , upon the cross , but lo , he both offers and gives himself to me in this his blessed institution ; what had his general gift been without this application ? now my hand doth not more sensibly take , nor my mouth more really eat this bread , than my soul doth spiritually receive , and feed on the bread of life ; OH Saviour , thou art the living bread that came down from heaven ; Thy flesh is meat indeed , and thy blood is drink indeed : O that I may so eat of this bread , that I may live for ever ; He that cometh to thee , shall never hunger , he that believeth in thee , shall never thirst : O that I could now so hunger , and so thirst for thee , that my soul could be for ever satisfied with thee ; Thy people of old , were fed with Manna in the wilderness , yet they died ; that food of Angels could not keep them from perishing ; but o , for the hidden Manna , which giveth life to the world , even thy blessed self , give me ever of this bread , and my soul shall not die but live : O the precious juice of the fruit of the Vine , wherewith thou refreshest my soul ▪ Is this the blood of the grape ? Is it not rather thy blood of the New testament , that is poured out for me ? thou speakest , OH Saviour , of new wine that thou wouldst drink with thy Disciples , in thy Father's kingdom , can there be any more precious and pleasant , than this , wherewith thou chearest the believing soul ? our palate is now dull and earthly , which shall then be exquisite and celestial ; but surely no liquor can be of equal price or sovereignty with thy blood ; O how unsavoury are all earthly delicacies to this heavenly draught ▪ OH God , let not the sweet taste of this spiritual Nectar ever go out of the mouth of my soul ; Let the comfortable warmth of this blessed Cordial ever work upon my soul , even till , and in , the last moment of my dissolution . Dost thou bid me , OH Saviour , do this in remembrance of thee ? O , how can I forget thee ? How can I enough celebrate thee for this thy unspeakable mercy ? Can I see thee thus crucified before my eyes , & for my sake thus crucified , and not remember thee ? Can I find my sins accessary to this thy death , and thy death meritoriously expiating all these my grievous sins , and not remember thee ? Can I hear thee freely offering thyself to me , and feel thee graciously conveying thyself into my soul , and not remember thee ? I do remember thee OH Saviour ; but o that I could yet more effectually remember thee ; with all the passionate affections of a soul sick of thy love ; with all zealous desires to glorify thee , with all fervent longings after thee , and thy salvation ; I remember thee in thy sufferings , O do thou remember me in thy glory . 

SECT . XXIX . 

Having thus busied itself with holy thoughts in the time of the celebration , the devout soul breaks not off in an abrupt unmannerliness , without taking leave of the great Master of this heavenly feast , but with a secret adoration , humbly blesseth God for so great a mercy , and heartily resolves and desires to walk worthy of the Lord Jesus , whom it hath received , and to consecreate itself wholly to the service of him that hath so dearly bought it , and hath given it these pledges of its eternal union with him . 

The devout soul hath thus supped in heaven , and returns home , yet the work is not thus done : after the elements are out of eye and use , there remains a digestion of this celestial food , by holy meditation ; and now it thinks , O what a blessing have I received to day ! no less than my Lord Jesus , with all his merits ; and in and with him , the assurance of the remission of all my sins , and everlasting salvation : How happy am I , if I be not wanting to God and myself ? How unworthy shall I be , if I do not strive to answer this love of my God and Saviour , in all hearty affection , and in all holy obedience ? 

And now after this heavenly repast , how do I feel myself ? what strength , what advantage hath my faith gotten ? how much am I nearer to heaven then before ? how much faster hold have I taken of my blessed Redeemer ? how much more firm & sensible is my interest in him ? 

Neither are these thoughts , & this examination the work of the next instant only , but they are such , as must dwell upon the heart ; and must often solicit our memory , and excite our practice , that by this means we may frequently renew the efficacy of this blessed Sacrament , and our souls may batten more and more , with this spiritual nourishment , and may be fed up to eternal life . 

SECT . XXX . 

These are the generalities of our Devotion , which are of common use to all Christians ; There are besides these certain specialties of it , appliable to several occasions , times , places , persons ; For there are morning , and evening Devotions ; Devotions proper to our board , to our closet , to our bed , to God's day , to our own ; to health , to sickness , to several callings , to recreations ; to the way , to the field , to the Church , to our home , to the student , to the soldier , to the Magistrate , to the Minister , to the husband , wife , child , servant ; to our own persons , to our families ; The severalties whereof , as they are scarce finite for number , so are most fit to be left to the judgement , and holy managing of every Christian ; neither is it to be imagined , that any soul which is taught of God , and hath any acquaintance with heaven , can be to seek in the particular application of common rules to his own necessity or expedience . 

The result of all , is , 

A devout man is he that ever sees the invisible , and ever trembleth before that God he sees ; that walks ever , here on earth , with the God of heaven ; and still adores that Majesty with whom he converses ; that confers hourly with the God of spirits in his own language ; yet so , as no familiarity can abate of his awe , nor fear abate aught of his love . To whom the gates of heaven are ever open , that he may go in at pleasure to the throne of grace , and none of the Angelical spirits can offer to challenge him of too much boldness : Whose eyes are well acquainted with those heavenly guardians , the presence of whom he doth as truly acknowledge , as if they were his sensible companions . He is well known of the King of glory , for a daily suitor in the Court of heaven , & none so welcome there , as he : He accounts all his time lost that falls beside his God ; and can be no more weary of good thoughts , then of happiness . 

His bosom is no harbour for any known evil ; and it is a question whether he more abhors sin , or hell ; His care is to entertain God in a clear , and free heart , and therefore he thrusts the world out of doors , and humbly beseeches God to welcome himself to his own : He is truly dejected , and vile in his own eyes : Nothing but hell is lower than he ; every of his slips are heinous , every trespass is aggravated to rebellion ; The glory and favours of God heighten his humiliation ; He hath looked down to the bottomless deep , & seen with horror what he deserved to feel everlastingly ; His cries have been as strong , as his fears just ; & he hath found mercy more ready to rescue him , than he could be importunate : His hand could not be so soon put forth as his Saviour's , for deliverance . The sense of this mercy hath raised him to an unspeakable joy to a most fervent love of so dear a Redeemer ; that love hath knit his heart to so meritorious a deliverer , and wrought a blessed union betwixt God and his soul . That union can no more be severed from an infinite delight , than that delight can be severed from an humble , and cheerful acquiescence in his munificent God ; And now , as in an heavenly freedom , he pours out his soul into the bosom of the Almighty , in all faithful suits for himself and others ; so , he enjoys God in the blessings received , and returns all zealous praises to the giver . 

He comes reverently to the Oracles of God , and brings not his eye , but his heart with him , not carelessly negligent in seeking to know the revealed will of his maker , nor too busily inquisitive into his deep counsels ; not too remiss in the letter , nor too peremptory in the sense : gladly comprehending what he may , and admiring what he cannot comprehend . Doth God call for his ear ? He goes awfully into the holy presence and so hears , as if he should now hear his last : Latching every word that drops from the Preachers lips , ere it fall to the ground , and laying it up carefully where he may be sure to fetch it . He sits not to censure , but to learn , yet speculation and knowledge is the least drift of his labour ; Nothing is his own but what he practiseth . Is he invited to God's feast ? he hate's to come in a foul and slovenly dress ; but trims up his soul , so , as may be fit for an heavenly guest : Neither doth he leave his stomach at home cloyed with the world , but brings a sharp appetite with him ; and so s●eds as if he meant to live for ever . All earthly delicates are unfavoury to him , in respect of that celestial Manna : Shortly , he so eats and drinks , as one that sees himself set at Table with God , and his Angels ; and rises and departs full of his Saviour ; and in the strength of that meal walks vigorously and cheerfully on towards his glory . Finally , as he well knows that he life's , and moves , and hath his being in God , so he refers his life , motions , and being wholly to God ; so acting all things as if God did them by him , so using all things , as one that enjoys God in them ; and in the mean time so walking on earth , that he doth in a sort carry his heaven with him . 

THE FREE PRISONER : OR , The COMFORT of RESTRAINT . 

Written Some while since in the Tower , BY I H. B. N.  

The Free Prisoner : OR The Comfort of Restraint . 

SECT . I  

SIR : 

whiles you pity my affliction , take heed lest you aggravate it , and in your thoughts make it greater than it is in my own ; It is true , I am under restraint ; What is that to a man , that can be free in the Tower , and cannot but be a prisoner abroad ? Such is my condition , and every Divine Philosophers with me . Were my walls much straighter than they are , they cannot hold me in ; It is a bold word to say , I cannot , I will not be a prisoner : It is my Soul that is I : my flesh is my partner , ( if not my servant ) not myself : However my body may be immured , that agile spirit shall fly abroad , and visit both earth , and heaven at pleasure . Who shall hinder it from mounting up ( in an instant ) to that supreme region of bliss , and from seeing that , by the eye of faith , which S. Paul saw in ecstasy ; and when it hath viewed that blessed Hierarchy of heaven to glance down through the innumerable , and unmeasurable globes of light ( which move in the firmament , and below it ) into this elementary world ; and there to compass seas and lands , without shipwreck , in a trice , which a Drake , or Cavendish cannot do , but with danger , and in some year's navigation ; And if my thoughts list to stay themselves in the passage ; with what variety can my soul be taken up of several objects ; Here , turning in to the dark vaults , and dungeons of penal restraint , to visit the disconsolate prisoners , and to fetch from their greater misery , a just mitigation of mine own ; There , looking in to the houses of vain jollity , and pitying that which the sensual fools call happiness ; Here stepping in to the Courts of great Princes , and in them observing the fawning compliances of some , the treacherous underworking of others ; hollow friendships , faithless engagements , fair faces , smooth tongues , rich suits , viewing all save their hearts , & censuring nothing that it sees not ; There calling in at the low cottages of the poor , and out of their empty cupboard furnishing itself with thankfulness ; Here so overlooking the Courts of Justice , as not willing to seerigour or partiality ; There listing what they say in those meetings which would pass for sacred , and wondering at what it hears . Thus can , and shall , and doth my nimble spirit bestir itself in a restless flight , making only the Empyreal heaven , the bounds of its motion ; not being more able to stand still , than the heavens themselves , whence it descended : Should the iron enter into my soul , as it did into that good Patriarches , yet it cannot fetter me : no more can my spirit be confined to one place , than my body can be diffused to many . Perhaps therefore you are mistaken in my condition ; for what is it I beseech you that makes a prisoner ? Is it an allotment to the same room without change , without remove ? What is that still to a mind that is free ? 

And why is my body then more a prisoner than the best man's soul ; that , you know , is peremptorily assigned , for inhabitation to this house of clay till the day of dissolution : Why more than the stars of Heaven , which have remained fixed in their first stations ever since they were first created ? Why more than those great persons which keep up for state ; or Dames for beauty ? Why more than those Anachorites whom we have seen willingly cooped up for merit ? How much more scope have we then they ? We breathe fresh air , we see the same heavens with the freest travellers . 

SECT . II  

But we have ( you will say ) bounds for our restraint , which the free spirit hate's ; as never being pleased , but with a full liberty both of prospect and passage ; Any bar , whether to the foot , or to the eye , is a death : O vain affectation of wild , and roving curiosity ! if their desires cannot be bounded , yet their motions must ; When they have the full sight of heaven above them , they cannot climb up into it ; they cannot possibly see that whole glorious contignation ; and when the whole earth lies open before them , they can measure but some small pieces of it . How can they be quiet till they have purchased Tycho Brahe his prospective Trunk of thirty two foot long , whereby they may discover a better face of Heaven ; some lesser Planets moving round about the Sun , and the Moonets about Saturn and Jupiter , and the Mountains , Seas , and Valleys in the Moon ? How can they rest till having acquainted themselves with the constellations of our Hemisphere , they have passed the Equinoctial , and seen the triangle , the cross , and the clouds , and the rest of the unknown Stars that move above the other Pole ? And when all this is done they are but who they were , no whit better , no whit wiser , and perhaps far less happy than those , who never smelled any but their own smoke ; never knew any star , but Charles-wayn , the Morningstar , and the Seven . For me , I do not envy , but wonder at the licentious freedom , which these men think themselves happy to enjoy ; and hold it a weakness in those minds , which cannot find more advantage and pleasure in confinement , and retiredness ; Is it a small benefit , that I am placed there , where no oaths , no blasphemies beaten my ears ? where my eyes are in no peril of wounding objects ; where I hear no invectives , no false doctrines , no sermocinations of Ironmongers , Feltmakers , Cobblers , Broom-men , Grooms , or any other of those inspired ignorants ; no curses , no ribaldries : where I see no drunken comeslations , no rebellious routs , no violent oppressions , no obscene rejoices , nor ought else that might either vex , or affright my soul . This , this is my liberty : who whiles I sit here quietly locked up by my Keeper , can pity the turmoils and distempers abroad , and bless my own immunity from those too common evils . 

SECT . III  

IS it the necessity and force of the restraint ; since those things which we do voluntarily , are wont to pass from us with delight , which being imposed seem grievous to us ? Why should not I have so much power over my will as to make that voluntary in me , to undergo , which another wills forcibly to inflict ? the mind that is truly subacted to Grace , can so frame itself to what it must suffer , as that it finds a kind of contentment in patience ; Thus we daily do to the Almighty , whose will , by our humble submission , we make ours ; and pray that we may do so : And who can restrain us without him ? If therefore my wise and holy God think it best to cage me up , by the command of authority ( upon what cause soever ) why should not I think this enclosure a better liberty : who know there is perfect freedom in his obedience ? So then , if constraint make a prisoner , I am none ; who an most willingly , where my God will have me : And , if my will did not often carry me out of my own walks at home , why cannot it as well confine me to a larger compass of the Tower ? 

SECT . iv.  

IS it solitude and infrequence of visitation ? This may perhaps be troublesome to a man that knows not to entertain himself ; but , to him that can hold continual discourse with his own heart , no favour can be greater ; For of all other , these self-conferences are most beneficial to the soul ; Other men's communication may spend the time with more advantage of learning or mirth ; but none can yield us so much spiritual profit , as our own soliloquies : And when all is done , the Greeks said well ; It is not much , but useful that makes truly wise . Besides this , we can never have the opportunity of so good company , as when we are alone : Now , we enjoy the society of God , and his Angels , which we cannot so freely do in a throng of visitants : When God would express his greatest entireness with his Church , Ducam eam in solitudinem , saith he : I will bring her into the wilderness , and there speak comfortably to her . We cannot expect so sweet conversation with God , in the presence of others , as apart . O the divine benefit of an holy solitariness , which no worldly heart can either know , or value ! What care I for seeing of men , when I may see him that is invisible ? What care I for chatting with friends , when I may talk familiarly with the God of heaven ? What care I for entertaining mortal guests , when I may with Abraham & his nephew Let feast the Angels of God : and ( which were too great a word , if God himself had not spoken it ) be attended by them ? 

SECT . v.  

IS it the reproach & ignominy that commonly attends the very name of an imprisonment ? weak minds may be affected with every thing : but , with solid judgements , it is not the punishment , but the cause that makes either the Martyr , or the malefactor . S. Paul's bonds were famous : and Petrus ad vincula is not without a note of yearly celebrity : and it were hard , if so many blessed Martyrs , and Confessors , who have lived , & died in Jayls , for the truth's sake ; should not have brought prisons ( such as they may be ) into some credit . Shortly , as notorious crimes may be at liberty , so even innocence may be under restraint ; yet those crimes no whit the better , nor this innocence the worse . 

Besides ( that which perhaps came not within your freer thoughts ) every restraint is not for punishment ; there is a restraint for safety , a salva custodia , as well as arcta , such is this of ours : This strong Tower serves not so much for our prison , as for our defence ; what horror soever the name may carry in it : I bless God for these walls , out of which I know not where we could ( for the time ) have been safe from the rage of the mis-incensed multitude : Poor seduced souls , they were taught it was piety to be cruel ; and were mispersuaded to hate & condemn us for that , ( which should have procured their reverence , and honour ) even that holy station which we hold in God's Church ; and to curse those of us , who had deserved nothing but their thanks and prayers : railing on our very profession in the streets ; and rejoicing in our supposed ruin : Father , forgive them , for they knew not what they did : Here we were out of the danger of this misraised fury , and had leisure to pray for the quenching of those wild fires of contention , ' and causeless malice , which ( to our great grief ) we saw wicked incendiaries daily to cast amongst God's dear & well-minded people . Here we have well and happily approved with the blessed Apostle , that ( what ever our restraint be ) the Word of God is not bound ; With what liberty , with what zeal , with what success hath that been preached by us to all comers ? Let them say , whether the Tower had ever so many , such guests , or such benedictions ; so as if the place have rendered us safe , we have endeavoured to make it happy ; Wherein our performances have seemed to confute that which Cornelius Bishop of Rome long since observed , that the mind laden with heavy burdens of affliction , is not able to do that service , which it can do when it is free and at ease ; Our troubles through God's mercy made us more active , and our labours more effectual . 

SECT . VI  

Add unto these ( if you please ) the eminent dignity of the place , such , as is able to give a kind of honour to captivity , the ancient seat of Kings , chosen by them , as for the safe residence of their royal persons , so for their treasury , their wardrobe , their Magazine ; all these precious things are under the same custody with ourselves ; sent hither , not as to a prison , but a repository ; and why should we think ourselves in any other condition ? How many worthy inhabitants make choice to fix their abode within these walls , as not knowing where to be happier ? the place is the same to us , if our will maybe the same with theirs ; they dearly purchase that , which cost us nothing but our fees ; nothing makes the difference , but the mere conceit of Liberty , which whiles I can give to myself , in my thoughts , why am I pitied as miserable , whiles their happiness is applauded ? 

You see then how free I am in that which you miscall my prison ; see now , how little cause I have to affect this liberty , which you imagine me to want ; since I shall be , I can be no other than a prisoner abroad : There is much difference of prisons ; One is straight and close locked , so far from admitting visitants , that it scarce allows the sun to look in at those crosse-barred grates ; another , is more large and spacious , yielding both walks , and access ; Even after my discharge from these walls , I shall be yet sure to be a prisoner , both these ways ; For , what is my body but my prison in the one ? and what is the world , but my prison in the other kind ? 

SECT . VII . 

TO begin with the former , never was there a more close prisoner than my soul is for the time to my body ; Close in respect of the essence of that spirit , which since its first Mittimus , never stirred out from this straight room ; never can do , till my gaole-delivery . 

If you respect the improvement of the operations of that busy soul , it is any where , it is successively every where ; no place can hold it , none can limit it ; but if you regard the immortal , and immaterial substance of it , it is fast locked up within these walls of clay , till the day of my changing come ; even as the closest captive may write letters to his remotest friends , whilst his person is in durance ; I have too much reason to acknowledge my native Jail , and feel the true Symptoms of it to my pain ; what darkness of sorrow have I here found ? what little-ease of melancholic lodgings ? what manacles and shakles of cramps ? yea what racks of torturing convulsions ? 

And if there be others , that find lesle misery in their prison , yet there is no good soul , but finds equal restraint : That spiritual substance , which is imprisoned within us , would fain be flying up to that heaven whence it descended ; these walls of flesh forbid that evolation , ( as Socrates called it of old ) and will not let it out , till the God of spirits ( who placed it there ) shall unlock the doors , and free the prisoner by death ; He that insused life into Lazarus , that he might call him from the prison of the grave , must take life from us , when he calls us out of this prison of flesh ; I desire to be loosed , and to be with Christ , ( saith the Apostle ) as some versions express it ; whiles we are chained to this flesh , we can have no passage to heaven , no free conversation with our Saviour : Although it was the singular privilege of that great Doctor of the Gentiles , that he was in heaven before his dissolution : whether in the body , or out of the body , he knew not : How far that rapture extended , whether to both soul and body , if he knew not , how should we ? But this we know , that such ecstasy and vision was in him , without separation of the soul from the body ; which another should hope for in vain : And for him , so he saw this glory of Paradise , that he could not yet enjoy it : Before he , or we , can be blessed with the fruition of Christ , we must be loosed : that is , freed from our clog , and our chain of this mortal body . 

What but our prison walls can hinder us here , from a free prospect ? What but these walls of flesh can hinder me from a clear vision of God ? I must now , for the time , see as I may : Nothing can enter into my soul , but what passes through my senses , and partakes , in some sort , of their earthliness ; when I am freed from them , I shall see as I am seen ; in an abstracted and heavenly way ; so as one spirit apprehends another : I do now , at the best , see those spiritual objects darkly , by the eye of faith , as in a glass ; and that not one of the clearest neither : ( Alas , what dim representations are these , that I can attain to here , of that Majesty , whose sight shall make me blessed ? ) I shall once see as I am seen , face to face ; the face of my glorified soul shall see the face of that all-glorious Deity , and in that sight be eternally happy ; It is enough for a prisoner in this dungeon of clay , to know of , and fore-expect such felicity , whereof these earthly gyves tender him as yet uncapable . 

SECT . VIII . 

WOE is me ! how many prisons do we pass ? so soon as ever this divine soul is insused into this flesh , it is a prisoner : neither can any more pass out of this skin , till this frame of nature be demolished : And now , as the soul of this Embryon is instantly a prisoner to the body , so the body is also a prisoner in the womb , wherein it is form : what darkness , what closeness , what uneasinesse , what nuisance is there in this dungeon of nature ? There he must lie in an uncouth posture , for his appointed month , till the native bonds being loosed , & the doors forced open , he shall be by an helpful obstetrication drawn forth into the larger prison of the world ; there indeed he hath elbow-room enough : but all that wide scope cannot free him from a true incarceration : Who knows not that there are many differences , and latitudes of restraint ? A Simeon may imprison and enchain himself in the compass of a pillar , not allowing himself the ease of his whole dimensions ; Peter may be locked up in a larger Jail , betwixt his two Leopards ( as that father terms them ; ) S. Paul may be two years allowed to be a prisoner in his own hired house , but under the guard of his keeper , and not without his chain : There are those who upon heinous , and dangerous occasions , may be kept close under many locks ; there are prisoners at large , who have the liberty of the Tower ; yet even these last , notwithstanding the allowance of spacious walks , & fresh gardens , are no other than acknowledged prisoners : Such is my condition to the world , when I am at my fullest liberty : It is true , that when I look back to the straitness of my first , and native prison , and compare it with the large extent of that wide world , into which I am brought , I may well with Isaac's Herdsmen , say , Rehoboth , For now , the Lord hath made me room : but when I compare that world , wherein I am , with that whereto I aspire , and which I know to be above , and look to enjoy ; I can see nothing here , but mere prison-wals , and profess my life to be no other than a perpetual durance . 

SECT . IX . 

IF Varro said of old , that the world was no other than the great house of little man , I shall be bold to add what kind of house it is ; It is no other than his prison , yea , his dungeon . 

Far be it from me to disparage the glorious work of my omnipotent Creator : I were not worthy to look upon this large , and glittering roof of heaven , nor to see the pleasant varieties of these earthly landscapes , if I did not adore that infinite power , and wisdom which appears in this goodly , and immense fabric ; and confess the marvellous beauty of that majestic , and transcendent workmanship ; Rather when I see the Moon and the Stars , which thou hast ordained , I say with the Psalmist , Lord what is man ? 

But , OH God , it is no dishonour to thee , that though this be a fair house , yet thou hast one so much better than it , as a Palace is beyond a Jail . 

This beauty may please , but that ravisheth my soul : Here is light , but dim , and dusky , in respect of that inaccessible light , wherein thou dwellest : Here is a glorious sun , that illumineth this inferior world , but thou art the sun who enlightenest that world above : thou , to whom thy created Sun is but a shadow . 

Here we converse with beasts , or at the best , with men ; there with blessed souls , and heavenly Angels : Here some frivolous delights are intermixed with a thousand vexations ; There in thy presence is the fullness of joy : So then , let the sensual heart mis-place his paradise here in the world , it shall not pass for other with me , than my prison : How can it ? Why should it ? for what other terms do I find here ? 

What blind light looks in here at these scant loopeholes of my soul ? Yea , what darkness of ignorance rather possesses me ? what bolts and shackles of heavy crosses do I bear about me ? how am I fed here with the bread of afdiction ? how am I watched and beset with evil spirits ? how contumeliously traduced ? how disdainfully looked upon ? how dragging the same chain with the worst malefactors ? how disabled to all spiritual motions ? how restrained from that full liberty of enjoying my home , and my God in it , which I daily expect in my dissolution ? when therefore , I am released from these walls , I am still imprisoned in larger , and so shall be till the Lord of the spirits of all flesh ( who put me here ) shall set me free ; and all the days of my appointed time will I wait , till this my changing come . 

SECT . X.  

You see then by this time , how little reason I have to be too much troubled with this imprisonment , or my friends for me ; But indeed , there are some sorts of Prisoners , which neither you nor I can have tears enough to bewail : and those especially of two kinds . 

The one , those that are too much affected with an outward bondage : The other , those that are no whit affected with a spiritual . 

In the first rank are they that sink under the weight of their Irons ; Poor impotent souls , that groaning under the cruelty of a Turkish thraldom , or a Spanish Inquisition , want Faith to bear them out , against the impetuous violences of their tormentors : I sorrow for their suffering ; but for their fai●●●● more : could they see the Gro●●● of glory , which the right● 〈◊〉 Judge holds ready for their ●●ctorious Patience , they 〈◊〉 not but contemn pain , 〈◊〉 all the pomp of Death , and ●●●fesse that their Light affliction ( which is but for 〈…〉 ) works for them a far more ●●●ceeding and eternal weight of glory : But alas , it is the weakness of their eyes , that they only look at the things that are seen , close walls , heavy 〈◊〉 sharp scourges , merciless racks , and other dreadful engines of torture , and see not the things that are not seen , the glorious reward of their victory , blessedness . Had they had Stephen's eyes , they would have emulated his martyrdom ; Surely whosoever shall but read the story of the Mother and the seven Brothers in the Maccabees , and that of the forty Armenian Martyrs frozen to death , reported by Gaudentius , and shall there see the fainting revolter dying uncomfortably in the Bath , whiles the other thirty and nine ( together with their new converted Keeper ) are crowned by an Angel from heaven , cannot choose ( except he have nothing but Ice in his bosom ) but find in himself a disposition emulous of their courage , and ambitious of their honour ; But alas , what ever our desires ; and purposes may be , it is not for every one to attain to the glory of Martyrdom ; this is the highest pitch , that earthly Saints are capable of : He must be more than a man , whom pain and death cannot remove from his holy resolutions , and especially , the linger execution of both . It is well if an age can yield one , Mole : In what terms shall I commemorate thee , OH thou blessed Confessor , the great example of invincible constancy , in these backsliding times , ( if at least thy rare perseverance be not more for wonder then imitation ) whom thirty years tedious durance in the Inquisitory at Rome , could not weary out of thy sincere profession of the Evangelical truth ? All this while thou wert not allowed the speech , the sight of any , but thy persecutors : Here was none to pity thee , none to exhort thee : If either force of persuasion , or proffers of favour , or threats of extremity , could have wrought thee for thy perversion , thou hadst not at last died ours . Blessed be the God of all comfort , who having stood by thee , and made thee faithful to the death , hath now given thee a crown of life and immortality ; and left thee a noble pattern of Christian fortitude , so much more remarkable , as less frequently followed . 

Whether I look into the former , or the present times I find the world full of shrinking professors . 

amongst the first Christians , persecution easily discovered four sorts of cowardly Renegadoes ; The first , and worst , whom they justly styled Idolaters , that yielded to all the public forms of worship to those false Gods : The second , Sacrificers , who condescended so far , as to some kind of immolation unto those feigned deities , or , at least , to a tasting of those things which were thus offered : The third , Incensers , such as ( with Marcellinus himself ) came on so far , as to cast some grains of incense into the Idols fire : The last were their Libellaticks , such as privately by themselves , or by some allowed proxey , denied the faith , yet with their money bought out this ignominy , & sin of any public Act of Idolatry . 

Not to speak of those many thousands which fell down before Solyman the second , and held up their finger to fignifie their conversion to his Mahometism , for ease of their taxations ; how many do we hear of daily of all nations , and some ( which I shame and grieve to say ) of our own , who yield to receive circumcision , and to renounce their Saviour ? O the lamentable condition of those distressed Christians ▪ If constant to their professio they live in a perpetual purgatory of torment ; If revolting , they run into the danger of an everlasting damnation in hell ; Even this gentle restraint puts me into the meditation of their insupportable durance ; Why do not all Christian hearts bleed with the sense of their deplorable estate ? why is not our compassion heightened , according to the depth of their peril , and misery ? 

What are our bowels made of , if they yearn not at their unexpressible calamity ? ye rich Merchants , under whose employment many of these poor souls have thus unhappily miscarried , how can you bless yourselves in your bags , whiles you see the members of Christ your Saviour , thus torn from him , for want of a petty ransom ? ye eminent persons whom God hath advanced to power and greatness , how can you sleep quietly upon your pillows , whiles you think of the cold and hard lodgings , the hungry bellies , the naked and walled backs of miserable Christians ? Lastly , what fervent prayers should we all , that profess the dear name of Christ , pour out unto the God of heaven for the strengthening of the faith and patience of these afflicted souls against the assaults of violence ? and for their happy and speedy deliverance out of their woeful captivity ? 

SECT . XI . 

These prisoners are worthy of our deep compassion ; as those , who are too sensible of their own misery ; Others there are , who are so much more worthy of greater pity , by how much they are less apprehensive of their need of it ; plausible prisoners under a spiritual tyranny ; whose very wills are so captived to the powers of darkness , that to choose they would be no other than bondmen ; pleasing themselves in those chains , whose weight is enough to sink their souls into hell ; such are they , who have yielded themselves over to be enthralled by any known sin ; no men under heaven do so much applaud themselves in the conceit of their liberty ; none so great slaves as they ; If the very Stoic Philosophers had not enough evinced this truth , Divinity should : Indeed , the world is a worse kind of Algiers , full of miserable captives ; Here lies one so fettered in lust , that he rots again ; there another , so laden with drunken excess , that he can neither go norstand , and in very deed is not his own man : Here one so pinched with golden fetters , that he can neither eat , nor sleep ; nor at all enjoy himself : there , another so pined with envy , that he is forced to feed on his own heart : Here , one so tormented with anger , that he is stark mad for the time ; and cares not how he mischiefs himself in a furious desire to hurt others ; there , another , so racked with ambition , that he is stretched beyond his own length , and lives in the pain of a perpetual self-extention . 

These , and all others of this kind are most miserable prisoners , chained up for everlasting darkness : So much more worthy of our pity , as they are less capable of their own : Spend your compassion ( if you please ) upon these deplorable subjects ; But for me , wish me ( if you will ) as free from any imputation of evil , as I was , and am from the thought of it ; wish me in your free champain , where I may have no hedge so much as to confine my eye : wish me happy in the society of so dear and and noble a Friend ; but in the mean while , think of me no otherwise , then as a Free prisoner , And 

Yours thankfully devoted , in all faithful observance , I N.  

THE REMEDY OF DISCONTENT . 

OR , A TREATISE OF CONTENTATION in whatsoever condition : Fit for these sad and troubled Times . 

By Jos. HALL. D. D. and B. of N.  

Phil. 4. 1● 〈…〉 have learned in whatsoever estate I am , therewith to be content . 

12.  I know both how to be abased , and I know how to abound ; Every where , and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry , both to abound and to want . 

LONDON , Printed by M. F. for Nat. Butter . 1646.  

I Have perused this Treatise entitled [ The Remedy of Discontentment , ] and judging it to be very pious , profitable , and necessary for these sad and distracted times , I licence it to be printed and published , and should much commend it to the Christian Reader , if the very name of the Author were not in itself sufficient without any further testimony . 

JOHN DOW●AM● . 

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER , Grace and Peace . 

What can be more seasonable , then when all the world is sick of Discontent , to give counsels and Receipts of Contentation ? Perhaps the Patient will think it a time is chosen for physic , in the midst of a Fit : But in this case we must do as we may . I confess , I had rather have stayed till the Paroxys me were happily over , that so the humours being somewhat settled , I might hope for the more kindly operation of this wholesome medicine . But , partly my age and weakness , despairing to outlive the public distemper ; and partly my judgement ( crossing the vulgar opinion for the season of some kind of Receipts ) have ●●w 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 upon this safe , and 〈…〉 inscription : God is 〈…〉 that I wrote this 〈…〉 of mine own afflictions , ( the particulars whereof , it were unseasonable to trouble the world withal ) as one that meant to make myself my own Patient , by enjoining myself that course of remedies , that I prescribe to others ; and , as one , who by the powerful working of God's Spirit within me , labour to find my heart framed to those holy dispositions which I wish and recommend to every Christian soul : If there be no remedy but the worst of outward troubles must afflict us ; it shall be happy yet , if we may find inward peace in our bosoms : which shall be , if we can reconcile ourselves to our offended God ; and calm our spirits to a meek undergoing of those sufferings , which the divine Providence hath thought fit to measure forth unto us : This is the main drift of this ensuing labour . Now the same God , who hath , in these blustering times , put into my heart these quiet thoughts of holy Contentation , bless them in every hand that shall receive them ; and make them effectual to the good of every soul , that shall now , and hereafter entertain them ; that so their gracious proficiency may , in the day of the appearance of our Lord Jesus , add to the joy of my account ; Who am the unworthiest of the servants of God , and his Church , 

J. N.  

THE CONTENTS OF the several Sections following . 

Sect. I The excellency of Contentation ; and how it is to be had . pag. 171 
§ II The contrariety of estates wherein it is to be exercised . 172 
§ III Who they are that know not how to want , and be abused . 176 
§ iv. Who they are that know how to want . 182 
§ v. Considerations leading to Contentation ; and first the consideration of the fickleness of life , and of all earthly commodities ; Honour , Beauty , Strength , etc. 183 
§ VI Consideration of the unsatisfying condition of these worldly things . 192 
§ VII . The danger of the too much estimation of these earthly comforts . 196 
§ VIII . The consideration of the divine Providence , ordering , and overruling all events . 198 
§ IX . The consideration of the worse condition of others . 200 
§ X. The consideration of the inconveniences of great estates ; & therein first their cares . 206 
§ XI . The danger of the distempers , both bodily , and spiritual , that follow great means , and the torment in parting with them . 211 
§ XII . Consideration of the benefits of Poverty . 216 
§ XIII . Consideration of how little will suffice Nature . 221 
§ FOURTEEN . Consideration of the inconveniences and miseries of discontentment . 225 
§ xv. The gracious vicissitudes of God's favours and afflictions . 230 
§ XVI . Consid . of the great examples of Contentation , both without , and within the Church of God. 236 
§ XVII . Contentment in death itself . 244 
§ XVIII . The miseries and inconveniences of the continued conjunction of the soul and body . 250 
§ XIX . Holy dispositions for contentment ; the first whereof , Humility . 256 
§ xx. 2.  Selfe-resignation . 262 
§ XXI . 3.  The true inward riches . 268 
§ XXII . Holy resolutions : and 1.  That the present estate is best for us . 272 
§ XXIII . 2.  Resolution to abate of our desires . 279 
§ XXIV . 3.  Resolution , to enure ourselves to digest smaller discontentments . 284 
§ XXV . 4.  Resolution , to be frequent and fervent in prayer . 291 
§ XXVI . The difficulty of knowing how to abound ; and the ill consequences of the not knowing it . 294 
CONTENTATION , in knowing How to want : where is set forth What it is to know how to want , and to be abased . 
How to be attained in respect Of the adversities of life , where must be certain 1 Considerations , 1 Of the valuation of earthly things ; the Transitoriness of Life , Honour , Beauty , Strength , Pleasure . 
Unsatisfying condition of them . 
Danger of over-esteeming them . 

2 Of divine providence overruling all events . 
3 Of the worse condition of others . 
4 Of the inconvenience of great estates . Cares . 
Danger of distemper bodily . 
spiritual . 

Torment in parting . 
Account . 

5 Of the benefits of poverty . freedom from Cares . 
Fears of keeping . 
losing . 


6 Of how little will suffice Nature . 
7 Of the miseries of Discontentment . 
8 Of the Vicissitude of Favours and Crosses . 
9 Examples of Contentation without 
within 
the Church of God.  

2 Dispositions . 1 Humility . 
2 Self-resignation . 
3 True inward riches . 

3 Resolutions . 1 That our present condition is best for us . 
2 Resol . to abate of our desires . 
3 Resol . to digest smaller inconveniences . 
4 Resol . to be frequent & fervent in prayer . 


Of death itself . Remedies against the terror of death . Necessity & benefit of death . 
Conscience of a well-led life . 
Final peace with God.  
Efficacy of Christ's death applied . 
Comfortable expectation of certain Resurrection ; and an immediate vision of God.  

Miseries & inconveniences of the continued conjunction of soul and body . Defilement of sin Original . 
Proneness to sin . 
Difficulty of doing well . 
Dullness of understanding . 
Perpetual conflicts . 
Solicitude of cares . 
Multiplicity of passions : 
Retardation of glory . 




How to abound . 

THE REMEDY OF Discontent . 

SECT . I  

The excellency of Contentation ; and how it is to be had . 

IF there be any happiness to be found upon earth , it is in that which we call Contentation : This is a flower that grows not in every Garden : The great Doctor of the Gentiles tells us that he had it ; I have learned ( saith he ) in what estate soever I am , therewith to be content ; I know how to be abased , and I know how to abound : Lo , he could not have taken out this lesson if he had not learned it ; and he could not have learned it of any other than his Master in Heaven : What face soever Philosophy may set upon it , all Morality cannot reach it ; neither could his learned Gamaliel , at whose feet he sat , have put this skill into him ; no , he learned it since he was a Christian ; and now professeth it ; So as it appears , there is a divine art of Contentation to be attained in the school of Christ ; which whosoeeer hath learned , hath taken a degree in heaven , and now knows how to be happy both in want , and abundance . 

SECT . II  

The contrariety of estates wherein Contentation is to be exercised . 

The nature of man is extremely querulous ; we know not what we would have , and when we have it , we know not how to like it : we would be happy , yet we would not die ; we would live long , yet we would not be old ; we would be kept in order , yet we would not be chastised with affliction ; we are loath to work , yet are weary of doing nothing ; we have no list to stir , yet find long sitting painful ; we have no mind to leave our bed , yet find it a kind of sickness to lie long ; we would marry , but would not be troubled with household cares ; when once we are married , we wish we had kept single ; If therefore grace have so mastered nature in us , as to render us content with what ever condition , we have attained to no small measure of perfection Which way soever the wind blows , the skilful Mariner knows how to turn his sails to meet it ; the contrariety of estates to which we lie open here , gives us different occasions for the exercise of Contentation : I cannot blame their choice who desire a middle estate betwixt want and abundance , and to be free from those inconveniences which attend both extremes : Wise Solomon was of this diet ; Give me neither poverty nor riches ; feed me with the food of my meet allowance ; Lo , he that had all , desired rather to have but enough : and if any estate can afford contentment in this life , surely this is it , in the judgement and experience of the wisest Heathen . But forasmuch as this equal poise is hardly attainable by any man , & is more proper for our wishes , and speculation , then for our hopes , true wisdom must teach us so to compose ourselves that we may be fit to entertain the discontentments , & dangers of those excesses , and effects , which we cannot but meet with in the course of our mortal life : And surely we shall find that both extremes are enemies to this good temper of the soul : prosperity may discompose us , as well as an adverse condition ; The Sunshine may be as troublesome to the Traveller as the wind or rain ; neither know I whether is more hard to manage of the two ; a dejected estate , or a prosperous ; whether we may be more incommodated with a resty horse , or with a tired one : Let us begin with that which nature is wont to think most difficult ; that contrary to the practice of learners , we may try to take out the hardest lesson first . Let us therefore learn in the first place how to want . 

SECT . III  

How many do not know how to want . 

Could we teach men how not to want , we should have Disciples enough ; every man seeks to have , & hate's to lack : could we give an Antidote against poverty , it would be too precious : And why can we not teach men even this lesson too ? The Lord is my shepherd , saith David , therefore can I lack nothing ; and most sweetly elsewhere , OH fear the Lord ye that be his Saints ; for they that fear him , lack nothing ; The Lions do lack and suffer hunger ; but they which seek the Lord shall want no manner of thing that is good : Let God be true , and every man a liar ; Certainly , if we were not wanting to God in our fear of him , in our faithful reliance upon him ; in our conscionable seeking of him , he whose the earth is , and the fullness of it , would not suffer our careful endeavours to go weeping away : But if it so fall out that his most wise providence finds it better for us to be held short in our worldly estate , ( as it may be the great Physician sees it most for our health to be kept fasting ) it is no less worth our learning to know how to want ; For there is many an one that wants , but knows not how to want , and therefore his need makes him both offensive and miserable . 

There are those that are poor and proud ; one of the wise man's three abominations ; foolish Laodiceans that bear themselves for rich , increased with goods , and lacking nothing ; when they are no other than wretched , and miserable , and poor , and blind , and naked ; These men know not how to want , their heart is too big for their purse ; and surely pride , though every where odious , yet doth no where so ill as in rags . 

There are those that are poor and envious ; looking with an evil eye upon the better fare of others ; as surely this vice dwells more commonly in Cottages then in Palaces . How displeasedly doth the beggar look upon the larger alms of his neighbour ? grudging to another what ever falls besides himself , and misliking his own dole , because the next hath more ; whose eye with the discontented Labourers is evil , because his Master is good ; Neither do these men know how to want . 

There are those that want distrustfully ; measuring the merciful provision of the Almighty by the line of their own sense ; as the Samaritan Peer , when in the extremity of a present famine he heard the Prophet foretell a sudden plenty ; Behold , if the Lord would make windows in heaven , might this thing be ? 

There are those that want impatiently ; repining at Gods dealing with them , and making their own impotent anger guilty of a further addition to their misery ; as the distressed King of Israel , in a desperate sense of that grievous dearth ; Behold , this evil is of the Lord , what should I wait on the Lord any longer ? And those wretched ones , who when the fourth Angel had poured out his vial upon the Sun , being scorched with the extremity of the heat , blasphemed the God of heaven : In this kind was that sinful techinesse of Jonah : when I see a poor worm that hath put itself out of the cool cell of the earth wherein it was lodged , and now being beaten upon by the Sunbeams , lies wriggling upon the bare path , turning itself every way in vain , and not finding so much as the shade of a leaf to cover it ; I cannot but think of that fretting Prophet ; when wanting the protection of his gourd he found himself scalded with that strong reflection ; and looking up wrathfully towards that Sun from whom he smarted , could say to the God that made it , I do well to be angry , even to the death . 

Lastly , there are those that are poor and dishonest even out of the very suggestion of their want ; It was the danger hereof that made Agur the son of Jakeh pray against penury ; lest I be poor , and steal ; and ( by forswearing it ) take the Name of God in vain . 

SECT . iv.  

Who they are that know how to want . 

These and perhaps others do and must want , but in the mean time they do that which they know not how to do ; there is a skill in wanting which they have not ; Those only know how to want , that have learned to frame their mind to their estate ; like to a skilful Musician , that can let down his strings a peg lower when the tune requires it ; Or like to some cunning Spagirick , that can intend or remit the heat of his furnace according to occasion . Those , who when they must be abased , can stoop submissly , like to a gentle reed , which when the wind blows stiff , yields every way ; those that in an humble obeisance can lay themselves low at the foot of the Almighty , and put their mouth in the dust ; that can patiently put their necks under the yoke of the Highest ; and can say with the Prophet , Truly this is my sorrow , and I must bear it ; Those that can smile upon their afflictions , rejoicing in tribulation , singing in the Gaol with Paul and Silas at midnight ; Lastly , those that can improve misery to an advantage , being the richer for their want , bettered with evils , strengthened with infirmities ; and can truly say to the Almighty , I know that of very faithfulness thou hast afflicted me ; Never could they have come out so pure metal , if they had not passed under the hand of the Refiner ; never had they proved so toward children , if they had not been beholden to the rod : These are they that know how to want , & to be abased ; and have effectually learned to be content with the meanest condition : to which happy temper that we may attain , there will be use of , 1.  Certain Considerations ; 2.  Certain Dispositions ; and 3.  Certain Resolutions ; These three shall be as the grounds , and rules of this our Divine Art of Contentation . 

SECT . v.  

The Consideration of the fickleness of life , and all earthly commodities . 

THE first Consideration shall be of the just valuation of all these earthly things ; which doubtless is such , as that the wise Christian cannot but set a low price upon them , in respect , first , of their transitorinesse ; secondly , of their insufficiency of satisfaction ; thirdly , the danger of their fruition . 

At the best , they are but glassy stuff , which the finer it is , is so much more brittle ; yea , what other than those gay bubbles , which children are wont to raise from the mixed soap and spittle of their Walnutshell ; which seem to represent pleasing colours , but in their flying up instantly vanish ? There is no remedy ; either they must leave us , or we must leave them . Well may we say that of the Psalmist , which Campian was reported to have often in his mouth ; My soul is continually in my hands ; and who knows whether it will not expire in our next breathing ? How many have shut their eyes in an healthful sleep , who have waked in another world ? We give too large scope to our account , while we reckon seven years for a Life ; a shorter time will serve ; while we find the revolution of less than half those years to have dispatched five Caesars , and five Popes ; nay , who can assure himself of the next moment ? It is our great weakness , if we do not look upon every day , as our last ; why should we think ourselves in a better condition , than the chosen vessel , who deeply protested to die daily ? What a poor complaint was that of the great Conqueror of the Jews , Titus Vespasian , who putting his head out of his sick litter , querulously accused Heaven , that he must die , and had not deserved it ; when he might have found it guilt enough that he was a man ; and therefore by the very sentence of nature condemned , I know not whether to live , or die . 

Indeed , what can we cast our eyes upon , that doth not put us in mind of our frailty ? All our fellow-creatures die for us , and by us : The day dies into night ; the trees and all other plants of the earth suffer a kind of Autumnal mortality ; the face of that common Mother of us all , doth at the least in Winter , resemble Death ; But if the Angel of Death ( as the Jews term him ) shall respite , and reprieve us for the time ; alas ! how easily may we have over-lived our comforts ? If Death do not snatch us away from them , how many thousand means of casualties , of enemies , may snatch them away from us ? He that was the greatest man of all the Sons of the East , within a few days became a spectacle and proverb of penury , which still sticks by him , and so shall do to the world's end , As poor as Job . 

The rich Plain of Jordan , which overnight was as the Garden of the Lord , is in the morning covered over with brimstone , and salt , and burning ; wilt thou cause thine eyes to fly upon that which is not ? saith wise Solomon : For riches certainly make themselves wings , they fly away as an Eagle towards Heaven : if we have wings of desire to fly after them , they are nimbler of flight to outstrip us , and leave us no lesle miserable in their loss , than we were eager in their pursuit . 

As for Honour , what a mere shadow it is ? upon the least cloud interposed , it is gone , and leaves no mention where it was : The same Sun sees Haman adored in the Persian Court , like some earthly Deity ; and like some base vermin waving upon his Gibbet : Do we see the great , and glorious Cleopatra , shining in the pompous Majesty of Egypt ? stay but a while , and ye shall see her in the dust , and her two children , whom she proudly styled the Sun , and the Moon , driven like miserable Captives before the Chariot of their Conqueror : Man being in honour abideth not , saith the Psalmist , he perishes , but his greatness ( as more frail than he ) is oftentimes dead and buried before him , and leaves him the surviving executor of his own shame . 

It was easy for the captive Prince , to observe in the Charet-wheel of his Victor , that when one spoke risen up , another went down , and both these in so quick a motion , that it was scarce distinguished by the eye . 

Well therefore may we say of Honour , as Ludovicus Vives said of Scholastical Divinity : Cui fumus est pro fundamento : It is built upon smoke , how can it be kept from vanishing ? 

As for Beauty , what is it , but a dash of Nature's tincture laid upon the skin , which is soon washed off with a little sickness ? what but a fair blossom , that drops off , so soon as the fruit offers to succeed it ? what but a flower , which with one hot Sun gleam weltreth and falls ? He that had the choice of a thousand Faces , could say , Favour is deceitful , and Beauty is Vanity . 

Lastly , for Strength , and vigour of Body , if it could be maintained till our old age , alas , how soon is that upon us , ere we be aware ! how doth it then shrivel our flesh and loosen our sinews , and cripple our joints ! Milo , when he looked upon his late brawny arms , and saw them now grow lank and writhled , le 's fall tears , and bewrays more weakness of mind , than he had before bodily strength : but how often doth sickness prevent the debilitations of age ; pulling the strongest man upon his knees , and making him confess , that youth , as well as childhood , is Vanity ? 

As for Pleasure , it dies in the birth , and is not therefore worthy to come into this bill of Mortality . 

Do we then upon sad consideration see and feel the manifest transitorinesse of Life , riches , Honour , Beauty , Strength , Pleasure , and whatever else can be dear and precious to us in this world , and can we dote upon them so , as to be too much dejected with our parting from them ? Our Saviour bids us consider the Lilies of the field ; And he that made both , tells us , that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these : Surely , full well are they worth our considering . But if those Beauties could be as permanent , as they are glorious , how would they carry away our hearts with them ? Now , their fading condition justly abates of their value ; Would we not smile at the weakness of that man , that should weep and howl , for the falling of this Tulip , or that Rose , abandoning all comfort for the loss of that , which he knows must flourish but his month ? It is for children to cry for the falling of their house of Cards , or the miscarriage of that painted gew-gaw , which the next shower would have defaced . Wise Christians know how to apprise good things according to their continuance , and can therefore set their hearts only upon the invisible Comforts of a better Life , as knowing that the things which are not seen , are Eternal . 

SECT . VI  

Consideration of the unsatisfying condition of all worldly things . 

But were these earthly things exempted from that fickleness , which the God of Nature hath condemned them unto , were they ( the very memory whereof perishes with their satiety ) as lasting , as they are brittle , yet what comfort could they yield for the soul to rest in ? Alas ! their efficacy is too short to reach unto a true Contentation ; yea , if the best of them were perpetuated unto us , upon the fairest conditions , that this Earth can allow , how intolerable tedious would it prove in the fruition ? Say that God were pleased to protract my life to the length of the age of the first founders of Mankind , and should ( in this state of body ) add hundred of years to the days of my pilgrimage : Woe is me , how weary should I be of myself , and of the World ? ay , that now complain of the load of seventy one years , how should I be tired out , ere I could arrive at the age of Parr ? but before I could climb up to the third Century of Johannes de Temporibus , how often should I call for death , not to take up , but to take off my burden , and with it myself ? But if any , or all these earthly blessings could be freed from those grievances , wherewith they are commonly tempered , yet how little satisfaction could the soul find in them ? What are these outward things , but very luggage , which may load our backs , but cannot lighten our hearts ? Great , and wise Solomon , that had the full command of them all , cries out , Vanity of Vanities ; and a greater Monarch than he , shuts up the Scene with , I have been all things , and am never the better : All these are of too narrow an extent , to fill the capacious soul of Man ; the desires whereof are enlarged with enjoying , so as the more it hath , the less it is satisfied , neither indeed can it be otherwise ; The Eye , and the Ear , are but the Purveyors for the Heart , if therefore the eye be not satisfied with seeing , nor the ear with hearing , how shall the heart say , It is enough ? Now , who would suffer himself to be too much disquieted with the loss of that , which may vex him , but cannot content him ? We do justly smile at the folly of that vain Lord , of whom Petrarch speaks , who when an Horse which he dear loved , was sick , laid that Steed of his , on a silken bed , with a wrought pillow under his head , and caused himself ( then afflicted with the Gout ) to be carried on his servants shoulders to visit that dear patient ; and upon his decease , mourned solemnly for him , as if it had been his Son. We have laughed at the fashion of the Girls of Holland , who having made to themselves gay and large Babies , and laid them in a curious cradle , fain them to sicken and die , and celebrate their funeral with much passion : So fond are we , if having framed to ourselves imaginary contentments here , in the World , we give way to immoderate grief in their miscarriage . 

SECT . VII . 

The danger of the love of these earthly comforts . 

Neither are these earthly comforts more defective in yielding full satisfaction to the soul , then dangerous in their over-dear fruition : For too much delight in them , robs us of more solid contentments : The World is a cheating gamester , suffering us to win at the first , that at last he may go away with all . Our very Table may be made our snare ; and those things which should have been for our wealth , may be unto us an occasion of falling : Leo the fourth Emperor of Constantinople , delighted extremely in precious stones , with these he embellishes his Crown , which being worn close to his Temples , strikes such a cold into his head , that causeth his bane : yea , how many with the too much love of these outward things , have lost , not their lives only , but their souls ? no man can be at once the Favourite of God and the World ; as that Father said truly : or as our Saviour in fuller terms , no man can serve two Masters , GOD and Mammon : Shortly , the World may be a dangerous enemy , a sure friend it cannot be . 

If therefore we shall like wise men , value things at their due prices , since we are convinced in ourselves , that all these earthly comforts are so transitory in their nature , so unsatisfying in their use , and so dangerous in their enjoying , how little reason have we to be too much affected with foregoing them ? Our blood is dear to us , as that wherein our life is , yet if we find that it is either infected , or distempered , we do willingly part with it in hope of better health : How much more , with those things , which are farther from us , and less concerning us ? 

SECT . VIII . 

Consideration of the Divine Providence ordering all events . 

The second Consideration is of that Alwise Providence which ordereth all events both in Heaven and Earth , allotting to every Creature his due proportion , so overruling all things to the best , that we could not want , if he knew it better for us to abound : This Station he hath set us in , this measure he hath shared out to us , whose will is the rule of good ; what we have therefore , cannot but be best for us . The World is a large Chessboard , every man hath his place assigned him : one is a King , another a Knight , another a Pawn , and each hath his several motion ; without this variety , there could be no game played ; A skilful Player will not stir one of these Chips , but with intention of an advantage ; neither should any of his men either stand , or move , if in any other part of that Chequer , it might be in more hope to win . 

There is no estate in this World which can be universally good for all , one man's meat may be another man's medicine , and a third man's poison ; A Turk finds health and temper in that Opium , which would put one of us into our last sleep . Should the Ploughman be set to the Gentleman's fare , this Chicken , that Partridge , or Pheasant , would ( as over-slight food ) be too soon turned over , and leave his empty stomach to quarrel for stronger provision : Beef is for his diet ; and if any sauce needs besides his hunger , Garlic : Every man hath , as a body , so a mind of his own ; what one loves is abhorred of another ; the great Housekeeper of the world knows how to fit every palate with that which either is , or should be agreeable to it , for salubrity , if not for pleasure : Lay before a Child a Knife , and a Rod , and bid him take his choice , his hand will be strait upon that edge tool , especially , if it be a little guilded , and glittering ; but the Parent knows the Rod to be more safe for him , and more beneficial : We are ill carvers for ourselves , he that made us , knows what is fit for us , either for time , or measure ; without his Providence not an hair can fall from our heads ; We would have bodily health , I cannot blame us ; what is the world to us without it ? He whose we are , knows sickness to be for the health of the soul ; whether should we in true judgement desire ? We wish to live , who can blame us ? life is sweet , but if our Maker have ordained , that nothing but Death can render us glorious , what madness is it to stick at the condition ? O our gross infidelity , if we do not believe that great Arbiter of the World , infinitely wise to know what is best for us , infinitely merciful to will what he knows best , infinitely powerful to do what he will ! And if we be thus persuaded , how can we , but in matter of good , say with blessed Mary : Behold thy Servant , be it unto me according to thy Word ; And in matter of evil , with good Eli : It is the Lord , let him do what he will ? 

SECT . IX . 

Consideration of the worse condition of others . 

IN the third place , it will be requisite for us to cast our eyes upon the worse condition of others , perhaps better deserving then ourselves ; for if we shall whine and complain of that weight , which others do run away cheerfully withal , the fault will appear to be not in the heaviness of the load , but in the weakness of the bearer : If I be discontented with a mean dwelling , another man life's merrily in a low thatched Cottage ; If I dislike my plain fare , the four captive children feed fair and fat with pulse and water : If I be plundered of my rich suits , I see a more cheerful heart under a russet Coat , then great Princes have under purple Robes : If I do gently languish upon my sick bed , I see others patient under the torments of the Colic , or Stone , or Strangury : If I be clapped up within four walls , I hear Petronius profess , he had rather be in prison with Cato , then at liberty with Caesar : I hear Paul and Silas sing like Nightingales in their cages : am I sad , because I am childless ? I hear many a parent wish himself so : am I banished from my home ? I meet with many of whom the world was not worthy , wand'ring about in Sheepskins , in Goatskins , in deserts , and in mountains , and in dens , and in caves of the earth : What am I that I should speed better than the miserablest of these patients ? What had they done , that they should far worse than I ? If I have little , others have less ; If I feel pain , some others , torture ; If their sufferings be just , my forbearances are merciful ; my provisions , to theirs , liberal : It is no ill counsel therefore , and not a little conducing to a contented want , that great persons should sometimes step aside into the homely Cottages of the poor , and see their mean stuff , course fare , hard lodgings , worthless utensils , miserable shifts ; and to compare it with their own delicate and nauseating superfluities : Our great and learned King Alfred was the better all his life after , for his hidden retiredness in a poor Neatheards Cabin , where he was sheltered , and sometimes also chidden by that homely Dame : Neither was it an ill wish of that wise man , that all great Princes might first have had some little taste , what it is to want , that so their own experience might render them more sensible of the complaints of others . 

Man , though he be absolute in himself , and stand upon his own bottom , yet is he not a little wrought upon by examples , and comparisons with others ; for in them he sees what he is , or may be , since no events are so confined to some special subjects , as that they may not be incident to other men . 

Merits are a poor plea for any man's exemption , whiles our sinful infirmities lay us all open to the rod of divine Justice : and if these dispensations be merely out of favour , why do I rather grudge at a lesser misery , then bless God for my freedom from a greater judgement ? Those therefore that suffer more than I , have cause of more humbling , and I that suffer less than they , have cause of more thankfulness ; even mitigations of punishment are new mercies , so as others torments do no other than heighten my obligations ; Let me not therefore repine to be favourably miserable . 

SECT . X.  

Consideration of the inconveniences of great estates : and first of their cares , that they expose us to envy , and then macerate us with cares . 

The fourth Consideration shall be of the inconveniences which do oftentimes attend a fullness of estate ; such , and so many as may well make us sit down content with a little ; whereof , let the first be envy : a mischief not to be avoided of the great ; This shadow follows that body inseparably ; All the curs in the street are ready to fall upon that dog that goes away with the bone ; and every man hath a Cudgel to fling at a well-loaded Tree ; whereas a mean condition is no eyesore to any beholder ; Low shrubs are not wont to be stricken with Lightning , but tall Oaks and Cedars feel their flames ; whiles David kept his father's sheep at home , he might sing sweetly to his Harp in the fields , without any disturbance : But when he once comes to the Court , and finds applause , and greatness creep upon him , now emulation , despite and malice , dog him close at the heels wheresoever he goes : Let him leave the Court , and flee into the Wilderness , there these bloodhounds follow him in hot suit ; Let him run into the Land of the Philistines , there they find him out , and chase him to Ziklag ; and if at the last , he hath climbed up to his just Throne , and there hopes to breathe him after his tedious pursuit , even there he meets with more unquietness then in his desert , and notwithstanding all his Royalty , at last cries out , Lord remember David , and all his troubles : How many have we known , whom their wealth hath betrayed , and made innocent malefactors ? who might have slept securely upon a hard bolster , and in a poor estate outlived both their Judges , and accusers . Besides , on even ground a fall may be harmless ; but he that falls from on high , cannot escape bruising : He therefore that can think the benefits of Eminence can countervail the dangers which haunt greatness , let him affect to overtop others ; for me , let me rather be safely low , then high with peril . After others envy , the next attendant upon greatness is our own cares ; how do these disquiet the Beds , and sauce the Tables of the wealth ? breaking their sleeps , galling their sides , embittering their pleasures , shortening their days : How bitterly do we find the holiest men complaining of those distractions , which have attended their earthly promotions ? Nazianzen cries out of them as no other than the bane of the soul ; and that other Gregory , whom we are wont to call the last of the best Bishops of Rome , and the first of the bad , passionately bewails this clog of his high preferment : I confess , saith he , that whiles I am outwardly advanced , I am inwardly fallen lower ; this burdensome honour depresses me , and innumerable cares disquiet me on all sides ; my mind ( grown almost stupid with those temporal cares which are ever barking in mine ears ) is forced upon earthly things ; thus he : There are indeed cares which as they may be used , may help us on towards Heaven ; such as Melancthon owns to his Camerarius ; My cares , saith he , send me to my prayers , and my prayers dispel my cares ; but those anxieties which commonly wait upon greatness , distracted the mind , and impair the body . 

It is an observation of the Jewish Doctors , that Joseph the Patriarch was of a shorter life than the rest of his brethren ; and they render this reason of it , for that his cares were as much greater , as his place was higher : It was not an unfit comparison of him , who resembled a Coronet upon the Temples , to a pail upon the head ; We have seen those , who have carried full and heavy vessels on the top of their heads , but then they have walked evenly , and erect under that load ; we never saw any that could dance under such a weight , if either they bend , or move vehemently , all their carriage is spilt : Earthly greatness is a nice thing , & requires so much chariness in the managing ; as the contentment of it cannot requite ; He is worthy of honey , that desire's to lick it off from thorns ; for my part , I am of the mind of him who professed , not to care for those favours , that compelled him to lie waking . 

Danger of distemper , both bodily and spiritual , that commonly follows great means : and torment in parting with them . 

IN the next place , I see greatness not more pale , and worn with cares , then swollen up , and sickly with excess ; Too much oil poured in , puts out the Lamp , Superfluity is guilty of a world of diseases , which the spare diet of poverty is free from ; How have we seen great men's eyes surfeited at that full Table , whereof their palate could not taste , and they have risen discontentedly glutted with the sight of that , which their stomach was uncapable to receive ; and when , not giving so much law to nature , as to put over their gluttonous meal , ( their wanton appetite charging them with a new variety of curious morsels , and lavish cups ) they find themselves overtaken with feverous distempers , the Physician must succeed the Cook ; and a second sickness must cure the first : But alas , these bodily indispositions are nothing to those spiritual evils , which are incident into secular greatness . It is a true word of S. Ambrose , seconded by common experience , that an high pitch of honour is seldom held up without sin ; And S. Jerome tells us , it was a common Proverb in his time , That a rich man either is wicked , or a wicked man's heir : Not , but that rich Abraham may have a bosom for poor Lazarus to rest in , and many great Kings have been great Saints in Heaven , and there is still room for many more ; but that commonly great temptations follow great estates , and oftentimes overtake them ; neither is it for nothing , that riches are by our blessed Saviour styled the Mammon of iniquity , & wealth is by the holy Apostle branded with deceitfulness ; such as cheat many million of their souls . 

Add unto these ( if you please ) the torment of parting with that pelf , and honour , which hath so grossly bewitched us ; such as may well verify that which Lucius long since wrote to the Bishops of France , and Spain , that one hour's mischief makes us forget the pleasure of the greatest excess . I marvel not at our English Jew , of whom our story speaks , that would rather part with his teeth , than his bags : how many have we known that have poured out their life together with their gold , as men that would not outlive their earthen god ; yea ( woe is me ) how many souls have been lost in the sin of getting , and in the quarrel of losing this thick clay , as the Prophet terms it ? But lastly , that which is yet the sorest of all the inconveniences , is the sadness of the reckoning , which must come in after these plentiful entertainments ; for there is none of all our cates here , but must be billed up ; and great Accounts must have long Audits : how hard a thing it is in this case , to have an Omnia aequè ? In the failing whereof , how is the Conscience affected ? I know not whether more tormented , or tormenting the miserable soul ; so as the great Owner is but ( as witty Bromiard compares him ) like a weary Jade , which all the day long hath been labouring under the load of a great treasure ; and at night lies down with a galled back . 

By that time therefore we have summed up all , and find here envy , cares , sicknesses both of body and soul , torment in parting with , and more torment in reckoning for , these earthly greatnesses ; we shall be convinced of sufficient reason to be well paid with their want . 

SECT . XII . 

Consideration of the benefits of Poverty . 

Let the fifth Consideration be , the benefit of Poverty ; such , and so great , as are enough to make us in love with having nothing . 

For first , what an advantage is it , to be free from those gnawing cares , which ( like Tityus his Vulture ) feed upon the Heart of the Great ? Here is a man that sleeps ( Aethiopian-like ) with his doors open ; no dangers threaten him , no fears break his rest ; he starts not out of his bed at midnight , and cries Thiefs , he feels no rack of ambitious thoughts , he frets not at the disappointment of his false hopes , he cracks not his brain with hazardous plots , he mis-doubts no undermining of emulous rivals , no traps of hollow friendship , but life's securely in his homely Cottage , quietly enjoying such provision , as nature , and honest industry furnish him withal ; for his drink , the neighbour Spring saves him the charge of his Excise ; and when his better earnings have fraught his trencher with a warm , and pleasing morsel , and his cup with a stronger liquor , how cheerfully is he affected with that happy variety ; and in the strength of it digests many of his thinner meals ? 

Meals usually sauced with an healthful hunger , wherein no uncocted Crudities oppress Nature , and cherish disease : Here are no Gouts , no Dropsies , no Hypochondriack passions , no Convulsive fits , no distempers of surfeits , but a clear , and wholesome vigour of body , and an easy putting over the light tasks of digestion , to the constant advantage of health . 

And as for outward dangers , what an happy immunity doth commonly bless the poor man ? how can he fear to fall , that lies flat upon the ground ? The great Pope , Boniface the seventh , when he saw many stately Buildings ruined with Earthquakes , is glad to raise him a little Cabin of boards in the midst of a Meadow , and there finds it safest to shelter his triple Crown . When great men hoist their Topsail , and launch forth into the deep , having that large clew which they spread , exposed to all winds , and weathers , the poor man sails close by the shore ; and when he foresees a storm to threaten him , puts in to the next Creek ; and wears out in a quiet security that Tempest , wherein he sees prouder Vessels miserably tossed , and at last , fatally wracked . 

This man is free from the peril of spiteful machinations ; no man whets his Axe to cut down a shrub , it is the large Timber of the world that hath cause to fear hewing : Neither is he less free inwardly from the galling strokes of a self-accusing Conscience ; here is no remurmuring of the heart for guilty subornations , no checks for the secret contrivances of public villainies ; no heart-breaking for the failing of bloody designs ; or late remorse for their success ; but quiet , & harmless thoughts of seasonable frugality , of honest recreation , with an uninterrupted freedom of recourse to Heaven . 

And if at any time , by either hostile , or casual means , he be berest of his little , he smiles in the face of a thief ; and is no whit astonished to see his thatch on a flame , as knowing how easy a supply will repair his loss . 

And when he shall come to his last close , his heart is not so glued to the world , that he should be loath to part ; his soul is not tied up in bags , but fly's out freely to her everlasting Rest . O the secret virtue and happiness of Poverty ; which none but the right disposed mind knows how to value ▪ It was not for nothing that so many great Saints have embraced it , rather than the rich proffers of the world ; That so many great Princes have exchanged their Thrones for quiet Cells ; Who so cannot be thankful for a little , upon these conditions , I wish he may be punished with abundance . 

SECT . XIII . 

Considering how little will suffice Nature . 

Neither will it a little avail to the furtherance of our Contentation , to consider how little will suffice Nature , and that all the rest is but matter of Opinion : It is the Apostles charge , Having food and raiment , let us be therewith content : Indeed what use is there of more , then what may nourish us within , and cover us without ? If that be wholesome , and agreeable to our bodily disposition , whether it be fine , or course , Nature passes not ; it is merely Will that is guilty of this wanton and fastidious choice ; It is fit that Civility should make difference of clothing ; and that weakness of body , or eminence of Estate should make differences of diets ; Else , why not Russet as well as Scarlet ? Beef , as Pheasant ? the Grasshopper feeds on dew , the Chameleon on air , what care they for other Viands ? Our Books tell us , that those Anachorets of old , that went aside into Wildernesses , and sustained themselves with the most spare diet , such as those deserts could afford , outlived the date of other men's lives , in whom Nature is commonly stifled with a gluttonous variety : How strong , and vigorous above their neighbour Grecians , were the Lacedæmonians held of old ? who by the Ordinance of their Lawgiver , held themselves to their black broth , which , when Dionysius would needs taste of , his Cook truly told him , that if he would relish that fare , he must exercise strongly , as they did , and wash in Eurotas : Who knows not that our Island doth not afford more able Bodies , than they that eat , and drink Oats ? And whom have we seen more healthful and active , than the children of poor men , trained up hardly in their Cottages with fare as little , as course ? 

Do I see a poor Indian husbanding one tree to all his household uses ; finding in that one Plant , Timber , Thatch , Meat , Medicine , Wine , Honey , Oil , Sauce , Drink , Utensils , Ships , Cables , Sayles ? and do I rove over all the latitude of Nature for contentment ? Our appetite is truly unreasonable , neither will know any bounds : We begin with necessaries , as Pliny justly observes , and from thence we rise to excess , punishing ourselves with our own wild desires ; whereas , if we were wise , we might find mediocrity an ease . 

Either extreme is a like deadly ; he that over-afflicts his body , kills a Subject ; he that pampers it , nourishes an Enemy . Too much abstinence turns vice , and too much ingurgitation is one of the seven , and at once destroys both Nature and Grace . The best measure of having or desiring , is not what we would , but what we ought : Neither is he rich that hath much ; but he that desire's not much : A discreet frugality is fittest to moderate both our wishes , and expenses ; which if we want , we prove dangerously prodigal in both ; if we have , we do happily improve our stock to the advantage of ourselves , and others . 

SECT . FOURTEEN . 

Considering the inconveniences , and miseries of discontentment . 

The next inducement to Contentation , shall be the serious consideration of the miserable inconveniences of the contrary disposition ; Discontentment is a mixture of anger , and of grief ; both which are wont to raise up fearful tempests in the soul ; He teareth himself in his anger , saith Bildad , concerning that mirror of patience ; And the sorrow of the world worketh death , saith the chosen Vessel : so as the Malcontent , whether he be angry or sad , mischiefs himself both ways ; There cannot be a truer word then that of wise Solomon , Anger rests in the bosom of fools ; What can be more foolish then for a man , because he thinks God hath made him miserable by crosses , to make himself more miserable by his own distempers ? If the clay had sense , what a mad thing were it for it to struggle with the Potter ? and if a man will spurn against strong Iron-pikes , what can he hope to carry away but wounds ? How witless a thing it is for a man to torment himself with the thoughts of those evils , that are past all remedy ? What wise beholder would not have smiled with pity and scorn , to have seen great Augustus ; after the defeat of some choice Troops , to knock his head against the wall , and to hear him passionately cry out ; OH Varus , restore me my lost Legions ? Who would not have been angry with that choleric Prophet to hear him so furiously contest with his Maker for a withered Gourd ? What an affliction was it to good Jacob ( more than the sterility of a beloved wife ) to hear Rachel say ; Give me children , or else I die ? yea , how ill did it sound in the mouth of the Father of the faithful ; Lord God , what wilt thou give me , seeing I go childless ? Yet thus froward and tetchy is nature in the best ; if we may not have all we would have , all that we have is nothing ; if we be not perfectly humoured , we are wilfully unthankful ; All Israel is nothing worth to Ahab , if he may not have one poor Vineyard : How must this needs irritate a munificent God , to see his bounty contemned out of a childish pettishnesse ? How can he forbear to take away from us his slighted mercies ? How can he hold his hand from plaguing so ingrateful disrespects of his favours ? 

As for that other passion of grief , what woeful work doth it make in ungoverned minds ? How many have we known , that out of thought for unrecoverable losses , have lost themselves ? how many have run from their wits ? how many from their lives ? Yea , how many , that out of an impatience to stay the leisure of vengeance , have made their own hands , their hasty executioners ? And even where this extremity prevails not ; look about , and ye shall see men that are not able matches to their passions , woefully macerating themselves with their own thoughts , wearing out their tedious days upon the rack of their own hearts ; and making good that observation of the wise man ; By the sorrow of the heart , the spirit is broken . 

Now all these mischiefs might have been happily prevented by a meek yeeldance of ourselves to the hands of an alwise , and an all-mercifull God , and by an humble composure of our affections to a quiet suffering ; It is the power of patience to calm the heart in the most blustering trials ; and when the vessel is most tossed , yet to secure the freight : This , if it do not abate of our burden , yet it adds to our strength , and wins the Father of Mercies both to pity , and retribution . 

Whereas murmuring Israelites can never be free from judgements ; and it is a dreadful word that God speaketh of that chosen Nation ; Mine heritage is unto me as a Lion in the forest ; it , still , yelleth against me , therefore have I hated it ; A Child that struggles under the rod , justly doubles his stripes , and an unruly Malefactor draws on , besides death , tortures . 

SECT . xv.  

Consid . the vicissitudes of favours and afflictions . 

Furthermore , it is a main help towards Contentation , to consider the gracious vicissitudes of Gods dealing with us : how he intermixes favours with his crosses ; tempering our much honey , with some little gall ; the best of us are but shrewd children , yet he chides us not always , saith the Psalmist : he smiles often , for one frown ; and why should we not take one with another ? It was the answer wherewith that admirable pattern of patience stopped the querulous mouth of his tempting wife ; What ? shall we receive good at the hand of God , and shall we not receive evil ? 

It was a memorable example which came lately to my knowledge of a worthy Christian , who had lived to his middle age in much health , and prosperity , and was now for his two last years miserably afflicted with the Strangury ; who in the midst of his torments could say , O my Lord God , how gracious hast thou been unto me ! thou hast given me eight and forty years of health , and now but two years of pain ; thou mightest have caused me to lie in this torture all the days of my life ; and now thou hast carried me comfortably through the rest , and hast mercifully taken up with this last parcel of my torment ; blessed be thy Name for thy mercy in forbearing me , and for thy justice in afflicting me . To be thankful for present blessings is but ordinary , but to be so thankful for mercies past , that the memory of them should be able to put over the sense of present miseries , is an high improvement of grace . 

The very Heathens by the light of Nature and their own experience , could observe this interchange of God's proceedings ; and made some kind of use of them accordingly : Camillus , after he had upon ten year's siege , taken the rich City Veios , prayed that some mishap might befall himself and Rome to temper so great an happiness ; when one would have thought the prize would not countervail the labour , and the loss of time and blood ; And Alexander the great , when report was made to him of many notable Victories , achieved by his Armies , could say ; OH Jupiter , mix some misfortune with these happy news : Lo , these men could tell that it is neither fit , nor safe for great blessings to walk alone , but that they must be attended with their pages , afflictions ; why should not we Christians expect them with patience , and thanks ? 

They say , Thunder and Lightning hurts not , if it be mixed with Rain . In those hot Countries , which lie under the sealding Zone , when the first showers fall after a long drought , it is held dangerous to walk suddenly abroad ; for that the earth so moistened sends up unwholesome steams ; but in those parts where the Rain and Sunshine are usually interchanged , it is most pleasant to take the air of the earth newly refreshed with kindly showers ; Neither is it otherwise in the course of our lives ; this medley of good and evil conduces not a little to the health of our souls : One of them must serve to temper the other ; and both of them to keep the heart in order . 

Were our afflictions long , and our comforts rare and short , we had yet reason to be thankful ; the least is more than God owes us : but now , when if heaviness endure for a night , joy cometh in the morning , and dwells with us , so , that some fits of sorrow are recompensed with many months of joy ; how should our hearts overflow with thankfulness , and easily digest small grievances , out of the comfortable sense of larger blessings ? 

But if we shall cast up our eyes to Heaven , and there behold the glorious remuneration of our sufferings , how shall we contemn the worst that earth can do unto us ? There , there is glory enough to make us a thousand times more than amends for all that we are capable to endure ; Yea , if this Earth were Hell , and Men Devils , they could not inflict upon us those torments , which might hold any equality with the glory which shall be revealed ; and even of the worst of them we must say with the blessed Apostle ; Our light affliction which is but for a moment , worketh for us a far more exceeding , eternal weight of glory : When the blessed Proto-martyr Stephen had stead fastly fixed his eyes on Heaven , and ( that Curtain being drawn ) had seen the Heavens opened , and therein the glory of God , and Jesus standing on the right hand of God ; do we think he cared aught for the sparkling eyes , and gnashed teeth , and kill stones of the enraged multitude ? O poor impotent Jews , how far was that divine soul above the reach of your malice ? how did he triumph over your cruelty ? how did he by his happy evolation make all those stones precious ? 

SECT . XVI . 

Consid . the examples of Contentation , both without , and within the Church of God.  

Lastly , it cannot but be a powerful motive unto Contentation , that we lay before us the notable examples of men , whether worse , or better than ourselves , that have been eminent in the practice of this virtue ; men , that out of the mere strength of morality , have run away with loss●ss , and poverty as a light burden ; that out of their free choice have fallen upon those condition , which we are ready to f●ar , and shrink from : What a shame is it for Christians to be outstripped herein by very Pagans' ? If we look upon the ancient Philosophers ; their low valuation of these outward things , and their willing abdication of those comforts , wherewith others were too much affected , made them admired of the multitude ; Here do Dsee a Cynic housed in his Tub , scorning all wealth and state ; and making still even with his virtuals , and the day ; who , when he was invited to supper to one of Alexander's great Lords , could say ; I had rather lick salt at Athens , than feast with Craterus : Here I meet with him , whom their Oracle styled the wisest of men , walking barefoot in a patched threadbare cloak , contemning honours , and all earthly things ; and when that garment would hang no longer on his back , I can hear him say , I would have bought a Cloak , if I had had money ; after which word , saith Soneca , whosoever offered to give , came too late ; Apollododonus , amongst the rest , sends him a rich mantle towards his end , and is resused ; With what patience doth this man bear the loud scold of his Xantippe ? making no other of them , than the creaking of a Cartwheel : with what brave resolution doth he repel the proffers of Archelaus , telling him how cheap the Market afforded meal at Athens , and the fountains water ? Here I meet with a Zeno , formerly rich in his traffic for purple , now impoverished by an ill Sea , and can hear him say , I sailed best when I Shipwrecked : Here I see an Aristippus drowning his gold in the sea , that it might not drown him : Here I can hear a Democritus , or Cleanthes , when he was asked how a man should be rich , answer ; If he be poor in desires . 

What should I speak of those Indian Sophists , that took their name from their nakedness ; whom we hear to say ; The sky is our house , and the Earth our bed ; we care not for gold , we contemn death : One of them can tell Onesicritus ; As the Mother is to the Child , so is the Earth to me ; The Mother gives Milk to her Infant ; so doth the Earth yield all necessaries to me ; And when gold was offered to him , by that great Conqueror ; Persuade ( said he ) if thou canst , these birds to take thy silver and gold , that they may sing the sweeter ; and if thou canst not do that , wouldst thou have me worse than them ? Adding moreover in a strong discourse ; Natural hunger , when we have taken food , ceaseth ; and if the mind of man did also naturally desire gold , so soon as he hath received that which he wished , the desire and appetite of it would presently cease ; but so far is it from this society , that the more it hath , the more it doth , without any intermission , long for more ; because this desire proceeds not from any motion of nature , but only out of the wantonness of man's own will , to which no bounds can be set . Blush , OH Christian Soul , ( whosoever thou art , that readest these lines ) to hear such words falling from Heathen lips , when thou seest those that profess godliness , dote upon these worthless metals , and transported with the affectation and cares of those earthly provisions . 

If from these patterns of men that should be below ourselves , we look up to the more noble precedents of Prophets and Apostles ; Lo , there we find Elijah fed by Ravens ; Elisha boarding with his poor Sareptan Hostess ; An hundred Prophets fed by fifty in a Cave , with bread and water ; The sons of the Prophets for the enlarging of their over-strait lodgings , hard at work ; they are their own Carpenters , but their tools are borrowed ; There we shall find a few barley loaves , and little fishes , the household provision of our Saviour's train : Yea , there we find the most glorious Apostle , the great Doctor of the Gentiles , employing his hands to feed his belly ; busily stiching of skins for his Tent-work ; Yea , what do we look at any or all of these , when we see the Son of God , the God of all the world , in the form of a servant ? Not a Cratch to cradle him in , not a Grave to bury him in , was his own ; and he that could command Heaven and Earth , can say , The Foxes have holes , the Birds have nests , but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head . 

Who now can complain of want , when he hears his Lord , and Saviour but thus provided for ? He could have brought down with him a celestial house , and have pitched it here below , too glorious for earthen eyes to have looked upon : He could have commanded all the precious things that lie shrouded in the bowels of the Earth , to have made up a Majestical Palace for him , to the dazzling of the eyes of all beholders ; He could have taken up the stateliest Court that any earthly Monarch possessed , for his peculiar habitation : But his greatness was Spiritual and Heavenly ; and he that owned all would have nothing , that he might sanctify want unto us ; and that he might teach us by his blessed example , to sit down contented with any thing , with nothing . 

By that time therefore we have laid all these things together , and have seriously considered of the mean valuation of all these earthly things , for their transitorinesse , unsatisfaction , danger ; of the overruling Providence of the Almighty , who most wisely , justly , mercifully disposeth of us and all events that befall us ; of the worse condition of many thousand others ; of the great inconveniences that attend great and full estates ; of the secret benefits of poverty ; of the smallness of that pittance that may suffice Nature ; of the miseries that wait upon discontentment ; of the merciful vicissitudes of favours , wherewith God pleaseth to interchange our sufferings ; and lastly , the great examples of those , as well without , as within the bosom of the Church , that have gone before us , and led us the way to Contentation : our judgement cannot choose but be sufficiently convinced , that there is abundant reason to win our hearts to a quiet and contented entertainment of want , and all other outward afflictions . 

SECT . XVII . 

Of Contentment in death itself . 

But all these intervenient miseries are sleight in comparison of the last , and utmost of evils , Death ; Many a one grapples cheerfully with these trivial afflictions , who yet looks pale , and trembles at the King of fear : His very Name hath terror in it , but his looks more : The courageous Champion of Christ , the blessed Apostle ; and with him , every faithful soul , makes his challenge universal , to whatsoever estate he is in ; to the estate of Death , therefore , no less than the afflictive incidence of life : When therefore this ghastly Giant shall stalk forth , and bid defiance to the whole Host of Israel ; and when the timorous unbelievers shall run away at the sight of him , and endeavour to hide their heads from his presence ; the good soul armed , not with the unmeet and cumbersome harmnesse of flesh and blood , but with the sure ( though invisible ) armour of God , dares come forth to meet him , and in the name of the Lord of Hosts , both bids him battle and foils him in the Combat ; and now having laid him on the ground , can triumphingly say , OH Death , where is thy sting ? OH Grave , where is thy Victory ? Five smooth pebbles there are , which if we carry in our scrip , we shall be able to quell , not only the power of death , but the terror too . 

Whereof the first is a sure apprehension of both the unavoidable necessary , and certain benefit of death : A necessity , grounded upon the just and eternal Decree of Heaven : It is appointed to all men once to die ; and what a madness were it for a man to think of an exemption from the common condition of mankind ? Mortality is , as it were , essential to our Nature ; neither could we have had our souls but upon the terms of a re-delivery , when they shall be called for ; If the holiest Saints , or the greatest Monarches sped otherwise , we might have some colour of repining : Now , grieve if thou wilt , that thou art a man ; grieve not , that being man thou must die . 

Neither is the benefit inferior to the necessity ; Lo here the remedy of all our cares , the physic for all our maladies , the rescue from all our fears and dangers , earnestly sued for by the painful , dearly welcome to the distressed : Yea , lo here the Cherub that keeps the gate of Paradise ; there is no entrance but under his hand ; In vain do we hope to pass to the glory of Heaven , any other way then through the gates of Death . 

The second is the Conscience of a well-led life ; Guiltiness will make any man fowardly , unable to look danger in the face , much more Death ; whereas the innocent is bold as a Lion : What a difference therefore there is betwixt a Martyr , and a Malefactor ? this latter knows he hath done ill , and therefore if he can take his death but patiently , it is well ; the former knows he hath done well , and therefore takes his death not patiently only , but cheerfully . 

But because no mortal man can have so innocently led his life , but that he shall have passed many offences against his most holy , and righteous God ; here must be , Thirdly , a final peace firmly made betwixt God and the soul . Two powerful agents must mediate in it ; a lively Faith , and a serious Repentance ; for those sins can never appear against us , that are washed off with our tears ; and being justified by faith we have peace with God , through our Lord Jesus Christ . Now , if we have made the Judge our friend , what can the Sergeant do ? 

The fourth is the power , and efficacy of Christ's death applied to the soul : wherefore died he , but that we might live ? wherefore would he , who is the Lord of life , die , but to sanctify , season , and sweeten death to us ? Who would go any other way then his Saviour went before him ? who can fear that enemy , whom his Redeemer hath conquered for him ? who can run away from that Serpent , whose sting is pulled out ? O Death , my Saviour hath been thy death , and therefore thou canst not be mine . 

The fifth is , the comfortable expectation , and assurance of a certain resurrection , and an immediate glory : I do but lay me down to my rest , I shall sleep quietly , and rise gloriously : My soul , in the mean time , no sooner leaves my body , than it enjoys God ; It did lately through my bodily eyes see my sad friends , that bade me farewell with their tears ; now it hath the blisse-making vision of God : I am no sooner launched forth , than I am at the haven , where I would be ; Here is that which were able to make amends for a thousand deaths ; a glory , infinite , eternal , incomprehensible . 

This spiritual Ammunition shall sufficiently furnish the soul for her encounter with her last enemy ; so as she shall not only endure , but long for this Combat ; and say with the chosen Vessel , I desire to depart , and to be with Christ . 

SECT . XVIII . 

The miseries and inconveniences of the continued conjunction of the soul and body . 

Now for that long conversation causeth entireness , and the parting of old friends and partners ( such the soul and body are ) cannot but be grievous , although there were no actual pain in the dissolution : It will be requisite for us , seriously to consider the state of this conjunction ; and to inquire what good offices the one of them doth to the other , in their continued union , for which they should be so loath to part : And here we shall find that those two , however united to make up one person , yet ( as it falls out in cross matches ) they are in continual domestic jars one with the other , and entertain a secret familiar kind of hostility betwixt themselves ; For the flesh lusteth against the spirit , and the spirit against the flesh , and these are contrary the one to the other . One says well , that if the body should implead the soul , it might bring many foul impeachments against it ; and sue it for many great injuries done to that earthly part : And the soul again hath no fewer quarrels against the body : betwixt them both there are many brawls , no agreement . Our Schools have reckoned up therefore eight main incommodities , which the soul hath cause to complain of in her conjunction with the body : whereof the first is the defilement of Original sin , wherewith the soul is not tainted as it proceeds , alone , from the pure hands of its Creator , but as it makes up a part of a son of Adam , who brought this guilt upon humano nature ; so as now this composition , which we call man , is corrupt : Who can bring a clean thing out of that which is unclean ? saith Job . 

The second is a proneness to sin , which , but by the meeting of these partners , had never been ; the soul , if single , would have been innocent ; thus matched , what evil is it not apt to entertain ? An ill consort is enough to poison the best disposition . 

The difficulty of doing well is the third ; for how averse are we by this conjunction from any thing that is good ? This clog hinders us from walking roundly in the ways of God : The good that I would do , I do not , saith the chosen Vessel . 

The fourth is the dulness of our understanding , and the dimness of our mental eyes , especially in the things pertaining unto God ; which now we are forced to behold through the vail of flesh : if therefore we mis-know , the fault is in the mean , through which we do imperfectly discover them . 

The fifth is a perpetual impugnation , and self-conflict , either part labouring to oppose and vanquish the other . This field is fought in every man's bosom , without any possibility of peace , or truce , till the last moment of dissolution . 

The sixth is the racking solicitude of cares , which continually distracted the soul , not suffering it to rest at ease , whiles it carries this flesh about it . 

The seventh is the multiplicity of passions which daily bluster within us , and raise up continual tempests in our lives , disquieting our peace , & threatening our ruin . 

The eight is the retardation of our glory ; for flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God ; we must lay down our load if we would enter into Heaven : The seed cannot fructify unless it die . I cannot blame nature if it could wish not to be unclothed , but to be clothed upon : but so hath the eternal wisdom ordered , that we should first lay down , ere we can take up ; and be devested of earth , ere we can partake of Heaven . 

Now then , sith so many and great discommodities do so avoidable accompany this match of soul and body , and all of them cease instantly in the act of their dissolution ; what reason have we to be too deeply affected with their parting ? Yea , how should we rather rejoice that the hour is come , wherein we shall be quit both of the guilt and temptations of sin ; wherein the clog shall be taken away from our heels , and the vail from our eyes ; wherein no intestine wars shall threaten us , no cares shall disquiet us , no passions shall torment us ; and lastly , wherein we may take the free possession of that glory , which we have hitherto looked at only afar off from the top of our Pisgah ? 

SECT . XIX . 

Holy dispositions for Contentment : and first , Humility . 

Hitherto , we have dwelled in those powerful considerations which may work us to a quiet contentment with whatsoever adverse estate , whether of life or death ; after which , we address ourselves to those meet dispositions , which shall render us fully capable of this blessed Contentation ; and shall make all these considerations effectual to that happy purpose . Whereof the first is true Humility , under-valuing ourselves , & setting an high rate upon every mercy that we receive ; For , if a man have attained unto this , that he thinks every thing too good for him , and self less than the least blessing , and worthy of the heaviest judgement ; he cannot but sit down thankful for small favours , and meekly content with mean afflictions : As contrarily , the proud man stands upon points with his Maker , makes God his debtor ; looks disdainfully at small blessings ; as if he said , What , no more ? and looks angrily at the least crosses ; as if he said , Why thus much ? The father of the faithful hath practically taught us this Lesson of humility , who comes to God with dust and ashes in his mouth : And the Jewish Doctors tell us truly , that in every Disciple of Abraham , there must be three things : a good eye , a meek spirit , and an humble soul ; His Grandchild Jacob , the Father of every true Israelite , had well taken it out ; whiles he can say to his God , I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies , and of all the truth which thou hast showed unto thy servant : And indeed , in whomsoever it be , the best measure of Grace is Humility ; for the more Grace still , the greater Humility ; and no Humility , no Grace : Solomon observed of old ; and Saint James took it from him , That God resisteth the proud , and giveth Grace to the humble ; so as he that is not humble , is not so much as capable of Grace ; and he that is truly humble , is a fit subject for all Graces , and amongst the rest , for the Grace of Contentation : Give me a man therefore , that is vile in his own eyes , that is sensible of his own wretchedness , that knows what it is to sin , and what belongs to that sin whereof he is guilty ; this man shall think it a mercy that he is any where out of Hell ; shall accounted all the evils that he is free from , so many new favours ; shall reckon easy corrections amongst his blessings ; and shall esteem any blessing infinitely obliging . Whereas contrarily , the proud beggar is ready to throw God's alms at his head , and swells at every lash , that he receives from the divine hand . Not without great cause , therefore , doth the royal Preacher oppose the patient in spirit , to the proud in spirit ; for the proud man can no more be patient , than the patient can be discontent with whatsoever hand of his God. Every toy puts the proud man beside his patience ; If but a fly be found in Pharaohs cup , he is strait in rage , ( as the Jewish tradition lays the quarrel ) and sends his Butler into durance : And if the Emperor do but mistake the Stirrup of our Countryman Pope Adrian , he shall dance attendance for his Crown : If a Mardochee do but fail of a courtesy to Haman , all Jews must bleed to death ; And how unquiet are our vain Dames , if this curl be not set right , or or that pin misplaced ? But the meek spirit is incurious ; and so thoroughly subacted , that he takes his load from God ( as the Camel from his Master ) upon his knees : And for men , if they compel him to go one mile , he goes twain ; if they smite him on the right cheek , he turns the other ; if they sue away his Coat , he parts with his Cloak also . 

Heraclius the Emperor , when he was about to pass through the golden gate , and to ride in royal state through the streets of Jerusalem , being put in mind by Zacharias the Bishop there , of the humble and dejected fashion wherein his Saviour walked through those streets , towards his passion , strips off his rich robes , lays aside his Crown , & with bare head & bare feet , submissly paces the same way that his Redeemer had carried his Cross towards his Golgotha : Every true Christian is ready to tread in the deep steps of his Saviour , as well knowing that if he should descend to the Gates of Death , of the Grave , of Hell , he cannot be so humbled , as the Son of God was for him : And indeed , this , and this alone , is the true way to glory ; He that is Truth itself , hath told us , that he who humbles himself shall be exalted ; And wise Solomon , Before honour is humility . The Fuller treads upon that cloth which he means to whiten : And he that would see the stars by day , must not climb up into some high Mountain , but must descend to the lower Cells of the earth . Shortly , whosoever would raise up a firm building of Contentation , must be sure to lay the foundation in Humility . 

SECT . xx.  

Of a faithful selfe-resignation . 

Secondly , to make up a true contentment with the most adverse estate , there is required a faithful selfe-resignation into the hands of that God , whose we are ; who , as he hath more right in us , than ourselves , so he best knows what to do with us : How graciously hath his mercy invited us to our own ease ? Be careful ( saith he ) for nothing ; but in every thing by prayer , and supplication , with thanksgiving , let your requests be made known unto God : we are naturally apt in our necessities to have recourse to greater powers than our own ; even where we have no engagement of their help ; how much more should we cast ourselves upon the Almighty , when he not only allows , but solicits our reliance upon him ? It was a question that might have befitted the mouth of the best Christian , which fell from Socrates , Since God himself is careful for thee , why art thou solicitous for thyself ? If evils were let loose upon us , so as it were possible for us to suffer any thing that God were not aware of , we might have just cause to sink under adversities ; but now , that we know every dram of our affliction is weighed out to us , by that alwise , and all-mercifull Providence ; O our infidelity , if we do make scruple of taking in the most bitter dose ! Here then is the right use of that main duty of Christianity , to live by faith : Brutus creatures live by sense , mere men by reason , Christians by faith . Now , faith is the substance of things hoped for ; the evidence of things not seen ; In our extremities , we hope for God's gracious deliverance , faith gives a subsistence to that deliverance , before it be : The mercies that God hath reserved for us , do not yet show themselves ; faith is the evidence of them , though yet unseen : It was the Motto of the learned and godly Divine Master Perkins , Fidei vita vera vita ; The true life , is the life of faith ; a word which that worthy servant of God did both write and live ; neither indeed is any other life truly vital , but this ; for hereby we enjoy God in all whatsoever occurrences : Are we abridged of means ? we feed upon the cordial Promises of our God : Do we sigh and groan under varieties of grievous persecutions ? out of the worst of them we can pick out comforts ; whiles we can hear our Saviour say , Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake ; for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven : Are we deserted , and abandoned of friends ? we see him by us , who hath said , I will never leave thee , nor forsake thee : Do we droop under spiritual desertions ? we hear the God of truth say ; For a small moment have I forsaken thee , but with great mercy will I gather thee ; In a little wrath I hid my face from thee , but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee , saith the Lord thy Redeemer : Are we driven from home ? If we take the wings of the morning , and remain in the uttermost parts of the Sea ; even there also shall thine hand lead us , and thy right hand shall hold us : Are we dungeoned up from the sight of the Sun ? Peradventure the darkness shall cover us ; but then shall our night be turned into day ; yea , the darkness is no darkness with thee : Are we cast down upon the bed of sickness ? He that is our God , is the God of salvation ; and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death . 

It cannot be spoken how injurious those men are to themselves , that will be managing their own cares , and plotting the prevention of their fears ; and projecting their own , both indemnity , and advantages ; for , as they lay an unnecessary load upon their own shoulders , so they draw upon themselves the miseries of an unremediable disappointment ; Alas , how can their weakness make good those events which they vainly promise to themselves , or avert those judgements they would escape , or uphold them in those evils they must undergo ? Whereas if we put all this upon a gracious God , he contrives it with ease ; looking for nothing from us , but our trust , and thankfulness . 

SECT . XXI . 

Of true inward riches . 

IN the third place , it will be most requisite to furnish the foul with true inward riches ; I mean not of mere moral virtues , ( which yet are truly precious when they are found in a good heart ) but of a wealth as much above them , as gold is above dross ; Yea , as the thing which is most precious , is above nothing : And this shall be done , if we bring Christ home to the soul ; if we can possess ourselves of him , who is God al-sufficient ; For , such infinite contentment there is in the Son of God made ours , that whosoever hath tasted of the sweetness of this comfort , is indifferent to all earthly things ; and insensible of those extreme differences of events , wherewith others are perplexed ; How can he be dejected with the want of any thing , who is possessed of him that possesseth all things ? How can he be over-affected with trivial profits , or pleasures , who is taken up with the God of all comfort ? Is Christ mine therefore ? How can I fail of all contentment ? How can he complain to want light , that dwells in the midst of the Sun ? How can he complain of thirst , out of whose belly flow rivers of living water ? What can I wish , that my Christ is not to me ? Would I have meat and drink ? My flesh is meat indeed ; and my blood is drink indeed : Would I have clothing ? But , put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ , saith the Apostle : Would I have medicine ? He is the Tree of life , the leaves whereof are for the healing of the Nations : Would I have safety and protection ? He truly is my strength , and my salvation ; he is my defence , so as I shall not fall ; In God is my health and my glory ; the Rock of my might , and in God is my trust : Would I have direction ? I am the way , and the truth : Would I have life ? Christ is to me to live ; I am the resurrection and the life : Would I have all spiritual things ? We are in Christ Jesus , who of God is made unto us Wisdom , and Righteousness , and Sanctification , and Redemption . 

O the happy condition of the man that is in Christ , and hath Christ in him ! Shall I accounted him rich that hath store of Oxen , and Sheep , and Horses , and Camels ; that hath heaps of metals , and some spots of ground ; and shall I not accounted him infinitely more rich , that owns and enjoys him whose the earth is , and the fullness of it ; whose Heaven is , and the glory of it ? Shall I justly accounted that man great , whom the King will honour , and place near to himself ; and shall I not esteem that man more honourable , whom the King of Heaven is pleased to admit unto such partnership of glory , as to profess ; To him that overcommeth will I grant to sit with me in my Throne ; even as I also overcame , and am set down with my Father in his Throne ? 

It is a true word of Saint Augustine , that every soul is either Christ's Spouse , or the Devil's Harlot : Now if we be matched to Christ , the Lord of glory ; what a blessed union is here ? What can he withhold from us , that hath given us himself ? I could envy the devotion of that man ( though otherwise misplaced ) whom Saint Bernard heard to spend the night in no other words , then , Deus meus & omnia ; My God , and all things ; Certainly , he who hath that God , hath more than all things ; he that wants him ( what ever else he seems to possess ) hath less than nothing . 

SECT . XXII . 

Holy resolutions : 1.  That our present estate is best for us . 

After these serious considerations , and meet dispositions , shall in the last follow certain firm resolutions for the full actuating our contentment : And first , we must resolve ( out of the unfailable grounds of divine Providence , formerly spoken of ) that the present estate wherein we are , is certainly the best for us ; and therefore we must herein absolutely captivated our understanding , and will , to that of the Highest : How unmeet Judges are flesh and blood of the best fitness of a condition for us ? As some palates ( which are none of the wholsomest ) like nothing but sweet meats , so our nature would be fed up with the only delicacies of pleasures and prosperity ; according to the false principle of Aristippus , that he only is happy , which is delighted ; but the alwise God knows another diet more fit for our health , and therefore graciously tempers our dishes with the tart sauces of afiliction : The mother of the two sons of Zebedee , and her ambitious children , are all for the chief P●●rage in the Temporal kingdom of Christ ; but he calls them to a bitter Cup , and a bloody baptism rather ; and this was a far greater honour than that they sued for : There is no earthly estate absolutely good for all persons ; like as no gale can serve for all passengers . In Africa , they say , the North wind brings Clouds , and the South wind clears up : That plant which was starved in one soil , in another prospers ; Yea , that which in some climate is poison , proves wholesome in another : Some one man , if he had another's blessings , would run wild ; and if he had some other man's crosses , would be desperate ; The infinite wisdom of the great Governor of the world allots every one his due proportion ; The Fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument ; neither is a Cartwheele turned about upon the Cummin ; but the Fitches are beaten out with a staff , and the Cummin with a rod , saith esay : And no otherwise in matter of prosperity ; Josephs Coat may be particoloured , and Benjamins' mess may be five times so much as any of his brethren . It is marvel if they who did so much envy Joseph for his dream of superiority , did not also envy Benjamin for so large a service , and so rich gifts at his parting ; this it seems gave occasion for the good Patriarches fear , when he charged them , See that you fall not out by the way : But , there had been no reason for so impotent an envy ; whiles the gift is free , and each speeds above his desert , who can have cause to repine ? It is enough that Joseph knew a just reason of so unequal a distribution , though it were hidden from themselves . The elder brother may grudge the fat Calf , and the prime Robe to the returned Unthrift , but the Father knows reason to make that difference . God is infinitely just and infinitely merciful , in dispensing both his favours and punishment . In both kinds every man hath that which is fittest for him , because it is that which Gods will hath designed to him ; and that will is the most absolute rule of justice : now if we can so frame our will to his , as to think so too , how can we be other then contented ? Do we suffer ? There is more intended to us then our smart : It was a good speech of Seneca , though an Heathen , ( what pity it is that he was so ? ) I give thanks to my infirmity , which forces me not to be able to do that , which I ought not will to do ; If we loose without , so as we gain within ; if in the perishing of the outward man the inward man be renewed , we have no cause to complain , much to rejoice : Do I live in a mean estate ? If it were better , I should be worse ; more proud , more careless ; and what a woeful improvement were this ? What a strange creature would man be , if he were what he would wish himself ? Surely , he would be wickedly pleasant , carelessly profane , vainly proud , proudly oppressive , dissolutely wanton , impetuously self-willed ; and shortly , his own Idol , and his own Idolater : His Maker knows how to frame him better ; it is our ignorance and unthankfulness , if we submit not to his good pleasure : To conclude , we pray every day , Thy will be done ; What hypocrites are we , if we pray one thing , and act another ? If we murmur at what we wish ? All is well between Heaven and us , if we can think our selus happy to be what God will have us . 

SECT . XXIII . 

2.  Resolution , to abate of our desires . 

Secondly , we must resolve to abate of our desires ; for it is the illimitednesse of our ambitious , and covetous thoughts , that is guilty of our unquietness ; Every man would be , and have more than he is ; and is therefore sick of what he is not . It was a true word of Democritus , If we desire not much , we shall think a little much : and it is suitable to one of the rules of S. Augustine ; it is better to need less , then to have more : Paul , the richest poor man , ( as Ambrose well ) could say , As having all things , yet possessing nothing : It is not for a Christian to be of the Dragon's temper , which they say is so ever thirsty , that no water will quench his drought ; and therefore never hath his mouth shut ; nor with the daughters of the Horseleech to cry always , Give , give ; He must confine his desires ; and that , to no overlarge compass ; and must say to them , as God doth to the Sea , Hitherto shalt thou come , and no further ; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed . 

What a cumber it is for a man to have too much ? to be in the case of Surena the Parthian Lord , that could never remove his family with less than a thousand Camels ? What is this , but Tortoise-like to be clogged with a weighty shell , which we cannot drag after us , but with pain ? Or like the Ostrich , to be so held down with an heavy body that we can have no use of our wings ? Whereas the nimble Lark rises and mounts with ease , and sings cheerfully in her flight . How many have we known , that have found too much flesh a burden ? and when they have found their blood too rank , have been glad to pay for the letting it out ? It was the word of that old and famous Lord Keeper Bacon , the eminent Head of a noble and witty family , Mediocria firma : There is neither safety , nor true pleasure in excess : it was a wise and just answer of Zeno the Philosopher , who reproving the superstuity of a feast , and hearing by way of defence , that the Maker of it was a rich man , and might well spare it , said ; If thy Cook shall oversalt thy broth , and when he is chid for it , shall say , I have store enough of salt lying by me : wouldst thou take this for a fair answer ? 

My Son , eat thou honey , saith Solomon ; because it is good : but , to be sure , for the preveating all immoderation , he adds soon after ; Hast thou found honey ? eat so much as is sufficient for thee , lest thou be filled therewith : if our appetite carry us too far , we may easily surfeit ; this ( which is the emblem of pleasure ) must be tasted ( as Dionysius the Sophist said of old ) on the tip of the finger ; not be supped up in the hollow of the hand : It is with our desires as it is with weak stomaches , the quantity offends , even where the food is not unwholesome ; and if heed be not taken , one bit draws on another , till nature be overlaid ; Both pleasures and profits ( if way be given to them ) have too much power to debauch the mind , and to work it to a kind of insatiablenesse ; there is a thirst that is caused with drunkenness ; and the wanton appetite , like as they said of Messalina , may be wearied , but cannot be satisfied ; It is good therefore to give austere repulses to the first overtures of inordinate desires , and to give strong denials to the first unruly motions of our hearts ; For , S. Chrysostome well ; pleasure is like a Dog , which being coyed , and stroked , follows us at the heels , but if rated , and beaten off , is driven away from us with ease . 

It is for the Christian heart to be taken up with other desires , such as wherein there can be no danger of immoderatenesse : These are the holy longings after grace and goodness ; This only covetousness , this ambition is pleasing to God , and infinitely beneficial to the soul . Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness , for they shall be filled : Spiritual blessings are the true riches whereof we can never have enough . S. Ambrose said truly , no man is indeed wealth , that cannot carry away what he hath with him : What is left behind , is not ours , but other men's : Contemn thou whiles thou art alive , that which thou canst not enjoy when thou art dead . 

As for this earthly trash , and the vain delights of the flesh , which we have so fond doted on ; we cannot carry them indeed away with us , but the sting of the guilty mis-enjoying of them will be sure to stick by us ; and , to our sorrow , attend us both in Death and Judgement : In sum therefore , if we would be truly contented , and happy , our hearts can never be enough enlarged in our desires of spiritual and heavenly things , never too much contracted in our desires of earthly . 

SECT . XXIV . 

3.  Resolution , to enure ourselves to digest smaller discontentments . 

Our third resolution must be to enure ourselves to digest smaller discontentments ; and by the exercise thereof , to enable ourselves for greater : as those that drink medicinal waters , begin first with smaller quantities , and by degrees arise , at last , to the highest of their prescribed measure ; or as the wise Lacedæmonians , by early scourge of their boys , enured them in their riper years to more painful sufferings : A strong Milo takes up his Calf at first , and by continual practice is now able to carry it when it is grown a Bull.  

Such is our self-love , that we affect ever to be served of the best ; and that we are apt to take great exceptions at small failing : We would walk always in smooth , and even paths , and would have no hindrances in our passage ; but there is no remedy , we must meet with rubs ; and perhaps cross shins , and take falls too in our way : Every one is willing and desirous to enjoy ( as they say the city of Rhodes doth ) a perpetual Sunshine ; but we cannot ( if we be wise ) but know , that we must meet with change of weather ; with rainy days , and sometimes storms and tempests ; it must be our wisdom to make provision accordingly : and some while to abide a whetting ; that , if need be , we may endure a drenching also . It was the policy of Jacob , when he was to meet with his brother Esau ( whom he feared an enemy , but found a friend ) to send the droves first , than his handmaids , and their children ; then Leah , with her children , and at last came Joseph and Rachel , as one that would adventure the less dear in the first place , and ( if it must be ) to prepare himself for his dearest loss . S. Paul's companions in his perilous Sea , first lighten the Ship of less necessaries , than they cast out the tackling , than the wheat , & in the last place themselves . It is the use that wise Socrates made of the sharp tongues of his cross and unquiet wives , to prepare his patience for public sufferings . Surely , he that cannot endure a frown , will hardly take a blow ; and he that doubles under a light cross , will sink under a heavier ; and contrarily that good Martyr prepares his whole body for the Faggot , with burning his hand in the Candle . I remember Seneca in one of his Epistles rejoices much to tell with what patient temper he took it , that coming unexpectedly to his Country house , he found all things so discomposed , that no provision was ready for him ; finding more contentment in his own quiet apprehension of these wants , then trouble in that unreadines : And thus should we be affected upon all occasions ; Those that promised me help , have disappointed me : that friend on whom I relied , hath failed my trust : the sum that I expected , comes not in at the day : my servant slackens the business enjoined him : the beast that I esteemed highly , is lost : the Vessel in which I shipped some commodities , is wracked : my diet & attendance must be abated ; I must be dislodged of my former habitation ; how do I put over these occurrences ? If I can make light work of these lesser crosses , I am in a good posture to entertain greater . 

To this purpose , it will be not a little expedient to thwart our appetite in those things wherein we placed much delight ; and to torture our curiosity in the delay of those contentments , which we too eagerly affected : It was a noble and exemplary government of these passions , which we find in King David , who being extremely thirsty , and longing for a speedy refreshment , could say ; O that one would give me drink of the water of the Well of Bethlehem ! but when he saw that water purchased with the hazard of the lives of three of his Worthies , when it was brought to him , he would not drink it , but poured it out unto the Lord  

Have I a mind to some one curious dish above the rest ? I will put my knife to my throat , and not humour my palate so far as to taste of it : Do I receive a Letter of news from a far Country , over night ? It shall keep my pillow warm till the morning : Do my importunate recreations call me away ? they shall , against the hair , be forcibly adjourned till a further leisure : Out of this ground it was , that the ancient Votaries observed such austerity , and rigour in their diet , clothes , lodging ; as those that knew how requisite it is that nature should be held short of her demands ; and continually exercised with denials , lest she grow too wanton , and impetuous in her desires : That which was of old given as a rule to Monastic persons , is fit to be extended to all Christians ; They may not have a will of their own , but must frame themselves to such a condition , and carriage , as seems best to their Superior ; If therefore it please my God to send me some little comfort , I shall take that as an earnest of more ; and if he exercise me with lesser crosses , I shall take them as preparatives to greater ; and endeavour to be thankful for the one , and patient in the other ; and contented with God's hand in both . 

SECT . XXV . 

4.  Resol . to be frequent and fervent in prayer . 

Our last resolution must be , to be frequent and fervent in our prayers to the Father of all mercies , that he will be pleased to work our hearts by the power of his Spirit , to this constant state of Contentation ; without which we can neither consider the things that belong to our inward peace , nor dispose ourselves towards it , nor resolve aught for the effecting it ; without which , all our Considerations , all our Dispositions , all our Resolutions , are vain and fruitless . Justly therefore doth the blessed Apostle , after his charge of avoiding all carefulness for these earthly things , enforce the necessity of our Prayers and Supplications , and making our requests known unto God ; who both knows our need , and puts these requests into our mouths : When we have all done , they are the requests of our hearts , that must free them from cares , and frame them to a perfect contentment : There may be a kind of dull and stupid neglect , which possessing the soul may make it insensible of evil events , in some natural dispositions ; but a true temper of a quiet and peaceable estate of the soul upon good grounds can never be attained without the inoperation of that holy Spirit , from whom every good gift , and every perfect giving proceedeth : It is here contrary to these earthly occasions : with men , he that is ever craving , is never contented ; but with God , he cannot want contentment that prays always . If we be not unacquainted with ourselves , we are so conscious of our own weakness , that we know every puff of temptation is able to blow us over ; they are only our prayers that must stay us from being carried away with the violent assaults of discontentment ; under which , a praying soul can no more miscarry , than an indevout soul can enjoy safety . 

SECT . XXVI . 

The difficulty of knowing how to abound ; and the ill consequences of not knowing it . 

Let this be enough for the remedy of those distempers which arise from an adverse condition ; As for prosperity , every man thinks himself wise and able enough to know how to govern it , and himself in it ; an happy estate ( we imagine ) will easily manage itself , without too much care ; Give me but Sea-room , saith the confident Mariner , and let me alone , what ever tempest arise : Surely , the great Doctor of the Gentiles had never made this holy boast of his divine skill , [ I know how to abound ] if it had been so easy a matter as the world conceives it : Mere ignorance , and want of selfe-experience , is guilty of this error . 

Many a one abounds in wealth and honour , who abounds no less in miseries and vexation : Many a one is carried away with an unruly greatness , to the destruction of body , soul , estate ; The world abounds every where with men that do abound , and yet do not know how to abound : and those especially in three ranks . The proud , the covetous , the prodigal ; The proud is thereby transported to forget God ; the covetous , his neighbour ; the prodigal , himself . 

Both wealth and honour are of a swelling nature ; raising a man up not above others , but above himself ; equalling him to the powers immortal ; yea , exalting him above all that is called God ; O that vile dust and ashes should be raised to that height of insolence as to hold contestation with its Maker ! Who is the Lord ? saith the King of Egypt : I shall be like to the Highest ; I am , and there is none besides me , saith the King of Babylon ; The voice of God , and not of Man , goes down with Herod ; And how will that Spirit trample upon men , that dare vie with the Almighty ? Hence are all the heavy oppressions , bloody tyrannies , imperious domineering , scornful insultations , merciless outrages , that are so rife amongst men , even from hence , that they know not how to abound . 

The covetous man abounds with bags , and no less with sorrows ; verifying the experience of wise Solomon ; There is a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun , riches kept for the owners thereof , to their hurt ; what he hath got with unjustice , he keeps with care , leaves with grief , and reckons for with torment ; I cannot better compare these Money-mongers then to Bees ; they are busy gatherers , but it is for themselves ; their Masters can have no part of their honey till it be taken from them ; and they have a sting ready for every one that approaches their Hive ; and their lot at the last is burning . What maceration is there here with fears , and jealousies ; what cruel extortion , and oppression exercised upon others ? & all from no other ground then this , that they know not how to abound ? 

The prodigal feasts and sports like an Athenian , spends like an Emperor ; and is ready to say as Heliogabalus did of old , Those cates are best , that cost dearest ; caring more for an empty reputation of a short gallantry , then for the comforble subsistence of himself , his family , his family , his posterity : Like Cleopes , the vain Egyptian King , which was fain to prostitute his daughter for the finishing of his Pyramid : This man lavisheth out not his own means alone , but his poor neighbours ; running upon the score with all trades that concern back or belly ; undoing more with his debts , than he can pleasure with his entertainments ; none of all which should be done , if he knew how to abound . 

Great skill therefore is required to the governing of a plentiful and prosperous estate , so as it may be safe and comfortable to the owner , and beneficial unto others ; Every Corporal may know how to order some few files , but to marshal many Troops in a Regiment , many Regiments in a whole body of an Army , requires the skill of an experienced General . But the rules and limits of Christian moderation , in the use of our honours , pleasures , profits , I have at large laid forth in a former Discourse ; thither I must crave leave to send the benevolent Reader ; beseeching God to bless unto him these and all other labours , to the happy furtherance of his Grace and Salvation . 

Amen . 

FINIS . 





Dr. Preston . Ps . 19 1 , 2.  Ps . 104. 24.  Cant. 5. 6.  Ps . 41. 4.  79. 8.  130. 3.  94. 11.  3. 7.  89. 48.  109. 21.  86. 4.  71. 10. 86. 11.  Ps . 70. 6.  60. 11.  71. 23.  31. 17.  40. 14.  5. 8.  119. penul . 68 35.  92. 5.  71. 17.  18. 47. 63. 4.  145. 10.  104. 25.  18. 31.  Ps . 20. 5.  107. 8  : 31. 21.  9 10.  16. 12.  8. 4.  115. 1.  Ps . 19 1.  74. 17.  97. 11.  36. 9  39 5.  93. 5.  139. 11.  Ps . 139. 2.  51. 7.  17. 5.  90. 12.  39 5.  Luc. 11. 25.  Wisd . 1. 4.  Psal . 26. 6.  Eccles . 10.  Esa . 66. 2.  Gen. 18. 27.  Pro. 30. 2.  Mat. 3. 11.  Ephes . 3. 1.  Job 38.  Phil. 2. 6 , 7 , 8 , etc.  Rom. 5. 1.  Ps . 103. 8.  Ps . 116. 12 , 13.  Ps . 119. 18. 21 , etc.  Phil. 1. 21.  Gal. 2. 20.  Cant. 2. 16.  Cant. 4. 9 6. 4 , 5.  Can. 5. 10.  8. 6.  2. 5.  Ps . 116.  Rom. 3. 4.  Ps . 119. 8.  Carolus Borromaeus  Acts 19 35  Eccles . 5. 1.  Jud. 3. 20.  2 Cor. 5. 20  Act. 10. 33  1 Sam. 25. 24.  Job 13. 17.  Psal . 40. 6.  Serm. ad Eccles . cautelam . 1 Pet. 2. 2  Eph. 3. 9  Zachar. 3. ●  Mat. 5. 23.  

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Hos . 2. 14.   Non enim potest mens attrita & oneribus & importunitatibus gravata , tanium boni peragere , quantum delectata & oppressionibus soluta Cornel. ep . 2.  Rufo Coepiscopo . Acts ult . Gen. 26. 22.  Magna domus homuli . Psal . 8. 3 , 4.  

Phil. 4. 11.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 v. 12.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Si sedeas requies est magna laboris ; Si multum sedeas , labour est . Tert. Car.  Pro. 30. 8.  Senec. the Tranquil . Psal . 23. 1.  Psal . 34. 9 , 10.  Ecclus. 25. 22.  rev. 3. 17.  Mat. 20. 15  2 King. 7. 2  2 King. 6. 33.  rev. 16. 9 11.  jonah 4. 9  prov. 30. 9   Galba Otho Vitellius Ael . Pertinax Didius . Anno D. 1275. 1276.  Gregor . 10 Innocent 5 Hadrian 5 Johan . 20 vel 21 Nicolaus 3   1 Cor. 15. 31.  Gen. 15. 10  Deut. 29. 23.  prov. 23. 5.  Ps . 49. 12.  Ludo. Vives in 3. de Civilcensuran notatus Vellosillo . prov. ult . penult . Eccles : 11. 10.  Mat. 6. 28.  Eccle. 1. 8.  Ps . 69. 22.  Dan. 1. 12 , 13.  Heb. 11. 13  Ps . 132. 1.  G. Naz. Carm. de calam . suis . Greg. l. 7.  Epi. 12. 7.  In vita Melanct.  Shicardus . Ambros . l. 4 Epist . 29.  Hieron . Ep. ad Hedibium . 1 Tim. 6.  Ep. Lucii ad Episc . Gall. & Hisp . 1 Tim. 6. 9  Paulo primo Eremitae in spelunca viventi palma & cibum & vestimentum praebebat : quod cum imp●s●●b●le vidcatur . Jestemm testur & Angelos vidisse me Monacbos , de quibus unus per 30. annos clausus , bo●deaceo pane & lu●ulenta aqua vixit . Hieron de vita Pauli . Revelatur Antonio nonagenario de Paulo agente jam 113 annum , esse alium se sanctiorem Monachum , ibid.  Plin. l. 26. c. 6.  Hugo . Instit . Mona . Reg. S. Columb . Senec. Epist . 38.  Job 18. 4.  Eccles 7. 9  Gen. 30. 1.  Gen. 15. 2.  Pro. 15. 13  Ps . 37. 7.  Jam. 5. 7.  Jer. 12. 8.  Ps . 103. 9  Job 2. 10.  Livius . 2 Cor. 4. 17.  Acts 7.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Inter opera Ambrosii De moribus Brachmannorum . 1 Kings 18. 13. 2  King. 6. 2 , 3 , 4 , 5.  Mat. 8. 20.  Heb. 9 27.  Rom. 5. 1.  Phil. 1. 23.  Gal. 5. 17.  Job 14. 4.  Rom. 7. 19  Gen. 18. 27  P●●k . Avoth . Gen. 32. 10  Pro. 3. 34.  Jam. 4. 6.  Eccles . 7. 8  Mat. 5. 39 , 40.  Pro. 15. 33  Phil. 4. 6.  Heb. 11. 1.  Mat. 5. 10.  Heb. 13. 5.  Esa . 54. 7 , 8  Psal . 139. 8 , 9  Verse 10 , 11.  Psal . 68 20  Joh. 7. 38.  Joh. 6. 55.  Rom. 13. 14.  rev. 22. 2.  Ps . 62. 6 , 7.  Phil. 1. 21  Joh. 11. 25  1 Cor. 1. 30  rev. 3. 23.  Esa . 28. 27.  Gen. 43. 34.  Gen. 45. 24.  2 Cor. 4. 16.  Ambros . de vitiorum & virtutum conflictus . Pro. 30. 15  Job 38. 11  Pro. 24. 13  Pro. 25. 16  Mat. 5. 6.  Ambros . Epist . 27.  Gen. 3. 2. 26.  & 33. 5 , 6. etc.  Acts 27. 18 , 19  2 Sam. 23. 15 , 16 , 17.  Phil. 4. 6.  Jam. 1. 17.  Exod. 5. 2.  Esa . 14. 14.  Act. 12. 12.  Eccl. 5. 13.  Aelius Lamprid . 