SICELIDES A PISCATORY , 

As it hath been Acted in King's College , in Cambridge . 

LONDON , Printed by I N. for William Sheares , and are to be sold at his shop , at the great South door of St. Paul's Church . 1631.  

Dramatis Personae . 

Perindus , A Fisher , son to Tyrinthus , in love with Gaucilla . 
Armillus , A Shepherd , and acquainted with Peri●dus' . 
Thalander , A Fisher , son to Glaucus , in love with Olinda , disguised and called Atyches . 
Alcippus , A Fisher.  
Pas , A Fisher , in love with Cosma . 
Fredocaldo , An old Fisher , in love with Cosma . 
Olinda , Sister to Perindus . 
Glaucilla , Sister to Thalander . 
Cosma , A light Nymph of Messena . 
Cancrone , Two foolish Fishers , servants to old Tyrinthus . 
Scrocca , Two foolish Fishers , servants to old Tyrinthus . 
Tyrinthus , Father to Perindus and Olinda . 
Conchylio , Cosma's page . 
Rymbombo , Cyclops . 
Dicaus . Neptune's chief Priest.  
Nomicus , An inferior Priest.  
Glaucus , Muti.  
Circe , Muti.  
Gryphus , Tyrinthus his man  
Cuma , Perindus his boy . 
Executioners . 
Chorus , of Priests . 
Chorus , of Fishers . 
PROLOGUS CHAMUS . 

Begin , thou royal Muse , Envy ne'er uses , 
●o dwell in gentle Courts , or sacred Muses : 
To beg of them that common courtesy 
Must grant ; were to condemn both them , and thee : 
Thy Came assures thee , they will all agree , 
Gently to bear their Actor's infancy ; 
Infants oft please ; the choicest Poet song , 
Breeds less delight than th' infant's prattling tongue . 
then let me here entreat your minds to see , 
In this our England , fruitful Sicily , 
Their two twin Isles ; so like in soil and frame , 
That as two twins they 're but another same . 
But this they beg , which you may grant with ease : 
That all these pains to pleasure you , may please . 
SICELIDES , 

Act. 1.  

Scen. 1.  

Enter PERINDUS , ARMILLUS , CUMA . Perindus .  Cuma ! bear home our spoils , and conquering weapons , 
And truss them on a wreath as our just trophy : 
And when Can●rone returns , return to me . Exit Cuma 
Thus : if but thus : yet thus my state is better , 
While lesser cares do laugh and mock the greater ; 
This change is best when changing I frequent , 
Even now that moist , now this dry element , 
When with this sceptre , setting on the Land , 
The scaly footlesse people I command : 
When riding on my wooden horse , I see 
The Earth that never moves , remove from me . 
A●d why my friend doth not this guise beseem me ? 
In this I● am not reckless as you deem me● 


Ar.   Not that I censure , but demand the cause , 
Why being born , and bred , in shepherd's laws ; 
You have our Hills , and Downs , and Gro●es forsaken , 
And to these Sands , and Waves yourself betaken . 


Per   Shepherd or fisher , I am still the same , 
I am a sea guest not for gain , but game . 


Ar.   A gamesome life ? thus with unarmed arms 
To fight 'gainst winds , and winters sharp alarms , 
And paddle in i'll Neptune's Icy lap ? 
But if in fishing any plesaure be , 
In Shepherd's life there is much more say we . 


Per.   Yet Fisher's life with me doth most consort , 
This sporting serves to moralise my sport : 
Viewing the storms , and troublesome waves ; I find 
Some thing in nature restless as my mind : 
Each captive fish tells met that in death's snare , 
My heart is not the only prisoner . 


Ar.   Walk along the shore — 
oft there he walks 
oft there with me or with the waves he talks . 


Per.   There in the tide I see fleet fortunes changing , 
And state of man , weak state : that 's never standing : 
But rises still , or falls all as the main , 
That ebbs to flow , or flows to ebb again . 
Yet fortune I accuse thee not for raging , 
Let others plain , I never felt the changing , 
Bud wast thou at the first , and so art still , 
Before I knew what 's good I knew the ill : 
And since of all my goods thou first bereav'st me , 
I near expected good , thou near deceived'st me ; 
Therefore although Oracle from whence 
I late arrived , would feed vain confidence ; 
Yet since so sure assurance thou dost give me , 
Still of the two fortune I must believe thee . 


Ar.   Vain fear when th' Oracle doth promise good ; 
The heaven's decrees by chance were near withstood . 
You fear without a cause , oft causeless fright , 
Is th' only cause that makes that on us light 
Which most we fear , ever a jealous eye 
Makes enemies by fearing enmity . 


Per.   What fearful tempest do the waves foretell , 
When seas without a storm to mountains swell . 


Ar.   Ill is invited when it is suspected 
And grief already come where he 's expected . 


Per.   The greatest evils oft are where thee show not . 
I fear the more , because my fear I know not . 
Music ! how sad it sounds ; my damped heart 
Tells me in these sad strains I bear a part : 
I wrong thee fate , or else thou now dost strain thee 
Which some unused weleomet ' entertain me . 


Scen. 2.  

Enter Dicaeus Neptune's Priest following Olinda , led by two Nymphs Cosma and Glaucilla , before and after a Chorus of Fishers and Priests singing . Song . 

Go go thy country's joy and jewel , 
The seas and rocks were ever cruel ; 
Men then may pity thee in vain , 
But not help nor ease thy pain . 
Take then these tnares they la●est due , 
For ever now alas adieu . 
Olin.   Glaucus ; to thee I friendless maid , 
In these last gifts my vows have paid : 
These once Olinda's , now are thine , 
This net , and hook , this rod , and line : 
thou know'st , why here my sports I give thee , 
Hence came my joys , and here they leave me . 


Gla.   Olinda , if that smiles were proofs of sorrow , 
Sure I should think thee full of woe , and sadness , 
but in so heaped grief , when every eye 
Yields tribute to so great a misery . 
thou only smil'st , why every tear thou seest , is paid to thee — 


Olin.   The less I need to pay : 
Gladucilla I cannot mourn , when I am married . 


Gla.   Married ? now heaven defend me , if this be marriage's 
So to be gripped in paws of such a monster , 
And bedded in his bowels — 


Cos.   Olinda I should weep , 
And spend the shortened breath that fate affords me , 
In cursing fate which makes my breath so short . 


Olin.   Peace peace my Cosma , thou wouldst 
Have me mad with reason ! 


Cos.   no : reason is never senseless . 


Olin.   thinkst thou me sense less friend ? 


Gla.   Dost not thou prove it ? 


Olin.   Why my Glaucilla I see thy drowned eyes , 
I feel thy kind embracements , and which thou seest not , 
Nor feelst , I feel and see , more mirth and joy 
Spring in my heart ; then if I now were leading 
To the best bed that Sicily affords me . 
Glaucilla if there were but fit occasion 
That I might show thee this tormented heart● 
It would affright thee friend to hear me tell 
How many deaths live in so narrow Hell.  


Decae.   We stay too long ; go on these idle tears 
Quench not her grief , but add new kindled fears . 


Olen.   Decaeus ; no fear within this breast is lying . 
Who living dies , fears not to live by dying . 


Exeunt ad rupem rufam manent reliqui . Scen. 3.  

Enter Perindus , Armillus . Ar.   saw you the troop which passed along here ? 


Per.   Yes . 


Ar.   Who is it led with such a mournful show ? 


Per.   My sister . 


Ar.   Who the fair Olinda ? 


Per.   Yes : 


Ar.   And do you know the end and purpose ? 


Per.   no : 


Ar.   Nothing but no and yes ? fie fie Perindus 
Your too much passion , shows you want affection ; 
Your sister in such sort conveyed , and you 
So careless of her grief ? it much misseems you 
Why learn you not the cause ? 


Per.   thou counselst well , 
Grief weary of itself , all sense depriving . 
Felt neither sense , nor grief , by overgrieving : Enter Atyches . 
But see my Atyches : what different passions 
Strive in his doubtful face , pity would weep , 
And danger fain would rock high thoughts a sleep , 
whiles resolution chides the daring fear , 
And courage makes poor fear afraid to fear . 


Atych.   thou God that rul'st the sun's bright flaming cart 
If thou my grandsire art , as sure thou art 
For in my breast I feel thy powers divine , 
Firing my soul , which tells me I am thine : 
Direct my hand and guide this pointed dart , 
That it may pierce , and rive the monsters heart . 


Per.   Atyches . 


Atych.   Ah Perindus this luckless hour 
Bids thee unwelcome , fly and never more , 
Never approach to view this deadly shore . 


Per.   Why what 's the news ? 


Atych.   Thy sister the fair Olinda must die . 


Ar.   So must we all . 


Atych.   But none of all as she . 


Per●  Canst tell the cause and manner ? 


Atych.   yes ; and till the sun 
'twixt noon and night his middle race shall run , 
The rites will not be finished ; 't is briefly thus . 
thou know'st by Neptune's temple close their grows 
A sacred garden , where every flowers blowe● 
Here blushing roses , there the Lilies white , 
He●e Hyacinth , and there Narcissus bright 
And underneath , the creeping violets show : 
That sweetness o●t delights to dwell below : 
Vaulted above with thousand fragrant trees , 
And under paved with shamefast Strawberries , 
Which creeping low do sweetly blushing tell , 
That fairest pleasantst fruits , do humblest dwell . 
Briefly a little Heaven on Earth it seems : 
where every sweet and pleasure fully streams . 


Are :  Fisher thou now describest some paradise , 
Can any ill from so much good arise ? 


Atych :  Henbane and roses in our garden grow , 
Ah that from fruits so sweet , such gall should flow ! 
Here fair Olinda , with her Mymphs arrives , 
And time away , time to fast posting drives , 
While Nago that deformed enchanter , ranging 
Along these trees , his shape and habit changing 
Seemed then Glaucilla , such his statelike eyes , 
Such hair , such lips , such cheeks , such rosy dies , 
So like Glaucilla's self that had she spied him , 
more would she doubt herself , the more she eyed him 


Ar.   Can art forge nature with so true a lie ? 


Atych.   The falsest coin is fairest to the eye , 
Singling thy sister forth , they chance to see , 
The sacred graft of that Herperian tree , 
Whose golden apples much the eye delighting , 
Would tempt the hands : the longing taste inviting : 
And now the subtle witch spies fit occasion , 
And with fit speech and oaths , and soft persuasion , 
So words he mind ; that she ( ha little guessing , 
What monster lay under that feigned dressing , 
Pulls of th' unhappy fruit strait down she falls , 
And thrice a thundering voice Dieaeus calls ; 
The priest knew what the fearful voice portended , 
And fair Olinda half dead apprehended : 
And to the temple bears her , there reserving 
Till the third day with death pays her deserving 
So Neptune , bids , that who shall touch the tree . 
With hands profane , shall by Malorcha die ; 
Malorcha bread in seas , yet seas do dread him , 
As much more monstrous than the seas that bred him 


Per.   Ah my Olinda who can pity thee 
That wouldst not pity th' excellent Thalander . 
't is just ye seas well doth impartial fate 
With monstrous death pnni●h thy monstrous hate . 
And whither art thou now thus armed going . 


Atych.   Down to the fatal rock I go to see 
And act a part in this foul Tragedy . 


Per.   Why canst thou hope such losses to repair ? 


Atych.   Who nothing hope's yet nothing ought despair . 


Per.   What 't is impossible ? ah cease to prove ? 


Atych.   What ever was impossible to love ? 


Per.   't is certain thou add'st thy death to hers 


Atych.   Unworthy love that life for love prefers 


Per.   What good canst do when thou canst not restore her . 


Atych   to live with her or else to die before her . 


Per.   't is fate that in this monster bids engrave her . 


Atych.   And 't is my fate to die with her or save her . 


Per.   In vain to fight against all conquering jove : 


Atyoh.   But in my hand shall fight jove conquering love . 


Per.   Atych●s why shouldst thou thus betray thyself ? 
She was my sister , and as dear to me 
As ever was a sister to a brother : 
Had fate felt any hope , my willing hand 
Should be as Pressed to give her aid as any . 
Were not the fight 'gainst heaven I might adventure , 
But here I needs must leave her , though a brother 
She never loved me . 


Atych.   I loved her ever . 


Per.   more shouldst thou hate her now : 


Atych.   Can Seas or Rivers stand can Rocks remove ? 
could they ? yet could I never cease to love : 
Perindus , if now I see thee last , farewell : 
Within thy breast all joys and quiet dwell . 
Adieu : Olinda now to thee I fly 
For thee I lived , for thee I 'll gladly die , 


Exit Atyches . Per.   Go choicest spirit : the heavenly love regard thee , 
And for thy love , with life , and love reward thee . 


Scen. 4.  

Enter Perindus , Armillus . Ar.   Perindus thou know'st how late was my arrival , 
And short abode in this your Sicily , 
And how delighted with these accidents 
So strange and rare , I have decreed to make 
Some longer stay , but since I saw this Atyches 
His love more strong than death , a resolution 
Beyond humanity I much desired 
To know him , what he is , and what his country 
That breeds such minds : let me entreat you then 
At large to give me all this story 
Somewhat 't will east your grief , just are his pains 
That sorrow with more sorrow entertains . 


Per.   It will be tedious , and my heavy mind 
Fit words for such a tale can never find : 
Yet I 'll unfold it all , that you may see 
How beauteous love shows in inconstancy : 
Who hath not heard of Glaucus' love ? hapless 
Whilst fairest Seylla baths him , love inspires 
At once herself she cools and him she fire's . 
A sea god burned in flames , and flames most please him 
Glaucus finds neither waves nor herbs to ease him 
Cold were his eyes more cold her coy disdain : 
Yet none of both could quench love's scorching flame : 
Till Circe whom scorned love to madness moves 
Quenches at once her beauty and his loves . 
There stands she now a proof of jealous spite 
As full of horror now as then delight : 


Ar.   The fruit of jealousy is ever cursed , 
But when 't is grafted in a crab 't is worst . 
Bad in a man , but monstrous in a woman , 
And which the greater monster hard to know 
then jealous Circe , or loathed Scylla now 
After when time had eased his grief for Scylla , 
Circe with charms , and prayers and gifts had won him 
Her lou● she reaped in that high rocky frame , 
Which ever since hath born fair Circe's name : 
The Moon her fainting light 10 times had fed , 
And 10 times more her globe had emptied : 
When two fair twins she brought , whose beauteous shine , 
Did plainly prove their parents were divine . 
The male Thalander , the female called Glaucilla , 
And now to youth arrived so fair they are 
That with them but themselves who may compare , 
All else excelling ; each as fair as other 
Thus best compared the sister with the brother . 


Ar.   So lively to the ear thy speeches show them , 
That I must half affect before I know them . 


Per.   Vain words that think to blaze so great perfection , 
Their perfectness more proves words imperfection . 
But if these words some little sparkle move , 
How would their sight inflame thy soul with love ? 
Scarce did his hair betray his blooming years , 
When with his budding youth his love appears , 
Myself and sister equally he loves , 
And as on those two poles heaven ever moves 
So on us two his soul still fixed , still loving 
Was ever constant , by his constant moving : 
Yet never knew we which was most respected , 
Both equally and both he most affected . 
In me his worthy love with just reflection , 
Kindled an equal and a like affection , 
But she my sister most ungrateful maid , 
With hate , ah hateful vice , his love repaide● 


Are :  Ceased he not then to love ? this sure we hold 
That love not back reflected soon grows cold . 


Per :  no though all spite within her bosom swelled , 
Spite of her spite his love her hate excelled ; 
At length to show how much he was neglected , 
His rival ugly rival she affected : 
Such rival could I wish whose foul distortion , 
Would make seem excellent a mean proportion , 
For Mago , thus his hated rival 's named ) 
All black and foul , most strange and ugly framed 
begot by Saturn , on a seaborn witch , 
Resembling both , his hairs like threads of pitch 
Distorted feet , and eyes sunk in his head : 
His face dead pale , and seemed but moving lead 
Yet worse within , for in his heart to dwell 
His mother's furies have their darkest hell . 
Yet when Thalander wooed her , she neglects him , 
And when this monster flattered she respects him . 


Are :  I'●t possible . troth Sir but that I fear me , 
If I should speak some women should o'er : hear me● : 
Meet thinks I now could rail on all their kinds , 
But who can sound the depth of woman's minds ? 


Per.   Shortly to come to 'th' height of all their wrong , 
So could this Mago fill his smoothest tongue , 
That she ●halander banished from her sight , 
Never to see her more his sole delight : 
And he to none his hidden grief in parted , 
But full of loving duty strait departed 
Leaving our groves in woods he grows a ranger 
To all but beasts and senseless trees a stranger . 
Thus in a desert like his love forsaken 
Wh●n nothing but cold death his flames could slacken 
Atyches spied him● but so grief had pined him . 
That when he saw him plain , he could not find him . 
And so had sorrow all his graces re●t 
That in him , of him nothing now was left 
Only his love ; with which his latest brea●h 
H● powered into his ears , so slept i● death . 
The rest when better leisure time affords 
This ●uck●ess● day asks rather tears ●hen words . 


Exeunt , CHORUS . 

Who near saw death , may death commend , 
Call it ●oyes Prologue trouble's end : 
The pleasing s●eepe that quiet rocks him , 
Where neither care ; nor fancy mocks him . 
But who in nearer space doth eye him 
Next to hell , as he●l defy him : 
no state● no age , no sex can move him , 
no beggars prey , no Kings reprove him● 
In midst of mirth , and love's alarms , 
He pulls the Bride from Bride grooms arms 
The beauteous Virgin he contemns , 
The guilty with the just condemns . 
All wear his cloth and no●e denies . 
Dressed in fresh coloured liveries . 
King's lewe as beggars lie in graves , 
Nobles as base , the free as slaves , 
Blessed who on virtue's life relying , 
dies to vice , thus lives by dying . 
But fond that making life thy treasure , 
Surfeit'st in joy , art drunk in pleasure . 
Sweets do make the sour more tart . 
And pleasure sharps death's keenest dart . 
Death's thought is death to those that live , 
In living joys , and never grieve . 
Hapless that happy art and know'st no tears 
Who ever lives in pleasure , lives in fears 
Exit . Finis Actus Primi . 

Act. 2.  

Scen. 1.  

Enter Conchylio solus . I Have been studying , what bold hardy fool 
Invented fisher's art , th●t tired with safety , 
Would needs go play with waves , winds , death and hell , 
The sum of fisher's life is quickly found , 
To sweat , frieze , watch , fast toil be starved or drownd● 
Well had my Mistress found no better trade , 
I would ere this have left these dabbling deities , 
But she while other fisher's fish on the seas , 
Sends me a fishing on the Land for flesh : 
no , game arrives amiss unto her net , 
For she 's not born among the cliffs , and rocks 
But from Messena comes to sport herself 
And fish for fools along these craggy shores , 
I took her for a Nymph , but she 's a woman 
A very woman loveth all she sees , 
This for his sprightly wit , and that for Music , 
Him cause he 's fair , another for his blackness 
Some for their bashfulness , more for their boldness , 
The wiseman for his silence , the fool for his bibble babble ; 
And now she longs in haste for another fat codshead , 
A good fat sow , and I must snare one for her 
She has ( let me see I have the tally ) 
Some hundred lovers , yet still desire's another 
The first that passeth all the rest in love 
Is called Pas : Ha know you your cue so well ? Enter Pas.  
He is a malum collum , alas poor fool ; 
He would engross my Mistress to himself 
He would have her all alone , let her alone for that 
And for that it will not be , he raves and swears 
And chides and fights , but what need I describe him 
he 'll do 't himself , come , begin begin . 
Scen. 2.  

Pas Conchylio . Pas.   Who sows ●he seas , or ploughs the easy shore ? 
Yet I , fond I more fond , and senseless more : 
Who strives in nets to prison in the wind ? 
Yet I in love a woman thought to bind : 
Fond , too fond thoughts , that thought in love to tie , 
One more inconstant than inconstancy : 
Look as it is with some true April day , 
The sun his glorious beams doth fair display , 
And strait a cloud breaks into fluent showers , 
then shines and reins , and clears and strait it lours : 
And twenty change in one hour do prove , 
So , and more changing is a woman's love . 
Fond then my thoughts , that thought a thing so vain , 
Fond love , to love what could not love again . 
Fond hopes , that anchor on so false a ground , 
Fond thoughts that fired with love , in hope thus drowned : 
Fond thoughts , fond hope , fond heart , but fondest I , 
To grasp the wind , and love inconstancy . 
Ah Cosma , Cosma . 


Exit Con.   Ah Pas , ass passing ass ; hah , ha , he : 
Fond thoughts , fond hope , fond heart , but fondest I , 
To grasp the wind , and love inconstancy ; ha , ha , he , 
This fool would have I know not what , the sea 
To stand still like a pond , the Moon never to change , 
A woman true to one he knows not what : 
She that to one all her affection's brings 
Cages herself and pinions Cupid's wings . 
Le●'s' see whose the second ; OH the second 
Is an old dotard who though now foure●score 
Yet nature having left him some few hot embers 
Racked up in cold ashes , thinks himself a●l fire and flame 
And therefore like the dwarves 
Who though near so old , ●et still consort with boys 
So he among the freshest , youth in dancing 
In songs and sporting spends his faddish time . 
Whe● snow on 's head , shows in his eye 
With winter looks gives summer words the lie 
His name is Fredocaldo ; he knows his name E●ter Fredocaldo . 
no sooner called but comest what is (null) he reads ? 
Upon my life some sonnet , I 'll stand and hear . 


Scen. 3.  

Fredocaldo Conhilio . ●re .  ay , I am silver white so is thy check 
Yet who for whiteness will co●demne it ? 
If wrinkled , of thy forehead is not fleck 
Yet who for frowning dare contemn it . 
Boys full of folly youth of rage 
Both but a journey to old age 
I am not yet fair Nymph to old to love 
And yet women love old lovers 
Nor yet to waving light , as false to prou● 
youth a foul in●ide fairly co●ers . 
Yet when my light is in the wain 
Thy suns renew my spring again . 
Pretty very pretty , why yet I see 
My brain is still as fresh as in my youth . 
And quick invention spring's as currently 
As in the greenest head : this little distich 
I made this morn , to ●end unto my lou● . 
See , here 's a leg how full , how little waning , 
My limbs are s●il accompanied 
With their kind fellow heat , no shaking palsy 
Nor cramp has ta'en possession , my swift blood streams 
Runs quick and speedy , through their burning channels 
Pish I am young , he is not ancient 
That hath a ●iluer b●dge of hoary hairs 
But he that in sweet love is dead and cold 
So old men oft are young , and young men old 
I 'll take my farewell of this pretty verse 
It is a pretty verse , I 'll read it again Conchyli● throws down his spectacles . 
If I am silver white and. OH ho my spectacles . 
Ah naughty boy alas my spectacles 


Con.   ha ha he your eyes Fredocaldo take up your eyes hah , ha , he . 


Fre.   Ah naughty boy alas my spectacles 
Whether is he gone ? OH if I find him 


Con.   find me without eyes ? hah , ha , he . 


Fre.   OH my ve●seses my verses , Snatches his verses . 


Con.   A very pretty verse : how fresh a brain that made it 
If I am silver white and. nay if you 'll try your limbs come on . 
Exit Fredocaldo . Enter Perindus . Farewell frost : how ? Perind●●'s ? o how fitly 
After warm winter comes a i'll could summer 
This youth in all things is that old man's contrary 
This a cold May , that a hot januarie 
All my art cannot blow up one sparkle 
If I should stay he 'd blast me , adieu sol in Pisceses 
Farewell good Caldofredo , I must after Fredocaldo 


Exit . Scen. 4 

Enter Perindus Allcippus . Per.   Blessed is that fisher swain that sank i' th' flood 
he 's food for them whom he would make his food . 
But I most wretched , who so many years 
Live safe in waters to be drowned in fears . 
In fire and sorrow like Titius is my life 
A covered table furnished still for grief . 
Hell love your pains , for all poor souls can prove 
Is felt and spoken but thus careless I love . 


Enter Alcipyus . Alcip.   Phoebus' write thou this glorious victory 
And grave it on thy shining axletree 
That all may see a fisher hath done more 
Than any age hereafter or before . 


Per.   Alcippus what news ? me thinks I plain descry 
joy mixed with wonder in thy doubtful eye . 


Alcip.   Perindus most happy have I found thee here 


Per.   Is' st good ah tell me , yet my grounded fear 
Pleads hope impossible . 


Alcip.   Were you away 
To the Echo I had told it , as grief , so joy 
Pressed down is burdensome , for now I see 
joy is no joy i● barred from company 
Olinda by the Priest's enchained-fast 
Unto the fatal rock down to the waist 
Was naked left , which thus was better dreamt 
Beauty when most unclothed is clothed best : 
And now the Priest all rites had finished 
And those last words and hidden verses said 
then thus he loud proclaims , who dare adventure 
Against this monstrous beast , now let him enter 
And if he conquer by his bold ●ndeavour 
This goodly maid shall be his prize forever 
Strait was the monster loosed , whose ugly sight 
Struck every trembling heart with cold affright 
Some sweat , some freeze , some shriek , some silent wear 
The eye durst neither wink nor see for fear : 
Heaven hid his light , the fearful sun did shroud 
His glorious eye under a jetty cloud . 


Per.   Saw'st thou the Ork ? 


Alcip.   Yes , and my panting heart 
To think I saw it in my breast doth start . 


Per.   Canst thou describe it ? 


Alcip.   Never tongue can tell 
What to itself no thought can portray well . 
more big than monstrous Python , whom men fain 
By Phoebus first was bred , by Phoebus slain . 
His teeth thick ranked in many a double band 
Like to an armed battle ready stand 
His eyes sunk in 's head , more fearful stood 
Like bloody flame or like to flaming blood 
Not any ear upon his head appears , 
no plaint nor prayer , no threat nor charm he fearest 
In sea and land he lives and takes from both 
Each monsters part which most we fear and loath , 
Soon as he felt him lose , he shakes his crest 
And hungry posteth to his ready feast 
And as through seas his oars a passage tear 
The thronging waves fly fast , and roar for fear . 


Per.   Me thinks I see him and th' unhappy lover 
Struck through with fright . 


Alcip.   In all their shrieks he smiles 
Stretching his arms , to fight himself composes 
And nothing feared his body interposes 
Shaking a dart the monster he defies 
Who scorning such a foe to 's banquet flies 
But he with certain aim his javelin drives 
Which as the sender bade at 's eye arrives . 
And fixed in 's hollow sight , deep drenched stood 
Quenching the bloody fire with fiery blood 
The wounded monster loudly 'gins to yell 
If Hell do speak such is the voice of Hell , 
And to revenge his hurt he fly's apace 
The other dart met him i' th' middle race 
And as along he blindly fast doth post 
His way and tother eye together lost 
Thus blind he quickly dies , and being dead 
Leaves to his foe his spoils , his paws his head . 


Per.   Hercules thy twelve works with this one conferred 
This one before thy twelve might be preferred . 


Alcip.   Perindus then mightst thou have seen how love 
Is not more bold than fearful , he that strove 
And conquered such a monster with a dart 
To her fair eyes yields up his heart 
Ah hadst thou seen how fearful modesty 
joined with chaste love did chide the hungry eye 
Which having long abstained and long time fasted 
Some of those dainties now would fain have ●asted 
Ah hast thou seen which such fit time he got 
How love to much remembering love forgot 
How th' eye which such a monster did outface 
durst not look up upon her eye to gaze 
How th' hand which such a bold fight undertook 
When her it touched as with a palsy shook . 
As all that saw it thou wouldst soon have said 
That never lived so fortunate a maid . 
Most happy such a danger to recover 
more happy far by having such a lover . 
And hark the Fisher's home the victor bringing 
Chant loud his conquest , his due praises singing . 


Scen. 5.  

Enter in triumph with Chorus of Fisher's a●d Priest's singing Atyches crowed leading Olinda following Glaucil●a and Cos●a . Song 

Olinda if thou yield not now 
The Ork less monstrous wa● the● thou 
no monster to the eye more hateful 
Than beauty to desert ungrateful 
Yield then thy heart and hand 
And sing along this sand 
Love's rule heaven , sea , and land . 
Per.   Atyches how farest thou ? OH let these arms enlace thee 
Me thinks I hold half heaven when I embrace thee . 


Atych.   Will Perindu●'s go with us to the temple ? 


Per.   Most willingly and when thou once art there 
then 't is a temple ● may justly swear . 


Exeunt omnes . Scen. 6.  

Enter Cancrone and Scrocca with their boat from fishing . Scr.   Yet more larboard ! haul up against that wave now starboard ! 



Can.   I thin●e we are upon the shallow 



Scr.   Hold in Cancrone I ●mell the shore Cancrone falls in● 



Can.   Nay by your leave 't was I that smelled it , for I am sure my nose kissed it . 



Scr.   Take hold of the stretcher , and then fasten the rope . 



Can.   A rope stretch al● such bottlehead boatmen , had it been my lot to have been Master at sea as 't is yours , we had near taken such a journey in ●uch a flyboat , such a sows-ear , such an eggshell . 



Scro.   Come help to lave her . 



Can.   it 's a true she● boot I warrant she leaks brackish all the year long . 



Scr.   Will you come Sir you are yet in my jurisdiction on the water . 



Can.   Will you scale the fish sir , will you bring forth the nets sir , will you spread them upon the rocks sir you are at my demand Sir upon the land , we 'll be known in our place ( Scrocca drinks ) is that your laving . 



Scro.   Ah ha this is something fresher than Neptune's salt potion , seest not what a pickle I amin , but OH those Scylla's bandogs ( bough wow ) our boat bepissed herself for fear . 



Can.   I and thou thyself for company ; faith we were almost in Thetis powdering tub , but now Scrocca● let's off with our liquor : Sirrah half to this blue-beard Neptune , but he gets not one drop on 't . 



Scr.   I and withal remember the roaring boy B●reas' ( puff puff ) hold : you bear your poop too high Cancrone , you 'd need go pump . 



Can.   So me thinks my brain is somewhat warmer now my wirt gear 's on . Let Neptune rage and roar and foam 
For now Concrone's safe at home . 






Scr.   How now Cancrone ! what ? poesied ? 



Can.   Why Scrocca is it such a matter for a waterman to be a poet now a days ? 



Sco.   I but I wonder that in all thy Poems thou never mad'st an Epitaph for thy grandsire that was eaten up by the Cyclops . 



Can ,  Ah Scrocca I prithee do not ming my grandsire , thou 'lt spoil my poetry presently ; those hungry side slops ; they eat him up crust and crumb , and then killed him too and that which grieves me most : he never sent me word who it was that bit of 's head , yet faith , one draught more and have at him . 



He drinks . Scr.   Nay if one draught will serve , he shall never starve for an Epitaph . 



Can.   So : it 's coming I have it Scrocca . 
Here lies Cancrone's grandsire , who sans boat . 
Sands wind , sans seas sailed down the Cyclops throat . 


Scr.   Here lies ? Why will you grave an Epitaph on the Cyclops belly ? 
I●me sure he lies yonder . 


Can.   Mass thou sayst true , but all our late writers begin so . 



Scr.   Well sir will you walk home and warm your poetical vain at the kitchen fire . 



Can.   Yes I care not if I do , for I shall ne'er be well till I have got the chimney corner over my head . Farewell ye rocks and seas , I think you 'll sh●w it 
That Sicily affords a water-poet 






Scen. 7.  

Enter Conchylio solus . Ha , ha , he ; I have laughed myself weary : is (null) possible ? 
That fire and frost should thus keep house together , 
Sure age did much mistake him , when it set 
His snowy badge on his blue riveled chin . 
Were not his faces furrows filled with snow 
His hams unstrung his head so straight bound 
His eyes so rainy , and his skin so dry 
He were a pretty youth . 
Scen. 8.  

Enter Cancrone and Scrocca . Con.   What old acquaintance ? lie by Mistress a little 
I 'll fish a while , I may chance to catch 
A Codshead ; I 'll stand and hear them . 


Sor.   Did not I tell you we were wrong ? sir.  


Can.   Me thought , we were at land vile soon . 


Sor.   I prithee on which hand was the cape of Peloro , 
When we left Sulla's bandogs . 


Can.   That did belong to thy water office to mark , 
But sure it stood strait before a little o' th' on side , 
Right upon the left , and then it left , the right , 
And turned west by East , and then stood still North , North , By South . 


Con.   Well bold woodcock 
Without a bias . 


Scr.   Come look about you to your land office . 
I 'll hold a bed of oysters the rock stands on yonder side ; 
Look this way : I prithee is not this Circe's ●ocke , 


Can.   I like thy reasons wondrous well it is her rock and her distaff too . 



Con.   I'●e spin● some thread out of this distaff . 



Scr.   then I swear by Circe's juggling box we come in o th' wrong side . 



Can   Look into my poll , canst thou not perceive by the colour of my brains that I have unlaced her knavery ? thou know'st Ci●ces' is a plaguy wi●ch . 



Scr.   I she did translate a good father of mine into an hog . 



Can.   She with her whisking white wand , has given this rock a box on the ear● , & set it one the other side of the country 



Scr.   I care not where Circe's dwells , but I am sure we dwell on this side , and we have pushed in the clean contrary way , and what you what , we have leapt through Hell-mouth : OH strange how — he falls down and cries . 



Can.   OH the Ork the huge huntie , puntie . 



Scr.   Up cancrone I tell thee we have 'scaped him . 



Can.   I tell thee Sirocca we have not 'scaped him , he has eat us up 



Con.   These fisher's are new returned from fishing , and know not that Atyches has slain the Ork , I 'll Ork them . 



Can.   Ah Sirocca I would this Ork were in Neptune's belly , that will suffer such a worm to live in his dominions , I am a very macherell if the very name be not worse to me then , three nights cold fishing . 



S●r.   Me thinks I am colder too than I was before . 



Con.   Let me strike then before the iron be key cold 
What hardy fishers dare approach this shore 
Untrod by men this twenty years and mo●e . 


Can.   Good now Conchyli● do not the Norke 



S●r.   We did eat the go●den apples ; we . 



Can.   What old Cancr●ne ? I am ●orrie for your chance The best that I advice you is ●hat you return round about the Cape presently before the O●ke smell you ( if he were within twelve score he might wind them ) foh . 



Can.   Nay I shall be devoured . 



Con.   Pluck out a good heart man  



Can.   If I could do so I might save the Ork a labour , that Will be done to my hand I know I shall be devoured . 



Con.   Why man  



Can.   Why my grandsire was deflowered , and they say deflowering goes in a blood . 



Co● .  If I rid you both of this fear will you worship m●e . 



Can.   OH worshipful water-wight . 


Scr.   OH Neptune's father . 


Can.   OH Glaucus Mother . 


Con.   Why then thus ; my deities oracle gives you answer thus 
When 2 famous fishers fall upon this sand 
Let them for fear of mighty Ork , leave seas sail home by land 
I have not pinched ●hem for measure 
I have given them Oracle up to ●he elbows . 


Ca● .  Saile there 's your office Scrocca , you must go : 


Scr.   By land , there 's your office go you . 


Con.   What can you not expound . 
Drag up your boat and homeward cr●●●e this shore 


Can.   W●e are all made , I understood you sir , but I did not know your meaning . 


Scr.   Pull you the b●te at nose ●'le lift at the arse . 


Can.   Manners lack this is a land voyage , I am master . 


Con.   Hoh ; roh ; droh ; , Horka , Corka , Suga ponto ; the monster comes down under the boat turn it over I 'll help : they cover themselves over with their beats for fear of the Ork & crept over the stage . 
Retire thou sacred monster ( creep on ) 
These sweet souls a●e no f●●d fo● thee ( on on ) 
't is time these souls were spent they begin 
To stink , retire thou great god Neptune's scourge 
Retire I say while this twin tortoise passes 
And dare not on●e to touch these fi●h flesh asses . 
Ha , ha , he , farewell good tortoise , what good foutch ? Haddock ●are and C●d ? you shall walk with me I 'll be your O●ke : yet I 'll carry the Cod to my mistress Cosma . I know she loves it well : let Conchylio be turned into an Oyster if he would not play the O●ke every day for such sport , it shall go hard but ●le with my friend ●ancr●ne yet once again . 


Exit . CHORUS . 

Happy happy Fisher's swain 
If that ye knew your happiness 
Your sport tastes sweeter by your pai●eses , 
Sure hope your labour relishes 
Your net your living , when you eat 
Labour finds appetite and meat . 
When the seas and tempest roar 
You either sleep or pipe or play 
And dance along the golden shore 
Thus you spend the night an● day 
Shrill winds a pipe , hoarse seas a taber 
To fit your sports or ease your labour . 
First ah first the holy Muse 
Raped my soul's most happy eyes 
Who in those holy groves d●e use 
A●d learn those sacred mysteries 
The years and months , old age and birth 
The palsies of the trembling earth . 
The flowing of the sea and Moon 
And ebb of both , ●nd how the tides 
Sink in themselves and backward run . 
How palled Cynthia closely slides 
Stealing her brother from our sight 
So robs herself and him of light . 
But if cold nature's frozen parts 
My dull slow heart and cloudy brain● 
Cannot reach those heavenly nets 
Next happy is the fisher's pain 
Whose love roofs peace do safely ●ide 
And shut out fortune , want and pride . 
There shall I quiet fearless reign 
My boys my subjects taught submission 
About my court my sons my train 
Nets my pu●naiorss of provision , 
The steer my sceptre , pip● musician 
Labour my Physic , no Physician . 
So shall I laugh the angry seas and sky 
Thus singing may I li●e , and singing di● . 
Act. 3.  

Scen. 1.  

Enter Perindus . When Attyches with better sight I eye , 
Some power me thinks beyond humanity , 
Some heavenly power within his bosom lies 
And plainly looks through th' windows of his eyes . 
Thalander , if that souls departed rest 
In other men , thou livest in his breast , 
He is more than he seems , or else — but see . Enter Glaucilla . 
My love , my hate , my joy , my misery . 
Glau.   Perindu●'s , whither turnst t●●u ? if thy wand'ring love 
My love eschew , yet nothing canst thou see 
Why thou shouldst fly me , I am no monster , friend , 
That seeks thy spoil , look on me , I am she 
To whom th' hast vowed all faith and loyalty , 
Whom thou with vows and prayers and oaths hast plied 
And praying wept and weeping been denied , 
And died in the denial , I am she 
Whom by my brother's importunity 
Thalander's means thou want'st , who still persever , 
Though thou art changed , I loving love for ever . 
Tell me am I altered in mind or bodies frame ? 
What then I was am I not still the same ? 


Per.   Yes , yes , thou art the same both then and now 
As fair , more fair than heaven's clearest brow . 


Glau.   What have I now deserved ? 


Per.   In heaven to dwell : 
The purest star deserves not heaven so well . 


Glau.   Perindus , I am the same , ah I am she 
I was at first , but thou , thou art not he 
Which once thou wast . 


Per.   True , ah too true : 
then was I happy being so distressed , 
And now most miserable by being blessed . 


Glau.   Tell me what thus hath changed thy former love , 
Which once thou swor'st nor heaven nor hell could move : 
How hath this scorn and hate stolen in thy heart 
And on a Comic stage , hast learned the art 
To play a tyrant , and a foul deceiver ? 
To promise mercy , and perform it never ? 
To look more sweet , masked in thy looks disguise , 
then mercy's self , or pities gracious eyes . 


Per.   Fa , lafoy , lafoy , fa , lafoy , lafoy , lah.  


Glau.   Ah me most miserable . 


Per.   Ah me most miserable 


Glau.   Wretched Glaucilla , where hast thou set thy love ! 
Thy plaints his joy , thy tears his laughter move , 
Senseless of these he sings at thy lamenting , 
And laughs at thy h●arts tormenting . 
Wretched Glaucilla . 


Per.   more wretched Perindus , 
Where by refusing life , thou diest , for whom 
thou livest , in whom thou drawst thy joy and breath , 
And to accept , thy life is more than death . 


Glau.   Perindus . 


Per.   Fa , lafoy , lafoy , fa , lafoy , lafoy , lah.  


Exit Perindus . Scen. 2.  

Glaucilla sola .  Hapless and fond , too fond and hapless maid , 
Whose hate with love , whose love with hate is paid . 
Or learn to hate where thou hast hatred proved , 
Or learn to love again , where thou art loved , 
Thy love gets scorn : do not so dear earn it , 
At least learn by forgetting to unlearne it . 
Ah fond and hapless maid , but much more fond 
Canst thou unlearne the lesson thou has conned ? 
Since than thy fixed love will leave thee never 
He hate's thy love , leave thou his hate forever , 
And though his ice might quench thy loves desiring 
Live in his love and die in his admiring● 
Olinda so late abroad ? Enter Olinda , 
The sun is now at rest , heavens winking eyes 
All drowsy seem , love only rest denies : 
But thou art free as air , what is the reason ? 
What glass is this ? 


Olin.   Prithee Glaucilla 
Do not thus search my souls deep rankling wound 
Which thou canst never help when thou hast found . 


Glau.   Thy soul was wont to lodge within mine ear 
And ever , was it safely harboured there 
My ear is not acquainted with my tongue 
That either tongue or ear● should do thee wrong 
Yet do not tell me , I 'll thee● I spy 
Thy burning fever is thy tell-tale eye . 
thou lov'st deny it not , thou lov'st Olinda 
In vain a chest to lo●ke up flames we seek 
Which now with purple fires thy blushing cheeks 


Olin.   thou art such a mistress in thy loving art 
That all in vain I hide my ●ove sick heart 
And yet as vain to open 't now 't is hid . 


Glau.   Why so loves he another ? 


Olin.   I would he did . 


Glau.   Strange wi●h in love , much rather had I die , 
Is he then perished ? 


Olin.   Yes and with him I  


Glau.   I prithee tell me all do not conceal it , 
I 'll mourn with thee if that I cannot heal it . 


Olin.   Hear then and who so ere mayst be a bride● 
Learn this of me to hate thy maiden pride . 
Atyches tho● knowest ? 


Glau.   Thy champion ? 


Olin.   The same 
Almost a year since he came to this town 
When finding me fishing along the shore 
Silent he angel's by me , till at length 
Seeing me take a sta●fish , and fling 't away 
He strait demands why I refused that pray 
The cause I said was hate , he thus replied 
Alas poor fish how wretched is your fate 
When you are killed for love saved but for hate ; 
Yet than that fish much worse the fisher swain 
Who for his love by hate is causeless slain , 


Glau.   Yet happier he that 's slain by loves defying 
then she in fate that lives yet ever dying 


Olin.   But soon as love he named , I strait was parting● 
He holding me thus speaks ; stay Nymph and hear 
I bring thee news which well deserves thine ear 
He which most loves thee and thou hatest most 
Thalander ( at his name my guilty heart 
Ashamed of itself did in me start ) 
He thus went on : thalander 's dead and dying 
By oath and all his love swo●e me to see thee 
With these few words : Thalander quite forsaken 
Would send to thee what thou from him hast taken 
All life and health , and never his love removing 
Wishes thee a friend more happy and as loving 
And with this prayer these legacies he sends thee 
This pipe his mother Cir●es' gift , to bind 
With this soft whistle the loud whistling wind 
And with this pipe he left this precious ring 
Whose virtues covers a venomous tooth or sting 


Glau.   Thalander were we nothing like the other 
Only thy love would prove thou art my brother . 
Did not this move thee . 


Olin.   Glaucilla why should I lie 
I took them as spoils from a slain enemio , 
And ●or these gifts ( says he ) his last demand 
Was thi● , that I might kiss thy hand : 
The last , the only gift thou canst impart 
To such , so loving , and now dying heart● 
I grant ; be gone , upon the Ring ● spy 
A Ruby cut most artificially , 
Wherein was framed a youth in fire consuming , 
And ●ound within it as the Ring I turn , 
I found these words , Alive or dead , I burn . 


Glau.   These words well fit his heart , so you , so I 
Thalander living loves , and loving dies . 


Olin.   But o those feigned flames , such strange desires , 
Such true , such lasting , never-quenched fires 
Have kindled in my breast , that all the Art 
Of Triphon's self cannot allay my smart : 
Ah Glaucilla , than scornful proud Olinda ; 
Which at so sweet a love a mockery made , 
Who scorned the true Thalander , loves his shade , 
Whose thousand graces living could not turn me , 
His ashes now he 's dead to ashes , burn me . 


Glau.   If thus you love him , how can●t thou allow 
Thy love to Atyches ! late didst thou vow 
In Neptune's temple to be his for ever . 


Olin.   My hand he married there , my heart ah never . 
Glaucilla , I love him for his love to me , 
For such his venture , for such his victory , 
But most , because in love he is my rival , 
Because he 's like and love , my Love Thalander . 
Ah , if my life will please him , let him take it , 
He gave it me and I would fain forsake it . 
Had it been mine to give , my wretched heart , 
Not worth his dangerous fight , I would impart 
But that is thine , Thalander thine for ever 
With me 't is buried and arise shall never . 
And wherefore serves this glass ? 


Olin.   This is a disamour Cosma lately gave me . 


Glau.   Olinda , know'st not yet the treachery 
Of Cosma , she thy greatest enemy ? 
Prithee let me see 't : shouldst thou this liquor prove , 
I tell thee , friend , 't will quench thy life and love . 
But so I 'll temper 't , it shall better please thee , 
And after few spent hours shall ever ease thee . 


Olin ,  't is beyond art , who there can give relief . 
Where patients hate the cure , more than the grief ? 


Glau.   Yes , by my art , before thou art 12 hours older , 
I 'll ease thy heart , though never make it colder . 


Exeunt . Scen. 3.  

Enter Conchylio . Con.   Glaucilla and Olinda ? I marl what mettle● 
What leaden earth and water nature put 
Into these Nymphs , as cold , as dull , as frozen 
As the hard rocks they dwell on ! But my Mistress 
she 's all quicksilver , never still , still moving , 
Now is she with some shepherd or some fisher , 
And here she sets me to entertain all comers : 
This is the hour her Lover's use to muster . 
But who should this be ? is (null) you , old boy ? Enter Fredocaldo . 
Old ten i' th' hundred , are you the captain ? boo , 


Fred.   Beshrew your heart , you are a very naughty boy , 
I shake every joint of me . 


Con.   no shaking palsy , nor cr●mpe has ta'en possession 
Of your nimble limbes● ha , ha , he . 


Fred.   Boy , where 's thy Mistress ? 


Con.   Where she would be . 


Fred.   where 's that ? 


Con.   Where you would be , 


Fred.   What , in her bed ? 


Con.   Ah old goate● do I smell you ? yet in her bed ? 


Fred.   May not I speak a word or two with her 


Con.   what a fool 't is ? thou hast spoken twice a already 


Fred.   ay But I would speak them in her ear . 


Can.   I know your errand but I prithee tell me Fredocaldoe 
How is (null) possible that all the bellowss in loves father's shop 
Should kindle any fire in ●uch a frost ? 


Fred.   ●hou know'st not what is love , I tell thee boy 
I love fair Cosma more than a●l her lovers . 


Con.   N●w in my conscience he says true , this old wood 
Makes a brighter fire than the greenest ever : 


Fred.   Conchylio thou art deceived , hast not seen 
That of the May the lust of all the year 
Nipped with the hoary frost grows cold and chare ? 
And oft October tho●gh the years declining 
With many dainty flowers is fairly shining 
For as the flaming sun puts out the fire 
So may the heat of love quench love's desires . 


Con.   Cou●d this dotard do as well as speak , he might — 


Fred.   I ●ell thee boy , when I was young — 


Con.   That was at the siege of Troy 
Now shall we hau● , more tales than ever poets made 
But w●at will you give me Fredocaldoe 
If I help thee in the rocky cave , near to the myrtle grove 
To sp●ake with Cosma all alone . 


Fred.   If thou 'lt do it , I 'll give thee as fair an otter tamed for fishing as ever was i● Sicily . 


Con.   Your hand on ●hat : Ah old Saturn cold and dry we 'll I 'll do 't 


Ferd   But when Conchylio when ? 


Con.   Within this hour expect ●er . 


Fred.   wilt thou besure . 


Con.   Why did I ever deceive you ? 


Ferd :  never never : 


Con.   b●eleeve me Fredocaldoe I say believe me then . 


Fred.   Farewell ; I 'll keep my promise . 


Con.   Fail not within this hour : Exit Fredocaldoe . 
I know not what this old man's like , unless 
O●r hill of Sicily the flaming Aetna : 
Whose parches bowels still in fire consuming 
Fills all the valley with flame and pitchy fuming . 
Yet on his top congealed snow doth lie 
As if there were not fire nor Phoebus' nigh . 
Why should we count this strange ? when even so 
This old man's heart 's all fire , his head all snow ? 
But what fresh soldier 's this ? Enter Armillus● 


Ar.   My pretty wag ? 


Con.   Sure you do mistake me , sir , I am another's . 


Ar.   thou dost mistake me , boy , I know well whose tho● art . 


Con.   I doubt you do not . 


Ar.   thou art fair Cosma's boy . 


Con.   My mother told me so . 


Ar.   thou art a very wag , take thi● , my boy . 


Con.   True sir , now I am yours indeed ; what ! yellow ? yours to command : what would you with me ? 


Ar.   Seest thou ! 


Con.   Yes I see very well . 


Ar.   thou art too : quick I prithee let me see thy Mistress . 


Con.   Troth , sir , you cannot , she 's taken up with other business , or rather taken down , yet I 'll try sir. Exit , 


Ar.   oft have I marvelled how the erring eye , 
Which of his proper object cannot lie , 
In other subject , fails so in his duty 
When he 's to judge of 's chiefest object beauty . 
None takes the night for day , the day for night . 
The Lilies seem alike to every sight : 
Yet when we partial judge of beauty's graces , 
Which are but colours plac'● in woman's faces , , 
The eye seems never sure the selfsame show 
And face , this thinks a swan , and that a crow . 
But sure our minds with strong affections tainted , 
Look through our eyes as through a glass that 's painted . 
So when we view our loves , we never see 
What they are , but what we fain would have them be . 
Thus Atyches . Perindus thus affecting 
These Nymphs , make them seem worthiest their respecting , 
And thus to lovo their beauties never move them : 
But therefore beauteous seem because they love them . 
Me thinks this Cosma far them both excels , 
In whose high forehead love commanding dwells . 
I like not this same too much modesty , 
Commend the Senate for their gravity . 
The wanton Nymph doth more delight me far , 
The modest Nymphs do more seem chaste then are , 
Women are all alike , the difference this , 
That seems and is not , that both seems and is . 
Or if some are not , as they call it , ill , E●ter Conchylo . 
They want the power and means , but not the william  


Con.   My Mistress as yet is so overlaid with sport or business , she cannot speak with you : may not I know your errand ? 



Ar●  My errand boy is love . 



Con.   Love ( 'em ) 't is light enough , I shall carry it away : 't is so short I shall remember it ; but troth sir , another golden star this starless night dropped in my hand , may chance to give light to make my Mistress shine in your arms . 



Ar.   Hold thee boy , hold thee : will that content thee ? 



Con.   Sir do you know the myrtle grove ? 



Ar.   Yes well . 



Con.   Your star will conduct you thither strait , within this hour she 'll meet you there . 



Ar.   How canst thou assure it ? 


Con.   Trust me I 'll procure it ; 
Else never more let me see golden stars . 


Ar.   I 'll try thee boy , 't is but one misspent hour , 
If thou perform thy promise good Conchylio , 
Many such glittering nights shall shine on thee . 


Con.   If ? make no question sir.  


Ar.   Farewell . 


Con.   Adieu . Exit . 
This strange new bird , this goose with golden eggs 
Must with some grain of hope be cherished , 
And yet not fed too fat ; now for my Crab , 
here 's his twin , if heaven's signs are right . Enter Scrocca . 
Next to the crab , the twin must come in sight , 
I 'll out and seek him . 


Scen. 4.  

Scroeca , Cancrone . Scr.   Sail home by land quotha ? well , I 'll have that saddle boat hung up for a monument in the temple of Odoxcom , hard by the everlasting shoes , and now to see the ill luck on 't never mo●e need of ●ish , a bouncing feast toward , umber of guests , not a whiting , not a haddock , not a cod-mop in the house : and in stead of catching fish , we must go fish for our nets , Cancrone , come along , along , along : the ork 's dead and buried , the ork 's dead and buried . 



Can.   I but does not his ghost walk thereabouts ? within . 

On afo●e , I 'll follow hintly fintly , by the hobnails of Neptun● horseshoes — 



Scr.   Nay if you swear , we shall catch no fish , what Can●rone , sneak you still ? whoop , we shall fish fairly if your searmore be off : Enter Cancro●e bu●ning his coat . 

How now , what all in white ? 



Can.   Seest not I am busified ? dost thou think a man can button his coat and talk all at once ? 



S●r.   My pretty sea-cob , why I prithee why in thy white ? 



Con.   Ino triumph I Ino triumph ● tell thee this is my triumphing suit , did not we vanquish the Ork ? 



Scr.   I hope so : ●oo but all our fellow fishers say 't was Aty●hes . 



Can.   Thus Atyches killed him alive , and we killed him dead . 



Scr.   I prithee on with thy gaberdine again . 



Can.   My old s●aly slimy gaberdine ? why , if I should fish in that , every fin would smell me . 



Scr.   Well , our nets are not above ground , what shall we do ? 



Con.   Why then Sir , you must go seek them under ground . 



Scr.   Well Sir , you 'll follow . Exit . 



Can.   Muddy Scrocca , canst thou not perceive Cancrone's inside by his new outside ? my old Ork apparel , my pitch patch poledavies had no good perfume for a sweet lover , as I now must be : but why a lover ? because I mean to kill the next Ork hand to hand ; for my master's sister's sweetheart Ataches , because a lover , therefore an Ork-killer . 



Enter Conchylio . Con.   What ? old crab tortoise ? has the Ork made you cast your shell ? 



Can.   Fish me no fishing : I 'm all for flesh . 



Con.   Thy lob hath learned that fishers keep no lent . 



Can.   Therefore thou blue-beard Neptune , and thou triumphing Triton , and thou watchet jacket Gl●ucus' , Dau●us , Maucus' , and all the rest of the salt fish gods , I denounce you all , and for your formable farewell , I do here reach forth to your dropping drivelling deities my love warm hand to kiss . 

So , have you done ? Fie flapmouth . Conchylio spits in 's hand . 

Triton , thou beslaverest me . 



Con.   OH doughty loves ! here 's more game for my mistress' net , or rather for mine . 



Can.   Nothing but Venus' smock or Cupid's wing shall wipe it dry ; surmount thy wagging wanton wing to me , god Cupid . 



Con.   Are you there ? I Orkt you once , and now I 'll fit you for a Cupid . Exit . Conchyl . 



Can.   Me thinks I am grown very eloquent already ; thanks sweet love ; OH now for my master Perindus , he has a fine cross cut with 's arms , and yet that Ork-catcher Ataches has a pestilence carriage on 's pate : the Nymphs believe him partly : so , so , so . Now Cupid do I come to thee , 
To thee , upon my barehead knee : 
Knee never barehead yet before , 
Before it begged at thy door . 






Enter Scrocca . with his nets . Scr.   What ? devout Cancrone knocking at Cupid's door ? 



Can.   Ah Scrocca , thou hast corrupted the goodest verse ! I was making my supplantation to Trusty Triton for good luck , and see if he have not heard me : our nets are returned . 



Scr.   He might well hear thee for this once : for thou dost not trouble him often . But if I had not looked to them better than he had , we might have gone whistle for them : come Cancrone , will you go ? 



Can.   Yes I warrant you , I 'll peradventure my person in a Cockboat . 



Scr.   Why then we 'll take the galley foist . 



Can.   Go foist if you will , the burned child dreads the water , and good men are scanty , make much of one , Cancrone . 



Scr.   Well , if you come , you shall have us at the red roche . 



Can.   Yes , I 'll fish on land for mermaids . Exit . 

This dogfish had almost put me out of my love-lesson . 
Now to thee again , courteous Cupid . 
All sunk and soused i● soppy love , 
Cupid for thy mother's dove 
Help . Enter Con●hylio in Cupid's habit . 


Con.   All hail , Cancrone , according to thy wish I here am present great King of hearts , Duke of desires , Lord of love , whom mortals gentle Cupid do clepe . 



Can.   Be'st thou Cupid ? thou art vile like our Conchylio . 



Con.   True , Cancrone , and lest the beams of my bright deity should with their lustre wound those infant eyes , I have vouchsafed in this form to appear , lo , thy Conchylio and thy Cupid here , what wouldst thou with me ? 



Can.   I have a suit to your godship . 



Con.   So it be not your Ork-suite I embrace it : say on , my darling . 



Can.   I am in love as they say , but I cannot tell whom to be in love withal . 



Con.   Here are Nymphs enough , Vrina , Olinda , Lilla , Glaucilla , Bobadilla , 



Can.   Me thinks that Boberdil sounds like a fine playfellow for me . 



Con.   no , I 'll tell thee one , her name shall make thy mouth water . 



Can.   Make water in my mouth ? that 's Vrina , I 'll none of her , she 's too high coloured . 



Con.   no , 't is Cosma , the fisher's flame , the shepherd's hope , whose beauty Pas admires . 



Can.   ay , but will you throw forth a good word for me ? 



Con.   I tell thee I 'll make her all to belove thee , she shall not rest til●●hee meet thee here ; but first I must arm thee with some magic charms . 



Can.   What be they ? my chaps would fain be champing them . 



Con.   First you must anagrammatise her name , then sympathise your own . 



Can.   Tize , zize , thize . I shall never hit that . 



Con.   For an anagram I 'll fit you : Cosma a smock . 



Can.   Pretty . 



Con.   For the sympathy of your own name but thus , your name Cancrone bids you counterfeit the counter-creeping crab ; and go backward to her . 



Can.   Do I look like a crab ? I had rather go forward to a Nymph . 



Con.   Thirdly , because every fisher is born under Pisces , therefore the sign is in the foot with you : you must come therefore with one foot bare . 



Con.   I but shall I not catch cold and cough and spoil my part ? 



Can.   It mu●t be the right foot : and then see●t thou this myrtle tree ? all my arrows are made of the wood of it , thou must in her sight get up and gather the highest bough of it . 



Con.   ay but what shall I do with the bough ? 



Con.   OH the bough ? why , setting thus ● pretty while , you must wrap a cockle garland about it , and then when the poor lass melts and consumes with thy love — 



Can.   then I 'll throw it at her , & come down to her , shall I not● 



Con.   Excellent well , I see thou art inspired . 



Can.   Nay I ●an take it , if you put it to me . 



Con.   But the just nick when thou must throw it is , when she says I die , I cry , I lie . 



Can.   I die , I cry , I lie . I would have her lie , but not die , but will you make her come indeed ? 



Con.   I and in her best clothes too . 



Can.   Nay 't is no such matter for clothes , but what must I say ? I had almost forgot it . 



Con.   Nothing but a short charm , which I 'll teach you as we go on afore , I 'll follow you . 



Can.   Let me see : backward ? 



Con.   Blockhead . 



Can.   Bareleg ? 



Con.   Beetlepate . 



Can.   Cockleshell ? 



Con.   Coxcomb . 



Can.   Boughs ? 



Con.   Bussard . 



Can.   The town 's ours . I no triumphs I no triumphs 



Con.   I 'll cool my hot lover , he shall sit on a perch for a stale , now must I be uncupidate , & shortly appear here Cosmafied , it shall be hard but with the same limetwig I 'll catch a bigger bird than this . First I will serve myself , my mistress after ; 
My bait is seeming love , my prey true laughter . 






Scen. 5.  

Enter Pas solus . What art , strength , wit can tame a fish or fly ? 
The least of creatures used to liberty , 
With loss of life shake off base captive chains , 
And with restraint all life disdains . 
But I , ah fool , yield up myself a slave , 
And what they shun , by death do basely crave : 
My grief more than my folly , who deplore 
That which all others use to wish before : 
My love loves too too much too many , 
For while she liketh all , she loves not any . 
Love , let my prayers yet thus far only move thee , 
Let me her falsely , or ●he truly love me . Enter Cosma . 
See where she comes ; and that so bright a sun 
Should have no sphere , no certain race to run : 
I 'll stand and overhear her . 
Cos.   I can but smile to think how foolish wise 
Those women are , that choose their loves for wisdom . 
Wisdom in man's a golden chain to tie 
Poor women in a glorious slavery . 


P●ss .  Hark Heavens ! OH monstrous ! hark . OH women , women . 


Cos.   Fond men , that blame the love that ever ranges 
To foul and sluttish love , that never changes . 
The Muse's love by course , to change their meeter , 
Love is like linen often changed , the sweeter . 


Pas.   Thus these neat creatures , dead with love and all , 
By shunning beastliness , make it bestial . 


Cos.   Our beauty is our good , the cause of love : 
Fond that their good to th' best will not improve ; 
What Husbandman neglects his time of sowing ? 
What fisher loseth winds , now fairly blowing ? 
Beauty our good : ah good , ah short and bri●tle , 
A little little good , for time as little , 
How easy dost thou slide , and pass away ? 
Unborn , full grown , and buried in a day . 
Thy spring is short , and if thou now refuse it , 
't is gone , when fain thou wouldst , thou shalt not use it . 
The time and every minute daily spends thee . 
Spend thou the time , while time fit leisure lends thee . 


Pas.   Does she not blush ? hark , women , here 's your preacher , 
Maids , you want a Mistress ; here 's a teacher . 


Cos.   Now since Conchylio spoke of this Armillus , 
My new found lover , I half long to try him : 
Too cruel she that makes her hearts contenting , 
To see a heart languish in loves tormenting . 
What though i'th' ' night we live most wantonly ? 
IN th' morn with clothes we put on modesty . 
Thus though we sport , and wanton all the night 
Next su●ne I 'll act a part of fear and fright . 


Pas.   Modesty ? marry guipp : these are your modest creatures . 


Cos.   Long have I hated Olinda , and Glaucilla , 
And one of them by this hath drunk her la●● , 
The next shall follow ere the next day's past . 
The gin is laid , and if it hit aright , 
This is her last , this her eternal night . 
Perindu●'s long I have long loved , who ever scorned me , 
Because he loves Glaucilla ; I know he 'll grieve : 
But when the tempest once is overblowne , 
Hoist up all sails ; the prize is sure mine own . 
Ill for a woman is that woman placed , 
Who like old janus , is not double faced . 
Now to Armillus who sure expects me . 
How dark the night ? more fit for Lover's play . 
The darkest night is lover's brightest day . Exit Cosma . 


Pas.   Well M●stris jana with your double face , 
I think I shall outface you by and by . 
I 'll fit you for a face i'fayth , I could be mad now . 
Well , since you are sportive , I 'll make one i' th' play ; 
You have a fool already , I 'll act a Devil ; 
And since you needs must to a new consort , 
I 'll bear a part , and make or mar the sport . 


Enter Perindus . Scen. 6.  

Perindus●'s Pas.  Per.   Atyches ? 


Pas.   no : Pas.  


Per.   If thou seest Atyches , send him hither friend ; Exi● Pas.  
Of all the plagues that torture souls in h●ll , 
Tant●le , thy punishment doth most excel . 
For present goods , thy evil most express , 
Making thee unhappy in thy happiness . 
Such are my pains : my blessedness torment's me , 
I see , and may enjoy what more torment's me . 
My life then love , I rather would forsake , 
Yet for my life , my love I dare not take . 
Glaucilla , couldst thou see this wretched breast , 
What torment's in it never resting rest , 
Whom now thou thinkst the cause of all thy grieving , 
then thou wouldst judge the wretchedst creature living . 
she 's here . Enter Glaucilla . 


Glau.   Perindus , whither goest thou ? the day 's enough 
To show thy scorn , the night was made for rest . 
For shame if not for love , let night relieve me : 
Take not that from me , which thou wilt not give me . 
Know'st thou this place ? even here thou first didst vow , 
Which I believe , and still me thinks even now 
Cannot unbeliev't , that when thy constant heart , 
From his first only vowed love should start , 
These waving seas should stand , whose rocks remove● 


Per.   Fa , lafoy , lafoy , fa , lafoy , lafoy , lah.  


Glau.   OH dancing levity , you steady rocks , 
Still stand you still ? his faith he lightly mocks . 
Ye ●leeting waves , why do you never stand ? 
His words , his love , his oaths , are written in sand . 
In rocks and seas I find more sense and loving , 
The rock less hard than he , the sea less moving . 


Per.   Didst never see the rocks in sailing move ? 


Glau.   Not move , but so● me to mou● . 


Per.   My picture right . 


Glau.   What says Perindus ? 


Per.   ha , ha , he , how scurvily grief laughs ! 


Glau.   Perindus , by all the vows I here conjure thee● 
The vow that on thy soul thou didst assure me , 
Tell me why thus my love thou false refusest ? 
Why me thy faith thyself thou thus deceivest ? 


Per.   Aye me . 


Glau.   How fares my love ? 


Per.   Ah Glaucilla . 


Glau.   I know thou can●t not hate me . 


Per.   I cannot hate , but laugh , and dance and sport , 
This is not hate , Glaucilla , 't is not hate . 


Glau.   Canst thou Perindus thus delude me ? 
i  lived enough , farewell : thou laughed haste viewed me . 


Per.   Glaucilla ? 


Glau.   How canst thou speak that hated name ? 


Per.   Stay : 


Glau.   To be mocked ? 


Per.   Stay , I 'll tell thee all . 


Glau.   Me thinks this forced mirth does not beseem thee : 
Sure 't is not thine , it comes not from thy heart . 


Per.   Glaucilla , call back thy wish , seek not to know 
thine or my death , thou winst thine overthrow . 


Glau.   Thy grief is common , I have my part in thine : 
Take not that from me which is justly mine . 


Per.   if I had any joy , it were thine own , 
But grant me to be wretched all alone . 


Glau.   Now all thy grief is mine , but it unhiding , 
Half thou wilt take away , by half dividing . 


Per.   thou seekest my love , it is my love to hide it , 
And I shall show more hate , when I divide it . 


Glau.   Thy love thus hid , to me much hatred proves , 
Unhide thy hate , this hate will show it loves : 


Per.   Glaucilla , while my griefs untouched rest , 
My better part seems quiet in thy breast . 


Glau.   So thou art well , but still my better part , 
Perindus , sinks all loaden with his smart : 
So thou my finger cut'st , and woundst my heart . 


Per.   Since than thou wilt not give me leave to hide it , 
Briefly 't is thus : when thou thy love hadst vowed me 
Most sure , but yet no certain time allowed me ; 
My marriage day as all my good desiring , 
To Prote●s' Cell I went , the time enquiring , 
There heard these words , the cause of all my sadness , 
The ca●se of all my seeming hate and gladness . 
Thus went th' Oracle . 
The day , that thou with grief so long forbearest , 
Shall bring thee what thou wishest most and fearest . 
Thy sister's grave shall be her marriage bed , 
In oneself day twice dying , and once dead . 
Thy friend , whom thou didst ever dearest choose , 
In losing thou shalt find , in finding loose . 
And briefly to conclude the worst at last , 
thou , or thy Love shall from a rock be cast . 
Glaucilla , had thy love but with my life been prized , 
My life t' enjoy thy love I had despised . 
But since it may be thine , thy life destroying , 
Shall ne'er be given for my love's enjoying : 
Much rather , let me live in fires tormenting , 
then with such purchase buy my hearts contenting . 


Glau.   then love 's the cause of all thy seeming hate , 
What hast thou seen in me , that I should seem , 
My life more than thy love , or mine esteem ? 
Perindus thy hat● hath cost me often dying , 
So haste th●u given me death , by death denying : 
For th' Oracle , with death I am contented , 
And will not fear , what cannot be prevented . 


Per.   Yet though such mischief Proteus did divine , 
Much better sped I at my father's shrine : 
Coming to Delphos , where the Pythian maid 
Told me my wishes' should be fully paid 
And that within few● days I should arrive 
Through many bitter storms , into the hive . 


Glau.   Why doubtst thou then ? ad●ew love till to morrow , 
Next rising sun shall to thee ease thy sorrow . 


Per.   Mayst thou prove true , or if heaven bade decree 
The good be thine , light all the bad on me . 


Glau.   Farewell . Exit . 
thou givest Glaucilla what thou wishest good rest . 
This victory my mind hath whole possessed , 
And from my eyes shuts out all sleep and rest : 
If I but slumber , straight my fancy dreams , 
This Atyches is much more than he seems : 
Coming to his couch , I found his empty bed 
As yet untouched , himself from sleep is fled . 
But soft , whom have we here ? Enter Atyches . 


Atych.   The Ox now feels no yoke , all labour sleeps , 
The soul unbent , this as her playtime keeps , 
And sports itself in fancies winding streams , 
Bathing his thoughts in thousand winged dreams . 
The fisher tired with labour , snorteth fast , 
And never thinks of pains to come or passed , 
Only love waking rest and sleep despises , 
Sets later than the sun , and sooner rises . 
With him the day as night , the night as day , 
All car● , no rest , all work , no holy-days 
How different from love is lover's guise ! 
He never opens , they never shut their eyes . 


Per.   ha : this is he , I 'll stand and overhear him . 


Atych.   So : I am alone , there 's none but I , 
My grief , my love , my wont company , 
And which best fits a grieved lovers spirit , 
The silent stars and solitary night . 
Tell me heavens sentinels that compass round 
This ball of earth , on earth was never found 
A love like mine , ●o long , so truly served , 
Whose wage is hate , have all my pains deserved 
Contempt ? mine and her ; for she dear affected : 
The more I loved , the more I was neglected . 
Since thou canst love where thou hast hatred proved , 
Olinda , how canst thou hate where thou art loved ? 
Thy body is mine by conquest , but I find , 
Thy body is not always with thy mind . 
Give both o● none , or if but one , o'th'two 
Give me thy mind , and let thy body go . 
If this without thy mind I only have● 
What giv'st thou more to me then to thy grave ? 
Prove me , my dear , what canst thou hate in me ? 
Unless my love , my love still bend on thee ? 
My name 's Thalander , perhaps it doth displease thee , 
I will refuse my name , if that may ease thee . 
Thalander to exile we 'll still confine , 
And ●'le be Atyches , so I be thine . 


Per.   Thalander ? is (null) possible ? I oft suspected 
How he is altered ! not himself ! is (null) possible ? 


Aty.   Yet what thou hat'st , thy brother loves as well . 
Tell me , my dearest love , what have I done ? 
What has Thalander done ? ah tell me . 


Per.   more 
Than thousand such as she can ne'er restore , 
Thalander ; start not ; how have my eyes deceived me ? 
Ah , let me bless my arms with thy embraces . 
My dear , Thalander , my only life , my heart , 
My soul , OH of my soul the better part . 
Is (null) thee I hold ; I scarce dare trust mine eyes , 
Which thus deceived me by their former lies . 


Aty.   thou welcom'st misery while thine arms enfold mee● 


Per.   I am the blessedst man that lives to hold thee . 
My heart doth dance to find thee . 


Aty.   Ah Perindus , 
When least thou thinkst , thou art deceived most , 
Myself , my love , my labour I have lost , 
When I have lost myself , to find my love . 


Per.   In losing of thy fame , thou st found 
She loves thee friend most dear , 
And though she thought thy love would be her death● 
Yet for and in thy love , she 'd lose her breath , 
And nothing else should grieve her in the end 
She had one life for such a love to spend . 


Aty.   Do not deceive me . 


Per.   Why shouldst thou mistrust me ? 


Aty.   Perindus , my joy , by too much joy enjoying , 
I feel not half my joy , by overioying . 


Per.   Herself ●hall speak it . Come , let 's go . 


Aty.   't is night ! 


Per.   she 'll think it day , when thou art in her sight . 


Aty.   Led me , for yet my mind , too much affected 
To have it so , makes truth itself suspected . 


Exeunt , CHORUS . 

Love is the fire , damn , nurse , and seed 
Of all that air , earth , waters breed . 
All these earth , water , air , fire , 
Though contraries , in love conspire . 
Fond painters : love is not a lad , 
With b●w , and hafts , and feathers clad ; 
As he is faucied in the brain 
Of some loose loving idle swain , 
Much sooner is he felt then seen , 
His substance subtle , slight and thin , 
oft leaps he from the glancing eyes , 
oft in some smooth mount he lies , 
Soon he wins , the fastest flies : 
oft lurks h● 'twixt the ruddy lips , 
Thence while the heart his Nectar sips , 
Down to the soul the poison slips , 
oft in a voice creeps down the ear , 
oft hides his darts in golden hair , 
oft blushing cheeks do light his fire , 
oft in a smooth soft kin retires , 
Often in smiles , often in tears ; 
His flaming heat in water bears , 
When nothing else kindles desire , 
Eu●n virtues' self shall blow the fire : 
Love with thousand darts abounds , 
Surest and deepest virtue wounds , 
oft himself becomes a dart , 
And love with love , doth love impart . 
thou painful pleasure , pleasing pain , 
thou gainful life , thou losing gain : 
thou bitter sweet , easing disease , 
How dost thou by displeasing please ? 
How dost thou thus bewitch the heart ? 
To love in hate , to joy in smart . 
To think itself most bound , when free , 
And freest in his slavery . 
Every creature is thy debtor , 
None but loves , some worse , some better : 
Only in lou● , they happy prove , 
Who love what most deserves their love . 
Act. 4.  

Scen. 1.  

Enter Perindus and Thalander . Per.   BE patient . 


Aty.   Yes , I am patient , 
And suffer all , while all heavens ills are spent . 


Per.   You give yourself to griefs 


Aty.   Senseless and mad . 
Who in much grief , is not extremely sad ? 


Per.   Alas sir , she was mortal , and must die . 


Aty.   True , true , and could the fates no time aspie 
But this ? to me she never lived till now , 
And now Perindus ? now ! o — 


Per.   She was my sister ! 


Aty.   Alas , thy sister ! 
She was my life , my soul , she was my love , 
She was — words know not what she was to me : 
She was — thou most accursed word of was● 


Per.   Be comforted . 


Tha.   Perindus , the very name of comfort , is most comfortless 
Comfort , joy , hope , lived in her cheerful smiling , 
And now must die , or live in far ex●●ing . 
Comfort , joy , hope , for ever I deny you , 
And would not name you now but to defy you . 


Per.   Sir , with more patience you have often born 
Far greater evils . 


Tha.   Perindus , do not say so , 
If thou yet love me , prithee do not say so : 
Was ever ill as this ? hell's breniary● 
All torment in this narrow space is laid , 
The wo●st of all , in these two words are said : 
Olinda dead ? dead ! whither dost thou lead me ? 
Why , I can go alone , alone can find 
The way I seek , I see it best when blind . 
I prithee leave me . 


Per.   Thalander , I 'll not leave thee , 
Should heaven with thunder strike these arms that clasp thee , 
My dying hands should but more firmly grasp thee . 


Tha.   thou violat'st thy love in thy mistaking , 
And clean forsakest thy friend , in not forsaking 
Olinda : I cannot come , they here enchain me . 
But neither can , nor shall they here detain me . 
i' th' mean time , all the honour I can give thee , 
Is but a grave , that sacred rock , the place 
Of my conception , and my burial : 
Since Hymen will not , death shall make thee mine , 
If not my marriage , my deathbed shall be thine . 
Exeunt . 

Sc●n . 2.  

Enter Rimbombo . Farewell ye mountains , and thou burning Aet●a , 
If yet I do not bear thee in my breast , 
And am myself , a living walking Aetna , 
The Nymphs that on you dwell , are too coy , 
Too coy and proud , more fierce then robbed tiger 
more deaf than seas , and more inflexible 
Than a grown Ork , false , flattering , cruel , crafty , 
And which most grieves me , when I would embrace them , 
Swifter than c●ased Deer , or dogs that chase them , 
You heavens , what have we poor men deserved , 
That you should frame a woman , I and make her 
So comely and so needful ? why should you cloth them 
With so fine a shape ? why should you place 
Gold in their hair , allurement in their face ? 
And that which most may vex us , you impart 
Fire into their burning eyes , y●e to their heart . 
Why sweeten you their tongues with sugared charms 
And force men love , and need their greatest harms ? 
And most of all , why do you make them fleet ? 
Minds as the winds , and wings upon their feet ? 
Of hundred women that I know , 
But one deserves to be a woman : 
Whom better heavens have not made more fair , 
then courteous , loving , kind , and debonair : 
She , when she used our Mountains , oft would stay , 
And hear me speak , and vow , and swear , and pray . 
Here I have learned , she haunts along these shores : 
Within these rocky cliffs I 'll hide myself , 
Till fit occasion , if she have changed her mind , 
then safely may I curse all women . kind . Exit . 
Scen. 3.  

Enter Armillu● . Love , without thee , all life is tedious , 
Without thee , there 's no sweet , no joy , no life ; 
thou first gav'st life , and still with new succession , 
Continuest what thou gav'st , with sweet enticements , 
Taming the strongest rebellion , thy weapons women , 
Whom thou so framest , that proudest men are glad , 
Beaten with them , gently to kiss the rod. 
Either my weighty passions pull too fast 
The wheel of time , or else the hour is past : 
But this is she , or I mistake it . 
Enter Cosma . Cos.   Women that to one man their passions bind , 
As this man altars , so altars still their mind : 
Thus ever change they , as those changing fairs , 
And with their lovers still their love impairs : 
But I , when once my lovers change their graces , 
Affect the same , though now in other faces : 
Thus now my mind is firm , and constant proved , 
Seeing I ever love , what first I loved . 
Who blames the speedy heaven , for ever ranging ? 
love 's fiery , winged , light , and therefore changing . 


Ar.   True , fairest Nymph , Love is a fire still burning , 
And if not slaked , the heart to ashes turning . 


Cos.   If I could scold , sir you might be chidden , 
For coming to my thoughts before y' are bidden . 


Ar.   Blame me not ( Sweet ) thy words do fan thy fires , 
And cool the flames which thy fair eye inspires . 


Cos.   The fire so lately applied , so lately framed ? 
Me thinks , green wood should not be yet inflamed . 


Ar.   Love's flame is not like earths , but heaven's fire , 
Like lightning , with a flash it lights desire . 


●os .  I love not lightning : lightning love that flashes 
before 't be all on fire , will be all ashes . 


Ar.   Gather the fruit then while 't is yet unblasted . 


Cos.   Is (null) worth the gathering ? is it pleasing tasted ? 


Ar.   Take say ●f this . kisses her . 
Monster ? 


Enter Pas offering to kiss on the other side , disguised like a fury . Cos.   Help ho.  


Exeunt Armil . Cos. several waie● . Scen. 4.  

Pas. Fredocaldo . Pas.   The Doe was almost struck , 't was time I came , 
For once I 'll be a keeper of the game . 
I see 't is Owl-light , Minerva's waggoner , Enter Fred.  
My old rival , who this twenty years 
saw nothing but what shined through gla●se windows , 
What comes he for ? I 'll stay a while and watch him . 


Fred.   Most happy age that shall be crowned with love 
Of thy love , Cosma : I am not as I seem , 
Farewell old age , I now am young again 
And feel not ages , but a lover's pain , 
In love I dare adventure with the best , 
Old beaten soldiers are the worthiest : 
If all my rivals heard I could dare them , 
If ●uriess should outfront me , I 'd outstare them . Pas runs upon him , he falls and lies . 


Exit . Pas.  Enter Con●hylio in his Mistress' apparel . Con.   How well my Mistress Cosma's clothes do fit me ? 
What pity 't was , I was not made a woman ? 
I think ● should have made a pretty Nymph : ha ? 
I could have been a pitiful creature , 
And yet perhaps , a good unhappy wench . 
Cosma by this hath met with her Armillus● 
And sports herself : could I meet Fredocaldo , 
I should have sport enough : She stumbles at Fred.  
What Fredocaldo dead ? cou●age , man  


Fred.   I had a fearful dream and scarce am waken . 


Con.   Come shake off dreams , sleep is not fit for lovers , 
we 'll to the rocky cave . 


Fred.   My sun ? my fire ? 


Con.   But Fredocaldo , can you think that fire 
Can love cold water , the sun can frost desire ? 


Fred.   I tell thee fairest Cosma , those fair eyes 
Bring back my spring : 
Wrong not thyself , dear love , so fair a day 
Cannot but make midwinter turn to May. 
Cold rheums I feel not , no frost 's locked in this chests 
Thy love begets a summer in my breast . 


Con.   Fie Fredocaldo : 
Not in the open air . 


Ex●unt● Scen. 5.  

Armillus . Cosma Ar.   Wha● furies haunt this grove ? is not this Cosma ? 
Yes : here again she comest most blessed heavens , Enter Cosma 
I see that ye are more gracious than Hell's spiteful . 
Cosma ? 


Cos.   Armillus . 


Ar.   My love . 


Cos.   Sure thou hast done some cruel murder , 
And the unexplate ghost thus haunts thee . 


Ar.   I never thought it , Cosma : rather some power of these woods , 
Too envious of my good hap , and jealous of thy favour , 
Thus crosses our desirest but if again 
He chance to interpose his horrid face , 
I 'll rather die , then leave thy wished embrace . Enter Pa● disguised . 
All hell and furies haunt us. Exit A● . 


Pa● .  Well overtaken , Nymph , start not , you are sure , 
S●e I am your familiar . 


Cos.   Beshrew your heart for thus affrighting me . 


Pas.   Do you not blush to cast your love upon a man , 
Whose love is as himself an alien ? to thine own 
thou mak'st thee strange , familiar to unknown . 


Cos   P●sh , thou art foolish , did I ever bind thee to me 
Only ? why shouldst thou then confine me 
To thy sole passion ? so oft before 
You men have changed , that you can change no more : 
From bad to worse , from worse , to worst of all : 
There lie you now , and can no lower fall : 
And as you wished that we should never rove , 
We pray as fast , that you at length could move . 
Cease then for shame to rail at woman's ranging : 
When men begin , women will leave their changing . 
Farewell . 


Pas.   Nay soft , I am dog well bitten , 
And will not part so easily with my prey , 
I have not tasted venison many a day . 


Cos.   I cannot well deny thee , 't is thy right : 
thou well hast purchased it , this be thy right . 


Exe●●t . Scen● 6.  

Conchylio . Con.   ha , ha , he : this old dry stubble , how it cracks i' th' burning ! alas poor sapless oak : 't is time 't were down , I stayed till he was ready , all unready , but when he began to put on his spectacles , away slipped I : he 'll do my mistress little hurt . Spectacles ! hah , ha , he ! now for my loving Lobster , this is his time ; and if the Cyclops too do keep his promise , OH what rare compound of mirth● I 'll make , while the one with shame , the other with fear I 'll take ! 

The fish comes already to the net . Enter Cancrone , going backward upon her . He looks over his shoulders . 



Can.   To all I speak , but I tell no man , 
Whether I love Nymph or woman . 


Con.   Tell not me , but tell the rocks , 
Not words must disciple you but knocks . 
I am out of your debt for a rhyme . 


Can.   I think she knew my cue , 
The charm begins to work already . 


Con.   I know not how this fisher's hook hath caught me , 
I ever for his rudeness love him : 't is the badge of innocence . 


Can.   Somewhat rude if you will , but innocent in your face . 


Con.   OH those glearing eyes that dart the beams , 
The beams that drowned my heart with fiery streams . 


Can.   Now to Cupid's arrow tree , and she sinks downright condoling ; Cosma , I have pity on thee , but it beseems a man of my confession , to have a negligent care of his good reparation abroad in the world and elsewhere ; I would be loath to be seen in my love-worke , I 'll mount the tree and scry the coast . He goes up the tree . 



Con.   Stay not , but come again thyself , sweet heart , to receive me . 



Can.   OH ho , here 's abundance of people , abundance a lookers on , I dare not love thee before them all , we 'll into the myrtle grove present . 



Con.   Quickly return , my love , return Cancrone my dearest . 



Can.   Stand forth Cosma , and say on till thou come to that , I cry , I die , I lie . 



Con.   I spy him now approaching , Enter Rimbombo . What though he be all rags in his limbs ? what though his gesture taste of violence ? we Nymphs , they say , like not such wooers worst . 



Rim.   thou speakest of thy Rimbombo , that myrtle groves which love the winding shores , deserve to be to Venus consecreate , as faster friend● to lovers , than the woods and caves of all the Mounts of Sicily , whose Nymph● do coily shun and mock our troops , 



Con.   you come somewhat before your time , Rimbombo , 
And Yet in love prevention is no crime : 
Lovers may come before , not out of time . 
And truly I wish , y 'had come a little sooner . 
●uen now a mongrel crabbed fisher swain 
Laid siege to this unconquered fort . 


Rim.   What wight of bravest blood by sea and land dares share with me in Cosma's love ? by Polypheme my sea-bred fire I vow , the sand on which he treads , is not so small , as shall this pestle make his pounded bones . 



Con ,  Nay now he treadeth not upon these sands , but is fled up to the hills , and shortly thence will of himself come tumbling down to me . 



Rim.   I would he durst : I never yet but once did taste of fisher's blood , 't is jolly sweet : come fisher , this way or that way I am for you at both weapons , club or teeth : let 's to the grove , see , every myrtle tree bids war to fisher's peace , and joy to me . Why weeps my Cosma ? Sweet , fear not that which thou desirest . 



Con.   Sweet Cyclops , meanest thou to ravish me ? 



Rim.   OH heavens thine own appointed time and place , thine , own sweet Cyclops , and can ravishment ? — 



Con.   Why this know ; we Nymphs that long live chaste , and wear our girdle of virginity — but lo , Diana stops my tongue , she bends her deadly bow , I dare not . 



Rim.   Speak on , here 's none but trees , and thy trusty true Rimbombo . 



Con.   By that bright flame which like one only sun gives day to 'th sphere of thy majestic face , I thee adjure , that thou disclose to none this sacred mystery . 



Rim.   Not : to my mother : no not in my dream : say on 



Con.   We neither yield , nor take in love delight , 
Until our girdle fi●st be once unplight 
By lover's hands , and then about his waist , 
By our own hands the same be tied fast . 
Now all is out . 


Rim.   A pretty piece of work , my hands do their office nimbly 
I have unfettered thee , come put this sweet yoke on me . 


Con.   Nay turn about , it must be tied contrary to other girdles , just behind . Stand nearer to me , yet near . 



Rim.   As close as thou wilt , Cosma ; I would your filthy fisher saw us now , 't would make his teeth water . 



Con.   hang him stinking Lobster , he da●res not look upon any of thy kin : his haddock eyes would start out of his head , if he should see but one hair of Rimbombo's head . 



Rim.   How long wilt thou be tying me ? 



Con.   The more knots I tie , the faster will my love be to you : but you 'll be prating of this secret , when you come home among your mounting Nymphs . 



Rim.   If I do , than ge●d me : hast thou done ? 



Con.   I have but three knots to tie : they are all true knots . 



Rim.   When thou hast done , prithee come kiss me , Cosma , Conchylio steals away , leaving him bound to the tree where Cancrone is . I see thou art a pure virgin , thou never didst this office before , thou art no quicker at it . What Cosma ? what ? no Cosma ! what a wooden wench ? here 's a true love knot with a witness . OH faithless Cosma ! OH witless Rimbombo ! OH Nymph ! OH fishers ! OH shepherds ! OH Satyrs ! OH Cyclops ! 



Enter Conchylio again . Con.   ha , ha ha : OH love ! OH wit ! OH tree ! OH girdle ! OH platterface ! 
OH oyster eyes ! 


Rim.   thou bitch , thou witch , thou spawn of a mermaid . 



Con.   thou Aetna , thou Chaos , thou Hell : nay tug and tug , my virginity is tough and strong enough : OH for , some Nymphs fishers or shepherds to bait this Ork . I 'll out and call in some bandog : so ho , so ho , ho , ho.  Exit . 



Rim.   The knots are so many , the girdle so strong , and the tree stands so fast . OH anger ! OH shame ! here she 'll bring in all the country to laugh me to death , hide yet thy face with some of these lower boughs . 



Enter Conchylio . Con.   So ho , so ho : OH dogged fortune ! not one Nymph to be found not one feat fisher ! not one : but that feating fisher that is ready to wing his sea token net on the Cyclops blockhead . 



Rim.   Away thou monstrous woman , o , oh● 



Con.   Away thou monstrous man's ah ha hey . 



Rim.   How now ! what 's that ? what , have I another witness of my folly ? what gobbet of man's flesh grouse upon this tree ? 



Con.   I 'll have a graft of this mi●tle tree , it bears fine love worms , on the stock , a maggot would up in a Cobweb , on the bough a barnacle , which ere long will fall and turn to a goose : now Cupid's gosling , now on your barehead knee , go beg at Cupid's door . 



Can.   Ah cursed Cupid● I 'll no more of thy service , I had rather fight with nine Orks , ha , hei , au . 



Rim.   Come down thou fished bitten ; my mouth shall catch thee . Gentle C●sma , I 'll forgive thee all , & love thee yet , if thou wilt help to reach my walking stick ; I 'll make my young Ork-catcher believe he shall be his grandsires heir . 



Con.   Your staff ? marry and shalt , it 's a pretty pole to bang those boughs withal , and when thou dost it , do but gape , and that rotten plum will fall into thy mouth . 



Can.   Nay , I know of old I should be devoured . 



Con.   Thy staff , Rimbombo , is not for a weak Nymph to lift . 



Rim.   Yet a little more to this hand : O o , my shoulder 's thunderstruck ! OH coward jove , to strike me on the back , bu● waste our fisher lubber ? is he escaped our hands ? 



Con.   Why Cancrone , rise , I 'll help thee . 



Can.   Good Charon carry me over gently , my bones are sore , and your boat side so hard . 



Con.   Give me thy hand , I 'll waft thee . 



Can.   I tell thee Charon , I have nothing to give thee for ferriage , I 'll help to row , I have been a poor fisher while I lived 



Rim.   I would I were there too , but that I should sink Charon's boat with a tree at my back . 



Con.   Why valorous Cancron● , view thyself and me thy captive Cosma , we are conquerors , behold our enemies in fetters fast bound . 



Can.   am I alive indeed ? me thought this leg hung out of Charon's boat i' th' water , did I tie the Orks there ; Cancro●● Come captain , let 's go triumphing to the temple . rises up . 



Con.   Nay , the ork 's dead and buried , this is the second fatal for the Cyclops . 



Can.   Is he safe ? I 'll make side-slops on him . I lay studying how to deal with him upon equal terms : come if thou darest , thou sea-bred brat of Polyphemes' sine , you that would lick your lips at sweet fisher's blood ! sweet fisher's blood ! mark that Cosma : I hope you think so too . 



Rim.   Sweet fisher , I will turn thy net maker if thou wilt undo me . 



Can.   no , it shall ne'er be said that I was the undoing of any man by net-making , and besides , I have forsworn the muddle trade . 



Con.   Cancrone●'s where 's thy spirit ? this is that pocketed up thy grandsire in his wide entrails . 



Can.   Me thought , when I was on the tree● his breath smel● of fish , my stomach even foamed at him . Now then , sir Bompelo , as that Ork mouth of thine did crumb thy porridge with my grandsires brains , and then gave him his death's wound too , so will I first mince out thy scald-pate bones , and give thy flesh to a fisher's boy for haddock's meat , & then , OH th●n I will ge●d thee , that thou never shalt run rutting after the Nymphs . How lik'st thou this● 



Rim.   Shame and scorn make me silent . 



Con.   Nay , I will tell thee fitter vengeance , use him , as sage Ulysses did his father Polypheme . 



Can.   That same Fool●sheses had ● polecats head , I ●●eane to mitigate him : he was something , as it wa●e about branding a huge stone in a cave , in a goat skin with Polypheme● when the firebrand was asleep . 



Con.   ay , I , in the cave ●e breded ou● Polyph●mes eye , when he was asleep , and you must imitate him ●here 〈◊〉 his own staff , and make it an ex●●guisher fo● that 〈◊〉 la●pe . 



Rim.   This sport I like worst of all : help , gods of the woods . 



Can.   I 'll blow the coal while you take your 〈◊〉 , but will your virginity hold him fast ? 



Con.   I warrant you it has been tried , come be thou my rest , I 'll tilt on thy shoulders . 



Can.   Rant tara , rant taunt : & Cancrone falls , and his dagger from him in the Cyclops reach . I shall make you stumble , let me Come hindermost . 



Con.   OH your Whineyeard , the enemy hath seized on 't . 



Can.   't is no matter , he 'll hardly make it fly out of the Eel-skin , it hath seen no sun this five quarters of a year I am sure . 



Con.   I hope the salt breath of the sea hath sealed it up . 



Can.   OH Cosma , 't is out , let us out too . 



Con.   OH Cancrone , lo thy Cosma , Cupid , and Co●chilio . Cyclops , blame not this my supposed sex , no Nymph , but lad hath caught thee in this snare . Exit . 



Rim.   The greater shame , and fouler scorn to me . 
Up to the hill , Rimbombo fly this shore , 
And never deal with fisher-nymph-lad more . Exit . 


CHORUS , 

This his wives quick ●ate lamenting , 
Orp●hus sat his soul tormenting : 
While the speedy wood came running , 
And rivers stood to hear his cunning 
The hares ran with the dogs along , 
Not from the dogs , but to his song : 
But when all his verses turning , 
Only framed his poor hearts burning : 
Of the higher powers complaining , 
Down he went to hell disdaining : 
There his silver Lute-strings hitting , 
And his potent verses fitting : 
All the sweets that ere ●e taken 
From his sacred mother's brook : 
What his double sorrow gives him● 
And love that doubly double grieves him : 
There he spends to move deaf hell , 
Charming Devils with his spell : 
And ●ith sweetest ask leau● 
Does the Lord of ghosts deceive . 
Charon amazed his boat foreslows , 
While the boat , the sculler rows , 
And of itself to 'th' shore d●th float , 
●●ipping on the dancing moat . 
The t●reeheaded Porter pressed to hear , 
Pricked up his thrice double ●are , 
The Furies , plague● for Gild up-heaping , 
Now as guilty , fell a weeping : 
Ixion , though his wheel stood still , 
Still was wrapped with Musics skill . 
Tantal might have eaten now , 
The fruit as still as was the bough , 
But he fool no longer fearing , 
Starved his taste to feed his hearing . 
Thus since love hath won the field , 
Heaven and Hell , to Earth must yield , 
Blessed soul that diest in love's sweet sound , 
That l●st in love in love art found . 
If but a truelove's joy thou once do prove , 
thou wilt not love to live , unless thou live to lou● . 
Act. 5.  

Scen. 1.  

Enter Alcippus and Thalander with a torch . Tha.   Tell me , Al●ipp●● , is it day or night ? 


Al.   The light you bear , shows you there is no light . 


Tha.   This is none● light was light in her eyes , 
In them it lived , put out with them it dies . 
The sun is quenched . 


Al.   Yet soon will shine again . 


Tha.   Not possible ! heaven's light will ever plain . 
When her two living stars can sink and die , 
How can the sun dream immortality ? 


Al.   Sir , if your to me , or mine to you , might give me privilege , I fain would tell you , that this too fixed love seems ra●her do●ing . 



Tha.   Alcippus , didst thou ever love ? 


Al.   I think sir never . 


Tha.   I think so too , nor canst know what love is . 


Al.   Yet this I know , love still is of the fairest , 
Fond then the love , that loves the withered , 
But madness seems to dote upon the dead . 


Tha.   True , true , Alcippus , love is of the fairest , 
And therefore never tied unto the body : 
Which if compared unto the minds fair graces , 
Seems like the block that Luna's face defaces . 
But grounded on the mind , whose virtuous parts . 
And living beauties are loves surest darts , 
Which makes me now as freely love as ever● 
Her virtue and my love decayeth never . 
Seest thou this rock , Alcippus ? 't is a temple , 
Olinda's temple ! 't is a sacred shrine , 
Where virtue , beauty , and what ere divine , 
Are to be worshipped , prithee friend now leave me , 
Here is an Altar , I must sacrifice . 


Al.   If you will leave your grief . 


Tha.   I will , I will : 
Indeed I will ; leave me : griefs ebb grows low , 
When private heart● th' eye-banks overflow . 


Al.   I will retire , not leave him : well , I fear , 
When two such flood-streams meet , love and despair . 


Tha.   thou blessed Altar , take these worthless offring● , 
The corral 's once more drowned in brine of sorrow , 
These pearly shells , which daily shall be filled 
With my heart's water , through my eyes distilled . 
You corals , whose fresh beauti●s are a shadow 
O● her sweet blushes , ●ell her living graces , 
Though now as you plucked from their native places , 
Are yet as you from your first seat removed , 
He●e fresher shining than when first I loved . 
thou rock , that in thy blessed arms dost enfold her , 
Witness my heart as firm as you do hold her . 
And now good-night thou set sun beauties , never , 
Never more to be seen , good-night for ever , 
thou silver forehead and thou golden hair , 
My best , my only treasure when you were , 
You snowy plains , and you fair modest dies , 
You living stars , but now two quenched lights , 
Whose fall , heaven's stars with feared ruin frights . 
You eyebrows , which like Rainbows two appear ; 
A miracle , Rainbows on sky so clear . 
And all you unseen beauties softly rest , 
Sleep , quiet sleep you in this stony chest , 
I cannot long ; I will not long be from you , 
Shortly I 'll come and in this rocky bed 
Slumber with my Olinda , with Olinda 
I 'll sleep my fil●●meane time as near as may be , 
Here rest mine eyes , rest close by your Olinda . 
He lies down by the rock . Hark , hark ; Arion , thou choice Musician , 
Sing me a note that may awake pale death , 
Such as may move deaf Hell● and Stygian jo●e , 
Such as once Orpheus — OH I am idle , idle : 
Sleep , sleep , mine eyes , this short releasement take you , 
Sleep , sleep for ever ; never more awake you . 
Her face your object never more shall be , 
Sleep then , vain eyes , why should you wish to see ? 


Scen. 2.  

The Rock opens : Enter Olinda led by Glaucus and Cir●e : they retire leaving Olinda . Song . Olin.   thou worthiest daughter of the greatest light , 
Most powerful Circe , and thou honoured Glaucus , 
What duty a poor fisher maid may give you , 
In thanks , and vows , and holy offerings , 
Shall still be ready at your sacred altars . 
Thalander , now to thee , what sacrifice ? 
What offerings may appease thy wronged love ? 
What have I but myself ? ah worthless prize 
Of such , so tried , and so unmoved a faith . 
Ah , could I spend my body , wear my soul , 
And then resume another soul and body , 
And then consume that soul and body for thee , 
All would not pay the use of half my debt . 
How pale he looks , how strangely altered ! 
Is he not dead ? no , no , his pulse is quick , 
His heart is strong , and rising , in his heat , 
Threatens with strokes , my churlish hand to beat : 
Nature , how couldst in one so firmly tie 
Perpetual motion to fixed constancy ? 
How can this wonder fall in Notion , 
A heart unmoved , yet still in motion ! 
Alas he weeps , I hope his grief and fears 
Swim fast away in those sad streaming tears . 
thou st mourned enough , more justly may I weep , 
Leave me thy tears , rest thou and sweetly sleep . 


Thalander starts up . Tha.   Morpheus , one more such dream shall buy me . 
Where , where art , Olinda ? whither , whither fliest thou ? 


Olin.   Nay whither fly's Thalander ? here 's Olinda : 
Tell me why waked the substance thou eschewest● 
Whose shadow in a dream thou gladly viewest . 


Tha.   thou fairest shadow of a Nymph more fair , 
●eath yet I see cannot thy light impair . 


Olin.   thou dreamest still Thalander ! 


Tha.   Ah too too true ; 
For such a sight wake shall I never view . 


Olin.   I live . 


Tha.   Would I were dead on that condition . 


Olin.   So would not I : believe me friend , I live . 


Tha.   could I believe it , I were happy . 


Olin.   If me thou wilt not , trust thy sense , thy eyes . 


Tha.   They saw thee dead , how shall I trust my eye , 
Which either now or then did vouch a lie ? 


Olin.   Credit thy touch . 


Tha.   then like a dream thou 'lt fly , 


Olin.   thou fliest , thou art the shadow love not I : 
Thalander , take this , 't is thine for ever , 
Nothing but death , nor death this knot shall sever . 


Enter Alcippus . Al.   How is this ! have you learned , have you learned your mother Circe's art to raise the dead ? wonder ? think she lives . 



Olin.   What says Thalander ? does he yet believe me ? 



Tha.   If thou art dead , fair hand , how dost revive me ? 



Olin.   Thalander , heart and hand had now been cold but for , Glaucilla , she preventing Cosma , tempered the poisonous vial , changing death for sleep , so gave me life , thee love . 



Tha.   Alcippus , art thou there ? thou art my friend I prithee tell me true , true Alcippus ! dost thou not see Olinda ? 



Al.   I see her in your hand . 



Tha.   Art sure 't is she ? tell me , are we alive ? 
Art sure we wake ? are we not both mistaken ? 
If now I sleep , OH let me never waken . 


Al.   If you would surely know , try if she breathe , 


Tha.   Thy hand lives : do thy lips live too Olinda ! 
Alcippus , she lives and breathes , Al●ippus : 
And with that sugared bread my heart both fired , 
And life and love with thousand joys inspired . 
Ah my Olinda . 


Olind.   My dear , my dear Thalander . 


Tha.   Is (null) possible thou livest ? is (null) sure I hold thee ? 
These happy arms shall never more unfold thee . 


Olin.   Tell me , my love , canst thou such wrongs forgive me ? 


Tha.   My joy , my soul . 


Olin.   I never more will grieve you . 
Canst thou forget my hate , my former blindness ? 
If not , boldly revenge my rash unkindness . 
Pierce this vile heart my souls ungrateful centre , 
Pierce with thy dart where loves dart could not enter . 


Tha.   For thy defence my hand shall still attend thee , 
My hand and heart , but never to offend thee : 
The only penance that I enjoin thee ever , 
Is that we live and love and joy together . 
Think not my hand will sacrilege commit , 
To break this temple where all Graces sit . 


Olin.   True , true my love , 't is vowed a temple now , 
Where ever shall be worshipped love and thou . 


Al.   You happy pair , since Cosma's spight 's defeated , 
And Mago's charmest and death by love is cheated , 
Why stand you here ? 't is time from hence to move : 
This was the bed of death , and not of love . 
Death hath his part of night , love challengeth 
The rest , love claims the night as well as death . 


Tha.   What says my love ? 


Olin.   What my Thalander , ever 
With thee to life or death , but from thee never . 


Al.   This half persuades me to become a lover . Exe●nt . 
Where better could her love then here have nested ? 
Or he his thoughts more daintily have feasted ? 


Manet Alcippus . Scen. 3.  

Enter Tyrinthus and Gryphus . Tyr.   Know'st thou Perindus sister , or Olinda ? 


Al.   I know them both sir.  


Tyr.   Live they yet and breathe ? 


Al.   They live and now most happy . Exit Alcippus . 


Tyr.   thou mak'st me happy , in thy happy news . 
All thanks ye heavenly powers , when I forget 
Your goodness in my children's life and safety , 
Let heaven forget both me and mine for ever . 
Gryphus , back to our ship , and fetch me thence 
The vestments vowed to Neptune , and the chest , 
Wherein I locked my other offerings . Exit Gryphus . 
This rock my heart prefers before a palace . 
Fond men that have enough yet seek for more , 
I thought by traffic to increase my store , 
And striving to augment this careful pelf , 
I lost my goods , my liberty , myself : 
Taken by Persians on the Grecian seas , 
So I my captain and the King did please , 
Soon was I loosed from my slavish band , 
And strait preferred to have a large command , 
There have I now consumed these thrice ●ive summers , 
There might I have lived long in wealth and honour , 
But ah thou little home , how in thy want 
The world so spacious , yet seems too too scanty 
At my departure hence I left two infants , 
Perindus and Olinda , the boy some eight , 
The girl but two years old , their mother dead , 
Who giving life to'th'girle , so took her death , 
And left her own , to give h●● in●ant b●●ath . 
Great jove and Neptune , I will keep my vows , 
Seeing my Children live , two chosen bulls , 
With myrtle crowned , and Oak leaves laid with gold , 
Shall fall upon your altars . 


Enter Pas.  Pas.   You sacred virtues , truth and spotless faith , 
Where will you live , if not in such a Nymph ? 
Whose breast will you now seek ? what mansion ? 


Tyr.   My trembling heart doth some great ill divine , 
And tells me , every grief and fear is mine . 


Pas.   Where now can unsuspected friendship rest ? 
If treachery possess so fair a breast . 


Tyr.   Fishers what news ? 


Pas.   Sir , little as concerns you . 


Tyr.   Pray heavens it do not . 


Pas.   Your habit speaks a stranger , 
And yet me thinks , I somewhat else have ●eene , 
Some lineaments of that face : are you Tyrinthus ? 


Tyr.   The same . 


Pas.   OH cruel heavens I could you find 
no other time , to give him back his country ? 
If thus you give , happy whom you deny , 
The greater good , the greater injury : 
Thy only daughter 


Tyr.   Is dead . Tyrinthus falls . 


Pas.   I should have said so . Alas , he falls . 
Tyrinthus , what , one blow thus strike thee under fortunes feet ? 
How loath his life returns ! 


Tyr.   How well I had forgot my grief , 
And found my rest , with loss of restless life ! 
thou much hast wronged me , fisher , 't is no love , 
Death from his just possession to remove : 
Heavens , ye have thanks for both , yet one you slew , 
Give back half of thy thanks , take but your due : 
I owe you nothing for Olinda , nothing . 
Ah poor Olinda●'s I shall never more , 
Never more see thee : thy father must lament thee , 
Thy father , wh● in death should long prevent thee , 
How long since died she ? 


Pas.   With the last sun she fell . 


Tyr.   Sure heavens , ye mock me : alas , what victory ? 
What triumph in an old man's misery ? 
When you have won , what conquest , that you slew 
A wretch that hated his life as much as you ? 


Pas.   Sir , you forget yourself : to war with heaven , 
Is no less fond , then dangerous 


Tyr.   Tell me fisher , have you a child ? 


Pas.   no sir.  


Tyr.   no marvel than 
thou blamest my grief , of which thou hast no ●ence : 
First loose a child , then blame my patience . 


Pas.   If thou be grieved , this is no way to ease it , 
Sooner we anger heaven , than thus appease it . 


T●y .  But when the heart such weight of sorrow bears , 
It speaks from what it feels , and what it fears . 
Died she by a natural , or by violent means ? 


Pas.   Nature refuses an office so unnatural . 


Tyr.   Hard fate , most fitly were you women made : 
Since fate unmerciful , unmoved stands , 
Well was life's distaff put in woman's hands . 
Killed by a man ? 


Pas.   no man was so unnatural . 


Tyr.   A woman ! 


Pas.   Yes . 


Tyr.   Fit instrument of women : what was the weapon ? 


Pas.   The coward's weapon , poison . 


Tyr.   Canst tell the murderer's name ? 


Pas.   Her name Glaucilla : 
A Nymph thought absolute , though now infected , 
That heaven itself might sooner be suspected . 


Tyr.   Tell me the circumstance . 


Pas.   'T will but more grieve you . 


Tyr.   True , but 't is pity in unhelpt distress , 
Condemned souls with all the weight to press . 


Pas.   Olinda this last night complained to Cosma , 
( A Nymph which lately came from fair Messena ) 
That this Glaucilla's powerful charms had fired her , 
And with Thalander's love now dead , inspired her 
With such a feeling grief , her grief lamenting , 
That she , to help so desperate love consenting , 
Gave her a water which she oft did prove , 
Wo●ld either quench or ease the pains of love , 
Which Cosma swore , the other ne'er denied . 
Glaucilla changed , Olinda drank a●d died . 
Dicaeus hearing this — 


Tyr.   lives then Dicaeus ? 


Pas.   As well and just as ever . 


Tyr.   His life doth somewhat mend 
My child's sad death , after a child , a friend . 


Pas.   Dicaeus by this evidence condemns her 
By ' th' law , from that high rock to fall , and she 
With smiling welcomed death , and quietly 
Stealed to the rock from whence she must be cast . 
Wonder so heavy guilt should fly so fast ! 
She led her leaders to that deep descending , 
The guilty draws the guiltless to their ending : 
And thus I left them , and with her just Dicaeus , 
To see her execution , who goes not from her , 
Till from the rock , in seas she leave her breath , 
Die must she as she killed , water her crime and death . 


Tyr.   Ah my poor Olinda ! had I seen thee yet 
And closed thine eyes , alas my poor Olinda ! 


Pas.   This grief is vain and can no more revive her , you loose your tears . 


Tyr.   When that I hold most dear is ever lost , poor loss to lose a tear . 


Pas.   Your son strives , the good which heaven bereaves you , 
You quickly see , but see not what it leaves you . 


Tyr.   Art sure he lives ? 


Pas.   Two hours since , sad I left him , 
But safe . 


Tyr.   What chances hap in an hour ? 
By this he may be dead and buried . 
But yet Perindus , if thou living be , 
My half joy lives , my half joy dies in thee . 


Scen. 2.  

Enter Cancrone and Scrocca bound : Nomicus ●he Priest.  Can.   Ah Scrocca , thou hast often heard me say , it would be my luck to be devoured ; and to tell thee true , I ever feared those Cyclops most ; I never had any mind to them . 



Scr.   Why Cancrone , this is the slavery on 't , had we been Master fishers , we should never have been troubled to climb up these Mountains , we should never have been cast to our old acquaintance the fish . 



Tyr.   Fisher , know'st thou these men ? 



Pas   I know the men , but not their meaning . 



Can.   That would never have angered me , thou know'st we have fed upon fish this many year , and for us to have made them one merry meal , had been but the sign of a thankful nature , but ah those C●clops , clops , clops . Scro●ca , I cannot digest them . 



Scr.   I fear they will ●gest us well enough . 



Can.   And yet I care not much if I were sure to be eaten up by that Cyclops that ate up my grandsire , for than I might have some hope to see the good old man once again before I die . 



Scr.   I care not whose hands I fall into , I 'm sure he shall have no sweet bit of me now ; nothing grieves me , but that having done but one good deed in all my life , I must die for that . 



Nom.   thou foolish fisher , thinkst it good to stop 
The course of justice , and break her sword , the Law ? 
By Law thou li●'st : he justly death deserves , 
Who that destroys , which him and his preserves . 


Tyr.   Are not these my old men , Scrocca and Cancrone ? 



Scr.   Well sir , you may say what you will , but if we live by the Law , how cometh it to pass , that we must die by the Law ? 



Can.   Me thinks I see how busy Rimronce will be about me : he surely will be upon my back , for my being upon his , a while a go . 



Scr.   Nay Cancrone , thou diest for saving thy master too . 



Tyr.   Aye me , my son ? 



Can.   I have no mind to climb these Mountains , I begin to be short-winded already , I shall never hold out ; had I thought it would have come to this , I would have been vilely tempted to ha let my Master drown quickly . 



Scr.   What , man ? thou couldst never have done thy Master better service then to die for him , nay , if Perindus live , I care not . 



Tyr.   Perindus ? I can hold no longer , friend , who is thy Master ? why art thou manacled ? 



Scr.   Mantled hither ! marry this Priest hath mantled us for saving our Master Perindus . 



Tyr.   Aye me , my son . 



Can.   Uds fish , old Master , where have you been this 20 years and more ; 



Nom.   Tyrinthus ! at such a time ! sir , your arrival is either ●ery happy , or else most hapless , either to see , or else prevent a danger . 



Tyr.   Priest , how is my Perindus ? 



Nom.   Doomed to die . 



Tyr.   What is the cause ? 



Nom.   His william  



Tyr.   Who could persuade him ? 



Nom.   She who most striven to hinder and dissuade him . 



Tyr.   What had he done ? 



Nom.   That which deserves all li●e and love . 



Tyr.   How fine the heaven's powers can sorrowe● frame ! 
The fates will play , and make my woe their g●me . 
Where is he ? 


Can.   Safe enough I warrant you , ge ts leave of the Priest , master , and we 'll go fetch him . 



Scr.   We caught him out of the water . 



Can.   OH , he had supped a abundance of ●ait porridge ! 



Scr.   And brought him to the ship where the mariners keep him . 



Tyr.   Why stand I idle here ! OH to the shore I 'll fly , 
And either with him live , or for him die . 


Can.   Master , master , master . Exit Tyrinchus . 


Pa● .  I 'll follow him : nature can do no less 
Than either help , or pity such distress . Exit Pa● . 


Can.   Nay if you go too , then farewell all , 
Farewell ye rocks , farewell to thee OH love , 
You lovely rocks , you hard and rocky love . 
Nay I shall turn swain presently and sing my final song . 


Nom.   I marvel what it is that stays Dicaus . 



Con.   Mary let him stay till I send for him , the Cyclops shall want their breakfast this month . 



Nom.   Here I must stay for him . 



Scen. 5.  

Enter Cosma . Cos.   fain would I know how my ging thrives and prospers . Ol●nda is fast , and by my disamour hath quenched her love with death : if now Glaucilla be taken in that snare , then am I cunning : well may I prove a fisher , who have taken too maids so soon with oneself bait and hook . Is not that Nomicus ? I shall learn of him . Nomicus ? 



Nom.   Who Cosm● ? 



Cos.   Why are these fishers bound ? 



Con.   For you . 



Cos.   For me ? 



Can.   I for you , had not you 'cused Glaucilla , she had not been condemned : if she had not been condemned , Perindus would not have died for her : if he would not have died for her , he had not fallen from the rock : had he not fallen from the rock , we had not saved him : if we had not saved him , we had not been bound : were we not bound , we would show a fair pair of heels , 



Cos.   What talks this fool ? Perindus' fallen from the rock ! 



Nom.   Hast thou not heard then of Perindus faith and fal● ? 



Cos.   no , not a word ; but fain would hear . 



Nom.   And shalt : my tongue is as ready as thy ear ; Mean while lead these away , soon as Dicaeus returns , I 'll overtake you . 



Can.   I prithee Mr. Priest , let me crave one favour ; that I may ha●e an Epitaph for me in Neptune's church porch , I 'll never go farther . 



Nom.   here 's no time for Epitaphs , away . 



Can.   Nay , 't is soon done , I 'll trouble never a poet of them all , I have it already . Cancrone valorous and kind , where art thou ? 
Cancrone too kind and valorous to live , 
Engulfed in Cyclops guts . Readers , why start you ? 
His life for his master he did freely give . 




Ungrateful Sicily that want'st his bones , 
Instead of members keeping his memory in stones . 
Short and sweet , Mr Priest.  


Scr.   Cancrone , this is a land voyage , you must lead the way . 



Can.   But when we sail down the Cyclops throat , I 'll giu● you the preeminence . Exeunt . 



Nom.   After that hapless Nymph had heard her doom , 
As she was led to 'th' rock , i' th' middle way , 
Perindus flying fast , calls out , Stay : 
And for he thought his feet too slowly bore him , 
Before he came , he sent his voice before . 
Stay , stay , Dicaeus , thou art a man , I see , 
And well mayst err heavens not more pure than she . 
Yet since the doom i● past I 'll , pawn my breath , 
And make your fact ●●sse heinous by my death : 
I 'll lose he● life in me , and she shall spend 
My life in her , so both shall better ●nd . 


Cos.   This was no ill news to the Nymph . 


Nom.   Yes , yes : then first she thought herself condemned , 
Death in him she feared and in her ●elfe contemned . 
That law itself ( says she ) should suffer death , 
Which one condemns , another punisheth . 
True , says Perindus , my life , my all 's in thee , 
When thou offendest , why shouldst thou punish me ? 
But brief to give their words in short contracted , 
Was never part of love more lovely acted : 
Both loath to live , and both contend to die , 
Where only death strove for the victory . 
Mean time I could but weep , nor I alone , 
That two such loves should die , not live in one . 


Cos.   Their spotless faith 's a crystal , where I see 
Too late my cankered ha●eses deformity . 


Nom.   At length the law itself decides the strife , 
That he with loss of his might buy her life . 
then and but then ●he , wept , and to prevent him , 
Down fell she with a deadly look and eye , 
Acting the prologue of his tragedy , 
And waked again , she began to chide and rave , 
And vows to live no further than his grave ; 
While he with cheerful steps the rocks ascending : 
Fearless beholds his death , that steep descending , 
And boldly standing on the utmost b●owe , 
Thus sp●ke : 
Poor life , I never knew thy worth till now , 
How thou art ove● valued to pay 
Her life with thine , gold with base alchemy . 


Cos.   Just , just , you heavens , I have set a gin 
For them , and now myself the first am in . 


Nom.   then turning to his love , thus spoke his last : 
Farewell Glaucilla , live and in thy breast 
As in a heaven my love and life shall rest : 
Seek not by death thyself from grief to free , 
Remember now Perindus lives in thee . 
Cherish my hear● , which in thy heart doth lie , 
For whilst thou livest , Perindus cannot die : 
So leapt he lightly from the cloudy rock . 


Cos.   Is he then dead ? 


Nom.   no : for the guilty ●ea 
With soft embraces wrapped his limbs ; 
It seems the waves moved with Sympathy , 
Would teach unhuman men humanity . 
Though they could not prevent , would ease his fall ; 
And not consenting to his pious death , 
Restored him up again to air and breath : 
Briefly , those two his servants not regarding , 
Dicaeus threatening voice , and just awarding , 
With him took up his guilt , and to a ship 
That rides in the haven safe convayd him , there 
They left him now revived , themselves were taken 
And as the law commands , were doomed to suffer 
The death of sla●eses : both to be strongly bound , 
And in those hills left to the greedy Cyclops : 
And now the stay is only in Dicaeus , 
At whose return they suffer , just they die , 
Who love their master more than equity . 


Cos.   OH lawless love ! this soul offence , 
Which when it prospered , pleased my ravished sense : 
With what a dry aspect , what horrid sight , 
Now done , ●t fills my ●oule with guilty fright , 
Who ere thou art , if in t●y spotless breast , 
Thy undefiled thoughts do quiet rest : 
Wake them not , and let no bloodhound with thee dwell , 
These murdering thoughts are like the mouth of hell , 
Into whose yawning 't is more easy never 
To fall , then fallen , to cease from falling ever . 


Enter Pas.  Pas.   Nomicus , thou now mayst let thy prisoners free , 
Thalander to Olinda now revived , 
Perindus to Glaucilla are to be married , 
And all are brought along with singing , 
Hymen the shores , Hymen the echoes ringing . 
Nomicus , seest thou this Nymph ? ah couldst thou think 
That treason , envy , murder , spite and hell , 
All hell itself in such a heaven could dwell ? 
This is the knot of all these sorrows ; Cosma , 
If not for shame , why yet for spite or fashion , 
For woman's fashion let some tears be spilt : 
A sea of weeping will not wash thy guilt . 


Nom.   Great nature , that hast made a stone descry 
'twixt mean●r natures , checking base metals , 
Which proudly sergeant the purer gold , 
Why hast thou left the soul of man no touchstone , 
To judge dissemblance , and descry proud vice , 
Which with false colours seems more virtuous 
Than virtues self ? like to some cunning workman , 
Who frames a shape in such a form of stature , 
That oft he excels by imitating nature . 
He that should look upon this Nymphs sweet ey●● 
Would vow 't a temple sworn to purity . 


Pas.   If murder rest in such a lovely grace , 
Here do I vow never to trust a face . 
Shall I call back your Prisoners ? 


Nom.   Prithee doe● 
Our nets , boats , oars , and hooks shall now go play , 
For heaven hath sworn to make this holy day . 


Scen. 6.  

Enter Dicaeus , Tyrinthus , Thalander , Olinda , Perindus , Glaucillae , Alcippus , Chorus . Song . 

Hymen , Hymen , come safe on , Hymen . 
That I love for ever constant stands , 
Where hearts are tied before the hands , 
Where fair virtue marries beauty , 
And affection pleads for duty : 
Hymen , Hymen , come safe on Hymen . 
Al.   You honoured pair of fishers , see where your love , 
So full of constant trial now hath brought you , 
Se● , blessed souls , through so many tears , 
turnings , despairs , impossibilities , 
Your love is now most safe arrived : Thalander , 
Is this the Nymph , whom heaven and angry hell , 
Her cold desires , and colder death itself 
Would have devoured from thy deserving love ? 
Thalander , these hands are thine , that heavenly face , 
Those starry eyes , those roses and that grace , 
Those coral lips , and that unknown breast , 
And all the hidden riches of the rest : 
They all are thine , thine is the fair Olinda . 
Yet thou , as thou wast wont , all sad and heavy● 


Tha.   Blame me not , friend : for yet I seem forsaken 
And doubt I sleep , and fear still to be waken . 


Enter Pas , with Cancrone and Scrocca . Cos.   Now is the time of pardon . ye happy maids , 
Your love in spite of all tempestuous seas , 
Is safe arrived , and harbours in his ease , 
And all those storms have got but this at last , 
To sweeten present joys with sorrows past . 
Blessed Olinda , thou hast got a love 
Equal to heaven , and next to highest jove . 
Glaucilla , thy loss thou now dost full recover . 
Ah you have found ( too seldom found ) a lover . 
then do not her too rigorously reprove , 
For loving those whom you yet better love . 


Olin.   For us , we judge not of your hard intent , 
But reckon your joys fatal instrument . 


Dicae.   Yet this her penance : Cosma , mark thy censure , 
Whom most tho● shouldst love , thou shalt love never 
Dote thou on dotards , they shall hold thee ever : 
The best and wisest never shall respect thee , 
Thou only fools , fools only shall affect thee . 
Lose now those prisoners ; so forward to the temple . 


Exit Chorus . Can.   ha brave judge , now Mistress mine , I must confess . 


Cos.   This charm begins to work already , 
I love this fool , and dote upon him more , 
then ever upon any man before : 
Well , I must be content thus to be cursed 
And yet of lovers , fools are not the worst . 
For howsoever boys do hoot and flout them , 
The best and wisest oft have fools about them . 


Can.   I and many a fool's babble too , I warrant the● . 
Sweet heart , shall we go to bed ? 


Cos.   What , in the morning ? 


Can.   Morning ? 't is night . 


Cos.   thou art a fool indeed , seest not the sun ? 


Can.   Why that 's a candle or the moon , I prithee let 's go to bed● 


Cos.   Content ; no time unfit for play , 
Love knows no difference 'twixt night and day . 


Can.   Nay , all the play 's done , gentles , you may goe● 
I have another play within to do . 
Riddle me , Riddle me , what 's that ? 
My play is work enough ; my werke is play , 
I see to work i' th' night , and rest ' i' th' day : 
Since than my play and work is all but one , 
Well may my play begin , now yours is done . 


Exeunt . EPILOGUS . 

AS in a Feast , so in a Comedy , 
Two senses must be pleased in both the eye , 
In feasts , the eye and taste must be invited , 
In Comedies , the ey● and ●are delighted : 
And he that only seeks to please but either , 
While both he doth not please , he pleaseth neither . 
What ever feast could every guest content , 
When a● t'each man each taste is different ? 
But less a Scene , where naught but as 't is newer , 
Can please , where guests are more , and dishes fewer : 
Yet in this thought , this thought the Author eased , 
Who once made all , all rules , all never pleased . 
Fain● would we please the best , if not the many , 
And sooner will the best be pleased then any : 
Our rest we set in pleasing of the best , 
So wi●h we you , what you may give us : Rest.  
FINIS . 





While Rimbombo reaches for his staff , Cancrone leaps on 's back , and lies on the ground . 