THE Fair Maid of the Exchange : With The pleasant Humours of the Cripple of Fanchurch . 

Very delectable , and full of mirth . 

LONDON Printed for HENRY ROCKIT , and are to be sold at the shop in rhe Poultry under the Dial . 1607.  

Eleven may easily act this Comedy . 

Berry an old man for one . 
Bobbington for one . 
Gardener for one . 
Officers for one . 
Mall Berry for one . 
Flower an humorous old man for one . 
Bennet for one . 
Scarlet for one . 
Ralph for one . 
Cripple for one . 
Barnard for one . 
Flowers wife for one . 
Ursula for one . 
Boy for one . 
Anthony Golding gentleman for one . 
Ferdin . Gold. gent. and Wood for one . 
Frank Golding gentleman . for one . 
Bowdler an humorous gallant . for one . 
Phillis the fair Maid for one . 
Fiddle the Clown . for one . 
Prologue . 

The humble Sock that true Comedians were , 
Our Muse hath donned , and to your favouring eyes , 
In lowest Plainsong doth herself appear , 
Borrowing no colours from a acquaint disguise : 
If your fair favours cause her spirit to rise , 
She to the highest pitch her wings shall rear , 
And proud cothurnic action shall devose , 
To win your sweet applause she deems so dear . 
Mean while shore up our tender pamping twig , 
That yet on humble ground doth lowly lie : 
Your favours sunshine guilding once this sprig , 
It may yield Nectar for the gods on high : 
Though our Invention lame , imperfect be , 
Yet give the Cripple alms for charity . 
Exit . ¶ The fair Maid of the Exchange . 

Scene . I  

Enter Scarlet and Bobbington . Even now the welcome twilight doth salute 
th' approaching night clad in black sable weeds . 
Black as my thoughts , that harbour naught but death , 
Thefts , murders , rapes and such like damned acts , 
The infant babes to whom my soul is nurse : 
Come Bobbinton , this star-bespangled sky 
Bodeth some good , the weather 's fair and dry . 
Bob.   My scarlet-hearted Scarlet , gallant blood , 
Whose bloody deeds are worthy memory 
Of after ages , let me embrace thee : so , 
So , now me thinks I fold a richer gem , 
Than wealth India can afford to Spain : 
There lies my treasure , and within thy arms 
Security that never breedeth harms . 


Scar.   Brave resolution , I am proud to see 
So sweet a graft upon a wormwood tree , 
Whose juice is gall , but yet the fruit most rare : 
Who wreaks the tree , if that the fruit be fair ? 
Therefore resolve , if we a booty get , 
It boots not whence , from whom , when , where , or what . 


Bob.   Well ( God forgive us ) here le 's take our stands , 
We must have gold although we have no lands . 


Enter Phillis and Ursula . Phil.   Stay Ursula , have you those futes of Ruffs , 
Those stomachers , and that fine piece of Lawn , 
Marked with the Letters C C. and S.  


Ursula .  I have . 


Phil.   If your forgetfulness cause any defect , 
you 're like to pay for 't , therefore look unto it . 


Vrsu.   I would our journey had as safe an end , 
As I am sure my Lady's ruffs are here , 
And other wares which she bespoke of you . 


Phil.   't is good ; but stay , give me thy hand my girl , 
't is somewhat dark , come , let us help each other : 
She passed her word one of her gentlemen 
Should meet us at the bridge , and that 's not far , 
I muse they are not come , I do assure thee , 
Were I not much beholding to her Ladyship 
For many kindnesses : Mile-end , should stand 
This gloomy night unuisited for us. 
But come , me thinks I may discern the bridge . 
And see a man or two , in very deed 
Her word , her love and all is honourable . 


Bob.   A prize young Scarlet , O , a gallant prize , 
And we are Pirates that will seize the same 
To our own uses . 


Scar.   But hold man , not too fast : 
As far as I can gather by their words , 
They take us for my Lady's Gentlemen , 
Who as it seems should meet them on their way , 
then if thou sayest the word we 'll seem those men , 
And by those means withdraw them from their way . 
Where we may rifle them of what they carry , 
I mean , both goods , and their virginity . 


Bob.   't is well advised , but Scarlet , give me leave 
To play the Gentleman and welcome them . 


Scar.   Enjoy thy wish . 


Bob.   Welcome you sacred stars , 
That add bright glory to the sable night . 


Scarl.   Excellent , by heaven . 


Bob.   I am sorry your beauty 's so discomfited , 
Treading so many tedious weary steps , 
And we not present to associate you . 


Scar.   O , blessed Bobbington . 


Phil.   Sir , I do thank you for this taken pains , 
That as your worthy Lady promised me , 
We now enjoy your wished company . 


Scar.   she 's thine own boy , I warrant thee . 


Bob.   And I am proud , too proud of this employment , 
Come M. Scarlet take you that pretty sweet , 
You see my Lady's care ; she promised one 
But hath sent two . 


Phil.   't is honourably done . 


Bob.   This is your way . 


Phil.   That way , alas sir no.  


Bob.   Come , it is : nay then it shall be so . 


Phil.   What mean you Gentlemen ? 


Vrsu.   OH he will rob me . 


Phil.   Look to the box Ursula . 


Phil. & Vrsu.   Help , help , murder , murder . 


Enter the Cripple . Crip.   Now you supporters of decrepit youth , 
That mount this substance 'twixt fair heaven and earth , 
Be strong to bear that huge deformity , 
And be my hands as nimble to direct them , 
As your desires to waft me hence to London . 


Phil. & Vrsu.   Help , help , he 'll ravish me . 


Crip.   My thinks I hear the sound of ravishment . 


Phil. & Vrsu.   Help , help . 


Crip.   Mary and will , knew I but where , and how . 
What do I see ? 
thieves full of lust beset virginity ! 
Now stir thee cripple , and of thy four legs 
Make use of one , to do a virgin good : 
Hence ravening curs : what , are you at a prey ? 
Will nothing satisfy your greedy chaps 
But virgin's flesh ? I 'll teach you prey on carrion , Fight & beaten them away . 
Pack damned ravishers , hence villains . 


Phil.   Thanks , honest friend , who from the gates of death 
Hath set our virgin souls at liberty . 


Crip.   Give God the glory that gave me the power . 


Phil.   I do , kind Sir , and think myself much bound 
To him above , to thee that treads this ground , 
And for this aid , I 'll ever honour thee ; 
My honour you have saved redeemed it home : 
Which were 't not done , by this time had been gone . 


Crip.   Hereafter more of this ; but tell me now 
The cause of these events , the effect , and how . 


Phil.   I 'll tell you sir ; but let us leave this place , 
And onward on our way . 


Enter Scarlet and Bobbington . Bob.   It shall be so , see where they walk along , 
I 'll cross the other way and meet them full , 
Keep thou this way , and when thou hearst us chat , 
Come thou behind him snatch away his crutches , 
And then thou know'st he needs must fall to ground , 
And what shall follow leave the rest to me . Exit . Bobb . 


Scar.   About it then . 


Crip.   Y faith she is an honourable Lady , 
And I much wonder that her Ladyship 
Gives entertain to such bad men as these . 


Enter Bobbington . Bob.   Stand thou that hast more legs than nature gave thee . 


Crip.   Mongrel , I 'll choose . 


Scar.   then go to sir , you shall . 


All , All.   Murder murder . 


Enter Frank Goulding . Frank.   Stay there my horse : 
Whence comes this echo of extremity ? 


All.   Help , help . 


Frank.   What do I hear , a virgin call for help ? 
Hands off damned villains , or by heaven I swear , 
I 'll send you all to hell . Fight and drive them away . 


Crip.   Hold , forbear . 
I came in rescue of Virginity . 


Phil.   He did , he did , and freed us once from thrall . 
But now the second time they wrought his fall . 


Frank.   Now you distressed objects , do you tell 
Upon what mount of woe your sorrows dwell . 


Phil.   First get we hence away , and as we go , 
Kind gentleman , our fortunes you shall know . 


Crip.   Thanks worthy sir , may but the Cripple be , 
Of power to gratify this courtesy , 
I then shall think the heaven's favour me . 


Phil.   no more now for God's sake , let us hence . 


Crip.   If I do live , your love I 'll recompense . Exeunt . 


Enter Mall Berrie . Mall .  Now for my truelove's handkerchief ; these flowers 
Are pretty toys , are very pretty toys : 
OH but me thinks the Peascod would do better , 
The Peascod and the Blossom , wonderful ! 
Now as I live , I 'll surely have it so . 
Some maids will choose the Gillyflower , some the Rose , 
Because their sweet cents do delight the nose , 
But very fools they are in my opinion , 
The very worst being drawn by cunning art , 
Seems in the eye as pleasant to the heart . 
But here 's the question , whether my love or no 
Will seem content ? ay , there the game doth go : 
And yet I 'll pawn my head he will applaud 
The Peascod and the flower , my pretty choice . 
For what is he loving a thing in heart , 
loves not the counterfeit , though made by art ? 
I cannot tell how others fancy stand , 
But I rejoice sometime to take in hand , 
The simile of that I love ; and I protest , 
That pretty peascod likes my humour best . 
But I 'll unto the Drawers , he 'll counsel me , 
here is his shop : alas , what shall I do ? 
he 's not within , now all my labour 's lost , 
See , see , how forward love is ever crossed , 
But stay , what gallant 's this ? 


Enter M. Bowdler . Bow.   A plague on this Drawer , he 's never at home : 
Good morrow sweetheart , tell me , how thou dost ? 


Mall .  Upon what acquaintance ? 


Bow.   that 's all one , once I love thee , give me thy hand and say , Amen . 


Mall .  Hands off , sir Knave , and wear it for a favour . 


Bowd.   What ? dost thou mean thy love pretty fool ? 


Mall .  no fool , the knave , OH gross ; 
A gentleman and of so shallow wit ! 


Bowd.   I know thou cam'st to the drawer . 


Mall .  How then ? 


Bowd.   am not I the properer man ? 


Mall .  Yes , to make an ass on . 


Bowd.   Will you get up and ride ? 


Mall .  no , I 'll lackey by his side , and whip the ass . 


Bowd.   Come , come , leave your jesting , I shall put you down . 


Mall .  With that face ! away you want-wit . 


Bowd.   By this hand , I shall . 


Mall .  By the ass-head you shall not . 


Bowd.   Go to , you are a woman . 


Mall .  Come , come , ye are a man  


Bowd.   I have seen as fair . 


Mall .  I have heard as wise . 


Bowd.   As fair as Mall Berry . 


Mall .  As wise as young Bowdler . 


Bowd.   As M. Bowdler . 


Mall .  Hoida ; come up . 


Bowd.   Go thou down then . 


Mall .  no good ass , bate an Ace of that . 


Enter Barnard . Bar.   What M. Bowdler , will it ne'er be otherwise ? 
Still , still a hunting , every day wenching ? 


Bowd.   Faith sir , the modest behaviour of this Gentlewoman , 
Hath insinuated my company . 


Mall .  Lord , how eloquence flows in this Gentleman ! 


Bowd.   Faith , I shall put you down in talk , you were best to yield . 


Mall .  no sir , I will hold out as long as I may , 
Though in the end you bear the fool away . 


Bowd.   Mean you by me ? you gull me not ? 


Mall .  no by this night , not I  


Bowd.   For if you did , I would intoxicate my head . 


Mall .  Yea , I dare swore you 'll go a fool to bed . 


Bowd.   Mean you by me ? you gull me not ? 


Bar.   no , I dare swear the Gentlewoman means well . 


Mall .  And so I do indeed , himself can tell : 
But this it is , speak Maidens what they will , 
Men are so captions the ' I 'll ever construe ill . 


Barn.   To her sir , to her , I dare swore she loves you . 


Bowd.   Well then fair Mall , you love me as you say . 


Mall .  I never made you promise , did I , I pray ? 


Bowd.   All in good time you will do , else you lie , 
Will you not ? 


Mall .  no forsooth not I  


Bowd.   Barnard , she gulls me still . 


Barn.   't is but your misconceit , try her again : 
You know by course all women must be coy ; 
To her again , than she may happily yield . 
Not I , in faith . 


Mall .  then mine shall be the field : 
Wisdom , adieu , once more faint heart farewell ; 
Yet if thou seest the Drawer , I prithee tell him , 
Mall Berry hath more work for him to do ; 
And for yourself , learn this when you do woe , 
Arm you with courage , and with good take heed , 
For he that spares to speak must spare to speed , 
And so farewell . Exit . 


Bowd.   Call her again , Barnard . 


Barn.   she 's too swift for me : 
Why this is the right course of gullery , 
What did you mean having so fair an aim 
So fond to let slip so fair a game ? 
Bowdler become a man for maids will stand , 
And then strike home , art thou not young and lusty , 
The minion of delight , fair from thy birth , 
Adonis' playfere , and the pride of earth ? 


Bowd.   I know it , but a kind of honest blood 
Tilts in my loins , with wanton appetites , 
She bade me do a message to the Drawer , 
And I will do it ; there will come a day , 
When Humphrey Bowdler , will keep holiday , 
then Mall look to yourself , see that you be sped , 
Or by this light I 'll have your maidenhead . 


Larn.   Spoken like a gallant , spoken like a gentleman , spoken like yourself : 
Now do I see some sparks of manhood in you , 
Keep in that key , keep in the self same song , 
I 'll gauge my head you 'll have her love ere long . Exeunt . 


Enter Ferdinand , and Franke.  Frank   wilt thou not tell me ( brother Ferdinand ) 
Now by this light I 'll haunt thee like a spirit , 
Until I know whence spring's this melancholy . 


Ferd.   OH brother ! 
thou art too young to reach the depth of grief , 
That is immured within my hearts deep closet , 
A thousand sighs keep daily centinel , 
That beat like whirlwinds all my comfort back , 
As many sobs guard my distressed heart , 
That no relief comes near to aid my soul , 
Million of woes like bands of armed men , 
Stop up the passage of my sweet relief : 
And art thou then persuaded that thy words , 
Can any comfort to my soul afford ? 
no , no , good Frank , dear brother then forbear , 
Unless with grief in me you 'll take a share . 


Fran.   Grief me no griefs , but tell me what it is 
Makes my ( sweet Ferdinand ) thus passionate : 
I 'll conjure grief , if grief be such an evil , 
In spite of Fortune , Fates , or any Devil . 


Ferd.   wilt thou not leave me to myself alone ? 


Fran.   Brother , you know my mind , 
If you will leave your dumpish melancholy , 
And like myself banish that puling humour , 
Or satisfy my expectation , 
By telling whence your sorrow doth proceed 
I will not only cease to trouble you , 
But like a true skilful physician , 
Seek all good means for your recovery . 


Fer.   Well brother , you have much importuned me , 
And for the confidence I have in you , 
That you 'll prove secret , I will now unfold , 
The load of care that presseth down my soul : 
Know then good Frank , love is tke cause hereof . 


Frank.   How , love ! why what 's that love ? 


Ferd.   A child , a little little boy that 's blind . 


Frank.   And be o'ercome by him ! plagued by him ! 
Driven into dumps by him ! put down by a boy ! 
Mastered by love ! OH , I am mad for anger : 
By a Boy ! is there no rosemary and bays in England 
To whip the Ape ? by a boy ! 


Ferd.   ay , such a boy as thou canst never see , 
And yet ere long mayst feel his tyranny : 
he 's not visible , yet aims at the heart , 
Woe be to those that feel his wounding dart ; 
And one of them I am : wounded so deep , 
That in my passions I no mean can keep : 
Unhappy time , woe to that dismal hour , 
When love did wound me with fair Phillis flower : 
OH Phillis , Phillis ; of flowers sweetest flower , 
That ever garnished any princely bower : 
Farewell , farewell , my woes will never remove , 
Till I enjoy fair Phillis for my love . Exit . 


Frank.   what 's here , Phillis and love , and love and Phillis : 
I have seen Phillis , and have heard of love ; 
I will see Phillis , and will hear of love : 
But neither Phillis , nor the power of love , 
Shall make me bondslave to a woman's beck . 
Enter Anthony . who 's here , my second brother malcontent ? 
I 'll stand aside and note his passions . 


Ant.   OH love , that I had never known thy power . 


Frank.   more lovers yet ! what the devil is this love ? 


Anth.   That these my wand'ring eyes had kept their stay ; 
That I myself had still been like myself ; 
That my poor heart had never felt the wound , 
Whose anguish keeps me in a deadly sound : 
O how deluding dreams this night o'erpast , 
Drenched my sad soul in pleasures floating sea ! 
Me thought I clasped my love within my arms , 
And circling her , saved her from threatening harms ; 
Me thought there came an hundred in an hour 
That sought to rob me of my sweetest flower : 
But like a champion I did keep her still 
Within this circle , free from every ill : 
But when I waked and missed my Phillis there , 
All my sweet joys converted into fear . 


Frank.   What brother Anthony , at prayers so hard ? 
Tell me what saint it is thou invocates ? 
Is it a male , or female ? howsoever , 
God bless thee brother , thou art in a good mind , 
But now I remember me , thy saint is blind . 


Anth.   How , blind ? 


Frank.   I brother , blind , I heard thee talk of love , 
And love is blind they say . 


Anth.   I would it were as blind as Ebon night , 
That love had never hit my heart so right ; 
But what is love in your opinion ? 


Frank.   A voluntary motion of delight , 
Touching the superficies of the soul ; 
A substance less divine than is the soul , 
Yet more than any other power in man 
Is that which loves , yet neither is enforced , 
Nor doth enforce the heart of man to love : 
Which motion as it unbeseemes a man , 
So by the soul and reason which adorn , 
The life of man it is extinguished , 
Even at his pleasure that it doth possess . 


Anth.   Thus may the freeman jest at manacles , 
The fur-clad citizen laugh at a storm , 
The swarthy Moor diving to gather pearl , 
Challenge the scalding ardour of the sun ; 
And aged Nestor sitting in his tent , 
May term wounds sport , & war but merriment . 


Frank.   't is true , fore God it is , and now me thinks , 
My heart begins to pity hearts in love : 
Say once more , Anthony , tell me thy griefs , 
Let me have feeling of my passion , 
Possess me deeply of thy melting state , 
And thou shalt see . 


Anth.   That thou wilt pity me , 


Frank.   no by my troth , if every tale of love , 
Or love itself , or fool-bewitching beauty , 
Make me cross-arm myself ; study ay-mes ; 
Defy my hatband ; tread beneath my feet 
Shoestrings and garters ; practise in my glass 
Distressed looks , and dry my liver up , 
With sighs enough to win an argosy . 
If ever I turn thus fantastical , 
Love plague me , never pity me at all . 


Enter Phillis . Anth.   Yonder she comes that holds me prisoner . 


Frank.   What ? Phillis , the fair maid of the Exchange ? 
Is she god Cupid's judge over men's hearts ? 
Brother , I 'll have one veny with her tongue , 
To breathe my wit , and jest at passion : 
By your leave Mistress Flower . 


Phil.   Your rude behaviour scarce offers you welcome . 


Frank.   I prithee tell me Phillis , I hear say , 
thou keep'st love captive in thy maiden thoughts . 


Phil.   That is a thought beyond your reach to know . 


Frank.   But shall I know it ? 


Phil.   On what acquaintance ? then might you deem me fond , 
If ( as you say ) love be at my command . 


Frank.   May not your friend command as great a matter ? 


Phil.   I 'll know him well first , for that friend may flatter . 


Frank.   Why , I hope you know me . 


Phil.   that 's a question . 


Frank   Well , if you do not , you shall before I stir . 
Know you yonder lump of melancholy , 
Yonder bundle of sighs yonder wad of groans , 
The same and I were chickens of one brood , 
And if you know him , as I am sure you do , 
Being his brother , you needs must know me too . 


Phil.   I partly have a guess of yonder Gentleman , 
His name is Master Golding as I take it . 


Ant.   Golding I am , and thine sweet fair I am , 
And yet not thine , but a most wretched man , 
thou know'st my cause of grief , my wound of woe : 
And knowing it , why wilt thou see it so ? 
Put salves of comfort to my grief's unrest , 
So mayst thou heal my sore of heaviness . 


Frank   Hark you fair maid , are you a Surgeon ? 
I prithee give my brother Anthony 
Somewhat to heal the love sore of his mind , 
And yet 't is pity that he should have help : 
A man as free as air , or the Sun's rays , 
As boundless in his function as the heavens , 
The male and better part of flesh and blood , 
In whom was powered the quintessence of reason , 
To wrong the adoration of his Maker , 
By worshipping a wanton female skirt , 
And making Love his Idol : fie dotard , fie , 
I am ashamed of this apostasy , 
I 'll talk with her to hinder his complaints . 
Phillis , a word in private ere you go , 
I love ye sweet . 


Phil.   Sour , it may be so . 


Frank   Sour , and sweet ; faith that doth scarce agree . 


Phil.   Two contraries , and so be we . 


Fra.   A plague on this courting , come , we 'll make an end . 


Phil.   I am sorry for it since you seem my friend . 


Frank   ay , but thou canst not weep . 


Phil.   then had I a hard heart . 


Frank   How say you ? come brother , now to your part . 


Ant.   At your direction : no , this merry glee , 
( Good brother ) sorts not with my melancholy , 
Love covets private conference , so my sorrow , 
Craveth your absence which I fain would borrow . 


Franck.   no marvel than we say that love is blind , 
If it still revel in obscurity , 
I will depart I will not hinder love , 
I 'll wash my hands fare well sweet turtle dove . Exit . 


Phil.   I'faith your brother is a proper man  


Franck.   what 's your will with me . 


Phil.   Even what you please . 


Franck.   Did you not call me back ? 


Phil.   Not , to my knowledge . 


Franck.   no , 'sblood somewhat did , farewell , farewell . 


Phil.   He is a very very proper man  


Franck.   I am in haste pray urge me not to stay . 


Phil.   The man doth dote pray God he hits his way . 


Franck.   Before God there 's not a maid in all this town , 
Should sooner win me , but my business calls me , 
Give me thy hand , next time I meet with thee , 
Lesser entreaty shall woo my company . 


Phil.   I'faith i'faith . 


Franck.   I'faith , this was the hand , what means my blood , 
Do I not blush , nor look extremely pale ? 
Is not my head a fire , my eyes nor heart ? 
ha , art thou here ? I feel thee love I faith , 
By this light , well via farewell , farewell . Exit . 


Antho.   Now he is gone , and we in private talk , 
Say , wilt thou grant me love , wilt thou be mine ? 
For all the interest in my love is thine . 


Phil.   Your brother Ferdinand hath vowed as much , 
Nam more , he swears what man so ere he be , 
Presumes to be corrival in his love , 
He will revenge it as an injury , 
And cloth the thief in basest obloquy . 


Antho.   ay , is my brother my competitor ? 
I 'll court my love and will solicit thee , 
Were Ferdinand himself in company . 
What sayest thou to my suit ? 


Phillip   Time may do much , what I intent to do 
I mean to pause upon . 


Ant.   Let it be so ; 
If that my brother's hindrance be all , 
I 'll have thy love though by my brother's fall . Exit 


Phil.   Two brothers drowned in love , I and the third 
For all his outward habit of neglect , 
If I judge rightly if I did not dream , 
Hath dipped his foot too in Love's scalding stream . 
Well , let them plead and perish if they will ; 
Cripple , my heart is thine , and shall be still . Exit . 


Frank   I am not well , and yet I am not ill , 
I am , what am I ? not in love I hope ? 
In love ! let me examine myself , who should I love ? who did I last converse with , with Phillis : why should I love Phillis ? is she fair ? faith so so : her forehead is pretty , somewhat resembling the forehead of the sign of the maiden head in , etc.  what 's her hair ? faith to Bandora wiars , there 's not the like simile : is it likely yet that I am in love ? what 's next ? her cheeks , they have a reasonable scarlet , never a Dyer's daughter in the town goes beyond her . Well , yet I am not in love . Nay , she hath a mole in her cheek too : Venus' mole was not more natural ; but what of that , I am Adonis , and will not love . Good Venus pardon me . Let us descend : her chin , OH Helen , Helen , where 's your dimple Helen ? it was your dimple that bewitched Paris , and without your dimple I will not love you Helen , no , yet I am safe . Her hand , le ts handle that , I saw her hand , and it was lily white , I touched her palm , and it was soft and smooth : and than what then ? her hand did then bewitch me , I shall be in love now out of hand . In love ! shall I that ever yet have profaned love , now fall to worship him ? Shall I that have jested at lover's sighs now raise whirl winds ? shall I that have flouted ay-mes once a quarter , now practise ay-mes every minute ? shall I defy hatbands , and tread garters and shoestrings under my feet ? shall I fall to falling bands and be a ruffian no longer ? I must ; I am now liege man to Cupid , and have read all these informations in his book of statutes , the first chapter , page millesimo nono , therefore , hatband avaunt , ruff regard your self , garters adieu , shoestrings so and so ; I am a poor enamorate , and enforced with the Poet to say , Love o'ercomes all , and I that love obey . Exit . 



Enter M. Flower . Flow.   Now afore God a very good conceit , 
But too much sleep hath over taken me , 
The night hath played the swift-foot runaway : 
A good conceit , a very good conceit , 
What Fiddle , arise Fiddle , Fiddle I say . 


Enter Fiddle . Fid.   here 's a fiddling indeed , I think your tongue be made of nothing but fiddlestrings , I hope the fiddle must have some rest as well as the fiddlestick : well Crowd , what say you to Fiddle now ? 



Flow.   Fiddle , it is a very good conceit . 



Fid.   It is indeed , Master . 



Flow.   What dost thou mean ? 



Fid.   To go to bed again Sir.  



Flow.   no , Fiddle , that were no good conceit Fiddle , 



Fid.   What a fiddling do you keep , are you not ashamed to make such music ; I hope sir , you will christen me anew shortly , for you have so worn this name , that never a wench in all the town but will scorn to dance after my fiddle . 



Flow.   Well Fiddle , thou art an honest fellow . 



Fid.   that 's more than you know , Master . 



Flow.   I 'll swear for thee Fiddle . 



Fid.   you 'll be damned then , Master . 



Flow.   I love thee Fiddle . 



Fid.   I had rather your daughter loved me , 



Elow ,  't is a rare conceit i'faith . 



Fid.   I hold with you Master , if my young mistress would like so well of my music , that she would dance after no bodies instrument but mine . 



Flow.   no Fiddle , that were no good conceit . 



Fid.   A shame on you , I thought you would not hear on that side 



Flow.   Fiddle , thou toldst me , M. Golding was in love with my daughter . 



Fid.   True , master ; therein you say well . 



Flow.   And he entreats me to meet him at the star in cheap , to talk concerning the match . 



Fiddle   True still master . 



Flo.   And I have sent for my neighbour M. Berry to bear me company , 



Fiddle   True , all this is most natural truth . 



Flo.   And now Fiddle , I am going on my way . 



Fiddle   Nay that 's a lie , that hath marred all , was your conceit so tired you could tell troth no longer ? 



Flo.   Why Fiddle , are we not going ? 



Fiddle   no indeed sir , we are not , we stand still , your conceit failed in that . 



Flo.   Before God 't is true , I am not ready yet : what 's he ? 



Enter Bobbington . Bob.   By your leave sir , I would crave a word in secret sir.  



Flo.   At your pleasure , here 's none but my man Fiddle , 



Fiddle   I sir , master Fiddle is my name , sir Laurence Syro was my father . 



Bob.   Sir , this is my business , my name is Racket , I have a ship of my own upon the river . 



Flo.   By your leave sir , captain Racket is your name . 



Bob.   Some call me so indeed sir.  



Flo.   It is a good conceit , I pray proceed . 



Bob.   Sir , I am now bound to sea , and wanting some money for the better furnishing of my wants . 



Flo.   OH , you would borrow money of me . 



Bob.   that 's my suit indeed . 



Flo.   that 's no good conceit . 



Bob.   Nam , hear me sir , if you will supply me with ten pound till my return from Barbary , I will leave in your hands a diamond of greater value than the money . 



Flo.   A Diamond , is it a Diamond , or but a counterfeit ? 
Fiddle , my spectacles . 


Bob.   't is right , I assure you sir.  


Flo.   then 't is a good conceit : my spectacles . 


Fiddle   here sir.  


Flo.   Where sir ? 


Fiddle   You cannot see master , but I can . 


Flo.   OH 't is good , it is a good conceit : well sir , ten pound , 
You are content if at three month's end , 
You bring me not ten pound in English coin , 
This diamond shall be my proper own . 


Bob.   I am sir , shall I receive the money now ? 


Flow.   ay , here it is , and 't is a good conceit . 
Will you go near sir ? Fiddle , make him drink . 


Fiddle   Will you approach cavaliero , if I speak not in season , 't is because I was never in the salt country , where you sea captains use to march . 


Bob.   You are very eloquent sir , I 'll follow you . 


Fiddle   Let me alone then for leading my men . 


Exeunt Bobbington and Fiddle . Flo.   A diamond worth forty for ten pound , 
If he return not safe from Barbary , 
't is good , a very good conceit . Enter M. Berry . 


Berry   By your leave master Flower . 


Flow.   Welcome good master Berry , I was bold to entreat your company to speak with a friend of mine , 
It is some trouble , but the conceit is good . 


Berry   no trouble at all sir , shall we be going ? 


Flo.   With all my heart sir , and as we go , 
I 'll tell you my conceit , come master Berry . Exeunt . 


Enter at one door Cripple , at the other Bowdler . Bow.   Well met my dear bundle of rue , well met . 



Crip.   As much to thee my humorous blossom . 



Bow.   A plague on thee for a dog , have I found thee ? I hate thee not , and yet by this hand I could find in my heart : but sirrah , Crutch , I was encountered . 



Crip.   Who became your bail ? 



Bow.   ye filthy dog , I was encountered by a wench I say . 



Crip.   In a wenches counter ! I thought no less : what sirrah didst thou lie in the Knight's ward , or on the master's side ? 



Bow.   Neither , neither i'faith . 



Crip.   Where then , in the Hole ? 



Bow.   By this hand Cripple I 'll bombast thee ! 



Crip.   My crutch you mean for wearing out my clothes . 



Bow.   Thy nose dog , thy nose , a plague on thee , I care not for thee , and yet I cannot choose but love thee . Sirrah , Mall Berry was here about work thou hast of hers , hadst thou been here to have heard how I spurred the wench with incantations , thou wouldst have given me the praise for a jester . 



Cripple   True master Bowdler , I yield it you , I hold you for the absolut'st jester ; OH mistake me not , I mean to jest upon , a juggling gull , a profound seeing man of shallow wit , that Europe , nam the world I think affords . 



Bow.   Well , thou art a jew sirrah , I 'll cut out that venomous tongue of thine one of these days . 



Cripple   Do it in time , or I 'll crush the heart of thy wit till I have strained forth thy infectious humour to a drop i'faith . 



Enter Mall Berry . Bow.   here comes my amorous vessel , I 'll board her i'faith : Well encountered Mall , how dost thou wench , how dost thou ? 



Mall .  what 's that to you sir ? 



Bow.   Why I ask thee in kindness . 



Mal.   Why then in kindness you are a fool for ask . 



Bow.   Is the fool your livery ? 



Mal.   Not so , for than you wearing that livery , would term yourself my fool . 



Bow.   Meaning me ? you gull me not , if you do : 



Mal.   What then ? 



Bow.   OH vile ! I would take you down . 



Mal.   Alas it wants wit , his wit is too narrow . 



Bowdler   I 'll stretch my wit but I will take you down . 



Mal.   How , upon the tenters ? indeed if the whole piece were so stretched , and very well beaten with a yard of reformation , no doubt it would grow to a goodly breadth . 



Bow.   By this hand . 



Mal.   Away you ass , hinder not my business . 



Crip.   Finely put off wench i'faith . 



Mal.   By your leave master Drawer . 



Cripple   Welcome mistress Berry , I have been mindful of your work . 



Mal.   Is it done ? 



Crip.   Yes , and here it is . 



Mal.   here is your money . 
Cripple , ere long I 'll visit thee again , 
I have some ruffs and stomachers to draw . 


Crip.   At your pleasure . 



Bow.   By thy leave Mall , a word . 



Mal.   Away you bundle of nothing , away . Exit Mal.  



Crip.   She hath a wit as sharp as her needle . 



Bowdler   Alas , myself have been her whetstone with my conference in th' exchange any time these many years . 



Crip.   In th' exchange ! I have walked with thee there , before the visitation of my legs , and my expense in timber , at the least a hundred times , and never heard thee speak to a wench . 



Bow.   that 's a lie , thou wert by when I bought these gloves of a wench . 



Cripple .  that 's true , they cost thee an English shilling at a word , marry it follows in the text , that your shilling proved but a harper , and thou wert shamefully arraigned for it . 



Bow.   Good , but I excused myself . 



Crip.   True , that thou thoughtst it had been a shilling , marry thou hadst never an other , nor so much as a shilling more to change it . thou talk in th' exchange ! 



Bowdler   Indeed my best gift is in the morning when the Maids visit my chamber , with such necessaries as I usually buy of them . 



Crip.   OH thou art one of those , that if an honest Maid be sent to thy chamber with her Mistress goods , and return as honest and chaste as the moon : Sirrah , you are one of those that will slander the poor wenches , by speaking liberally of their proneness to love ; and withal , brag how cheap you have bought their ware metaphorically , when indeed they departed as honest as they came thither , and leave you all the day after to sigh at the sight of an ill bargain . 



Bowd.   When wilt thou spit out this serpent's tongue of thine ? 



Crip.   When wilt thou cast off this antic garment of ostentation ? do it , do it , or by the Lord I will impress thy vanities , and so anatomize the very bowels of thy absurdities , that all the world shall take notice of thee for a fool , and shun thee as the pox or the pestilence . 



Enter Barnard . Barn.   News , news , news . 


Bowd.   Sweet rogue , what 's the matter ? 


Barn.   By jesu the rarest dancing in christendom . 


Bowd.   Sweet rascal , where , OH do not kill my soul 
With such delays , tell me kind rogue , OH tell me where it is . 


Barn.   At a wedding in Gracious street . 


Bow.   Come , come , away , I long to see the man 
In dancing Art that does more than I can . 


Bar.   Than you sir ! he lives not . 


Bow.   Why I did understand thee so . 


Bar.   You only excepted , the world besides 
Cannot afford more exquisite dancers 
Than are now capering in that bridal house . 


Bow.   I will behold them , come crutch , thou shalt with us.  


Crip.   Not I  


Bow.   Down dog , I 'll have thy company . 


Crip.   I have business . 


Bow.   By this hand thou shalt go with us.  


Crip.   By this leg I will not . 


Bow.   A lame oath , never stand to that . 


Crip.   By this crutch but I william  


Bar.   Come , you loose time , supper is done long since , 
And they are now a dancing . 


Enter master Berry and Fiddle . Berry   Stay Fiddle with thy torch , Gentlemen , good eeven . 


Barn.   Master Berry ! 


Bow.   Master Berry , I wish you well sir : master Fiddle I am yours for a congee . 


Fiddle   After the French salutation I am yours for the like courtesy . 


Berry   Master Barnard , to morrow is your day 
Of payment sir , I mean the hundred pound , 
For which I have your bond , I know 't is sure , 
You will not break an hour ; then if you please 
To come to dinner sir , you shall be welcome . 


Barn.   Sir , I did mean to visit you at home , 
Not to pay down the money , but entreat 
Too month's forbearance . 


Ber.   How ! forbear my money ? 
Your reason , why I should forbear my own ? 


Barn.   You know at first the debt was none of mine , 
I was a surety , not the principal : 
Besides , the money that was borrowed 
Miscarried in the venture ; my friend died , 
And once already have you prisoned me , 
To my great charge , almost my overthrow , 
And somewhat raised the debt by that advantage : 
These things considered , you may well forbear 
For two month's space , so small a sum as this . 


Ber.   How ! I may forbear ; Sir , I have need of money : 
I may indeed sit moneyless at home , 
And let you walk abroad spending my coin . 
This I may do , but sir you know my mind , 
If you do break your day , assure yourself , 
That I will take the forfeit of your bond . 


Crip.   The forfeit of his bond ! 


Ber.   I sir , the forfeit ; 't is no charity 
To favour you that live like Libertines : 
here 's a Crew ! 


All.   A crew ; what Crew ? 


Ber.   A crew of unthrifts , careless dissolutes , 
Licentious prodigals , vild tavern-tracers . 
Night watching money-wasters , what should I call ye ? 
OH I want words for to define you rightly ; 
But this I know , London never fostered such 
As Barnard , Bowdler , and this paltry crutch . 


Crip.   And you want words sirrah , I 'll teach thee words ; 
thou shouldst have come to every one of us 
As thus : thou wretch , thou miser thou vild slave 
And drudge to money , bondman to thy wealth , 
Apprentice to a penny , thou that hoards up 
The fry of silver pence and halfpennies , 
With show of charity to give the poor , 
But putst them to increase , where in short time 
They grow a child's part , or a daughter's portion . 
thou that invents new clauses for a bond 
To cousin simple plainness : OH not a Dragon , 
no , nor the devil's fangs are half so cruel 
As are thy claws ; thus , thus thou shouldst have railed : 
The forfeit of his bond , OH I could spit 
My heart into his face ; thou bloodhound that dost hunt 
The dear , dear life of noble Gentry . 


Berry .  Cripple , 't is known I am an honest man ; 
But for thy words , Barnard shall far the worse : 
As for thyself . 


Fid.   Who he sir , never regard him , I know the vildest thing by him , OH 't is abominable ! 


Ber.   Dost thou so Fiddle , speak , hold , take thou that speak of his shame , speak freely , I 'll protect thee . 


Fid.   I tell you sir , 't will make your hair to stand on end as stiff as a Rubbing-brush , to hear his villainies . 
what 's this you have given me ? 


Ber.   A shilling Fiddle . 


Fid.   Have you any skill in Arithmetic ? 


Ber.   Why dost thou ask ? 


Fid.   Sir , I would have you to multiply ; could you not make this one shilling two or three ? I would not be known to beg , but if out of your cunning you can do this trick of multiplication , I shall speak the better . 


Ber.   OH there 's another shilling for thee , now let me hear what villainies thou canst charge the Cripple with . 


Fid.   So sir , this is multiplication , now sir , if you know the Rule of addition you are an excellent Scholar : can you not add ? 


Berry .  What dost thou mean ? 


Fid.   An other shilling sir.  


Ber.   There is another shilling ; now Fiddle speak . 


Fid.   Why then attend you Hills and Dales , and stones so quick of hearing , this Cripple is . 


All.   What is he villain ? 


Fid.   An honest man , as any is in all the town . 


Ber.   An honest man ! 


Fid.   I by this silver , and as good a fellow as ever went upon four legs , if you would multiply till midnight , I would never speak otherwise . 


Ber.   Fiddle , thou art a knave , and so is he : 
Come let us home ; Barnard , look to thy bond , 
If thou do break thy day , I do protest , 
By yond chaste Moon . 


Fid.   The chaste Moon , why the Moon is not chaste . 


Ber.   How provest thou that ? 


Fid.   Why sir , there 's a man in the middle of her , how can she be chaste then ? 


Berr.   then by my life I swear , I 'll clap him up 
Where he shall see neither the sun nor moon , 
Till I be satisfied the utmost penny , 
And so farewell . Exit . 


Fid.   Gallants good-night ; if time and place were in prosperity , I were yours for an hour's society , I must after yond mulberry with my torch : adieu dear hearts , adieu . Exit . 


Bowd.   Come Barnard , le 's to the dancing , le 's tickle it to night , For to morrow thy heels may be too heavy . 


Barn.   all 's one ; my heart shall be as light as fire . 
Come , shall we go ? 


Bowd.   Cripple , will you along ? 


Crip.   My business stays me here . 


Bowd.   Farewell then dog of Israel , farewell . Exeunt . 


Crip.   all 's one , my heart shall be as light as fire : 
'Sblood , were I indebted a hundred pound , 
My fortune failed , and fled as Barnard's are , 
Not worth a hundred pence as Barnard's is : 
I should be now devising sentences 
And Caveats , for posterity to carve 
Upon the inside of the counter wall : 
Therefore I 'll now turn provident ; I 'll to my shop 
And fall to work . 


Enter Phillis . Phil.   yonder 's his shop , OH now you gods above 
Pity poor Phillis heart , that melts in love ; 
Instruct the Cripple to find out my love , 
Which I will shadow under the conceit 
Of my invention for this piece of work ; 
OH teach him how to yield me love again , 
A little little love , a dram of kind affection , 
His many virtues are my true direction : 
By your leave M. Drawer . 


Crip.   Welcome Mistress Flower , what 's your pleasure ? 


Phil.   My cause of coming is not unknown to you , 
Here is be spoken work which must be wrought 
With expedition , I pray have care of it ; 
The residue I refer to your direction : 
Only this handkerchief , a young Gentlewoman , 
Wished me acquaint you with her mind herein : 
In one corner of the same , place wanton love , 
Drawing his bow shooting an amorous dart , 
Opposite against him an arrow in a heart , 
In a third corner picture forth disdain , 
A cruel fate unto a loving vain : 
In the fourth draw a springing Laurel tree , 
Circled about with a ring of poesy : and thus it is : Love wounds the heart and conquers fell disdain , 
Love pities love , seeing true love in pain : 
Love seeing Love how faithful Love did breath , 
At length impalà love with a Laurel wreath . 



Thus you have heard the Gentlewoman's mind , 
I pray be careful that it be well done : 
And so I leave you , more I fain would say , 
But shame forbids and calls me hence away . Exit . 


Crip.   Sweet fair , I pity , yet no relief 
Harbours within the closet of my soul : 
This Phillis bears me true affection , 
But I detest the humour of fond love : 
Yet am I hourly solicited 
As now you see , and fain she would make known 
The true perplexion of her wounded heart : 
But modesty checking her forwardness 
Bids her be still ; yet she in similes 
And love-comparisons , like a good Scholar 
By figures makes a demonstration 
Of the true love enclosed in her heart . 
I know it well , yet will not tell her so , 
Fancy shall never marry me to woe ; 
Take this of me , a young man 's never marred , 
Till he by marriage from all joy be barred . Exit . 


Enter Frank singing , Frank.   You gods of Love that sits above , and pity Lover's pain , 
Look from your thrones upon the moans , that I do now sustain . 
Was everman thus tormented with love ? 
Song . 

ye little birds that sit and sing 
Amid the shady valleys , 
And see how Phillis sweetly walks 
Within her Garden alleys ; 
Go pretty birds about her bower , 
Sing pretty birds she may not lower , 
Ah me , me thinks I see her frown 
ye pretty wantoness warble . 
Go tell her through your chirping bills , 
As you by me are bidden , 
To her is only known my love , 
Which from the world is hidden : 
Go pretty birds and tell her so , 
See that your notes strain not too low , 
For still me think I see her frown , 
ye pretty wantoness warble . 
Go tune your voices harmony , 
And sing I am her Lover ; 
Strain loud and sweet , that every note , 
With sweet content may move her : 
And she that hath the sweetest voice , 
Tell her I will not change my choice , 
Yet still me thinks I see her frown , 
ye pretty wantoness warble . 
OH fly , make haste , see , see she falls 
Into a pretty slumber , 
Sing round about her rosy bed 
That waking she may wonder , 
Say to her , 't is her lover true , 
That sendeth love to you to you : 
And when you hear her kind reply , 
Return with pleasant warble . 
Avaunt delusion , thoughts cannot win my love ; 
Love , though divine , cannot divine my thoughts : 
Why to the air then do I idle here 
Such heedless words far off , and never the near ; 
High thee young Frank , to her that keeps thy heart , 
There let sweet words they sweeter thoughts impart . 
But stay ; here comes my melancholy brothers both , 
I 'll step aside , and hear their conference . Exit aside . 


Antho.   What ? is my brother Ferdinand so near ? 
He is my elder , I must needs give place ; 
Anthony , stand by , and list what he doth say , 
Haste calls me hence , yet I will brook delay . 


Ferd.   Shall I exclaim 'gainst fortune and mishap . 
Or rail on Nature who first framed me ? 
Is it hard chance that keeps me from my love ? 
Or is this heap of loathed deformity , 
The cause that breeds a blemish in her eye ? 
I know not what to think , or what to say , 
Only one comfort yet I have in store , 
Which I will practise though I never try more . 


Anth.   O , for to hear that comfort I do long , 
I 'll turn it to a strain to right my wrong . 


Ferd.   I have a brother rival in my love ; 
I have a brother hate's me for my love ; 
I have a brother vows to win my love ; 
That brother too , he hath incensed my love , 
To gain the beauty of my dearest love ; 
What hope remains then to enjoy my love ? 


Anth.   I am that brother rival in his love , 
I am that brother hate's him for his love : 
Not his but mine , and I will have that love , 
Or never live to see him kiss my love ; 
What thou erst said , I am that man alone , 
That will depose you brother from love's throne ; 
I am that man , though you my elder be , 
That will aspire beyond you one degree . 


Ferd.   I have no means of private conference , 
So narrowly pursues my hinderer , 
no sooner am I entered the sweet court 
Of lovely rest , my love's rich mansion , 
But rival love to my affection 
Follows me , as a soon enforced straw , 
The drawing virtue of a sable jet : 
This therefore 's my determination , 
Within the close womb of a sealed paper , 
Will I right down in bloody Characters , 
The burning zeal of my affection : 
And by some trusty messenger or other , 
Convey the same into my loves own hand ; 
So shall I know her resolution , 
And how she fancy's my affection . 


Antho.   Yet subtle Fox , I may perchance to cross you : 
Brother , well met ; whither away so fast ? 


Ferd.   About affairs that do require some haste . 


Antho.   't is well done brother , you seek still for gain . 


Ferd.   But you would reap the harvest of my pain : 
Farewell good brother , I must needs be gone , 
I have serious business now to think upon : 
Yet for I fear my brother Anthony , 
I 'll step aside and stand a while unseen , 
I may perchance descry which way he goes ; 
Thus policy must work 'twixt friends and foes . Aside . 


Anth.   So , he is gone , I scarcely trust him neither ; 
For 't is his custom , like a sneaking fool , 
To fetch a compass of a mile about , 
And creep where he would be ; well , let him pass , 
I heard him say , that since by word of mouth 
He could not purchase his sweet mistress favour , 
He would endeavour what his wit might do 
By writing , and by tokens ; OH 't is good 
Writing with ink ; OH no , but with his blood . 
Well , so much for that , now I know his mind 
I do intent not to be far behind : 
he 'll send a letter , I will write another , 
Do what you can , I 'll be before you brother ; 
I 'll intercept his letter by the way , 
And as time serves , the same I will bewray : 
Mine being made , a Porter I 'll procure , 
That shall convey that heart-enticing lure ; 
About it then , my letter shall be written , 
Though not with blood , yet with a reaching wit. Exit . 


Ferd.   And shall it so , good brother Anthony ? 
Were you so near when we in secret talked ? 
wilt never be otherwise ? will you dog me still ? 
Enter Franke.  Welcome sweet Frank ; such news I have to tell , 
As cannot choose but like thee passing well : 
thou knowest my love to Phillis ? 


Frank.   Brother , say on . 


Ferd.   thou likewise art acquainted with my rival , 
And I do build upon your secrecy . 


Frank.   'Sblood , and I thought you did not , I 'd retire : 
Brother you know , I love you as my life . 


Ferd.   I dare profess as much , and there-upon 
Make bold to crave thy furtherance , in a thing 
Concerns me much . 


Franke.   Out with it brother ; 
If I shrink back , repose trust in some other . 


Ferd.   then thus it is ; my brother all in haste 
Is gone , to write a letter to my love , 
And thinks thereby to cross me in my suit , 
Sending it by a Porter to her hand ; 
If ever therefore thou wilt aid thy brother , 
Help me in this , who seeks help from no other . 


Frank.   By the red lip of that dainty saint , I 'll aid thee all I may . 


Ferd.   It is enough ; then brother I 'll provide 
A Porter's habit , alike in every point , 
Will you but so much humble your estate , 
To put yourself in that so base attire , 
And like so mean a person wait his coming , 
About his door which will not be o'er long , 
thou shalt for ever bind me to thy love . 


Frank   Brother , 't is a base task , by this light , 
But to procure a further force of love , 
I 'll do 't , i'faith I will sweet Ferdinand , 
About it then , provide thee some disguise , 
But see you stay not long in any wise , 
here shall you find me , go , dispatch . 


Ferd.   For this I 'll love thee everlastingly . 


Frank   Mean time I 'll cross your love and if I can . 
here 's no villainy 'twixt us three brothers : 
My brother Ferdinand he would have the wench , 
And Anthony he hope's to have her too : 
then what may I ? faith hope well , as they do . 
Neither of them know that I love the Maid ; 
Yet by this hand I am half mad for love . 
I know not well what love is , but 't is sure , 
I 'll die if I have her not , therefore 
Good brothers mine beguile you one an other , 
Till you be both gulled by your younger brother . 


Enter Ferdinand . Ferd.   here is a Porter's habit , on with it brother . 


Frank   Your hand then brother for to put it on , 
So now 't is well , come brother , what 's my task ? 


Ferd.   This first , that thou make haste to Anthony's , 
Ask for a burden and thou shall be sure 
To have his letter to my dear love Phillis , 
Deliver it not , but keep it to thyself , 
Till thou hast given this paper to her hands , 
Whose lines do intimate thy chaste desires . 
This is the sum of all , good Frank , make haste , 
Love burns in me , and I in love do waste . Exit . 


Frank   Waste still , but let me in my love increase , 
Now would not all the world take me for a Porter ? 
How strangely am I metamorphosed ? 
And yet I need not be ashamed neither , 
jove when his love-scapes when he attempted ever 
Transformed himself , yet ever sped in love , 
Why may not I then in this strange disguise ? 
This habit may prove mighty in love's power , 
As beast , or bird , bull , or swan , or golden shower . 


Enter Anthony . Antho.   Within the centre of this paper square , 
Have I wrote down in bloody characters , 
A pretty poesy of a wounded heart , 
Such is love's force once burst into a flame , 
Do what we can we cannot quench the same , 
Unless the tears of pity move compassion , 
And so quench out the fire of affection , 
Whose burning force heats me in every vain , 
That I to Love for safety must complain : 
This is my Orator whose dulcet tongue 
Must plead my love to beauteous Phillis . 
Now for a trusty messenger to be 
Employed herein betwixt my love and me , 
And in good time I see a Porter nigh , 
Come hither fellow , dwellest thou here about ? 


Frank   Sir , my abiding is not far from hence , 
And Trusty john men call me by my name . 


Anth.   Canst thou be trusty then , and secret too , 
Being employed in weighty business ? 


Frank   Sir , I was never yet disproved in either . 


Anth.   then mark me well , in Cornhill by th' exchange , 
Dwells an old Merchant , Flower they call his name , 
He hath one only daughter , to whose hands , 
If thou conveniently canst give this letter , 
I 'll pay thee well , make thee the happiest Porter 
That ever undertook such business . 


Frank   Sir , give me your letter , if I do it not , 
then let your promised favour be forgot . 


Anth.   Anthony Golding is my name , my friend , 
About it then , thy message being done , 
Make haste to me again , till when , I leave thee . Exit . 


Frank   And so fare thee well loving brother , 
It had been better you had sent some other , 
Let me consider what is best be done , 
Shall I deliver his letter ? no : 
Shall I convey it to my rival brother ? Nor so : 
Shall I tear the same ? no not for a million : 
What shall I then do ? marry like a kind brother , 
Open the book , see what is written there , 
If naught but love , in love have thou a share . 
Brother , by your leave I hope you 'll not deny , 
But that I love you : God bless my eyesight , 
A Sonnet 't is in verse , now on my life 
He hath perused all the impressions 
Of Sonnets since the fall of Lucifer , 
And made some scurvy acquaint collection 
Of fustian phrases , and uplandish words . 
A Letter . 

Fair glory of virtue , thy enamorate 
Pleads loyally in pure affection , 
Whose passion Love do thou exonerate , 
And he shall live by thy protection : 
Nor from thy love shall he once derogate , 
For any soul under this horizon , 
Yield thou to love , and I will fail in neither , 
So love and truth shall always live together . 
Yours devoted , Anthony Golding . 



Before God , excellent good Poetry , 
'Sblood what means he by this line ? 
For any soul under this horizon ? 
no matter for his meaning , mean what he will , 
I mean his meaning shall not be delivered , 
But for my other trust my other letter , 
That shall come short too of fair Phillis hands , 
There is a Cripple dwelling here at hand , 
that 's very well acquainted with the Maid , 
And for I once did rescue them from thiefs , 
swore , if he lived , he would requite that kindness , 
To him I will for council , he shall be 
My tutor by his wit and policy . Exit . 


Enter Boy in a Shop cutting of square parchments , to him enter Phillis . Phi.   Why how now sirrah , can you find naught to do , 
But waste the parchment in this idle sort ? 


Boy   I do but what my mistress gave in charge . 


Phi.   Your mistress ! in good time : then sir it seems 
Your duty cannot stoop but to her lewre : 
Sir , I will make you know , that in her absence 
You shall account to my demand , your mistress 
And your mistress will is thus , and thus you 'll do : 
But answer to the motion I have made , 
Or you shall feel you have another mistress now : 
Speak , why when I say ? 


Boy   Indeed I know your glory . 
Your pride 's at full in this authority : 
But , were it not for modest bashfulness , 
And that I dread a base contentious name , 
I would not be a byword to th' exchange , 
For every one to say ( my self going by ) 
Yond goes a vassal to authority . 


Phil.   You would not sir : had I the yard in hand , 
I 'd measure your pate for this delusion , 
And by my maiden chastity I swear , 
Unless Reach for the yard , and the boy stay her hand . 


Boy   What unless ! I know your wilfulness , 
These words are but to show the world your humour . 
I often use to square these parchment pieces 
Without occasion : I am sure you are not witting 
The Lawns you lately bought of master Brooks 
Are new come home , brought by the Merchant's servant : 
I know you are short membered , but not so short 
Of your remembrance , that this is news to you . 


Phil.   y' are best to brave me in a taunting humour . 
wilt please you open the door ? where 's Ursula ? 
O here 's good stuff , my back 's no sooner turned 
But she must needs be gadding , and where I pray ? 


Boy .  she 's gone to M. Pawmer's on th' other side . 


Phil.   On great occasions , sir , I doubt it not . 


Sat and work in the shop . Enter M. Richard Gardiner booted , and M. William Bennet , two gentlemen , at one end of the stage . Ben.   Kind Dick , thou wilt not be unmindful of my duty 
To that same worthy Arts-master , Lionel Barnes . 


Gard.   Thy love , sweet Will , hath chained it to my memory . 


Ben.   then with this kind embrace I take my leave , 
Wishing thou wert as safe arrived at Cambridge , 
As thou art at this present near the Exchange . 


Gardiner   And well remembered , kind Will Bennet , 
Others affairs made me oblivious 
Of mine own ; I pray thee go to the Exchange , 
I have certain bands , and other linen to buy , 
Prithee accompany me . 


Ben.   With all my heart . 


Gard.   Sure , this is a beauteous gallant walk . 
Were my continual residence in London , 
I should make much use of such a pleasure : 
Mendoza thinks the glorious virgins of this square 
Gives life to dead struck youth ; O heavens ! 


Ben.   Why how now Dick ? 


Gard.   By my sweet hopes of an hereafter bliss , 
I never saw a fairer face than this : 
OH for acquaintance with so rich a beauty . 


Ben.   Take thy occasion , never hadst thou better . 


Gard.   Have at her then . 


Phil.   What lack you Gentlemen ? 


Gard.   Faith nothing , had I thee . 
For in thine eye all my desires I see . 


Phil.   My shop you mean sir , there you may have choice 
Of Lawns , or Cambrics , Ruffs well wrought , Shirts , 
Fine falling bands of the Italian cutwork , 
Ruffs for your hands , waistcoats wrought with silk , 
Nightcaps of gold , or such like wearing linen , 
Fit for the Chapman of what ere degree . 


Gard.   Faith virgin in my days , I have worn & outworn much , 
Yea , many of these golden necessaries ; 
But such a gallant beauty , or such a form 
I never saw , nor never wore the like : 
Faith be not then unkind , but let me wear 
This shape of thine , although I buy it dear . 


Phil.   What hath the Tailor played his part so well , 
That with my gown you are so far in love ? 


Gard.   Mistake not sweet your garment is the cover , 
That veils the shape and pleasures of a lover . 


Phil.   That argues then , you do not see my shape , 
How comes it then you are in love with it ? 


Gard.   A garment made by cunning Artsman's skill , 
Hides all defects that Nature's swerving hand 
Hath done amiss , and makes the shape seem pure ; 
If then it grace such lame deformity , 
It adds a greater grnce to purity . 


Phil.   O short lived praise ! even now I was as fair 
As any thing ; now fouler nothing . 
Dissembling men , what maid will credit them ? 


Gard.   How misconstruction leads your thoughts awry . 


Ben.   I prithee Dick adone ; think on thy journey . 


Phil.   You counsel well sir , I think the Gentleman 
Comes but to whet his wit , and 't is but need ; 
't is blunt enough , he may ride far upon 't . 


Gard.   Marry gip Minx . 


Phil.   A fine word in a Gentleman's mouth ; 
'T were good your back were towards me , 
There can I read better content , then in the face of lust . 


Gard.   Now you display your virtues , as they are . 


Phil.   What am I , you , Cipher , parenthesis of words , 
Stall-troubler , prater , what sit I here for naught ? 
Bestow your lustful courtships on your minions , 
This place holds none ; you and your companion 
Get you down the stairs , or I protest 
I 'll make this squared walk too botte for you . 
Had you been as you seemed in outward show , 
Honest Gentlemen , such terms of vild abuse 
Had not been proffered to virginity ; 
But Swains will quickly show their base descent . 


Gard.   This is no place for brawls , but if it were , 
Your impositions are more than I would bear . 


Ben.   Come , she 's a woman , I prithee leave her . 


Exeunt Gard. and Ben.  Phil.   Nay sure a maid , unless her thoughts deceive her . 
God speed you well : sirrah boy . 


Boy .  Anon . 
Got to the Starchers for the suit of ruffs , 
For M. Bowdler's bands , and M. Goldings shirts , 
le 's have a care to please our proved friends : 
As for our strangers , if they use us well , 
For love and money , love and ware we 'll sell. Exeunt 


Enter Franke. The Cripple at work . Frank.   Now fortune be my guide , this is the shop ; 
And in good time the Cripple is at work : 
God speed you sir.  


Crip.   Welcome honest friend ; what 's thy will with me ? 


Frank.   I would entreat you read a letter for me . 


Crip.   With all my heart : 
I know the maid to whom it is directed . 


Frank.   I know you do Cripple , better than you think . 


Crip.   I pray you , what Gentleman written the same ? 


Frank.   Sir , a Gentleman of good learning , and my friend ; 
To say the truth , 't was written for myself , 
Being somewhat overtaken with fond love , 
As many men be sir.  


Crip.   Why art thou persuaded , or haste thou any hope , 
So beautiful a virgin as she is , 
Of such fair parentage ; so virtuous , 
So gentle , kind , and wise as Phillis is , 
That she will take remorse of such base stuff , 
I think not so : but let me see , what 's thy name ? 


Frank.   Trusty john men call me sir.  


Crip.   How comes it then your blinded Secretary , 
Hath written another name unto the letter ? 
Yours devoted Anthony Golding . 
But sure this letter is no right of thine , 
Either thou foundst the same by happy chance , 
Or being employed as a Messenger , 
Play'dst leger dumaine with him that sent the same : 
wherefore the maid ( well known unto myself ) 
I will reserve the letter to her use , 
That she , if by the name herein set down , 
She know the Gentleman that doth wish her well , 
She may be grateful for his courtesy . 


Frank.   Nay then I see I must disclose myself : 
Sir , might I build upon your secrecy , 
I would disclose a secret of import . 


Crip.   Assure thyself I will not injure thee . 


Frank   then Cripple know , I am not what I seem , 
But took this habit to deceive my friend : 
My friend indeed , but yet my cruel foe ; 
Foe to my good , my friend in outward show : 
I am no Porter , as I seem to be , 
But younger brother to that Anthony ; 
And to be brief , I am in love with Phillis , 
Which my two elder brothers do affect : 
The one of them seeks to defeat the other : 
Now if that I , being their younger brother 
could gull them both , by getting of the wench , 
I would requite it with love's recompense . 
Cripple , thou once didst promise me thy love , 
When I did rescue thee on Mile-end Greene , 
Now is the time , now let me have thy aid , 
To gull my brothers of that beauteous maid . 


Crip.   Sir , what I promised I will now perform ; 
My love is yours , my life to do you good , 
Which to approve , follow me but in all , 
we 'll gull your brothers in the wench , and all . 


Frank.   Sayest thou me so friend , for that very word 
My life is thine , command my hand and sword . 


Crip.   then let me see this letter ; it should see me 
You undertook to carry from your brother 
To the maid . 


Frank   I did , and from my brother Ferdinand , 
This other letter to the same effect . 


Crip.   Well , list to me , and follow my advice , 
You shall deliver neither of them both ; 
But frame two letters of your own invention , 
Letters of flat denial to their suits , 
Give them to both your brothers as from Phillis , 
And let each line in either Letter tend 
To the dispraise of both their features ; 
And the conclusion I would have set down , 
A flat resolve bound with some zealous oath , 
Never to yield to either of their suits : 
And if this sort not well to your content , 
Condemn the Cripple . 


Frank   But this will ask much time , 
And they by this time look for my return . 


Crip.   Why then myself will fit you presently , 
I have the Copies in my custody , 
Of sundry Letters to the same effect . 


Frank   Of thy own writing ? 


Crip.   My own I assure you , sir.  


Frank   Faith thou hast robbed some Sonnet book or other , 
And now wouldst make me think they are thine own . 


Crip.   Why , thinkst thou that I cannot write a letter , 
Ditty , or Sonnet with judicial phrase , 
As pretty , pleasing , and pathetical , 
As the best Ovid-imitating dance 
In all the town . 


Frank   I think thou canst not . 


Crip.   Yea , I 'll swear I cannot , 
Yet sirrah , I could coney-catch the world , 
Make myself famous for a sudden wit , 
And be admired for my dexterity , 
Were I disposed . 


Frank   I pray thee how . 


Crip.   Why thus there lived a Poet in this town , 
( If we may term our modern Writers Poets ) 
Sharp-witted , bitter-tongued , his pen of steel , 
His ink was tempered with the biting juice , 
And extracts of the bitter'st weeds that grew , 
He never wrote but when the elements 
Of Fire and Water tilted in his brain : 
This fellow ready to give up his ghost 
To Lucia's bosom , did bequeathe to me 
His Library , which was just nothing , 
But rolls , and scrolls , and bundles of cast wit , 
Such as durst never visit Paul's churchyard : 
amongst them all , I happened on a choir 
Or two of paper filled with Songs and Ditties , 
And here and there a hungry Epigram , 
These I reserve to my own proper use , 
And Pater-noster-like have conned them all . 
I could now when I am in company , 
At ale house , tavern , or an ordinary , 
Upon a theme make an extemporal ditty , 
( Or one at least should seem extemporal ) 
Out of th' abundance of this Legacy , 
That all would judge it , and report it too , 
To be the infant of a sudden wit , 
And then were I an admirahle fellow . 


Frank   This were a piece of cunning . 


Crip.   I could do more , for I could make enquiry 
Where the best witted Gallants use to dine , 
follow them to the tavern , and there sit 
In the next room with a calf's head and brimstone , 
And over hear their talk , observe their humours , 
Collect their jests , put them into a play , 
And tyre them too with payment to behold 
What I have filched from them . This I could do : 
But OH for shame that men should so arraign 
Their own fee simple wits , for verbal theft ! 
Yet men there be that have done this and that , 
And more by much more than the most of them . 


Frank   But to our purpose Cripple to these letters . 


Cripple   I have them ready for you , here they be , 
Give these to your two brothers , say that Phillis 
Delivered them with frowns , and though her name 
Be not subscribed ( which may not well be done ) 
It may perhaps give them occasion 
To think she scorned them so much grace and favour . 
This done , return to me , and let me know 
th' occurrants of this practice as they grow , 
And so farewell , I can no longer stand 
To talk with you , I have some work in hand . Exit . 


Frank   Farewell mad Cripple , now Frank Golaing sly , 
To put in practise this new policy : 
But soft , here comes the Maid , I will assay 
Euter Phillis and Fiddle . To plead my own love by a stranger way , 
By your leave sir.  


Fid.   Porter , I am not for you , you see I am perambulating before a female . 



Frank   I would crave but a word with you . 



Fid.   Speak in time then Porter , for otherwise I do not love to answer you , and be as brief as you can , good Porter . 



Fran.   I pray you sir , what Gentlewoman is this ? 



Fiddle .  Certes Porter , I serve a Gentleman , that Gentleman is father to this Gentlewoman , this Gentlewoman is a maid , this maid is fair , and this fair maid belongeth to the Exchange , and the Exchange hath not the like fair maid now Porter , put all this together , and tell me what it spells . 



Frank   I promise you sir , you have posed me . 



Fid.   then you are an ass Porter , 't is the fair Maid of the Exchange . 



Fran.   Her name I pray you sir.  



Fiddle .  Her name Porter requires much poeticality in the subscription , and no less judgement in the understanding ; her name is Phillis , not Phillis that same dainty lass that was beloved of Amintas , nor Phillis she that doted on that comely youth Demophoon , but this is Phillis , that most strange Phillis , the flower of the Exchange . 



Phil.   What , would that Porter any thing with me ? 


Frank   Yes Mistress , since by chance I meet you here , 
I 'll tell you , though it not concerns myself , 
What I this morning saw ; there is a Gentleman 
One master Golding the youngest of three brothers , 
They call him Frank ; OH this man lies very sick , 
I being at his house perchance enquired 
What his disease was of a servant there , 
Who said , the doctors cannot tell themselves , 
But in his fits he ever calls on Love , 
And prays to Love for pity , and then name's you , 
And then names Love again , and then calls Phillis , 
And sometime starts , and would forsake his bed , 
And being asked whither , he says he would go to Phillis , 
My business called me hence , but I heard say 
His friends do mean to entreat you to take the pains 
To visit him , because they do suppose , 
The sick man loves you , and thence his sickness grows . 


Phi.   Porter , is this true ? 
Or art thou hired to this , I prithee tell me . 


Frank   Mistress , not hired , my name is Trusty john . 
If I delude you , never trust me more . 


Phi.   I thank thee Porter , and thank Love withal , 
That thus hath wrought the tyrant Goldings fall , 
He once scorned Love , jested at wounded hearts , 
Challenged almighty beauty , railed at passion , 
And is he now caught by the eyes and heart ? 
Now by Diana's milk white veil I swear , 
The goddess of my maiden chaste desires . 
I am as glad of it as glad may be , 
And I will see him , if but to laugh at him , 
And torture him with jests ; Fiddle , along , 
When we return , if they do send for me , 
I 'll arm myself with flouts and cruelty . 


Fiddle   Porter , we commit you , if you be a crafty knave , and lay in the wind for a vantage , you have your answer : mark her last words , I 'll arm myself with flouts and cruelty . Exeunt . 


Frank.   I 'll arm myself with flouts and cruelty . 
Will you so Phillis , what a state am I in ? 
Why I of all am furthest from her love : 
'Sblood , if I now should take conceit at this , 
Fall sick with love indeed , were not my state 
Most lamentable ? I by this hand were it : 
Well heart , if thou wilt yield , look to thyself , 
thou wilt be tortured , well what remedy . 
Enter Anthony . Here comes my brother Anthony , I am for him . 


Anth.   Porter , what news ? spoke you with Phillis ? 


Frank.   I too late , to my grief , 
Spoken with her , sir , I'faith I think I have ; 
here 's a letter for you , and by that 
You shall be judge if I did speak with her ; 
Now Cripple , shall we prove your learned wit ? 


Anth.   Zounds am I mad , or is she mad that written this ? 
I 'll read it o'er again : 
A Letter . 

Sir , I did never like you , I do not now think well of you , And I will never love you : I choose my husband with my eyes , and I have seen some especial fault in you ; as the colour of your hair , the elevating of your head , to an affected proportion , as if you fainted for want of air , and stood in that manner to suck it into your nose , your neck is too long : and to be short , I like no part in or about you : and the short and the long boy , is , that I will never love you , and I will never marry but one I love . 

Not yours , but her own . 





Antho.   Blank , I am struck blank , and blind , and mad withal , 
here is a flat denial to my suit , 
A resolution never to be won : 
What shall I do ? assist me God of love , 
Instruct me in thy school-tricks ; be my guide 
Out of this labyrinth of love and fear , 
Unto the palace of fair Phillis favour : 
I have it ; I will intimate her mother 
In my behalf , with letters and with gifts , 
To her I 'll write to be my advocate : 
Porter farewell , there 's for thy pains , 
Thy profit by this toil passeth my gains . Exit . 


Frank.   You have your answer , and a kind one too ; 
Cripple I 'll make thee chrutches of pure silver 
For this device , thou hast a golden wit ; 
Now if my brother Ferdinand were here 
To read his absolution , here he comes . 
Enter Ferdinand . Brother . 


Ferd.   Franke. 
What hast thou given the letter to her hand , 
And stayed my brother Anthony's withal ? 


Frank   I have done both , and more than that , behold 
here is an answer to your letter brother . 


Anth.   Frank , I will love thee , whiles I live for this . 


Franke.   Scarce , when you read what there contained is . 
A Letter . 

Gallant , that write for love , if you had come yourself yond might perchance have sped ; I do not counsel you neither , to come yourself , unless you leave your head at home , or wear a vizard , or come backwards , for I never look you in the face but I am sick : and so praying God to continue my health , by keeping you from me , I leave you . 





Ferd.   OH unkind answer to a Lover's letter ; 
Let me survey the end once more : For I never look you in the face but I am sick : and so praying God to continue me in health , by keeping you from me . 


Is she so far from yielding ? is this fort 
Of her chaste love yet so impregnable ? 
What shall I do ? this is the furthest way , 
A labour of impossibilities : 
This way to win her ? I will once again , 
Challenge the promise that her father made me ; 
To him I 'll write , and he I know will plead 
My love to Phillis , and so win the maid . Exit . 


Frank.   Farewell poor tortured heart ; was ever known 
Two loving brothers in such misery ? 
Let me consider of my own estate : 
What profit do I reap by this delusion ? 
Why none ; I am as far from Phillis heart 
As when she first did wound me with her eyes : 
Cripple , to thee I come , 't is thou must be 
My counsellor in this extremity . Exit . 


Enter Cripple , Bowdler , and Barnard . Crip.   Sirrah Bowdler , what makes thee in this merry vain ? 



Bowd.   OH Lord sir , it is your most elevated humour to be merry , to be concise , set up the collar , and look thus with a double chin , like Diogenes peering over his Tub , is too cynical , the sign of Melancholy , and indeed , the mere effect of a salt rheum . 



Crip.   Who would think this Gentleman yesterday distemperature should breed such motions ? I think it be restorative to activity , I never saw a gentleman caper so excellent , as he did last night . 



Bow.   Mean you me sir ? 


Crip.   Your own self , by this hand . 


Bowd.   You gull me not . 


Crip.   How , gull you ! 
Me thinks a man so well reputed of , 
So well commended for your qualities 
In Schools of nimble activeness , 
And places where divinest Choristers 
Warble enchanting harmony , to such 
As think there is no heaven on earth but theirs : 
And knowing yourself to be the Genius 
Of the spectators , and the audience hearts , 
You wrong your worthy self intolerably , 
To think our words savour of flattery . 


Bowd.   Sirrah dog , how didst thou like my last caper , and turn a the toe ? 


Crip.   Before God passing well . 


Barn.   I know his worship made it , 't is so excellent , 


Bowd.   It was my yesterday exercise . 


Crip.   After the working of your purgation , was it not ? 


Bowd.   What purgation , you filthy cur ? 


Crip.   After the purging of your brain Sir.  


Bow.   Be still dog , bark not , though by misfortune 
I was last night somewhat distempered : 
I will not be upbraided ; 't was no more 
But to refine my wit ; but tell me truly , 
How dost thou like my caper ? 


Crip.   far better than I can commend it . 


Bowd.   Now as I am a Gentleman 
My Tutor was not witting of the same ; 
And in my opinion 't will do excellent : 
OH this air ! here 's a most eloquious air for the memory , 
I could spend the third part of my Arms in silver , 
To be encountered by some good wit or other . 


Crip.   What say you to your sweet heart , Mall Berry ? 


Bowd.   Peace Cripple , silence , name her not , I could not endure the career of her wit , for a million , she is the only she Mercury under the heavens ; her wit is all spirit ; that spirit fire , that fire fly's from her tongue , able to burn the radix of the best invention ; in this Element she is the abstract and brief of all the eloquence since the incarnation of Tully's I tell thee Cripple , I had rather encounter Hercules with blows , than Mall Berry with words : And yet by this light I am horribly in love with her . 



Enter Mall Berry . Crip.   See where she comes , OH excellent ! 


Bowd.   Now have I no more blood than a bulrush . 


Barn.   How now ; what ail you sir ? 


Crip.   what 's the matter man ? 


Bowd.   See , see , that glorious angel doth approach , 
What shall I do ? 


Crip.   She is a saint indeed ; Zounds to her , court her , win her , wear her , wed her , and bed her too . 


Bowd.   I would it were come to that , I win her ! by heaven , I am not furnished of a courting phrase , to throw at a dog . 


Crip.   Why no , but at a woman you have ; OH sir , seem not so doltish now , can you make nofustian , ask her if she 'll take a pipe of Tobacco . 


Bow.   It will offend her judgement , pardon me . 


Cri.   But hear you sir ? reading so much as you have done , 
Do you not remember one pretty phrase , 
To scale the walls of a fair wenches love ? 


Bow.   I never read any thing but Venus and Adonis . 


Crip.   Why that 's the very quintessence of love , 
If you remember but a verse or two , 
I 'll pawn my head , goods , lands and all 't will do . 


Bow.   Why then have at her . 
Fondling I say , since I have hemmed thee here , 
Within the circle of this ivory pale , 
I 'll be a park . 


Mal.   Hands off fond sir.  


Bow.   And thou shalt be my dear ; 
Feed thou on me , and I will feed on thee , 
And Love shall feed us both . 


Ma.   Feed you on woodcocks , I can fast awhile . 


Bow.   Vouchsafe thou wonder to alight thy steed . 


Crip.   Take heed , she 's not on horseback . 


Bow.   Why then she is alighted , 
Come sit thee down where never serpent hisses , 
And being set , I 'll smother thee with kisses . 


Ma.   Why is your breath so hot ? now God forbid 
I should buy kisses to be smothered . 


Bow.   Mean you me ? you gull me not ? 


Ma.   no , no , poor Bowdler , thou dost gull thyself : 
Thus must I do to shadow the hide fire , 
That in my heart doth burn with hot desire : 
OH I do love him well what ere I say , 
Year will I not myself self love bewray , 
If he be wise he 'll sue with good take heed : 
Bowdler , do so , and thou art sure to speed : 
I will fly hence to make his love the stronger , 
Though my affection must lie hid the longer . 
What master Bowdler , not a word to say ? 


Bow.   no by my troth , if you stay here all day . 


Ma.   Why then I 'll bear the bucklers hence away . Exit . 


Crip.   What master Bowdler , have you let her pass unconquerd ? 


Bow.   Why what could I do more ? I looked upon her with judgement , the strings of my tongue were well in tune , my embraces were in good measure , my palm of a good constitution , only the phrase was not moving ; as for example , Venus herself with all her skill could not win Adonis , with the same words : OH heavens ! was I so fond then to think that I could conquer Mall Berry ? OH the natural fluence of my own wit had been far better ! 

God-den good fellow . 


Enter Fiddle . Fid.   God give you the time of the day , pardon me Gallants , I was so near the middle that I knew not which hand to take . 



Bow.   A very good conceit . 



Fid.   And yet because I will be sure to give you a true salutation , Cripple , quomodo vales ? Good morrow Cripple , god-den good master Barnard , master Bowdler , Bonos noches , as they say , good night ; and thus you have heard my manner of salutation . 



Crip.   You are very eloquent , sir ; but Fiddle , what 's the best news abroad ? 



Fid.   The best news I know not sir , but the newest news is most excellent i'faith . 



Barn.   Prithee le 's hear it . 



Fid.   Why this it is , the Sergeants are watching to arrest you at master Berry's suit . 



Barn.   Wounds , where ? 



Fid.   Nay , I know not where ; alas sir , there is no such matter , I did but say so much , to make you warm the handle of your rapier : But M. Bawdler , I have good news for you . 



Bow.   Let me hear it , my sweet russetting . 



Fid.   How , russeting ? 



Bow.   I my little apple john . 



Fid.   You are a 



Bow.   A what ? 



Fid.   You are a , OH that I could speak for indignation ! 



Bow.   Nay , what am I ? 



Fid.   Yond are a pippinmonger to call me Russeting or apple john . 



Bow.   Sirrah Russeting , I 'll pair your head off . 



Fid.   You pippinmonger , I 'll cut off your legs , and make you travel so near the mother earth , that every boy shall be high enough to steal apples out of thy basket , call me Russeting ? 



Crip.   Nay , be friends , be friends . 



Fid.   As I am a gentleman cripple , I meant him no harm , but the name of Russetting to master Fiddle , that many times travels under the arm in velvet , but for the most part in leather trussed with calf-skin points , 't is most tolerable , and not to be endured , flesh and blood cannot bear it . 



Crip.   Come , come , all shall be well . 



Bow.   Fiddle , give me thy hand , a plague on thee , thou knowest I love thee . 



Fid.   Say you so ? why then anger avoid the room , melancholy march away , choler to the next chamber , and here 's my hand I am yours to command from this time forth , your very mortal friend , and loving enemy , master Fiddle . 



Bow.   Now tell us , what is the news you had for me ? 



Fid.   OH , the sweet news , faith sir , this it is , that I was sent to the Cripple from my young Mistress . Master Cripple you know I have spent some time in idle words , therefore be you compendious , and tell me if my mistress handkerchief be done or no.  



Cri.   Fiddle 't is done , & peace it is , commend me to thy mistress . 



Fidd.   After the most humble manner I will ; and so gentlemen I commit you all : you Cripple to your shop ; you sir , to a turnip and dish of capers ; and lastly , you M. Barnard , to the tuition of the Counter-keeper : there 's an Item for you , and so farewell . Exit . 



Crip.   M. Bowdler , how do you like his humour ? 



Bowd.   By this light , I had not thought the clod had had so nimble a spirit : but Cripple farewell , I 'll to Mall Berry , come Barnard along with me . 



Crip.   Farewell sweet Signiors both , farewel , farewell . Exeunt . 



Enter M. Flower at one door reading a letter from Ferdinand , at the other Mistress Flower , with a Letter from Anthony . Master Flo.   The conceit is good , Ferdinand entreats a marriage with my daughter ; good , very good : for he is a Gentleman of good carriage , a wise man , a rich man , a careful man , and therefore worthy of my daughter's love : it shall be so . 



Mistress Flo.   Mary and shall , kind Gentleman , my furtherance sayest thou ? Yes Anthony , assure thyself , for by the motherly care that I bear to my daughter , it hath been a desire that long hath lodged within my careful breast , to match her with thy well-deserving self ; and to this end have I sent for my daughter , and charged my servants , that presently upon her repair hither from her Mistresses , that she enter this private walk , where , and with whom , I will so work , that doubt it not , dear son , but she shall be thine . 



Master Flo.   And I will make her jointure of a hundred pounds by year : it is a very good conceit , and why ? because the worthy portion betters my conceit , which being good in conceiving well of the Gentleman's good parts , the proffered jointure adds to my conceit , and betters it , very good . 



Mistress Flo.   A thousand crowns for you to make the match , pretty heart , how love can work ! by God's blessed mother , I vow she shall be thine , if I have any interest in my daughter ; Flower smiles reading the Letter , they snatch the Letter from each other . but stay , whom have I espied ? my husband likewise reading of a Letter , and in so good an humour , I 'll lay my life , good Gentleman he hath also wrought with him for his good will ; and for I long to know the truth thereof , my sudden purpose shall experience it . what 's here husband ? She reads privately , and frowns . a Letter from master Ferdinand , to entreat a marriage with your daughter . 



Master Flo.   And here the like to you from Anthony to that effect , this is no good conceit , if she be mine , she shall be Ferdinand . 



Mistress Flo.   If she respect her mother's favour , 
't is Anthony shall be her love . 


Master Flo.   How wife ? 


Mistress Flo.   Even so husband . 


Master Flo.   You will not cross my purpose , will you ? 


Mistress Flo.   In this you shall not bridle me I swear . 


Master Flo.   Is she not my daughter ? 


Mistress Flo.   You teach me husband , what your wife should say , 
I think her life is dearest unto me , 
Though you forget the long extremity 
And pain which I endured , when forth this womb 
With much ado she did enjoy the life she now doth breathe , 
And shall I now suffer her destruction ? 


Master Flo.   Yea but conceit me wife . 


Mistress Flo.   A fig for your conceits , in this I know there can be none that : 
Say he be his father's elder son , and a merchant of good wealth , yet my dear Anthony's as rich as he : 
What though his portion was but small at first , 
His industry hath now increased his talon ; 
And he that knoweth the getting of a penny , 
Will fear to spend , she shall have him , if any . 


Master Flo.   By the Mary God wife , you vex me . 


Mistress Flo.   't is your own impatience , you may choose . 


Master Flo.   I will not wed my daughter to that Anthony . 


Mistress Flo.   By this . 


Master Flo.   Hold wife , hold , I advice thee swear not , 
For by him that made me , first I vow , 
She shall not touch the bed of Anthony . 


Mistress Flo.   And may I never live ( so God me help ) 
If ever she be wed to Ferdinand . 


Master Flo.   The devil 's in this woman , how she thwarts me still ! 


Mistress Flo.   Fret on , good husband , I will have my william  


Master Flo.   But conceit me wife , suppose we should consent our daughter should wed either of them both , and she dislike the match , were that a good conceit ? 


Mistress Flo.   all 's one for that , I know my daughter's mind if I but say the word . 


Master Flo.   I would be loath to wed her against her will , 
Content thee wife , we 'll hear her resolution , 
And as I find her , to her own content 
To either of them she shall have my consent . 


Mistress Flo.   Why now old Flower speaketh like himself . 


Master Flo.   Agreed , and faith wife 't is a good conceit , 
Enter Phillis . And see where my daughter comes : welcome girl , 
How doth your Mistress Phillis ? God bless thee Phillis , rise . 


Phi.   God have the glory , in perfect health she is . 


Master Flo.   't is good , I am glad she doth so well ; 
But list my daughter , I have golden news 
To impart unto thee : 
A golden , Golding , wench , must be thy husband , 
Is 't not a good conceit ? 


Phi.   Father , I understand you not . 


Master Flo.   then , my girl , thy conceit is very shallow , 
Master Ferdinand Golding is in love with thee . 


Mistress Flo.   no daughter , 't is thine Anthony . 


Master Flo.   Ferdinand is rich , for he hath store of gold . 


Mistress Flo.   Anthony is rich , yet is not so old . 


Master Flo.   Ferdinand is virtuous , full of modesty . 


Mistress Flo.   Anthony's more gracious , if more may be . 


Master Flo.   Ferdinand is wise ( being wise ) who would not love him . 


Mistress Flo.   Anthony more wise , than Girl desire to prove him . 


Master Flo.   In Ferdinand is all the beauty that may be . 


Mistress Flo.   He is deceived , 't is in thine Anthony . 


Phi.   Dear Parents , you confound me with your words , 
I pray what mean these hot persuasions ? 


Master Flo.   Thy good my daughter . 


Mistress Flo.   If but ruled by me . 


Master Flo.   But for thy ill-fare . 


Mistress Flo.   If she tend to thee . 


Master Flo.   The truth is this , that each of us hath ta'en 
A solemn vow , that thou my loving daughter 
Shalt wed with one of those two gentlemen : 
But yet refer the choice unto thyself , 
One thou shalt love , love Ferdinand , if me . 


Mistress Flo.   If love thy mother , love thine Anthony . 


Phil.   In these extremes what shall become of me ? 
I pray you give me respite to consider 
How to digest these impositions , 
You have imposed a business of such weight , 
Pray God your daughter may discharge herself . 


Master Flo.   Think on 't , my girl , we will withdraw awhile . 


Phi.   A little respite fits my resolution , They walk . 
Those Gentles sue too late , there is another , 
Of better worth , though not of half their wealth , 
What though deformed , his virtue mends that miss ; 
What though not rich , his wit doth better gold , 
And my estate shall add unto his wants , 
I am resolved ( good father , and dear mother , ) 
Phillis doth choose a Cripple , and none other ; 
But yet I must dissemble . 


Master Flo.   How now my soul's best hope ! tell me , my girl , 
Shall Ferdinand be he ? 


Phi.   I pray a word in private . 


Master Flo.   Marry with all my heart . 


Phi.   In all the duty that a child can show , 
The love that to a father it doth own ; 
I yield myself to be at your command , 
And vow to wed no man but Ferdinand . 
But if you please , at your departure hence , 
You may enforce dislike to cloud your brow , 
To avoid my mother's anger and suspicion . 


M Flo   Before God a very good conceit , 
Hence baggage , out of my sight , 
Come not within my doors , thou hadst been better , 
Run million of miles bore footed , then 
Thus by your coy disdain to have deluded me . 
O mine own flesh and blood , the mirror of wit ! 
Now will I hence , and with all the speed I may 
send for my son , I 'll have it done this day . Exit old Flow.  


Mistress Flow.   What , is he gone ? and in so hot a chafe ? 
Well let him go , I need not question why , 
For well I wot his suit is cold , 't must die . 
Daughter , I gather by thy pleasant smiles , 
Thy mother hath more interest in thy love , 
Than discontented Flower thy aged father . 


Phi.   Mother , you have , for when I well consider 
A mother's care unto her dear bought child , 
How tenderly you nursed and brought me up , 
I could not be so much unnatural 
As to refuse the love you proffer me , 
Especially being for my chiefest good ; 
Therefore when married I intent to be , 
My loyal husband shall be Anthony . 


Mistress Fl.   Live ever then my dear dear daughter Phillis , 
Let me embrace thee in a mother's arms ; 
Thus , thus and thus I 'll ever hug my daughter , 
Him hence thou send'st with frowns , me hence with laughter , 
Come Phillis , let us in . 


Exit Mistress Flower . Phi.   Forsooth I 'll follow you . 
am not I a good child think you , 
To play with both hands thus against my parents ? 
Well , 't is but a trick of youth : say what they will , 
I 'll love the Cripple , and will hate them still . Exit . 


Enter Cripple in his shop , and to him enters Franke.  Frank   Mirror of kindness , extremities best friend , 
While I breathe , sweet blood , I am thine , 
Entreat me , nay command thy Frances heart , 
That wilt not suffer my ensuing smart . 


Cripp.   Sweet signior , my advice in the reservation of those Letters , 
Which I will have you hide from eye of day , 
Never to feel the warmth of Phoebus' beams , 
Till myself's care , most careful of your weal , 
Summon those lines unto the bar of joy.  


Francke   I will not err , dear friend , in this command . 


Cripple   So much for that , now listen further Francke , 
Not yet two hour's expiration , 
Have taken final end , since Beauty's pride , 
And Nature's better part of workmanship , 
Beauteous Phillis was with me consorted ; 
Where she amongst other pleasing conference , 
Burst into terms of sweet affection , 
And said , ere long she would converse with me 
In private at my shop , whose wounded soul 
Struck with love's golden arrow lives in dread , 
Till she do hear the sentence of my love , 
Or be condemned by judgement of fell hate . 
Now since that gracious opportunity 
Thus smiles on me , I will resign the same 
To you my friend , knowing my unworthy self 
Too foul for such a beauty , and too base 
To match in brightness with that sacred comet . 
That shines like Phoebus in London's Element ; 
From whence inferior stars derive their light : 
wherefore I will immediately you take 
My crooked habit , and in that disguise 
Court her , yea win her , for she will be won , 
This will I do , to pleasure you my friend . 


Frank.   For which my love to thee shall never end . 


Crip.   About it then , assume this shape of mine , 
Take what I have . for all I have is thine ? 
Supply my place , to gain thy hearts desire , 
So may you quench too hearts that burn like fire : 
she 's kind to me , be she as kind to you , 
What admiration will there then ensue ? 
Frank , I will leave thee , now be thou fortunate , 
That we with joy your loves may consummate , 
Farewell , farewell , when I return again , 
I hope to find three in a pleasing vain . Exit . 


Fran.   Farewell dear friend ; was ever known a finer policy ? 
Now brothers , have amongst you for a third part , 
Nay , for the whole , or by my soul , I 'll lose all , 
What though my father did bequeath his lands 
To you my elder brethren , the movables I sue for 
Were none of his : and you shall run through fire , 
Before you touch one part of my desire : 
am I not like myself in this disguise , 
Crooked in shape , and crooked in my thoughts 
then am I a Cripple right , come wench , away , 
Thy absence breeds a terror to my stay . 
Enter Phillis . Yonder she comes , now frame thy hands to draw , 
A worse workman never any saw . 


Phil.   Yea yonder sits the wonder of mine eye ; 
I have not been the first whom destiny 
Hath thwarted thus ; imperious Love , 
Either withdraw the shaft that wounds my heart , 
Or grant me patience to endure my smart : 
Remorseless love , had any but thyself 
Been privy to my direful passion , 
How I consume and waste myself in love , 
They would have been , yea much more pitiful : 
But all avails not ; demanding for my work 
Shall be a means to have some conference . 
She speaks to Franke.  Good morrow to you , is my handkerchief done ? 


Frank.   Yea Mistress Flower , it is finished . 


Phil.   How sweetly tunes the accent of his voice ! 
O , do not blame me , dearest love alive , 
Though thus I dote in my affection ; 
I toil , I labour , and I fain would thrive , 
And thrive I may if thou wouldst give direction : 
thou art the star whereby my course is led , 
Be gracious then , bright sun , or I am dead . 


Frank.   Fair Mistress Phillis , such wanton toys as these , 
Are for young Novices that will soon be pleased , 
The careful thoughts that hammer in my brain , 
Bid me abandon wanton love ; 't is vain . 


Phil.   For me it is . 


Frank.   Is my ungarnishd , dark , and obscure Cell , 
A mansion fit for all-commanding love ? 
no , if thou wilt sport with love , 
And dally with that wanton amorous boy ; 
High thee unto the odoriferous groves . 


Phil.   There is no groves more pleasant unto me , 
then to be still in thy society . 


Franke.   There of the choicest fragrant flowers that grow 
thou mayst devose sweet roseate Coronets , 
And with the Nymphs that haunt the silver streams , 
Learn to entice the affable young wag ; 
There shalt thou find him wand ring up and down , 
Till some fair saint impale him with a crown : 
Be gone I say , and do not trouble me , 
For to be short , I cannot fancy thee . 


Phil.   For to be short , you cannot fancy me : 
O cruel word , more hateful than pale death , 
O , would to God it would conclude my breath . 


Frank.   Forbear , forbear , admit that I should yield : 
Think you , your father would applaud your choice . 


Phil.   Doubt not thereof , or if he do not , all 's one , 
So you but grant to my affection . 


Crip.   I am too base . 


Phil.   My wealth shall raise thee up . 


Crip.   I am deformed . 


Phil.   Tut , I will bear with that . 


Crip.   Your friend's dislike brings all this out of frame . 


Phil.   By humble suit I will redress the same . 


Frank.   Now to employ the virtue of my shape : 
Fair mistress , 
If heretofore I have remorseless been , 
And not esteemed your undeserued love , 
Whereby in the glass of your affection 
I see my great unkindness ; forgine what 's past , 
And here I proffer all the humble service 
Your high prized love doth merit at my hands , 
Which I confess is more than I unable 
Can gratify : therefore command my toil , 
My travel , yea , my life to pleasure you . 


Phil.   I take thee at thy word , proud of thy service , 
But yet no servant shalt thou be of mine , 
I will serve thee , command , and I 'll obey : 
This doth my soul more good , yea , ten times more 
Than did thy harsh denial harm before , 
Let us embrace like two united friends , 
here love begins , and former hatred ends . 


Enter Ferdinand and Anthony walking together . Ferd.   Brother Anthony , what news from Venice ? 
Are your ships returned ? I had rather aside . 
Hear news from Phillis : O , brother Frank , 
Thy absence makes me burn in passion . 


Anth.   Sir , I had letters from my factors there 
Some three days since ; but the return of one , aside . 
Of one poor letter , yet not answered , 
Makes me stark mad : a plague upon that Porter , 
Damned may he be for thus deluding me . 
Ferdinand spies Phillis and turns back . How now brother , why retire you so ? 


Ferd.   yonder 's a friend of mine acquaintance , 
With whom I would gladly have some conference , 
I pray thee stay I will return immediately . 


Go to Phillis and court her to themselves . Anth.   Of your acquaintance ; is she so good brother ? 
Only with you acquainted , and no other ? 
Faith I 'll try that , take heed sir what you do . 
If you begin to court , I needs must woe , Go to her too . 
Brother have you done ? 


Ferd.   But two words more at most : 
You have not then received any such letter ? 
A vengeance take the lazy messenger ; 
Brother if I live , I 'll quittance thee for this , 


Fran.   Good words , dear brother , threatened men live long . 


Anth.   You have done . 


Ferd.   Yes . 


Anth.   then by your leave brother , 
You had one word , I must have another . Talk in private . 


Ferd.   I know our business tends to one effect : 
OH that villain Frank , it mads my soul 
I am so wronged , by such a foolish Boy . 


Frank.   That foolish boy may chance prove to be witty : 
What , and the elder brother's fools ? O t i's pity ! 


Anth.   That villaive Porter hath deluded me , 
Confusion guerdon his base villain . 


Frank.   What are you cursing too ? then we catch no fish : 
Comes there any more , here 's two Snights to a dish . 


Ferd.   Well , since I have such opportunity , 
I 'll trust no longer to uncertainty . 


He court's her again in private . Anth.   At it so hard brother ; well , woe apace , 
A while I am content to give you place . 


Frank.   Well , to her both , both do the best you can ; 
I fear young Frank will prove the happier man  


Phil.   You have your answer , trouble me no more . 


Fer.   Yet this is worse than my suspense before , 
For than I lived in hope , now hope is fled . 


Anth.   What , male content ? is Ferdinand struck dead , 
Fortune be blithe , and aid the second brother . 


Talk in private . Franke.   Think you to have more favour than an other ? 
To her a God's name , live not in suspense , 
While you two strive , I needs must get the wench . 


Phil.   I am resolved , and , sir you know my mind . 


Frank.   What , you repulsed too ? Phillis is too unkind . 


Phil.   Here sits my Love , within whose lovely breast 
lives my content , and all my pleasures rest , 
And for a further confirmation , 
Which to approve , even in sight of both you here present , 
I give my hand , and with my hand , my heart , 
Myself , and all to him ; and with this ring 
I 'll wed myself . 


Frank.   I take thy offering , 
And for the gift you gave to me , take this , 
And let us seal affection with a kiss . 


Ferd.   O sight intolerable . 


Anth.   A spectacle worse than death . 


Frank.   Now gentlemen , please you draw near and listen to the Cripple . 
Give them the letters and they stamp and storm . Know you that letter ? sir , what say you to this ? 


Both.   How came they to your hands ? 


Frank   Sirs , a porter even of late left them with me , 
To be delivered to this Gentlewoman . 


Anth.   A plague upon that Porter ; if ere I meet him , 
My rapiers point with a death's wound shall greet him . Exit . 


Ferd.   Frank thou art a villain , thou shalt know 't ere long . 
For proffering me such undeserued wrong . Exit . 


Frank.   So , vomit forth the rheum of all your spite , 
These threats of yours procure me more delight . 


Phil.   Now gentle love , all that I have to say , 
Is to entreat you seek without delay , 
My father's kind consent , for thou hast mine , 
And though he storm yet will I still be thine ; 
Make trial then , 't is but thy labour lost , 
Though he deny thee , it requires no cost . 


Frank.   I will assail with expedition . 


Phil.   God , and good fortune go with thee , farewell . Exit . 


Frank.   Well , I will go , but not in this disguise ; 
Arm thee with policy Frank , Frank must be wise : 
Now would the substance of this borrowed shape 
Were here in presence , and see where he comes , 
Enter the Cripple . Poor in the well framed limbs of nature , but 
Rich in kindness beyond comparison . 
Welcome dear friend , the kindest soul alive , 
Here I resign thy habit back again , 
Whereby I prove the happiest man that breathes . 


Crip.   Hast thou then , sweet blood , been fortunate ? 


Frank.   Hark , I will tell thee all : Whisper in private . 


Enter Bowdler , Mall Berry , and Ralph , Bowdler caper's and sings . Ralf .  Faith sir , me thinks of late you are very light . 


Bowd.   As a feather , sweet Rogue , as a feather : 
Have I not good cause , sweet Mall , sweet Mall , 
Hath she not caused the same : well , if I live , sweet wench , 
Either by night or day I will requite your kindness . 


Franke.   Now I will take my leave , to put the same in practice . Exit Franke.  


Crip.   Good fortune wait on thee . 


Bowd.   Mall , thou art mine , by thine own consent ; 
How sayest thou Mall ? 


Mall .  Yes forsooth . 


Ralph .  I am witness sir.  


Bowd.   But that is not sufficient Mall , if thou art content Mall , here 's a Rogue hard by , a friend of mine , whom I will acquaint with our loves , and he shall be partaker of the match . 


Ralf .  Nay sir , if you mean to have partners in the match , I hope Ralph can help to serve your wife's turn as well as another , what ere he be . How say you mistress ? 


Mall .  all 's one to me , whom he please . 


Bowd.   Come then sweet Mall , we 'll to the Drawer , 
There to dispatch what I further intend . 


Mall .  And well remembered husband . 


Ralph .  A forward maiden by this light ; husband before the Clerk hath said Amen . 


Mall .  He hath work of mine , I pray forget it not . 


Bowd.   I will not Maul . Now you lame Rogue , where is this maiden's work ? my wife's work you rascal , quick , give it her ? 


Crip.   Sweet Signior , the sweet Nymph's work is almost finished , but sweet blood , you drive me into admiration with your latter words , your sweet wife's work , I admire it ! 


Bowd.   I ye halting Rascal , my wife's work ; she 's my wife before God and Ralph , how sayest thou Mall , art thou not ? 


Mal.   Yes for sooth , and to confirm the same , 
here in this presence , I plight my faith again ; 
And speak again , what erst before was said , 
That none but you shall have my maidenhead . 


Bowd.   A good wench Mall , i'faith , now will I to thy father for his good will , Cripple , see you remember what is past , for I will call thee in question for a witness if need require , farewell cur , farewell dog . Exit . Bowdler and Ralph . 


Crip.   A due fond humorist , Parenthesis of jests , 
Whose humour like a needless Cypher sils a room : 
But now Mall Berry , a word or two with you : 
Hast thou forgotten Barnet ? thy thoughts were bend on him . 


Mall .  On him Cripple ! for what ? was it for marriage ? 


Crip.   It was for love , why not for marriage ? OH monstrous ! 
Were I a maid and should be so bewitched , 
I 'd pull my eyes out that did lend me light , 
Exclaim against my fortune , ban my stars , 
And tear my heart , so yielding her consent 
To Bowdler's love , that froth of compliment . 


Mall .  Cripple , you loose your time , with your fair tears 
To circumvent my heart : Bowdler I love thee , 
Barnard I hate , and thou shalt never move me . 


Crip.   I will ; thou dost love Barnard , and I can prove it . 


Mall .  That I love Barnard ! by heavens I abhor him . 


Crip.   thou lov'st him , once again I say , thou lov'st him , 
For all thou hast born Bowdler still in hand . 


Mall .  What wilt thou make me mad ? I say , I hate him . 


Crip.   I say thou lov'st him : have not I been at home , 
And heard thee in thy chamber praise his person , 
And say he is a proper little man , 
And pray that he would be a suitor to thee ? 
Have I not seen thee in the Bay-window 
To sit crosse-aride , take counsel of thy glass , 
And prune thyself to please young Barnard's eye ? 
Some times curling thy hair , then practising smiles , 
Sometimes rubbing thy filthy butter-teeth , 
then pull the hairs from off thy beetle-brows . 
Painting the veins upon thy breasts with blue , 
An hundred other tricks I saw thee use , 
And all for Barnard . 


Mall .  For Barnard ! ' was for Bowdler . 


Crip.   I say , for Barnard . 
Nay more , thou know'st I lay one night at home , 
And in thy sleep I heard thee call on Barnard 
Twenty times over . 


Mall .  Will you be sworn I did . 


Crip.   ay , I will swear it : 
And art thou not ashamed thus to be changed , 
To leave the love of a kind Gentleman 
To dote on Bowdler ? Fie , fie , reclaim thyself : 
Embrace thy Barnard , take him for thy husband , 
And save his credit , who is else undone , 
By thy hard father's hateful cruelty . 


Mall .  Cripple , If thou canst prove that ever I 
Did fancy Barnard , I will love him still . 


Crip.   Why I 'll be sworn thou didst . 


Mal.   And that I doted on him in my sleep . 


Crip.   I 'll be sworn I could not sleep all night 
In the next room , thou didst so rave on him . 


Mal.   I cannot tell , I may well be deceived , 
I think I might affect him in my sleep , 
And yet not know it ; let me look on him , 
I'faith he is a pretty handsome fellow , 
't is pity he should waste himself in prison ; 
Hey ho.  


Crip.   what 's the mater wench ? 


Mal.   Cripple , I will love him . 


Crip.   wilt thou i'faith ? 


Mal.   I'faith ay william Enter two Sergeants 


Crip.   Give me thy hand , a bargain , 't is enough . 


Mal.   But how shall he know I love him ? 


Crip.   Why thus : I will entreat the Sergeants 
To go with him along unto thy father , 
And by the way I 'll send young Bowdler from us , 
And then acquaint my Barnard with thy love , 
He shall accept it and avouch the same 
Unto thy father , wench do thou the like , 
And then I hope his bonds are canceled . 


Barn.   Cripple , shall we have your company ? 


Crip.   My friends , hold here , there 's money for your pains 
Walk with your prisoner but to master Berry , 
And ye shall either find sufficient bail , 
Or else discharge the debt , or I assure you 
we 'll be your aid to guard him safe to prison . 


1. Sergeant  Well , we are willing sir , we are content 
To show the Gentleman any kind of favour . 


Crip.   Along then ; hark master Bowdler . Exeunt . 


Enter Master Flower , Mistress Flower , Master Berry , and Fiddle . Mayst Flo.   Welcome good master Berry , is your stomach up sir ? It is a good conceit i'faith . 


Fiddle   It is indeed sir.  


Master Flo.   What , Fiddle ! 


Fid.   If his stomach be up to go to dinner . 


Master Flo.   Fiddle , bid master Berry welcome . 


Fid.   What else master ? with the best belly in my heart , the sweetest strain in my music , and the worst entertainment that may be , Fiddle bids your worship adesdum . 


Berry   Thanks Fiddle , and master Flower , I am much beholding to your courtesy . 


Mistress Flo.   Fiddle , I wonder that he stays so long , 
thou toldst me Anthony would follow thee . 


Fid.   ay , and he 'll be here I warrant you . 


Master Flo.   I 'll tell you sir , it is a rare conceit , 
My wife would have her marry Anthony , 
The younger brother , but against her mind , 
I will contract her unto Ferdinand , 
And I have sent for you and other friends , 
To witness it ; and 't is a good conceit . 


Mistress Flo.   Fiddle , are all things ordered well within ? 


Fid.   all 's well , all 's well , but there wants some saffron , 
To colour the custards withal . 


Mistress Flo.   here , take my keys , bid Susan take enough . 


Master Flo.   Fiddle , are all our guests come yet ? 


Fid.   I sir , and here comes one more than you looked for . 


Exit . Enter Franke.  Frank   God save you Master Flower , as much to you Master Berry . 


Master Flo.   Welcome M. Golding , you are very welcome sir.  


Frank   My brother Ferdinand commends him to you , 
And here 's a letter to you from himself . 


Master Flo.   A letter sir , it is a good conceit , 
I 'll read it straight , 
Gives the other Letter to mistress Flower . Master Flower , I am beholding to you for your kindness , and your furtherance in my love-suite , but my mind is changed , and I will not marry your daughter , and so farewell . 
This is no good conceit : what Ferdinand , 
Delude old Flower , make me deceive my friends , 
Make my wife laugh , and triumph in her will , 
What think you Fiddle ? 


Fid.   Why sir I think it is no good conceit . 


Master Flo.   thou sayest true Fiddle , 't is a bad conceit , 
But hear you sir.  
Mistress Flower reads her Letter . I understand by Fiddle your forwardness in my suit to your daughter : but nevertheless I am determined to draw back , and commit your daughter to her best fortunes , and yourself to God ; Farewell . 



Why this is like my husband's bad conceit , 
Have you o'erreached me Flower , you crafty fox ? 
This is your doing , but for all your sleight 
I 'll cross you if my purpose hit aright . 


Fra.   Tut , tell not me sir , for my credit and reputation is as it is , and there 's an end : if I shall have her , why so . 


Maist. Flo.   Sir , the conceit is doubtful , give me leave but to consider of it by myself . 


Frank   With all my heart . 


Mistress Flo.   Master Golding , a word I pray sir , 
You know my daughter Phillis , do you not ? 


Frank   Mistress , I do . 


Mistress Flo.   She is a star I tell you . 


Frank   She is no less indeed . 


Mistress Flo.   I tell you sir upon the sudden now , 
There came an odd conceit into my head , 
Are you a bachelor ? 


Frank   I am indeed . 


Mistress Flo.   And are you not promised ? 


Frank   Not yet believe me . 


Master Flo.   Master Golding . 


Mistress Flo.   Well , do you hear sir ? if you will be pleased 
To wed my daughter Phillis , you shall have her . 


Frank   To wed your daughter , why she loves me not . 


Mistress Flo.   all 's one for that , she will be ruled by me : 
Disdain her not because I proffer her , 
I tell you sir , Merchants of great account 
Have sought her love , and Gentlemen of worth , 
Have humbly sued to me in that behalf : 
To say the truth , I promised her to one , 
But I am crossed and thwarted by my husband , 
Who means to marry her unto another : 
Now sir , to cry but quittance for his guile , 
I offer her to you ; if you accept her , 
I 'll make her dowry richer by a pair 
Of hundred pounds than else it should have been . 


Frank   Why this is excellent , past all compare , 
Sued to to have her , gentle mistress Flower , 
Let me consider of it . 


Mistress Flo.   Nay , nay , defer no time if you will have her , 
I 'll search my coffers for another hundred . 


Fran.   Say I should yield , your husband will withstand it . 


Mistress Fl.   I 'll have it closely done without his knowledge ; 
Is it a match ? 


Frank   Well , well , I am content . 


Mast. Fl.   Why then old Flower , I 'll cross your close intent . 


Master Flo.   It shall be so ; and 't is a good conceit , 
It shall be so if but to cross my wife , 
Hark master Golding , the conceit doth like me . 
You love my daughter , so me thought you said ; 
You said moreover , that she loves you well , 
This love on both sides is a good conceit . 
But are you sure sir , that my daughter loves you ? 


Frank   For proof thereof show her this ring . 


Master Flo.   A ring of hers ! 't is well . 


Frank   I but conceit me , 
If I had wood her in my proper shape , 
I do believe she never would have liked me , 
Therefore since I shall have her , give me leave 
To come and court her in my borrowed shape . 


Master Flo.   With all my heart , and 't is a good conceit , 
And here 's my hand , son Golding , thou shalt have her . 


Frank   then father Flower , I rest upon your promise , 
I 'll leave you for a while , till I put on 
My counterfeited shape , and then return . Exit . 


Master Flo.   Welcome good son , 't is well , by this conceit 
My wife will be prevented of her will : 
I would not for the half of all my wealth , 
My cross-word wife had compassed her intent : 
Now wife . 


Mistress Flo.   Now Husband . 


Master Flo.   You still maintain the suit for Anthony , 
you 'll have your will , and I must break my word . 


Mist. Flo.   jest on old Flower , be cross , and do thy worst , 
Work the best means thou canst , yet whiles I live 
I swear she never shall wed Ferdinand . 


Mast. Flo.   What shall she not ? 


Mist. Flo.   no that she shall not . 


Master Flo.   I say , she shall . 


Mistress Flo.   I'faith she shall not . 


Master Flo.   No!  


Mistress Flo.   No.  


Master Flo.   Well wife , I am vexed , and by God's precious . 


Master Berry   OH sir , be patient gentle mistress Flower , 
Cross not your husband , let him have his william  


Mistress Flo.   His will ! 


Master Flo.   Hearst thou wife , be quiet , thou knowest my humour . 
Thus to be crossed , it is no good conceit . 


Mistress Flo.   A fig for your conceit ; yet for because , 
I know I shall prevent him of the match , 
That he intends , henceforth I will dissemble . 
Well master Flower , because it shall be said , 
And for kind master Berry may report 
The humble loyalty I bear to you , 
Such as a wife should do unto her husband . 
I am content to yield to your desires , 
Protesting , whiles I live , I never more 
Will speak that Anthony may marry her . 


Master Flo.   Wife , speakest thou with thy heart ? 


Mistress Flo.   Husband , I do . 


Master Flo.   Dost thou indeed ? 


Mistress Flo.   Indeed forsooth I do . 


Master Flo.   then 't is a good conceit : ha , ha ; 
I see 't is sometimes good to look aloft , 
Come hither wife , because thou art so humble , 
I 'll tell thee all , I have received a letter 
From Ferdinand , wherein he sends me word , 
He will not marry with my daughter Phillis , 
And therefore I was full determined 
To cross thy purpose , that his brother Frank 
Should marry her , and so I still intend : 
What sayest thou wife , dost thou assent thereto ? 


Mist. Flo.   That Frank should marry her , I have sworn he shall , 
And since this falls so right , I 'll not disclose , 
That I did mean so much ; but now I 'll yield , 
That it may seem my true humility : 
Husband , because hereafter you may say , 
And think me loving , loyal , and submiss , 
I am content , Frank shall have my consent . 


Master Flo.   Why now thou showst thyself obedient , 
And thou dost please me with thy good conceit . 


Enter Barnard , Mall , and two Sergeants . Barn.   By your leave master Flower , 
Berry I am arrested at your suit . 


Berry   And I am glad of it with all my heart ; 
Hold friends , there 's somewhat more for you to drink , 
Away with him to prison . 


Barn.   Stay master Berry , I have brought you bail . 


Berry   What bail ? where is your bail ? here 's none I know 
Will be thy bail , away with him to prison . 


Mall   Yes , I forsooth father , I 'll be his bail , 
Body for body ; think you I 'll stay at home , 
And see my husband carried to the jail ? 


Berry   How , thy husband ! 


Mall   My husband I assure you : 
Father , these Sergeants both can witness it . 


1.  Ser.   We saw them both contracted man and wife , 
And therefore thought it fit to give you knowledge , 
Before we carried him unto the prison . 


Berry   But I 'll undo this contract on my blessing , 
Daughter , come from him , he 's a reprobate . 


Mall   He is my husband . 


Berry   But thou shalt not have him . 


Mall   Faith but I will , Barnard , speak for thyself . 


Barn.   Why M. Berry , 't is well known to you , 
I am a gentleman , though by misfortune , 
My ventures in the world have somewhat failed me : 
Say that my wealth disables my desert , 
The difference of our bload supplies that want ? 
What though my lands be mortgaged , if you please , 
The dowry you intent to give your daughter , 
May well redeem them . You perhaps imagine 
I will be wild , but I intent it not . 
What shall I say , if you will give consent ? 
As you redeem my lands , so I my time ill spent 
Mean to redeem ; with frugal industry , 
I 'll be your counsel's pupil , and submit 
My follies to your will , mine to your wit.  


Berry   What think you master Flower ? 


Master Flo.   Faith master Berry , 
Barnara speaks well , and with a good conceit . 


Mal   Dost thou love him Mall ? 


Mall   Yes sir , and here protest , 
Of all in London I love Barnard best . 


Master Flo.   then master Berry , follow my conceit , 
Cancel his bond , and let him have your daughter . 


Berry   Well Barnard , since I see my daughter loves thee , 
And for I hope thou wilt be kind and loving , 
Regard thy state , and turn an honest man , 
here , take my daughter , I 'll give thee in thy bond , 
Redeem thy lands , and if thou please me well , 
thou shalt not want all that I have is thine . 


Barn.   I am love-bound to her , to you in duty , 
You conquer me with kindness , she with beauty . 


1.  Ser.   then Master Berry I think we may depart . 


Berry   ay , when you please , you see the matter ended , 
The debt discharged , and I can ask no more . 


1.  Ser.   Why then we take our leaves . Exeunt Sergeants . 


Ma. Flo.   Now wife , if young Frank Golding were come back , 
To sum our wish , it were a good conceit : Enter Phi.  
Why how now Phillis , sad , come tell me wench , 
Art thou resolved yet for to have thy husband ? 


Phi.   A golden Golding , 't is a good conceit . 
That golden Golding is but loath some dross , 
Nor is it gold that I so much esteem ; 
Dust is the richest treasure that we have , 
Nor is the beauty of the fairest one , 
Of higher price or value unto me , 
Than is a lump of poor deformity . 
Father , you know my mind , and what I said , 
Which if you grant not , I will rest a maid . Enter Fid.  


Master Flo.   To die a maid , that is no good conceit . 


Fid.   Master , where 's my master ? here 's one would couple a brace of words with you . 


Master Flo.   With me sir.  


Fid.   no sir , with my young mistress . 


Master Flo.   What is he knave ? 


Fid.   A crooked knave sir , 't is the Cripple . 


Mai. Flo.   What would he have ? he hath no good conceit , 
't is he that hath bewitched my daughter's heart , 
He is a knave , go send him packing hence . 


Phi.   As you respect the welfare of your child , 
Dear father , let me speak with him . 


Master Flo.   Speak with him ! no , it is no good conceit , 
I know he comes to run away with thee . 


Fid.   Run away with her ? well may she carry him , but if he run away with her , I 'll never trust crutch more . 


Master Flo.   thou sayest true Fiddle , 't is a good conceit : 
Go call him in , Frank Golding , it is he . Exit Fid.  
In the lame knave's disguise , a good conceit ; Enter Frank 
Now sir , what 's the news with you , you come to speak with my daughter ? 


Frank   Yea sir , about a little work I have of hers . 


Master Flo.   What work , you knave ? no , thou hast some conceit , to rob me of my daughter ; but away : 
I like not that conceit out of my doors . 


Phi.   Unhappy Phillis , and unfortunate . 


Fra.   Sir , I am content , I 'll not move your patience . 


Phi.   Life of my living body , if thou go , 
Though not alive take me hence dead with woe . she sounds 


Berry .  In troth sir , you are too blame . 


Master Flow.   What ? is she dead ? it is no good conceit . 
Speak to me Phillis , OH unhappy time , 
Sweet Girl , dear daughter , OH my only joy , 
Speak to thy father wench , in some conceit , 
What , not a word ? 


Berry .  Now may you see , what fell impatience 
Begets upon such tender plants as these . 


Mistress Flow.   Now may we see the folly of old age , 
Governed by spleen , and overweening rage . 


Master Flow.   Speak to me , daughter . 
And thou shalt have , what not ? covetst thou gold ? 
thou shalt not want for crowns , thou shalt have all . 
OH was my fury author of thy trance ? 
Did I deny thy love's access to thee ? 
Speak but one word and thou shalt be his wife , 
By heaven thou shalt . 


Phil.   I take you at your word ; it is no pain 
To die for love , and then revive again . 


Berry .  Now M. Flower how like you this conceit , 
Hath she not over reached you ? 


M. Flow.   My word is past , and yet for all my rage , 
I rather choose to fail in my conceit , 
And wed thee Phillis to thy own content . 
here , take my daughter , Cripple , love her well , 
Be kind to her , and I 'll be kind to thee , 
thou art but poor , well I will make thee rich , 
And so God bless you , with a good conceit . 


Frank.   I thank you , when I leave to love my wife , 
Heaven hasten death and take away my life . 


M. Flow.   't is well done Frank , I applaud thy wit , 
And now I know I fail not in conceit . 


Enter Cripple , Ferdinand , Anthony , Bowdler . Crip.   Gentlemen sweet bloods , or brethren of familiarity , 
I would speak with Phillis , shall I have audience ? 


Phil.   Help me dear father , OH help me Gentlemen , 
This is some spirit , drive him from my sight . 


Frank.   Were he the devil , thou shalt not budge a foot . 


Bowd.   Zounds two Cripples , two dogs two curs , 't is wonderful ! 


Frank.   Fear not dear heart . 


Phil.   Hence foul deformity . 
Nor thou nor he , shall my companion be , 
If Cripples dead , the living seem to haunt , 
I 'll neither of either , therefore I say avaunt ; 
Help , me father . 


Frank.   Dear heart , revoke these words , 
Here are no spirits nor deformities , 
I am a sergeant Cripple now no more , 
But young Frank Golaing . as I was before : 
Amaze not love , nor seem not discontent , 
Nor thee nor him shall ever this repent . 


Ferd.   M. Flower , I come to claim your promise . 


Anth.   I come for yours , your daughter I do mean . 


M. Flow.   My promise ; why sir , you refused my promise , 
And sent me word so in your letter . 


Mistress Flow.   And so did you to me , and now 't is past , 
Your brother Frank hath both our free consents . 


Ferd.   Sir , sir , I wrote no letter . 


Anth.   By heaven , nor I  


Frank.   But I did for you both ; I was your Scribe , 
The whilst you went to see your house a fire : 
And you ( as I remember ) I did send , 
To see your sister drowned at London-bridge . 


Ferd.   Y faith good brother have you o'er reach , d us so ? 


Anth ,  So cunningly , that none of us could know . 


Ferd.   For all this cunning , I will break the match . 


Anth.   And so will 1  


Frank.   Why brothers , she 's mine by her father's gift . 


Ferd.   Brother you lie , you got her with a shift . 


Franke.   I was the first that loved her . 


Ferd.   that 's not so , 't was I  


Anth.   Catch that catch can , than brothers both you lie . 


M. Flow.   Yea , but conceit me Gentlemen , what do you mean to spoil my daughter ? you claim her , and I have given her your younger brother ; this is no good conceit : why how now Phillis , still drooping , cheer thee my girl , see a company of Gentlemen are at strife for thy love ; look up , and in this fair assembly make thine own choice ; choose where thou wilt , and use thine own conceit . 



Phil.   But will my father then applaud my choice ? 


M. Flow.   I william  


Phil.   And will these worthy Gentlemen be pleased , 
How ever my dislike or liking prove ? 


All.   We william  


Phil.   I must confess you all have taken pains , 
And I can give but all for that pains taken , 
And all my all , is but a little love , 
And of a little who can make division , 
I would I knew what would content you all . 


Ferd.   Thy love . 


Anoth.   Thy life and love . 


Frank.   Thy life , thy love , thyself , and all for me , 
For if I want but one , I then want thee . 


Phil.   If then I give what either if you crave , 
Though not what you desire will it suffice . 


Ferd.   I wish but love . 


Phil.   And as a friend you have it . 


Anth.   I life and love . 


Phil.   And as your friend , I vow , to love you whilst I live , as do now . 


Frank.   I ask but all for I deserve no more . 


Phil.   And thou shalt have thy wish , take all my store , 
My love myself . 


Frank.   By heaven , I ask no more : 
Brothers , have done , and Dad to end all strife , 
Come take her hand and give her for my wife . 


M Flow.   Withal my heart , and 't is a good conceit . 


Bowd.   Gentlemen , patience is your fairest play . 


Ferd.   Impatience pulls me hence , for this disdain , 
I am resolved never to love again . Exit . 


Anth.   Stay brother Ferdinand , I 'll follow thee , 
Farewell all love , 't is full of treachery . Exit . 


Bow.   By heavens Frank I do commend thy wit , 
Come Mall , shall thou and I ask blessing too for company ? 


Mall .  You and I sir , alas , we are not playfellows , though we be turtles : I am provided . 


Bowd.   Provided ! why am not I thy Menelaus ? 


Mall .  I sir , but this is my Paris , I am resolved , 
And what I do is by authority . 


Bowd.   Is it even so , is Helen stolen by Paris ? 
then thus in arms will Menelaus mourn , 
Till Troy be sacked , and Helena return . Exit 


Enter M. Wood , and Officers . Wood   This is the man , officers attach him upon felony . 


Office.   M. Flower , I arrest you upon felony , and charge you to obey . 


M. Flow.   Arrest me upon felony ! at whose suit ? 


Wood   Sir , at mine ; where had you that Diamond on your finger ? it was stolen from me , and many other jewels to the value of a hundred pound . 


M Flo   This is no good conceit ; hath Captain Racket , 
Banded old Flower to such an exegent ? 
I hope my credit somewhat will assist me ; 
Well , whither must I go ? 


Wood   Strait to the bench , where now the judges are 
To give you speedy trial . 


M. Flow.   Words here are little worth , wife and friends all 
Go with me to my trial , you shall see 
A good conceit now brought to infamy . Exeunt . 


FINIS . 

