Ignis Coelestis : OR An interchange of Divine LOVE between GOD and his SAINTS . 

BY JOHN LEWIS , Minister of God words at St. PETER'S in the town of St. Albon . 

LONDON : Printed by T. S. for N. N. 1620.  

To the worshipful Mr. ROBERT SHUTE ESQVIER . 

Sir : so often as I consider the brevity and frailty of this mortal life , that between the womb and the tomb , the cradle and the grave , there is but a spans breadth : and so often as I remember , That it is appointed for man once to die , and then he must come to judgement ; I cannot but with grief admire the wilful madness of this age ; wherein men set their wits upon the tenterhookss of invention and policy , and set their brains a work to find strange plots : One with Ahab to get Naboths' vineyard ; another with the rich Churl to enlarge his barns by magnitude , and his bags by multitude ; a third with proud Haman only aims at greatness , his aspiring mind is always climbing , his desires cannot find a Non ultra , for his preferment hath no period ; a fourth with the rich Man how he may bathe himself in pleasure , and Sardanapalus-like become effeminate by giving himself to all voluptuousness ; But that which is unum necessarium , especially necessary for our sound comfort here , and eternal happiness hereafter , is not remembered , not regarded . Things which are obtained with much labour , retained with much care , and lost with much vexation , we hunt after with great eagerness ; but God who hath given us , not only our esse , but our bene esse , the fruition of whom is man's beatitude , is neither affected nor desired . With the Gadarens we prefer a few swine before Christ our Redeemer : with profane Esau we sell our birth right , yea and the blessing with it , for a mess of pottage : whereas if we could but be advised by the Heathen ; Ab jove principium , Let our love begin at God , with him we should possess peace , patience , comfort , content , help , happiness , yea whatsoever were expe●ient for life temporal and eternal : If we did but seek God and his righteousness , all things necessary shall be added unto us There is no cause why we should be so lovesick for the world ; it is variable , soon got , soon lost ; deceivable , being but a shadow of felicity , no substance ; treacherous● ● while it flattereth the body , it stays the soul ; perfidious , it complementeth with her lovers , as Dalilah with Samson , but be●raies them un●o Satan their moral enemy . If we could but look on the world with the eye of faith and sound judgement , and be so wise as to behold it in its proper complexion , we would not dote on so mean a creature , we would not make our servant to be our Lord , when the Lord sues for the love of us his servants : He that is unchangeable , he that is amiable , he that is infinitely holy , infinitely compassionate , hath a long time stood at the door knocking , desiring to come in and ●up with us , intending to bring his provision with him , to furnish our hearts , and at length to bring salvation to our souls , and our souls unto blessedness ; yet like men careless of his kindness , fearless of his displeasure , we suffer him to knock , and will not open , we are in bed with our darlings , and will not rise ; O that in this our day we did but know the things which belong unto our peace ! 

The motive that induceth me to commit this small work unto the Press , is rather the worthiness of the subject , than any excellency of the Author's wit , it being worthy of the most advised meditations of the best men , of our best time ; wherein we shall clearly behold what God hath been to us , and what we ought to be toward him , the love of the one , and the duty of the other . 

The great and mere voluntary kindness which I have received from your Worship , without any desert on my part , is a sufficient argument to persuade me to dedicate it unto your worthy self , beseeching you to accept it as a testimony expressing his thankfulness , who shall perpetually acknowledge himself obliged unto you : The Widow's Mite , a token of a willing mind , was kindly accepted . Although this work be composed rudi ac crassa Minerva , yet herein the Author's desire may no less be conceived , then in that which is more exquisite . I endeavour not indeed so much to please the ear , as to comfort the conscience , labouring rather for soundness of matter , than plausiblenes of phrase , and aiming more at a general then at a particular benefit . What once Peter said unto the Cripple that lay at the gate of the Temple , the same will I say unto your worship . Silver and Gold have I none , but such as I have give I thee . And seeing I cannot express my thankfulness as I would , let me be bold to do it as I may ; and what I cannot in action , I shall in praying God to give you increase of grace and honour in this life● and the eternal fruition of soule-contenting blessedness in the life to come . 

Yours in all Christian duty , JOHN LEWIS . 

Ignis Coelestis : OR An interchange of divine love , between GOD and his SAINTS . 

1.  JOHN , Chap. 4.  Verse 19  

We love him , because he loved us first . 

I May say of these words , as Simonides did of God , that when he had required but one day to resolve what GOD was ; when the day was expired , he was more unable to answer , then at the first . The more I think of the admirable greatness of God's love toward us , the more I may meditate of it , but the less able am I to express it ; for me thinks I am enclosed in such a labyrinth , that I can neither by art nor nature extricate myself , like the sun , which keeps his continual motion , and yet never comes to an end . And indeed no marvel , seeing that divine love which is in God differs nothing from himself , for Quicquid in Deo est , est ipse Deus : Whatsoever is in God is God himself . It is therefore as impossible for me fully to declare , and for you exactly to conceive , what this love of God is in itself , as to declare and conceive what God himself is , seeing as the one is infinite , so is the other ; God is infinite in his essence , therefore not finite in his properties , therefore unconceivable by any finite creature . But as God himself cannot be expressed as he is in his divine essence , but as he hath revealed himself in his word and works , so his love seeing it is de escentia divina , essential unto him that is incomprehensible , can only be conceived per nebulam , somewhat infirmely of us , even as he hath revealed it in his word and works toward his creatures . 

This verse me thinks may not unfitly be compared unto the two Cherubims which were on the mercy seat , the one looking toward the other : for God out of his mere favour manifesting his love toward us , first , hath begotten in us a holy love toward him again . And as the Species or image that issueth from the countenance into the glass , is reflected back into the eye of the beholder : so the love of God toward us , bege●teth in us a love toward him , which is reflected back to him which is the Author of all love , yea , Love itself ; like the rivers , whose beginning is from the sea , and whose recourse is into the se● again . 

The Apostle Saint john in this Epistle , doth exhort unto three graces especially ; Faith , Love , and Obedience ; and these duties he doth interchangeably mix one with another , but Love is the grace he doth chiefly insist upon , and oftenest exhort unto . And this love he showeth hath two objects ; The one more principal which is God : The other less principal which is man God we must love simply for himself , Man for God ; God because he is God , Man because he is Gods. Thus as the objects of our Love are diverse , so are their conditions ; yet not so diverse as that they are contrary , but only subordinate as the inferior to the superior . 

The words of my Text do divide themselves into these two branches : First , an affirmation of an effect wrought . Secondly , a declaration of the cause working . The effect wrought in these words . We love him ; wherein observe three things . 1.  The subject , We . 2.  The action of this subject , Love. 3.  The object of this action , Him. In the cause observe four things . 1.  The efficient , God. 2.  His affection , Love. 3.  The object , Vs. 4.  The extent . First . 

The Metaphrase of the words is this : True indeed it is , that all those which know God truly , and are begotten again by the immortal seed of his divine Word , and are endued with the heavenly graces of his blessed spirit , do entirely , and with ardent affection love God their father who hath begot them : But whence proceeds this love ? is it from themselves ? or have they it radically or naturally growing in them ? no questionless . God is as a fountain of love , who loving them first , hath so conveyed his love into their hearts by the powerful operation of his holy Spirit , that the stream returns unto himself again : and as the Sun by his power , with the motion of the heavens , is the cause of all natural heat in these sublunary creatures : So is God by the motion of his own divine love , the efficient cause that worketh the heat of love in all that fear him : We love him indeed but not of ourselves , but we love him , because he loved us first . Thus much for the meaning of the words . 

Seeing by order of nature the cause is before the effect , I suppose it is not so convenient to handle the words as they lie in the Text , for it seems somewhat preposterous : but I will rather begin with those words which are last in place , but first in nature ; and so shall I show , first the love of God to his children being the cause , than our love back again to God being the effect . 

Touching the love of God I lay down this Doctrine : That God before the foundation of the world hath , doth , and will love those that are his elect . For so must we understand the text ; the word us , implying the object of God's love is not general to all men , but particularly to be restrained unto those who do rightly know God , and in knowing him do truly and faithfully serve him . For as touching the wicked , I may say of them as Peter said of Simon Magus , They have no part nor fellowship in this matter , that is , in the inheritance of God's love ; and till such time as they are regenerated , and effectually converted , they are in the gall of bitterness , and the bond of iniquity . 

For the proof of the Doctrine , it is confirmed : First , by Scripture : Secondly , by Instances . By scripture , see Mal. 1.2 . I have loved ye , saith the Lord , yet ye say wherein hast thou loved us ? Was not Esau Jacob's brother , saith the Lord , yet I loved jacob . And I hated Esau , and laid his mountains and heritage waste , for the dragons of the wilderness . The Israelites contest with God , he affirmeth he hath loved them , but they being ( as they always were ) an ungrateful and an unthankful nation , with bold and impudent faces , do not stick to deny that ever God did testify any love to them ; yea , they will not take Gods bare word , but will put him to prove it . Wherein hast thou loved us ? OH miserable hardness of heart , that hath continual experience , and yet will not take notice of God's love : yet God shows them plainly in particular wherein he testified his lo●e toward them ; even in jacob , whom of his free and mere mercy he choose to be heir of the promise , from whose loins they sprang , & through whom they were made the children of the covenant . So again ; Behold , what love the father hath showed us , that we should be called the sons of God. Where the Apostle doth prefix the word Behold , as a mark of attention and observation : teaching all those that are the servants of the most high , and children of the immortal GOD , that they should by no means be ignorant of the great love that God had showed unto them . And a most remarkable place is that of jeremie : I have loved thee with an everlasting love , therefore with mercies have I drawn thee . Where the Lord declares the greatness of his love by the word everlasting , which shows that it is eternal , both a part ante , et a parte post ( as the Schools speak ) that is , both before the world was made , and after the world shall be dissolved ; now whatsoever was before the world , was eternal , and whatsoever shall be after the world , shall be eternal . 

Many other testimonies might be alleged for the confirmation of this point ; but let us a little see what this love of God is . Love is nothing else but a strong affection and inclination to the thing beloved , with a contenting of the mind in the thing obtained . And so the Hebrew word , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 doth signify ; Non solum aliquid velle , verum etiam in eo iam comparato acquiescere ; not only to love & desire , but also to rest contented in the fruition of the thing desired . So the Greek word in the text , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to love , signifies as much as to be content , for so Cicero turns it . Phavorinus derives it 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , that is , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , seipsum , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , altogether , and with his whole mind to affect and give himself to the thing beloved . But others ( and that I think more fitly ) derive it 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , quod est , valde perfecteque in re amata acquiescere ; greatly and perfectly to rest contented in the enjoyment of the thing beloved . So God himself pronounced from heaven touching Christ , Hic est filius meus 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : This is my well-beloved Son ; and immediately as though he would give a reason or etymology of the word , he adds , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , in quo acquiesco ; in whom I rest , or am well pleased . 

So then there are in love three things . 1.  An affection or passion , whereby we are inclined unto the thing beloved . 2.  There is a desire , whereby we are strongly carried to the enjoying of the thing beloved . 3.  A great joy , whereby we rest ourselves contented in the possession of the thing desired . In these three things doth Augustine in his book De substantia delectionis , make love to consist . Hence than we may easily see what love is . It is an ardent affection of the mind , whereby the heart is moved towards that which either is truly or seemingly good , desiring to draw that good unto itself , that it might enjoy it , and in the fruition of it rest contented . 

Love doth unite and knit two things together , that they become one ; and from this union ariseth a sympathy , that the lover doth not less feel the griefs and afflictions of his beloved than he himself , and the good and prosperity of the thing beloved , is not more its , than the lovers . 

But the love of God is of another kind , and of another manner : for love in God is most perfect , for that he is perfection itself ; but in us love is imperfect , being not without some passion and weakness of mind . But such a love is not in God , for he is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , impatible , and cannot be moved , there being nothing in God that is servile or base , or that argues any the least imperfection : but he is a divine Majesty , most glorious , most holy , most absolute in perfection , most free from any the least inclination to weakness . And howsoever it pleaseth him in the Scripture to compare his love to the love of a Mother toward her Child , of a Hen toward her Chickens , of a Pastor toward his Sheep , yea , of a Father grieving at the misery of his Sons , and the like : yet this is but only 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , after the manner of men , that we may conceive it ; idque ob nostram utilitatem , for our benefit ( as Zanchius speaks ) that we may be verily persuaded , that the love of God toward us , is most fervent , most sincere , and that from thence we may conceive confidence to fly unto him and to call upon him . 

But we must note that the love of God consists in three things , which are absolutely perfect without any passion or motion of the mind . First , in his eternal benevolence , that is , his eternal goodwill unto his Elect , and his everlasting purpose of commiserating , helping , preserving , and redeeming his children : For ( according to the saying of Saint Paul ) before the children did either good or bad , yea , before they were born , God hated Esau , and loved jacob . What was this love that God bore unto jacob before he was born ? Even his goodwill that he had toward him , whereby he had decreed the good and salvation of his soul . The second thing wherein God's love doth consist , is his actual beneficence , that is , in the outward effects of his inward love ; whether it be in things temporal , and belonging to this life , or eternal , respecting the life to come . And herein God's love is more excellent than Man's love , and more pure than the love of any creature ; for God doth good to the creature , not thereby to do good to himself ; whereas the love of man is not so much for the things sake beloved , as for the profit , pleasure , or content it bringeth with it . So that the second thing wherein the love of God consisteth , is his readiness to do all things he thinketh good for his children , and that not so much for his own benefit as for theirs : for so the Philosopher defines true love . The third thing wherein the love of God consists , is that complacency , oblectation , delight , content , and well-pleasingnesse that God finds in his elect : and in this sense we find it used . The way of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord , but he loveth him that followeth after righteousness . Here we see that the love of God is taken neither for his benevolence , nor beneficence , but for his approbation and delectation , his delight he takes in those that work righteousness ; and on the contrary he hate's , disalowes of , and is discontented at the wicked ways of the ungodly . Thus we see what the love of God to his Elect is ; Even his eternal purpose and decree of doing good unto them , and the expressing of this inward and secret love , by outward evident testimonies of grace and favour , and that freely delighting in them , uniting himself unto them , not for his own good , but for theirs , even to make them partakers of his goodness . 

Here than we are to observe , that there is a double love in God. First , a general love , wherewith he loveth all his creatures , and whereby he preserveth them being created , and of this love of God have the wicked experience , God loving them as they are his creatures , and the workmanship of his hands , but when they degenerate from their creation , and become sinful creatures , then though God love them with a general love as they are his creatures , yet he hate's them with a particular hatred because they are sinful , their sins making themselves and all things accursed unto them . Secondly , there is a special love of God , wherewith he loveth his Elect in Christ , not proper opera praevisa , for the works he foresaw , neither Legal as the Papist , nor evangelical as the Arminians teach ; but merely from his own good pleasure , and from the desire he had to do good unto them . And from hence it is , that he is never called the God of Cain , or of Esau , or of Saul : but the God of Abraham , Isaac , and jacob ; the God of the faithful , whom he loveth for ever . We see then that the love of God is not equally vouchsafed unto all men , but the Elect have more prerogative in his mercies and favours than others have . King's make choice of some particular persons whom they make either of their Counsel , or their favourites , not affecting nor countenancing all alike : so God's love is general to all his creatures , as the Kings to all his subjects , but more particularly he chooseth some , on whom his special love and favour is settled , and of them it is said God is not ashamed to be called their God. They being his spouse , he hath knit himself unto them by an indisso●uab●e band of union , never to be violated or broken . 

But because love is an internal affection in God , and we cannot either conceive or express it , as it is in itself , let me ( according to my promise ) by instance in the external effects , demonstrate it unto you . The special effects of God's love toward his children are these . 1.  Election● 2.  Creation . 3.  Preservation . 4.  Redemption . 5.  Vocation . 6.  Sanctification . 7.  Glorification . 

And first to speak of God's love to us in our Election . God in his divine wisdom before the world was created , out of the lump of mankind had called and elected a certain number , whom he pleased to make partakers of his love and favour : being once elected according to God's purpose , it needs must be , that all things in the world should work together for their good . And this is made a testimony of God's love unto his children . God hath chosen us in Christ , before the foundation of the world , that we should be holy and without blame before him in love , who hath predestinated us to be adopted through jesus Christ unto himself , according to the good pleasure of his william Here then we see what is the causa proëgumena , the internal moving cause of our election , even the mere love and goodwill of God , according to that of Saint Paul , He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy . God's election is without any merit of ours , therefore merely from his love . Again , the love of God in our election is seen , in that it is immutable , unchangeable , so that they which are indeed chosen to salvation , cannot perish , but shall without doubt attain to life eternal . When Adam fell , God might have suffered him to have lain in his fall , but that he had ordained him unto life , wherefore for the execution of his decree , he appointed all means to concur for his salvation . The purpose of God according to election must remain firm and sure . Such as God's nature is , such is his will and counsel ; his nature and essence is unchangeable ; I am jehovah , and ●hange not , therefore his will and counsel must needs be immutable . Here than we see the first evidence of God's love toward us , it is neither to day nor yesterday that he hath begun to love us , our election began not with ourselves , but before the Mountains were made , before the foundation of the world was laid , even from everlasting to everlasting the Lord is our God. What creature then is able to disannul that which God hath willed before that ever any creature was ? Only let us labour that as our election is sure in itself , so that we may make it sure unto ourselves , by walking with a good conscience in holiness before the Lord , and then we need not fear what the Devil or man can work against it ; seeing the stormy gusts of Satan's malice , the rage of his temptations , the power of the gates of hell , can never frustrate the decree of God. wherefore let it be in our daily meditations , to consider Gods infinite love to his elect , that whereas it was in his power to have reprobated all men , or to have chosen the reprobate in their stead ( there being nothing in the one to move him , any more than in the other , but his mere love ) yet out of so many thousands , to elect so few unto himself , and to decree them unto salvation ; surely as it testifieth great love in God , so ought it to provoke great fear in us , and to give unto God that divine respect which is due unto him . And whereas Satan stirs up many tempests of trouble and blasts of temptation against the Church of God , desiring to sink the ship , or to drive it on the rocks : Let us be sure to cast the anchor of hope , and to fasten it in heaven upon the foundation of God's election . 

The second testimony of God's great love toward his children , is in their Creation . Man in respect of his creation and being , was far more excellent than any creature of the earth beside , which appeareth in the text of the Scripture ; for whereas for the creation of the light , of the heavens and earth , and every creature in them Gods bare command sufficed ; but when he was to create man , to show the excellency of the creature , he consulteth with the whole Godhead , the Trinity : Let us make man in our own image . In man therefore as he was created , we are to consider the integrity of his nature , and the dignity of his person . The integrity of his nature is seen , in that he was endued with divine wisdom , knowing God his maker so far forth as was convenient and possible for the creature to know his Creator ; he knew the will and works of God perfectly , wherefore Zanchius terms Adam , Insignem Theol●gum ac Philosophum , of mere men , the best Divine , and most excellent Philosopher . He had habitual justice , whereby he was conformable unto the will of God , in his will , desires , inclinations , and actions . The dignity of man did consist principally in the communion he had with his God and maker ; less principally in the divine essence of his soul , in the beauty and majesty he had in his body above all earthly creatures , in his dominion and government he had over them , in his immunity from sickness , weariness , and all infirmities . The dignity of man by creation is observed in this ; that God hath made him a compound of all his creatures , therefore he is called by the Grecians 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , The little world : In respect of his soul , he is like the Angels : in respect of his body , he hath affinity with earthly creatures , there being no excellency in any terrestrial creature , which man hath not in greater perfection . wherefore this must be unto every faithful soul a testimony of God's love to him ; that whereas all creatures were in the hand of God as the clay in the hands of the Potter , and that he might ( if it had pleased him ) have made thee far inferior unto that thou art : God might have created thee a Dog or a Toad , or any other loathsome creature , for neither was there anything to compel him , or to resist him , yet it pleased him of his mere love to create thee after his own image , to endew thee with a reasonable soul , that so thou mightest be capable of the knowledge and fruition of thy Creator . To confer good on any man for his good , without either compulsion or merit , must needs proceed from love ; why then shall not we ascribe the benefit of our creation to the mere love of God , seeing he could not be compelled , nor could we merit ? Although the faithful man only is not made partaker of this benefit , but the wicked also , yet must we notwithstanding acknowledge it to proceed from God's love , and to be a great blessing ; for community doth not take away the nature of a benefit . 

The third testimony of God's love to his Elect is their Redemption . When God had created Adam , he put him into the garden of Eden , he gave him freewill , ability either to stand in innocency , or to fall from it ; but he through his disobedience dis-robed not only himself , but also his whole posterity of their garments of holiness , and made himself and us slaves of Satan , and heirs of eternal damnation . GOD ●n his creation hath done his part , but he became a rebel against his maker , and so captivated himself and his whole stock under the Devil's bondage . God in this case might justly have forsaken him , seeing he was author of his own misery , as Hosea saith , OH Israel thou hast destroyed thyself . Yet the LORD , whose love is infinite , and whose mercy is eternal , looking upon man in this wretched and miserable estate with the eye of pity and compassion , out of his mere grace and favour made unto Adam a promise of redemption by jesus Christ the Messiah , in these words , The seed of the woman shall break the Serpent's head . This promise made unto Adam was fulfilled unto us. For when the fullness of time was come , God sent forth his son , made of a woman , made under the law , to redeem them that were under the Law , that we might receive the adoption of sons . This the Apostle makes a manifest demonstration of God's love . God showed his love to us , in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us. And questionless this was a more excellent testimony of God's love , then either of the former , and that in two respects : First , in respect o● us : Secondly , in respect of Christ. In respect of ourselves ; before we were elected or created , we had done nothing , that did displease or anger God , nothing did oppose him ; but before our redemption we had depraved our nature and deprived ourselves of all holiness , & were rebels against God , so that our sins stood between him and us , which like a partition wall must first be removed , before we could be brought into league with God. Secondly , in respect of God , our redemption is observed to be a greater work , then either our election or creation ; for our election was but God's eternal counsel ; our creation but the composing of the body , and inspiring of the soul , both effected of God without pain , without shame ; but for the accomplishing of our redemption , Christ jesus , true God , coequal with the father in Deity , must leave the heavens , lay afide his crown of glory , and be incarnate in the form of a servant , and be obedient unto the law , and suffer a shameful and painful death upon the Cross , and all to take away our sins ; the Son of God was made the Son of man , that the sons of men might be made the sons of God ; the LORD of glory was vilefied , that the sons of shame might be glorified , the servants committed the offence , the master bore the punishment ; the LORD of life was sold to death , that the servants of death might-become heirs of life ; he was set apart of his father , that our sins might be set apart by him , and we through him to be heirs of glory , and immortality . Thus in these two respects was the love of God more admirable in the work of our redemption , then either in our election or creation . Whence proceeded therefore our redemption ? Even from the unspeakable love of God. What was it that moved God to promise and to send Christ into the world ? only his divine love . What was it that moved Christ to cloth himself with the garment of our frail flesh ? only his divine love . What moved him to endure so many and so great torments both in body and soul for us ? only his divine love . What moved him to bestow upon us all his blessings , and to take upon himself all our miseries ? only his divine love . What moved him to hunger and thirst , to continue ●asting , to remain walking all night , to pass over sea and land to seek after lost souls ? only his divine love . What moved him lastly to sweated drops of blood , to be despised , whipped , wounded , to cry● Eli , Eli , lamasabachthani ? My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ? and at length to yield up the ghost for our sins ? only his divine love . Here is love for meditation incomprehensible ; for imitation impossible . God in the work of our redemption hath afforded unto us such a pattern of love , as that all the world is not able to parralel the smallest part of it . Wherefore so often as we do consider the great work of our redemption , let us be sure to acknowledge the great love of our Redeemer . 

The third testimony of God's inward love toward his elect , is in their preservation . God's preservation is twofold ; General and Special . His general preservation is that which extends itself over the whole universe , the whole world , by which the Lord continues and maintains the order which he set in nature at the creation , and preserves the life , being , and substance of every creature in his kind . His special preservation is that which God manifesteth and exerciseth toward his Church and chosen children , in gathering , guiding and preserving them . This preservation is twofold , ●i●h●r from the evil of sin , or from the evil of punishment . From the evil of sin God doth preserve his elect , ●or he doth guide them by his counsel ; hence it is that Peter saith , The godly run not with the wicked into the same excess of riot : They are so led by the spirit of God , that they let not lose the reinss of their affections , but being withheld by the restraining grace of God , they are preserved from the committing of many sins . Thus the Lord preserved Noah from partaking with the old world in their sins : Lo● from following the Sodomites in their filthy abominations : joseph from consenting to the lewd entisement of his Mistress . Eliah from the idolatry of Israel : David from slaying Saul his Master : the three Children from worshipping the image of Nabuchadnezzar . As God preserved these , so doth he all his children , not suffering them to commit so many and so great sins , as he doth wicked and ungodly men . Secondly , he preserves them from the evil of punishment ; Noah from the flood , Let out of Sodom , Israel from Pharaoh , David from Saul , Eliah from jezabel , Daniel from the lions , the three children from the fire , etc.  God indeed is the shepherd of his flock , which covers them under the shadow of his wings , and watcheth over them to preserve them from the devouring wolves . wherefore when thou considerest that thou art the son of Adam , having in thee the root and seed of all sins yet ( when others run headlong to destruction , following the stream of their own cursed desires , letting loose the reins of their affections to all sin and wickedness , being fearless and shameless in their impious courses ) thou art preserved ; First , from that abomination and heinous impiety which wicked men practise , thou neither desirest nor delightest in that which GOD hath forbidden in his Law. But from whence proceeds this ? from thine own power ? no questionless : of thyself thou canst not think a good thought , either to abstain from evil , or to do good ; Seeing that by nature thou art equally indifferent unto all sin , thou must therefore disclaim all strength of nature , & renounce all ability in thyself , and acknowledge that it is from God only that thou art preserved , his love toward thee moved him to restrain thee . If it be from God that every good gift doth proceed ; how then shall it no● be from him that sin is prevented ? Learn therefore to ascribe thy preservation from sin , only to God , and to his love . Secondly , seest thou what punishments God infl●cteth upon others , upon some diseases ; on others bodily imperfections , on others imprisonment , on others shame and disgrace , on others losses in their estates , on others sudden destruction , on others spiritual plagues , as hardness of heart , blindness of mind , etc. on others eternal condemnation ; if thou art freed from these or the like , acknowledge it to be neither from thine own power , or merit , but merely from God's love , for of thyself thou liest open to all perils , not being able to avoid any , unless the powerful providence of God did protect thee , he alone made thee , and he alone doth preserve thee . 

If he should withdraw his providence , thou couldst not subsist the least moment of time . Though many men do slightly esteem of these things , yet being weighed in the balance of good consideration thou shalt find them especial testimonies of God's love to thee . thou seest one break his leg ; it was God's love to thee● that it was not thy lot ; thou s●est another slain , but that God loved thee he might have caused it to have fallen on thee ; thou hast no patent of exemption , no privilege of immunity to be free from common calamities . Art thou not a man as others ? A sinner as others ? The son of Adam as all others ? If then all evi●s be inflicted on man for ●inne ; the same cause being in thee as in others , how is it that the same effects are not showed on thee as on others ? Who hath suspended the effects from their causes ? who hath stayed the violent torrent of the water that thou shouldst not perish in this common flood ? Surely we can ascribe it to no other cause but to the goodness and love of God.  

So often therefore as we see Gods judgements upon others , they ought to be so many remembrancers of our own sinful deserts , and Gods admirable goodness . 

The fifth experiment of God's love toward his Elect , is their Vocation ; that is , their inward calling : for we must know that there is a double calling . An inward calling , whereby men are only in the Church , not of the Church , living where the Word and Sacraments are exhibited , and making an outward profession of Religion : And an inward calling , which is a donation of justifying faith by the preaching of the Gospel , and the communication of saving grace by Christ jesus ; whereby we follow our heavenly calling , being enlightened by the Spirit of God , with the beams of divine wisdom ; and being separated from the cursed generation of the world , we are sealed with a visible mark of grace and holiness . This was not done to many , more worthy than thyself ; but it pleased God to call thee from walking with the reprobate , being like him by nature , being both born rebels and transgressors from the womb , and didst wa●ke on with him in the same course of disobedience , which leads to damnation , till it pleased God to call thee to a better estate that thou mightest be saved . 

Thus the Lord delivers his children by calling them , as he did Lot out of Sodom , from the ●earefull condemnation of wicked reprobates . Of thyself thou canst not be delivered , for there is no difference by nature between the elect and reprobate , till God work grace ; Paul till God called him , as bloody a persecutor as Nero , Domitian or julian : Zacheus as unconscionable and covetous a worldling , as the rich Glutton condemned to hell . It is the Lord only that can give this grace : no man can come unto me , unless the father draw him , saith Christ. He must open our hearts , as he did the heart of his servant Lydia , that we may receive the seed of grace . It is indeed a new creation's ● man was not able to give himself a being by nature , much less of grace ; as it was the Lord only that could bring light out of darkness , so it is ●e only that can give us the light of heavenly wisdom , it is he only that creates in us new hearts , and renews right spirits within us N●y , of ourselves we have no more mind of our effectual calling , than Saul had when he went to Damascus to persecute the Church ; wherefore the praise of it must redound to God : Nemo dicat ideò me vocavit quia colui Deum , quomodo coluisses si vocatus non fuisses ? Let no man say God hath therefore called me , because I loved him , for thou couldst not have loved him , unless he had called thee . wherefore when God by his word and holy spirit shall call any of us , and give us grace to change our course , turning our backs upon Satan , and our faces toward the Lord , and parting company with the children of disobedience , that so while they go on in their sins unto judgement , we return home with the penitent Prodigal to our father's family ; o let us count it a happy day of division between us and our sins , a happy day that with Israel we have left Egypt , and are entered into the borders of Canaan , that so like the redeemed of the Lord , we may walk from strength to strength till we appear before the Lord in Zion . And let us magnify the goodness of our God , and ascribe our conversion to his favour and loving kindness . What moved God to vouchsafe the means of grace ? what moved him to give thee so large a time of repentance ? what moved him to give thee the grace of regeneration ? what moved him to give thee perseverance ? Only his divine love wherewith he hath loved from eternity . O what an exceeding joy will it be unto thee , when ( by virtue of this vocation ) thou shalt see thyself possessed of the fruition of almighty God for ever and ever in the kingdom of heaven , and shalt see others of thy companions and acquaintance , for want of the same grace to remain everlastingly tormented in the unquenchable fire of hell ? then thou wilt cry out with Paul , OH profunditatem divitiarum ! O the depth of the riches of God's love ! 

The sixth testimony of God's love toward us , is our Sanctification . We are by nature altogether corrupt , our whole man is nothing but a very sink of sin and pollution ; but the Lord having chosen and redeemed us unto himself , hath so washed us in the blood of Christ , and in the water of the new birth , that we are beautiful and comely in his eyes : He hath made our bitter waters to become sweet , he hath turned our filthiness into cleanness ; he hath made our hearts of barren wildernesses to become fruitful lands , of sinners he hath made us Saints , to the glory and praise of his name . 

He hath so loved us , that he hath made us precious in his eyes ; he found us polluted in our own blood , naked and bare , but he hath washed us with the water of regeneration ; he hath anointed us with his oil , and covered our filthy nakedness with his rich ornaments : when we were in the state of unregeneration , all our actions were odious in his sight , our thoughts wicked before him , our words profane against him , but now being sanctified by the spirit of the Lord jesus , our persons , thoughts , words , and works are gracious in his eyes , not through their merits , but through his own mercy and love in jesus Christ. wherefore if thou findest in thyself the grace of regeneration and sanctification , know that then thy ugly loathsomenesse is clean purged away , and thyself is become acceptable unto the Lord All which he hath done to persuade thee of his love . 

The last testimony of God's love , is in the Glorification of his elect . The glory that God hath laid up for his Saints , is such as neither eye hath seen , nor ear hath heard , neither hath it entered into man's heart . 

The glory that King Ahashuerosh would give unto the man whom he would honour was great : He should wear the King's royal apparel , and ride on the King's horse , the imperial crown shall be set upon his head , and proclamation shall be made before him as he rides through the streets , This is the man whom the King doth honour . Alas this glory is not comparable to the magnificent majesty of the Saints in heaven ; it is so excellent that it darkeneth all worldly honour , as the Sun with his beams obscures the less●r S●arreses . There are four titles by which the holy Ghost in the Scripture useth to express the felicity of the Saints of God in heaven . First , it is called a life , and such a life as is eternal . Secondly , it is called a kingdom , and such a kingdom as cannot be shaken . Thirdly , it is called an inheritance , and such an inheritance as is immortal , undefiled , and fades not away . Fourthly , it is called a crown , and this crown hath three , adjuncts , of glory , of life , of righteousness ; of glory there is excellency , of life there is immortality , of righteousness there is equity . The glory of it argues the sufficiency of content , that there shall be no baseness , but all shall be glorious ; We shall so behold the glory of the Lord that we shall be transformed into it . The word life argues a perpetuity , and imports a continual enjoyment , without trouble , without interruption . The word Righteous , implies the righteous author , God , the righteous means , Christ , the righteous receivers , the Saints . There we shall shine with albes of innocency on our backs , with Palms of victory in our hands , crowns of glory on our heads , and songs of triumph in our mouths ; there shall be joy without heaviness , strength without weakness , glory without shame , holiness without impurity , and happiness without intermission . Moses was but forty days with God upon mount Sinai , and his face shined so brightly , that the Israelites could not behold him : If forty days in Sinai remaining with God , did so change Moses , how shall we be changed that shall abide with him for ever in the highest heavens ? The three Disciples of our Lord that beheld a little glimpse of his glory on mount Thabor , wished they might abide there for ever : How then shall we be ravished , when we shall for ever behold the full manifestation of his glory in the kingdom of heaven ? This glory the Saints deceased already possess , we that are here , hasten to it : wherefore seeing the Lord hath raised our honour from the dust , and delivered our souls from the lower hell , and hath caused us to sit with himself in heavenly places , where we shall be filled with the joys which are at his right hand , and drink of the river of his pleasures , and be invested with glory and majesty perpetual world without end : what can we ascribe this unto , but his infinite goodness , and unspeakable love ? If the King should of his mere mercy and princely compassion , free a man from bonds and imprisonment , and heap upon him many great honours and dignities , making him one of his chiefest peers , who would not presently conjecture and say ; Surely the King's love is great toward him ? As our glory in heaven doth far transcend the glory of any temporal state in this world ; and as God hath done more for us in freeing and ransoming us from our slavish bondage , and making us spiritual kings and Priests unto himself ; then any earthly King can do for his favourite , in regard of the greatness of our misery we were in , and the excellency of the glory we shall possess ; So let us evermore bear in memory these forementioned mercies , and in them acknowledge God's love to be infinite , and his compassion incomprehensible . 

The uses of this Doctrine of God's love are two : First of duty : Secondly of comfort . First seeing God's love was and is the ground of all blessings unto man , and not man's merits ; This should work in every one of us true humility of mind , to be lowly and humble in our own eyes . One hath riches , he is so proud , that he will neither know himself , his friends , nor his betters . A second hath wisdom political and spiritual , he is so wrapped up with a vain imagination of his own excellency , that he supposeth none like himself . A third abounds in sanctification , but selfe-conceite makes him despise his brethrens . A fourth is soared to a high pitch of honour , from the which with the eye of contempt he beholds all men like Crows . OH beloved this haughtiness and loftiness of mind is the ruin of goodness in man  

Alas , what was he before Gods love elected and created him ? why he had no being . What was he before God in his love redeemed him ? a very firebrand of hell and child of perdition . What had he been if God had not preserved him ? Smitten and confounded into hell long ere this . What was he before he was called and sanctified ? a yoke-mate with the reprobate , a copesmate with the castaway , walking in the same path of disobedience with many of the damned in hell . What were he if he should not be glorified ? Surely of all miserable creatures the most miserable . Sed unde haec ? From whence , OH man hast thou these blessings ? Not from thyself ; for out of filthiness can no cleanness proceed : no they flow from the clear fountain of all grace and goodness , the great and infinite love of God Almighty . Remember what thou wert , and it will make thee humble ; remember what thou art , and it will make thee thankful ; the one will keep thee from presumption , the other from despair . Paul did justly demand , What hast thou OH man , thou hast not received ? All good things , both internal and external , may be for man , but not from man  

God made man , and for man all things . Man of himself is so degenerated a creature that he is not worth the ground he goes on ; nay , he is not worth himself , not worth the matter and form whereof he doth consist . That sentence that was written in golden Characters upon Apollo's Temple , ΓNΩΘI ΣΑΥΤΟΝ , Know thyself , is highly worthy to be engraven on the heart of every man Did we but know ourselves to be but men , the very name of men , would cause us to cast away our proud plumes , and remember our father Adam , that was but earth . The Prophet cries out with an exclamation , How art thou fallen from heaven , OH Lucifer , the Son of the morning ? We on the other ●ide may cry , OH how art thou mounted to heaven , OH man , the son of corruption ? Let us know ourselves and our places , lest in soaring too high , the fiery beams of God's wrath melt our waxen plumes , and we fall headlong into the Sea of confusion . The Elders that sat about the throne of God , did cast their crowns before the throne , and cried saying . thou art worthy , OH Lord , to receive glory , and honour , and power , for thou hast created all things for thine own pleasure . If we have any crowns , let us cast them at the feet of God , and say ; thou art worthy , OH Lord , to receive glory , honour , and power , for thou hast elected , created , redeemed , preserved , called , sanctified , and wilt hereafter glorify us ; not because we are worthy , but because thou hast loved us from eternity . 

The second Use of this point is for comfort unto every godly soul . What greater comfort can a subject have in this life , than this , to be his Prince's favourite , to be dear and precious in his eyes , upon whom he doth cast honours and confer wealth , gracing him with his countenance , dignifying him with promotions , and sheltering him from the furious tempests of malicious envy ? if a man's happiness could be confined to the world , what could be desired more ? But this is nothing to the comfort of a Christian ; who hath God for his master ; yea , I may say for his father , heaven for his home , celestial happiness for his reward , the LORD of host for his shield and buckler . What ? shall not the Christian solace himself more in God , than the subject in his Prince ? shall not his consolation be greater seeing his estate is more happy ? Comfort thou thyself thou that art begotten of God , Esau is hated , but if thou hast Jacob's heart thou shalt with jacob be beloved of God ; the wicked man wants God's love , therefore he wants all things ; the godly man enjoys God's love , therefore he enjoys all things . God's love was thine before thou wert thine own ; thou hadst thy beginning within these few years ; Gods love hath no beginning , but like himself was from eternity : God did not begin to love thee , when he begun to make thee , but he loved thee , before the world was made , and will love thee after the world is dissolved . What then if wicked men hate thee ? God loves thee . What if men reject thee ? God hath chosen thee . What if men persecute thee ? Greater is he that is with thee , than they that are against thee . What if the Devil assault thee ? Christ hath redeemed thee . What if thy sins affright thee ? God hath washed and sanctified thee . What if Satan would confound thee ? God will glorify thee . Thus hast thou against all dangers Murum aheneum , God's favour as a wall of brass to secure thee . Fear not man's hatred , God is love : Fear not Satan's rage , God is power : Fear not thine own sins , God is mercy . Let the rich man rejoice in his riches ; the strong man in his strength ; the wise man in his wisdom ; the ambitious man in his honour ; the Epicure in his pleasure ; let not us rejoice in these things , but that our names are written in heaven . 

Rejoice in this that you are Gods beloved , his love is engraven upon your hearts : The cause of their rejoicing is momentany and shall perish with them , our rejoicing is eternal which shall never fade : God is eternal , so is his love ; his love is eternal , so shall our rejoicing be : God is love , & he hath loved us.  

Thus much touching Gods love toward us , I come now to speak of our love toward him again : We love him ; Which words do afford us this Doctrine , That to love God truly is an essential property of the child of God. That is an essential property ( according to the Schools ) quod convenit omni , soli , et semper ; which is found in every individuum of the same species , in them only , and in them always . To love God therefore is an essential property of the child of God ; because it is found in every child of God , only the child of God , and the child of God always . First every one that is regenerate doth love God , for where the cause is , there must needs be the effect : the work of regeneration proceeds from God's love , and where his love is toward us , there he worketh in us love toward him . That which Peter spoke in his own behalf , is generally belonging to every one who is effectually called : Lord , thou knowest that I love thee . Saint Paul saith , the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost . Not only in his , but in the hearts of all his children ; For it was not a benefit peculiar to Paul , but common to all that are regenerated by his Spirit . Secondly , this is not so common as that it is communicated unto the wicked , but is found solely in the godly ; for the wicked are like Saul before his conversion , persecuters of God , and of jesus Christ. The wisdom of the flesh ( that is ) the understanding , the will , and the affections of the wicked , are enmity against God ; they are rebels against him , and his Law. Men unregenerate are haters of God ; they neither love him , nor his glory . Lastly that the godly do love God always is plain , for whom God loveth he loveth to the end , even for ever : therefore a man being once made partaker of God's love in the regeneration of his heart , can never be distracted from God ; for the cause continuing the effect must needs follow . Thus we see it briefly proved , that to love God is the property of every child of God. But for the better explicating and opening of this doctrine of our love toward God , let me show you these particulars : 1.  What our love toward God is . 
2.  The marks or effects of it . 
3.  The reasons or motives persuading to it . 
4.  The means to attain it . 


For the first , What our love toward God is : we may conceive it by this definition . Amor erga Deum est gratia infusa in cordibus sanctorum per spiritum sanctum , proveniens ab amore Dei erga ipsos ; qua summa cum affectu Deum cognitum diligunt propter seipsum , & in ipsius fruitione tanquam in summo bono acquiescunt . Our love toward God is a spiritual grace infused into the hearts of the faithful by the holy spirit , flowing from God's love toward us ; whereby we knowing God , do love him with all our might , with all our soul , and that for his own sake , and in the enjoyment of him do rest contented . First I say it is a supernatural or a spiritual grace infused , to teach us that it is not naturally or habitually bred in us ; for we are by nature as Adam was before the promise , runaways from God , neither desiring to see him , nor to hear him , till the holy Ghost work this love in us by his inspiration . Secondly , I say it is only in the hearts of the faithful , for it is limited and restrained to them , as to its proper subject , no wicked man partaking with them in that work ; for he that loves God must transcend nature and have justifying faith . He only loves God that keeps his Commandments , and he only keeps God's Commandments whose heart is enriched with a true faith , for without Faith it is impossible to please God. Hereby we may note the falsehood of the doctrine of the Church of Rome . First , for that they teach , That before justification , there must be a disposition and aptitude in a man thereunto , standing in the fear of hell and love of God. By this doctrine the love of God in our hearts should go before justification , whereas indeed it is a fruit and effect of it ; And if the love of God were in the heart of any man before he be justified , it would follow that a man may be truly sanctified before ●e be justified , seeing where the love of God is , there is sanctification . Secondly , they teach that faith apprehendeth Christ by love , and not by itself , which is false , for love by order of nature and time followeth faith which apprehendeth Christ , there ●e is not apprehended by love : for ●irst we believe , and being knit unto Christ by faith , than our hearts are knit unto God by love . Thirdly , I say it proceeds from God's love toward us. Zanchius calls it , radius amoris Dei erga nos , in Deum reflesux ; a beam of God's love toward us reflected back to him again : Gods love like a loadstone draws our hearts to love him . thou thyself who now loves the LORD , before the manifestation of God's love to thee in thy conversion , didst not love him , thy heart went a whoring from God , & thou preferredst every creature , yea , the satisfying of thine own lust , before him . It is thought commonly among men , an easy matter to love God , & every man abhors to be counted such a monster , as not to love God , but they are much deceived , no man can love God , but he that is beloved of him with a saving love . Amor Dei , animae parit amorem . God's eternal love of us , begets in our souls a love of him : he is the Ocean of Divine love , from whence we derive , and into which we return the streams of our love . Fourthly , I say we must know God before we can love him . Quod latet ignotum est , ignoti nulla cupido : Things unknown are unaffected , and love is according to a man's acquaintance : a man cannot love God before he know what God is , and that he is good , and worthy to be beloved ; and such as is our knowledge , such is our love ; our knowledge of him in this world is not so perfect , as it shall be in the world to come ; no more is our love on earth so perfect as it shall be in the heavens . 

And this is the reason why wicked men love not God , because they know him not ; did we but know God in his excellent goodness , we would be ravished with desire to love him ; but the mists of worldly vapours do so interpose themselves , that they darken our eyes , and overcloude this Sun of righteousness , that we see not , we think not of his glory , we desire not to know the perfection of his Majesty : Things unknown , are not beloved ; love never shoots at a blind mark : Let us first labour rightly to know God , them shall we be sure truly to love God. Fiftly , if we love God truly , I say then we love him with all our might , and with all our soul . Herein are contained these two properties of ho●y love ; unity and constancy ; we must love God summo cum af●f●ctu , wi●h the chiefest of our affections and strength : Here is the unity of our love ; we must not be divided between God and the world ; we must not part stakes between Christ and Belial ; God is a jealous God and will admit no rival ; we must love God principally and chiefly , he must have our hearts ; other things which are good , we may love in a lower degree , but for God's sake ; still reserving the principal to God ; for he that loves not his Father , Mother , Wife , and Children , sins ; but he that loves them in summo gradu , more than God , is not worthy of God ; Non amat Christum● , qui aliquid magis quam Christum amat . He loves not Christ , that loves any thing more than Christ. With the unity , in these words is contained the constancy , we must love him with all our strength , even for ever ; if we cease from loving God , we did never love God truly ; if our love slake by Apostasy , then know it was but in hypocrisy . Sixtly , I said true love , loves God for himself : for a mercenary love is base , when a man loves God only for his gifts : Thus Saul loved God , but not for himself , but for the continuance of his Kingdom . Thus many wicked men seem to love God , not for himself , but for his benefits . It was objected by Satan against job , but falsely , that he served God for his riches : But job manifested himself to be a true lover of God , for then when he was deprived of all earthly comforts which God had given him , yet did the love of God continue in him . The woman that loveth her husband only because he is rich , loveth not him but his riches . The worldling , who with the carnal Israelite , doth love God for his abundance of Corn , Wine , Oil , and the rest of those good things which he bestows on men , he loves the gift more than the giver , and is but a hireling , and not a chaste lover of God , and therefore in him is the old Proverb verified ; no penny , no pater noster ; If God ceases to give , he ceaseth to love and worship ; if God withdraw his liberality , he will cut him short in his service . It is true love to love God simply for his own sake ; let us love his glory more than our own benefit , lest we be found lovers of ourselves more then of God : This is the reason why the love of the godly is constant in adversity ; though their riches and friends be gone , yet God remains , and so long as the object remains , the action of their love shall not cease ; if we love God we must love him for himself . Lastly , whereas I said true love doth rest contented in the enjoyment of God whom it loveth : It showeth the delight and sufficiency it finds in God ; it cannot rest till it enjoy him , and he being enjoyed , it rests contented . Augustine in his book De substantia dilectionis . Cap. 2. lays down this definition of Love , which contains in it the two forenamed properties . Amor est affectio cordis ad aliquid , cum desiderio in appetendo , et gaudio in perfruendo , per desiderium currens , per gaudium requics●ens . What is here spoken generally of love , may particularly be affirmed of the Love of God. First , there is a desire whereby we are united unto the Lord , for as hatred doth disjoin and segregate , so love doth unite and knit the desire of the lover to the thing beloved . Secondly , in the fruition there is rest and content : hatred breeds dislike ; aversation and discontentednesse , love causeth joy , delight , and contentment ; when love hath once possessed God , it moves the soul to joy in God , and to accounted him her chiefest happiness , so that it will cry out with David , Whom have I in heaven but thee ? and whom have I desired in earth with thee ? God is my strength and my portion for ever . 

Thus have I laid down briefly as I could in this definition , the intrinsical properties of our love of God , which are in number seven . 1.  It is a Divine grace wrought by the Spirit . 2.  It is only proper to the regenerate . 3.  It is an effect of God's love to us. 4.  It is accompanied with the knowledge of God. 5.  It is constant in unity and in perpetuity . 6.  It is not mercenary , but free . 7.  It is eager for the enjoyment and content in the fruition . 

The second thing considerable is the marks and effects of our love of God , whereby we may truly try as by a touchstone , whether our love be sincere or adulterate ; the effects are many for number , but I will only recite those which are most principal , and they are six . First , the love of God doth quench all unchaste loves . There are 3● sorts of love . One is always good , the 2. is always bad : the 3. is good in itself , but bad through our bad disposition . That which is always good , is the love of God , in which it is impossible to sin through excess , for we cannot love God too much , the measure of loving him is to love him without measure . That love which is always bad , is the love of that which is absolutely evil : Actus distinguitur per obiectum , an evil object makes an evil action , and this is the love of murder , theft unchaste pleasures , these have no mediocrity , for the least inclination to them is a sin . The love which is good by nature , and becometh evil by accident , is the love of meat , drink , riches , honour , and the like ; the love of these things is made evil by the excess and intemperance of the lover . Now the former of these , which is the love of God , doth quite extirpate and root out the second , which is the unlawful love ; and it doth rectify that love which may be bad through our evil disposition ; for in meats , drinks , and apparel the love of God moveth us to satisfy our necessity , not our curiosity ; in riches to labour for sufficiency , not for superfluity . Search therefore thine own heart with an undazeled and undissembling eye , and if upon the inquiry thou find all adulterate and unchaste love rooted out of thy heart , and thy heart to be so wedded and married to the Lord that nothing can alienate it from him , then persuade thyself the divine and blessed love of God dwelleth in thee , and thrice happy is that soul where it hath his habitation . 

The second mark of the love of God , is a care to keep his commandments . If ye love me ( saith Christ ) keep my commandments : And again , This is the love of God , that we keep his commandments . True obedience is the fruit of ●ove : If we do not perform obedience to God , and wear his commandments as a frontlet between our eyes , and write them upon the doors of our hearts that we may keep them , surely it is to be feared we love not God : The value of Christian love is to be tried by the touchstone not of words , but of works . Yet how many are there , that say , they love God and yet cast off all obedience to his laws ? Can a woman play the harlot , and prostitute her body to an adulterer , and yet truly say she loves her husband ? no more can any man call himself the child of God , if he doth de●ight to commit the works of the Devil . 

wherefore as the jews called jesus their King , and the soldiers said unto him ; Hail King of the jews , and bowed their knees before him ; but yet they spat in his face and buffeted him : so the bastard Christians of this age call Christ their Lord , and bow their knees before him , but by their sinful disobedience they crucify him , and tread his blood of the covenant under their feet . They both kiss and betray him with judas ; it is but a sceptre of a reed they allow him , for they obey him not in heart , neither will they give him any command over their affections . 

The third mark of our love of God , is an earnest desire to be joined to God. This is a sure mark ; for if we truly love God , we shall in desire soar aloft seeking to be there where God is : carnal love carrieth a man downward to the earth which it loveth , but holy love being ( as Zanchius calls it ) ignis accensus , a spark of heavenly fire kindled in our hearts by the holy Ghost , ascends continually toward heaven to his own sphere , drawing our hearts with it toward the Lord , not suffering us to rest till we enjoy him . Thus doth he that truly loves God , ( as it were ) deprive himself of himself , and bestoweth himself on God whom he loveth . For the love of God is of a ravishing nature , by the which the lover is so wrapped out of himself , that he ( in a manner ) forgets himself , denies himself , and is wholly in God whom he loveth . And this is it that makes the faithful lover by frequent communication to counsel and consolate himself with God. Being to deliberate upon any matter of importance , he first enquireth after the will of God , and first consulteth with the oracle of God's mouth ; not with his belly , not with worldly hopes , not with pleasure , not with wicked friends , but God is his teacher , and the Law of God his Counsellor . This is a sign that we love God , if we love to be taught by h●m . Yet this is not all , for true love desire's the fruition of God in his kingdom ; Paul loved Christ so dear , that he accounted all things as dung in respect of Christ , and that made him de●ire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. This makes the love-longing soul to complain with David , Woe is me that I must dwell in Meshech , and have my habitation among the tents of Kedar . Woe is me that I sojourn in Egypt ; woe is me that I dwell in Cabull , and do not as yet possess my Canaan . This makes the loving soul cry , Come Lord jesus , come quickly : thou art my treasure , therefore thou hast my heart and soul ; o where my soul is , there let my body be also . 

The fourth mark of our love of God , is tranquillity and peace of conscience ; the love of God chaseth away fears , assuageth cares , sweeteneth afflictions . To them that love God crosses become blessings , their bodily poverty is a spiritual diet , their banishment teacheth them to leave this world , their sequestering from honours , is their approaching to God , their enemies are their Physicians , causing them to be circumspect and wary ; death is an entry unto life , afflictions the passage of the red Sea to Canaan . Thus he that loves God hath a quiet conscience , which like jacob sleeps securely at the bottom of the ladder of peace . The furious tempests of Satan's malice ; the envious persecutions and slanders of wicked men , do not once move him , but make him more steadfast : for nothing can separate his love from God , nor Gods from him . 

The fifth mark of our love of God , is our zeal for his glory . The son of Croesus seeing his father assailed by his enemies in the wars , though he were born and till that time continued dumb ; yet fear and grief having overcome all natural impediments , he presently cried out ; Save my father . So the child of God ; seeing his father's honour and glory trampled under-feets , and his most sacred and blessed Name wounded and torn in pieces with most blasphemous oaths , is not able to contain himself , but like the hand will interpose himself to save the head . This zeal did exulcerate Paul being at Athens , and grieved his sou●e to see the town so given to Idolatry . There is no more certain effect of the love of God than this zeal ; if we be more angry to hear the Name of God blasphemed , than ourselves evil spoken of . This is an assured witness , that the love of God is imprinted in our souls . Good blood will not belie itself : All well-born children are touched at the quick with their father's injuries . The high spirited Gallants of our Age and Nation , that stand upon their own and friends reputation , will rather hazard their lives then hear a disgraceful term put upon them : beloved if we be of God's seed ; children of the most high , and of the blood Royal , we will rather lose our lives then our father should lose his honour . This made the holy Martyrs to step out of their own element into the fire , with greater joy and willingness , than worldlings ●it down at their banquets to refresh them , or lie down on their beds to rest them . If we have the spirits of Eliakim , Shebnah , and joah , we will rend our clothes when we hear Rabshekah rail on the li●ing God. Degeneres animos timor arguit . Fear argues we come of a bastardly generation . If therefore we desire a sure testimony of our love of God , see whether we be zealous for his honour , and if need require to lay down our life in his cause and quarrel , Greater love can no man have then this , to lay down his life for his friend . 

The sixth and last mark of our love of God , is to love those that are the children of God. Every one that loveth him that begetteth , loveth him that is begotten . And if any man say he loveth God , and hates his brother , he is a liar . Can a man truly love his friend and yet hate his picture ? Can a man love God and hate those that have the image of God ? Do we not love the children for the father's sake ? Divine love is of such a diffusive and spreading nature that it cannot be confined within the heavens , it cannot be limited to God only , it will redound unto the children of God also . I will never believe that man loves myself , that hate's my children because they are mine . There is such an union between the godly that the good of one , is the good of another : and there are good reasons why it should be so : they are children of one father ; brethren with one Christ ; nourished with the same meat ; of one household , namely , the Church ; travellers and pilgrims to the same home ; combatants for the same cause ; called to the same hope ; coheires of the same kingdom : all which considerations are as so many straight lines meeting in one centre , which is the love of God ; these are so many obligations binding us to love one another in Christ , in whom we are all one , because we are one with him . This love toward our brethren must be showed in dando & condonando , in giving and forgiving ; in giving to them that are in necessity . If a brother or sister be naked and destitute of daily food , and one of you say unto them , Departed in peace , be ye filled and warmed ; notwithstanding ye give them not these things which are needful to the body , what doth it profit ? In forgiving trespasses against us committed . It is our daily prayer : Forgive us our trespasses , as we forgive them that trespass against us. All men cannot give ; but all men may forgive ; he that would give and cannot , of him a cup of cold water is accepted ; for God respects not so much quid , as quo animo : not so much donum , as donantis animum ; not what , but with what mind . He that can give , and will not , hath neither love nor honesty . Love without liberality is hypocritical ; love without charity is Diabolical . 

Thus have we the marks of our love of God. Whereby we see that many deceive their own souls , who are religious in speech , not in actions ; who study to be great , not good ; who know God , but love him not , at most but in show , not in deed , and in truth ; they confess God with their lips , and deny him in their hearts . 

We say many of us that we love God , but when we come to the touch , we are found but adulterate , loving sin , which we should not love , and what we may love , we love too much ; we make gold our God , and set God behind the door ; we cast God out of the temple of our hearts , and in his room we place a golden Idol . We say we love him , yet his commandments are grievous , we cannot bear them : his company is too strict , we must needs abandon it : his glory is not regarded , we have no courage for his cause : the superfluity of our attire would cloth many of the poor : but all is spent in pleasure , nothing in piety : Thus we love God at adventure , but are found to hate him when we come to the trial . Let us therefore every one in the fear of God search our own hearts diligently and without selfe-sparing dissimulation by these forenamed marks , whether we have this holy and heavenly love , or no : if we find this love in our hearts , it is better than money in our purses : but if we find that as yet our hearts are not heated with this celestial fire of the love of God , like the laborious Merchant let us take great pains , to get this rich treasure into our hearts , with which we have all things , without which nothing . 

The fourth general part of this Doctrine , are the motives that should persuade us to love God ; among which I shall commend these four which follow . 

First , the object itself ; even God , if we consider him in his essence and attributes , should be the most sufficient enducement to love him . In his essence he is eternal without beginning , without ending ; he is infinite not comprehensible ; in no place circumscriptively , in all places repletively . In his attributes : he is most beautiful ; naturally we love beauty ; God is the perfection of beauty , he is the Sun of righteousness , to whom all things are transparent and manifest : his glory is so great , that the very Seraphims are not able to behold it , but standing before the throne , are dazzled , and are fain to cover their faces with their wings . Dost thou love wisdom ? God is omniscient , his knowledge is infinite , things past , and things to come are present with him : Admirable must needs his knowledge be , who knew before the foundations of the world were laid , what would be all the thoughts , words , and works of all men and Angels that ever should existe . Dost thou love holiness ? The holiness of God doth as infinitely surpass the holiness of the Angels , as the Creator doth the creature ; holiness in the creature is a quality in God it is his essence : God is holy à seipso & essentialiter ; the creature à Deo & participative : God's holiness is originally and fundamentally in himself ; the creatures only by participation , God communicating his holiness to the creature . Dost thou love justice ? God is most just . Hence called the righteous judge : He is justice itself , yea the rule and perfection of justice. Dost thou love mercy ? See in God the mirror of mercy : He loveth them that hate him ; he causeth the Sun to shine upon the just and unjust ; he giveth us many good things ; and forgiveth us many evil offences : yea , he gave his dear and only Son , for us wretched and miserable ●innerss . 

The Lord is so infinite that we cannot know him as he is , let us labour therefore to love him as we may . 

The second motive that should induce us to love God , is the excellency of the grace of love ; it is that which makes us like unto God , for God is love : It is that which maketh us acceptable to him , for God loveth those that love him : it is that which doth assure us of the love of God toward us , for if we love him , he loved us first . A man by beholding a Sunne-dyall , may know the motion of the Sun in the firmament : so beholding the dial of thy love toward God , thou mayest quickly be persuaded of God's love toward thee . 

Hatred is darkness , love is light● which will bring thee to light . Love is the Sum of the Law. Love is the bond of perfection . There are three Theological virtues , Faith , Hope , and Love : of these three Love is most permanent , and when Faith and Hope shall cea●e , because they enjoy what they believed and hoped for , yet love shall be eternal , because God is eternal . 

The third motive to persuade us to love God , is God's love towards us. Amari & non amare inhumanum est . To be loved and not to love again is inhuman : God loved us before we were ; he elected us of his free pleasure : he created us of his mere goodness ; he redeemed us of his infinite mercy : he preserved us by his wonderful power : he converted us of heavenly compassion ; and will glorify us by his grace . 

He brought us home when we wandered in the wilderness of wickedness , as he did the lost sheep . He hath nourished us with food both natural and spiritual : he hath canceled the hand-writing which was against us : he hath set us at liberty to serve him ; he hath freed us from the cup of fornication of the Babylonian hostess , I mean , Rome's beast : In a word , he hath been our God from generation to generation , delivering us admirably and strangely from many wonderful dangers ; witness Eighty-eight , and the Powder-treason ; deliverances never to be forgotten , so long as England stands . Let us not therefore be so ungrateful , so unthankful , as not to love our God , who hath thus loved us.  

The fourth and last inducement to love God , is the reward which is laid up for them that love him . Paul tells us there is a crown of righteousness laid up for them that love his appearing : no man can love the appearing of God , but he that loves God himself . james tells us that God hath promised a crown of life to them that love him . He than that would live in heaven like a king , must first love God here as a subject : he that would have the glory there to reign with him ; must first have the grace here to love him . Men love the joys and pleasures of this world , because they seem delectable ; but in the presence of God there is fullness of joy , and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore . There is plenitude of joy , and perpetuity of heavenly pleasure . 

And again , Saint Paul comforts us , saying , That the eye hath not seen , the ear hath not heard , neither hath it entered into the heart of man , the things that God hath prepared for them that love him . There shall be life without death , continuance without weakness , light without darkness ; joy without sadness , a kingdom without change , happiness without interruption ; in a word , there we shall enjoy God himself , who is more excellent than all the world beside : the enjoying of whose presence the Fathers call , The beatifical vision : which alone is able perfectly to make us happy . Thus if we seek love and ensue it , it will at length bring us to the heavenly city , the new jerusalem , where we shall dwell for ever . 

The last general part of this doctrine , are the means to attain this love of God. The old Greek proverb is true : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Difficilia quae pulchra . Good things are hard to come by . Love being so excellent a grace is the more difficult to be attained , wherefore our industry must work out the difficulty , that by using these good helps , we may at length purchase this unualuable jewel . 

The first help to purchase this love of God is Prayer . Prayer , it is the key wherewith we unlock heaven , and move God to power down blessings in abundance , like the rain which Eliah prayed for upon the earth . Prayer , it is the life of all our labours , without it , it is impossible to get any grace ; it must be the first and the last of all our works ; it must be a key to open the morning , and shut up the evening . When Elias prayed , there came down fire from heaven , and consumed the Captains with their fifties : so by prayer thou shalt bring down from God the fire of divine love , which will consume thy Captain sins , and destroy thy strong corrupt desires . When good king Asa fought against the Ethiopians , the Text saith , he prayed unto God and got the conquest : if we take the same course , we shall speed after the same manner , for by prayer we shall vanquish and overcome all our sins , which are in this life our greatest enemies ; and by prayer we shall offer up a love-offering , sweet and delightful to the Lord our God. Is thy heart barren and devoyde of grace ? as Abraham's prayer opened the barren wombs of Abimelechs' household ; so shall thine own prayers open thy barren and fruitless heart , and draw down the blessings of grace and goodness upon thy soul . The prayer of Moses parted the red Sea , that the Israelites might pass into Canaan : Thy fervent , hearty , and faithful prayers unto God shall so part thy sins , and set them aside from thee , that by the tract and path of the love of God , thou shalt be able to pass into the heavenly Canaan . The prayer of joshua made the Sun to stand still in the firmament : thy prayer will make the Sun of righteousness , the LORD jehovah , to send forth the beams of divine love into thy heart . Thus prayer shall be unto thee a sovereign antidote against the poison of sin ; and a precious restorative to work grace in thy soul . In our greatest tentations we shall have comfort , so soon as we have the grace to pray . Ascendit precatio , & descendit miseratio : When prayer ascends to God , God's mercy descends to us.  

The second means whereby we shall obtain this sweet grace to love God , is by faith in Christ. For we must know that it is impossible for any man to love God , but only through jesus Christ : if he be not reconciled to God by faith in his Son , than God is as hateful and fearful unto him as he was unto Adam before the promise of the Messiah ; but by faith in Christ he is persuaded of God's love toward him , he sees God a loving , gracious , and merciful father , and therefore is not afraid to approach unto him . But he that comes to God without faith , is like him that came unto the feast without a wedding garment , whose end we remember : but if we come unto God clothed with the robes of Christ's righteousness , we shall be as welcome unto him , as the lost son unto the glad father . Faith in Christ is the next and immediate cause of the love of God : faith is the fountain , love is the stream ; faith is the root , love is the branch ; have faith and have love ; want faith and want love : Faith is the match that must kindle the flame of love in our frozen hearts . But for the attaining of faith , the Apostle hath given us charge to use a necessary means , which is hearing t●e Word of God. By the Word of God we are taught what is our own misery through sin , and what is God's mercy in redeeming us : by it we are taught how to put on Christ , and to make him our own , which we must do if we will be saved : for it is as impossible for a man to go to heaven without Christ , as to fly into the air with great weights at his heels . They therefore that reject the preaching and reading of the Word , and yet hope to be saved , are like a simple fool , that hopes to live , and yet will eat no meat . The soul is the life of the body , and the word of God is the food of the soul : without the soul , the body is dead ; and without the Word , the soul is dead : love therefore the Word that thou mayest live in it , and practise it that thou mayest be saved by it . 

The third means to attain this love of God , is a serious meditation of his mercy toward us. What man weighing in an equal balance God's mercies , and his own merits , would not find the one surmounting the other as much as the heavens do the earth ? which truly considered , would cause us ardently to love him : then would we say as Augustine ; ipsi debeo me totum qui fecit me totum . I owe myself wholly to him that made me not only wholly but whole , when I was wounded with the sting of sin . If it be demanded what is the cause why men so little love God ? I think I may safely answer , because they consider not his goodness : for if they did rightly weigh God's mercy in his works of Election , Creation , Redemption , Preservation , Vocation , Sanctification , and Glorification ; our hearts would burn within us ( as the hearts of the two disciples that went unto Emaus ) till we did enjoy him . 

The Uses of this doctrine , are these : First , it teacheth us every one , seeing it is such a special mark of the child of God , to desire God to give us grace to love him : Qui dilexit nos non existentes , imo resistentes . He loved us when we did not exist , yea , when we did re●i●t . O let the love of God bear rule in our hearts , and fill our souls ; let us love him in summo gradu , in the higest degree , and let us love nothing but for his sake . Let us love God ; for when we sought him Invenimus , sed non pravenimus : we found him , but he prevented us , he found us first . Let us set before us the example of the covetous Mammonist that makes his gold his God. Covetousness taketh away rest , and troubleth sleep ; his money is his last thought at his down lying ; and the first at his uprising . So let the love of God possess our thoughts in the night , let it break our sleep & disturb our rest ; let it be the last of our thoughts at our down-lying , and the first at our waking . Covetousness doth shut the heart of the covetous into his coffer where his treasure is : So let the love of God shut up our hearts in heaven , that where our treasure is , there may our hearts be also . Covetousness snatches out of the nigards hand , the bread he should eat , & maketh him be content with little : So must the love of God move us to abstinence , to be content with little , to deprive ourselves of our fleshly desires for his service . The covetous man refuseth no labour , foresloweth no time to get gain into his purse : So let the love of God incite us to refuse no pains , to lose no time , to fear no dangers , so we may get grace into our hearts . The covetous man having put his money to use , calculateth the time , desireth that the day of payment were come , that so he may receive his money with advantage : So we , knowing that God hath in his hands our pledge Christ jesus , and that he will repay us our good works with advantage , should very much desire the time of payment : and in the mean time very preciously to keep his obligation , which is the doctrine of the Gospel . The covetous man the older he grows , the more greedy he is , he lives poorly , that he may die rich , his de●ire of gathering is at the greatest , when his term of life is at the shortest : So must the love of God move every one of us the older we grow to be more desirous to hoard up grace , that as we grow in years , so we may grow in goodness ; the nearer we come to the possession of our inheritance , the more careful must we be to make the title of our evidences strong and sure , by holiness of heart and life : wherefore seeing we are all at the next door to death , let us labour every one to have the seal of our inheritance in our hearts ; and let us with a good covetousness never say we have grace enough ; let us husband our time well , let us get a good stock of grace , let us send our good works before us , to make such friends to ourselves , as may receive us into everlasting habitations . Thus let us set before our eyes , the practice of a covetous man , and look with what care , diligence and eagerness he runs in a wrong way , let our diligence in divine love , and godly care in a good way outstrip his . For as our God is better than Mammon , and Christ then Beliall , so let our love of GOD transcend the love of the carnal worldling . 

Secondly , is it so that where God loves truly , there we love him again : then if thou desirest to know in what favour thou art with God , whether he hath elected thee to be heir of eternal salvation , whether thou shalt be made partaker of the reward of his love ; thou needest not ascend up into Heaven to search in the Book of Life , to know the secret counsel of GOD ; but descend into thine own heart , see whether thou findest any love of God there , any love toward thy heavenly father : for as surely as when the Sun shines clearly , the beams of it are discerned upon the earth : so where God loves , there are found the beams of divine love shining in that man's heart : And God's love doth as naturally work a love of him in our hearts , as the beams of the Sun do light or heat in these sublunary bodies . Look therefore into thine own heart , if thou findest it illuminated with holy love , which is a shining fire , then mayest thou be persuaded that God loved thee first , because now thou lovest him . Dost thou affect him above all things ? Dost thou highly prise his glory ? Dost thou desire to enjoy him ? then it is apparent , the LORD loveth thee : but if thou findest thyself wrapped up in thy sins , and that thou lovest the accomplishing of thine own desires , and the fulfilling of thine own lusts , more than the honour of God , and his holy commandments , then may I say unto thee , as Peter to Simon Magus . thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter , for thy heart is not right in the sight of God ; Repent therefore of this thy wickedness , and pray God , if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee ; For I perceive thou art in the gall of bitterness , and bond of iniquity . 

The third use of this point is this , seeing it is an essential property of the child of God to love God , this must needs reprove them that say they are the children of God , and yet they have no love of God in their hearts , and these I find especially to be four . First , the carnal Mammonist , the covetous worldling ; he pretends he loves God , but alack 't is but as judas loved the poor , not for themselves but for the gain he got , for he was a thief and carried the bag . The love of the world is enimity with God. And if any one love the world , the love of the father is not in him . How canst thou that art the drudge of the world be a lover of God ? Where God is truly affected , there he is truly served , and he that truly serveth Good cannot be a Cham , a servant of servants , a slave to his wealth , which should be a slave to him . True love is chaste ; how then canst thou approve the chastity of thy love , when being in the Church of God thy heart shall run a whoring after thy worldly pelf ? Can God be persuaded of thy love ? no more than the husband can be persuaded his wife loves him , when she plays the harlot under his nose . 

He that is a true Theophilus , a lover of God , will not answer with the Philosopher , who being demanded what countryman he was , answered , A citizen of the world ; no he is a stranger on earth , & a citizen of heaven ; he let's the worldlings enjoy the fleshpotss of Egypt , his journey is toward Canaan : and therefore with a holy indignation he scorns this world , and with a godly ambition his heart aspires to a better . 

no man can serve two masters : let the worldling boast of his love as jehu did of his Zeal ; but as the one was but hypocritical , so the other is but counterfeit : and he shall never persuade me , That love , which is so pure a grace , can entertain a couple of so contrary conditions . wherefore if thou sayest thou lovest God , do not excessively toil thyself , and run thyself out of breath in the pursuit of the world's admired treasure : but follow Mary's example , choose that good part which shall never be taken from you , neither in this life , nor in the life to come . 

The second , whose love ●● but feigned , is the Hypocrite ; This man hath two faces , yea two hearts ; he can sergeant Religion cunningly , while within himself he laughs to think how wittily he hath cozened God and the world . Every man by nature hath but one heart , only the Hypocrite hath two : wherefore the Apostle james calls him 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a man of a heart and a heart , for he hath a heart for God , and a heart for the Devil ; as he is really and indeed wicked , so the Devil hath his real and very heart ; as he is seemingly holy , so God hath but the shadow of his heart● for outwardly he compliments with God , as joab did with Amasa , but in his heart he stabs at his honour . thou therefore that art an hypocrite , whose religion is but in show , brag of thy love as much as thou wilt , till thou hast a sound heart , thou canst have no sound love : till thy heart be refined thy love will be but impure ; for what is more contrary than true love and hypocrisy ? what is more contrary than fair words and false deeds ? wilt thou say thou lovest God , and wilt not give him thy heart ? then may judas say he loved his master when he betrayed him with a Kiss . 

The third , whose love is not sincere , is the love of the Ambitious man ; who with Haman thirsting after honour , sets no period to promotion ; if his designs speed well , ere he be warm in his place of preferment which he hath now gotten , his mind is possessed of an higher ; what he hath is but a degree to what he would have . This man says he loves God , but he never thinks of him ; he thinks God is ever busy , wherefore he is loath to disturb him with his prayers . When the Devil comes to him , as he did unto Christ , and says , All these will I give thee ; he forsakes God , and makes no bones of worshipping the Devil . The heat of his burning fever cannot be slacked with a small quantity of honour . But thou that art an ambitious Haman , who seekest more after thine own honour than Gods ; who lovest thine own self more than God , know that as thou climbest up high and perilous stairs , so thy fall shall be the greater : because thou soughtest not God , God will seek thee , and finding thee soaring so high shall cast thee down with proud Lucifer into hell . 

The fourth false lover of God , is the Epicure , the voluptuous man ; this man's belly is his God whom he worshippeth , and his pleasure is his deity which he adoreth ; eating , drinking , hawking , hunting , pleasures and pastimes are this man's happiness : which it is too apparent he loves more than God ; for if he want any of these , his desires are so importunate that they will brook no denial ; if he enjoy them with some interruption and discontent , the honour of God must be abused , and the sacred name and attributes of the most glorious jehovah must be most damnably profaned & blasphemed : But if God , or his word , or any thing belonging to his service be wanting , of these things ( like a stone ) he is insensible , he neither desire's their presence , nor grieves for their absence ; yet this man sees no reason why he should not be a good Theophilus , a lover of God. That which Bernard spoke , though in another sense , may fitly be affirmed touching the voluptuous man Nunquam ego Ebrium putabo Chastum : I will never believe chastity can sleep in the drunkard's bed . Doubtless that man which wallows like a swine in voluptuousness , and is drunken with the pleasures of the world , can never be a chaste and constant lover of God ; pleasure and piety are two opposites , if thou affect the one , thou must reject the other . 

As these four especially , so there are many more in the Church which are not of the Church , carnal professors which have a kind of superficial love to God and his worship , but not from the ground of the heart ; they join in the outward service with God's children , but for true love they let them go alone . Let these timeservers , and temporising protestants know their doom , which Christ shall one day pronounce to their terror ; Away from me ye wicked I know ye not . O but we have heard thy word , and did partake in thy Sacraments , and professed thy name . 't is true , ye heard my word but practised not ; ye partook of the sign , not of the grace ; ye professed my name , but ye lo●ed it not : Away from me I know ye not . 

The fourth and last Use , is to teach every one that says he loves God , to show it by his love to his brother , for can a man love God whom he hath not seen , and hate his brother whom he hath seen ? no questionless ; God will be loved in his children : we must love the godly for God , and God for himself . Per amorem Dei amor proximi gignitur , et per amorem proximi amor Dei nutritur . The love of our neighbour is begotten by the love of God , and the love of God is nourished by the love of our neighbour . thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself : which particle as , notes the quality not the quantity : thou oughtest not to love thy neighbour so much as thyself , for that is against nature ; but thou must love him as truly as thyself . Some men love not their neighbours at all , these men sin through defect ; Some love men more than God , these sin through excess : few attain to that golden means , to love God above all , and their neighbour as themselves . wherefore seeing God hath so graciously loved us , let it be our daily prayer that he would give us grace to love him again , that when our sinful days are ended , we may reign with him in his heavenly kingdom for evermore . Amen . 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 

FINIS . 





Psal. 39 5.  Heb. 9.27 . 1 Kings 21.  Ester 3.5 . Luke 16. 19  Luke 10.42 . Quae possessa one●an● , amata inquinant , omissa crucian● . Luke 8.37 . Gen. 25.32 . Virgil . Matth. 6.33 . judg. 16.18 . Mal. 3.6 . Cant 1.  Levit. 11.44 . joel 2.18 . Revel . 3.20 . Luke 19.42 . N●n quid u●●ui , sed quid potui . Acts 3.6 . 

Exod. 37.9 . 1 john 4.8 . Context . Parts . Doctrine 1.  Acts 8.21 . Mal. 1.2 . 1 joh. 3.1 . jer. 31.3 . The love of God.  Mat. 3. 17.  Note . Rom. 9.11 . Note . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Aristot.  Prou. 15.9 . Note . Exod. 3.6 . Effects of God's love . Election . Rom. 8.28 . Ephes. 1.4.5  Rom. 9.11 . Mal. 3.6 . Creation . Gen. 1.26 . Note . Redemption . Hosea 13.9 . Gen. 3.10 . Gal. 4.4 . Rom● 5.8 . Note . Preservation . Psal 73.24 . Gen. 6.9 . Gen. 19.5 . Gen. 39.8 . 1 King. 19 10. 1  Sam. 26.11 . Dan. 3. 17.  Eadem est causa procreans , et conseruans . Vocation . Gen. 19.16 . Acts 9  Luke 19.2 . Luke 16.23 . john 6.44 . Acts 16.14 . 2 Cor. 5.17 . Psal. 51.10 . Acts 9  Augustinus . Luke 15.  Sanctification Glorification Ester 6.8 . Note . john 10.26 . Heb 12.28 . Note . Exod. 34.29 . Mat. 17.4 . 1 Pet. 2.9 . Use 1  1 Cor 4.7 . Reu. 4.10.11 . Use . 2.  Luk. 10.20 . 2.  Part.  Doctrine 2.  john 21.15 . Rom. 5.5 . Acts 9 . 2●  Rom. 8.7 . Rom. 1.30 . Our love to God , what ? Rom. 5. 5.  Heb. 11.6 . Note . Ouidius . Augustin . job 1.9 . Psal. 4● 6.  Psal. 73. 25.26 . Marks of the love of GOD.  joh. 14.15  1 joh 5.3 . joh. 19.3 . Heb. 10. 26.  Luk. 22.48  Psal. 119. 24.  Phil. 3.8 . Phillip 1.28  Psal. 120.5  Revel . 22. 20.  Gen. 28. 12.  Acts 17.16  2 Kin. 18. 37.  Virgilius . 1 joh. 5.1 . Chap. 4. 20.  Like the oil which was poured on Aaron's head , and ran down to the skirts of his clothing . Psal. 133. ●  jam. 2 15.  Mat. 6.12 . Mat. 10. ult.  Use . Motives to love God.  esay 6.2 . 2 Tim. 4.8  1.  joh. 4.8 . 1 joh. 2.11  1 Tim. 1.5  Col. 3.14 . 1 Cor. 13. 13.  Luk. 15.4 . 2 Tim. 4.8  1 jam. 12.  Psa. 16.11  1 Cor. 2.9 . Meanus to attain the love of God.  1 Kin. 18.  2 Kin. 1.10  2 Chron. 14.11 . Gen. 20. 17.  Exod 14.  jos. 10.13 . Mat. 12.13  Luk. 15.  Rom. 10. 17.  Luk. ●4 . 32  Use . 1.  Bernard . Augustine . Use . 2.  Acts 8.21 . 22.  23.  Use 3  Mammonist . jam. 4. 4.  1 joh. 2.15  Mat. 6. 24.  2 Kin 10● 16.  Luk. 10.42 . Hypocrite , jam. 4.8 . 2 Sam. 20. 9  Ambitious . Mat. 4.9 . Epicure . Mat. 7.23 . Use . 4●  1 john 4. 20.  Greg●●ie . Mat. 19.19  