LOVE'S METAMORPHOSIS . A Witty and Courtly Pastoral , WRITTEN BY Mr. john Lyllie . 

First played by the Children of Paul's , and now by the Children of the Chapel . 

LONDON Printed for William Wood , dwelling at the West end of Paul's , at the sign of Time. 1601.  

Love's Metamorphosis . 

Ramis , Montanus , Silvestris . I Cannot see , Montanus , why it is feigned by the Poets , that Love sat upon the Chaos and created the world ; since in the world there is so little love . 

Mm. Ramos ,  thou canst not see that which cannot with reason be imagined ; for it the divine virtues of Love , had dispersed themselves through the powers of the world , so forcibly as to make them take by his influence , the forms and qualities impressed within them , no doubt they could not c●se , but favour more of his Divinity . 



Sil.   I do not think Love hath any spark of Divinity in him ; since the end or his being is earthly . In the blood is he begot by the frail fires of the eye , & quench by the frailer shadows of thought . What reason have we then to sooth his humour with such zeal , and follow his fading delights with such passion . 



Ram.   We have bodies , Silvestris , and human bodies ; which in their 〈◊〉 natures being much more wretched than beasts , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 more miserably than beasts pursue their own 〈◊〉 : And since it will ask longer labour and study to subdue the powers of our blood , to the rule of the soul , then to satisfy them with the fruition of our loves , let us be constant in the world's errors , and seek our own torments . 



Mont.   As good yield indeed submissively , and satisfy part of our affections ; as be stubborn without ability to resist , and enjoy none of them : I am in worst plight , since I love a Nymph that mocks love . 



Ram.   And I one that hate's love . 



Sil.   ay , one that thinks herself above love . 



Ram.   Let us not dispute whose mistress is most bad , since they be all cruel ; nor which of our fortunes be most froward , since they be all desperate . I will hang my Scutcheon on this tree in honour of Ceres , and write this verse on the tree in hope of my success , Penelopen ipsam perstes , mode tempore vinces . Penelope will yield at last : continue and conquer . 



Mont.   I this : Fructus abest facies cum bona teste caret . Fair faces loose their favours , if they admit no lovers . 



Ram.   But why studiest thou ? What wilt thou write for thy Lady to read ? 



Sil.   That which necessity maketh me to endure , love reverence , wisdom wonder at . Rivalem patienter h●●e . 



Mont.   Come , let us every one to our walks , it may be we shall meet them walking . Exeunt . 



ACTUS PRIMUS . SCENA SECUNDA . 

Nisa , Celia , Niobe , Fidelia , Erisychthon . Nisa .  It is time to hang up our Garlands , this is our harvest holiday , we must both sing and dance in the honour of Ceres : of what colours or flowers is thine made of , Niobe ? 



Niob.   Or Salamints , which in the morning are white , 〈◊〉 at noon , and in the Evening purple , for in my affections shall there be no staidness but in unstaiedues : bue what is yours of , Nisa ? 



Nisa .  Of Holly , because it is most holy , which lovely green neither the Sun's beams , nor the winds blasts can alter or diminish . But Celia , what Garland have you ? 



Celia .  Mine all of Cypress leaves , which are broadest and beautifullest , yet beareth the least fruit ; for beauty maketh the brightest show , being the slightest substance ; and I am content to wither before I be worn , and deprive myself of that which so many desire . 



Niob.   Come , let us make an end , lest Ceres come and find us slack in performing that which we owe : But soft , some have been here this Morning before us.  



Nis.   The amorous Foresters , or none , for in the woods they have eaten so much wake-robin , that they cannot sleep for love . 



Celia .  Alas poor souls , how ill love found'st in their lips , who telling a long tale of hunting , think they have bewrayed a sad passion of love ! 



Niob.   Give them leave to love , since we have liberty to choose , for as great sport do I take in coursing their tame hearts , as they do pains in hunting their wild Hearts . 



Celia .  Niobe , your affection is but pinned to your tongue , which when you lift you can unloose ▪ But let us read what they have written : Penelope●'s ipsam perstes mode tempore vinces . That is for you Nisa , whom nothing will move , yet hope makes him hover . 



Nisa .  A fond Hobby to hover over an Eagle . 



Niob.   But Foresters think all Birds to be Buntings . what 's the nexte Fructus abest facies cum bona teste care● , Celia , the Forester gives you good counsel , take your pennyworth whiles the market serves . 



Celia .  I hope it will be market day till my death's day . 



Nisa .  Let me read to Ri●●tem patienter babe , Heetoucheth you , Niobe , on the quick , yet you see how patient he is in your constancy . 



Niob.   Inconstancy is a vice , which I will not swap for all the virtues ; though I throw one off with my whole hand , I can pull him again with my little finger ; let us encourage them and write something ; if they censure in favourably , we know them fools ; if angrily , we will say they are froward . 



Nisa .  I will begin . Cedit amor rebus , res age , tutus eris . 



Celia .  Indeed better to tell stars then be idle , yet better idle then ill employed ; Mine this , Sat wehee sifacies , sit bene nota mihi . 



Niob.   You care for nothing but a Glass , that is a flatterer . 



Nisa .  then all men are Glasses . 



Celia .  Some Glasses are true . 



Niob.   no men are ; but this is mine : Victoriatecum stabit . 



Nisa .  thou givest hope . 



Niob.   He is worthy o●●e , that is patient . 



Celia .  Let us sing , and so attend on Ceres ; for this day , although into her heart never entered any motion of love , yet usually to the Temple of Cupid , he offereth● vo white Doves , as entreating his favour , and one Eagle , as commanding his power . Praecibusque minaes regaliter addet . 



Cantant & Saltant . Erisict.   What noise is this , what assembly , what Idolatry Is the modesty of virgins turned to wantonness ? The honour of Ceres accounted immortal ? And Erisychthon ruler of this Forest , esteemed of no force ? Impudent giglots , that you are , to disturb my game , or dare do honour to any but Erisychthon . It is not your fair faces as smooth as lea●e , nor your enticing eyes , though they drew uron like Adamants , nor your filled speeches , were they as forcible , as Thessalids , that shall make me any way flexible . 



Niob.   Erisychthon , thy stern looks joined with thy stout speeches ; thy words as unkembd as thy locks , were able to affright men of bold courage , and to make us silly girls frantic , that are full of fear ; but know thou , Erisychthon , that were thy hands so unstated as thy tongue , and th' one as ready to execute mischief , as the other to threaten it ; it should neither move our hearts to ask pity , or remove our bodies from this place ; we are the handmaids of divine Ceres , to fair Ceres is this holy tree dedicated , to Ceres , by whose favour thyself livest , that are worthy to perish . 



Erisict.   Are you addicted to Ceres , that in spite of Erisychthon you will use these sacrifices ? no , immodest girls , you shall see that I have neither regard of your sex which men should tender , nor of your beauty which foolish love would dote on , nor of your goddess , which none but peevish girl's reverence : I will destroy this tree in ●●spite of all , and that you may see my hand execute , 〈◊〉 my heart intendeth ; and that no mean may appea●e my malice , my last word shall be the beginning of the first blow . 



Celia .  Our alas , what hath he done ? 



Niob.   Ourselves , I fear , must also minister matter to his fury . 



Nisa .  Let him alone : but see , the tree poureth our blood , and I hear a voice . 



Erisict.   What voice ? If in the tree there be any body , speak quickly , left the next blow hit the tale out of thy mouth . 



Fidel.   Monster of men , hate of the heavens , and to the earth a burden , what hath chaste Fidelia committed ? It is thy spite , Cupid , that having no power to wound my unsported mind , procurest means to mangle my tender body , and by violence to gash those sides , that enclose a heart dedicate to virtue : or is it that savage satire , that feeding his sensual appetite upon lust , seeketh now to quench it with blood , that being without hope to attain my love , he may with cruelty end my life ? Or doth Ceres , whose nymph I have been many years , in recompense of my inviolable saith , reward me with unspeakable torments ? Divine Phoebus that pursued Daphne till she was turned to a Bay tree , ceased then to trouble her . ay , the gods are pitiful ; and Cineras , that with fury followed his daughter Miretia , till she was changed to a Myrrh-tree , left then to prosecute her ; yea parents are natural : Phoebus lamented the loss of his friend , Cineras of his child : but both gods , and men either forget or neglect the change of Fidelia ; nay follow her after her change , to make her more miserable : so that there is nothing more hateful then to be chaste , whole bodies are followed in the world with lust , and prosecuted in the graves with tyranny . Whose minds the freer they are from vice , their bodies are in the more danger of mischief ; so that they are not safe when they live , because of men's love ; nor being changed , because of their hates ; nor being dead , because of their defaming . What is that chastity which so few women study to keep , and both gods and men seek to violate ? If only a naked name , why are we so superstitious of a hollow found ? If a rare virtue , why are men so careless of such an exceeding rareness : Go , Ladies' , tell Ceres I am that Fidelia , that so long knit Garlands in her honour , and chased with a Satire , by prayer to the gods became turned to a tree , whole body now is grown over with rough bark , and whose golden locks are covered with green leaves ; yet where ●●nd nothing can alter , neither the fear of death , nor the torments . If Ceres seek no revenge , then let virginity be not only the scorn of Savage people , but the spoil . But alas , I feel my last blood to come , & therefore must end my last breath . Farewell Ladies , whose lives are subject to many mischiefs ; for if you be fair , it is hard to be chaste ; if chaste , impossible to be safe ; if you be young , you will quickly bend ; if bend , you are suddenly broken . If you be soul , you shall seldom be flattered : if you be not flattered , you will ever be sorrowful . Beauty is a firm sicklenes , youth a feeble staidness , deformity a continual sadness . 



Ni●b.   thou monster , canst thou hear this without grief ? 



Erisict.   Yea , and double your griefs with my blows . 



Nisa .  Ah poor Fidelia , the express pattern of chastity , and example of misfortune . 



Celia .  Ah cruel Erisychthon , that not only defacest these holy trees , but murderest also this chaste nymph . 



Erisict.   Nymph or goddess it skilleth not , for there is none that Erisychthon careth for , but Erisychthon : let Ceres the Lady of your harvest revenge when she will , nay when she dares , and tell her this , that I am Erisychthon . 



N●●b .  thou art none of the gods . 



Erisict.   no , a contemner of the gods . 



Nisa .  And hopest thou to escape revenge being but a man ? 



Erisict.   Yea , I care not for revenge being a man and Erisychthon . 



Nisa .  Come , let us to Ceres and complain of this unacquainted and incredible villain ; if there be power in her deity , in her mind pity , or virtue in virginity , this monster cannot escape . Exeunt . 



ACTUS SECUNDUS . 

SCENA PRIMA . 

Ceres , Niobe , Nisa , Cupid , Tirtena . Ceres .  Doth Erisychthon offer force to my Nymphs , and to my deity disgrace ? Have I stuffed his barns with fruitful grain , and doth he stretch his hand against me with intolerable pride ? So it is , Ceres , thine eyes may witness what thy Nymphs have told , here lieth the tree hacked in pieces , and the blood scarce cold of the fairest virgin . If this be thy cruelty , Cupid , I will no more hollow thy temple with sacred vowes●●t thy cankered nature , Erisychthon , thou shalt find as great misery , as thou showest malice : I am resolved of thy punishment , and as speedy shall be my revenge , as thy rigour barbarous . Tirtenae , on yonder lull where never grew grain nor lease , where nothing is but barrenness and coldness , fear and paleness , lieth famine , go to her , and say that Ceres commandeth her to gnaw on the bowels of Erisychthon , that his hunger may be as unquenchable as his fury . 



Tart.   I obey , but how should I know her from others ? 



Cer.   thou canst not miss of her , if thou remember but her name ; and that canst thou not forget , for that coming near to the place , thou shalt find gnawing in thy stomach . She lieth gaping , and swalloweth 'nough but air ; her face pale and so lean , that as easily thou mayest , through the very skin behold the bone , as in a glass thy shadow ; her hair long , black and shaggy ; her eyes sunk so far into her head , that she looketh out of the nape of her neck ; her lips white and rough ; her teeth hollow and red with rustiness ; her skin so thin , that thou mayest as lively make an Anatomy of her body , as she were cut up with Surgeons ; her maw like a dry bladder , her heart swo●ne big with wind , and all her bowels like snakes working in her body . This monster when thou shalthehold , tell her my mind , and return with speed . 



Tart.   I go , fearing more the sight of famine , than the force . 



Cer.   Take thou these few cares of corn , but let not 〈◊〉 so much as smell to them ; and let her go aloof from thee : Now shall Erisychthon see that Ceres is a great goddess , as full of power as himself of pride ; and as pitiless , as he presumptuous ; how think you Ladies , is not this revenge apt for ●o great injury ? 



Niob.   Yes Madam : To let men see , they that contend with the gods , do but confound themselves . 



Cer.   But let us to the Temple of Cupid , and offer sacrifice ; they that think it strange for chastime to humble itself to Cupid , know neither the power of love , nor t●e nature of virginity : th' one having absolute authority to command , the other difficulty to resist : and where such continual war is between love and virtue , there must be some parties , and continual perils : Cupid was never conquered , and therefore must be flattered ; Virginity hath , and therefore must be humble . 



Nisa .  Into my heart , Madam , there did never enter any motion of love . 



Cer.   Those that often say , they cannot love , or will not love , certainly they love . Didst thou never see Cupid ? 



Nisa .  no , but I have heard him described at the full , and as I imagined , foolishly . First that he should be a god blind and naked , with wings , with bow , with arrows , with free-brands ; swimming sometimes in the Sea , & playing sometimes on the shore ; with many other devices , which the Painters being the Poet's Apes , have taken as great pains to shadow , as they to lie . Can I think that gods that command all things , would go naked ? What should he do with wings that knows not where to slice ? Or what with arrows , that sees not how to aim ? The heart is a narrow marks go hit , and rather requireth Angus eyes to take levelly , there a blind boy to shoot at random : If he were fire , the Sea would quench those coals , or the flame turn him into cinders . 



Cer.   Well Nisa , thou shalt see him . 



Nisa .  I fear Niobe hath felt him . 



Niob.   Not I , Madam , yet must I confess , that oftentimes I have had sweet thoughts , sometimes hard conceits , betwixt both a kind of yielding ; I know not what . But certainly I think it is not love : sigh I can , and 〈◊〉 ease in melancholy : smile I do and take pleasure in imagination , I feel in myself a pleasing pain , a i'll heat , a delicate bitterness , how to term it I know not ; without doubt it may be love , sure I am it is not hate . 



Nisa .  Niobe is tender hearted , whose thoughts are 〈◊〉 water , yielding to every thing , and nothing to be seen . 



Cer.   Well , let us to Cupid , and tak●●●eede 〈◊〉 your stubbernesse yo'i offend him not , whom by entreaties you ought to follow Diana's Nymphs were as cha●t as Ceres' virgins , as fair , as wife : how Cupid tormented them , I had rather you should hear then feel , but this is truth , they all yielded to love : look not scornfully , my Nymphs , I say they are yielded to love . This is the temple , thou great god Cupid , whom the gods regard and men reverence , let it be lawful for Ceres to offer her sacrifice . 



Cup.   Divine Ceres , Cupid accepteth any thing , that cometh from Ceres , which feedeth my Sparrows with ripe corn , my Pigeons with wholesome seeds ; and honour'st my Temple with chaste virgins . 



Cer.   then Love , to thee I bring these white and spotless Doves , in token that my heart is as free from any thought of love , as these from any blemish , and as clear in virginity , as these perfect in whiteness . But that my Nymphs may know both thy power and thy laws , and neither err in ignorance nor pride ; let me ask some questions to instruct them that they offend not th●● , who●e resist they cannot . In virgins what dost thou 〈◊〉 desire ? 



Cup.   In those that are not in love , reverend thoughts of love , in those that be , faithful vows . 



Cer.   What dost thou most hate in virgins ? 



Cup.   Pride in the beautiful , bitter taunts in the witty , 〈◊〉 in all . 



Cer.   What may protect my virgins that they 〈◊〉 ne●●r love ? 



Cup.   That they be never idle . 



Cer.   Why didst thou so cruelly torment all Diana's Nymphet wit●●ove ? 



Cup.   Because they thought it impossible to love . 



Cer.   What is the substance of love ? 



Cup.   Constancy and secrecy . 



Cer.   What the signs ? 



Cup.   Sighs and tears . 



Cer.   What the causes ? 



Cup.   Wit and idleness . 



Cer.   What the means ? 



Cup.   Opportunity and Importunity . 



Cer.   What the end ? 



Cup.   Happiness without end . 



Cer.   What require●● thou of men ? 



Cup.   That only shall be known to men . 



Cer.   What 〈◊〉 for those that will not love ? 



Cup.   To be deceived when they do . 



Cer.   Well , Cupid , entreat my Nymphs with favour and though to love it be no vice , yet spotless virginity is the only virtue : let me keep their thoughts as chaste as their bodies , than Ceres may be happy , & they praised . 



Cup.   Why , Ceres , do you think that lust followeth love ? Ceres , lovers are chaste : for what is love , divine love , but the quintessence of chastity , and affections binding by heavenly motions , thou cannot be undone by earthly means , 〈…〉 by any man ? 



Cer.   〈…〉 continual sacrifice , warm us with mild 〈…〉 we seem immodest 〈…〉 ●ble like stocks . 



Cup.   Ceres , 〈…〉 be light nor obstina●●● , 〈…〉 and faithful ; so shall your flames warm , but not burn , delight and never discomfort . 



Cer.   How say you , my Nymphs , doth not Cupid speak like a ●o● ▪ Counsel you I will not to love , but conjure you I ●u●t that you be not disdainful , let us in , and see how Er●sictson speedeth ; famine faeth swiftly , and hath already seized on his stomach . 



Exeunt . ACTUS TERTIUS . 

SCENA PRIMA . 

Ramis , Nisa , Montanus , Celia , Silvestris , Niobe . Ram.   Stay , cruel Nisa , thou knowest not from whom thou fliest , and therefore fliest ; I come not to offer violence , but that which is inviolable , my thoughts are as holy ●ss thy vows , and I as constant in love as thou in cruelty : lust followeth not my love as shadows do bodies , but truth is woven into my love , as veins into bodies ; let me touch this tender arm , and say my love is endless . 



Nisa .  And to no end . 



Ram.   It is without spot . 



Nisa .  And shall be without hope . 



Ram.   Dost thou disdain Love and his laws ? 



Nisa .  I do not disdain that which I think is not , yet laugh at those that honour it if it be . 



Ram.   Time shall bring to pass , that Nisa shall confess there is love . 



Nisa .  then also will love make me confess , that Nisa 〈◊〉 a fool . 



Ram.   Is it folly to love , which the gods account honourable , and men esteem holy ? 



Nisa .  The gods make any thing lawful , because they be gods , and men honour shadows for substance , because they are men . 



Ram.   Both gods and men agree that love is a consuming of the heart , and restoring a bitter death in a sweet life . 



Nisa .  Gods do know , and men should , that love is a consuming of wit , and restoring of folly , a staring blindness , and a blind gazing . 



Ram.   Wouldst thou allot me death ? 



Nisa .  no , but discretion . 



Ram.   Yield some hope . 



Nisa .  Hope to despair . 



Ram.   Not so long as Nisa is a woman . 



Nisa .  Therein , Ramis , you show yourself a man  



Ram.   Why ? 



Nisa .  In flattering yourself , that all women will yield . 



Ram.   All may . 



Nisa .  thou shalt swear that we cannot . 



Ram.   I will follow thee , and practise by denials to be patient , or by disdaining die , and so be happy . 



Exeunt . Mont.   Though thou hast over-taken me in love , yet have I over-taken thee in running : fair Celia , yield to love , to sweet love . 



Celia .  Montanus , thou art mad , that having no breath almost in running so fast , thou wilt yet spend more in speaking so foolishly : yield to love ! cannot , or if I do , to thy love I will not . 



Mont.   The fairest Wolf chooseth the foulest , if he be faithfullest , and he that endureth most grief , nor he that hath most beauty . 



Celia .  If my thoughts were wolvish , thy hopes might be as thy comparison is , beastly . 



Mon.   I would thy words were , as thy looks are , lovely . 



Celia .  I would thy looks were , as thy affection is , blind . 



Mont.   Fair faces should have smooth hearts . 



Celia .  Fresh flowers have crooked roots . 



Mont.   Woman's beauties will wain , and then no art can make them fair ? 



Celia .  men's follies will ever wax , and then what reason can make them wise ? 



Mont.   To be amiable and not to love , is like a painted Lady , to have colours , and no life . 



Celia .  To be amorous , and not lovely , is like a pleasant fool full of words , and no deserts . 



Mont.   What call you deserts , what lovely ▪ 



Celia .  no lovelier thing than wit , no greater desert than patience . 



Mont.   Have not I an excellent wit ? 



Celia .  If thou think sothy self , thou art an excellent fool . 



Mont.   Fool ? no , Celia , thou shalt find me as wise , as I do thee proud , and as little to digest thy taunts , as thou to brook my love . 



Celia .  I thought , Montanus , that you could not deserve , when I told you what it was , Patience . 



Mont.   Sweet Celia , I will be patient and forget this . 



Celia .  then want you wit , that you can be content to be patient . 



Mont.   A hard choice , if I take all well , to be a fool , if find fault , then to want patience . 



Celia .  The fortune of love , and the virtue is neither to have success , nor mean . Farewell . 



Mont.   Farewell , nay I will follow , and I know not how it cometh to pass ; disdain increaseth desire , and the farther possibility standeth , the nearer approacheth hope . 



Sil.   Polypus , Niobe , is ever of the colour of the stone it slicketh to , and thou ever of his humour thou talkest with . 



Niob.   find you fault that I love ? 



Sil.   So many . 



Niob.   Would you have me like none ? 



Sil.   Yes one . 



Niob.   Who shall make choice but myself ? 



Sil.   Myself . 



Niob.   For another to put thoughts into my head , were to pull the brains out of my head ; take not measure of my affections , but weigh your own : the Oak findeth no fault with the dew , because it also falleth on the bramble . Believe me , Sil●●str●● , the only way to be mad , is to be constant . Poets make their wreathes of Laurel , Ladies of sundry flowers . 



Sil.   Sweet Niobe , a ryver running into diverse brooks becometh shallow , and a mind divided into sundry affections , in the end will have none : what ●oy can I take in the fortune of my love , when I shall know many to have the like favours ? Turtles slocke by couples , and breed both joy and young ones . 



Niob.   But Bees in swarms , and bring forth wax and honey . 



Sil.   Why do you covet many , that may find sweetness in one ? 



Niob.   Why had Argus an hundred eyes , and might have seen with one ? 



Sil.   Because whilst he slept with some , he might wake with other some . 



Niob.   And I love many , because being deceived by the inconstancy of diverse , I might yet have one . 



Sil.   That was but a device of Inno , that knew I●p●●orss love . 



Nio.   And this a rule of Venus , that knew 〈◊〉 lightness . 



Sil.   The whole heaven hath but one Sun●●● . 



Niob.   But stars ins●●●● . 



Sil.   The Rainbow is ever in one compass . 



Niob.   But of sundry colours . 



Sil.   A woman hath but one heart . 



Niob.   But a thousand thoughts . 



Sil.   My Lute , though it have many strings , maketh a sweet consent , and a Lady's heart , though it harbour many fancies , should embrace but one love . 



Niob.   The strings of my heart are tuned in a contrary key to your Lute , and make as sweet harmony in discords , as yours in concord . 



Sil.   Why , what strings are in Lady's hearts ? Not the base . 



Niob.   There is no base string in a woman's heart . 



Sil.   The mean ? 



Niob.   There was never mean in woman's heart . 



Sil.   The treble ▪ 



Niob.   Yea , the treble double and treble , and so are all my heart strings . Farewell . 



Sil.   Sweet Niobe , let us sing , that I may die with the Swan . 



Niob.   It will make you sigh the more , and live wi●● the Salamich . 



Sil.   Are thy tunes fire ? 



Niob.   Are yours death ? 



Sil.   no , but when I have heard thy voice , I am content to die . 



Niob.   I will sing to content thee . 



Cantant . Sil.   Inconstant Niobe ! unhappy Silvestris ! yet had I rather she should rather love all than none : for now though I have no certainty , yet do I find a kind of sweetness . 



Ram.   Cruel Nisa , born to slaughter men ! 



Mont.   Coy Celia , bred up in skoftes ! 



Sil.   Wavering , yet witty Niobe , but are we all mo●● 



Ram.   Yea , and met withal , if your fortunes be answerable to mine , for I find my M●stris immoveable , and the hope I have is to despair . 



Mont.   Mine in pride intolerable , who biddeth me look for no other comfort then contempt . 



Sil.   Mine is best of all , and worst , this is my hope , that either she will have many or none . 



Ram.   I fear our fortunes cannot thrive , for Erisychthon hath felled down the holy tree of Ceres , which will increase in her choler , and in her Nymph's cruelty : let us see whether our Garlands be there which we hanged on that tree , and let us hang ourselves upon another . 



Sil.   A remedy for love irremoveable , but I will first see whether all those that love Niobe , do like in the mean season I will content myself with my share . 



Mont.   Here is the tree . OH mischief scarce to be believed , in possible to be pardoned ! 



Ram.   Pardoned it is not , for Erisychthon perishes with famine , and is able to starve those that look on him . Here hang our Garlands , something is written , read mine . 



Sil.   Cedit amor rebus , res age , tutus eris . 



Mont.   And mine . 



Sil.   Sateros mihi si facies , sit bene nota mihi . 

Now for myself , 

Victoriatecum stabit scilicet . 



Mont.   You see their posies is as their hearts ; and their hearts as their speeches , cruel , proud and wavering : let us all to the Temple of Cupid , and entreat his favour , if not to obtain their loves , yet to revenge their hates , Cupid is a kind god , who knowing our unsported thoughts , will punish them , or release us. We will study what revenge to have , that our pains proceeding of our own minds , than plagues may also proceed from theirs . Are you all agreed ▪ 



Sil.   I consent ; but what if Cupid deny help ? 



Mont.   then he is no god . 



Sil.   But if he yield , what shall we ask ? 



Ram.   Revenge . 



Mon.   then let us prepare ourselves for Cupid's sacrifice . 



Exeunt . ACTUS TERTIUS . SCENA SECUNDA . 

Erisychthon , Protea , Marchant . Erisict.   Come , Protea , dear daughter , that name must thou buy too dear , necessity causeth thee to be sold , nature must frame thee to be contented . thou seest in how short a space I have turned all my goods into my guts , where I feel a continual fire , which nothing can quench , my famine increaseth by eating , resembling the Sea which receiveth all things , and cannot be filled : life is sweet , hunger sharp , between them the contention must be short , unless thou , Protea , prolong it . I have acknowledged my offence against Ceres , make amends , I cannot , for the gods holding the balance in their hands , what recompense can equally weigh with their punishments ? Or what is he that having but one ill thought of Ceres , that can raze it with a thousand dutiful actions ? such is the difference , that none can find defence : this is the odds , we miserable , and men , they immortal , and gods . 



Prot.   Dear father , I will obey both to sale and slaughter , accounting it the only happiness of my life , should I live an hundred years , to prolong yours but one my●●te : I yield father , chop and change me , I am ready , but first let me make my prayers to Neptune , and withdraw yourself till I have done , long it shall not be , now it must be . 



Erisict.   Stay , sweet Protea , and that great god hear thy prayer , though Ceres stop her ears to mine . 



Prot.   Sacred Neptune , whose godhead conquered my maidenhead , be as ready to hear my passions , as I was to believe thine , and perform that now I entreat , which thou didst promise when thyself didst love . Let not me be a prey to this Merchant , who knows no other god than Gold , unless it be falsely swearing by a god to get gold ; let me , as often as I be bought for money , or pawned for meat , be turned into a Bird , Hare , or Lamb , or any shape , wherein I may be safe , ●o shall I preserve mine own honour , my father's life , and never repent me of thy love , and now bestir thee , for of all men , I hate that Merchant , who , if he find my beauty worth one penny , will put it to use to gain ten , having no Religion in his mind , nor word in his mouth but money . Neptune , hear now or never . Father , I have done . 



Erisict.   In good time , Protea , thou hast done , for lo , the Merchant keepeth not only day , but hour . 



Prot.   If I had not been here , had I been forfeited● 



Erisict.   no ; Protea , but thy father famished . Here , Gentleman , I am ready with my daughter . 



Prot.   Gentleman ? 



Mar.   Yea , Gentleman , fair maid , my conditions make me no less . 



Prot.   Your conditions in deed brought in your obligations , your obligations , your Usury , your Usury , your Gentry . 



Mar.   Why , do you judge no Merchants Gentlemen ? 



Prot.   Yes , many , and some no men . 



Mar.   You shall be well entreated at my hands . 



Prot.   It may . Commanded I will not be . 



Mar.   If you be mine by bargain , you shall . 



Prot.   Father , hath this Merchant also bought my mind ? 



Erisict.   He cannot buy that , which cannot be sold.  



Mar.   Here is the money . 



Erisict.   Here the maid : farewell , my sweet daughter , I commit thee to the gods , and this man's courtesy , who I hope will deal no worse with thee , than he would have the gods with him , I must be gone , left I do starve as I stand . 



Exit . Prot.   Farewell , dear Father , I will not cease continually to pray to Ceres , for thy recovery . 



Mar.   You are now mine , Protea . 



Prot.   And mine own . 



Mar.   In will , not power . 



Prot.   In power if I william  



Mar.   I perceive , Nettles gently touched , sting , but roughly handled , make no smart . 



Prot.   Yet roughly handled , Nettles are Nettles , and a Wasp is a Wasp , though ●hee loose her sting . 



Mar.   But then they do no harm . 



Prot.   Nor good . 



Mar.   Come with me , and you shall see , that Merchants know their good , as well as Gentlemen . 



Prot.   Sure I am , they have Gentleman's goods . 



Exeunt . ACTUS QVARTUS . 

SCENA PRIMA . 

Ramis , Montanus , Silvestris , Cupid . Ram.   This is the Temple of our great god , let us offer our sacrifice . 



Mont.   I am ready . 



Sil.   And I Cupid , thou god of love , whose arrows have pierced our hearts , give ear to our plaints . 



Cup.   If you come to Cupid , speak boldly , so must lovers , speak faithfully , so must speeders . 



Ram.   These ever burning Lamps , are signs of my never to be quenched flames ; this bleeding heart , in which yet sticks the head of the golden shaft , is the lively picture of inward torments : mine eyes shall bedew thine Altars with tears , and my sighs cover thy Temple with a dark smoke , pity poor Ramis . 



Mont.   With this distaff have I spun , that my exercises may be as womanish as my affections , and so did Hercules : and with this halter will I hang myself , if my fortunes answer not my deserts , and so did Iphis. You thee , divine Cupid , I present not a bleeding , but a bloodless heart , dried only with sorrow , and worn with faithful service . 

This picture Toffer , carved with no other instrument than Love ; pity poor Montanus . 



Sil.   This fan of Swans and Turtles feathers , is token of my truth and jealousy : jealousy , without which love is dotage , and with which love is madness , without the which love is lust , and with which love is folly . This heart , neither bleeding nor bloodless , but swollen with sighs , I offer to thy godhead , protesting , that all my thoughts are as my words without lust ; and all my love , as my fortune without sweetness . This Garland of flowers , which hath all colours of the Rainbow , witnesseth that my heart hath all torments of the world : pity poor Silvestris . 



Cup.   I accept your offers not without cause , and wonder at your loves , not without pleasure : but be your thoughts as true as your words ? 



Ram.   thou Cupid , that givest the wound , knowest the heart , for as impossible it is to conceal our affections , as to resist thy force . 



Cup.   I know , that where mine arrow lighteth , there breedeth love , but shooting every minute a thousand shafts , I know not on whose heart they light , though they fall on no place but hearts . What are your mistresses ? 



Ram.   Ceres' maidens : mine most cruel , which she calleth constancy . 



Mont.   Mine most fair , but most proud . 



Sil.   Mine most witty , but most wavering . 



Cup.   Is the one cruel , th' other coy , the third inconstant ? 



Ram.   Too cruel . 



Mont.   Too coy . 



Sil.   Too fickle . 



Cup.   What do they think of Cupid ? 



Ram.   One saith he hath no eyes , because he hits he knows not whom . 



Mont.   th' other , that he hath no ears , to hear those that call . 



Sil.   The third , that he hath no nose , for savours are not found of lovers . 



Ram.   All , that he hath no taste , because sweet and sour is all one . 



Mont.   All , that he hath no sense , because pains are pleasures , and pleasures pains , 



Sil.   All , that he is a foolish god , working without reason , and suffering the repulse without regard . 



Cup.   Dare they blaspheme my godhead , which jove doth worship , Neptune reverence , and all the gods tremble at ? To make them love , were a revenge too gentle for Cupid : to make you hate , a recompense too small for lovers . But of that anon : what have you used in love ? 



Ram.   All things that may procure love , gifts , words , oaths , sighs , and swoon . 



Cup.   What said they of gifts ? 



Mont.   That affection could not be bought with gold , 



Cup.   What of words ? 



Ram.   That they were golden blasts , out of Leaden bellowss . 



Cup.   What of oaths ? 



Sil.   That jupiter never swore true to ju●● . 



Cup.   What of sighs ? 



Sil.   That deceit kept a forge in the hearts of fools . 



Cup.   What of swoon ? 



Mont.   Nothing , but th●● they wished them deaths . 



Cup.   What reasons gave they , not to love ? 



Sil.   Woman's reasons , they would not , because they would not . 



Cup.   Well , then shall you see Cupid requite their reasons with his rigour . What punishment do you desire , that Cupid will deny ? 



Ram.   Mine being so hard as stone , would I have turned to stone , that being to lovers pitiless , she may to all the world be senseless . 



Mont.   Mine being so fair and so proud , would I have turned into some flower , that she may know beauty is as fading as grass , which being fresh in the morning , is withered before night . 



Sil.   Mine divine , Cupid , whose affection nothing can make stayed , let her be turned to that Bird , that ●ueth only by air , and dieth if she touch the earth , because it is constant . The bird of Paradise , Cupid , that drawing in her bowels nothing but air , she may know her heart fed on nothing but fickleness . 



Cup.   Your revenges are reasonable , and shall be granted . thou Nisae , whose heart no tears could pierce , shalt with continual waves be wasted : in stead of thy fair hair , shalt thou have green mos●e , thy face of fl●●t , because thy heart is of marble , thine ears shall be holes for fishes , whose ears were more deaf than fishes . thou Celia whom beauty made proud , shalt have the fruit of beauty , that is , to fade whiles it is flourishing , and to blast before it is blown . Thy face , as fair as the Damask rose , shall perish like the Damask rose , the canker shall eat thee in the bud , and every little wind blow thee from the stalk , and then shall men in the morning wear thee in their Hats , and at night cast thee at their heels . thou Niobe , whom nothing can please ( but that which most displeaseth Cupid , inconstancy ) shalt only breathe and suck air for food , and wear feathers for silk , being more wavering than air , and lighter than feathers . This will Cupid do . Therefore , when next you shall behold your Ladies , do but send a faithful sigh to Cupid , and there shall arise a thick mist which Proserpina shall send , and in the moment you shall be revenged , and they changed , Cupid prove himself a great god , and they peevish girls . 



Ram.   With what sacrifice shall we show ourselves thankful , or how may we requite this benefit ? 



Cup.   You shall yearly at my Temple offer true hearts , and hourly bestow all your wits in loving devices , think all the time lost , that is not spent in love , let your oaths be without number , but not without truth , your words full of alluring sweetness , but not of broad flattery , your attires neat , but not womanish , your gifts of more price for the fine device , than the great value , and yet of such value , that the device seem not beggarly , nor yourselves blockish , be secret that worketh miracles , be constant that brings secrecy ; this is all Cupid doth command . Away . 



Ram.   And to this we all willingly consent . 

Now what rests , but revenge on them , that have practised malice on us , let mine be any thing , seeing she will not be only mine . 



Mont.   Let us not now stand wishing , but presently seek them out , using as great speed in following revenge , as we did in pursuing our love : certainly we shall find them about Ceres' tree , singing or sacrificing . 



Sil.   But shall we not go visit Erisychthon ? 



Mont.   Not I , left he eat us , that devoureth all things ; his looks are of force to famish : let usin , and let all Ladies beware to offend those in spite , that love them in honour , for when the Crow shall ●et his foot in their eye , and the black Ox tread on their foot , they shall find their misfortunes to be equal with their deformities , and men both to loathe , and laugh at them . 



Exeunt . ACTUS QVARTUS . SCENA PRIMA . 

Erisychthon , Protea , Petulius , Siren . Erisict.   Come , Protea , tell me , how didst thou escape from the Merchant ? 



Prot.   Neptune , that great god , when I was ready to go with the Merchant into the ship , turned me to a Fisherman on the shore , with an Angle in my hand , and on my shoulder a net ; the Merchant missing me , and yet finding me , asked me who I was , and whether I saw not a fair maiden ? I answered no ? He marue●ling and raging , was forced either to lose his passage , or seek for me among the Pebbles ? To make short , a good wind caused him to go I know not whither , and me ( thanks be to Neptune ) to return home . 



Erisict.   thou art happy , Protea , though thy Father be mi●erable : and Neptune gracious , though Ceres' cruell●thy escape from the Merchant , breedeth in me life , joy , and fullness . 



Prot.   My father cannot be miserable , if Protea be happy , for by selling me every day , he shall never want meat , nor I 〈◊〉 to escape . And now , Father , give me leave to enjoy my Petulius , that on this unfortunate shore still seeks me sorrowing . 



Erisict.   Seek ●●m , dear Protea ; find and enjoy him ; and live ever hereafter to th●ne own comforts , that hast ●●ther●o been the preserver of mine . 



Exit . Prot.   Ay me , behold , a Siren haunts this shore , the gods forbid she should entangle my Petulius . 



Siren . Sir   Accursed men , whose loves have no other mean then extremities , nor hate's end but mischief . 



Prot.   Unnatural monster , no maid that accuseth men , whose loves are built on truth , and whose hearts are removed by courtesy : I will hear the depth of her malice . 



Sir   Of all creatures most unkind , most cunning , by whose subtleties I am half fish , half flesh , themselves being neither fish nor flesh , in love luke warm , in cruelty red hot , if they praise , they flatter ; if flatter , deceive ; if deceive , destroy . 



Prot.   She rails at men , but seeks to entangle them , this slight is prepared for my sweet Petulius , I will withdraw myself close , for Petulius followeth , he will without doubt be enamoured of her , enchanted he shall not be , my charms shall countervail hers , it is he hath saved my Father's life with money , and must prolong mine with love . 



Pet.   I marvel , Protea is so far before me , if she run , I 'll fly : sweet Protea , where art thou● it is Petulius calleth Protea . 



Sir   Here cometh a brave youth , Now Siren , leave out nothing that may allure , thy golden locks , thy enticing looks , thy tuned voice , thy subtle speech , thy fair promises , which never misled the heart of any but Ulysses . 



Sing with a Glass in her hand and a Comb . Pet.   What divine goddess is this ? What sweet harmony ? My heart is ravished with such tickling thoughts , and mine eyes stayed with such a bewitching beauty , that I can neither find the means to remove my affection , nor to turn aside my looks . Sing again Siren . 

I yield to death , but with such delight , that I would not wish to live , unless it were to hear thy sweet lays . 



Sir   Live still so thou love me : why standest thou amazed at the word Love ? 



Prot.   It is high time to prevent this mischief : Now Neptune , stand to thy promise , and let me take suddenly the shape of an old man ; so shall I mar what she makes . 



Pet.   Not yet come to myself , or if I be , I dare not credit mine ears . Love thee divine goddess ? Vouchsafe I may honour thee , and live by the imagination I have of thy words and worthiness . 



Sir   I am a goddess , but a Lady and a virgin , whose love if thou embrace , thou shalt live no less happy , than the gods in heaven . 



Prot.   Believe not this Enchantress ( sweet youth ) who retaineth the face of a Virgin , but the heart of a F●end , whose sweet tongue sheddeth more drops of blood , than it uttereth syllables . 



Pet.   Out dotterel , whose dim eyes cannot discern beauty , nor doting age judge of love . 



Prot.   If thou listen to her words , thou shalt not live to repent : for her malice is as sudden , as her joys are sweet . 



Pet.   Thy silver hairs are not so precious , as her golden locks , nor thy crooked age of that estimation , as her flowering youth . 



Sir   That old man measureth the hot assault of love , with the cold skir●●heses of age . 



Prot.   That young cruel resembles old Apes , who kill by culling ; from the top of this Rock whereon she sitteth , will she throw thee headlong into the Sea , whose song is the instrument of her witchcraft , never smiling but when she meaneth to smite , and under the flattery of love , practiseth the shedding of blood . 



Pet.   What are thou , which so blasphemest this divine creature ? 



Prot.   I am the Ghost of Ulysses , who continually hover about these places , where this Siren haunteth , to save those which otherwise should be spoilt : stop thine ears , as I did mine , and succour the fair , but by thy folly , the most infortunate Protea . 



Pet.   Protea ? What dost thou hear , Petulius ? Where is Protea ? 



Prot.   In this thicket , ready to hang herself , because thou carest not for her , that did swear to follow : curse this hag● who only hath the voice and face of a Virgin , the rest all fish and feathers , and filth ; follow me , and strongly stop thine ears , left the second encounter make the wound incurable . 



Pet.   Is this a Siren , and thou Ulysses ? cursed be that hellish carcase , and blessed be thy heavenly spirit . 



Sir   I shrink my head for shame . OH Ulysses , is it not enough for thee to escape , but also to teach others ? Sing and die , nay ●ie , and never sing more . 



Prot.   Follow me at this door , and out at the other . 



Pet.   How am I delivered ! the old man is vanished , and here for him stands Protea . 



Prot.   Here standeth Protea , that hath saved thy life , thou must also prolong hers : but let us into the woods , and there I will tell thee how I came to Ulysses , and the sum of all my fortunes , which happily will breed in thee both love and wonder . 



Pet.   I will , and only love Protea , and never cease to wonder at Protea . 



Exeunt . ACTUS QVINTUS . 

SCENA PRIMA . 

Ceres , Cupid , Tirtena . Cer.   Cupid , thou hast transformed my Nymphs and incensed me , them to shape's unreasonable , me to anger immortal , for at one time I am both robbed of mine honour and my Nymphs . 



Cup.   Ceres , thy Nymphs were stubborn , and thyself speaking so imperiously to Cupid , somewhat stately . If you ask the cause in choler , Sic volo , sic iubeo : if in courtesy , Quae venu ex merito poena dolenda venit . They were disdainful , and have their deserts ; thou Ceres , dost but govern the guts of men , I the hearts : thou seekest to starve Erisychthon with thy ministered famine , whom his daughter shall preserve by my virtue love . 



Cer.   thou art but a god Cupid . 



Cup.   no Ceres , but such a god as maketh thunder fall out of jove's hand , by throwing thoughts into his heart , and to be more terrified with the sparkling of a Lady's eye , than men with the flashes of his lightning : such a god that hath kindled more fire in Neptune's bosom , than the whole Sea which he is king of can quench : such power have I , that Pluto's never dying fire , doth but scorch in respect of my flames . Diana hath felt some motions of love , Vesta doth , Ceres shall . 



Cer.   Art thou so cruel ? 



Cup.   To those that resist , a Lion , to those that submit , a Lamb . 



Cer.   Canst thou make such difference in affection , and yet shall it all be love ? 



Cup.   Yea , as much as between sickness and health , though in both be life : those that yield and honour Cupid , shall possess sweet thoughts , and enjoy pleasing wishes : the other shall be tormented with vain imaginations and impossible hopes . 



Cer.   How may my Nymphs be restored ? 



Cu.   If thou restore Erisychthon , they embrace their loves , and all offer sacrifice to me . 



Cer.   Erisychthon did in contempt hew down my sacred tree . 



Cup.   Thy Nymphs did in disdain , scorn my constant love . 



Cer.   He slew most cruelly my chaste Fidelia , whose blood lieth yet on the ground . 



Cup.   But Diana hath changed her blood to fresh flowers , which are to be seen on the ground . 



Cer.   What honour shall he do to Ceres ? What amends can he make to Fidelia ? 



Cup.   All Ceres grove shall he deck with Garlands , and account every tree holy ; a stately monument shall he erect , in remembrance of Fidelia , and offer yearly sacrifice . 



Cer.   What sacrifice shall I and my Nymphs offer thee ? For I will do any thing to restore my Nymphs , and honour thee . 



Cup.   You shall present in honour of my mother Venus , Grapes and Wheat , for Sine Cerere & Baccho friget Venus . You shall suffer your Nymphs to play , sometimes to be idle , in the favour of Cupid , for Otiasitollas , periere Cupidinis arcus . So much for Ceres . Thy Nymphs shall make no vows to continue Virgins , nor use words to disgrace love , nor fly from opportunities that kindle affections : if they be chaste , let them not be cruel ; if fair , not proud ; if loving not inconstant . Cruelty is for Tigers , pride for Peacocks , inconstancy for fools . 



Cer.   Cupid , I yield , and they shall : but sweet Cupid , let them not be deceived by flattery , which taketh the shape of affection , nor by lust , which is clothed in the habit of love ; for men have as many slights to delude , as they have words to speak . 



Cup.   Those that practise deceit , shall perish : Cupid favoureth none but the faithful . 



Cer.   Well , I will go to Erisychthon , and bring him before thee . 



Cup.   then shall thy Nymphs recover their fames , so as they yield to love . 



Cer.   They shall . 



Exeunt . ACTUS QVINTUS . SCENA PRIMA . 

Petulius , Protea . Pet.   A strange discourse , Protea , by which I find the gods amorous , and Virgins immortal goddesses , full of cruelty , and men of unhappiness . 



Prot.   I have told both my Father's misfortunes , grown by stoutness , and mine by weakness , his thwarting of Ceres , my yielding to Neptune . 



Pet.   I know , Protea , that hard iron falling into fire , waxeth soft , and then the tender heart of a Virgin being in love , must needs melt : for what should a fair young and witty Lady answer , to the sweet enticements of love , but , 



Molle meum levibus cor est violabile telis . Prot.   I have heard too , that hearts of men stiffer than steel , have by love been made softer than wool , and then they cry , 



Omnia vincit amor , & ●os cedamus amori . Pet.   Men have often feigned sighs . 



Prot.   And women forged tears . 



Pet.   Suppose I love not . 



Prot.   Suppose I care not . 



Pet.   If men swear and lie , how will you try their loves ? 



Prot.   If women swear they love , how will you try their dissembling ? 



Pet.   The gods put wit into women . 



Prot.   And nature deceit into men . 



Pet.   I did this but to try your patience . 



Prot.   Nor I , but to prove your faith . But see , Petulius , what miraculous punishments here are for deserts in love ; this Rock was a Nymph to Ceres , so was this Rose , so that Bird.  



Pet.   All changed from their shapes ? 



Prot.   All changed by Cupid , because they disdained love , or dissembled in it . 



Pet.   A fair warning to Protea ; I hope she will love without dissembling . 



Prot.   An Item for Petulius , that he delude not those that love him ; for Cupid can also change men . Let 〈◊〉 . 



Exeunt . ACTUS QVINTUS . SCENA QVARTA . 

Ramis , Silvestris , Montanus . Ram.   This goeth luckily , that Cupid hath promised to restore our mistresses , and Ceres , that they shall accept our loves . 



Mont.   I did ever imagine , that true love would end with sweet joys , though ●o was begun with deep sighs . 



Sil.   But how shall we look on them when we shall see them smile ? We must , and perchance they will frown . 



Ram.   Push , let us endure the bending of their fair brows , and the scorching of their sparkling eyes , so that we may possess at last the depth of their affections . 



Mont.   Possess ? Never doubt it , for Ceres hath restored Erisychthon , and therefore will persuade with them , nay , command them . 



Sil.   If it come by commandment of Ceres , not their own motions , I rather they should hate : for what joy can there be in our lives , or in our love's sweetness , when every kiss shall be sealed with a curse , and every kind word proceed of fear , not affection ? enforcement is worse than enchantment . 



Ram.   Art thou so superstitious in love , that wast wont to be most careless ? Let them curse all day , so I may have but one kiss at night . 



Mont.   thou art worse than Silvestris , he not content without absolute love , thou with indifferent . 



Sil.   But here cometh Ceres with Erisychthon : let us look demurely , for in her heart she hate's us deeply . 



ACTUS QVINTUS . SCENA VLTIMA . 

Cupid , Ceres , Nymphs , Erisychthon , Petulius , Protea . Erisict.   I will hollow thy woods with solemn feasts , and honour all thy Nymphs with due regard . 



Cer.   Well , do so , and thank Cupid that commands , nay , thank my foolish Nymphs , that know not how to obey ; here be the lover's ready at receipt : How now Gentlemen , what seek you ? 



Ram.   Nothing but what Ceres would find . 



Cer.   Ceres hath found those , that I would she had lost , vain lovers . 



Ram.   Ceres may lose that , that Cupid would save , true lovers . 



Cer.   You think so one of another . 



Sil.   Cupid knoweth so of us all . 



Cer.   You might have made me a counsel of your loves . 



Mont.   I madam , if love would admit counsel . 



Cer.   Cupid , here is Erisychthon in his former state , restore my Nymphs to theirs , then shall they embrace these lovers , who whither out their youth . 



Erisict.   Honoured be mighty Cupid , that makes me live . 



Pet.   Honoured be mighty Cupid , that makes me love . 



Prot.   And me . 



Cer.   What , more lovers yet ? I think it be impossible for Ceres to have any follow her in one hour , that is not in love in the next . 



Cup.   Erisychthon , be thou careful to honour Ceres , and forget not to please her Nymphs . The faithful love of thy daughter Protea , hath wrought both pity in me to grant her desires , and to release thy punishments . thou Petuliu● shalt enjoy thy love , becaused know thee loyal . 



Pet.   then shall Petulius be most happy . 



Prot.   And Protea most fortunate . 



Cup.   But do you , Ramis , continue your constant love , and you , Montanus , and you , Silvestris . 



Ram.   Nothing can alter our affections which increase , while the means decrease , and wax stronger in being weakened . 



Cup.   then Venus , send down that shower , wherewith thou wert wont to wath those that do thee worship , and let love by thy beams , be honoured in all the world and feared , wished for , and wondered at : here are thy Nymphs , Ceres . 



Ram.   Whom do I see ? Nisa ? 



Mont.   Divine Celia , fairer than ever she was ! 



Sil.   My sweet Niobe . 



Cer.   Why stare you , my Nymphs , as amazed triumph rather because you have your shapes : this great god Cupid , that for your prides and follies changed , hath by my prayer and promise restored you . 



Cup.   You see , Ladies , what it is to make a mock of love , or a scorn of Cupid ; see where your lovers stand , you must now take them for your husbands ; this is my judgement , this is Ceres' promise . 



Ram.   Happy Ramis . 



Mont.   Happy Montanus . 



Sil.   Happy Silvestris . 



Cer.   Why speak you not , Nymphs ? This must be done , and you must yield . 



Nisa .  Not I  



Niob.   Nor 1  



Cel.   Nor 1  



Cer.   Not yield ? then shall Cupid in his fury turn you again to senseless , and shameful shapes . 



Cup.   Will you not yield ? How say you Ramis ? Do your loves continue ? Are your thoughts constant ? & yours Montanus ? And yours Silvestris ? 



Ram.   Mine most unspotted . 



Mont.   And mine . 



Sil.   And mine , Cupid , which nothing can alter . 



Cup.   And will you not yield , Virgins ? 



Nisa .  Not I , Cupid , neither do I thank thee that I am restored to life , nor fear again to be changed to stone : for rather had I been worn with the continual beating of waves , then dulled with the importunities of men , whose open flatteries make way to their secret lusts , retaining as little truth in their hearts , as modesty in their words ; how happy was Nisa , which felt nothing , pined yet , not felt the consumption ! unfortunate wench , that now have ears to hear their cunning lies , and eyes to behold their dissembling looks ! turn me , Cupid , again ; for love I will not . 



Ram.   Miserable Ramis , unhappy to love , to change the Lady , accursed , and now lose her , desperate ! 



Cel.   Nor I Cupid : well could I content myself to bud in the Summer , and to die in the Winter : for more good cometh of the Rose , then can by love : when it is fresh , it hath a sweet favour , love a sour taste : the Rose when it is old , loseth not his virtue ; love when it is state waxeth loathsome . The Rose distilled with fire yieldeth sweere water : love in extremities kindles jealousies : in the Rose how ever it be , there is sweetness ; in love nothing but bitterness . If men look pale , and swear , & sigh , then forsooth women must yield , because men say they love , as though our hearts were tied to their tongues , and we must choose them by appointment , ourselves feeling no affection , and so have our thoughts bound prentices to their words : turn me again . Yield I will not . 



Mont.   Which way shalt thou turn thyself , since nothing will turn her heart ? Die , Montanus , with shame and grief , and both infinite . 



Niob.   Nor I Cupid : let me hang always in the air , which I found more constant than men's words : happy Niobe , that touched not the ground where they go , but always holding thy beak in the air , didst never turn back to behold the earth . In the heavens I saw an orderly course , in the earth nothing but disorderly love , and previshnesse : turn me again , Cupid , for yield I will not . 



Sil.   I would myself were stone , flower , or fowl , seeing that Nisa hath a heart harder than stone , a face fairer than the Rose , and a mind lighter than feathers . 



Cup.   What have we here ? Hath punishment made you perverse ? Ceres , I vow here by my sweet mother Venus , that if they yield not , I will turn them again , not to flowers , or stones , or birds , but to monsters , no less filthy to be seen , then to be named hateful : they shall creep that now stand , and be to all men odious , and be to themselves ( for the mind they shall retain ) loathsome . 



Cer.   My sweet Nymphs , for the honour of your sex , for the love of Ceres , for regard of your own country , yield to love , yield , my sweet Nymphs , to sweet love . 



Nisa .  Shall I yield to him that practised my destruction , and when his love was hottest , caused me to be changed to a rock ? 



Ram.   Nisa , the extremity of love is madness , and to be mad is to be senseless , upon that Rock did I resolve to end my life : fair Nisa , forgive him thy change , that for himself provided a harder chance . 



Cel.   Shall I yield to him , that made so small account of my beauty , that he studied how he might never behold it again ? 



Mont.   Fair Lady , in the Rose did I always behold thy colour , and resolved by continual gazing to perish , which I could not do when thou wast in thine own shape , thou wast so coy and swift in flying from me . 



Niob.   Shall I yield to him that caused me have wings , that I might fly farther from him . 



Sil.   Sweet Niobe , the farther you did seem to be from me , the nearer I was to my death , which to make it more speedy , wished thee wings to she into the air , and myself lead on my heels to sink into the Sea.  



Cer.   Well , my good Nymphs , yield let Ceres entreat you yield . 



Nisa .  I am content , so as Ramis , when he finds me cold in love , or hard in belief , he attribute it to his own folly ; in that I retain some nature of the Rock , he changed me into . 



Ram.   OH my sweet Nisa , be what thou wilt , and let all thy imperfections be excused by me , so thou but say thou lovest me . 



Nisa .  I do . 



Ram.   Happy Ramis . 



Celia .  I consent , so as Montanus , when in the midst of his sweet delight , shall find some bitter overthwarts , impute it to his folly , in that he suffered me to be a Rose , that hath prickles with her pleasantness , as he is like to have with my love shrewdness . 



Mont.   Let me bleed every minute with the prickles of the Rose , so I may enjoy but one hour the savour : love , fair Celia , and at thy pleasure comfort , and confound . 



Celia .  I do . 



Mont.   Fortunate Montanus . 



Niob.   I yielded first in mind , though it be my course last to speak : but if Silvestris find me not ever at home , let him curse himself that gave me wings to fly abroad , whose feathers if his jealousy shall break , my policy shall nip . 



Now custodiri , ni velit ulla potest . Sil.   My sweet Niobe , fly whither thou wilt all day , so I may find thee in my nest at night , I will love thee , and belove thee . 



Sit modo non feci , dicere lingua me●●or . Cup.   I am glad you are all agreed , enjoy your loves , and every one his delight . thou Erisychthon art restored of Ceres , all the lovers pleased by Cupid , she joyful , I honoured . Now , Ladies , I will make such unspotted love among you , that there shall be no suspicion nor jar , no unkindness nor jealousy : but let all Ladies hereafter take heed , that they resist not love , which worketh wonders . 



Cer.   I will charm my Nymphs , as they shall neither be so stately , as not to stoop to love , nor so light as presently to yield . 



Cup.   Here is none but is happy : but do not as Hippomanes did , when by Venus' ay● he won Atlanta , defile her Temple with unchaste desire●●nd forgot to sacrifice vows . I will soar up into heave● , to settle the loves of the gods , that in earth have disposed the affections of men . 



Cer.   I to my harvest , whose corn is now come out of the blade , into the ear , and let all this amorous troop to the temple of Venus , there to consummate what Cupid hath commanded . 



Erisict.   In the honour of Cupid , and Ceres , will solemnize this feast within my house , and learn , if it be not too late , again to love . But you Foresters were unkind , that in all my maladies would not visit me . 



Mont.   thou knowest , Erisychthon , that lovers visit none but their mistresses . 



Erisict.   Well , I will not take it unkindly , since all ends in kindness . 



Cer.   Let it be so ; these lover's mind nothing what we say . 



Ram.   Yes , we attend on Ceres . 



Cer.   Well , do . 



Exeunt . FINIS . 

