THE FIRST BOOK OF Songs or Airs of 4. parts : with Tabulature for the Lute or Orpherian , with the Viol de Gamba . 

Newly composed by Francis Pilkington , Batcheler of Music , and Lutenist : and one of the Cathedral Church of Christ , in the City of Chester . 

LONDON : Printed by T Este , dwelling in Aldersgate-streete , and are there to be sold . 1605.  

To the Right honourable William Earl of Derby , Lord Stanley , Lord Strange , of Knocking and of the Isle of Man , and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter . Francis Pilkington wishes health , with increase of Honour in this life , and Eternity hereafter . 

Aristoxenus' ( thrice noble Lord ) held that the Soul of man was Music : But that the being thereof was framed of Bumbees , as the Pithagorians affirm : But for that it is the subject and object of all harmonical concents : Intimating hereby the dignity and high renown of that Art , which descended from so noble a stem , seeketh by all means possible to nobilitate the same , and that man to be unfit for the society and commerce of men , that honoureth not so worthy a Jewel for the life of man Which opinion verily is worthy Aristoxenus , that is to say , a noble Philosopher , yet how little squaring with the time , experience a perfect Mistress of truth hath a long time taught . For who regardeth the melodius charms of Orpheus , or enchanting melody of Arion ? surely but a few , Quos aequus amavit jupiter dijs geniti , aut ardeus evexit ad aethera virtus . Of which rank seeing your Lordship hath given undoubted testimonies of your honour to be one : Musicians should commit an undiscreet part of ingratitude not to acknowledge so great a favour . For mine own part ( who an meanest of many which profess this divine skill , though not meanest in good will & humble affection to your Honour ) I must confess myself many ways obliged to your Lordship's family , not only , for that my Father and Brother received many graces of your Honours noble Father , whom they followed , but that myself had the like of your most honourable Brother , even from the first notice he chanced to take of me . And therefore ( most honourable Lord ) I have here presented this oblation , howsoever mean , a token of mine affectionate good will Love , yea only devoted to your Lordship , which if it may gain your gracious acceptation , will fear neither Zoilus nor Momus his reprehension . 

Your Honours in all duty 

THE TABLE . 

Now peep , boe peep , thrice happy blessed mine eyes . I 
My choice is made , and I desire no change . TWO 
Can she disdain , can I persist to Love. III 
Alas fair face , why doth that smoothed brow . FOUR 
Whether so fast , see how the kindly flowers perfumes the Air . V 
Rest sweet Nymphs let golden sleep , charm your Star brighter eyes . VI 
Ay me , she frowns , my mistress is offended . VII 
Now let her change and spare not , since she proves false I care not . VIII 
Underneath a Cypris shade , the Queen of Love sat mourning . IX 
Sound woeful plaints in hills and woods . X 
You that pine in long desire . XI 
Look Mistress mine , within this hollow breast . XII 
Clime OH hart , clime to thy rest . XIII 
Thanks gentle Moon for thy obscured light . XIIII 
I Sigh as sure to wear the fruit , of the willow tree . XV 
Down a down , thus Phillis sung , by Fancy once oppressed . XVI 
Diaphenia like the Dafdowndillie , white as the Sun , fair as the Lily XVII 
Beauty sat bathing by a spring , where fairest shades did hide her . XVIII 
Music dear solace , to my thoughts neglected . XIX 
With fragrant flowers we strew the way . XX 
Come , come all you that draw heaven's purest breath . XXI 
A Pavin for the Lute and Base Viol . XXII 
¶ FINIS . 

I CANTO . 

Now peep , boe peep , thrice happy blessed mine eyes , For I have found fair Phillis , for I have found fair Phillis where she lies , Upon her bed , with arms unspred , all fast a sleep , Unmasked her face , thrice happy grace , farewell , farewell my Sheep , Look to yourselves , new charge I must ap - prove , Phillis doth sleep , Phillis doth sleep , And I must guard my Love. Look . 

2 

Now peep boe peep , mine eyes to see your bliss , 
Phillis closed eyes atrackts you , hers to kiss : 
O may I now perform my vow , loves joy t' impart , 
Assay the while , how to be-guile , farewell faint hart . 
Taken she is , new joys I must approve , 
Phillis doth sleep , and I will kiss my Love.  
3 

Now peep , boe peep , be not too bold my hand , 
Wake not thy Phillis , fear she do withstand : 
She stirs alas , alas , alas I faint in spirit , 
She opens her eye , unhappy I , farewell delight . 
Awaked she is , new woes I must approve , 
Phillis awakes , and I must leave my Love.  
I ALTO . 

Now peep , boe peep , thrice happy blessed mine eyes , For I have found fair Phillis , for I have found fair Phillis where she lies , upon her bed , upon her bed , upon her bed with arms unspred , All fast a sleep , vnmas'kt her face , thrice happy grace , Farewell , farewell my sheep , Look to yourselves , look to yourselves , new charge I must ap-prove , Phillis doth sleep , Phillis doth sleep and I must guard my Love. Look to your etc.  

I BASSO . 

Now peep , boe peep , thrice happy blessed mine eyes , For I have found fair Phillis , for I have found fair Phillis where she lies , Upon her bed with arms unspred , all fast a sleep , Vnmas'kt her face , thrice happy grace , Farewell , farewell my sheep , Look to your selves , new charge I must approve , Phillis doth sleep , Phillis doth sleep , and I must guard my Love. Look to etc.  

I TENORE . 

Now peep , boe peep , thrice happy blessed mine eyes , For I have found my Phillis , for I have found my Phillis where she lies , Upon her bed with arms unspred , upon her bed with arms unspred , with arms unspred , all fast a sleep , vnmas'kt her face , thrice happy grace , Farewell , farewell my sheep , Look to yourselves , look to yourselves , new charge I must ap-prove , Phillis doth sleep , Phillis doth sleep , and I must guard my Love. Look to your etc.  

II CANTO . 

MY choice is made and I de - sire no change , My wan - The de - serts wild wherein my wits did range , Are now dring thoughts in livre - mits now are bound : Let him that list sooth hu - mors that made ea - sie walks and plea - saint ground : Let passions still pos - sesse the in - be vain , Till va - ni - tie all mean ex - ceeds , dle brain , And care con - sum whom fol - lie feeds . I rest resolved no fancy's fits can me e - strange , My choice is made , and I de-sire no more to change . 

2 

Change they their choice , to whose delicious sense , 
The strangest objects are of most esteem : 
Inconstant liking may find excellence , 
In things which ( being not good ) yet best do seem . 
Let gallant bloods still crown their sports with joy , 
Whom honour , wealth , and pleasure fills : 
Let sweet contentment never find annoy , 
While Fortune frames things to their wills . 
This stirs not me , I am the same , I was before . 
My choice is made , and I desire to change no more . 
3 

Be my choice blamed , or be I thought unwise , 
To hold my choice , by others not approved , 
I say , that to myself I fall or rise , 
By fear , or force I cannot be removed . 
Let friends in pity doubt of my success , 
Their pity gets no thanks at all : 
Let foes be glad to see my hopes grow less , 
I scorn the worst that wish they shall : 
Still stand I firm , my hart is set , and shall remain , 
My choice is made , and never will I change again . 
II ALTO . 


MY choice is made , and I de - sire no change , my wand'ring thoughts in livre - mits now are bound . 
The de - serts wild , wherein my wits did range , are now made ea - sie walks and pleasant ground . 

Let him that list sooth humours that be vain , till va - ni - tie , till va - ni - tie all mean exceeds . 
Let passions still pos - sesse thee I - dle brain , and care consume , and care consume , whom fol - lie feeds . 

I rest resolved , no fancies fits can me estrange , my choice is made , and I desire no more to change . 
II BASSO . 

MY choice is made , and I de - sire no change , my mandring The de - serts wild , wherein my wits did range , are now made thoughts in livre - mits now are bound . ea - sie walks and plea - saint gound . Let him that list sooth humours that be Let passions still possess the I - dle vain , till va - ni - tie , all mean exceed . brain , and care con-sume whom foe - lie feeds . I rest resolved , no fancies sits can me estrange , my choice is made , and I desire no more to change . 

II TENORE . 


MY choice is made , and I de-sire no change , my wand'ring thoughts in livre - mits now are bound . 
The de - serts wild , wherein my wits did range , are now made ea - sie walks and pleasant ground . 

Let him that list sooth humours that be vain , till va - ni - tie , till va - ni - tie all mean exceeds . 
Let passions still pos - sesse thee I - dle brain , and care consume , and care consume , fol - lie feeds . 

I rest resolved , no fancies fits can me estrange , my choice is made , and I desire no more to change . 
III CANTO . 

Can she disdain can I per-sist to love , can she be cruel , I subjected still . Time will my truth , come - passion hers a - prove , re - lease the thralled , and con - quer from - ward william I love not lust , O , o therefore let her deign , to equal my de - sires , to ij . my de - sire's with like a - gain . I love not , etc.  

am I not pleasing in her prouder eyes , 
O that she knew Love's power as well as I , 
Witty she is , but loves more witty wise , 
She breathes on earth , he Reigns in heaven on high . 
I love not lust , o therefore let her deign , 
To equal my desires with like again . 
Love scorns the abject earth his sacred fires , 
Unites divided minds dissevers none , 
Contempt spring's out of fleshly base desires , 
Setting debate 'twixt love and union . 
I love not lust , o therefore let her deign , 
To equal my desires , with like again . 
III ALTO . 

Can she disdain , can I persist to love , Can she be cruel I subjected still . Time will my truth compassion hers a prove , release the thralled , and conquer from - ward william I love not lust , I love not lust . O therefore let her deign , to equal my desires , to ij . with like a gain . I love not etc.  

III BASSO . 

Can she disdain , Can I persist to love , can she be cruel I subjected still . Time will my truth compassion hers a - prove , release the thralled and conquer froward william I love not lust , O therefore let her deign , o ij . To equal my desires , to ij . with like again . I love not etc.  

III TENORE . 

Can she disdain , can I persist to love , can she be cruel I subjected still . Time will in truth compassion hers approve , release the thralled and conquer from - ward william I love not lust O therefore let her deign , O ij . to equal my desires , to equal my desires with like a gain . I love not etc.  

FOUR CANTO . 

Alas fair face why doth that smoo - Alderman in themselves con - firm a scorn - thed brow : those speaking eyes rosed lips , and blush-ing beauty . full vow : to spoil my hopes of love , my love of duty . The time hath been , when I was bet - ter graced : I now the same , and yet that time is past . 

Is it because that thou art only fair , 
O no such graceful looks banish disdain , 
How then , to feed my passions with despair , 
Feed on sweet love , so I be loved again . 
Well may thy public scorn , and outward pride , 
Inward affections , and best like hide . 
Breath but a gentle air , and I shall live , 
Smile in a cloud , so shall my hopes renew , 
One kind regard , and second seeing give , 
One rising Morn , and my black woes subdue . 
If not , yet look upon the friendly Sun , 
That by his beams , my beams to thine may run . 
FOUR ALTO . 

Alas fair face , why doth that smoothed brow . Those speak-ing All in themselves , confirm a scornful vow . To spoil my eyes , rosd lips , and blush - king beauty . The time hath been , when I was better hopes of love , my love of du - tie . graced , I now the same , and yet that time is past . The time hath : etc.  

FOUR BASSO . 

Alas fair face , why doth that smoothed brow . Those speak-ing All in themselves confirm a scornful vow . to spoil my eyes , rosed lips and blushing beauty . hopes of love , my love of duty . The time hath been , when I was better graced , I now the same , and yet the time is past . The time hath etc.  

FOUR TENORE . 

Alas fair face , why doth that smoothed brow . Those speak - king All in themselves , confirm a scornful vow . To spoil my eyes , rosd lips , and blush - king beauty . The time hath been , when I was better graced , hopes of love , my love of du - tie . I now the same , and yet that time is past . The time hath , etc.  

v. CANTO . 

Whether so fast , see how the kindly kindly flowers , perfumes the air , and all to make thee stay , The climbing woodbine clipping all these bowers , eclipse thee like - wise , eclipse ij . wise , for fear pass a - way , Fortune our friend , our foe will not gainsay . Stay , stay but a while , stay ij . stay ij . Phoe - be no tell-tale is , no tell-tale is , She her En - di - mi - on , I 'll my Phoebe kiss my Phoebe kiss . Stay , stay , etc.  

Fear not , the ground seeks but to kiss thy feet 
Hark , hark how Philomela sweetly sings , 
Whilst water wanton fishes as they meet , 
Strike crochet time amidst these crystal spring's , 
And Zephyrus amongst the leaves sweet murmur ring's , 
Stay but a while , Phoebe no tell-tale is , 
She her Endymion , I 'll my Phoebe kiss . 
See how the Helitrope herb of the Sun 
Though he himself long since be gone to bed , 
Is not of force thine eyes bright beams to eat , 
But with their warmth his gouldy leaves unspred , 
And on my knee invites thee rest thy head . 
Stay but a while , Phoebe to tell-tale is , 
She her Endymion , I 'll my Phoebe kiss , 
v. ALTO . 

When - their so fast , see how the kindly , kindly flowers perfume the air , and all to make thee stay . The climbing Woodbine clipping all these bowers , eclipse thee likewise , eclipse . ij . for fear thou pass away . Fortune our friend , our foe will not gain - say . Stay , stay but a while , ij . ij . Phoebe no tell - tale is , no : ij . no : ij . She her Endymion , I 'll my Phoebe kiss . my Phoebe kiss . Stay , stay , etc.  

v. BASSO . 

When - their so fast , see how the kindly flowers perfumes the air , & all to make thee stay : the climbing wodbind clipping all these bowers , eclipse thee likewise , eclipse : ij . for fear thou pass away . Fortune our friend , our foe will not gain say . Stay , stay but a while , stay : ij stay : ij . Phoebe no tell-tale is , no : ij . She her Endymion , I 'll my Phoebe kiss . I 'll my Phoebe kiss my Phoebe kiss . Stay , stay : etc.  

v. TENORE . 

Whether so fast , see how the kind - lie flowers perfumes the air , and all to make thee stay , The clipping woodbine , clipping all these bowers , eclipse thee likewise , eclipse ij . for fear thou pass away . Fortune our friend , our foe will not gane say . Stay , stay but a while , stay ij . stay ij . stay ij . Phoebe no tell-tale is , no ij . no ij . She her Endimi - on Ile my Phoebe kiss , my Phoebe kiss . Say stay etc 

VI CANTO . 

Rest sweet Nymphs let golden sleep , charm your star brighter eyes , whiles my Lute the watch doth keep with pleasing simpa - thighs , Lulla lulla - by , Lulla Lulla-by , sleep sweetly , sleep sweetly , let nothing affright ye , in calm con - tent - ments lie . Lulla , etc.  

Dream fair virgins of delight , 
And best Elysian groves : 
whiles the wand'ring shades of night , 
Resemble your true loves : 
Lulla lullaby , Lulla lullaby 
●●ur kisses your blisses send them by your wishes , 
though they be not nigh . 
Thus dear damzells I do give 
Good night and so am gone : 
With your heart's desires long live 
still joy , and never moon . 
Lulla lullaby , Lulla lullaby 
Hath pleased you and eased you , & sweet slumber sezd you , 
And now to bed I high . 
VI ALTO . 

Rest sweet Nymphs , let golden sleep charm your star brigh-ter eyes , whiles my Lute the watch doth keep with pleasant sympathies , Lulla lul-la - by , lul-la-by , lul-laby , sleep sweetly , sleep sweet - lie , let nothing affright ye , in calm content - ments lie . Lulla etc.  

VI BASSO . 

Rest sweet Nymphs , let golden sleep charm your star brighter eyes , whiles my Lute the watch doth keep , with pleasing Sympathies . Lulla lul-laby , lul-la - by , sleep sweetly , sleep sweetly , let nothing affright ye , in calm contentments lie . Lul-la etc.  

VI TENORE . 

Rest sweet Nymphs let golden sleep , charm your star brighter eyes , whiles my Lute the watch doth keep , with pleasing sympathies , Lulla lul - laby , lul - laby , lul-laby , sleep sweetly , sleep sweetly , let nothing affright ye , in calm contentments lie . Lulla etc.  

VII . CANTO . 

AY me , she frowns , my Mistress is of - fen - deed , O pardon dear , my miss shall be a - mended : My fault from love proceeded , It merit's grace the rather , If I no dan - her dreaded , it was to win your favour . then clear those clouds , then smile on me , And let us be good friends . Come walk , come talk , come kiss , come see , how soon our quarrel ends . then clear , etc.  

Why low'rs my love , and blots so sweet a beauty , 
O be appeased with vows , with faith and duty : 
Give over to be cruel , sith kindness seems you better , 
You have but changed a Juell , and love is not your debtor . 
then welcome mirth , and banish moan , show pity on your lover , 
Come play , come sport , the thing that 's gone no sorrow can recover . 
Still are you angry , and is there no relenting ? 
O wiegh my woes , be moved with my lamenting : 
Alas my hart is grieved , mine inward soul doth sorrow , 
Unless I be relieved , I die before to morrow . 
The coast is cleared , her countenance cheered , I am again in grace , 
then farewell fear , then come my dear , le 's dallieand embrace . 
VII ALTO . 

Ay me , she frowns , my Mistress is offended , O pardon dear , my miss shall be a-men-ded : my fault from love proceeded , it merit's grace the rather : if I no danger dreaded , it was to win thy favour . then clear those Clouds , then smile on me , and let us be good friends : come walk , come talk , come kiss , come see how soon our quarrel ends . then etc.  

VII . BASSO . 

AYE me , she frowns , my Mistress is offended , O pardon dear , my miss shall be amended : my fault from love pro - ceeded , it merit's grace the rather , if I no danger dreaded , it was to win thy favour . then clear those clouds , than simile on me , and let us be good friends : come walk , come talk , come kiss , come see , how soon our quarrel ends . Then.  

VII . TENOR . 

Ay me , she frowns , my Mistress is offended , O pardon dear , my miss shall be amended my fault from love proceeded , it merit's grace the rather , if I no danger dreaded , it was to win thy favour . then clear those Clouds , then smile on me , & let us be good friends : come walk , come talk , come kiss , come see , how soon our quarrel ends . Then. etc.  

VIII . CANTO . 

Now let her change and spare not , since she proves false I care not , Feigned love so bewitched my de - light , That still I doted on her sight , But she is gone , but ij . but ij . New desires embracing , And my deserts does - gracing . But she is etc.  

When did I err in blindness , 
Or vex her with unkindness , 
If my care did attend her alone , 
Why is she thus untimely gone ? 
True love abides till the day of dying , 
False love is ever flying . 
then false farewell for ever , 
Once false prove faithful never , 
He that now so triumphs in thy love , 
Shall soon my present fortunes prove . 
Were I as fair as divine Adonis , 
Love is not had where none is . 
VIII . ALTO . 

Now let her change and spare not , since she proves false I care not : feigned love so beewitched my delight , that still I doted on her sight . But she is gone , But : ij . But : ij . new desires embracing , and my deserts disgracing . But etc.  

VIII . BASSO . 

Now let her change & spare not , since she proves false I care not : feigned love so be witched my delight , that still I doted on her sight . But she is gone , but : ij . ij . ij . new desires embracing , and my deserts disgracing . But : etc.  

VIII . TENORE . 

Now let her change & spare not , since she proves false I care not : feigned love so bewitched my delight that still I doted on her sight . But she is gone , but : ij . ij . ij . new desires embracing , and my deserts disgracing . But : etc.  

IX . CANTO . 

VN - der - neath a Cypris shade , the Queen of Love sat mourning , Casting down the Rosy wreaths , Her heavenly brow a - dor - ning : Quenching fiery sighs with tears , But yet her hart , but yet her hart , her hart still burr - ning . Quenching fiery sighs with tears , but yet her hart , but yet her hart , her hart still burr - ning . 

2 

For within the shady mourn , the cause of her complaining , 
Myrrha's Son the levy bowers did haunt , her love disdaining , 
Counting all her true desires , in his fond thoughts but feigning . 
3 

Why is youth with beauty graft , unfeeleing judge of unkindness , 
Spotting love with the foul report , of cruelty and blindness , 
Forcing to unkind complaints , the Queen of all divinenesse . 
4 

Stint thy tears fair Seaborn Queen , & grief in vain lamented , 
When desire hath burned his hart , that thee hath discontented , 
then to late the scorn of youth , by age shall be repent . 
IX . ALTO . 

Underneath a Cypris shade , the Queen of Love sat mour - ning , casting down the Ro - sie wreathes , her heavenly brow a-dorning , quenching fi'rie sighs with tears , quenching : ij . but yet her hart still burning , but yet her hart , but ij . still burr - ning . quenching fi ' - rye sighs with tears , quenching ij , but yet her hart still burning . but yet her hart , but yet her hart still burr - ning . 

IX . BASSO . 

Underneath a : The Queen of Love sat mourning , casting down the Rosy wreathes her heavenly brow adoring : quenching si'rie sighs , fi'rie sighs with tears , quench : ij . but yet her hart , but yet her hart , her hart still burning . quenching si'rie sighs , si'rie sighs with tears , quench : ij but yet her hart , but yet her hart , her hart still burning . 

IX . TENORE . 

Underneath a Cypris shade , the Queen of Love sat mourning , casting down the Rosy wreathes , her heavenly brow ado - ring : quenching fi'rie , fi'rie fi'rie sighs with tears , quench : ij . but yet her hart , yet her hart still burning . but : ij . but : ij . quenching fi'rie , fi'rie sighs with tears , quench : ij . but yet her hart , yet her hart still burning . but : ij . but : ij . 

For his unfortunate friend William Harwood . X. CANTO . 

Sound wo - full plaints in hills and woods , Fly my cries , to the skies , Melt mine eyes , and hart lan - guish , Not for the want of friends , or goods , make I moan , though alone , thus I groan , by souls an - guish . Time , friends , chance , goods , might again re-cover , Black woes , sad griefs , o'er my life do hover , Since my loss is with despair , no blessed Star to me shine fair , All my mirth turn to mourning , Hart lament , for hope is gone : is gone , Music leave , I 'll learn to moan , Sorrows the sads a - dor - ning . Since my , etc.  

Ay me my days of bliss are done , 
Sorrowing must I sing , nothing can relieve me : 
Eclipsed is my glorious Sun , 
And mischance doth advance horrors lance , still to grieve me . 
Poor hart , ill hap hath all joy bereft thee : 
Gon's the sole good , which the Fates had left me . 
Whose estate is like to mine ? Fortune doth my weal repine , 
Envying my one pleasure , 
Patience must me assure , other plaster can not cure . 
Therefore in this my treasure . 
For his unfortunate friend William Harwood . X. ALTO . 

Sound woeful plaints in hills & woods , fly my cries to the Skies , fly : ij . melt mine eyes , & hart languish , not for the want of friends , or goods , of : ij . make I moan , though alone thus I groan , by souls an - guish : time , friends , chance , goods might again recover , black woes , sad griefs o'er my life do hover , since my loss is with despair , no blessed Star to me shine fair , all my mirth turn to mourning , hart lament , lament , hart la - ment , for hope is gone , Music leave , I 'll leave to moan , sorrows the sads ador - ning . Since my : etc.  

For his unfortunate friend William Harwood . X. BASSO . 

Sound woeful plaints in hills and woods , fly my cries to the skies , fly ij . melt mine eyes & hart languish , not for the want of friends , not for two . or goods make I moan , though a - loan , thus I groan , by souls ; an - guish : time , friends , chance goods might a gain re-cover , black woes , sad griefs , o'er my life do hover , since my loss is with disparie , no blessed Star to me shine fair , all my mirth turn to mourning , hart la - meant for hope is gone , Music leave I 'll learn to moan , sorrows the sads adorning . since my etc.  

For his unfortunate friend William Harwood . X. TENORE . 

Sound woeful plaints in hills and woods , fly my cries to the skies . fly ij . melt mine eyes and hart languish , not for the want of friends or goods , of ij . make I moan , though alone , thus I groan , by souls an - guish , time , friends , chance goods might a - gain recover , black woes , sad griefs , o'er my life , o'er my life do hover , since my loss is with despair , no blessed Star , to me shine fair , all my mirth turn to mourning . hart lafoy : ij . hart ij . hart ij . for hope is gone , Music leave I learn to moan , sorrows the sads ador - ning since : 

XI . CANTO . 

You that pine in long de - sire , help to cry . Come Love , come Love , quench this burr - ning fire , Lest through thy wound I die . Lest through thy wound I die . Lest through thy wound I die . Come love , etc.  

2 

Hope that tires with vain delay , 
ever cries 
Come love , come love , hours and years decay , 
In time loves treasure lies . 
3 

All the day , and all the night 
still I call 
Come love , come love , but my dear delight , 
yealds no relief at all . 
4 

Her unkindness scorns my moan , 
that still shrykes 
Come love , come love , beauty penned alone 
dies in her own dislikes . 
XI . ALTO . 

You that pine in long desire , help to cry . come Love , come Love , quench this burning fire , burning fire , least through thy wound I die . least through thy wound I die , least through thy wound , least through thy wound I die . come love , etc.  

XI . BASSO . 

You that pine in long desire , help to cry , come Love , come Love quench this burning fire , least through thy wound I die . I die , least through thy wound I die . lest ij . die . come Love etc.  

XI . TENORE . 

You that pine in long desire , help to cry , come Love , quench this bur-ning fire , least through thy wound I die . least through thy wound I die , least through thy wound I die . least through thy wound I die . come Love etc.  

XII . CANTO . 

Look Mistress mine within this haul - low breast , See here in - closed a tombe of tender skin , wherein fast locked is framed a Phoenix nest , That save your self , is no passage in . Witness the wound that through your dart doth bleed , And craves your cure , and ij . and ij . since you have done the deed . Witness , etc.  

wherefore most rare and Phoenix rarely fine , 
Behold once more the harms I do possess : 
Regard the hart that through your fault doth pine , 
Attending rest yet findeth no redress . 
For end , wave wings and set your nest on fire , 
Or pity me , and grant my sweet desire . 
XII . ALTO . 

Look Mistress mine , within this hollow breast , see here enclosed , a tomb of tender skin , wherein fast locked is framed a Phoenix nest , that , save yourself , there is no passage in there is no passage in . Wit - nesse the wound , that through your dart doth bleed , and craves your care , and craves your care , since have done the deed . Witness the etc.  

XII . BASSO . 

Look mistress mine within this hollow breast , see here enclosed a tomb of tender skin , wherein fast locked is framed a Phoenix nest , that , save yourself , there is , there is no passage in . Witness the wound that through your dart doth bleed , & craves your cure , & : ij . & : ij . & : ij . since you have done the deed witness . 

XII . TENORE . 

Look mistress mine within this hollow breast , see here enclosed a tomb of tender skin , within fast locked is framed a Phoenix nest , that , save yourself , there is no passage in , there is no passage in . Witness the wound that through your dart doth bleed , and craves your cure , & ij . & : ij . since you have done the dead . 

To his loving friend M. Holder , M. of Arts. XIII . CANTO . 

Climb OH hart , clime to thy rest , Climbing yet take heed of falling , Climbers oft even at their best , catch love , down fall'th , hart appa-ling . Climbers , etc.  

2 

Mounting yet if she do call , 
And desire to know thy arrant : 
Fear not stay , and tell her all , 
Falling she will be thy warrant . 
3 

Rise , o rise , but rising tell , 
When her beauty bravely wins thee , 
T'sore up where that she doth dwell , 
Down again thy baseness brings thee . 
4 

If she ask what makes thee love her , 
Say her virtue , not her face : 
For though beauty doth approve her , 
Mildness gives her greater grace . 
5 

Rise then rise if she bid rise , 
Rising say thou risest for her : 
Fall if she do thee despise , 
Falling still do thou adore her . 
6 

If thy plaint do pity gain , 
Love and live to her honour : 
If thy service she disdain , 
Dying yet complain not on her . 
To his loving friend M. Holder M. of Arts. XIII . ALTO . 

Climb OH hart , clime to thy rest , Climbing yet take heed of sal - ling , Climars oft even at their best , catch Love , down falt'h hart ap-palling . Climars' etc.  

XIII . BASSO . 

Climb OH hart , clime to thy rest , climbing yet take heed of fall - ling , clymers oft even at their best , catch love , down fall'th hart appalling . clymars : etc.  

To his loving friend M. Holder M. of Arts. XIII . TENORE . 

Climb OH hart , clime to thy rest , Climbing yet take heed of falling , Climars' oft even at their best , catch Love , down falt'h hart ap-pal-ling . Clymars etc.  

XIIII . CANTO . 

Thanks gentle Moon for thy obscured light , My Love and I be - traid thou set us free , And Zephyrus as many un - to thee , Whose blasts con - ceald , the pleasures of the night , Re - solve to her thou gave , content to me . But be those bowers still filled with Ser - pents hisses , That sought by treason , that ij . to be - trey our kiss - ses . to betray our kisses . But be those , etc.  

And thou false Arbour with thy bed of Rose , 
Wherein , whereon touched equal with love's fire , 
We reaped of either other loves desire , 
Whither the twining plants that thee enclose . 
O be thy bowers still filled with serpent's hisses , 
That sought by treason , to betray our kisses . 
Torn be the frame , for thou didst thankless hide , 
A traitorous spy , her brother , and my foe , 
Who sought by death , our joys to under go , 
And by that death , our passions to divide , 
Leaving to our great vows , eternal woe . 
O be thy bowers still filled with serpent's hisses , 
That sought by treason , to betray our kisses . 
XIIII . ALTO . 

Thanks gentle Moon for thy obscured light , My Love and I betrayed thou set us free , And Zephirus as many un-to thee , whose blasts concealed , the pleasures of the night , Resolve to her thou gave , content to me . But be those bowers still filled with Serpent's hisses , That sought by treason , that ij . to betray our kisses . to be - trey our kisses . But be those etc.  

XIIII . BASSO . 

Thanks gentle Moon for thy obscured light , My Love and I betrayed thou set us free , And Zephyrus as many unto thee , Whose blasts concealed , the pleasures of the night , Resolve to her thou gave , content to me . But be those bowers still filled with Serpent's hisses , That sought by treason , that : ij . to be - trey our kisses . to betray our kisses . But be those , etc.  

XIIII . TENORE . 

Thanks gentle Moon for thy obscured light , My Love & I betrayed thou set us free , And Zephyrus as many unto thee , Whose blasts concealed , the pleasures of the night , Resolve to her thou gave , content to me . But be those bowers still filled with Serpent's hisses , That sought by treason , That : ij . to betray our kisses . to betray our kisses . But those : etc.  

xv. CANTO . 

I Sigh as sure to wear the fruit of the Will - low tree , I sigh as sure to lose my suit , for it may not be . I sigh as one that loves in vain , I sigh as one that lives in pain , very sorry , ij . ij . very weary of my mi - se - rye . I etc.  

2 

I hate my thoughts which like the Fly , flutter in the flame , 
I hate my tears which drop , and dry , quench and fri● the same : 
I hate the hart which frozen burns , I hate the hart which chosen turns , 
Too and from me , making of me nothing but a game . 
3 

My thoughts are fuel to desire , which my hart doth move , 
My tears are oil to feed the fire , smart whereof I prove : 
She laughs at sighs that come from me , I sigh at laughs in her so free , 
Who doth glory , in the story of my sorry love . 
4 

Her lovely looks , and lovelesse mind do not well agree , 
Her quick conceit , and judgement blind , as ill suited be : 
Her forward wit , and froward hart , that like to knit , this glad to part , 
Makes so pretty , and so witty , not to pity me . 
5 

The more I seek , the less I find what to trust unto , 
The more I hold , the less I bind , she doth still undo : 
I wove the web of idle love , which endless will , and frutles prove , 
If the pleasure for the measure of my treasure go . 
xv. ALTO . 

I Sigh as sure to wear the fruit of the willow tree , I sigh as sure to lose my suit , my suit , for it will not be , for it will not be , I sigh as one that loves in vain , that loves in vain , I sigh as one that lives in pain , very sorry , ve : ij . ij . very weary of my misery . I sigh as etc.  

xv. BASSO . 

I Sigh as sure to wear the fruit , of the willow tree , I sigh as sure , I sigh as sure to lose my suit , for it will not be . I sigh as one that loves in vain , love's in vain , I sigh as one that lives in pain , very sorry very ij . very sorry , very weary of my misery . I sigh & 

xv. TENORE 

I Sigh as sure to wear the fruit , the fruit of the willow tree , I sigh as sure to lose my suit , for it will not be , for it will not be . I sigh as one that loves in vain , I sigh as one that lives in pain : very sorry , very : ij . very sorry very weary of my mi - se - ry . I sigh etc.  

Chorus . XVI . CANTO . 

Down a down , ij . Thus Phillis sung , by Fan - cie once oppress - said , Who so by foolish Love are stung , Are worthily distress - sed , and so sing I , and ij . with a down , ij . ij . with a down a down a down . 

1 Verse . When Love was first be - got , and by the mother's will , Did fall to human , lot , his solace to full - fill , Devoid of all de - ceit , a chaste and holy fire , Did quicken man's con - ceit , and woman's breast in - spire . The Gods that saw the good , that mortals did ap - prove , With kind and holy mood , began to talk of love . Chorus . Down a down . 

2 

But during this accord , a wonder strange to hear 
Whilst love in deed and word , most faihfull did appear : 
False semblance came in place , by selocie attended , 
And with a double face , both love and fancy blended , 
Which made the gods forsake , and men from fancy fly , 
And maidens scorn a mate , forsooth and so will 1  
Chorus . Down a down . etc.  

Chorus . XVI . ALTO . 

Down a etc.  And so sing I , and ij . with a down , with ij . with a down down with a ij . a down a down . verses . When Love : etc.  

Chorus . Down a etc.  

Chorus . XVI . BASSO . 

Down a : etc.  & so sing I with a down , ij . ij . with a down a down a down . Verses . When Love : etc.  Chorus . Down a : etc.  

Chorus . XVI . TENORE . 

Down a etc.  And so sing I , with a down , ij . with a down a , with a down a down a down down . Verses . When Love : etc.  Chorus . Down a : etc.  

XVII . CANTO . 

Diaphenia like the Dafdown - dillie , White as the Sun , fair as the Lily , Heigh ho , heigh ho , how I do love thee : I do love thee as my Lambs , Are belo - ved of their dumbs , How blessed were I if thou wouldst prove me . I do : etc.  

2 

Diaphenia like the spreading Roses , 
That in thy sweets , all sweets encloses , 
Fair sweet how I do love thee ? 
I do love thee as each flower , 
loves the Sun's life giving power , 
For dead , thy breath to life might move me . 
3 

Diaphenia like to all things blessed , 
When all thy praises are expressed , 
Dear joy , how I do love thee ? 
As the birds do love the spring , 
Or the Bees their careful king , 
then in requite , sweet virgin love me . 
XVII . ALTO . 

D I - a - phe-nia like the Dafdown - dil-lie , white as the Sun , fair as the Lily , Heigh ho , heigh ho , how I do love thee , I do love thee as my Lambs , are beloved of their dambs ; how blessed were I if thou wouldst prove me . I do ; etc.  

XVII . BASSO . 

D I-a-phe-ni-a like the Dafdown - dillie , white as the Sun fair as the Lily , Heigh ho , high ho , how I do love thee , I do love thee as my Lambs , are beloved of their dambs , how blessed were I if thou wouldst prove me . I do etc.  

XVII . TENORE . 

D I-aphe-ni-a like the daf - down - dillie , white as the Sun , fair as the Lily , Heigh ho , heigh ho , how I do love thee : I do love thee as my Lambs , are beloved of their dambs , how blessed were I if thou wouldst prove me . I do love etc.  

XVIII . CANTO . 

Beauty sat bathing by a spring , Where fairest shades did hide her : The winds blew calm , the birds did sing , The cool streams ran be - side her . My wanton thoughts enticed mine eye , To see what was for - bidden : But better memory said fie , So vain de - sire was chidden . Hey no - nigh , hey no - ny , hey ij . hey nonny not nonny nonny . Hey , etc.  

Into a slumber than I fell , 
When fond imagination , 
Seemed to see , but could not tell , 
Her feature , or her fashion . 
But even as Babes in dreams do smile , 
And sometime fall aweeping : 
So I awaked as wise this while , 
As when I feel a sleeping . 
Hey nonnie , nonnie , etc.  
XVIII ALTO . 

Beauty sat bathing by a spring , where fairest shades did hide her : The winds blew calm , the Birds did sing , The cool streams ran beeside her . My wanton thoughts enticed mine eye , mine eye , To see what was forbidden : But better memory said fie , so vain desire was chidden . Hey nonny nonie , hey : ij . hey , ij . nonie , nonie , hey : ij . Hey nonie , etc.  

XVIII . BASSO . 

Beauty sat bathing by a spring , Where fairest shades did hide her : The winds blew calm , the Birds did sing , The cool streams ran beside her , beeside her . My wanton thoughts en - ticed mine eye , To see what was forbidden : But better memory said fie , So vain desire was chidden . Hey nonie nonie , hey : ij . nonie , hey ij . hey : ij . hey : ij . hey no - nigh . Hey nonnie . etc.  

XVIII . TENORE . 

Beauty sat bathing by a spring , Where fairest shades did hide her : The winds blew calm , the birds did sing , The cool streams ran beside her , beside her . My wanton thoughts enticed , enticed mine eye , To see what was forbidden : But better me-mory said fie , So vain desire was chidden . Hey nonny , ij . hey ij . hey ij . nonny . Hey etc.  

XIX . CANTO . 

Mvsick dear solace , to my thoughts neg - lected , Music time sporter , Music time sporter , to my most res - pec - ted , Sound on , sound on , thy gol - den harmony is such , That whilst she doth vouchsafe her E-bon Lute to touch . By descant numbers I do nimbly climb , from Loves see - cluse , Unto his Courts , un-to his Courts where I in fresh attire , at - tyre my Muse . By descant , etc.  

2 

I do compare her fingers swift resounding , 
Unto the heaven's Spherical rebounding : 
Hark , hark , she sings no forced , but breathing sound I hear , 
And such the concord Diapasons she doth rear , 
As when th' immortal god of nature from his seat above , 
First formed words all , & fairly it combined , combined by love . 
3 

Divine Apollo be not thou offended , 
That by her better skill thy skills amended , 
Scholars do oft more lore , than masters theirs attain , 
Though thine the ground , all parts in one though she contain , 
Yet mayst thou triumph that thou hast a Scholar only one , 
That can her Lute to thine , and to thy voice , her voice atone . 
XIX . ALTO . 

Mvsicke dear selace to my thoughts neg-lected , Music time sporter ij . to my most res-pected , Sound on , sound on , thy golden harmony is such , That whilst she doth vouchsafe her Ebon Lute to touch , By descant numbers I do nim-bly climb , from love's secluse , unto his Courts , unto his Courts , where I in fresh attire at - tyre my Muse . By descant numbers etc.  

XIX . BASSO . 

Mvsick dear solace , to my thoughts neglected , Music time sporter , Music time sporter , to my most respected , Sound on , sound on thy golden harmony is such , That whilst she doth , she doth vouchsafe hre Ebon Lute to touch . By descant numbers I do nimbly climb , from Love's secluse , Unto his courts unto his Courts , where I in fresh attire , at - tyre my Muse . By descant etc.  

XIX . TENORE . 

Mvsick dear solace to my thoughts neglected , Music time sporter , Music time sporter , to my most respected : Sound on , sound on , thy golden harmony is such , That whilst she doth , she doth vouch - safe her Ebon Lute to touch . By descant numbers I do nimbly climb , from Love's secluse , unto his Courts , unto his Courts , where I in fresh attire at - tyre my Muse . By descant , etc.  

xx. CANTO . 

With fragrant flowers we strew the way , And make this our chief ho - lie day , For though this Clime were blessed of yore , Yet was it never proud before : OH gracious King , OH ij . OH ij . OH ij : of second Troy , Ac - cept of our un - fai - ned joy . OH , etc 

2 

Now th' air is sweeter than sweet Balm , 
And Satyrs dance about the Palm : 
Now earth with verdure newly dight , 
Gives perfect signs of her delight . 
OH gracious King of second Troy , 
Accept of our unfeigned joy . 
Now Birds record new harmony , 
And trees do whistle melody : 
Now every thing that Nature breeds 
Doth clad itself in pleasant weeds . 
OH gracious King of second Troy , 
Accept of our unfeigned joy . 
xx. ALTO . 

With fragrant flowers we strew the way , And make this our chief holy day , For though this Clime were blessed of yore , Yet was it never proud before : OH gra - cious King , OH ij . OH ij . OH ij . OH ij . of second Troy , Accept of our unfeigned joy . OH , etc 

xx. BASSO . 

With fragrant flowers we strew the way , And make this our chief holy day , For though this Clime were blessed of yore , yet was it ne - ver proud be - fore : OH gracious King , OH ij . OH ij . OH ij . OH ij . of second Troy , Ac-cept of our unfeigned joy . OH gracious etc.  

xx. TENORE . 

With fragrant flowers we strew the way , And make this our chief holy day , For though this Clime were blessed of yore , Yet was it never proud before : OH gracious King , OH ij . OH ij . OH ij . OH ij . of second Troy , Accept of our unfeigned joy . OH gracious etc.  

An Elegy in remembrance of his Worshipful friend Thomas Leighton Esquire . XXI . CANTO . 

Come come all you that draw heavens pu - rest breath , Come An - gell breasted sons of har - mother - nigh . Let us candole in tragic E - li - gie , Con - dole with me our dearest Leightons death , Leighton in whose dear loss death belmish - eth jones beauty and the soul of true de - light , Leighton heaven's favourite and the Muses jewel , Muses and heavens only here - in too cruel , Leighton to hea - ven , Leighton to heaven , hath ta'en too time - lie flight . Leighton to , etc.  

Come then sith Seas of tears , sith sighs and groans , 
sith mournful plaints , loud cries , and deep laments , 
Have all in vain deplord these drerements , 
And fate in-explorable scorns our moans , 
Let us in accents grave , and saddest tones , 
Offer up Music's doleful sacrifice : 
Let these accords which notes distinguist frame , 
Serve for memorial to sweet Leightons name , 
In whose sad death Music's delight now dies . 
An Eiegie , in remembrance of his Worshipful friend , Thomas Leighton Esquire . XXI . ALTO . 

Come come all you that draw , Heavens pu - rest breath , Come Angel breasted sons , come ij . of har - mother - nigh , Let us condole in tragic E - li - gie , con-dole with me our dearest Leightons death , Leighton in whose dear loss death blemisheth , jones beauty and the soul , the soul of true delight , Leighton heaven's favoret and the Muse's jewel , Muses and heavens only herein too cruel , Leighton to heaven , to heaven , Leighton to heaven , hath ta'en too timely flight . Leighton etc.  

An Elegy etc. XXI . BASSO . 

Come come all you that draw heaven's purest breath , Come Angel breasted sons of harmony , Let us con - dole . tragic Elegy , Condole with me our dearest Leightons death Leighton in whose dear loss death ble - misheth jones beauty and the soul of true de-light , Leighton heaven's favourite and the Muse's jewel , Muses and heavens only herein too cruel , Leighton to heaven , Leigh : ij . to heaven hath ta'en too timely flight . Leighton to heaven , etc.  

An Elegy , in remembrance of his Worshipful friend , Thomas Leighton Esquire . XXI . TENORE . 

Come come all you that draw heaven's purest breath , Come Angel breasted sons , come ij . of harmo-ny , Let us condole in tragic Elegy , Condole with me our dearest Leightons death , Leighton in whose dear loss death blemisheth jones beauty , and the soul of true delight , Leighton heaven's favourite and the Muses jewel , Muses and heavens only herein too cruel , Leighton to heaven , to ij to heaven hath ta'en too timely flight . Leighton , etc.  

XXII . BASSO . 

A Pavin . 2 

A Pavin for the Lute and Base Viol . XXII . 



FINIS . 



