MOUNT EBAL , OR A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF DIVINE LOVE . Showing the Equity and Necessity of his being accursed that love's not the Lord jesus Christ. Together with the Motives 
Means 
Marks 
of our love towards him . By that late Faithful and worthy Divine , JOHN PRESTON , Doctor in Divinity , Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty , Master of Emmanuel College in Cambridge , and sometimes Preacher of Lincoln's Inn . 

PSAL. 31. 26.  

Love the Lord , OH all ye his Saints , etc.  

PSAL. 145. 20.  

The Lord preserveth all them that love him , and scattereth abroad all the ungodly . 

LONDON , Printed by M. P for john Safford , and are to be sold at his house in Black horse Alley in Fleetstreet . 1638.  

A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF Divine Love.  

1 CORINTH . 16. 22.  

If any man love not the Lord jesus Christ , let him be accursed ; yea let him be had in execration even to the death , or let him be Anathema Maranatha . 

THESE words have little or no dependence on the words before going , which are these ; The salutation of me Paul by mine own hand : and the reason why he thus writes is , because there were many false Apostles , and sergeant Epistles went abroad in the world , if not under his name ; but hereby ( saith he ) you shall know me from them all , even by this my salutation , and subscription , as by mine own hand ; for in all my Epistles so I write , The grace of our Lord jesus Christ be with you all , Amen . 

wherefore to consider them in themselves , St. Paul hating those ( as we use to do ) who speak evil of them we love , doth here pronounce a curse against them that love not the Lord jesus Christ ; and the reason why he doth so , is , because he cannot endure to hear him evil spoken of by any blasphemous tongue . 

So that this then is the scope and drift of the Apostle in this place , namely , to commend Love unto us , and above all other , the love of the Lord jesus Christ , and to exhort us by all means thereunto ; in which exhortation , let me desire you to observe with me these two reasons why we should thus love him . Whereof the first is taken from the Necessity of it , he is accursed that love's him not . 
second is taken from the Equity , or object of his love , the Lord jesus Christ.  


If any man love not the Lord jesus Christ , let him be etc.  

There is not much difficulty in the words , yet foam there is ; for clearing whereof , I will show you what is meant by these two terms , Anathema , Maranatha , and so proceed : for the first ( Anathema ) it is a Greek word , and it is as much as elevari , & suspendi , to be lift up , or be hanged , and it signifies accursed , by way of allusion to that opprobrious and cursed kind of death , which was inflicted upon notorious and heinous Malefactors , who for their offence were hanged up upon a tree , gibbet , or any such engine , according as it is said , cursed is every one that hangs etc. which place is again alleged by this our Apostle St. Paul , to prove that Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law , being made a curse for us , for it is written , cursed is etc.  

Secondly , for the word ( Maranatha ) it is an Assyrian word taken from an Hebrew root , which signifies execration or cursing , ( and therefore I so rendered it in the reading of it unto you ) now in that the Apostle useth two words of divers Languages , for the fuller expression of this his so fearful a malediction and curse , as if one word were not enough , or that out of his zealous affection he could not so content himself with it , we may note that by how much the more the curse is greater , by so much the more grievous is the duty omitted , from which premises we may make this conclusion , or draw this point of Doctrine . viz.  

That he is worthy to be cursed , ( yea to be cursed ●ith all execration ) that love's not the Lord jesus ●●rist . 

For the further unfolding and opening whereof , consider with me these three things following , to wit.  

First , what Love is in general . 

Secondly , what love to the Lord jesus Christ is . 

Thirdly , some reasons why he is worthy to be accursed that love's him not : of each of these in their order ; and first of the first . What Love is in general , and for that take this brief description of it , viz.  

Love is an inclination of the will , whereby it inclines to some good thing agreeable to itself . 

First , ( I say ) its an inclination of the will ] where we may take notice of two things , both of the subject or seat , which is not any inferior part or faculty of the soul , but the will , one of the most supreme and potentest of all the rest . And what is the nature and property , the quality and condition of it ? it is elicita , non coacta , not forced , but free ; inclined , not constrained , for voluntas ( as say the Philosophers ) est libera , the will is of a most absolute and free power , so that though a man may be compelled to do something against his liking , yet he can never be forced to do any thing against his will , at lest his will cannot be forced , that like a Queen in her Thrown is always free . 

Secondly , I say its an inclination of the will unto good ; aut verum , aut apparens , either for that it is so indeed , or at least ( for the present ) appeare● and seems so to be unto it , according to 〈◊〉 trite and true axiom of the Schools too , bonum est objectum voluntatis , the Adequate object of the will is only good , yet not every good neither , but bonum sibi conveniens , such a good as is agreeable to itself , that only is the object of love . Now by this you conceive the second thing , what love to the Lord jesus Christ is : and it is nothing else but an intensive bending of the mind unto Christ , as the most necessary and suitablest thing for it that may be , the Summum bonum , the chiefest good of all that it can desire , so that it desire's and love's nothing like him . 

Now the properties whereby we shall know , whether our love to the Lord jesus Christ be such or not , are especially these three . 

First , it always desire's to have the thing it love's , cannot be contented with any thing else but him , as being the proper Centre of the soul , which is never at quiet so long as it is out of his place ; agreeable to that of a Father , Fecistinos Domine ad te , & inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescit in te , thou hast made us OH Lord , and our heart is never at rest till it rest in thee , it is his fruition that gives it satisfaction : again , as it desire's the fruition of him , so it desire's as much , 

Secondly , the conjunction and union with him , to be one with him and he with us ; and therefore it hate's whatsoever may hinder it , and seeks whatsoever may help it therein : and being thus once conjoined , and enjoying it , it finally 

Thirdly , seeks and endeavours the protection and preservation of the thing it love's , as it on the other side shuns and avoids aught that might endanger the destruction thereof ; and if notwithstanding it meet with it , interposeth itself betwixt it and that to defend it , as the arm wards the blow from the head , albeit it be to the wounding of itself . 

And when these three concur together , when our love hath these three concommitants , and is attended with these fruits and effects , as you heard before , that it thus desire's the fruition 
conjunction 
preservation 
of Christ.  

then may we distinguish it from all sensual and carnal love ; for there be many sorts of love in the world , but it is all but worldly love , not spiritual and Heavenly love . 

First , there 's a love of pity , as when we bewail a man's case , but hate his deeds , so are Malefactors beloved . 

Secondly , there 's a love of desire , as when the stomach desire's sweet meats , the ear delightsome sounds , and the eye fine sights , etc.  

Thirdly , there 's a love of complusment , when one lusts or longs after a thing with the whole heart or soul , so as he cannot subsist without it ; as a woman with child lusteth and longeth after a thing she hath a mind to , which she cannot fafely go without . 

Fourthly , there 's love of friendship , when one man love's another for some courtesy or kindness he hath received from him . 

Fiftly and lastly , there 's a love of dependence , when a man love's God more than himself , more than his life , and depends upon him for all good things belonging to body or soul . Or to be more brief there 's a natural 
sinful 
spiritual 
Love.  

The first , is betwixt parents and children , and in itself is neither good nor evil . 

The second , ariseth from evil habits bred in the soul , and it is most hateful to God , and makes us worse than the brute beasts . 

The third , is that divine gift and grace of God which the Holy Ghost puts into our hearts , whereby we are more than men , and desire Holy things for themselves ; and this is that love which the Apostle here calls for in this place . 

Now if our love to the Lord jesus Christ be such , we shall further know it by these two things which always proceed and go before it , as the former followed after it . viz. humiliation for sin past , and faith in Christ for the time to come . 

First humiliation for sin past ; for till a man come to have a sight and sense of himself by reason of his sins , he will never care for Christ ; and when he hath been thus cast down , yet 

Secondly , without faith in Christ , whereby he applies him to himself , and is persuaded that he is reconciled unto him , he will not yet love him , but rather hate him of the twain . 

Now the manner or means of getting of both these , and so consequently of love into our hearts , is by the preaching of the word of God , by prayer , and taking him when he is offered and given unto us in the same for that end . 

But now we must take Christ as an husband takes a wife , or a wife an husband , out of love to their persons , not to their portions , and then shall we be the better subject unto him ; but except we be first humbled ( as was before said ) for our sins , and consider in what need thou standest of him , how that without him thou must perish ; till then ( I say ) thou canst not sufficiently set by him , nor love him aright : but when thou knowest how necessary he is for thee , how alsufficient , and affectionate he is towards thee , than thou beginnest to look at Christ as a condemned person doth at him that brings a pardon for him whom he love's and longs after , joys and rejoiceth in . 

And yet all this is but a preparative to our love of him ; it is faith , that is the first fountain , whereby we so love him , as that we can cleave unto him , with purpose of heart to serve and please him in all things , and this love which thus ariseth from faith , doth not only believe that Christ is merciful , and will forgive thee thy sins upon thy supplication and repentance unto him for the same , but also that he is most fit and conformable for thee , so that thou couldst find in thy heart to be anathaematized for his sake , and to be divorced from all things in the world for love of him : And so much for the second thing also , I come now to the last ; to wit , 

Thirdly , to the reasons , why he is worthy to be had in execration , and to be cursed even to the death that love's not the Lord jesus Christ ? and they are chiefly these five . 

First , because when Christ shall come and be a Suitor unto us to love him , and we refuse to do it , and to be reconciled unto him and receive him , than he grows angry to the death ; you may see this in the Parable of the Marriage of the King's son , how wroth he was when he heard they had abused and beaten his servants which he sent to call them to the wedding : and therefore the Prophet David bids us kiss the Son lest he be angry , and so etc. that is , as if he should say , when he offers himself to kiss you with the kisses of his mouth , be not too coy and curious , but embrace his offer , return his courtesy with the like kindness , and kiss him again , lest he take it in great indignation at your hands ; and be so angry with you , that you die for it . 

Indeed when we knew not the Gospel , he was content , though we were froward and fruitless ; but now that he sends his Desciples to preach unto all Nations , then if they bring not forth fruits worthy amendment of life , he tells them , the axe is laid unto the roots , etc.  

Secondly , because he that in old time broke the law , was accursed ; now this was the Lord's Commandment , that we love him . 

But you will say , we are not able to fulfil the law of ourselves ; and how then shall we do it ? 

I answer , there 's a twofold obedience , Legal , and Evangelicall , that requires exact obedience in our own persons ; but this requires no more but only our endeavour , and faith in Christ.  

Thirdly , because he love's something else more than God , and so commits Adultery ; now she that in the old law did commit Adultery , had a drink of bitter water given her , which made her belly swell etc. so that she died ; how much more worthy of death is he then that thus deals with God , and going a whoring after it , commits spiritual fornication . 

Fourthly , because that commonly belongs to Hypocrites , they are a cursed crew , to whom Christ shall say at the last day , go ye cursed etc.  Now all such as love him not , are , no better nor worse , but wretched and damnable Hypocrites . 

Fiftly , because love governs the whole man , it 's as the Rudder of a ship , which turns it any ways ; and so which way soever this affection of love goes , it carries the whole man along with it , and makes him lead his life accordingly . 

Thus much then for the proof of the point , before propounded . 

Now for the application of it to ourselves , that so we may the better make some use of it , for the direction and reformation of our lives and conversations therein : if it be so ( as so you have heard it is ) that it is such a sin not to love the Lord jesus Christ , that he is worthy to be accursed that love's him not ; yea , to be had in execration etc.  then first it may teach us to look to ourselves , and be sure that we love him ; and so look at others , as that out of a godly zeal thou canst sincerely and truly say with Saint Paul here , let him be accursed , for this is an infallible and sure sign of this love which proceeds from faith , that when we see Christ trampled under feet , our hearts burn within us , as his did : there are some ( saith he ) of which I told you before , and now tell you again with tears or weeping , that they go about to pervert and turn others from the ways of God : so that we may here see Saint Paul's disposition , he doth not say , cursed be he , but cursed is he ; from whence we may also note the difference betwixt the curses of the Law , and ●f the Gospel : for the Law faith , cursed is he that continueth not in all etc. but the Gospel saith , cursed is he that love's not the Lord , etc.  

Now if we love him , we will desire ( as was said but a little before ) to be joined unto him , and to have his company , for how can that woman be said to love her husband that cares not for his company ; so how canst thou say thou lovest the Lord jesus Christ when thou lovest not his society ? 

Again , if we love him , we will be content to have him upon any condition ; for love is impulsive , the love of Christ constrains us ( as the Apostle speaks ) to do what it desire's ; yet , so as not against , but with our wills , which it inclines thereunto : now if we do not find these things in us , we do not love the , etc.  

And therefore this Doctrine that he that love's him not is etc. it should teach us to consider our own conditions , how we stand affected towards him , and whether we love him or not ; and we shall know it for certain whether we do , or do not , by examining ourselves by these queries . 

First whether whatsoever good things we have done , we have done them out of love to God , and desire of his glory , more than of our own profit , or out of custom ; for otherwise all that we do is nothing worth ; Christ respects nothing but what comes from love , and that love from faith , if that be not the primum mobile , the first mover that sets us on work , if we go not upon this ground , we were as good do ●othing , for all the good we shall get by it : o that thou , that most of all despisest Religion , and scoffest at the zealous Professors thereof , wouldst but thoroughly consider of this one thing , that he is accursed that love's not the Lord jesus Christ , and that all the good duties of piety , or charity which thou performest , if thou dost them not out of love , but more for custom then conscience sake , are rather abominable than any whit pleasing unto God ; for then wouldst thou no longer content thyself with the form of godliness , but labour for the power thereof . 

But thou wilt say , how shall I know whether this that I do , I do it out of love to his name , rather than out of any hypocrisy , or love to myself ? I answer . 

You shall feel it , for love is of a stirring nature , and moves all the rest of the affections , as desire and longing after him , with hope that thou shalt obtain him , and fear lest thou shouldst fail of it ; but yet still let me give thee this caveat , beware thou love him not more in regard of his Kingdom , then of his person , for than I tell thee true , thou lovest him not aright . 

Secondly , consider whether ( as was said ) thou love his company , and delight in his presence , to have communion with him , to be talking to him by prayer , or to have him speaking unto thee by his word ; so then dost thou pray not by constraint , but willingly ; dost thou hear , read , receive the Sacrament etc. not for fashion sake , but of faith unfeigned , in obedince to his commandment , than dost thou love him , but otherwise thou dost not . 

Thirdly , dost thou love his appearing at the last day , canst thou say in the uprightness of thy soul , come Lord jesus , come quickly ? dost thou think it long first ? and art not afraid when thou hearest of it , as Felix was , who trembled when he heard Paul discourse of Temperance , Righteousness , and judgement to come ; but dost rather desire it , and wouldst be glad of it , and the sooner , the better ? then ( I say ) also mayst thou resolve upon it , that thou dost assuredly love him , and that when he shall so come , he shall come without sin unto thy salvation . 

Fourthly , whether thou lovest him as well in health as in sickness , and in sickness as in health , as well in poverty as in abundance , and in adversity as in prosperity , for so thou wilt , if thou love him truly for himself , and not for these . 

Fiftly , mark this with thyself too , whether thy love be bountiful , as was that woman's that had the box of ointment , which she poured on Jesus head , and as Abrahams was , who would have offered his Son , his only Son Isaac for his sake ; so ( I say ) examine thyself hereby , whether thou be content to part with the best things for his sake , as thy living , thy lusts , thy life ; for he that love's any thing truly , will forgo and give all he hath to purchase it . 

Sixthly , look whether thou seek to do the Lords will , and what may please him best ; for love seeks not her own , we see it in men who will take any pains , be at any cost , to get that thing for them whom they love , which they love to have , and so will we do for Christ , if we love him , we will keep his Commandments , and they will not be grievous unto us ; yea rather it will be our meat and drink to do his will , and the dearer it costs us , the dearer will it be unto us . 

Seven , examine thyself by this rule also , whether thou be content to do much for him , not some things , and not othersome , but whether thou have an eye to all his Commandments , and all false ways thou utterly abhor ; for faith ( you know ) works by love , and love that proceeds from faith is not idle but operative , so that what is spoken of faith , may as truly be said of love , that its dead without works , and therefore Saint Paul professeth of himself , that he laboured more than they all , which was an argument , that he loved much because he was in labour much ; and so when our Saviour asked Peter whether he loved him , he puts him to work , and sets him his task saying , feed my sheep ; and last of all , 

Eighthly , whether thou wouldst not only do , but suffer much for his sake , as David , when his wife Michal laughed at him for dancing before the Ark , he was contented to bear it , because he did it to the Lord ; and so the Apostles rejoiced because they wer● counted worthy to suffer for his name . And Saint Paul likewise when the people entreated him with tears , not to go up to jerusalem , because he should be bound , as Agabus had signified by the spirit unto him , answered them , Why do ye rend my heart , I am ready not only to be bound , but also to die for etc.  

But thou wilt say , I have no such occasions now adays , if I had , I know not what I should do . 

But I answer , is it so ? hast thou no such occasions ? yes , thou hast occasions enough , as when he takes away thy wife , thy child , thy friends , thy goods , thy good name etc. if then ( I say ) thou canst bear it patiently with job , and say , it is the Lord giveth , and the Lord etc. or with Ely , it is the Lord , let him do what seemeth him good : then thou lovest him , and yet thou must do more than that , thou must not only bear it patiently , but joyfully too , as you heard before the Apostles did ; lay thyself to these rules then , and try impartially whether thou love the Lord jesus Christ or not ; and forty further help and more infallible notice thereof , to know whether thy love to him be pure and unfeigned , or whether it be false and sergeant , take these more particular proofs of it ; for assure thyself if thou love him aright ( as we touched before ) that then , 

First thou wilt be content with nothing but love again , so that as Absalon ( though in hypocrisy ) said , when as David had fetched him out of banishment , and confined him to his own house that he might not see the King's face , what do I here , seeing I may not see the King's face ? so wouldst thou say out of love to the love of God ; what do I here , since I cannot behold the fair beauty of the Lord ? Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me , or else what good will my life do me ; but if thou do so , than thou shalt make my heart more joyful and more glad , than they that have had their Corn and Wine and Oil increased . 

Secondly , thou wilt love the brethren , for they are like him , though he exceed them in the degrees and measures of goodness , as the Ocean doth a drop of a bucket , this is a pregnant proof hereof , and therefore deal squarely with thyself herein . And the reason why thou canst not love the Lord if thou love not the brethren , is because its an easier matter to love man whom thou hast seen , than it is to love God whom thou hast not seen ; for use ( we know ) makes them comelier and handsomer ; wherefore Saint john saith , If any man say he love's God , and yet hate's his Brother , he is a liar , he deceives himself , and there is no truth in him . 

But thou wilt say , thou lovest them well enough . Dost thou so ? then thou wilt love their company ; for what we love and delight in , we are never well without it , nor cannot endure it out of our sight ; and therefore when the Psalmist had said That all his delight was in the Saints , and upon such as excel in virtue , if you would know , how to know it was so , he afterwards tells us , That he was a companion of them that fear him , etc. Psal. 119.  

But thou wilt say again , though thou dost not love them , yet God forbid thou shouldst be so bad but that thou shouldst love the Lord jesus Christ. But I answer thee again to that too ; If thou dost so , than thou wilt love his appearing , for if thou wish in thy heart there were no general judgement , thou lovest him not , say what thou wilt to the contrary ; as a loving and loyal wife cannot love her husband but she will rejoice at his coming home when he is abroad , and the nearer the time approacheth , by so much the more joyful and glad will she be . 

Thirdly , if thou love him thou wilt speak well of him upon all occasions , and in every place where thou comest , for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh ; so that if thou speak well of God , but for fashion sake , not out of any true affection , but of fear , thou lovest him not ; for he that love's him will be much in his praise , as we have an instance in David , so that if the heart be inflamed , the mouth will be open , thou wilt not be tonguetied , nor ashamed of him , no not before Princes . 

But thou wilt say , I am no scholar , I cannot speak eloquently ; if I could , then indeed I should not be so afraid , nor ashamed to do it , as now I am , because I can do it no better , nor Rhetorically then now I can . 

But let me tell thee for thy comfort , let that never trouble thee , speak as well as thou canst , and thou needst care for no more , for that will beget more and more love in thee , and love that will make thee eloquent ; we have a notable president for this in the Spouse , who because she loved Christ , see how she sets him forth , my beloved is all beautiful & c* . and it is most sure , it will be so with thee ; if thou love the Lord , thou wilt show it by thy speeches , for thou canst not well speak well of him whom thou lovest not ; but if thou hast no good thought of him , thy words will bewray thee ; yea thou wilt not only speak well of him , and of his ways , but thou wilt also walk in the same , nor wilt thou stand pausing upon it , to consider whether thou wert best do it , or no ; but if it be about a good duty , as suppose keeping of the Lords day , hearing of the word etc. thou wilt do it without any more ado , yea though there were no promise nor profit to be got by it , for else thou dost no more but as a servant , not as son , in hope of wages , and not out of love , looking for nothing for thy pains : so did Saint Paul , he would preach the Gospel , though he had nothing but chains and imprisonment for his labour ; and why will he so ? why ? because God commands it , and its a good duty ; so that if thou make a question of it , whether thou wert best to do this or that good duty , or wilt do no more than thou must needs , thou lovest not the Lord , for he that love's him , will do whatsoever he can for him , and yet think all too little when he hath done too . 

Fourthly , as thou wilt speak well of him thyself , so thou wilt not endure to hear others speak ill of him , but thy heart will be moved within thee at them , and at any thing that might impeach and hurt his glory ; as to see his Church lie waist , his word corrupted etc. so Ely was not moved so much with the death of his Sons , as to hear that the Ark of God was taken* . and indeed they are bastards and not sons that can hear their father reviled , and railed on , and never be affected , nor offended at it . 

Fiftly , if thy love to the Lord jesus Christ be sincere and sound , thou wilt be loath to lose him , for we will rather lose all we have , then loose the favour and affection of a friend , whom we love entirely ; and as thou wouldst be loath to lose him , so thou wouldst be as loath to offend him , or do any thing whereby thou mightest be like so to do ; or if so be thou hast , thou wilt never be at quiet till thou hast gained his good will again , whatsoever it cost thee to get it . 

Sixtly , thou wilt linger and hang after him , as we may see in the woman of Canaan , she would not be said nay , but let him say or do what he would , she would not leave him , but she still stayed by him till he had granted her suit . 

Examine thyself then narrowly by these signs likewise , and when thou hast done so , and findest thyself guilty in any , or all of these particulars , then confess thy sin unto the Lord , and beg the pardon of it at his hands , leave him not till he hath heard thee , and granted thee the request of thy lips , by saying unto thy soul , I am thy salvation ; and witnessing with thy spirit , that thou art his child by adoption and grace . And so as I have hitherto showed you some reasons , why he is accursed that love's not the Lord jesus Christ , aught to love him , and whereby thou mayst be incited and stirred up thereunto ; for as David said in another case , the Lord is worthy to be praised , so may I say , the Lord is worthy to be beloved , and that in many respects ; as 

First , because he hath all the glory and beauty in himself that ever thou sawest in any creature , it is in its full perfection in him ; whereas it is but in part in any creature , as the light is in its full lustre and strength in the Sun ; whereas the Stars and Planets have but a glimpse or beam of it , and than by participation , and not in itself , as in a fountain ; and therefore the Spouse in the Canticles saith , that he is all glorious , or that all glory is in him ; and this is the reason why some love him , and others love him not , because he hath manifested and revealed himself and his glory to some , and not to others , as unto Moses , Abraham , etc.  

Secondly , he is unchangeable , there 's no man but that thou shalt at some time or other , see that in him , which might make thee not to love him , but in God we cannot find any such matter , for he is jehovah , semper idem , yesterday , to day , etc. there 's no variableness nor shadow , etc.  

Thirdly , because he is Almighty , he can do whatsoever he will ; there is nothing impossible to him ; and as he is able to do all he will , so he will do all that he is able , so far forth as it may make for his own glory and thy good . 

But thou wilt say , why ? is this such a loadstone of love ? 

Yes verily that it is , for by his omnipotency are understood all the excellency and glory , all the grace and virtues that are in God.  

But thou wilt say , I have often offended him , will he then yet hear me , or accept of my love for all that ? 

Yes that he will , for he is gracious and merciful . 

O , but I have nothing in me , but am ready to offend him again . 

What if thou be , yet he is long suffering , so that he will not cast thee off , if so be thou wilt cleave to him ? 

O , but how shall I know that ? 

I answer , thou shalt know it by his word ; and that is truth itself ; search the Scriptures therefore , and there thou shalt hear him say as much in plain terms , he that cometh to me , I will in no wise etc.  

O , but my sins are such strange ones , as no bodies are . 

Suppose they were , yet his mercy is infinite , and far more than thy sins are , or can be : but yet that is not so as thou sayst , for there have been as great sinners as thou , whatsoever thou art , which yet nevertheless upon their faith and repentance , have been received into grace and favour again ; as were , Marry Magdalen , Peter , David , and divers others besides them . 

O , but for all that I am not worthy of his love , and it will be a disparagement for him to set his love upon such a one as I am . 

But what is that to thee ? if he think thee worthy ; as so he doth , for he sues unto thee , what needst thou stand upon that , why shouldst thou care for any more ? now this is all the dowry and duty he asks of thee , for what doth the Lord thy God require of thee , o Israel , but that thou love him* ? 

And moreover , besides this , consider that it is he that first gave thee this affection , that thou shouldst love him ; and that there 's none other on whom thou canst better bestow it , or who more deserves it at thy hands , than he doth . 

And finally , consider that thou hast engaged thyself unto him by vow in Baptism , so that as joshua said unto the Children of Israel , ye are witnesses against yourselves , that you have chosen the Lord , to serve him ; so are ye against yourselves , and every time that ye receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper , you renew your covenant ; so that if you love and serve not the Lord , you are so many times witnesses against yourselves . 

And here let us make some little stand to reckon up the several circumstances that do engage us to love him ; as , 

First , that he is our Lord , and hath bought us at a very high rate ; now if a condemned person , or a man taken by the Turks , should be repleeved or ransomed by another , we would all think it his duty that he should love him as long as he life's for it : and so stands the case with us , we all sat in darkness and in the shadow of death , and were taken Captive by Satan , at his pleasure ; and Christ hath redeemed us from that his more than Egyptian bondage , and that not with corruptible things , as silver or gold , but with his precious blood , as of a Lamb without , etc. and doth not he then deserve thy love ? canst thou deny him such a small thing as that is ? Again consider 

Secondly , what he hath done for thee , even from thy youth up , how he hath fed thee , forgiven thee thine offences , and paid the debt for thee , when thou wast ready to go to prison for it , so that now the Lord begins to grow angry with thee , if thou wilt not yet love him for all this ; and yet this is not all , and therefore 

Thirdly , consider also that he love's thee ; now as fire begets fire , so doth love beget love , therefore saith Saint john , we love him , because he loved us first ; that is , his love to us should make us love him again : but especially we cannot but love him , if we consider in the last place , 

Fourthly , what his love is , for its unspeakable , and passing knowledge ; we can never conceive the height and length etc.  All which , what should it teach us , but these two things ? 

First , that if we will not love the Lord , he will show his wrath , and make his power known upon us , that we are but vessels of wrath , fitted for destruction , as it is said . Again , 

Secondly , it should exhort us to love the Lord jesus Christ ; and therefore to provoke us thereunto , we should often consider , and think in these things , what right and title he hath to us , how much he hath done for us , and how greatly he love's : yea and more than all this , we shall thereby also have these and these things , we shall by this means reap these and these benefits . 

First , we shall have his spirit , the spirit of truth , the Comforter which shall lead us into all truth , and enable us to fulfil his Commandments , and with facility and ease , whereas else they would be grievous unto us ; as for example , Saint Paul would soon have been weary of preaching and suffering so much as he did , if he had not had this love in him ; and why do parents think nothing too much for their children , but because they love them ? therefore it is that though they be froward and untoward , yet still they bear with them : if then we cannot find in our hearts to be quiet , until they look to the Lord , like as the needle of a compass which is touched with a Loadstone , will never stand still till it comes to the North-pole ; then may this be a testimony unto us , that may distinguish us from Hypocrites , and witness to our souls that we love the Lord jesus Christ ; for they keep the Commandments of God in some sort , and abstain from some one kind of sin , but not out of love to him , nor in any obedience and conscience of his word , but in love to themselves . 

Secondly , this is a mark of thy Resurrection from the death of sin , to the life of righteousness , hereby shall ye knew that ye are translated from death to life , because ye love the brethren , now ye cannot love them , but you must love the Father that begot them . 

Thirdly , thou shalt get by this thy love to him , for when thou givest him thy heart , he will give it thee again , he will only alter the object , but let thee keep the affection still , only it shall be better than it was before , he will purify it from all its corruptions , and cleanse it from all its sins : Nor shall this be any thing out of thy way , it shall be as much for thy profit as ever it was before , for when thy heart is set to keep his Commandments , when it inclines to his statutes , ( as so he will incline it ) than whatsoever thou dost , it shall prospero : so that as it 's said of the Sabbath , that it was made for man ; that is , for man's good ; so may we say the same of all the rest of the Commandments , that it is made for man ; that is , for his good and benefit , and therefore the promise of life and happiness is made to all alike . 

And here by the way take this difference along with thee , to distinguish thy love from self love , for that is all for itself , but this is all for him whom thou lovest ; if then thou love the Lord for thine own good , it is self love , but if thou love him for himself , simply without any respect to the recompense of reward , then is it true love indeed . 

Fourthly , we shall receive much comfort by loving the Lord : now what is that keeps us from loving of him but our pleasures ? we are loath to part with them , and yet alas we shall receive much more , and they far more substantial , sollider , and sounder comfort by loving of him , than ever we should by loving of the world , or the things of the world . Now do but think how good a thing it is to love one that is but like thee ? much rather shouldst thou love one that died for thee ; wherefore if thou wouldst have thy heart filled with joy and comfort , love him ; for so thou shalt have joy unspeakable and glorious . And last of all , if thou wouldst indeed unfeignedly love the Lord jesus Christ ; consider , 

Fiftly , that it makes thee a more excellent man than thou wast before ; for every man is better or worse according to his love , as it is set on things better or worse ; now Christ is the Summum bonum , the chiefest good , and if thou love him , thou art united unto him , and to his Godhead , for love is of a uniting nature . 

thou wilt say , these are indeed good motives to make us to love him , but how shall I come by this love ? or by what means shall I get this love into my heart ? 

For answer whereunto , I tell thee , first of all , that if thou canst but unfeignedly desire to love him , thou hast half done this work already ; and that thou mayst have such a desire , meditate often upon those motives before . 

This is the answer Christ himself gave to his Disciples , when they asked him , how they should get faith ; why , saith he , if you have faith but as a grain of mustard feed , you should say to this mountain , be thou removed , and be thou thrown into the midst of the Sea , etc. thereby showing them the excellency of it , that so he might the more enamour them with the love of it , and make them desire it above all that they could imagine and think of besides , in comparison thereof : but if thou wouldst ( as thou sayst thou desirest to ) love the Lord jesus Christ indeed , with all thy heart , with all thy soul , and with etc.  I answer , and add again , thou canst not use a better means to attain thereunto , and get the love of him into thy heart then these . 

First , pray unto God for it , for all graces are his gifts , they are mere Donatives , and he hath promised to hear them that ask in his Son's name , and to give the spirit to them that ask it , that is , to give the gifts and graces thereof unto them ; nor is he any niggard , for he giveth liberally , and obraideth not . 

But thou wilt say , how doth prayer beget love ? 

I answer , it begets it two ways . 
First , by prevailing with God.  
Secondly , by familiarity with him . 
First , I say , by prevailing with God ; so did jaacob , and the woman of Canaan , for considering that he hath condescended to their request ; that he hath granted their suit , and heard their petition , and that in such a matter , as they are never able to make him any part of amends ; as the forgiveness of their sins ; why , then they think that to love him , is one of the least things they can do for him , so Mary Magdalen loved much , because much was forgiven her . 

Secondly , by familiarity with him , we have a saying , that nimium familiaritatis contemptum parit , that too much familiarity breeds contempt ; and however amongst some men it may sometimes fall out so , yet it 's seldom seen amongst those that are intimate friends indeed ; or say it should , yet I say , it never so comes to pass betwixt God and the faithful soul ; but by how much the more familiar and frequent they are together , by so much the more fervent and indissoluble is their love : and this is most certain , that a man that is a stranger may with thee well , but cannot truly love thee , till he be acquainted with thee ; so neither canst thou love the Lord as thou shouldst , so long as you are strangers one to another ; and what brings us and the Lord better acquainted together , then prayer ? wherein ( as it were ) thou talkest familiarly with God ; even as a man talketh with his friend face to face : this is the first means . 

Secondly , desire the Lord to show himself unto thee , as Moses did , for this is a strong motive and means to make thee love him ; therefore ( saith our Saviour to his Disciples that ) him* , which is , as if he had said , if you would know how you shall come to love me , or my father , it shall be by this way or means ; I will manifest myself unto you , I will show you my glory , and then you cannot choose but love me , though you loved me not before . 

Now the ordinary way and means whereby he reveals himself unto any one , is by the preaching of the word , which though it be but a dead letter in itself , yet when he puts life and spirit into it , and opens our hearts , as he did open Liddeahs' thereby , than we see and conceive his mercy and our own wretched vileness , whereupon we cannot but love him , knowing how he hath loved us , and gave himself for us : and therefore the Apostle prayeth , That the God of our Lord jesus Christ would give the Ephesians the spirit of knowledge , wisdom , and revelation , that the eyes of their understanding being enlightened , they may know what is the hope of his calling , and the riches of the glory of his inheritance in his Saints* ; as if he had said , if you know but these things , than there is no doubt to be made of it but that you will love him , as well as one would desire : for this is one sure ground why we love him not , or love him no better than we do , because we know him no better ; we are ignorant of him , and ignoti nulla cupido ( as it is said ) there is no love , no longing desire after that which we know not , or know not the worth and necessity of it : as a sick man hath no thought after the sovereign drugs in the Apothecary's shop , because he is ignorant of any such matter ; whereas the skilful Physician seeks out and sends for them : and as an ordinary rustic , cares not for a precious pearl , but casts it away when he finds it ; which if an expert Lapidary had it , he would set much by it , because he knows the price and worth of it well enough : and thence it is , that when the Prophet David had professed his love to God , saying , I will love thee o Lord my strength ; he afterwards adds ( as it were ) the reason or ground of that his love towards him ; because he bowed the Heavens and came down . what 's that ? why that he had made himself known unto him : he had declared his power and might in his deliverance , and that was it that made him love him ; if therefore thou wilt but desire ( I say ) to love him , he will inflame thy heart with the love of him ; yea he will open the Heavens , and thou shalt see him sitting on the right hand of God ; as Saint Steven did . 

But thou wilt say , all these are the works of God , and they extraordinary ones too ; but what must I do for my part , to have the love of God in my heart ? to which I answer . 

First , no ; it is no such extraordinary thing for God to reveal himself to his Saints ; it is an usual manner with him ; but yet , 

Secondly , thou must do these things thyself : First , thou must look how he hath revealed himself in the Scriptures , to be a most glorious and gracious God , a merciful Father in jesus Christ , slow to anger , and of much mercy ; and now when we perceive him to be such a one , we cannot but love him , and long after him with all our hearts . 

Secondly , we must consider our own misery ; this made Mary to seek after him , and were it not but that we stand in need of him , but that we know we are undone and damned without Christ , we should never care so much for him , for the whole have no need of the Physician , that is , they care not for his skill , nor his help ; but they that are sick , they that know their own wants and weaknesses , they know how to value and esteem of him : and so we , when we see we are wounded by sin , and sick unto death , then will we inquire and seek out for the spiritual Physician of our souls , Christ jesus . 

Thirdly , we must humble ourselves before him confessing our sins , and that in particular , as many as we can , by the omission of such and such good duties , and the commission of these and these sins : especially we must confess our beloved bosome-raigning sins ; so the Prodigal Son confessed , that he had sinned especially against Heaven , and before his father , by riotous living , whereby he was unworthy to be called his son , and did desire only to be as one of his hired servants : and now when he saw his father notwithstanding make him so welcome , who had so mean a conceit of himself , that he put a ring upon his finger , and shoes on his feet , etc. then he loved him much more : and so it is with Christ and us , when we are once out of love with ourselves , and yet perceive that he love's us , who are not worthy to be beloved , then that makes us love him again , and the more lowly we are in our own eyes , the more highly do we esteem Christ , and Christ us . 

Fourthly , and lastly , thou must first of all get faith , for as thy faith is stronger or weaker , so is thy love more or less ; if thou hast but a little faith , thou hast but a little love , for faith is the ground of love , as the promises are the ground of faith . Now so long as thou dost not believe that he hath satisfied the divine wrath and justice of God for thee , and that God hath accepted the atonement for thee in him , thou canst never love him as a brother or friend , but rather fear him as an enemy or Judge ; pray therefore with the Desciples , Lord increase our faith , and therefore ply the ministry of the word , one* ; else ( I say ) again , thou canst never truly love him , but as thou dost another man which thou knowest not whether he love thee again , or no ; and so thou mayst hate him again at some time or other for all that : but labour for faith , and that will breed love ; and than if thou love him he will surely love thee ; yea , indeed , thou couldst neither love nor believe in him , were it not but he love's thee first . 

But thou wilt say , how shall I know that ? I answer . 

It is the Apostle Saint johns' own words , or rather his words by that his Apostle ; we love him , because he loved us first . And besides his word ( though that were enough ) thou hast his seal , he hath given thee his Son , who hath given his life for thee , and shed his most precious blood for thy salvation ; and would he have done this for thee ( thinkest thou ) if he had not loved thee ? no , but herein is love , not that we loved God , but that God loved us , and sent his Son to die for us , us* ; and even yet by his spirit , he still sues unto us for our love , as a further testimony thereof . 

O but ( thou wilt say ) , I am not worthy of so great love , for I am a sinner , disobedient , and rebellious . 

But I answer , what dost thou tell him of that ? what if thou wert the chief of sinners ; he knew that before he gave thee his Son ; and he gave him unto thee the rather , because he knew thou wast so , for he justifies the ungodly ; that is , those that condemn and judge themselves to be so ; so that if thou wilt but believe in him , and embrace him , it is as much as he desire's of thee . 

But thou wilt say , it may be he is affected to this or that person , and not to me : to which I answer again . 

That his commission is general ; Go preach unto all nations , baptising them etc.  And so is his invitation too ; Come unto me all you that labour etc. so that if thou wilt but believe and come in unto him , thou shalt be saved ; for he casts out none that come in unto him ( as you heard before ) joh. 6. 37.  

And when thou hast considered this , then begin to argue and reason thus with thyself ; sith the promise is made to all , I know I am one of that number , and then thou wilt begin to love him for all thou art a sinner , yea thou wilt love him so much the more for that , to consider that for all that he loved thee . 

O but ( thou wilt say ) I see I sin daily and hourly , and that again and again , against many vows and promises , against many mercies and means of better obedience 

But I answer ; what though thou dost ? remember that as there 's a spring of sin and corruption in thee , so there 's a spring of mercy and compassion in God ; and that spring is set open for sin and for uncleanness , to wash and purge thee from the same , so that still ( I say ) if thou wilt but love and believe in him , he will love thee ; for notwithstanding all this , he still woes and sues unto thee for thy love , and therefore stand no longer out with him , but come in with all the speed thou canst make , which that thou mayst the better do , thou must remove these two hindrances out of the way Strangeness , 
Worldly mindedness . 


First , Strangeness ] for strangeness begets coldness of love , whereas familiarity ( as I told you ) procures boldness in the day of judgement . 

But ( thou wilt say ) how shall I come to be acquainted with God ? 

How ? why be much in his praise , in hearing of the word , and receiving of the Sacrament , there is a communion of Saints ( you know ) and so there 's a communion of God with the Saints ; let us therefore be careful to maintain this communion betwixt us ; by having recourse unto him in his ordinances , and seeking unto him for comfort in all our troubles and adversities . 

Secondly , Worldly mindedness ] that also begets coldness of affection , and want of love to the Lord Christ , and therefore he circumcises the heart ; that is , he puts off all carnal and worldly affections from it , that so thou mayst not love the world , nor the things of the world , but may love him with all the heart , and with all etc. for the love of the world is enmity with God , so that if any man love the world , the love of the father is not in him , for you cannot serve God and Mammon ; and therefore our Saviour saith , That we must not only forsake , but hate father , and mother , and wife , and children , and house , and lands for his sake and the Gospels ; or else we cannot be his Disciples : so did the Apostles , we have forsaken all and followed thee . wherefore let us not set these things too near our hearts , but considering what it is that keeps us asunder ; as vain hopes , worldly fears , fantastic pride , pleasures , profits , and the like , let us cashier them , and cast them from us ; for what are all these , and all such as these are ? but vain things that cannot profit in the evil day . 

And therefore as Samuel exhorts the people of Israel , Turn not aside from the Lord unto them , either to the right hand or to the left ; for they cannot profit , because they are vain . 

But ( thou wilt say ) will God then be content with any love ? 

I answer , no truly that he will not neither ; what then ? Answer . 

First , thou must love him withal thy strength , and with all thy power , with all the parts and faculties of soul and body . 

Now it may be thou art a Magistrate , a master of a family , a Minister , a Tutor , or any other governor , and then thou must do God more service than another private and inferior person ; thou mayst compel them that are under thee , to love the Lord by thy authority and example ; God looks for this ( I say ) at thy hands ; for to whom much is given , of them much shall be required ; thou art but as a servant sent to market , which must give an account for what he hath received , and the more money he hath given him to bestow and lay out , the more commodities his master looks he should bring home with him for it ; so the more wit or understanding , or learning , or knowledge , or authority , and power thou hast , the more love must thou bear unto Christ , and show it by thy bringing forth more fruits thereof unto him , than others that have none of all these opportunities , or not in so great a measure as thou hast , this is the first thing . 

Secondly , thou must love him above all things in the world besides , whether it be pleasure , or honour , or pride , or profit , or what else thou wilt , or canst name besides ; yea thou must love him above thyself and thine own salvation ; so that if his glory , and any , or all of these come in competition together , thou canst be content to be accursed for his sake , to have thy name razed out of the book of life , and to be Anathema for Christ ; then is thy love such as God will accept of , for this is that selfe-deniall which Christ himself speaks of , and calls for of us . 

But thou wilt say , durus est hic sermo , this is an hard saying , how shall I be able to do this ? to which I answer . 

thou shalt do it the better , by considering that he is better than all things , and that the whole world is not to be compared with him ; I count that all the afflictions of this life , are not worthy the glory that shall be revealed ( saith the Apostle ) and that made him endure such persecutions for the Gospel as he did , with joy and patience ; and so if thou be once come to that pass as to know and be persuaded in thy conscience , of the incomparable worth and excellency of Christ , thou wilt make more reckoning of him , then of all the world besides ; for as he himself said of himself , He that will not deny himself , and take up his cross , and follow me , is not worthy of me ; so he that love's any thing else above , or equal with Christ , is not worthy of him ; no , thou must be wholly his as he is , as he is wholly thine , and hath betrothed thee unto himself ; so that as a Virgin that hath betaken herself to an husband , must forsake all other , and cleave or keep her constantly unto him , so long as they both shall live ; so we , being married unto Christ , must not play the Harlot , and go a whoring after other Gods , but must be wholly his , as he is wholly thine . 

But thou wilt say , he is not wholly mine , for he is the Saints too . 

To which I answer ; he is indivisible , he is not divided , but is wholly thine as well as theirs , so than if thou wilt love the Lord Christ truly and purely , as he would thou shouldst , thou must love him so , as that all that is within thee be set upon him . 

But ( thou wilt say again yet further ) what , must we love nothing else but him then ? to which I answer . 

Yes that thou mayst , so as it be with a subordinate , and not with an adulterous love , as a woman may love another man besides her husband , but it must not be with such a love as she love's her husband withal , she may not love his bed ; it must be only with a neighbourly and civil , but not with a conjugal or matrimonial love , and so thou mayst love thy lands , thy life , thy friends , etc. but so as thou art ready to part with all for love of Christ : so that hereby shalt thou know whether thy love be an adulterous love or not , if when he bids us follow the duties of our callings , and we suffer ourselves to be drawn away by vain delights , and do not therein abide with God ( as the Apostle speaks ; ) that is , use it not to the glory of God , and the good of the Church and Commonwealth wherein we live ; and so for any other matter , if we cannot be content it should give place to Christ , then is our love unlawful and adulterous , yea if our lives lay upon it , if we do not yet prefer him before them , we are not worthy of him , we love ourselves more than him , it is no true love of Christ.  

But thou wilt say , this is impossible , that a man should thus love God more than himself , more than his soul . 

I answer , I deny not but that it may seem so to flesh and blood ; but yet thou must know , that to a man truly regenerate it is not so ; for ( as Saint Paul saith ) I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me : those things that to the eyes of carnal reason seem hard and difficult , to them that are spiritually enlightened , are facile and easy to be done , and so is this . 

Thirdly , If thou wouldst have thy love pleasing to God ; thou must have it grounded on him , and that requires two things . 

First , It must be grounded on faith in his promises , revealed unto thee in his word ; for without faith , it is impossible to please God , neither is it so much love , as presumption that hath not this foundation . 

Secondly , it must be grounded on his person , not on his prerogatives or privileges which thou shalt get thereby , for if we love him only for his Kingdom , and not for his person ( as we do when we cannot be content to suffer temptation and persecution for his sake ) than he cares not for thy love , because it is self love , and not love of the Lord jesus Christ , for than if it were , thou wouldst respect nothing else but him . 

Fourthly , thy love must be a diligent love , ready to reform any thing that is amiss in thee , or which may dislike him ; which whether it be so or no , thou mayst try it by these three marks or tokens following . 

First , it will cause thee to put on new apparel ; a woman that love's her husband , will attire herself according as she thinks it will please him best , and give him most content , especially when she is to be married unto him , than she will have a wedding garment that may set her forth , so as he may take the better liking in her : so thou , if thou hast put off the old man which is corrupt , according to the deceivable lusts of the flesh , and hast put on the new man , which after God is created in knowledge , righteousness , and true holiness ; if thou be clothed with the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness , and givest diligence thereunto , to make thy calling and election sure , then mayst thou be sure thou lovest him , and that he accepts of that thy love from thee . 

Secondly , It will open and enlarge thy heart towards him , so as thou wilt daily love him more and more , ( so saith the Apostle Saint Paul ) my heart is enlarged towards you o ye Corintheans ; it is not any scanty or niggardly kind of love that he will like of , but a full , free , and liberal one ; so that if thou canst not be content to be at some cost and charges for the maintenance of the Gospel , and the enjoyment of his love , thou lovest him not , or at least he regards not thy love whosoever thou art . 

Thirdly , it cleanseth thy heart , what is said of hope , is as true of love ; he that hath this love in him , purifies himself as he is pure , and of faith it purifies the heart , and so doth love ; therefore saith the Apostle again , ye were thus and thus , but ye are washed , but ye are sanctified , but ye are justified , etc. so that if you would not lose your labour , if you would have Christ accept of your love , and you would know that he doth so ; suffer not any sluttishness , any sin and filthiness to rest in your hearts , but sweep and cleanse them with the besom of repentance , from all such things . 

And so hitherto of the necessity of your loving the Lord jesus Christ , together with the means , motives , and marks thereof , and in all these , the equity and justice of God , how worthy he is to be accursed that love's him not ; now 

Secondly , follows the object of this our love , which is ( the Lord jesus Christ ) who may be considered three ways . as being our Lord , 
Saviour , 
Messiah . 


First , as our Lord ] to whom of due , we do own our love and obedience : now as he that runs away from his earthly Lord is worthy to be hanged for it , so he that runs away from the Lord Christ , and will not love and serve him , is most worthy to be accursed : but I have spoken of this sufficiently in the former part of our text , and therefore because I have been so large therein , I will now be more brief in this , and therefore so much for the first consideration we must love him also . 

Secondly , as our Saviour , or Jesus , and Redeemer , who hath bought and chosen us unto himself , a peculiar people , zealous of good works ; and therefore let us not defer it , for now are the last times , the end of all things is at hand , so that if ye do not love him now , it will be too late hereafter to do it , if we would never so fain , and its a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.  

Thirdly , he is the Messiah , the anointed of the Lord , the light that should come into the world , the high Priest of the new Covenant , ordained and consecrated of God to offer sacrifice for us , even a peace offering of his precious body and blood , to be a reconciliation for us unto the Father , and to set us at one again with him , who before were utter enemies one to the other , haters of God , and hated of him , therefore is he also called our peace , our Mediator , and Advocate , and the like : but yet he is not only made and appointed to be a Priest unto us , to reconcile us unto his Father ; but withal a King too , to rule over us and subdue us , if so be we will not be reconciled and come in unto him ; therefore these two words , Lord , and jesus , are here , ( and in divers other places elsewhere ) joined together . And so Saint Peter gives him two the like titles , saying that he is a Prince , and a Saviour ; not a Saviour only , but also a Prince to them that would not that he should reign over them . 

So that we must mark this then , we do not preach Christ in the Gospel a Saviour only , but a Prince , and a Lord also ; and they that love him must be content to take him as both , aswell a Lord and King , as a jesus and Saviour ; as a wife takes her husband , to honour and obey him aswell as to love him , or have him keep and cherish her in sickness and in health : and thus if we be content to take Christ upon these conditions , than we shall have him with all his influences , all the fruits and benefits of his passion : but otherwise thou hast no part nor portion therein , Christ shall profit thee nothing , but thou art and shalt be accursed to the death notwithstanding he died . 

It may be thou wilt say , thou carest not for that . 

But let me ask thee one question ; dost thou know what it is to be so accursed ? if thou dost , consider more seriously of it , if thou dost not , know it is this ; First , he curseth thy soul , and that in a double respect of Grace , 
Glory . 


First , he curseth it from the excellency of grace ; that is , from the effectual and powerful working of it , so that thou shalt be never the better , but rather the worse for all the means of grace and salvation ; and shalt go on in thine impenitency and hardness of heart , which cannot repent etc.  

But thou wilt still say , that 's nothing ; Is it not so , than 

Secondly , he curseth thee from his presence , in whose presence is the fullness of joys , and at whose right hand , etc. so he did Cain , the text saith , he went out from the presence of the Lord* , that he cast off all care of him ( as it were in this life ) so as let what would befall him , he would never pity , nor protect him . 

But it may be , thou wilt say , that is nothing neither . 

Is it not so ? is it not a great grief for a man to be confined to his house , so that he must never come to the Court , nor see the King's face any more ? much more grief than is it , and a far greater judgement must it be for any poor soul to be excluded from the presence of the King of Kings . And however ( for the present ) thou dost not now think it so much , yet the time will come thou shalt find it to be one of the most fearfullest things that can be ; when thou shalt behold Abraham , Isaac , and jacob in the Kingdom of God , and thou thyself out , to have thy portion with the Devil and his Angels ; and therefore the Schoolmen are not afraid to say , that the punishment of loss is greater than the punishment of sense . 

But thou wilt say , these are all spiritual things , we feel not these curses ; and so as we have no crosses nor curses in our outward man , our estates , our goods , and good name , we care not a straw for these , we neither feel nor fear them . 

To this therefore I answer , that you shall not escape so , but even in your outward man , in your body and goods shall you be cursed also , for the earth shall not yield her increase unto thee , but the Heavens shall be as brass , and the Earth as iron ; thou shalt sow much and reap little ; and thou shalt be a vagabond and a runagate upon the face of the earth all the days of thy life ; and whosoever meeteth thee shall slay thee , as the Lord also said to Caine.  

But thou wilt say yet again ; we see no such matter as I speak of , for you know them that love him as little as yourselves , and yet they thrive and do well enough , yea better than many other that love him a great deal better . 

To which I answer , it is true , it may be so , they may proser a while , but they shall be plagued at the last ; either here , or hereafter in hell fire for evermore . And now do but consider seriously of Eternity , what a lamentable thing it is , that when thou hast been there ten thousand times , ten thousand years , thou shalt yet be as far from ever coming out , or having of any end of thy torments as thou wast at the very first moment thou wentest thither : and therefore remember for this purpose these two places of Scripture , which here I desire thee to look and read with me ; the one is , where the wise man saith , that though a man live many days , and rejoice in them all , yet he shall remember the days of darkness , for they are many , and all that cometh is vanity* ; that is , all his delights shall have an end , but his damnation shall be eternal , it shall never have either ease or end . The other place is this ; where the Apostle , with such as thus despised the bountifulness , and patience , and long suffering , and forbearance of God , not knowing that his mercy , etc. he tells them that they did but treasure up wrath against the day of wrath , etc. for God will render unto every man according to his works , to them that through patience in well doing seek glory and honour etc. and to them that are contentious , and disobey the truth , and obey unrighteousness , tribulation , and anguish , and wrath , etc. that is , as if he should say , let men please themselves in sin as long as they list , yet they shall pay dear for it at the last upshot ; for , for all these things . God will bring them to judgement , and reward them according to their works , whether they be good or evil : so that however some drops of his mercy may light upon them here in this world , yet then the great deep of his judgements , and the vast gulf of his justice shall be broken up , and he shall rain upon them fire and brimstone , storm , and tempest , this shall be their portion to drink . 

This than may reach thee not to deceive thyself any longer , but to know for certain that he that will not now take the Lord Jesus , and love Christ whilst he is offered unto thee , shall undoubtedly be accursed , and that with such a curse as is here described ; for God will not have his Son mocked and derided by us , there is nothing that angers him more ; and therefore it 's said ( as I said before in the beginning ) kiss the Son lest he be angry . And let us not dream that it will be soon enough then to receive him when his wrath is once kindled : For if we will not take him now , than we shall not be able to do it , but shall be afraid to come in unto him , for than will his wrath burn like fire , and scoarch like a flame , and therefore Saint john saith , That his feet are of burning brass , and his eyes of flaming fire , as if from top to toe he were all on a raging flame . 

But thou wilt say ; what though I do not receive him now , I may receive him hereafter , before he be so thoroughly moved , and angry with me , as that he will not be pacified . 

To which I answer , indeed I cannot deny it , but that the time of this life is the time of grace , & offering of reconciliation , and that so long as there is life , there is hope ; but yet I tell thee withal , that there is a time set down and decreed of God , beyond which thou shalt not receive Christ ; for than it may be he hath sworn in his wrath thou etc. he doth never reject , till they reject him , and then when they will not embrace his offer but refuse him , it is just with God to refuse them ; so that afterwards though they would receive him , yet they shall not do it ; thus when the Jews had once rejected and refused his Son , than he left them ; and so when the Israelites refused the good land , than he refused them ; and swore in his wrath that they should never etc.  

And here , for a conclusion , let us note that the Gospel bringeth a swifter and severer curse than the Law doth ; so that ( as Saint Paul to the Hebrews hath it ) if he that despised Moses law died without mercy , under two or three witnesses , of how much soarer punishment shall he be thought worthy that trampleth under feet etc.  wherefore as it is there also said in that Epistle ; Whilst it is time , whilst he stands at the door and knocks , open unto him and receive him , even now whilst it 's called to day , harden not your hearts as in the provocation , etc. lest hereafter he swear in his wrath etc.  And so to say no more , consider what I have said , and the Lord give you understanding in all things . Amen . 

FINIS . 

November , 30. 1637.  Imprimatur 

THOUGH : WYKES . 



 Deut. 21. 23.   Gal. 3. 13.  Doct  Deut. 21. 23.  Gal. 3. 13.  Doct  Reas.   Mat. 22. 1. 2.   Psal. 2. 12.  Matth. 22. 37.  Object . Sol.   Numb . 5. 15.  Use . Quest.  Answ.   Act. 5. 41.   Act. 21. 13.  Object . Answ.   2 Sam. 14. 32.   Psal. 4.   1 joh. 4. 20.   Psal. 16.  Object . Sol.  Object . Sol.  Cant. 5.  1 Sam. 13.  james 1. 17.  Object . Object . Solu . Object . Sol.  Object . Sol.  joh. 6. 37.  Object . Sol.  Object . Sol.  Deut. 10. 12.  1 Pet. 1. 18. 19  Ephes. 3. 19  Rom. 9 22.  esay 58. 14.  Deut. 5. 33.  Quest.  Answ.  Quest.  Answ.  joh. 14. 21.  Ephes' 1. 17 , 18.  Psal. 18. 1.  ver . 9  Act. 7. 56.  Quest.  Answ.  Luke 15. 19  Psal. 4.  Rom. 10. 17.  Quest.  Ans.  1 joh. 4. 19  1 joh. 4. 10.  Object . Answ.  Object . Solu . Matth. 28. 19  Matth. 11. 28.  Object . Sol.  Quest.  Answ.  Deut. 30. 6.  Quest.  Answ.  Object . Sol.  Rom. 8. 18.  Host 2. 19  Object . Solu . Quest.  Ans.  1 Cor. 7. 24.  Object . Sol.  1 Thes. 1. 3.  1 joh. 3. 3  1 Cor. 6. 11.  1 pet . 4. 7.  Acts 5. 31.  Object . Sol.  Rom. ● . 5.  Object . Gen. 4. 16.  Object . Sol.  Object . Solu . Object . Sol.  Eccles. 11. 8.  Rom. 2. 7 , 8. 9  Psal. 11.  ● . Object . Sol.  Revel . 1. 14.  1● . Object . Sol.  Heb. 10. 28 , 29.  