A TREATISE OF LOVE . 

Written by JOHN ROGERS , Minister of God's Word in Dedham in Essex . 

God is Love , and he that dwelleth in Love dwelleth in God , and God in him , 

1 john 4. 16.  



This is the message that ye heard from the beginning , that ye love one another , 

1 john 3. 11.  



And this Commandment have we of him , that he that loveth God , should love his Brother also , 

1 john 4 21.  



LONDON , Printed by H. Lownes and R. Young , for N. Newberry , at the sign of the Star in Pope's head Alley . 1629.  

TO MY LOVING Neighbours of Dedham . 

Loving and good Neighbours , the doctrine of Faith being gone forth into the World , I thought it not amiss that the Daughter should attend upon her Mother : and therefore to put forth a Treatise of Love , to follow after Faith , as they were both handled in your hearing not very many years since . Now I desire that these things may live and speak unto you , when I shall be taken from you : In which two if you shall profit , you cannot but do well , God shall be much honoured , and I shall have my great desire . Now this of Love , I dedicate unto you , that as you have learned in some measure to love one another . so that you do it still , and increase more and more . I found you , by the care & diligence of my worthy Predecessor , in a peaceable state . Thus , through God's mercy , have you continued without rents or divisions , sidings or part taking , in peace and unity these three and twenty years of my abode with you : wherein both the head and body of the Congregation looking one way , much ill hath been hindered , and much good done and mainetained . And I hope so to leave you : yea , my heart's desire is , that you may live in peace , and godly love when I am gone , that as you have done , so you may draw altogether as one man So shall nothing be too hard for you , nor no force of wickedness be able to prevail against you ; As a bound Faggot cannot be broken , though the band loosed and sticks shattered asunder , becomes weak . As few or no suits of Law have been found amongst you , but differences either between yourselves agreed , or by indifferent Neighbours compounded ; so do still in the name of God. And as I have ever found you forward in good sort to any deed of Charity , wherein you have been moved , besides the good provision made for your own poor : so I beseech you to continue , that you may show forth the fruit of the Ministry of the Word so long , so long continued among you ; and other towns seeing your well-doing and good order , may be provoked by your example ▪ and so God may have much honour by you , and he take pleasure to dwell among you , and be the God of your Posterity after you , from one generation to another . Which I beseech him to grant for his mercies and his Christ his sake . 

And you that be young now ( which God be thanked give good hope ) if God let you live to stand up in your Predecessors rooms , see that you labour to quit yourselves as well as they have done ; and better will be required , as having more light every day , & their example to make use of . In which hope I take my leave , and commend you all heartily to the grace of God , remaining till death 

Yours in what service of Love I can , JOHN ROGERS . 

A TREATISE OF LOVE . 

CHAP. I  

Having finished the Doctrine of Faith , let me add a few things concerning Love , which were delivered from the same Text , 1 john 3. 23. in my ordinary course one after another . This is the commandment of God , that we believe in the Name of his Son jesus Christ , and love one another . Which , seeing the holy Ghost hath joined together , as two necessary & inseparable companions ; and that the duty of Love is of so necessary use in the course of our lives , I thought good to add some things hereof to the former Treatise . The holy Ghost having had occasion in Verse 22. of that Chapter , to speak of the keepers of God's commandments , who are the parties whose prayers God will hear ; now in this Verse , lest any should doubt and ask the question , But what be those commandments ? he therefore name's them , and oring them all to these two heads ; Faith in jesus Christ , and Love to our brethren : and these he exhorts unto , to believe in Christ jesus , and to love one another . 

Now , in that the Apostle hath reduced to two heads all the commandments of God and our duties , he hath mercifully provided for our weakness , and prevented those carnal excuses whereby most men cloak their ignorance and careless neglect of heavenly things : O , they be so dull to conceive , and the Scriptures so dark , and they have such ill memories , and the Scripture so large , as they can make no work of them ; which is Adam-like , to turn the fault from themselves upon God. As if they should say , If God had given us shorter and plainer Scripture , and better wits and memories , we would have done great matters . But this is but the wickedness and falsehood of their hearts : for they can find wit and memory enough for the world , their profits , pleasures , or lusts , and what they have a mind to ; and why should they not serve them for better things , if they would bend themselves thereto ? 

And God hath mercifully left us so much of his Word , as is necessary to salvation , clear and plain to every humble & teachable heart , that seeks help of God by prayer , and is willing to be ruled thereby . Yea , he hath gathered the whole into short sums ; As the whole Law and will of God , so large and scattered in the Scriptures , is referred to ten words , Deut. 10. 4. which are the ten commandments , delivered by God , Exod. 20. and these ten referred to two , Matth. 22. 40. and these two to one , Galat. 5. 14.  

So our whole direction concerning Prayer , is in that short platform called the Lords-prayer . So hath the Church of God since , out of the Apostles writings , gathered all the things we are to believe unto eternal life , into twelve Articles . So hath God provided in this lightsome , ( and in that respect ) blessed age of ours , abundance of good Books of the points and principles of our Religion , some more large , some more brief ; Catechisms for every bodies turn , that even the dullest , and of worst memory , may come to the knowledge of God , themselves , and their duties , and the things of salvation , if they be not shamefully careless . So that the ignorance of the people of this Land ( which yet is fearfully gross , and more than any think for , but they that try it ) is affected and wilful ; and therefore their condemnation will be ( as more fearful than of other Nations , so ) most just and inexcusable . it 's lamentable to see how the precious time is spent with many , in sinful courses and exercises ; with most , in eager pursuit of the world , the profits , honours , and pleasures thereof , as if they were the necessary things , and end of our being here ; when the means of the knowledge of God , and the things that concern our own happiness lie woefully neglected . Hath God after the long night of superstition , ignorance , and idolatry , that our Forefathers lay under , caused the day to arise , & the sun of Righteousness to shine so long upon us , and shall we yet love darkness and not light , be ignorant , and grope at noon day ? Hath God set us up with those precious means of grace and life , and given us our full scope in them , when he hath denied them to Nations twenty times as great as ourselves , and shall we make sleight of them ? O how many under the tyranny of Antichrist , that would skip at the crumbs that fall from our tables , would adventure their lives for the scraps and leave of such things as we cast under our feet ? They would and cannot ; we may and will not : may we not justly fear , lest God ere long snatch his Word from us , and bestow it upon them , that will make better use of it ? 

The Lord awaken the people of this Land , to know the day of their Visitation , and to understand the things that belong to their peace , before the decree come forth , and it be too late . 

Get knowledge and understanding , search the Scriptures , make use of such good helps as the time affords plentifully . Take our time : Say not , I am dull , I have a bad memory . God hath taken away these pretences : therefore they will not go for payment at that day . 

Next , observe , that Faith and Love are joined together as two inseparable companions : wheresoever one is , there is the other also , and miss one miss both . He that hath Faith , must needs have Love ; for Faith worketh by Love , Gal. 5.  Faith assuring us of God's love , to us , makes us love God again , and our neighbour for his sake , at his commandment , and for his Image that is in him . 

And wheresoever true Love is , there certainly Faith hath gone before ; these can be no more severed than sun and light , good tree and fruit . As for that , 1 Cor. 13.  If I had all Faith , and have no Love , I am a sounding brass , and tinkling cymbal : it 's to be understood of the greatest measure of the Faith of miracles , which indeed might be severed from that of Love , as in judas ; not meant of justifying Faith , of which before in the Treatise of Faith.  

This may be comfortable to many humble souls , that unfeignedly love God ( as appears by good signs ) that love his Word , Ordinances , and their Neighbours ; but Saints especially , and yet doubt whether they have any Faith or no : they may as well doubt whether the sun be risen , when they see the beams thereof shine in at their window . it 's impossible to have Love , till we have Faith wrought in us , which is the mother-grace ; as impossible , as to have good fruit without a tree for it to grow upon . 

2.  This on the contrary , witnesseth fearfully against the people of England , and the most part every where , that there is no Faith among them , seeing Love is so scarce and hard to be found . The manifold idle and malicious wilful suits in Law , the many contentions , brawling , railing , and fall out for trifles , do show there is but a little love . So much oppression , cruelty , extortion , bribery , simony , such racking and rending , every man for himself , not caring who sink , so he swim ; so much deceit in bargaining and dealings , in buy and selling , as one knows scarce whom to believe , every one spreads a net for his neighbour , to catch him if he can : such covetous pinching , neglect of giving where cause is , of free lending , by reason of usurious lending , and innumerable such courses as these , do cry out with a loud voice , that Love is but rare . Such neglect of duty to others souls , so few regarding to admonish , reprove , exhort , comfort , when , and where there is need , few able , fewer willing : Besides , so little love to the Saints and true servants of God. All these bear witness strongly , that Love is wanting ; and therefore , certainly , that there is no Faith : which where it is , cannot but show itself by true Love in the fruits thereof . Let men therefore , whosoever they be , keep silence concerning Faith , except they can prove it by their Love ; which while they live in the quite contraries thereto , they can never do . 

Next , whereas Faith and Love being joined together , yet Faith is set in the first place , note , that though in regard of time , they be wrought together in the soul , yet in order of nature , Faith goes first , uniting us to Christ , from whom are derived into us , Love , and all other graces . 

First , this confutes that Popish assertion , That Love informeth Faith , or gives a being unto it ; which cannot be , since Faith is before it . It declares and makes Faith manifest where it is , and proves the soundness and truth of it , but gives no form or being thereto . 

2 ▪ This showeth , that where Faith is not , there it 's impossible Love should be ; therefore an unbelieving man or woman , neither doth , nor can love God or their Neighbour : which is a fearful thing to be spoken , and yet most true : Therefore , Lord , how should it awaken such ( which are the greatest part ) to labour earnestly after this grace of Faith ! get this and get all ; and so on the contrary . 

3 Lastly , let none of those that are about the work of Faith , hold off , and say , If I could love God as I would , and my Neighbour as I should , than I could believe : Nay , rather know , that you must first believe , and then you shall be able to love God and your Neighbour . 

Object . But here some may object , that whereas the Apostle hath brought all our duties to these two , Faith in Christ , and Love to our Neighbour ; that this is defective , for as much as the Love of God , which is the chief of all , is left out . 

Answ. We are to know , that it 's not left out , but necessarily included in the love of our neighbour , from whence that doth proceed : for as he that loves God , cannot but love his neighbour , so no man can love his neighbour truly , in whom the love of God is not wrought , for whose Image , and at whose commandment he loveth him , 1 ▪ joh. 5. 2.  

CHAP. 2.  Of the Love of God.  

OF which love of God , seeing both it 's the principal , and that whereby we may know whether the love of our neighbour be in us , yea or no , which is the point we mainly intent in this Treatise ; I will therefore speak a little of the same . The love of God is a most precious and honourable esteeming and affecting of him , with a chief delight in him above all things . God is worthy to be loved unmeasurably , because he is infinitely and unmeasurably holy , pure , perfect , and good in himself . Also because he hath been unmeasurably good to us , especially in giving his Son to the death for us. john 3. 16.  So God loved , i e. so unmeasurably and unutterably , etc.  1 john 4. 9 , 10.  & Ephes. 3  To know the love of Christ , which passeth knowledge : But that we cannot ; therefore we must love him , as Deut. 6. 5. with all our heart , soul and might . But this we cannot neither , since the fall of Adam ; therefore we must love him with an upright heart , and this God will accept in Christ. We must love him simply and absolutely for himself , and all other things for him , in , and under him . We must not love him as we love other things , but above all other things in the world . Mat. 10. 37.  He that loveth father or mother more , etc. Nay , Luke 14. 26.  He that hate's not father , etc. that is , when they would withdraw us from God and his Obedience : therefore Deut. 13. 6. are we bidden , if any , never so near and dear , should entice us to Idolatry , we should reveal him , that he may be put to death . If we love him not above all things , he is not our God.  

And this we ought to do , first , because he is goodness itself , which is most worthy of all love , and wheresoever we see any part of this Image , it ought to draw our hearts unto it . Secondly , he hath created us after his own Image , redeemed us by his dear Son , preserved us always , and multiplied upon us , and daily reneweth innumerable mercies both for soul and body ; and do not these ( besides what he hath promised us hereafter ) challenge all our best affections ? 

Thus have the worthy servants of God done in their several generations . The holy Martyrs , who have forsaken all for his love , and counted meanly of their lives for his Names sake : yea , choose rather to endure the uttermost torturing , that cruel persecutors could inflict upon them , rather than do any thing to his dishonour . 

This condemneth all such as are so far from this love of God , as they are no better than haters of God : O , there be none so vile . Yes , we are all such by nature , till God work a change , Rom. 1. 30. and 8. 7.  The carnal mind is enmity against God ; for it 's not subject to the will of God , nor indeed can be . Saint Paul , Rom. 5.  Colos. 1 saith , we were enemies to God. 2 Chro. 19 2.  Wouldst thou love them that hate God : 1.  Ahab a wicked Idolater , and such as he ? so also in the end of the Second Commandment , see if God call not Idolaters , and such as pretend great love to him , and are at great cost and pains with him , haters of him . 

Such be all Atheists , Heretics , etc.  Papists be Idolaters , and great haters of God , persecuting also his Truth & Saints with fire and sword . Among ourselves be many abominable blasphemers , contemners of God and all goodness : The better any person , thing , speech , action , or duty is , the more they hate it ; and the worse any thing , or any company is , the better it pleaseth them . 

These be Satan's elder sons , marching in the Fore-ranke of the Devil's Band , to whom ( without rare Repentance ) belongs nothing but a fearful expectation of vengeance , and violent fire to devour such adversaries , Heb. 10. 27.  

It condemneth all such as love not God , which indeed are to be ranked with the former haters of God , save that they do it not in so high a degree . But most will say , they love God , or else it were pity of their lives , and they defy him , that shall say , they love not God : What , am I a dog ? Thus , if great words would carry it , every body would be lovers of God : but its deeds must prove it , not words . And the Holy Ghost hath left us certain and infallible marks , to know the love of God by , by which if you will be tried , let us briefly hear some of them , and judge yourselves accordingly . They that love God , hate evil , Psalm 97. 10.  They will keep God's commandments , joh. 14. 21. 1  john 5. 3.  

They that love God , would that all others did so , and draw as many to God as they can ; as Philip did Nathanael , john 1. 41.  Matthew the Publicans , Mat. 9 to our Saviour Christ. isay 2. 1. and rejoice to see any come home to God by Repentance , as the Angels of Heaven do . 

They will grieve , when they see him wronged or dishonoured ; as Moses , when he threw down the Tables ; and Phinees , when he ran through Zimri and Cozbi . Lot's righteous soul was vexed at the unclean conversation of the Sodomites . 

They that love God , will love his Word , being holy and pure as himself , and containing his good william  

They love his faithful Ministers : he that receiveth you , receiveth me , Luke 10.  

They will love God's Children and his Image , wheresoever they see it , 1 john 5. 1.  Psalm 16. 3.  

They will take pains in his service , as jacob did night and day in Laban's , for the love he bore to Rachel : and be at cost , as David towards the building of the Temple ; and Mary , with her box of precious ointment poured on our Saviour Christ. Yea , and speedily he will go about what God calls him to ; as Abraham that rose early to offer Isaac , and Hamor , who made speed to get the Shechemites to yield to the demands of Dinahs' brethren , because he so dearly loved her . 

They that love God , are willing and glad to meet him , or hear from him in the Ordinances of his Word , Prayer , Sacraments , as the wife desireth , and is glad to hear from her absent husband , and to send or receive tokens to him and from him . 

They that love God greatly , are content to suffer for his Names sake ; as Paul , that said , I am not ready to be bound , but to die at jerusalem for the Name of Christ. And that worthy Martyr , that said , Shall I die but once for my Saviour ? I could find in my heart to die a hundred times for him . 

Also they long for his last coming , for their full Redemption , and that they might be ever with the Lord , as 1 Thes. 4. 17.  As the Church , Reu. 22.  Come , Lord jesu , come quickly . Or else they long to be with him , in the mean time , as Paul , I desire to be dissolved , and to be with Christ , which is best of all . 

Now , if these be the true and certain marks of the Love of God , and where these be wanting , or much more , where the contraries to these be found , there is no love of God ; then must we necessarily conclude against the most part of people in all places , that there is little love of God abiding in them , as will appear , if we look over the particulars : which might strike terror into their hearts , if it were well considered . 

For those whose hearts by these marks can bear witness on their sides , let them labour to increase more and more in this love of God , and see what privileges God hath promised and bequeathed unto them . Psal. 91. the three last Verses , Because he hath loved me , therefore will I delever him , etc.  He shall call upon me , and I will hear him , I will be with him in trouble , I will be with him , and glorify him : With long life will I satisfy him , and show him my salvation . And john 14. 21.  He that loveth me , shall be loved of my Father , and I will love him , and show mine own self unto him . vers . 23.  Yea , these are they , to whom God hath promised his heavenly Kingdom . james 1. 12. to them that love him . 

Thirdly , it condemns those , that love any thing more than they love God ; as father , mother , wife , child , profit , pleasure , friend , yea , or life itself : which is no other than Idolatry , and to make that our God , which we love above God , and spiritual Adultery , as St. james calls it , james 4. 4. as a man that loves a harlot more than his own wife : yet what is more common than this ? yea , the trade of it with the common sort , who for the sake of the things above named , care not what duties they omit , or what sins they commit against God : who yet ought to be loved above all , and all things to be loved , in , and for him , and under him , and as may stand with our love to him , and not otherwise . 

Yea , the servants of God , because their love is not perfect , suffer many things to come in between God and us , and steal our heart and affection in part from him , and that obedience that we owe unto him : which we ought to bewail deeply , and labour every day more and more , that his love may be greater in us , than to any thing ; nay , all things else that are in the world besides . And so much of the Love of God briefly , having taken it but by the way . 

CHAP. 3.  Of Love to our Neighbour : and first , what it is . 

Now I come to handle the duty of Love to our Neighbour , as that which necessarily floweth from the Love of God. And of this , first , What it is : secondly , of the Notes it 's known by : thirdly , of the Properties of true Love : and fourthly , of the persons that we ought to love . 

1 Love is a sanctified affection of the heart , whereby whosoever is endued withal , endeavoureth to do all the good he can to all ; but especially , to them that be nearest unto him . 

1.  it 's an affection seated ( as we say ) in the heart , as all the other of hate , hope , fear , joy , grief , etc. as the understanding is in the head . These are in themselves good , and not evil , being given to Adam in his creation , in whom they were all pure , well ordered , and in good tune , loving the good , and hating the contrary , and so in the rest . But ever since the Fall , they are utterly corrupted : the will and affections have not only lost all their purity , but the will is become most rebellious , and all the affections disordered , and turned the contrary way : As this of Love , is turned to the love of evil , to malice , revenge , and self-love . 

2.  I say its a sanctified affection : for ere a man can love , he must be regenerate , & sanctiffed throughout ; as in his understanding and will , so in his affections : which is , when a man is united to Christ by Faith , he is sanctified by the Spirit ; that is , the old and cursed disposition that is in us by nature , is put away , and a new and contrary frame and disposition of soul , wherein we were at first created , is brought into us , the understanding enlightened , the will made pliant and frameable to the will of God , and so the affections purged and restored to their former integrity in some measure ; as to hate the evil , so to love the good , to love God and our brethren for God's cause . 

So that no unregenerate or unsanctified man , can love either God , himself , or any body else . True Love proceeds from a pure heart , good conscience , & faith unfeigned , 1 Tim. 1. 5. from a soul purified by the spirit , 1 Pet. 1. 22.  And Gal. 5. it 's reckoned among the fruits of the spirit . And 2 Pet. 1. 7. its reckoned among other graces , Faith , Temperance , Patience , Godliness , etc. so that one is no more in us naturally , than the rest . 

There be many things that the blind world call Love , which are not this grace that we speak of , nor come in any such account with God. That between the fornicator and his harlot , is no love but lust ; as in Amnon , which turned as soon into hatred . Between drunkards and thieves , is no love , but conspiracy : for Love rejoiceth not in iniquity , but in the truth : that is , in that that is good . 

Nor that natural love of parents to their children . This is in bruit creatures : the Cow loves , nourisheth , and defendeth her Calf ; the Goose and Gander tend and brood their young . 

Nor that civil love that is between ordinary people in the world , that stands only in eating and drinking , prating and playing together , which they count such love and good fellowship , as who so speaks against , and calls for better spending of the time , is cried out upon , as an enemy to all love , and not to be suffered . But our Saviour Christ , nor the Gospel , comes not to bring such friendship , but rather debate . Such as that , was among the Heathen , and is only carnal , whereas true love respecteth the soul , and that most of all ; which is no whit seen , nor thought of among carnal men . 

Unregenerate men cannot love their neighbours ; for while they be kind to their bodies , and have no care of their souls , is this worthy to be called Love ? it 's as ones friend or child should have a hurt in the brain , and another in the heel , and he should carefully look to the heel , and let the brain putrify . 

Carnal Parents , that pamper their children's bodies , and prank them up brave , and lay for great portions for them , and suffer their souls to welter in sin , and die and perish for want of instruction , admonition , prayer , and holy example , is this to be called Love ? what do they more than Turkish Parents ? 

The wicked Magistrate , that is very friendly to all the Country , and keeps a good house all the year , and yet suffers sin to reign , and houses of disorder to abound in his circuit , the Sabbaths to be profaned , and , like Gallio , cares for none of those things , call you this Love ? 

The negligent Minister , that sets on the great Pot , and keeps good Hospitality among his neighbours , and yet suffers their souls to famish for want of breaking to them the Bread of life . The carnal neighbour , that to the body of his neighbour is very kind , but suffers sin to rest upon his soul , and rather nourisheth him therein , than rebuketh him thereof ; this in the language of the holy Ghost , is hatred and no love , Levit. 19 17.  

And what hold is there of unsanctified men's love one to another ? They may be very inward , and great friends now , and on the sudden , upon a small occasion , fall out , and become deadly enemies . They oft go arm in arm to the Alehouse or Tavern , embracing each other , and stab one another ere they come forth . 

See a lively picture of this , judges 9 in that sworn friendship that was between Abimelech , and the House of Shechem , who yet came shortly to hate each other so , as they never lin , till they had wrought ▪ each others , destruction . And no marvel ; for even the Heathen could say , That true friendship was grounded only upon virtue . 

Neither can unregenerate men ( much less ) love the children of God : For there is a natural enmity between the seed of the Woman , and the seed of the Serpent , which all are , till they be regenerate ; nor can any man love grace in another , till he be sanctified , and gracious himself . 

They may be convinced in conscience , that they be the good servants of God , and better than themselves , as Saul was of David , Herod of john Baptist , Pilate of our Saviour Christ , pronouncing him Iust.  

They may be restrained from hurting them , as Laban and Esau from hurting jacob , one in his hot pursuit of him , the other in his meeting him with four hundred men . If a man's ways please God , he will make his enemies at peace with him , Proverbs 16.  

As Daniel was preserved safe among the Lions , and the three Children took no hurt in the fire . 

Nay , they may do them good , as Cyrus did the jews , restoring them to their land and liberty , and furnishing them with all necessaries to the building the City and Temple of jerusalem . 

Ahashuerosh also and Artashashte to Ezra and Nehemiah , and by them to the people of God. But they do it , as Caiaphas , that uttered that pprophecy , not of himself , but as he was high Priest that year . So these are used of God to such purposes : As the Ravens that brought Elias bread and pottage in the morning , and again at even . 

But love them they cannot , at least , not for their godliness sake . They may do a man outwardly some good , & 't is not amiss to take it , yet it 's not good to be too much beholding to them . 

And what hold is there of their good will ? If they cry Hosanna now , they may cry Crucify him by and by . If as Acts 14. 18  ▪ 19 they so highly esteem us , as to be ready to deify us , yet by and by , upon a lying report , they will be ready to stone us. As Herod reverenced john Baptist , and yet at the persuasion of Herodias , cut off his head . 

David saith , it was his familiar , that ate bread with him , and took counsel with him , that yet lift up his heel against him , Psal. ● . 1. 9  They are gone , and hide their heads . If the multitude go the other way , or the times begin to turn any thing dangerous ▪ when they have most need of them they are gone . Nay , no bond of benefits bestowed , no nor of nature itself , is strong enough to bind such a man sure to the child of God. Our Saviour Christ made judas his Disciple , an Apostle , of his own Family , Table , and Mess , made him his Purse-bearer , and yet how ▪ villainously did he betray him into the hands of his utterest enemy ? jehoiada preserved the life ▪ of joash ▪ when all his brethren were slain , h●lp him to the Kingdom , and was a ▪ guide to him as long as he lived with him ; yet how ungratefully and wrongfully did he cause his good son Zechariah , a Prophet , to be put to death ? 

And for the bonds of nature never so near , our Saviour Christ foretold that which experience hath proved often true , Matth. 10. 21.  That the brother shall betray the brother , father the son , and children shall rise up against their parents , to get them put to death . There is no hold of any unregenerate man , but ▪ he may prove a persecutor ; therefore what 〈◊〉 to be given to his love ? 

Use . This shows the miserable state of unregenerate men , that they can neither love God , themselves , nor any body else , while they are in this case : what should such a man do in the world ? One would think it should make him weary of himself . If he would consider , and believe it , so it would . O beg of God , by his blessed Word and holy Spirit , to work a mighty work of change in your hearts , and to sanctify you throughout , that from hence you may be able to love God , your own selves , and others in a right manner ; till which time , you cannot so much as love your own wife and children , as you ought to do . 

2.  It teacheth also God's people , not to trust too much to such men and their love : live peaceably with them , use them kindly , accept kindness from them , but open not ourselves too far to them , lean not too much on them , lest they prove like Egypt , a broken reed , that will run into our hand , and they prove like a sliding foot and a broken tooth . For if they be penned , they will burst : They are like a jade , that will draw while its going , but is not sure . If the time alter , there is no hold , but he may betray thee : As Pilate , who knew our Saviour Christ to be innocent , and that all was wrongfully and of malice that was done against him , and he sought many ways to rid his hands of him , and to save his life , yet when they urged him , that he was not Caesar's friend , if he let him go , than he passed sentence of death against him . 

Object . But some will say , I am not of your mind , I will trust my honest neighbour before these runners to Sermons , none will sooner deceive one than they . I know one that came from a Sermon , and went and hired his neighbour's house over his head . 

Answ. I deny not but as ever there have been , so now be some , that make a show of godliness , and deny the power of it : and then the world is no wiser , than to judge and say so of all professors ; which is a most fowl wrong , and a false thing . For there are to be found , that dare not deal unfaithfully , but say as joseph , How should I do this wickedness , and sin against God ? they have the Spirit of God within them , and the fear of God in their hearts to bridle them , which the carnal person hath not , nor any thing that one may warrant will tie and hold him . And this even the men of the world know : for they will put the matters of greatest trust into their hands . I have known a very carnal Master , that having diverse ruffianly servants that he delighted in , and a couple of sober Christian men ; and to these he committed his keys , and matters wherein greatest faithfulness was required , which ▪ yet he heartily affected not , but they were fit to serve his turn . So in matters of Arbitrement , they will put their case to such as be of best report for godliness in the Country , persuading themselves , that they will deal uprightly and with a good conscience . And the truth is , he is not worthy the name of a Christian , and its pity of his life , that will not do better than any carnal man in the world . 

It followeth in the description of love , whereby whosoever is endued therewith : for it 's not to be found in every bush , but its rare ; and he that hath it , hath received it from the Father of lights , and its a gift of God's Spirit . Look for it therefore from above . 

endeavoureth to do , etc.  So that howsoever love is in the heart , yet it lies not still , nor sits idle , but is working ▪ like the good huswife , Prou. 3. 1. both by words and deeds , to soul and body : therefore that love ▪ that is all within in the heart , and none in the hand and life , is a dead love , a carcase , like the dead Faith that St. james speaks of , that is without works , and like bad men's love to God , which is without obedience to his commandments . 

endeavoureth to do , etc.  Puts forth itself , and doth what it can , though not what it would , creeps where it cannot go ▪ wishes it could , grieves that it cannot , gives two mites , a cup of water , etc.  

And indeed , what we do here is rather endeavour , than any ▪ great matter that wre attain to , especially at the first . And a true endeavour with increase , God accepts , Host 6. 3. CITIZEN  Cor. 28. 7.  

It commands all the powers and abilities of the soul , to further the good of the Beloved , to whom it wishes all good : therefore the eye sees , the tongue speaks , the foot walks for the good and benefit of the party beloved : Why Love will have it so . The memory is a faithful remembrancer , the mind plods and counsels , the affections pursue all purposes and occasions for his help , all other things neglected , Why Love will have it so . Nay , patience is enjoined to bear all the wrong that such one doth , compassion must pity all the wants that such one hath , humility and modesty give way to any thing that he requireth . Why Love will have it so . Love is like the great wheel of the clock , all are turned about when that stirs : it sets on work all the other graces in the soul to their several works . 

[ To do good . ] So that love doth no hurt , its contrary to its nature ; whatsoever hurt is done to souls , bodies , goods , names , Love may wash her hands of it , as none of her doing ; but whatsoever good is done , that is of her . 

[ To do good . ] Love contents not itself to do no evil , but labours to do good : the harmless , yet unfruitful figtree was accursed . Such only as have done good , will stand on the right hand at the last day . 

[ To all . ] For though brotherly kindness be to the Saints , yet Love , 2 Pet. 1. 7. reaches to all , near and far off , strangers , enemies , within , and without the Pale of the Church , Turks and Pagans' , we must pray for them , & do them any good if they come in our way , as the Samaritan did to the jew fallen among thieves , Luke 10.  

[ But especially to them that be nearest . ] So God gives leave , nay commandment , that love begin at ourselves and ours , & so proceed . First , seek our own salvation , than others ; our own bodily preservation from danger , then others . First , begin with our own family , 1 Tim. 5. 8. then to our kindred , 1 Tim. 5. 4. then to our own Town , then to strangers , as far as we can , and God requires no more . 

If any therefore , having good gifts , resort to other folk's houses to repeat Sermons , and never do any such duty among their own company ( which I have heard of some ) these are justly to be suspected of pride and hypocrisy . 

They also , that in outward things prefer strangers before their own kindred , and kinsmen before children , do not well . To bestow upon Copesmates that please them , or spend on lewd companions , or be surety for them or any other , to the hindrance or undoing of wife and family , is not Love , but folly and cruelty . 

[ Nearest also in the spiritual bond . ] For we must especially love the household of Faith , Gal. 6. 10.  

Quest. Whether should we love our natural or spiritual kindred best ? 

Answ. no doubt , the Saints before our natural kindred , that be but carnal , as our Saviour Christ did , Who is my brother ? He that doth the will of God , he is my brother , sister , and mother : yet we must help our kindred , whom God's Word bindeth us to provide for , as children and parents in their necessity , though not godly , before the Saints , if both be in equal need together , because these be most specially committed to our care . As a rich bad man , and a godly poor man be at our house together , I must love the godly best , and he must have the highest room in my heart , but yet I may and must set the ungodly rich man highest at my table , because God is the author of degrees among men , and so the author of order , not of confusion . So is it in the other case of my natural and spiritual kindred . 

This is the virtue so oft commanded , and so highly commended in the holy Scriptures ; commanded , Rom. 12. 10.  & 13. 8. commended , Col. 3. 14. called the bond of perfectness . It binds up all the duties that we owe to our neighbour , which are many ; holds them together , as the band doth the Fagot-stickes . It makes every duty easy ; as where this is not , every duty is irksome , nothing comes well off hand . It ties societies together and families . it 's the strength of Kingdoms , Cities , Corporations , and Villages : O how it keeps out evil , and sets up good ; by it small things have proved great , and for want of it , great things have come to nothing . 

In a Town , when chief men hold together , what evil can stand against them ? what good may they not effect ? As on the contrary , when some would pull down houses of misrule , and others , to cross them , and out of spleen to them , shall strive to uphold them : when some would bring in the Ministry of the Word , and others oppose it , how must not the Devil needs have his throne in such a place ? 

In a Family , when husband and wife both draw the right way , God's worship goes up in that house , children and servants be well governed , the outward state prospers . But when they be divided and disagree , prayers be interrupted , no good can get forward : when one would go to the Sermon , the other is against it ; one would govern the children , the other cockers them , nothing can do well : for the band is broken that should hold all together , and make all strong . Even servants that agree not , nay , horses if they draw not together , the work cannot get forward . 

2 it 's the fulfilling of the Law , Rom. 13. 8.  Gal. 5. 13 , 14.  

3 it 's a very comely thing in the eyes of God and men , only hateful to the Devil , to whose Kingdom this is a great enemy . it 's very precious , and of most fragrant smell : Also is very fruitful in all good wheresoever it is , as appears , Psal. 133. the whole Psalm . 

4 Love is the beneficial virtue ; other virtue's benefit ourselves , but this doth good to others . Faith draws all from Christ to us. Love lays out all it hath for others good : as the Sun that shines forth his light to others , having it for that end , and not for itself . Faith is like the bung of the barrel , that takes in the beer or wine ; Love is like the tap , that let's it forth , to the benefit of them that need . If a man be never so full of knowledge and other good gifts , and have not this tap , others may starve for all that ; and he himself is but a sounding brass , and a tinkling cymbal . We are not born for ourselves , nor our Talents given us to hide : but the perfection of all our gifts , spiritual and temporal , is the well employment of them for the good of others . The useful man , is the happy man , that keeps the best house , and most drink of his cup , especially in spiritual things . 

5 This is the virtue that makes us most like to God ; for he is love , and continually exercised in doing good to all , even to the ends of the world : yea , to his enemies , though specially to his children , to souls , to bodies , and every way , and he is not weary to do good , even to such unworthy ones as we are . So that when we be full of love ; giving here , lending there , forgiving this wrong , and passing by that injury , requiting good for ill hath been done to us , when we be instructing , counselling , admonishing , comforting , praying for any that need , we are like unto God in our measure , and like to our Lord jesus Christ , who went about doing good , Acts 10. 38.  So must we walk in love , Ephes. 5. 2.  Love must be our continual walk , and we must never be out of it : for than we are out of our way . All our ways and works towards our brethren , must be in love , and savour of love . All our life must breathe love : as when we come in heaven , it shall be the common air we shall breathe and draw in . So that what is love , but the life and soul of the world , and that , without which all things else are nothing ? 1 Cor. 13.  

O that I could so paint out the face of this lovely Virtue , and set it before you , that every soul that sees it , may fall into a deep love and liking therewithal ▪ 

But alas , how lamentable a thing is it , that so excellent and necessary a virtue , should be so scarce and rare to be found among men as it is , and that in these days of the Gospel , and when the God of peace and love dwells amongst us , whose people we profess ourselves to be ! Alas , it 's as it were banished out of the earth , and departed from the sons of men , and found but at a few hands , and there but scantly . But pride and contention , oppression , deceit , malice and revenge , and all contraries to love , have taken possession of all places , of most hearts : yea , even among true Christians what cold affection , what hollowness , strangeness , hard surmises , readiness to fall out for trifles ? little power to forgive & to pass by wrongs , to overcome evil with good , which yet God doth to us every day . it 's easy to hear , read , and pray ; let 's show the fruit of them in love . 

O let us every one suffer ourselves to be provoked , yea , and overcome in this , that we labour to be possessed of this grace of Love , in whom it hath not hitherto taken place : and they , in whom it 's begun , that they would increase in it more , as 1 ▪ These ▪ 4. 10.  Hereby it shall appear , that we regard God's commandment , we shall do much good , and strengthen the places where we live ▪ 

We shall know we are not of the Devil , but of God , 1 john 3. 10. and shall be like unto him ; & what should we desire so much , as to represent our Maker , and to have his Image shining forth in us ? 

And the more love God hath showed to us , the more let us show to others ; the more he hath given us of temporal or spiritual gifts , give the more to our brethren , Freely ye have received , freely give . The more God hath forgiven us , the more let us forgive others , the more patient and slow to wrath he hath been with us , the more patience see we show towards our brethren . And here with let us stay ourselves , when we find readiness to be provoked , or to renenge ; and think it a most unreasonable thing , that God forgiving us a thousand talents , we should catch and hold our neighbour by the throat for an hundred pence . If this grace of Love be in us and abound , we shall honour God much , and our holy profession , get a good report , and much love in the Church of God , and further our own account against that day , and provide for the increase of our glory in the Kingdom of Heaven . 

CHAP. 4.  Of the Notes , whereby love to our Neighbour may be known . 

Now to this end , that none may deceive themselves , but may try whether they have in them this grace of Love or no , or in what measure , I will set down some of the chief acts , effects , or fruits of it , as notes whereby it may well be known , as a tree by the fruits . 

1.  Love is not lefthanded , but interprets , and takes things at the best . As it commends what is plainly good , so it interprets favourably what is doubtful , until it know the contrary ; speeches , or actions of men , towards ourselves or others , if they may be well taken , it will not take them ill . As the mother , when the child cries , saith a pin pricks it , it hath the fret , or breeds teeth , she is loath to say , it 's nothing but frowardness , and so to chide or fight . When Joseph's brethren , out of malice , had fold him into Egypt , and afterwards were afraid he would remember it , what construction makes he of it ? God sent me hither aforehand to provide for you . As our Saviour Christ did , when his Disciples were so sleepy in the garden : though he mildly rebukes them for it , yet he favourably helps it , saying , The spirit is willing , but the flesh is weak . 

Yea , if a thing be plainly evil yet Love will make it no worse than it is . It will not say , it was done deliberately , and of set purpose , when it was done rashly ; maliciously , when it was done weakly only , and in temptation . For one may do injury to a bad action , and its better to think and speak a little better of it , than worse than it is . Always provided , this be understood , not of palpable , notorious fowl evils , nor of continued courses in sinning ; for what good or charitable construction can be made of these ? When such therefore be plainly reproved , and told their danger , and they cry out , O you may not judge : Why , what can Charity itself judge , but that you are of the Devil , and in the state of damnation for the present , and without sound Repentance for ever ? it 's therefore no property of Love , but a fowl fault , and a sign of a corrupt conscience to extenuate and blanche fowl sins in bad persons . 

2.  It will depart from his own right , rather than break peace ; as our Saviour Christ , Matthew 17. 27.  Abraham to Lot ▪ Gen. 13. 9  If thou wilt take the left hand , I will take , etc.  As it will give way in conference to one that is stiff , though one know he hath the truth , so it be in small matters : After offences , it will soon yield and seek reconciliation , though it were meet the other should seek to him . It stands not upon terms : it will lay down the bucklers , go on the lower ground , yield the way or the wall to those , that it were meet should yield it to him . For why ? it more prizeth and esteemeth Love , than small matters . 

3 It doth no hurt , it 's against the nature of it so to do , neither in life , chastity of our neighbour , goods , or good name . See this in the two chief patterns of Love : in God towards his , and parents towards their children , who do nor can do them no hurt , at least , parents , in their conceit . 

4 It seeks not her own things , but others as well , as is commanded , 1 Cor. 10. 24.  

5 It provoketh nor exasperateth not , but strives rather to please , as far as it may with good conscience : As we see in a loving mother toward her child , so also in whomsoever it is truly found . 

6 it 's not easily provoked , 1 Cor. 13. 5. but forbears , forgives , puts up , etc. which is well seen in God , and a natural mother with her unquiet child . 

It will cover natural infirmities , such things as be little weaknesses in our brethren , yet not done of set purpose , nor growing into extremities , but only natural defects . As some be a little too quick , some a little too slow , some see a fault , and be a little too ready to speak , others somewhat too slow to speak , or reprove a fault . Some be a little too fine , some a little too homely and plain ; if they were not all so much on either hand , it were better . Some be somewhat too earnest in their business , if it were not altogether so much , it were better ; yet not much amiss , and it 's their nature , who be yet very gracious : Some be a little too negligent , some be a little too merry , some a little too solemn : these and such like Love will cover , or else nothing . Love will not standupon them , rebuke or reproach them , or deal hardly with them for these , but wisely bear with them , and in love cure them , if it can . 

As for example : a wife , a godly woman , good housewife , loving & dutiful in good measure , but somewhat cursed , and quick of speech , or not so cleanly as were to be desired ; a good husband in love will bear with these , and be thankful for the main that he finds in her . 

So a woman hath a husband , good in all the substantial points of the husband's duty , but he is somewhat too glum , not so affable and cheerly as might be , or whose nature will not suffer him to use such complement● to his wife , as some can do with facility ; Love will reach her to bear with this . A servant is very trusty , religious , and careful to please , only somewhat slow ; the Master or Mistress must not rebuke him too oft , too openly , too sharply for it , as a thing they can hardly remedy : no perfection to be expected in any . If you can cure it by a loving and private admonishion sometimes , do . 

So a Neighbour confers with his Neighbour , and he is a little too quick and harsh : but love will not see it , but considers it as a natural infirmity ; therefore will not exasperate him , or be put out of patience by him , answering him tartly again , but passeth it by , and goeth on in kind and friendly manner . 

Love will also cover and put up wrongs done unto it , not seeing small ones , passing by somewhat greater ; as considering he himself is a man , and so subject to offend his Neighbour , and so may stand in need of his pardon . As also that he offends God daily , and would be glad to obtain pardon ; therefore he must pardon his Neighbour , or else can have small hope or boldness to come before him for mercy ; and this often , yea unto seventie times seven times . 

If they be greater matters , yet Love will easily accept of indifferent conditions of agreement . If they be so great as they so endanger our name and estate as they are not to be passed by , than its lawful to flee to the Magistrate , and take the benefit of Law ; yet so , as Love will teach the party to lay away malice , and to forgive the revenge . And in going to Law , these two Caveats must be observed : First , that it be not for trifles . These should rather be forgiven , 1 Cor. 6. 7.  Why rather suffer ye not wrong ? Secondly , that it be the last Remedy , when all other ways of more peaceable agreement have been tried . It must be as the cutting off a member , when it cannot be healed otherwise . 

Hitherto belongs also that Love will teach us to hide and cover folk's faults from the world , except we have a cause and calling to speak thereof , but rather of their virtues . 

7.  Lastly , Love is bountiful , beneficial , and helpefull , not keeping what it hath to itself , but ready to distribute and communicate to the good of others , whether spiritual or temporal gifts . Spiritual ; for love begins at the soul , and doth good to that first , of children , servants , neighbours . It will communicate any gift it hath to them that need it , taking to heart their spiritual wants , instructing the ignorant , counselling the doubtful , comforting the afflicted , admonishing them that be out of the way , exhorting them that begin to faint or stagger in the way , & praying for all . 

So for outward things , it will cause men to give to the poorest that are to be holp by Alms , as they be able : and lend freely to them that be a degree above the poorest , which having a Trade , and skill and will to follow it , yet want stock to employ themselves and their company . These a man is as much bound in conscience to lend unto , according to their ability and honesty to pay again , as to give a piece of bread or a penny to a poor miserable Creature , Mat. 5. 42.  Deut. 15. 8.  By this shore , many a reeling house hath been kept from falling flat to the ground . By this help , many have lived handsomely , and brought up their families , that else must have come to uttermost misery . 

To the wealth that have no need of us , yet to be neighbourly and friendly , in lending or exchanging Courtesies with them ! To invite them sometimes to us , & to go to them being invited : And in their sickness or heaviness to visit them ▪ and comfort them in the best manner we can . 

Use . Now seeing Love is such a thing , and that these be the fruits of it , If we look abroad among men , we shall be forced to say there is but little love in the world : for , where be these Properties spoken of , to be found ? as may appear in going over them . 

1.  Who takes not things in the worst part , hardly construing men's words and actions ; doubtful ones , it may be not bad , taking them to be evil ; those that be bad , making them worse ? Thus the jews misinterpreted our Saviour Christ , john 2.  Destroy this Temple , etc. which afterwards cost him his life . 1.  Chro. 19 3.  How was David's good and loving Action towards Hanun wickedly misconstrued ? which cost the lives of many thousands . Old Eli offended in this , 1 Sam. 1. 14. judging Hannah drunk , because she prayed , and her voice not heard . What more common than to say , Men do that they do to be seen , and to win credit , when yet they do it sincerely , and to please God ? Or , having invited one to our house , and he comes not , to think or say he doth it out of some spleen , or want of good william Many a time in a year are we forced to recant , and with shame say , I thought it had been worse meant than now I see it was . This is the cause of innumerable contentions and breaches among men . 

2.  For departing from men's right , who doth it , but stand out stiffly to the utmost ? This is an usual speech , It is my right , and I will have it . I ask no more but my right , and that I will not lose . This is thought but reasonable , and he is thought an honest man that will have but his right . But it 's an ill speech and resolution , whether it be in conference : If a man know he hath the truth , though it be but in small matters , yet he will hold it out , though the other be never so peremptory , till they fall flat out , whereas in small truths its better to give in ; Or in dealings , covenants , bargains , bonds , men will have their right : and yet herein extreme right may be extreme wrong . 

Always provided , that we give not away other folks right , especially Gods. Moses would not yeed a hoof , Exod. 10. 9 , yet most men , stiff in their own , will yield enough of God's right , can cut large thongs out of that . They will not let their servants play one hour on the six days , yet can let them play on the seventh what they william So are sins against the first Table made small account of , in comparison of the breaches of the second . 

3 Whereas Love hurts no way , whence comes all the hurt and mischief that is done among men ; stabbing , kill , fight , quarrelling , grailing , reviling , scolding , etc. all the defiling of men's wives , children , and servants ? So for bribery , thievery , cozenage , false weights , false wares , etc ▪ slandering , defaming , backbiting , mocking , and such like : All these abound every where . I am sure Love doth none of them . Love was not at the doing of these ▪ 

And for seeking others good as well as our own , OH Lord , where is this ? But in all men's courses ▪ the greatest part , yea , and among Christians , they seek themselves too much , and others too little . 

4 Also that men will so readily provoke one another by words and deeds , they care not how . 

5 For being provoked . Lord be merciful to us , who can bear any thing ? but taunt for taunt , quip for quip ; he shall have as good as he brings . If there be a little trespass done them , O how men stand upon it , and study revenge ? Hence the innumerable suits in this land , many thousands in a year for mere trifles , that ten times as much is spent in them as is sued for . 

A shame for England to be so contentious , having the Gospel of peace amongst us. O , men's stomaches be up strait , all their blood is in their face , or else look as pale as ashes , or secretly practising to revenge . Hand on the dagger strait ; on the top of the house by and by , and fly in one another's faces for trifles : so far off are we from forgiving till seventy times , as our Master Christ hath commanded . So short spirited , as we can bear nothing ; and that which is worse , if we have taken up a displeasure once , it 's not easily laid down , but Sun after Sun ▪ Moon after Moon , yea some , year after year can carry it about with them : quickly provoked , but hardly pacified , especially truly . It may be , some will not be seen to live in open onmity , yet have hearts unsound , and full of secret grudge , that cause open break out upon every occasion . Men can bear nothing , but are strait carried after revenge . 

6 And for speaking of our neighbour's virtues , and hiding their faults , without just cause , and calling to the contrary , where is that to be found ? Nay , the contrary is most woefully common ; little of men's virtues spoken , except a word or two , to make way for a But , and to speak of their faults : and these we delight to be much in , as the Crow that seeks out the carrion , & the Hog that delights to lie in the mire , rather than upon the green grass : like the Fly , that if there be but one galled platt on the horses back , delights rather to sit on that , than on all the whole body besides . 

7 And for the last , where is communicating of spiritual good things ? Parents bring up their children brave , but how few catechise , instruct , admonish them , pray with them , and for them ? 

So for servants , their governors give them meat , drink , and wages , and hold them to work on the six days , but little care how they spend the Sabbath , or for instructing and examining them , calling them to reading and prayer : and what love call you this , but such as you show to your beasts ? 

So for neighbours , what Christian conference is there , what admonishing them that be out of the way , but rather let them run on , and talk of them behind their backs , and that oft times with rejoicing , which is fearful ? 

What consolation is given to the heavy ? who lays their case to heart ? how few are able to speak a word in season , and to comfort fitly ? but utter vain and frothy speeches to them , fitter to do hurt than good . And for such as be troubled in conscience for their sins , alas how few have any skill of such things ? nay , many will rather deride , and make a scoff at them , saying , they have run to Sermons so long , till they will go out of their wits . Who provokes one another to that that is good ? but every man saith , Who made me my brother's keeper ? Nay , men are so far from these , as they seek all they can to drive others from God and goodness , by their cursed counsel and wicked example , and by all the discouragements they can devose , of threats , mocks , and taunts . And is not this fearful ? where is true Love in the mean time ? that is a great way off . 

And for outward things , how backward are most in giving to the poor any more than needs must ? what contentions at making of rates , though God hath freed us from the chargeableness of the Legal service , and hath freed us from that intolerable burden of the Rogues , that swarmed like Locusts all over the Land ; whose burden lay on us very heavy ; as they that be of years can remember , which yet yielded small comfort , the greatest part of them being a cursed generation of idle and sinful Varlets : which seeing God hath marvellously and mercifully rid us of , what encouragement should it be to us , to relieve our own true poor ? 

And for lending , where is this in use ? but rather , as if God had never given precept of it , or as it were a Statute repealed ; and that is out of date , so is this duty of lending . That cursed and cruel trade of Usury , hath eaten up , and banished out of the Country this Christian duty of free-lending . 

Some rich men are so grim and so austere , as a poor man dares not speak to them for such a thing . And indeed , how few be there , that have any thing to lend at any time ? 

Some lend out all so near to Usury , as they have not to lend , but borrow rather : Or if a poor man do any work for them , they cannot pay them of a good while , they be so bare . For as soon as any money comes in , it must out again strait , as if it would burn a hole in the Cupboard , or would be half an undoing to them , if it lay there but a week or two . 

Others are ever purchasing , and so keep themselves bare , and in debt , and then they whine at every charge , and wrangle at rates , and are never fit or ready to lend , or to any good use . Such bring a curse upon themselves , making themselves borrowers , when they might be lender's , Deut. 28. 44.  

Others be so miserable , as though they have it , yet they will not lend . So for the last duty of neighbourly dealing , inviting , visiting , these are decayed ; so that we may believe in all these respects , these be the times foretold , Matth. 24. 12. wherein Love should wax cold . 

Yet indeed there is a great deal of sergeant love , of fawning , crouching , and congeying , of pot-companionship , and joining together in evil . 

A great deal of self-love also , making others faults great , and our own small , or none ; nay , sometimes making them virtues : extenuating and making light of the virtues of others , highly esteeming our own ; seeking ourselves in all our dealings and courses , with little regard of our neighbours : which self-love the Apostle , 2 Tim. 3. 2. foretells shall be in the last times , and sets it in the forefront , as the cause of many other evils that follow . 

Now let every man examine himself in particular touching these things , and so make use to his own soul for comfort , or the contrary . 

But who shall not find himself failing in every one of them ? whereby we have much cause to be humbled ; and the courses of the common sort are wholly contrary to all these properties of true Love , whereby they may conclude fearfully against themselves . 

CHAP. 5.  Causes of the want of Love to our Neighbour . 

Now to this end , that every man may the better see how to mend that that is amiss , let us a little look into the causes of this want of Love , and what are the hindrances of the fruits thereof . The main and general cause is an evil heart , pestered with self-love , and many lusts that be contraries to Love.  

1 more particularly . Want or weakness of Faith is one great cause . When our Saviour Christ told his Apostles , they must for give till seventy times seven times , what said they ? Luke 17. 4 , 5.  Increase our Faith. Assurance of God's love to us , in pardoning our many sins , and giving his Son jesus Christ , and assurance of eternal Life , makes us love again , and both to give and forgive ; which are two principal dueries , and fruits of Love. Pride , and the following Vices are hinderers of the exercise of Love.  

2 Pride , whereby men think highly of themselves , and meanly of others ; think they may speak or do any thing , but others may do nothing to them . Only by pride do men make contentien , Prou. 13. 10.  Humbleness causeth love , Ephes. 4. 2.  Pride makes men think themselves so wise and good , as every body should say as they say , do as they do , and after a sort do homage to them ; if they do not , than the peace is broken strait . 

Pride will not endure a reproof : therefore being told of a fault , they fall out deeply ; as joash with Zechariah , Ahab and jezabel with Eliah , Herod with john . 

3 Covetousness is another : this makes men contend for trifles , the least damage done him is thought so great ( looking on it in a false glass ) as its sufficient to break Love , and cause a suit . 

It causeth men to oppress , to use false weights & sleights , etc.  It hinders both mercy to the poor , and all other neighbourly offices of inviting , and the like . 

4 Envy hinders Love exceedingly . When one envies at the prosperity of another in whatsoever kind , of temporal or spiritual good things ; As Laban's sons did at jacob , which changed their countenances towards him , and made him weary of his place . Cain , that envied that Abel's sacrifice was better accepted than his , and Esau that jacob was blessed , Ishmael , that Isaac was the son of the Promise : what breach of Love , and woeful fruits followed of all these ? 

5 Frowardness & shortness of spirit breaks Love very oft : for angry words stir up strife , Prou. 15. 1.  

6 These days of peace are an occasion , through men's corruption , that men grow hollow and strange , and to set light by one another . Trouble's cause men to make much of each other , and cling together : as the sheep , that out of danger , and in a fair day , scatter themselves over a field , in a storm , or when they see a dog come , run all together . 

These and such like , be woeful causes of the want of Love , which also bring forth as lamentable effects every where , both in Church and Commonwealth . What woeful breaches , hideous contentions , what hard measure and wrongs are offered , what enmities and oppositions , to the hazard of the Church , danger of the Commonwealth , and overthrow of the prosperity of many Parishes ? 

What ruin brings this want of Love upon many Families ? 

And among particular persons , what break out both in word and deed , to the dishonour of God & Religion , & the undoing each other many times , both in soul and state ? to the disgrace of the Gospel , and ill example of the beholders , and hurt to their own souls , by keeping them from , and disabling them for the right performance of holy duties , which cause cold prayers , and those not heard ; and hereby either kept from the Sacrament , as many times it is ( O fearful thing to be spoken ) or else slubber it over , and come with festered hearts , and so lose the benefit : nay , by such unworthy coming , they provoke the wrath of God , and eat their condemnation as much as in them lieth ; but oft times they eat and drink their judgement , a sore sickness , and may be , their own death , or the death of wife , or some child that is dear to them , to teach them and others by their example the price of such boldness . 

Now seeing these things be so , the Lord give us every one hearts , where we find ourselves faulty , to humble ourselves , and crave mercy , and to labour to be reform in this point . Therefore , first , let 's labour to pluck up these noisome weeds out of our hearts , that this precious plant of Love may grow therein . 

1 Strive against Infidelity , and labour to get Faith , and the increases thereof , if by God's grace we have it already . 

2 In humbleness of mind , labour to esteem others better than ourselves . 

3 Labour for a moderate affection toward these outward and base things in comparison , setting more by Love , and the sweet fruits of it , than by them all ; and therefore much more , than by small trifles . 

4 Avoid envy . Is our eye evil , because our Master's eye is good ? we have more than we might look for . 

5 Strive against techinesse and shortness of spirit . Think what a base lust , and sinful distemper it is , how it exalteth folly , and how ill it becomes us , and what an enemy it is to true Love.  

And labour we , that this love to our brethren may show forth itself in all good fruits , in judging the best , departing from our right , not provoking , nor being easily provoked , but forbearing and forgiving offences and wrongs , and communicating of what God hath imparted to us of any kind . and that for these Reasons ; weigh them well . 

1 First , God requireth it of us , who is Love , 1 john 4. 8. and if we perform it , we do not so much serve our neighbour , as please God , who takes it to himself ; and in neglecting this , we neglect not our neighbour only , but God , who takes himself wronged in this behalf . 

2 Our neighbour is our own flesh , and every one hath some part of the Image of God in him , or upon him . 

3 The Word abundantly calls for it , the Sacrament of the Lords Supper puts us strongly in mind of it . 

4 no better argument , that we are in the light , love God , and are Christ's Disciples , be translated from death to life , be endued with that excellent grace of true Faith , than this , that we truly love one another , john 13. 34 , 35. 1  john , 3. 14.  As a King is not known by his apparel , great company with him , etc. which may be some meaner man , but by his Crown ; so is not a Christian known by his hearing Sermons , or good words , but by his Love.  

5 The beauty of a Christian is Love : he is the best Christian , that loves most , whose lips feed most , whose branches spread widest . 

6 And for forgiving wrongs , what should we do else ? God forgives us many & great debts , and ill dealings with him , and shall we be ready to revenge every petty trespass ? See Matth. 18. 34. what became of him that did so . God bids us ask forgiveness on no other condition , than that we forgive our neighbour , Mark 11. 25 , 26.  And no better sign , that a man is forgiven of God , than to forgive our neighbour ; and no man can be assured of that , but he will forgive . Let us therefore of the sea of compassion that God hath shed out upon us , let fall some drops of it upon our neighbour . 

Also we may stand in need of our neighbour's forgiveness : for who lives , and is not subject to offend his neighbour one way or other ? no cause therefore we should seek revenge , which every Turk , yea , every beast can do ; but pass by offences , which is the glory of a man , Prou. 19 11.  Keep out anger therefore in such cases if we can , or if we be not so strong , yet let it not rest in us , souring in our hearts : Let not the sun go down upon it . The world count's this base , but indeed it 's truly honourable . it 's the honour of God , Micah 7. 18. and so it makes us like him . Let us therefore labour to do thus ; and not a little or some few times , but get a long skirted Love , which will cover a multitude of offences , as St. Peter saith , 1 Pet. 4. 8. or , as Prou. 10. 12.  All trespasses . 

7 And for distributing things temporal or spiritual as we have , great reasons there be . God gives to all , both good and bad : he hath given us what we have ; ( for what hast thou , that thou hast not received ? ) and given us them to be good stewards , and dispensers thereof , to the good of others , 1.  Pet. 4. 10.  

And the more we give , the more we have , and not the less ; it increaseth in the giving , as the loaves in our Saviour ▪ Christ's hands , especially in spiritual things ; yea , in temporal : therefore giving is compared to sowing , which in good ground is usually with increase . Therefore a worthy Minister upon occasion ask his wife , whether there were any money in the house , she answered , that she knew but of one three pence ; Well , saith he , we must go sow : that is , give something to the poor , knowing that to be the way of bringing in , Prou. 11. 24 , 25.  Deut. 15. 10.  The best thrift is to be merciful , and the way to beggary in a a man's self , or his posterity , is to be pinching . 

And to conclude all , Love in the exercise of it , will bring much peace to our consciences , and comfort us not a little on our deathbed , that we have not lived to ourselves , but to be useful to many , especially to souls . It procureth us love in the places we live in , and in the Church of God a good report . 

no man is well beloved , though he have good things in him , if he be not loving . O , say they , he is a good honest man , I think , but he is a harsh censurer , contentious , so hasty that no man can tell how to speak to him , he is a straight man , lives all to himself , few the better for him by counsel , admonition , encouragement , and the like : and so for outward things , very close-handed and near . 

But if a man be full of love , it will procure him love again , he shall be well spoken of while he lives , and mourned for when he dies , which is a good mercy of God , and the temporal reward of righteousness and love . Pro. 10. 7.  The memorial of the Justice shall be blessed . Thus they wept for Dorcas , and showed the coats she had made , Acts 9 39  But a proud , churlish , close man , shall live without being desired , and die without being mourned for . 

These would have love , good will , and credit in the Country and Town they live in , but they will not seek by this way to procure it , will not be at the cost , be not useful , liberal , etc. let them never look for it : Let them win it , if they will wear it . Others care not , so they may scrape all to themselves , what the world say of them ; let the good name go which way it william But these are base minded persons , and they carry little better than a curse about them , while they live . 

CHAP. 6.  Properties of true Love.  

Now yet for our further direction in this point of Love , I will set down some such Properties , as the Scripture requireth in it ; as that it must be mutual , common , sincere without feigning , fervent , pure , constant ; all gathered out of 1 Pet. 1. 22.  

First , it must be mutual , it must come from one to another mutually , and be at every hand : as God commands others to love us , so us to love others . so that none is free from this duty . 

Many will look for a great deal of Love from others , that care not how little they show themselves ; would be visited , but care not to visit others : would have their own virtues commended , will not do so by others ; have their infirmities covered , but will not do so : would not be provoked , yet will provoke : would not that others should be quickly angry with them , yet they will with others . 

Alas , this is great weakness : for its a more blessed thing to give , than to receive , Acts 20. 35.  And we should rather strive to go before , and set others in our debt by love , and be on the forehand . 

A good mind rather remembers the debt that is going from him , than that which is coming to him . This oft comes of pride in some men , to look for much of others , and perform little themselves . 

The husband oft looks his wife should walk at an inch with him , though he will break else out of square . So sometimes it falls out ▪ with the wife towards her husband , look for much , and perform little . This is no equity : we must do , as we would be done to . 

it 's more dangerous for us to neglect our duty to others , than that they neglect to us ; for this is but a small want , but the other makes us liable to God's judgement . Let us therefore strive who shall do most duty each to other ; husband to wife , neighbour to neighbour : and not the contrary . 

2.  It must be common : One another . it 's in the plural number , and shows a community ; that we must not love one , or two , or a few , but all , and especially all that fear God. Love communicates itself , and is not engrossed to a few . Many can be content to love one , or two , or a few as they list , but they set light by the rest , yea oppose and justle with some , and live unkindly with them . This is no true love , neither ought it so to be . Yea , we must love the meanest that fear God , and not neglect them . The meanest member of the body is regarded by the greatest . Though they be of low degree in the world , yet seeing they be members of that glorious body of jesus Christ , we must not have the faith of him in respect of persons , james 2. 1.  Seeing God hath vouchsafed to give his Son for them to redeem them , his Spirit to sanctify them , and hath prepared a place in heaven for them , we must not despise them . Nay , these we ought the rather to encourage , and to hearten on in well-doing , seeing so few of that sort have any good in them , and they have many discouragements . They will bear their poverty the better . it 's a great cheering to them , when they see themselves regarded . And nothing is more comely , than to see wealth ones to be affable , and to speak kindly , and to the hearts of the poor that be godly ; as Boaz did to Ruth . For , being fellow-brethrens and fellow-members as dear to God as they , should a little wealth lift up the mind ? The Lord is the Maker of them both , Prou. 22. 2.  james 2 ▪ 5.  Hath not God chosen the poor of this world , that they should be rich in Faith , and heirs of the Kingdom ? etc.  

3 It must be without seigning , Rom. 12. 9 1  john 3. 18.  Not in word , or in tongue , but in deed , and in truth . God hate's dissembling in every thing : whether in love pretended to himself , when is no such thing , or towards our neighbour , in any of our dealings with him . God loves simplicity and plain dealing ; as in jacob and Nathaneel . 

If Love , which is the main virtue , be sergeant , what shall become of all the duties that proceed from thence ? God's love to us was not feigned and in show , but sincere and real , when he gave us his beloved Son to the death for our sins . 

Here two sorts of persons are justly to be taxed : 1.  Such as pretend to love , when yet they hate . 2.  Such as make show to love , and do not . For the first , Psal. 28. 3.  Psal. 12. 2.  & 55. 21.  & 62. 4.  Pro. 26. 24. read these places . Thus did joab to Amasa , 2 Sam. 20.  judas to our Saviour Christ , Saul to David , 1 Sam. 18. 17. 25. giving him his Daughter to be a snare to him , requiring no jointure , but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines , hoping thereby he might fall into their hands . which persons carry a mark of Reprobation about them . Psalm 28. 3.  Workers of iniquity , to whom belongs some notable judgement of God. They be like the Devil , who pretended love to Eve , when he sought her ruin , and of all her posterity . So to our Saviour Christ , Mat. 4.  All these will I give thee etc.  

As these be more dangerous to those they hate , than if they did openly show it ( for then they could better beware of them : One Enemy within the Walls is worse than ten without ) so are they worse for themselves : For , any vice masked and cloaked under a show of virtue , is double iniquity . And as our Saviour Christ said to the Scribes and Pharisees , Mat. 23. 14.  ye shall receive greater damnation ; so shall these . 

Yet how common is this ? many will speak fair as may be to their Neighbour , when yet they intent mischief against them , or as soon as their back is turned , mock or jest at them , speak evil , or raise up some slander against them , or do them what hurt they can . If we know any have dealt so with us , let us take heed that we never do so by them or any other , but loathe it , as hateful and devilish . 

For the second sort : There be that pretend they love , but alas ! try , and you shall find no such thing . A deal of Court-holy ▪ water , congeyes , and crouching , an handful of true hearty love , is worth ten armfuls of their congeyes down to the ankles : they will salute Good morrow , and Good night , when yet they mind , nor heartily wish no good . These are clouds without rain , plashes that deceive when most need is ; vessels with false bottoms , that have a little water on the top , but empty below : Snch as will earnestly invite , when they know one cannot or will not stay , proffer kindness , when they think it will not be needed ; but if it hap to be accepted , and made use of at any time , than they either have some shifts to avoid it , or else do it with much unwillingness , and grumbling behind the parties back . 

So those that pretend they love the poor , yet come to them in their behalf , and nothing shall you get , but what they are forced unto , and hardly that . 

So many good Ministers and Christians have found small kindness in their need , at the hands of such , as yet in their prosperity have professed good will , and made great shows of love to them ; they might have done full ill for all these : what love call you this ? it 's like Faith without works , which God will condemn . So to speak well of such and such men , to pity them , and say they are worthy men , and pity they should want , yet never do any thing for them . If God should feed them thus , they would soon complain . 

4 The fourth thing required in Love , is , that it must be pure . It must come from a pure heart ▪ as Saint Peter speaks , and be agreeable to the rule of the pure Word of God.  

Pure Love is seen in diverse things : First , it loves for some virtuous and good actions : therefore the love of the Adulterer and his Mate , of Drunkards and thieves , that be sworn brothers , is no love . 

To love a man , because he can dice well , or swear deeply , drink others under board , or mock and deride wittily , or rail bitterly against the servants of God ; this is cursed love : for true Love rejoiceth not in iniquity ; as we have heard . A worse note cannot be , than when one sees one fight cunningly or desperately against God , to love him the better . These be no better than Rebels , and Conspirators against the Majesty of God.  

2 Pure Love is that , which is grounded on Grace and Religion , and on no transitory thing ; or in those that have no grace , we love them for conscience of God's commandment , and because of that part of the Image of God that is in them : which condemns the carnal love of the most , which love only for worldly respects ; for strength , beauty , or any inward gift of the mind not sanctified : as wit , skill in Arts , music , play . These are worthy love , but to love only for these , is not true and pure Love ; for thus loved the Heathen : worldly men's love is for such respects , and no other . Yea , even God's servants fail this way sometimes , as old Isaac , that loved Esau for his skill in hunting , David loved Absalon for his beauty ; and so doth many a man his wife , which do ill to build love on so false grounds : for when these fail , oft the love goes after . 

3 Pure Love is in respect of the party himself , whom we love , and for no respect to ourselves , or any commodity of ours . And such was God's love , in giving his Son to us miserable sinners ; which condemns the world , who only love for self-respects : As he is my Uncle , Friend , loves me , or hath done this or that for me , or may do me a pleasure ; therefore I will make much of him , or for fear he may do me a shrewd turn : This , if it be shaken out of the clouts , will be found but self-love ; we have a respect and aim only to , and at ourselves , Mat. 5. 46.  Many a man shows kindness , or doth good to some only , to purchase credit . 

The husband loves his wife , because she pleaseth him well , is fair , a good housewife , and for nothing else : this is self-love . All the Papists charitable deeds were all self-love ; for they were done with opinion of merit , and so they loved themselves rather than the parties they gave unto . So is all the love of worldlings ; examine it , and you shall mostwhat find it to be self-love ; they have some reach at themselves . 

4 Pure Love is , when we so love a man , as we love his soul ; and therefore will suffer no evil to rest upon him , but hate the sin in him whom he loves most dearly , and will counsel him to all good , and from all evil . Therefore so to love our neighbour , as not to tell him of his fault for angering or disquieting of him ( if he be such as we may speak to ) is hatred rather than love , as God saith , Leviticus 19 17.  

So Parents , that love their children so well , as they will not nurture , rebuke , correct them ; they hate them ▪ they slay them in following their ways : He that spares the rod , hate's his child , Prou. 13. 24.  it 's as one should be so tender over a child , as not to suffer the wind to blow upon it ; and therefore hold the hand before the mouth of it , but hold so hard , as he strangles the child : As the Ape that hugs her young so hard , as she kills it . 

Again , friends persuade a man to do this or that for preferment , that he cannot do with good conscience : O they love him , they would fain see him preferred . Woeful love to the body , to destroy the soul . 

A neighbour hath a child , or cattle strangely handled ; one comes in of love , and persuades him to send to such a cunning man , or good Witch ( the worst instrument of the Devil of all ) for help . Is he a friend , that will do that that shall vantage one a penny , and ere the year come about , hinder him a hundred pound ? 

So when a good Christian is ready to suffer for a good conference , and a friend comes and says , O I pray cast not away yourself , I wish you well ; be not too nice , do as others do . Cruel love is this , to persuade them to save their bodies , by doing that , whereby they should cast away soul and body for ever : As Peter adviseth our Saviour Christ not to go up to jerusalem to suffer , but to favour himself , Matth. 16. 22. which was to dissuade him from doing his Father's will , and from that , whereby Peter himself and all mankind should be saved , and without which they had all been lost for ever : what love therefore was this ? you may see by the thanks our Saviour Christ gave him , who bade him get him behind him Satan ; for he savoured not of the things of God , but of the world . 

5 Next , our Love must be fervent . We must love earnestly , and hotly as we can ; and secondly , constantly : for in these two things stands fervency . First , for the earnestness of our Love ; as we must stretch it to as many persons , and in as many duties as we can , to soul , to body , in giving , forgiving , etc. as we have heard before ; so in these we must not be sparing , but in giving , liberal ; for he that sows sparingly , shall reap sparingly , 2 Cor. 9 6.  So in forgiving plenteous , to seventy times , etc.  For thus is God to us , in giving for soul , body , goods , name , to ourselves and ours , day & night , never weary in doing us good , never upbraiding . In forgiving , how merciful , in passing by our manifold offences , and that daily ? And the rather , because a little love is soon quenched ; therefore we must so love , as though we meet with many temptations from the parties themselves , or from others , that yet we suffer it not to be extinguished . And we must love fervently ; not doing these duties when we can well , and have nothing to let us , but forget our pleasure , profit , ease , etc. to do our neighbour good . Love seeks not her own things . It is laborsous , 1 Cor. 13. as in the Samariran , who set up the wounded man upon his horse , and went on foot himself , and left all the money in his purse for his charges , and promised to send more . And as he that rose out of his warm bed , to lend his neighbour loaves . As they that gave out of their main stock , or sold their lands to relieve the necessities of the Church , Acts 2. 44.  Above and beyond all comparison ten thousand times , was the fervency of the love of God the Father , when he parted with his own and only Son out of his bosom , for our Redemption , and of our Lord jesus Christ , who forsook the glory of Heaven , and laid down his life here upon earth , to save us miserable siuners , and his utter enemies . 

O how doth this condemn the cold , yea , frozen love of the world ? And where there is a spark , yet it is so weak , as the least drop of water will quench it . We will not speak a word in defence of never so good a man or cause , if it will hinder ourselves never so little , or procure us but a frown . 

How worthily on the contrary did jonathan , who spoke for David to Saul his father , to the danger of his own life , 1 Sam. 20. 33.  So Ester endangered her life to speak for the Church ; I will go to the King , If I perish , I perish , Hest. 4. 16.  

6 Lastly , our Love must be constant ; not easily broken off , but continuing to the end , Heb. 13. 1.  Ephes. 4. 3.  

Thus is God's love to his , john 13. 1. which we must imitate . The Devil will seek to break it off , and ourselves ( being men ) are frail , and many occasions will be ready to be offered ; therefore we had need with all diligence , to strive to hold and maintain it alive in our hearts . 

How doth this rebuke the inconstancy of many men , that are won ( as we say ) with an apple , and lost with a nut ; that will upon every sleight occasion break friendship ? If God should so deal with us , what should become of us ? But his love is constant to his , notwithstanding their daily provocations . 

Yea , he loves them in adversity , and their low estate ; yea , best then , and is nearest them with his comforts . So it ought to be with us ; for than our neighbour hath most need of us , and then our love will show itself to be most free , and not mercenary . But how contrary is this every where ? While they be in prosperity , they have many friends , which in their affliction go aloof off ; as David oft complaineth , and job , to whose very wife his breath was strange in the day of his affliction . Ruth did quite contrary , & very commendably , who vowed to her mother-in-law Naomi , that nothing but death should separate between them . 

CHAP. 7.  Whom we must love . 

Now followeth , to speak of the persons whom we ought to love : and they are all men upon the face of the earth , good and bad , without or within the Pale of the Church ; our love must stretch itself to any of them : they are our neighbour , whom we are bidden to love as ourselves ; as we may see in the Parable of the Samaritan : these we ought to do good to , if they need , and we be able ; and for these we must pray . 

Yea , we ought to pray for every particular person , that we know or can see , because we know not ( whatsoever he be now ) but he may belong to God.  

We must therefore love all ; our enemies , and all men whatsoever they be , but especially the Saints and People of God. And of these I will speak severally , and in order . 

And first of the love of our enemies . That we must love our enemies , is required inclusively in these words of 1.  joh. 3. 23. that ye love one another ; and in those words , that be the sum of the two Tables , thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself : as may appear by comparing Exod. 23. 4 , 5. with Deut. 22. 1 , 2.  He that is called in one place thine enemy , is called in the other thy brother or neighbour . more plainly its required , Pro. 25. 21.  Matth. 5. 44.  But ere we proceed to the proof of this point , let us see who are the enemies we must love , by showing the kinds of enemies that there be , and withal clear some Scriptures that seem to countenance hatred of our enemies . Enemies be public or private , God's enemies or ours . Public , be such as oppose & hate the Religion and truth of God , and persecute it in the professors thereof , or are enemies to any good courses and godly proceedings , and so to us for the same . These again be either curable or incurable : for the curable , such as Saul was , who afterwards became a Paul ; we must hate their sins , pray against their devices , but love their persons . The incurable we must hate their sins directly , and their persons indirectly . 

Thus we hate the person of the Devil ; though he be God's creature , yet because he hath sinned against the holy Ghost , and is God's desperate , final and incurable adversary , therefore we are bound to hate him : So might , nay ought we to do , if we knew any man or men to be such : as S. Paul did , who 2.  Tim. 4. prayed against Alexander , that God would reward him according etc. and the Primitive Church against julian the Apostate . 

Of these David meant , Psal. 139. 22.  Do not I hate them , OH Lord , that hate thee ? yea I hate etc. and Psal. 109.  & 69 22. to the 29. and in many Psalms he prays for the final and utter destruction of his enemies , which is a sign of utter hatred . But this was not because they were his enemies , but Gods as well ; and not that only , but desperate and irrecoverable ones , which he saw by the spirit of God , being extraordinarily and infallibly ▪ informed : thereof : whose prayers were but prophecies of the final destruction of these men , as Psal. 63. 9  & 54. 5.  But for us , because we have not the like measure or gift of the spirit , we have no such warrant to hate or pray directly against any man's person . 

Of these also are meant such places , where we are bidden to rejoice at wicked men's destruction , Psal. 52. also Psal. 58. 10.  We also , though we know not men's final estate , yet if we see any notorious enemies of the Church , and Gospel , and good men , taken away , may give God thanks , and in some sense rejoice , namely , that God hath showed himself careful of his Church , and hath provided for his glory , the comfort of his people and passage of goodness , and for the terror of other bad ones ; but not to rejoice as it 's their destruction : but as we should pray for them while they live , so pity them being cut off , that they have brought misery upon themselves . 

Object . But an objection or two may be made . Our Saviour Christ tells us , we must hate father and mother , wife and child etc. for his Names sake . 

Answ. True , when they stand in opposition against Christ , and would pull us from him , we must then say , Get thee behind me Satan , and tread upon them if they stand in our way to hinder us from following Christ. We must hate their counsel , but yet love their persons , and pray God to open their eyes and turn their hearts . 

Object . 2.  God bade the Israelites kill the Canaanites , man , woman and child , and spare none . 

Answ. If God bade them hate them , they had a warrant so to do ; for we must love our enemies in God and for God , and not against God , and we must obey his commandment . But God bade them not hate them , but kill them , and so they might do , and yet wish well to them , and pity them . The same may be said of all just wars : we may hate the bad cause of our enemies , overthrow their erterprises , and slay their persons , and yet pity them , and pray for their salvation . As the Magistrate also , that puts a malefactor to death for his offence , and to terrify others by his example , yet hate's him not , but desire's that his bodily punishment may be an occasion to bring him to Repentance , to the saving of his soul ; and therefore gives him godly counsel , grants him respite and time , sends Preachers to him to labour with him . So in the other . 

And thus much of God's enemies . Besides these , we may have private enemies , that be upon occasion fallen out with us , that hate and hurt us , and have done us wrong , and seek our mischief . These our enemies we must love : and of these principally , as also of God's curable enemies , is our speech to be understood in all that follows . 

We must love our enemies : that is , we must carry a tender affection towards them , as desiring their good , wishing salvation to their souls , and outward prosperity , so far as may stand with God's glory , and their good , rejoicing at their welfare , and grieving at the contrary : and this we must show forth by all signs and fruits of good usage every way . which are referred , Mat. 5. 44. to these three heads : first , Bless them : that is , speak kindly to them and of them : secondly , Do good : that is , be ready to help and relieve them : and lastly , Pray for them that hate and persecute you ; even pray to God to pardon them , and to turn their hearts . And thus are we to do to those , that be never so deadly set against us ; yea , and never so wrongfully . And mark , that in this last cited place , we are first bidden to ove them : the beginning must be in the affection of the heart , that so the other duties required may be performed , and that in a right manner , without which , the one or the other , or both will fail : and then that we must not say we love them only , but show it by the fruits . Rom. 12. 20.  If thine enemy hunger , feed him , etc. overcome evil with goodness . Prou. 24. 17. we are forbidden to rejoice at our enemies fall , either into sin or punishment . 

Thus David put on sackcloth , fasted , and prayed , when his enemies were in affliction . Elisha bade the King set bread & water before his enemies , and them that came to take the Prophet , 2 Kings 6.  So did our Saviour Christ to his Precept ( Matth. 5. ) join his Pattern , not only not revenging , as St. Peter saith , being reviled , he reviled not again , being persecuted , he threatened not : but on the contrary , prayed for them that put him to death ; Father , forgive them , they know not what they do . Thus he spoke kindly to judas , when he betrayed him with a kiss , and called him Friend , Matth. 26. 50.  Thus Steven prayed for his persecutors , even in the act of their stoning of him ; Lord , lay not this sin to their charge , Acts 7. at the end . 

Now listen to some Reasons , to move us to this difficult duty , and the Lord make them powerful to persuade us thereto . 

First , They be our own flesh , Isa. 58. 7. therefore we are not to hurt them , nor turn away our face from them to do them good . 

Secondly , they have some part , at least of God's Image in them , in their soul , being an immortal spirit , in the Majesty of their face above all creatures , in their authority they bear , or age , or gifts , or the like . 

Thirdly , our Saviour Christ commands it : But I say unto you , Mat. 5. 44.  The Scribes and Pharisees had taught , they should love their friends , and hate their enemies : But our Saviour Christ , the Lawmaker , and so the truest Interpreter thereof , the Doctor of his Church , he of whom the Father bade from heaven hear him , Matth. 17. 5. who is also our Lord and King ; bids us love our enemies . 

So that if he may be heard , who is only to be heard , and if his authority and commandment may bear sway with us , that only ought to command our consciences ; then must we do so . So that though Scribes and Pharisees say , Love friends , and hate enemies ; though the Devil say so , flesh and blood say so , and do so , yet there is another to be heard against all these ; But I say unto you , etc.  Let us therefore listen to his voice . 

Fourthly , so shall we be the children of God , and be like him , who makes his sun to shine , and rain to fall on the just and unjust : and besides many outward mercies , gives them the Gospel , to call them to repentance ; And even loved us when we were his utter enemies , and when as he might have glorified himself in our condemnation ; yet he so loved us , as he gave his own dear Son to redeem us ; and hath effectually called diverse of us to the Faith of his Son jesus Christ , and the hope of eternal life . O Love unspeakable , to be showed to enemies ! Now what should we desire , and is our happiness , but to be like him ? Now when we can love our enemies indeed , it will be a certain evidence we are the children of God : a sign we love God dearly , when we can do this difficult thing for his sake : And a sign of much grace to mortify the rebellion of our nature , that lusteth to the quite contrary . And we can have no mark we are the Lords , except we can do this in some measure , and strive after it more and more . 

Fifthly , God's people must do singular things , such as the world cannot attain to . Now every Publican , civil person , hypocrite , can love his friends , and hate his enemies , but we must do more : God hath showed us singular mercy ; therefore we must yield him singular obedience , and show forth the power of his grace that is in us. We must not be singular in conceits , opinions , and courses of our own devising ; but we must be singular , in obeying such commandments of God , as the world will not be brought unto : and to reproach us for such singularity , shows them to be of this world that do it . 

Sixthly , this hath reward from God , so hath not loving them only that love us , which is self-love ; we shall have their love still its like , and there is the reward we are like to have : but in loving our enemies , we shall have a reward , Prou. 25. 22. not of merit , but of promise for our encouragement . 

Seventhly , we are commanded , Matth. 5. 48.  ( whence all these reasons are collected ) that we should be perfect , as our heavenly Father is perfect . This is a degree of grace , and profiting in Christ's School , to be able to love our enemies ; which we must strive unto , in this and the like duties ; not contenting ourselves to hear , read , come to the Sacrament , which not only weaklings in grace , but hypocrites can do , and do continually , nor yet holding ourselves satisfied with some small measure of Love , or other graces , as Faith , Patience , etc. but to strive forward to some good degrees of them , and of the fruits of the same in our course , as occasion serves : of which this loving and doing good to our enemies , are principal ones . 

Eighthly , hereby we shall , it may be , convert and overcome our enemies to love the truth ; As the patience of the Martyrs , was a mean of the conversion of some , who suffered soon after them . Or at least , it will be a convincing them , and leaving them without excuse ; as Saul , by David's innocency , who twice might have killed him , and did not , was convinced , and cried out , thou art more righteous than I , 1 Sam. 24. 19  

Ninthly , we shall provide herein well for our own comfort , both in life and in death ; when in all adversities and wrongs by wicked men , our enemies , our hearts can testify with us , that we seek no revenge , that we can pray for our persecutors . For this argueth much love to be in us , and that it is fervent , as God commands . As that is a great fire , that warms not only them that be near , but gives heat to them that be far off : So is this Love.  

This then , first confuteth the Doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees , of which we have heard : which is Doctrine and Divinity for our turn , and well suiting to our nature ; but it 's too pleasing to nature to be good : nay , it 's to be abhorred . 

2 The Papists also , who , little better , teach , that in two cases only we are bound to help our enemies , in the case of extremity , or of scandal . For other things , to love them , or pray for them , or do them good in other cases , it 's but a counsel our Saviour Christ gives , and no commandment . If men can do it , it 's well ; but if they cannot , it 's not required . But this is false ; our Saviour Christ speaks in the Imperative and commanding Mood , and urgeth it hard , with diverse reasons : therefore it 's not left to our discretion , but flatly required , as in other Scriptures . 

3 It rebuketh the contrary nature that is in us , and the practice of the world , which quite against this Precept of loving , praying for , and doing good to our enemies , do hate them , rejoice at their fall , envy at any good that comes to them , speak all ill to them , and of them , interrupt all ill against them , requited one evil with another , taunt with taunt , suit with suit , blow with blow , and seek to do them all evil . Yea , and men think they should be born with , and not blamed for this : Why , say they , he is mine enemy , and that wrongfully , I never did him hurt , yet he hath raised lies and slanders of me , or thus and thus abused me : What then ? what mastery else were it for you to love him ? O but this cannot be heard of ; whereby it appears , that most men are carnal , and of the Devil . 

They say , they owe them no love ; Well , yet you owe God all love , you cannot deny , and he hath turned over some of the love you owe to him , to be paid to your enemy , and he will take it as paid to him ; and this is but just in common dealing among men . 

Nay , it 's a fault too much among many Christians , that show great weakness this way . If they be wronged , O how they swell , and how far they will go in revenge , both by words and deeds , and how long they dare lie herein ? whereby they be wray they be more flesh than spirit , as Paul said to the Corinthians . While these things are thus , are ye not carnal , and walk as men ? 1 Cor. 3. 3  

My brethren , these things ought not so to be . This is not the persuasion of God's Spirit . Indeed , the spirit that is in us lusteth after envy ; but the Scripture teacheth better things : The wisdom that is from above , is , first , pure , then peaceable , full of mercy , and good fruits . Therefore this revenging course , which is counted wisdom , if it be any , its earthly : that is , of the men of this world ; sensual , of our own corrupt lust and desire , and Devilish , he is the author and teacher of it . 

O that we could be brought to see our sin every of us in this point , and be humbled , that there is such a nature in us , so contrary to the will of God , and for our practice , that hath been so bad , and let's every one of us bewail heartily , and repent of that that is past : and for time to come , le 's labour for greater grace , that when any such occasions be offered us hereafter , we may show better fruits . 

And though we talk with our enemy , or debate the matter , keep passion away , and do it patiently ; yea , or if we reprove him , if he be worthy , or take the benefit of Law or Magistrate , yet let it be without revenge . We are not bound hereby to love their sins , nor their needless society , nor to furnish them with kindness , that might make them fitter to do hurt , nor to relinquish our right , or our good cause ; but that we be free from hatred and revenge , yea , and further , to overcome their evil with goodness , as God doth , and commands . 

And first , that we beware of revenge , which is a wicked thing , and that for these Reasons : 

First , Vengeance is the Lords , and he will repay . it 's his office and privilege : to revenge therefore , is to take the Royalty out of his hand ; as one should put the Lord chief justice out of his seat , and judge his cause himself . He must revenge to whom it belongs , as Psal. 94. 1 , 2. therefore the Egyptian said to Moses , when he would have parted him and the Israelite , Exod. 2. 14.  Who made thee a judge over us ? Noting , that men must not avenge without authority : therefore our Saviour Christ bade Peter put up his sword , when he cut off Malchas ear : with a reason , Because who so avengeth without a calling , shall perish by the sword . 

We must therefore commit our case to God , as our Saviour Christ did ; for he can also do it most wisely , and most righteously , 1 Pet. 2. 23. we will do it foolishly and partially , as we see in daily experience . Leave it to him , he will not fail to do it , and well too . 

2 When we revenge our own wrongs , we leave the Lord nothing to do , except it be to turn his wrath from our enemy , on whom we have been revenged already , to ourselves , for our sin of revenging , as Pro. 24. 17 , 18.  

3 When we revenge , we do we know not what : we consider not who smote us. it 's the Lord , as job said , The Lord hath given , and the Lord hath taken , when the Chaldeans had robbed him . no evil in the City : that is , of punishment , but the Lord hath done it , Amos 3. 6. which made David so quietly bear Shimei his railing , because the Lord set him on work so to do for his humbling . 

Our enemy is but as Ashur , the Lords rod , to beaten us with ; therefore to revenge , is to wring the rod out of God's hand , and break it , or cast it into the fire , which is but an ungracious child's part . When God bids us love our enemies , he bids us but kiss the rod , to pull down our stomaches ▪ which many wise mothers will make their young ones do betimes . 

So also it 's the Devil in thine enemy , that doth thee wrong in goods , life , or name , who hereby seeks to drive thee to revenge , or some other sin ; as he did to move job to curse God , by all the trouble's he brought upon him ; therefore resist the Devil , and not the man : for the Devil aims not at thy goods , or name , to hurt thee in them , but to draw thee to sin , to the hurt of thy soul . If thou canst therefore , resist Satan herein , and avoid the sin he seeks hereby to bring thee to commit , thou shalt play a wise man's part , and so in stead of revenging thyself on thy enemy , be revenged upon Satan , thy chiefest enemy . 

4 When we revenge , we do ourselves ten times more hurt , than we do our enemy : we hurt him a little , it may be , in his body , goods , or good name , and wound ourselves deeply in our own souls ; hit him in the skin , and pierce the kall of our own hearts : As the Bee , that to sting another , loseth shortly her own life . it 's the foolishest thing in the world to revenge ; but a wise part , to commit it to God , best for us , and worst for our enemy . O it 's no dealing with a man that commits his cause to God , no standing before him : for though God would part from his own , yet he will not give away his servants right . It were better for an enemy , that the party that he hate's , should devose all ways of revenge in the world , by himself , and by his friends against him , than that he should put it up quietly , and leave it to God.  



And let us not stay ourselves here , in avoiding revenge , but go forward to love our enemies , and labour to do good against evil , as we are commanded , Rom. 12. ult.  

Object . I cannot do it : for he hath deserved all ill of me ; and can I then do him good ? 

Answ. And have not you done so against Almighty God , and yet he doth you good daily ? 

Object . it 's a base part for me , being wronged , disgraced , and abused , not to challenge him , and be avenged of him , if I can , else I shall be counted a cowardly fool , much more if I should do him good . 

Answ. This is but carnal Divinity , which count's it great courage to turn again and revenge , which Heathens & Turks can do , and every Bull and Boar can do , and that its baseness to put up wrongs . But it 's quite contrary : for its true valour to overcome ourselves , and conquer our unruly lusts and sinful passions , and to obey the commandment of God , Prou. 16. 32. he is more mighty that can rule himself , than he that conquers many others : And that is true baseness , for a man to be so led by his passions , as he can be are nothing , no , though God command , and the contrary turn to his own destruction . 

Object . When you have said all you can , it is impossible . 

Answ. no , it 's not impossible , though a hard thing it is , I grant : and therefore by the way , for such as profess they can bear all indignities done them , and can do them that do them , all good , as if there were no such matter , and find no difficulty in it , ( and yet but ordinary persons neither ) for my part , I do not believe them , and I doubt , they do but deceive themselves . If it were not hard to be done , it were not so worthy of a Christian. it 's therefore a yoke , but easy ; a burden , but light to the spiritual man , that is well assured of the love of God to him , and of the forgiveness of many sins . But to the carnal man , I grant , it 's wholly impossible . 

le 's labour therefore for this Faith and Assurance of forgiveness , whereby we may be enabled to do this difficult work . 

Now to draw to an end of this point of Love to our enemies , let us , I beseech you , be persuaded seriously to weigh the reasons that have been used to move to this duty , and let us suffer ourselves to be overcome of them . 

it 's the most noble and heroical duty , and truly worthy of a Christian man : hereby we shall prove ourselves to be the children of God , and do like to him ; which ought to be our greatest ambition . 

Hereby we shall show ourselves to have profited well in the School of Christ , and that we have not learned to do that every body can do , but to do some singular thing ; for so may God expect of us , after all this cost of his Word bestowed upon us , and that we are grown past children and weaklings , on towards perfection , even to do difficult duties , and such as are most contrary to our rebellious nature . The Lord persuade our hearts to conceive well of , to believe , and obey this point . 

Me thinks , whiles I am speaking . of these reasons , the heart somewhat yields to this duty , and there seems as if one should have some power to do it : and I am persuaded , that there be diverse , that at the hearing and reading of these things , if they were tried now they be hot , could be able to do something this way . 

But let them sink down so deep into our hearts , as they may abide with us , that if hereafter occasion shall be offered , we may be able to show forth the force and fruit thereof . We must look to meet with wrongs and enemies ; therefore le 's learn to take out this lesson beforehand . 

O that we could but learn this one point at this time ! how happily should we have spent our time ? Hereby we shall honour our profession , convert or convince our adversaries , and provide much comfort to our own souls : As that worthy Master Greenham , a man subject to many slanderous reports , that yet would say , these two things comforted him : First , that he found his heart not ill , but well affected to his brethren : Secondly , that when he was alone , he could humble himself to God , and pray him to forgive him , that raised them up . 

le 's labour hereunto : what else do we hearing so many Sermons continually , if we mean not to show forth the power thereof ? 

CHAP. 8.  Of Love to all men . 

Next unto our Enemies , whom must we love more ? We must love all other men . Not only our kindred , friends , acquaintance , our neighbours of the same town , country , or nation , but even all that dwell upon the face of the earth , high , low , rich , poor , men , women , yongue , old , bond , free , without or within the Church , that either are or ever may be the people of God. True , our love must begin at those that be nearest us , and must be most to those within the Church , especially to the household of Faith ; but it must stretch itself far , and wide , and over all , and we must do all duties of Love to them , as occasion shall be offered and we be able . For whosoever hath or shall have need of our help , he is our neighbour , whom we are bound to love , because God hath commanded it , and he is our own flesh . Our prayers , as a main duty of love , must reach at one time or other to all , and do them what other good we can . We must pray for the poor Pagans' , that God would send his light and truth amongst them , that they in time may be brought into the bosom of the Church , and the sheepfold of Christ jesus . 

For the Lords ancient people the jews , that he would be pleased to make those dry bones to live , and to take the veil of unbelief from off their hearts , that they may at last come to embrace and believe in the Lord jesus Christ , to their eternal salvation . And that God would in mercy bring in the fullness of the Gentiles , and to that end that he would hasten the ruin of Anchrists' Kingdom , that those nations that have long lyen under the bondage of that man of sin , and in the darkness of superstition and Idolatry , may be set at liberty , and have the light of the glorious Gospel to shine among them , to teach them to know and worship the true God aright , and to believe in jesus Christ , which is life eternal . 

And for those within the Church , we ought to pray to God to continue his mercy towards them , and to give them grace to walk worthy thereof . And for those that be fallen into their enemy's hands , and be in great distress every way , we ought to send up continual fervent prayers and strong cries , out of the bowels of compassion towards their miseries , unto Almighty God the father and protector of his Church , that though he hath punished them for their sins as pleased him , yet that he would in judgement remember mercy , and humble their hearts under his heavy hand , pardon their sins , and restore their former liberties to them again . Yea and as their bodily necessities shall be truly made known to us , we should be ready to reach out our hand to the relief thereof . 

Ob. If any will say , They be strangers to me , what have I do with them ? 

Ans. Let such a one know , that yet God's Image , nor his express commandment ought not to be strange unto us , but aught to provoke us to this duty . Yea they that be never so ignorant , profane , ungodly , whether rich or poor , we must wish well unto them , and seek their good : for as we must not hate the vices for the persons sake , so neither the person for the vices sake . Our love towards them , may be a mean to win them to God.  

Use . But alas , how few be there that think any such thing required of them ? and therefore no marvel though no conscience be made of the performance thereof : for even in those things that they know to be the will of God and their duties , yet few will be brought to the obedience of them . Who so pity's the miserable state of those that know not God , nor have any means of salvation , but be out of the pale of the Church ; as to pray earnestly to God , that he would in mercy visit them in his due time ? Alas , multitudes pray not for their own selves and families , their neighbours and nation ; and therefore no marvel they look not so far . 

But , me thinks , that fearful Prayer the Church maketh against such , Psalm 79. 6. should strike fear into them , to move them to seek to avoid the dint and danger of it . 

How sew lay to heart the long and sore afflictions , nay , the woeful desolations of our brethren in the Palatinate , Bohemia , and places adjoining ; and therefore pour out compassionate repenting and fervent prayers to God for them ? We hear of their unspeakable miseries , but are not affected with them , either to profit by their harms unto sound repentance ourselves , or to put to our helping hand , by our instant prayers to seek their deliverance . We talk much of them , and would fain see an end of their troubles , and a return of things , but few be those that do pray for them , and that so seldom , and so coldly , as we can have as little comfort , as they have hitherto found benefit : for what fruit can be expected from prayers , not joined with true repentance ? for God hears no sinners ; and let him that calls upon the Name of the Lord ( and looks to be heard ) departed from iniquity . 

I doubt not but some there are , that do compassionately and feelingly wrestle with God for them , from time to time , yea , do afflict their souls to obtain mercy for them , whose prayers are assuredly not shut out , or forgorten before God , but shall in due time have blessed effect ; but these , I doubt , are but a very few . 

And for other duties of Love , no marvel , if ( as occasion serves ) they be coldly performed to those that be further off , when we are found so faulty towards those we daily converse with . What extreme failing in the duties of forgiving wrongs , and doing good to souls and bodies of those we have to do with ? Of which we have spoken already upon one or two several occasions ; therefore I now speak no more thereof : only I pray God to give us this true Love , that may reach out itself to all men , as occasion is , or shall be offered . 

CHAP. 9  Of Love to the Saints . 

Now I come to the love we owe to the Saints and true people of God ; and these are to be loved in the greatest degree of all other men , and to be had in high price and account , Gal. 6. 10.  Psalm 15. 4.  

Thus did David , Psalm 16. 3.  All his delight was in the Saints . Psal. 119. 63.  He was their companion . Psal. 101.  He would have such to attend upon him , and such only as near as he could . So Cornelius , Acts 10. 7. had a soldier that feared God , that was at his hand . 

Reasons of this are : First , the Image of God is most clearly seen in them : we are to reverence and love the least part of it , wheresoever we see it , even in wicked men ; how much more then , the brightness of it , which stands in the graces of the Spirit , wisdom , holiness , and righteousness , wherein they most lively resemble their Maker ? And the more of this we see , the more we ought to love , in children , friends , neighbours , or whomsoever . This is to be esteemed far above wit , beauty , strength , wealth , activity , or any gift of Nature or Art ; these be toys to grace : Favour is deceitful , and beauty vanity , but one that fears God , he or she , shall be praised . Therefore herein Rebecca was wiser than Isaac , who loved jacob for his grace , more than Esau for his skill in hunting . 

Secondly , God loves them best ; therefore so should we . As whom the King favours , all do honour . These be his secret ones , precious in his account , as the apple of his eye ; he hath rebuked Kings for their sakes . 

When he drowned all the world , he preserved his little number : As Lot in Sodoms' destruction . Yea , if there had but ten righteous persons been found in five Cities , they had all been saved from the burning . These be marked in jerusalem from the common destruction , Ezek. 9  These he sealed , Revel . 7. to be preserved from the plagues bodily and spiritual , that should come upon the world . He makes more account of one righteous one , than of a thousand other , Isa. 43. 3 , 4.  As he did , when to make way for his people , the jews , into Canaan , he gave seven mighty Nations to the sword . 

Thirdly , they be more excellent than any other , Prou. 12. 26.  The righteous is more excellent than his neighbour : meaning , that is not righteous , but wicked . more excellent in this life , at his death , and in the day of judgement . These are written in the Book of Life , be washed white in the blood of the Lamb , clothed with his Righteousness , aricher robe than ever Solomon wore on his back : adorned with the precious jewels of God's sanctifying graces , attended by the Angels , born from above , the children of God , members of Christ , temples of the Holy Ghost , heirs of all things here , & shall at death , and after the day of judgement , be inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven , prepared for them before the beginning of the world . And for the wicked , we may say , as Psal. 1. 4.  It is not so with them . And therefore good reason these should be best beloved . 

4 Lastly , they be most useful , and can do us most good , by their counsel , example , prayers , when we be present with them , yea , absent from them : He that walks with the wise , shall be the wiser ; much good may we learn , and comfort may we get , by conversing with them , that be truly godly . 

For their sake the world continues ; if the number of the Elect were fulfilled , the wicked should no longer rout here , but come to judgement , and be sent to their own place . 

For their sake , and at their prayers , many plagues are kept from the Land ; as at Moses prayers they were from the Israelites : Many judgements entered , have been removed , as Plague and Pestilence , and unseasonable times ; yea , final desolation prevented : and had it not been for a few , we might have looked to have been as Sodom , and as Gomorrha . All fare the better for the Righteous sake ; as all that were in the ship ▪ with Paul , had their lives given them , and were preserved from drowning for his sake , Acts 27.  

Use . 1.  This then serves to reprove the folly of carnal people , that so dote upon wealth and honour , and things of this world , as if they that had them were the happy men ; O they be made , they cannot do amiss . And these , in their language , are usually called the best men in the Town , and these they crouch to and add mire , when grace and the fear of God in any is little regarded ; esteeming the servants of God without wealth ( how gracious soever ) but poor snakes . 

But , O folly and madness to worship the Golden Calf ! so highly to esteem men for red and white earth , gifts of God's left hand , given even to his enemies , things transitory & soon fading away , and that cannot keep their owners from the damnation of hell ; and not to esteem of the precious graces of God's Spirit , given from above only to his Elect , and which do abide unto everlasting life . 

Elisha , that worthy Prophet of the Lord , was of another mind , who , but for the goodness that was in King jehoshaphat , would not have once looked towards jehoram , that wicked King of Israel , 2 Kin. 3. 14. which folly , of preferring wealth above grace , the Apostle St. james rebuketh , Cap. 2. 1 , 2. etc.  

Secondly , this rebuketh such , as make account of all alike , especially , if they be any thing civil ; one as welcome to them as another , as much commended in life and at death : like as well of the civil , as of them that be truly religious , show as much countenance , yield as much help to one as to the other . If they have any thing to give , they put no difference between the poor , good , or bad . 

These are justly to be suspected , and to be thought to be neither Fish nor Flesh ; for where true grace is , their eyes be anointed , that they can see a difference between men , and grace will draw to grace , and as discern it , so embrace it : for though we challenge no such gift , as some that say , If they talk but half ▪ an hour with a man , they will know whether he be the child of God or not ; yet , I say , God gives grace to discern grace where it is , from bare civility , at least by conversing with them , and to prefer one infinitely before the other . 

Many will commend a mere civil man , in whom its easy to discern , that there is not one dram of piety or true grace , to be as honest a man as need to be , and think and speak as well of him , as of a true good Christian ; but this is a very dangerous sign , that there is no more but civil honesty in themselves . 

Thirdly , this reproveth a more fearful sin yet , and yet the common practice of some , that in stead of loving the godly best of all persons , they can worst away with them . They could love such a kinsman , tenant , servant , etc. but that he is ( as they call them ) a Puritan , and they cannot abide these precise fellows . Nay , they have loved such and such a one , till it pleased God to convert him , and ever since they could never abide him : As the chief Priests dealt by Saul , after he was converted , and became a Paul Why ? he was the same man that he was , only he was better now : So it 's with the other that I spoke of ; which is a plain argument , that they hate them for their goodness , as David complains , Psalm 38. 20.  Though they pretend they hate them for this or that fault , yet ▪ that is not so ; for they love those that live in greater faults , and themselves live in far greater , than they can possibly charge them withal : The truth is , it 's because they are better than themselves , and dare not be companions with them in evil , 1 Pet. 4. 4. therefore the openly profane hate them : They hate them , because they fly a higher pitch , than they are willing to put themselves to the pains to attain to , and so they count they discredit them , who , but for these precise ones , should be counted the best , and as good , as one would desire . 

Besides , these tell them , that their fruitless profession of Religion will not serve to bring them to Heaven ; and therefore urge them to look further , which they are not willing to do ; and this makes them wish , they were all out of the way : for they only trouble the world , they should be quiet but for them . And thus our Saviour Christ and the Gospel bring variance , not into the same Town where before all went hand in hand to sin , but into the same Family ; because some will receive the Gospel and the power of it , some others will not : therefore they are now at odds , that were all one before in evil . 

This sin hath most fearfully overspread this Nation , so that its more safe from the hatred and ill tongues of most , to be any thing , rather than to be zealous and godly . A fearful thing . Every man loves a courageous soldier , a diligent and resolute servant for his Master , a man forward in his business ; only forwardness and zeal for God and in Religion , that cannot be endured . These be they that be the troublers , and a burden to the places where they be , and so to the Land , and be railed on as the vilest persons , when as yet these are perhaps upon their knees , pleading with God for the Nation , when multitudes are swilling , and swearing , and provoking God's wrath against it ; therefore we have small cause to be weary of them : the Land , no doubt , fares the better for them every day . 

Is this the fruit of above threescore years' peace and plenty of the Gospel ; wherein it had been meet we had all been such as I mean : that is , zealous and true hearted Christians , that now those few that labour to show forth the power of true godliness , in an universal obedience to the Word they profess , that these should be had in derision , and be a wonder in Israel ? As sure as we live , if all in this Land served God , as it is to be feared , some do , in an idle and mere ceremonious coming to Church , hearing of Sermons , and receiving the Sacrament , and yet live as they list , and keep their lusts still , and the sins they have a mind to ; God would soon ease himself of us , and vomit up such a lukewarm Nation : for how odious is this to God , to have people draw near to him with their lips , when their hearts are divided from him , and run after their sins : to hear his Word , and hate to be reform , or to mend a little in what they list , and no further than they please ; to call upon God , and yet departed not from evil ; in receiving the Lords Supper , to profess Faith in Christ , and obedience to all God's commandments , and in their lives to show the clean contrary every day ? what is this but to provoke God against us , and to deceive our own souls ? 

And as for those particular persons that are haters of Gods true servants , they are no such themselves , and their state is fearful . For they are not led by the spirit that David and Cornelius was , and which I pray God I may ever be . They be no true Members of the Church here , nor shall be heirs of God's Kingdom hereafter , as Psal. 15. 4.  None of Christ's Disciples , who are known by loving their brethren , john 13. 35. nor are translated from death to life , 1 john 3. 14. but remain under death to this hour : Nor have any love to God in them , 1 john 5. 1. for if they loved him that begetteth , they would love those that are begotten of him . 

But they are of the seed of the Serpent , bearing enmity against the seed of the Woman , against Christ in his members ; of Cains lineage , of the brood of Ishmael , worse than Balaam ; Numb . 23. that said , How shall I curse , where God hath not cursed ? or detest , where God hath not detested ? are led by Satan , who is an accuser of the brethren , Revel . 12 , 10. who provide woefully for themselves : for God said to Abraham , and so to all that be of the seed of Abraham by true faith , I will bless them that bless thee , and curse them that curse thee . 

Their ill will is indeed against Christ , and reaches to him ; as he said from heaven to Saul , Why persecutest thou me ? and , it 's hard kicking against the pricks . Look throughout all the Scriptures , and you shall see , that fearful judgements have overtaken the haters , and pursuers , or opposers of the true servants of God. Later Histories of the Church , and our own daily experience affords abundance of very true , sensible , and fearful examples in this kind . And if at the day of judgement , they that have done them no good shall be set on the left hand , and hear this doleful sentence , Go ye cursed etc. than what shall become of them that have hated them , and done them hurt ? Let every one therefore that hath been guilty in this thing , repent deeply of it , as there is cause , and so shake off this black and fearful Mark , else the time will come , when they shall wish , and would think themselves happy , to be shadowed under their wing whom now they hate ; when they shall see them received , and themselves refused . 

Yet here again let me put in this by the way , that I count not those for God's true servants who are such only in Profession , and not in their Practice . 

Some zealous Professors there are , which yet are not so diligent in their callings as they ought to be . Some not so careful to keep out of debt , or not to pay their debts , but hang on every bush , and break promises shamefully , to the just opening the mouths of their Neighbours . Some be rash and indiscreet , given to censure too deeply . Some spend all their zeal in crying out against Ceremonies , and neglect matters more belonging to edifying themselves and others . Some forsake their own Ministers when they preach , very uncharitably and indiscreetly . Some separate themselves from the Church , and our Ministry and Society altogether . Now if a Minister , or any Christian shall show his dislike of such courses in general , or rebuke any particular person for any of them , he is not to be ill thought of for so doing , nor to be reputed an hater of God's servants . 

Fourthly , there are diverse sorts of them that be no open enemies to God's children , that yet will be found no other , when God shall come to judgement ; and therefore here to be discovered and reproved . They be not with them ; therefore they be against them . They can sit and hear them unjustly evil spoken of , and yet be never grieved , nor once open their mouths in their behalf . That pry into their lives , and if they can spy a hole in their coat , they reproach them by it , and tell it from one to another , and that with no grief . Can cast out a scoff against them : That care not for their company . Delight rather in those that spend the time in telling News or Tales , of this or that body : with these they can sit long ; but for other that will hold to any godly speech , they take no pleasure in them : They make matches with such rather than with those ; invite them , and love their company to choose . These be lukewarm Christians , Neuters , neither the one , nor the other , of both sides , of every side : but God can see them to be Enemies , and will set them on his left hand ; when it will not serve them to plead that they never hated them , or opposed them . Let men look well to this Point : for there be many that think well of themselves , for good Christians , that yet will be found of this number : But as they can have no sound peace to their Consciences , so shall they never have good name in the Church of God , till it be otherwise . 

Fiftly and lastly , let this be a Consolation to all those whose hearts do bear witness , and their practice bewray that they truly love the Saints ; they can have no better sign of the grace of God , or that they be true Members of the Church here , and shall be inheriters of glory hereafter ; that they love God , be Christ's Disciples , and be translated from death to life . Always provided , that you deceive not yourselves in this point , as no doubt diverse do , To think , that because you love some one or two choice ones , that you are a lover of God's people , though you neglect all the rest : which is not so ; for whosoever loves any in truth , loves the grace of God in whomsoever he sees it , rich or poor , high or low . Or because you love some that be of your Kin , or for some outward good qualification they have , or some common gift of learning , eloquence , or because they be rich , or be such as have done you some pleasure , or may do : for if your love be set upon God's servants for such by respects , this is not the true Love of the Saints : But if you love them simply for the work of God's sanctifying grace that yousee or hear to be in them , though you never saw them , nor never shall , yet for the grace of God your heart is knit to them , as Jonathan's to David : or if you know and live near them● though they never did you any special good turn , or be nothing to you outwardly and in the flesh , nay , though any such have reproved you of some fault they have seen in you , yet you love them for the Image of God that shines in them : yea , though you see , hear , or know some imperfections in them , and things worthy blame , yet seeing signs of sincerity you love them notwithstanding , are glad when they do well , and grieve at the contrary : this is good . 

Examine yourselves by these things ; if you be taken tardy , then deceive yourselves no longer : If your heart witness on your side by these trials , then be comforted , and labour to increase in this grace , that so your evidence may be strong : And the rather , because this hath kept many from sinking in time of Temptation , when all other evidences have been to seek . Thus much of the love that all aught to bear to the People of God.  

CHAP. 10.  How true Christians should love each other . 

Now I will add yet one thing more , and that is , How true Christians should love and carry themselves towards each other . They ought to love one another most entirely , and more than they do , or can love the common sort . They must love them as fellow-members of the same mystical body whereof Christ is the head . Now how do the members of the natural body love , stick together , and seek the good of each other , defend and tender one another , rejoice in each others welfare , and grieve at the contrary ? so ought the Members of the spiritual body much more , if it were possible . We cannot love all thus ; for all are not fellow-members in this body of Christ.  

Secondly , they must love as brethren : therefore the love that is to be between them is called Brotherly kindness , 2 Pet. 1. 7.  Therefore though some scoffing Ismaels' deride this name , and say , O you be of the brethren : yet we are not to be ashamed of this name , seeing GOD so speaks . 

God's children be brothers and sisters ; they have the same Father , which is God , the same Mother , the Church , begotten by the same immortal seed , the Word of God , nourished with the same milk , and meat of the same Word and holy Sacraments , heirs of the same Inheritance in Heaven by Christ jesus . A better Brotherhood than that of nature , as much as the spirit is better than the flesh : Yea , and a more lasting Brotherhood ; that will last when this is vanished away , which lasteth only for this frail life of ours , but the other abideth for ever . Therefore our Saviour Christ said , Who is my Mother , and who are my brethren ? Natural brethren ought to love dear , how much more we that are of a better kindred ? 

it 's very pleasing to God our Father ; and to the Church our Mother , that all their children should live in love , as Psal. 133. 1. and a joy to all the brothers and sisters ; As it is a joy to any earthly Parents to have their children love well together : and the contrary is very grievous , and they will mourn to each other , There be two Boys can never agree , two Girls that love not one another ; what will they do when we are gone ? 

Now to love as brethren , is this ; To have Brotherly ▪ affections each to other inwardly , and to declare the same outwardly by brotherly actions . For the first , we are bidden , Rom. 12.  Be affectioned to lòue one another ; as to weep with them that weep , to have compassion of their miseries , as Heb. 13. 9  As the Samaritan had compassion on the man that fell among thieves . And our Saviour Christ had compassion on the spiritual misery of the People , Mat. 9 36.  St. Paul was affected with the miseries of the jews , and took them deeply to heart , Rom. 9 1 , 2 , 3.  So Nehemiah , hearing of the distress of the Church of the jews at jerusalem , though he were well himself , yet he so mourned for them as it was seen in his face . The contrary is blamed , Amos 6.  no man is sorry for the affliction of joseph . 

So to rejoice with them that rejoice , as Luke 1. 58. yea , though it were ill with ourselves . As Paul in prison , yet rejoiced to hear of the welfare of the Churches . These brotherly affections be so necessary , as all brotherly actions not proceeding from these , are in no account with God ; As a man may give all his goods to the poor , and have no love , and so be but a tinkling Cymbal , 1 Cor. 13.  As if a man should give , that he might merit thereby , or to purchase credit , or for companies sake , or with upbraiding ; and from no compassion of the poor man's misery , it would neither please God , nor profit him that doth it . 

So to admonish one ( which is a special duty of Love ) but if done with twitting & reproaching , as glad they have some matter against him , it hath lost his grace and reward with God.  

And herein , the poor may show as much love to their fellow-brethrens as the rich ; which may comfort them which are ready to be discouraged , and think they are unhappy , and have nothing to show any love in ; Yes , you may be as plentiful in brotherly affections , as any other . 

Now for brotherly actions , they must be adjoined to show the truth of the affections ; they be sergeant , if not thus approved , as 1 john 3. 17. like those speeches , james 2. 15 , 16.  

Brotherly actions be to the soul and body , as need is . To the bodily necessities of our fellow-brethrens in ordinary wants , we must give of our superfluity ; in extraordinary calamities , of our main substance : And to think it honour enough , that God makes us givers to them , that be as dear to him as ourselves , and shall be inheritors of the same glory with us , though we abound now , and they be suffered to want . 

So to the soul in admonition , exhortation , consolation , and prayer , which are the principal and most profitable fruits of our love one to another . And all these aught to be performed purely , fervently , and constantly , as we heard in handling the properties of Love.  

But , Beloved , if we come to look for these things among Christians , they will all be found very much wanting , both brotherly affections , and brotherly actions , and those that be , oft not pure , but with looking at ourselves , not fervent , but faint and few , nor constant , but short and brittle , broken off by affliction , especially , if it continue , when yet there is most need : for a brother is born for adversity . 

Many Christians will be kind to another in the beginning of their affliction , and for a little while ; but if it hold long , than most fail him , and their love is spent as it were . Or otherwise , their love is broken off by some unkindness , and not readily sodered again so strong as it was afore . 

There is much strangeness between Christians ; they care not one for another almost : they see each other at Church , but not all the week after . Peace hath made Christians proud and careless ; every man can subsist by himself , and hath no need of his brother : We may justly fear , God will send us troubles , to make us glad one of another . 

But there is use enough one of another even now , if we had eyes to see it , to help , encourage , comfort , and confirm each other in our holy profession and Christian course , against the manifold discouragements and temptations we are subject to meet with ; and to whet on , and set an edge one upon another , that grow so dull ; to lay our brands together , that we may catch some heat from one another ; to mind one another of such changes as may come , and so of our last end , to prepare for them in time . 

Stronger Christians , and of better gifts , look so hoverly on the weak ; so the rich upon the poor : Fie upon it , are they not your brethren ? do you not know them , because of their russet or leather coat ? he hath as much grace , may be , more than you , and shall have ( it may be ) a better place in Heaven than you ; and do you esteem so meanly of him ? it 's counted pride , when any will not know their poor kindred ; know jesus Christ and the grace of God in them , and disdain not their company , though your inferiors ; seeing , as you may comfort and refresh them by your love , so you may receive much benefit from them again . 

Christian's should meet together , not to feasting only , but sometimes to build up one another by holy conference . and this will increase love greatly : for when we see the grace of God one in another , and get good one by another , our love is hereby greatly furthered . 

Another fault too much among many Christians , is , as want of bowels of tender compassion towards our brethren in distress , so there is not that forwardness and freeness to relieve their necessities . 

First , for their bodily wants , there is too much straitness ofttimes ; whereas if we did consider , that they are not only our own flesh ( as the common sort are ) but our fellow-members , fellow-brethrens , and such as whom God might have made us takers from them , and them givers to us , it would enlarge our heart and our hand towards them . Well , what we do for them , is not to fellow-members and fellow-brethrens only , but to Christ jesus himself ; and it shall be so counted for at the last and great day . it 's not so much theirs to whom we give it , as it 's our own , and furthers our reckoning : As the seed is not the grounds so much , as the owners that sows it , and for his benefit . It will be all reckoned ours at the great payment day , even to a cup of cold water : and we shall see he hath not forgotten any work of our love , but hath kept just books and true accounts , and will then say to us , Come ye blessed of my Father , inherit , etc.  For I was oft , in my members , in a poor condition , and ye ministered unto me ; now receive a thousand fold , even that Kingdom that was prepared for you from the beginning of the world . 

And for relieving their spiritual wants , there is oft too much want of compassion and care . How far may a Christian go out of his way , ere another , with the spirit of meekness , will step in by a wholesome admonition , to stop him in his course ? The heavy not comforted with a word in season , nor the fainting encouraged , but every man minding his own matters , as though we were strangers , and God had given us no charge one of another . 

Nay , there is yet a greater fault to be found among many Christians , than these two that I have spoken of , and that is this , That sundry of them can take leave to fall out , and contend with each other , and that very deeply : sometimes for words , sometimes for small matters of the world ; yea , and some when they be out , cannot find the way in again , nor are they ashamed of that they have done , but can lie and continue in it month after month . Is this the behaviour of fellow-members ? think we our Head Christ will endure or bear it , to have his body thus rend one member from another ? nay , one would think , is this possible : What do you think of yourself , that you are a true member of Christ by Faith ? Well , and what do you think of him , that you are thus rend and divided from ? I dare not but think ( you will say ) but he belongs to God. And do you think then , that the member of Christ should either thus deal , or thus be dealt withal , and that by his fellow member ? He that should see one member in a man's natural body , offering hurt and violence to another , would he not think the man were mad ? What shall we say then , when Christians can so eagerly pursue each other in words and deeds ( as too oft is seen ) shall we say they be in their right mind ? but rather , that the spirit of pride , or covetoushesse , or some such humour , hath intoxicated their brains . This will cost them dear , or ever they can make their peace with God and their Conscience ; and they must fall out as deeply with themselves for their folly , & with indignation take a holy revenge of themselves , that they may fear ever to do the like again . 

Is this the behaviour of brothers and sisters , to fly in one another's face , to live at such odds , as that all the Parish takes notice of it ? If natural brethren should do so , all men would cry shame of it . Doth our father like this , think you ? our mother , and fellow-brethrens round about , that see or hear of it , do you think this goes not to their hearts ? And think you , you do not open the mouths of Canaanites and Perizzites that are every where , and hear of it ? Think we good , to give them such just matter to speak evil of us , and of our holy profession for it ? Our father Abraham could say to his inferior Lot , Let there be no strife between me and thee : for we are brethrens . A body would think that the name Brother , should either prevent all strife , or at least quickly break the neck of it . 

Though good Christians , may out of brittlenesse of nature , fall out on the sudden , yet , me thinks , grace should enforce them to recall themselves , and yield to each other , and come in , though they were of never such a proud and stout stomach naturally . Else may they not suspect themselves to be bastards , rather than right bred brothers ? to be wooden legs , and no living members ? at least they have got the numb palsy , for which they had need to seek speedy remedy . 

Let us , I beseech you , so many of us as have been faulty in any of these three things , see how ill they have becommed us , be ashamed and humbled for them , and amend , that we may have sound arguments , that we are true members of Christ's body , and lively and feeling ones . 

Think like brethren , speak as brethren , both to face and behind their backs , and do like brethren , so shall we glorify God our Father , credit and comfort the Church our Mother , and our fellow-brethrens , and stop the mouths of Papists , Atheists , profane ones , mere civil ones and worldlings , that would not a little rejoice at our divisions . 

Put on brotherly affections , show them by brotherly actions , let not small matters make unkindness , departed from much for peace and love , let our differences be speedily compounded by others , if we cannot agree them within ourselves ; fear rather to do the least wrong , than to suffer a greater : so shall we be fit to do good one to another upon all occasions ; for goodness goes forward where love is , but contention or unkindness stops the course of all that is good . So shall we also be stronger against our common adversaries , the World , and Devil , which do so hate us , as a body would think it were meet for us to stick fast and close together , and make much one of another , seeing this wicked world is bend against us.  

Let me conclude this my speech to you Christians , with that blessed exhortation of Saint Paul , 2 Cor. 13 , 11.  Finally , my brethren , fare ye well , be perfect , be of good comfort , be of one mind , live in peace , and the God of love and peace shall be with you . 

CHAP. 11.  Of relieving the poor . 

I Will add but one thing more , and so make an end of what I purpose to say of this duty of Love , in which I have been longer than I thought of at first : And that is touching one branch , and duty of love , which is the relieving the necessities of the poor ; of which , because I have spoken some thing in one of the Notes of Love , namely , that its Bountiful , I will be so much the shorter ; handling some things here , that were not there so convenient to be spoken of . 

The Scriptures , both of Old and New Testament , are plentiful about this Point , either Commandments touching it , and Promises of blessing thereto , or threatenings against the neglect of it . 

In the Old Law God commanded to leave their Grounds unsowen , and Trees ungathered the seventh year , for the poor , Exod. 23. 10 , 11.  Leu. 25. 3.  And the years that they sowed and gathered in , they were bidden to leave glean , Deut. 24. 19 to the end . 

How oft in the Prophets doth the Lord call for Mercy ? yea , tries the truth of their Religion , and performance of holy Duties by this , as St. james doth , chap. I and the last verse , giving such charge of the poor in general , particularly , of the widow , stranger and fatherless . 

It is commanded , esay 58. 7.  a very excellent place , plain and plentiful ; and in most of the Prophets its called for , as a thing that the jews much failed in , and were covetous and cruel . Heb. 13 , To do good , and to distribute , forget not , etc. Ephes. 4. 28.  Mat. 5. 45.  He commands it , whose we are , and all we have at his appointment . I will add a few Reasons to move to this Duty : 

1 To let pass to speak of the example of God , who fills the whole world with his goodness , and feeds both man and beast ; who hath also been bountiful to every of us that are unworthy ( as jacob said ) of the least of his mercies ; Let the examples of God's servants , who herein obeyed and imitated the Lord in all ages ; let them move us. Elisha took order for the poor widow , for the payment of her debts , and for her own maintenance , 2 Kings 4.  job was notable in this duty , as appears Chap. 31. from verse 16. to 21.  Our Saviour Christ of that little that he received for his maintenance , yet gave something to the poor : therefore ( judas carrying the bag ) when our Saviour Christ bade him , that he did do quickly , the Disciples thought he had meant he should give somewhat to the poor . Zacheus , being converted , gave half his goods etc. Luke 19  So Acts 2.  & 4. the rich sold , and relieved the poor . Dorcas a good Woman this way , Acts 9 towards the end . Cornelius' also a notable example , Acts 10. 1.  There was also a contribution made by the Christians for the poor brethren in judea , because of a famine was among them , Acts 11. 29.  Onesiphorus is commended , and Gaius for an host to the poor Saints of God.  

2 it 's a sacrifice very acceptable to God , Heb. 13. 16.  Phil. 4. 18. as Cornelius his Alms came up into remembrance before God , Acts 10. 4.  Yea , so pleasing , as when his service and that cannot stand together , he prefers mercy before sacrifice , Host 6. 6.  And so pleasing , as no duty of Religion , ordinary or extraordinary , is welcome to God , if this duty be wanting , as esay 1  & 58. from verse 5. to 13.  What stronger motive can there be than this , seeing its our happiness that we can do any thing that GOD will be well pleased with ? 

3 We are but Stewards in respect of God ( though owners among men ) who hath so delivered these things out of his hand to us , as yet he hath reserved a Royalty in them , and the appointing how they shall be disposed , and will call us to accounted of our stewardship , who hath appointed the poor a part : therefore without this , we can bring in no good bills of account . 

We must not be like the Giant's den , that have all the footings coming to us , and none from us. As that rich churl that coming over among his Tenants at the half year , a poor body asked him a penny , no he told them , he came to receive money , and not to give : the contrary had been better sense and reason a great deal . Else how can we show ourselves thankful to God , that hath made us able to give , that might have made us receivers , the tail as well as the head , it being in his hand to make poor or rich , and there being nothing in us to move him to give us the better part ? 

it 's a great honour to be the Almners of the King of Heaven and Earth , and that to those that be not our own flesh only , but may be , such as belong to the Kingdom of God , as well as ourselves . If we should see an Ox or Ass in misery , ready to famish , or lying under the burden , we ought to pity and help them : how much more our Christian Brother ? it 's honour enough that we may be givers and lender's , though we keep not all to ourselves . it 's good manners for them that sit at the upper end of the Table , when they have cut well , to set down some to them that sit below , that all may go away satisfied , and praise the Master of the Feast . 

4 By our liberality and merciful dealing we shall bring much glory to God : for we shall cause many thanks to be given him from the poor , 2 Cor. 8. and make them more to depend upon God , and to speak good of his dispensing of things ; that though he hath appointed some to be poor , yet hath also commanded the rich to have respect unto them . 

5 We shall do them a great deal of good whom we relieve : First to their bodies , feeding their hungry bellies , clothing their naked loins , refreshing their bowels : Or by lending we set them to their work , whereby they may get to live of . Next to their souls , keeping them from murmuring , impatience , theft , discontent : if they have no goodness in them it 's the way to break their hearts , and to bring them to good , or else to convince them at least : if they have any good , we shall comfort their hearts , strengthen their faith , and make them serve God much the more cheerfully . 

But especially we shall do ourselves a great deal of good : First , we shall procure many prayers ▪ of the children of God for us. which is no small benefit , 2 Tim. 7. and the three last verses , the third Epistle of St. john the first and second verses : St. Paul prayeth earnestly in the one place for Onesiphorus , and St. john in the other for Gaius his host ; and such prayers be not in vain . 

Besides , we bring upon ourselves a great many blessings , God having made such promises of blessing to this Duty rightly performed . 

We provide well for our outward estate : for he that soweth liberally , shall reap liberally , and with increase . God hath given his Word for requital , Pro. 19 17.  So that we have God in our Cupboard for it ( as we may say with holy reverence ) he is the Poors Surety , whose word is better than any man's bond : Heaven and Earth must be empty ere he will fail to pay . He that finds seed to the sower will supply to such , 2 Cor. 8.  His righteousness shall endure for over , Psal. 112.  God will not put him out of his Farm that pays his Rent so well , but bless his stock and store , his crop and increase , Deut. 15. 10.  Eccles. 7. 1.  

Yea , he will bless them , not in their goods only , but in their names , they shall have love and a good report , which is better than a good ointment , and than much silver and gold , Prou. 22. 1.  How fresh and sweet is Mary's name still , for her ointment poured out ; and Gaius , whose name is used , when we speak of a bountiful man to the people of God ; he is a Gaius we say ? Yea , God will bless such in their souls , Prou. 11. 17.  Isa. 58. from verse 8. on forward . Matth. 5. the merciful shall obtain mercy . As on the contrary , God will not hear the prayer of the unmerciful man , Isa. 1. 15.  Prou. 21. 13.  He that stops his ear at the cry of the poor , etc.  Nay , God will not bless the merciful man in this world only , but at the resurrection of the Just , Luke 14. when they shall hear this comfortable and most sweet word , Come ye blessed , etc. because he count's it as done to himself ; and will we not give to God that gives all , nor to jesus Christ , that spared not his life for us ? If we say , Yes to God or Christ , we will give any thing , else God forbid ; God takes it done to himself , that is done to any of his . Whereas the Lord will plague both here and hereafter the unmerciful man : here , as Nabal , whom he struck that he died ; and the Fool , Luke 12. that had all for himself , never mentions any body else , was struck with sudden death ; and hereafter , as the rich glutton , Luke 16. for no covetous or unmerciful man shall ever come in the Kingdom of heaven : but there shall be judgement without mercy , to them that show no mercy : they that will not give crumbs of bread on earth , shall be denied drops of water in hell . 

Nay , God will not only bless the liberal and merciful man himself , but his posterity after him , Psalm 37. 26.  The son of a Tenant , that paid his rent duly , shall not be put out his of Farm . Whereas God will curse the posterity of unmerciful men , and pluck from them the poors portion , which their wicked fathers unconscionably hoarded up among their own ; God will let the extortioner catch him , or give him up to a riotous wasteful course , that shall consume all : one way or other God will draw it out of his belly ; and he oft dies in misery , whose father had no mercy . 

Therefore , howsoever they have a Proverb , Happy is that son , whose father goes to the Devil , yet it 's most wicked and false : for even for outward happiness they miss of it , except it be some odd one , that by Repentance breaks off , and heals his father's sin by mercifulnesse to the poor . 

So that every way a merciful man provides well for himself , furthers his reckoning , and brings a great heap of blessings upon himself and his . But an unmerciful cruel man is well called a miserable man ; for of all men , a covetous man is most miserable , in goods , name , soul and posterity , here and hereafter . 

Use 1  This rebuketh a number of cruel , and unmerciful , and hard hearted men , of whom there are every where some seen . True , the Gospel ( God be thanked ) hath prevailed with many , and they show forth some good fruits of their Faith and Love : But a number be usurers , oppressors , grinders , rakers , all for themselves , and so covetous , as they will part from nothing by their good will : if any thing come from them , it 's so hardly , as one should wring water out of a stone , or pull away a piece of their flesh ; as Nabal , that sent away David's servants empty , and with a churlish answer . 

Some others so prodigal and riotous , and given to their pleasures , and to all excess , as they waste their state so fast , as they disable themselves to do that good they might ; it 's not to be had : Luxury keeps them so bare , which if they had grace to measure their matters with judgement , might live a great deal better themselves , and do much good where need is . 

Or if some be so rich , as they hold their state , yet they lay it on so upon themselves and theirs , as no cost is spared upon brave apparel , new fashions , costly and curious diet , hawks , hounds , dice , cards , game 's , that yet when it comes to a matter of giving , are as pinching , as they that have not the tithe of their estate , can beteeme nothing , to the poor or good uses , very frank in idle expenses to serve their own lust , very sparing to those that have need ; like the Glutton , Luke 16. who spared nothing from himself , nor nothing for poor Lazarus . And those , Amos 6. that fed to the full of the fattest , and drunk of the sweetest , till they were fitter to stretch themselves , and tumble upon their costly beds , than to do any good , yet they had not so much as a thought of the poor that were in want . And as the Fool , Luke 12. that made account he had much , and all for himself ; Soul , eat , drink , and take thine ease , thou hast goods laid up for ( thee ) for many years . 

Notwithstanding the commandment of God , which they cannot be ignorant of , and the Law of Nature , which would be holpen , if they were poor , Gods and good men's example , and the many promises of blessing made to this duty , yet are no whit moved by all these , but fast glued to the world , and can hear nothing that should pull any thing from them . This was one of Sodoms' sins , Contempt of the poor . 

Let these sorts of men know , they are not so ill for others , as they be for themselves : As they show well , there is no love of God or men in them , as 1 john 3  Who so hath this world's good , and sees his brother have need , and shuts up his compassion against him , how dwelleth the love of God in him ? So they will pull some judgement of God upon their own heads , as their Predecessors , whom I have named , have done . And this is one reason , no doubt , that men's goods shift masters so oft ; besides the ill account they will make of their stewardship , when they shall be called thereto , for which they must make their reckoning , to hear no better sentence than , OH evil and unfaithful servant , take him , bind him hand and foot , and cast him into utter darkness . 

Let these better bethink themselves in time , and break off their sins by repentance , and their unrighteousness by mercy to the poor , that there may be a healing of their error , and a preventing the judgements of God : O that my counsel from God may be acceptable to them . 

2 But for those , that out of conscience of God's commandment , and faith in God's promises made to this duty , out of a zeal to bring glory to God , do good to others , and to further their own reckoning ; make conscience to be doing good with a merciful heart , carry a liberal hand , as God gives ability in themselves , and occasion from others : let them take it to themselves , as a good mark of the truth of their Religion , and know they can no way provide better for their comfort , or the continuance of God's blessing upon them and their estate , than by continuance in this duty . 

3 And thirdly , let this provoke all sorts of men , to take knowledge of this duty of mercifulnesse to the poor , as one part of God's will ; and well weighing the reasons used to provoke thereto , set themselves to make conscience of the performance thereof : which that they may do indeed , they must be persuaded to remove out of the may certain vices , that be deadly enemies thereto , and labour for the contrary virtues . 

1.  The first is Unbelief , which , as it breeds many other vices , so that of Vnmercifulnesse ; for that casts so many doubts and fears of what they may want themselves , and that it will hinder them in their estate , to give here and there , as they withdraw : therefore labour for Faith to believe , that as God will perform all his promises , so those made to this duty ; and therefore that its the high way to thriving . and this will set us to it , and that with chearfulnesse . 

2.  Pride , which is seen in excess of costly attire for ourselves and ours , aiming at high pitches and great portions for our children , and such and such estates must be obtained ; this must needs hinder liberality : therefore the Apostle , 1 Tim. 2. 9 , 10. forbids women to be decked with costly apparel , but commands to array themselves with good works : Noting , they cannot do both ; for the back is a thief : the meaning is , when its superfluous , and beyond their ability , all duties discharged : O what an infinite deal of good might be done , if but the superfluities of folk's apparel were taken away , which might very well be spared ! 

3 The like may be said of intemperance excess of cheer , variety & costliness of dishes at men's tables : God allows to men according to their degrees , to some usually , to others at festival times & days of greater rejoicing ; yet to none excess : or so as they thereby be disabled for such good works as their place calls for at their hands . The excess of this Land in these two forenamed things , would abundantly not only relieve the wants of our poor at home , but would make a blessed supply of the most woeful and crying necessities of our distressed brethren abroad . 

And is it meet that some should be hungry , and others drunken ? as the Apostle saith , 1 Cor. 11. 21.  Were it not much meeter , that they had our superfluities ( which do us but hurt ) to supply their necessities , and so both should be better ? The Lord give us at last to make conscience of this Duty ; it 's more than high time so to do . 

4 Idleness and unthriftinesse , which usually go together , are great lets of liberality . For , if one go ever to the heap , and by labour add nothing thereto , in time it will consume , and so he shall have nothing for himself nor the poor : therefore the Apostle , Ephes. 4. 28. commands to work with the hands , that so there may be wherewith to give to them that want . 

But usually idleness is joined with spending , gaming , drinking , and such unthrifty courses , and this hastens beggary the faster , and so prevents liberality in a high degree . The provident and thrifty are fittest to do good : as the good Housewife in the last of the Proverbs . 

5 Covetousness is especially to be cast out , as the direct opposite to mercifulnesse to the poor , as contrary as fire and water : which is an unsatiable desire of getting more , setting men's hearts on the world so eagerly , as it were heaven or happiness , and making it their God , so as they cannot endure to part from it ; not knowing that they are base and transitory things , and that the perfection of them is in their well employment . 

le 's therefore be entreated to remove these let's out of the way , that this duty may be carefully performed . 

But yet let us not content ourselves to do this Duty of Mercifulnesse to the poor , but labour like Christians to do it in a right manner : for that is all in all , that makes or mars . For we may give much , and yet not please God , nor profit ourselves . Therefore diverse Rules to this purpose must be observed : 

1.  We must give or lend righteously , that is , of our own lawfully come by ; not what we have gotten by oppression or wrong , which is to rob one , to give to another . We must not keep the poor as the Lion or Fox keep their Whelps or Cubs , with that we have got by rapine , but with our own : therefore giving is called Righteousness , Psal. 112 , not only to show that its a duty that must be done , but it must be done in Righteousness . Therefore Micah 6. these two are joined together , to do justly , to love mercy . Zacheus first restored what he had got wrongfully , and then gives of his own just gotten goods to the poor . 

Contrary to this , is the practice of some usurious , covetous , or sacrilegious persons , who when they have got much by Church robbery , and selling Church livings , or by oppressing and undoing many families ; to still the gnawing of their Consciences , give somewhat to the poor at last . But its abomination to God , and their sins cry louder for judgement , than their liberality for any blessing . 

Quest. But here it may be demanded , whether servants may give of their Master's goods ? 

Answ. no doubt , without Masters or Dames consent in one kind or other , they may not , it shall be theft to them , rather than any thing pleasing to God.  

Quest. May children give of their Parents goods ? 

Ans. no : not except they have some consent . 

Quest. May such as are behind hand , and owe more than they be worth , or able to pay ; may these give ? 

Answ. no : by no means . They boast of false liberality . 

2 We must give freely , without expecting a recompense . Not therefore with opinion of merit to earn heaven , as Papists mercenarily do : Or to help themselves out of Purgatory ; that is base : Nor do it Pharisaically , with ostentation , and desire to be seen . 

We may look upon the Promises made by God to this Duty , to encourage us the more ; yet to do it freely , because it 's commanded us of God.  

Not expecting any thing from man What is freer than gift , as we say ? So when we lend to our poor Neighbour , it must be free , not looking he should earn it out , as it were , or do as much for us some other way ; fie upon it . Nay , we ought not so to look for our own again , as that be the chief thing we aim at , but to do him a pleasure . 

3 Cheerfully , as a freewill offering . God loves a cheerful giver : as Zacheus stood forth and gave etc. The Macedonians 2 Cor. 8. counted and called it a grace and favour , that they might have their hand in so good , acceptable & gainful a work . Men sow cheerfully in good ground . 

Therefore it 's not to be done by force of Law , as some : Nor yet by such importunity of Neighbours , fain to use so many Arguments , and such a deal of do to persuade and get them to it . Not grudgingly or of necessity . 

4 Seasonably ; not tomorrow , if they now need , and we have it , Pro 3. 28. we know not what may fall out by then , what temptation they may meet with . Also we may be dead , or they : He gives twice , that gives quickly . 

Also help them ere it be too late : shore them up when they begin to reel , so they may stand a good while ; not let them alone till they fall flat down . A little in time may do more good , than much more after . We must not tarry till they have sold their cupboard , bed , their best coat ; fie upon it . If one be lent to in time , he may be upheld , that else must soon come to receive Alms . So to give to the poor in their sickness , before they be too farspent . 

5 Wisely : not lashing it on too fast , but measuring it out as it may continue . Psal. 112.  Measure our affairs by judgement . Few err on this hand ; yet some have been so lavish in housekeeping , entertainment and giving , as they have over gone themselves . This is to pull out the tap : We must draw as need is . A good housekeeper will not set the barrel on the green , for every one to drink that will , and more than need ; so he should soon make an end , and have no comfort when he hath done . 

Also we must give wisely , as we may do most good with that we give . Therefore we must take care , that they have it that have most need : Not the lusty to have it , and the old , lame , blind , impotent , and yongue children to want . it 's a great disorder in some great men's keeping open house at Christmas , that the rude , idle and profane round about , they come thither to meat , but the very poor indeed , which cannot travel in the dirt , and cold , and crowd , they sit at home and want . 

no doubt , if it pleased them to send to their Neighbour-townes in money what they think good to bestow , to be distributed by the Officers and chief of the Town that know how to give it indifferently , and where most need is , it would be much greater relief to the poor , and so a more charitable work , and save themselves a very great deal of trouble , and prevent a great deal of sin committed by that rude company , in their unseasonable returnings home , besides their rudeness there . 

6 We must give to the good especially , Galliard 6.  True , we must give to all ; I mean , to such as follow their calling : but for those that can work , and will not , let them starve . Give even the bad in their want , if they be diligent to do what they can ; yet give them with instructions , admonitions to keep their Church , have a care of their souls , and to bring up their children to work , not to pilfering , idleness , or begging , rebuking them for these or any such faults ; as they that be most poor are very graceless , and godless almost . 

So may we do good both ways But to the household of Faith , give them with more chearfulnesse , and good encouragement of them in their good course , and behold jesus Christ in them : when all be alike to us , it 's no good sign , but when these be worst regarded , there can be no worse sign . 

7 Orderly . To our own kindred first ▪ 1 Tim. 5. and so on to our own Town , and so further , as God gives occasion and ability . 

8 According to every man's ability . To whom much is given , of them is much required . The Master called his servant that had five Talents to accounted for five . 1 Tim. 6. 17.  Rich men are charged to be rich in good works : he that hath but little , little is of him expected ; if it be but a cup of cold water , a widow's mite , where is no more , it shall be as well accepted , as great things of the rich . For God requires not of a man according to that he hath not , but according to that he hath : and that he will require . 

it 's therefore a great fault in most Parishes , that the meaner sort bear the chiefest burden , and not the richest : but a man , not a quarter sometime , not half a quarter of their substance , shall be half as much in charge as they . Fie upon such inequality : amongst men of good conscience , it ought not so to be . 

Though it were but a foolish thing for one of us to say , If I were such a rich man , I would do thus and thus much good more than such a man doth ; because we were never in that state : and therefore know not the temptations belonging to that state : yet this we may truly say , that such and such a rich man hath means in his hand to do very much good : O what elbow room he hath ? he might reach out his hand two ways , ten ways , and be never the worse . Towards the Ministry of the Word , to help a poor body out of great trouble , etc.  What is it for a richman to give here twenty shillings , there forty shillings , five pound to this good use or that ? And when some charge is to be born by a company of mean men , to exempt them , and bear it all himself ; what good by lending poor young beginners , and such as want stock ? 

But alas , how far off is it from the most such ? Some do no good : others nothing answerable to their ability . They loose their honour that God hath put upon them . 

Truly let them look to it : for they have great accounts to make : And if their receipts be found great , and their laying out small , God will cast such bills in their faces , and themselves into hell . 

9 We must give according to every one's need : for their need should be the whetstone to our liberality : As in dear times , or in time of sickness and distress , to reach out our hand more than ordinarily ; not to give hand over head , as much to those that have less need , as to those that have more . The wicked will be most clamorous , and if we go by that , oft times the better minded poor , which be more bashful & slow to speak for themselves , shall have wrong ; therefore we ought to inform ourselves , as well as we can , of every one's wants , especially , in our own Parish , and to carry our hand accordingly : we must not be bountiful to our wealthier neighbours , and pinching to the poor . If we cannot do both , let our feasting the wealthier alone , and do good to the poor ; for that will be the truer & more certain testimony of our love , because they cannot requite us again . But you shall have some , that will spare no cost , to make a feast to them that have no need , ( which , with the other too , hath his place ) that yet are very miserable to the poor , and will the same day of such feast , shake up a poor body like a dishclout , that comes but for some of the scraps . Let not these boast of their Love.  

And then to show ourselves most kind & helpful , when their need is greatest : for a brother or neighbour is born for adversity , and that is the trial of love . God is never so near his servants with his comforts , as in their greatest afflictions : And therefore , while a man is in prosperity and good case , to salute him , use him kindly , be glad of his company ; and when the world frowns on him , and God casts him behind , than not to know him , to shake him off , go on the other side of the way , or if we must needs take notice of them , then to speak slightly to them , hoverly , and be strange and far off , this is no true love : and yet this is that that many a one finds in the world , as Pro. 14. 20.  & 19 4. 7.  These be like winter-plashes , that be very broad when there is no need of them ; but in summer are dry , when they should do most good . 

Thus many a worthy Minister , while they have enjoyed their health and Ministry , have had countenance of all sorts , both Gentlemen and Yeomen , that after , by some occasion , having had the case altered with them , have gone up and down moping , and no body , especially of the wealthier sort , take notice of them , but eat them , as if they had the Plague about them . So the wives of many painful Ministers , while their husbands lived , were made account of , and invited , that when God hath taken their husbands from them ( when they had most need of comfort ) have found cold friendship , not of strangers only , but even of those that professed greater love to the parties deceased . This is but carnal , or at least but cold love , that is then farthest off when there is most need of it ; whereas true Love rejoiceth to be showing itself , where is most good to be done . 

10 We must give with compassion , and out of a pitiful heart and feeling of others miseries ; as we are bidden , Col. 3. 23. to put on tender mercies , and bowels of compassion , etc. and 1 Pet. 3. 8.  Be pitiful , etc. and Isa. 58. 10.  Pour out our soul to the hungry : that is , have compassion of their miseries . Thus did the Lord to us , when we had plunged ourselves into irrecoverable misery , he took pity on us , and gave us his blessed Son , etc.  

So had he compassion on the groan of Israel under Pharaohs bondage . So in the book of judges diverse times , judg. 10. 16. so also , Neh. 9 17.  This will prove us to be living members , not dead stocks . A little given with compassion , is more acceptable to God , than never so much without , 1 Cor. 13. yea , compassion alone is much accepted with God and men , where there is nothing else to be had . 

Which condemns the great Almsdeeds of Papists , that proceed from no compassion towards the poor , but out of love to themselves , to save their own skins . That give to be seen of men , that give by constraint of authority , or for shame , and to avoid reproach , or to satisfy the requests of friends : Or those that give with twits and taunts , and proud insulting , checks and upbraid , especially towards those that be any thing well minded : all these have their reward they are like to have , except their work had come from a better root : Whereas many a poor body coming to their poor sick neighbour , with pitiful moaning , out of a grieved heart , & water in their eyes , beaten up their pillow , watch with them all night , or tend them a day or two ( which can very hardly spare the time from their own bellies ) or of their little give them a little , this is a very rich gift , and pleasing to God , and shall not go unrewarded . Let not the poor therefore be discouraged , and say , I live like an unprofitable person , & can do no body any good ; but consider what our Saviour Christ said of the Widows two mites cast into the treasury , and be of good comfort . 

Now seeing compassion is so necessary , & gives such commendation to our liberality , it shall be good for us to use the best means we can , to stir it up , or procure it in us.  

1 It shall be therefore good , to take a true report from such , as can relate the miseries of any that we are to give unto , and so well weigh and mark it , as it may move us. Thus did Nehemia , Cap. 1. so weigh the misery of God's people that was told him , as he was very deeply affected therewith . 

2 To put ourselves into their person , & think ( as it might have been our case , as well as theirs , so ) what we would be glad to find from others , if it were . Consider , they be not bruit beasts , but even our own flesh ; and therefore to pity them . 

3 So by our own afflictions that God sends us at any time , to be moved to pity others ; and from the comforts that we find in them , from God or Men , be provoked to the like compassion towards others , 2.  Cor. 1. 4.  

4 Especially , it 's of very great force to this purpose , to go and see the miseries of our poor brethren , their ruinous & cold houses , poor fire to make amends with , empty cupboards , thin clothing , and so near the wind , cold lodging , slender covering ; and to see what exceeding pains some take early and late , to see others in how great pain and affliction they lie , and how little to comfort them , etc.  

5.  If our heart be not made of an Adamant , this will move us , & a great deal more than all that we can hear . The sight of the eye moves much , either to good or evil ; which the Devil well knew , when he tempted Eve to look upon the Apple , and when he set Bathsheba naked and bathing before David's eye , which did more hurt than if he had heard of such a thing : So is it powerful to move to good . Therefore Saint james bids us , visit the fatherless and widows in their adversity , etc.  Our Saviour Christ seeing the people scattered , etc.  Mat. 9 had compassion on them : So the Samarit an saw the wounded man , and had compassion of him . 

It were therefore a comely thing sometimes for wealth women to look into the poors houses , and see a sight that might move them , and that they might report of to their husbands . Their coat would sit never the worse on their backs , if they did so : neither need they think scorn , seeing the glorious Angels attend about them , if they be good , and God himself is with them . 

This also is comely for Ministers and their Wives . 

Especially it is requisite for them to do so , that are in office , and have taken for the time the special charge of the poor . ●o shall they answer their name of Overseers , which few do , but go by hearsay , which is oft uncertain , or that which is worse , by the words of the poor themselves ; the worst mostwhat being most bold and importunate , when others ▪ that have more need , and are better to be regarded , cannot so well speak for themselves . 

These Rules being carefully observed in our Relieving the poor , it will not only be profitable to them , but it shall be wellpleasing to God , and bring much comfort and blessing to our own selves here and hereafter : Without which , howsoever others may have benefit , yet ourselves shall certainly lose our labour . 

But now I draw to an end of this duty of mercy to the poor , Do you think that the carnal and unbelieving heart of man will willingly yield hereto , without any further questioning or opposing against it ? O no : for though those that are of God will hear God's Word , and his Commandment , and Reasons that he useth to move to the obedience thereof , will overcome and prevail with them , yet to the unregenerate , nothing can be so spoken , but they have many carnal reasoning and objections to make against the same . Some whereof I will here make known , and briefly answer them , and so wind up with a word or two of the duties of the poor . 

Object . 1.  My goods are mine own , I 'll do with them what I list , and nobody shall make me give , but where and when I see good myself . 

Answ. Though thy goods be thine own among men , yet God hath but committed them to thee of trust , and reserved a right in them , commanding thee to dispose of part of them to the poor , to whom he hath given none , and will accordingly call thee to accounted for the same : therefore thou art not such an absolute owner of them as thou imaginest , but an accountant and steward . 

Object . 3.  If I give to every one that will ask , and say they have need , I may give away all , and make myself a beggar . 

Answ. that 's not required of thee , but to give with discretion . As for the yongue man that was bidden by our Saviour Christ to sell ▪ all , and give to the poor , and follow Christ ; it was a commandment of trial peculiar to him , not binding all : and yet we see it not plainly required of him , that he should give away all . 

Again , they fear a false fear : for when some of them hinder themselves much by running into usury , of a covetous mind to purchase withal , some others by riotous expenses in apparel , by suretyship , or other blind courses that they take ; then every little thing that they give to the poor , or any good use ; o this will beggar them . no , no , look well about thee , and thou shalt find it 's not thy liberality beggars thee , but somewhat else ; leave that , and thou mayst do well to thyself , and much good to others . 

Object . 3.  Though I have enough now , yet I cannot tell what I may want hereafter ; I 'll be sure to provide for myself , and if I leave any thing when I die , I will give them somewhat then : As one that lying upon his death bed , put a piece of Gold in his mouth , and kept it there , and being asked his reason , he answered , Some wiser than some , I mean to keep this till I am dead . 

Answ. A right objection of a covetous distrustful man , that will trust God no further than he sees him ; no , though he hath promised to reward liberality with plenty . What a wretched mind is this , to think that God will fail men ever the more that obey him ? And whereas they think to make sure of enough for themselves , it 's not all , nor ten times so much that could keep them from beggary and misery , if God should set himself against them . And to give when they die , its little thanks ; for they cannot carry it with them . 

Object . 4.  All is little enough for myself and my children : for I mean to leave my elder son a good estate , and I have diverse daughters that I purpose to match well ; and therefore must get them good portions , as it 's expected in these days , and then they must have education accordingly . 

Answ. But who bids you fly such high pitches , and set down such portions , and in the mean time neglect God's commandment , and your duty to the poor ? This is the high way to pull down your children . Do as you may , all duties discharged , and there an end : for if you hoard up the poors part in your children's great portions , God will draw it out of your , or your children's bellies . 

Object . 5.  They be never the better for all that is given them , they draw all through their throat . 

Answ. If some be not , yet some be thrifty , and it 's well seen and well bestowed of them : If any abuse your liberality , you may cut them the shorter , but let not others fare the worse for them . 

Ob. 6.  They be ill tongued , one may give them never so much , & they will not give one a good word . 

Answ. It may be we spoil our gift in the manner of bestowing it , and so it loseth its grace and credit . 2.  Though some be unthankful and ill tongued , yet all are not so : they that be , yet give them , and overcome them . 

Ob. 7.  They be so bad and so wicked , as its pity to give them . 

Answ. We give it not to their badness , but to their poverty : and may be our goodness to them with good counsel , may make them better . But some blame not their badness for hatred of their sin , but as an excuse to save their purses : but that is not a sufficient plea.  

Ob. 8.  They be so thievish one can keep nothing for them almost , abroad especially : They break my hedges , carry away my bars , pluck up my styles ; I 'll give them nothing , not I  

Answ. This is most what rich men's faults : for if they would take order that every family should do what work they are able ( according to the Law of God , and the good Statutes of the Land ) and than what they cannot reach to by their labour , to supply to them for necessaries , every one being held to work , most part of this would be prevented . And then if any were taken in such offence , and were well punished , either by the whip , or else their collection that week kept back , you should hear few such complaints . But if they be not as well looked to , to follow their work , as to give them a little collection , a great many will beg or steal , rather than get it by working . 

Ob. 9  Some of them that make a great show of Religion , yet if they get money into their fingers that one hath lent them , one cannot tell how to get it again , for all their great preciseness , and running to sermons . 

Ans. True ; some such offences there be , more is the pity : but this must not wholly take our mind from the duty of lending , nor let all far the worse for the fault of some few : Or if we should do well for any that we thought well of for soundness , and after they proved but Hypocrites ; yet if our minds were upright in that we did , we shall not lose our reward 

Ob. 10.  There be such a number of charges every way , to the King , and for Soldiers , to the Ministers , to the repairing the Church , to Bread and Wine for the Communion , and Briefs , and one Collection or other , that I can never a Sunday be quiet : and now you come for the poor ; I think you will have all ; I see no reason to be at all these charges . 

Answ. For those that be to the King , it 's our bounden duty , and they be abundantly recompensed in the peace and quietness that we enjoy under his Government . And for the Church , small cause to grudge at that , seeing it is a trifle towards his service that gives all . And that we give for the good of our souls , is the best bestowed money that can be , if the fault be not in ourselves . For any thing we do in compassion to them that be in want , God hath given his word himself to see that requited . So that if it be well considered , there is no such cause of this grumbling at any one , or all of these charges . 

Ob. 11.  If you will not be quiet , but follow me thus with Give , give , and Pay , pay , I will make a shortcut of it , I 'll break up house and go live in a great Town , and eat and drink , and be merry with my friends , and put out my money to usury . 

Answ. If you do , you shall carry many curses with you , and a guilty conscience , and the hand of God will follow you , and it may be you may have as small joy of it , as your Predecessor in the twelfth of Luke , when he had thought to have nestled himself in his wealth for many years , and lived at ease , he was suddenly arrested , with OH fool , this night they shall fetch away thy soul , and then whose shall these things be ? There is no flying from the duties that God requires : therefore listen and learn , obey and be blessed . 

CHAP. 12.  Of the Poors duties . 

Now for the Poors duties , a word or two . I speak to you from the Lord , how you should behave yourselves in this your condition ( and it 's very needful ) know them , and God give you a heart to do them . 

You must labour to be contented with your estate , & give glory to God , and know it to be the state that he seeth fittest for you , if you were born to it ; or he hath brought you into it , especially , if you have by any wicked courses brought it upon yourselves , you can have the less comfort in it . But if you can be so wise as make it unto you a spur to true repentance , you shall be happy . 

Keep your Church diligently , though your clothing be mean : Keep holy the Sabbath day , and know nothing is lost by that : Pray daily , and labour to live in the fear of God , that though you be poor to the worldward , yet you may be as St. james saith , Cap. 2.  Rich in Faith , and heirs of the Kingdom , which he hath promised to them that love him . 

follow your calling diligently , that as much as may be you may eat your own bread , & that God may move men's hearts to supply willingly that that is wanting . Be not over clamorous : Keep a good tongue , though men deal not very well with you . 

Carry yourselves dutifully and humbly towards the rich , and all your superiors ; not saucy , surly , ill-tongued : patient and meek , when you receive a reproof , and not swell or give ill words . 

Be thankful for any kindness you receive ; First and chiefly to God , who gives the ability , the commandment and the heart to do you good ; and upon former experience , depend upon him in after needs : and resolve , that whatsoever want you suffer , you will use no unlawful means to help yourselves , but rather make known your burdens , and God will make a way . Secondly , be thankful to those , whom he hath made his instruments to do you good , so God gives good leave ; and see it practised by godly Hezekiah , 2 Chron. 31. 8.  In token of your thankfulness , pray to God for them , that God would bless their basket and store , themselves and theirs , especially , that he would give them much joy and comfort to their souls , and to have long life and happy days . 

For you that are borrowers , borrow no more than you have possibility of paying again . Appoint such a day , as in all likelihood you may repay it : work night and day to keep touch , borrow it of another to pay , rather than break day ; for if you keep your day , you keep your friend . Or if you be much disappointed that you cannot , then come before the day , tell your case , and crave favour , and a new day , and show yourselves as careful to pay , as ever you were to borrow ; so shall you have a good conscience , and provide well for yourselves : for if you deal honestly , you shall not need to fear but you shall find friends . 

Many there be , that care not what they borrow , & never care for paying ; they cared to borrow it , they say , let the Owner care to come by it again : they do not mean to take two cares . which bear the mark of wicked men , Psal. 37. 21. for the godly make great conscience of it , as the son of the Prophets , that was so sorry for the loss of the axe ; Alas , Master , it was but borrowed , 2 Kin. 6. 5.  And the Prophet Elisha wrought a miracle to this purpose , increasing the oil in the Widows cruse , and bade her sell it , and , first pay her debts , and then live of the rest : For we must own nothing to any , but to love one another ; that is , not wilfully , or through carelessness , but what we can , & mean to pay . They will appoint , it may be , a near day , though they know no means to compass it , only to obtain their purpose : But when they have it , they care to keep no day , nor yet come at the Creditor , nor in his sight , as near as they can . These play the fools as well as the wicked men , and undo themselves utterly , which otherwise might have been upheld , and lived comfortably of their credit , though they had no ability of their own . But when they have no ability nor credit neither , they must needs hasten apace to misery , and thank themselves . 

Let all , that have any wit or conscience , take heed of this : But especially , let all those , that make greater profession of Religion than others , beware of this , that they give no just occasion to carnal men , to speak ill of them , and their holy profession for their sakes ; nor to the godly to be griened by their unfaithfulness . 

FINIS . 





Use . Use . 

Use . 1.  2.  

Wishing well is the pulse of love , and heats wheresoever love is alive . 

Effects . Reasons . 

1.  

Love of our enemies . Use 1  esay 10.  

1.  Pro. 13. 20   My meaning is only to reprove those , who , upon sincere and devout Chrians , such as make most conscience of their ways , and are truly zealous in God's service ; fasten the odious name of Puritan , and cannot abide them . 

Reas.  Rules f●● right relieving . 2.  Cor. 8. 12.  Pro. 17. 17.  