An Excellent Sonnet : OR , The Swains complaint , whose cruel doom , It was to love he knew not whom . 

To the tune of , Bodkins Galliard . 



You gentle Nymphs that on the Meadows play , and oft relate the Loves of Shepherds young , 
Come sit you down , if that you please to stay , now may you hear an uncouth passion Song : 
A Lad there is , and I am that poor groom , 
that 's fallen in love , and cannot tell with whom . 
O do not smile at sorrow as a jest , with others cares good natures moved be : 
And I should weep if you had my unrest , then at my grief how can you merry be ? 
Ah , where is tender pity now become ? 
I am in love , and cannot tell with whom . 
I that have oft the rarest features viewed , and beauty in her best perfection seen , 
I that have laughed at them that love pursued , and ever free from such perfections been , 
Lo now at last so cruel is my doom , 
I am in love , and cannot tell with whom . 
My heart is full nigh bursting with desire , yet cannot tell from whence these longings flow , 
My breast doth burn , but she that light the fire , I never saw , nor can I come to know : 
So great a bliss my fortune keeps me from , 
That though I dear love , I know not whom . 
E'er I had twice four Springs renewed seen , the force of beauty I began to probe , 
And ere I nine years old had fully been , it taught me how to frame a sound of love , 
And little thought I this day should have come , 
Before that I to love had found out whom . 
For on my chin the mossy down you see , and in my veins well heated blood doth gloe , 
Of Summers I have seen twice three times three , and fast my youthful time away doth go : 
That much I fear , I aged shall become , 
And still complain , I love I know not whom . 
O why had I a heart bestowed on me , to cherish dear affections so inclined , 
Since I am so unhappy born to be , no object for so true a love to find , 
When I am dead it will be missed of some , 
Yet now I live , I love I know not whom . 
I to a thousand beauteous Nymphs am known , a hundred Ladies favours do I swear , 
I with as many half in love am grown , yet none of them I find can be my dear , 
Me thinks I have a Mistress yet to come , 
Which makes me sing , I love I know not whom . 
The second part , 

To the same tune . 



There life's no swain doth stronger passion probe for her , whom most he covets to possess , 
then doth my heart that being full of love , knows not to whom it may the same profess , 
For he that is despised hath sorrow some , 
But he hath more , that love's , & knows not whom . 
knew I my Love , as many others do , to some one object might my thoughts be bend , 
So they divided , wand'ring should not go , until the soul's united force be spent , 
As he that seeks , and never finds a home , 
Such is my rest , that love , and know not whom . 
Those whom the frowns of jealous friends divide , may live to meet and descant of their woe , 
And he hath gained a Lady for his Bride , that durst not woo his Maid a while ago : 
But o what ends unto my hopes can come , 
That am in love , and cannot tell with whom . 
Poor Collen grieves that he was late disdained , and Clores doth for Willies absence pine , 
Sad Thirthes weeps for his sick Phebe pained , but all their sorrows cannot equal mine , 
A greater care on me , alas , is come , 
I am in love , and cannot tell with whom . 
Narcissus-like did I affect my shade , some shadow yet I had to dote upon , 
Or did I love some Image of the dead , whose substance had not breathed long ago , 
I might despair , and so an end would come . 
But o I love , and cannot tell with whom . 
Once in a dream me thought my love I viewed , but never waking could her face behold , 
And doubtless that resemblance was but showed , that more my tired heart torment it should . 
For since that time more grieved I am become , 
And more in love , I cannot tell with whom . 
When on my bed at night to rest I lie , my watchful eyes with tears bedew my cheeks , 
And then , o would it once were day I cry , yet when it comes I am as far to seek , 
For who can tell , though all the earth he room , 
Or when or where , to find he knows not whom . 
O if she be amongst the beauteous trains , of all the Nymphs that haunt the several Kills , 
Or if you know her Ladies of the plains , or you that have your Bowers on the Hills , 
Tell , if you can , who will my love become , 
Or I shall die , and never know for whom . 
Printed at London for I Wright dwelling in Gilt-spurre street near Newgate . 

FINIS . 

