The Christians LOOKING-GLASS : Wherein he may clearly see , His love to GOD lively expressed , His Fidelity truly discovered , And Pride against GOD and Man , Anatomised . 

whereby the Hypocrisy of the times is notoriously manifested . 

By THOMAS TOOK , Minister of GOD'S Word at Saint Giles in the Fields . 

LONDON , Printed by Nicholas Okes , and are to be sold by Richard Bolton , at his Shop in Chancery-lane , near Holborn . 1615.  

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS AND HONOURABLE LADY , the Lady ALICIA DUDLEY . 

MADAM , 

There are three necessary virtues well be-seeming every Christian Man , Charity , Fidelity , and Humility , both towards God and Man There are four reasons ( to pass by many more ) which should move us to the love of God : First , because he is our gracious Father , who of his own will begat us with the word of truth , that we should be as the first fruits of his Creatures . Now if a child shall love his father , of whom he hath received a part of his body , how much more ought he love God , ( Qui animam suam infundendo creavit , & creando infudit ) of whom he hath received his soul , and to whose goodness he stands obliged both for soul and body , both for the being & continuing of them ? Therefore David saith , thou hast possessed my reins , thou hast covered me in my Mother's womb . Upon thee have I been stayed from the womb : thou art he that took me out of my mother's bowels . And job long before him , thine hands have made me , and fashioned me wholly round about ; thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh , and joined me together with bones and sinews : thou hast given me life and grace , and thy visitation hath preserved my spirit . 

Secondly , God is to be loved for his most sweet and pleasing nature , which the wicked indeed feeleth not ; because ( as Isidore saith ) he hath lost the palate of his heart with the fever of iniquity . 

Thirdly , God by his beneficence hath deserved our love : for out of his mere love he sent his own and only Son into the world , to save us when we were lost , to redeem us when we were captives , and by his death to give us life when we had deserved naught but death . 

Fourthly , ask now the beasts , & they shall teach thee , and the fowls of the heaven , and they shall tell thee : speak to the earth , and it shall show thee , or the fishes of the sea , & they shall declare unto thee . Even these things in their kinds do praise God , and show their love unto man , for whom they were appointed : and shall man show no love to God ; and in love do nothing for God , for whom his creatures do so much good , & suffer so much evil , being all put under his feet , and subjected to his power , All sheep & oxen , yea & the beasts of the field , the fowls of the air , and the fish of the sea ? 

Now because a man hath in him life like a plant , sense as a beast , and understanding proper to a Man , therefore it behoves him to love God with his life , with his senses , and with his reason . Our Saviour saith , we ought to love God with all our heart , with all our soul , and with all our mind . We ought to love him with all our heart , that is , with all our affections , delighting and joying in him more than in any thing : For he loves not God , that delights in any thing more than in God : and as s t Austen saith , Minus te amat , qui aliquid t●cum amat , quod non propter te amat . By how much the more the lower bows of a Tree are multiplied , by so much the less it groweth upwards : so by how much the more a man doth love these things beneath , by so much the less is his love erected and lifted unto God above : therefore such love is to be pruned & cut away , as superfluous branches from a tree , that it may thrive the better . God requires the whole heart , My son , give me thy heart , like some noble Bird of prey , that seizeth upon the heart : for he alone created it , he alone covers it , and he only can content and fill it . Totum exigit te , qui fecit te totum , he requires thee all that made thee all . If we owe ourselves wholly for our generation , what shall we add for our regeneration ? Neither are we so easily new made , as made . In the first work God gave us unto ourselves : in the second he gave us himself , and restored us unto ourselves . Being therefore both given and restored , we do own ourselves for ourselves , and we do own ourselves twice . But what shall we repay unto the Lord for himself ? For although we were able to repay ourselves a thousand times , what are we unto the Lord ? If a man had some special jewel which he is minded to give away , he would bethink himself where he might best bestow it . Our heart is the best member which we have , and God is our best friend , let us bestow it upon him : it is not lost , that is given unto him . 

Secondly , we must love the Lord with all our Soul , enduring rather the separation of the soul from the body , then that our soul should be separated from God , who is the soul of our soul , & the comfort both of soul and body . And because our soul affords life and sense unto the body , therefore to show that we love God with all our soul , we ought to honour him with our lives all our life long , and with all our senses , suffering them to be guided by his will , and choosing rather to be deprived of them all , then of him , that gave them all . 

Thirdly , we must love him with all our mind and understandings and cogitations being fixed upon him , and ruled by him : His word should inform ●nd direct our reason ; our reason rightly informed , should rule our wills , our affections and conversations , in all which we ought to seek and apply ourselves unto God , that our lives , our affections , our wills , and our understandings may be said to be Gods , so as although we live , yet we may truly say , We live not , but God doth live within us. And so much for our love of God.  

Love of Man is either love of ourselves , or of our Neighbour . That a man should love himself it is very necessary : for he that loves not himself , cannot love another . And as s t Austen saith , Sinon nosti diligere teipsum , tim●o ne decipias proximum sicut teipsum ; if thou knowest not to love thyself , I am afraid lest thou shouldst deceive thy neighbour as thyself . Yet is it no easy matter for a man to love himself aright : for he that loves iniquity hates his own soul , and he that loves himself in the way of sin , doth love a robber condemned to die . Si malè amaveris , tunc odisti : si benè ode●is , tunc amasti : If a man love himself amiss , he hate's himself : but if he hate himself well , than he loves himself . If a man lose himself by loving himself , than he finds himself , if he hate himself . Let us therefore learn to love ourselves by not loving ourselves . He that hate's his lusts , loves himself : he that loves his lusts , hate's himself . He that will love himself well , must love himself in God , and ●or God : and either because he is Gods , or that he may be Gods. ●nd thus much for Self-love . 

Our Neighbour also is to be loved , whether friend or foe , rich or poor , young or old , high or low : For ( Per amorem Dei amor proximi gignitur , & per amorem proximi amor Dei nutritur ) the love of our neighbour is begotten by the love of God , and the love of God is nourished by our love of our Neighbour . Here first I say , we ought to love our neighbour , because he is a Man of the same flesh with us , or because he is a Christian of the same faith , incorporated into the same body , and animated by the same spirit . In whomsoever Christ doth show himself , he is to be loved , in the poor as in the rich , without respect of persons . A Diamond is a Diamond whether set in Gold or Silver , or in Iron , or Wood , and he that rejects or contemns Christ in a poor man , loves not Christ in a rich man , but riches : yea , we are to love our Enemies . So Christ said , and so he did . He said so : I say unto you ; L●ue your enemies , bless them that curse you , do good to them that h●●e you , and pray for them that hurt you . And so he did ; for us , which were strangers and enemies , hath he also reconciled . whiles we were yet sinners , Christ died for us. Secondly , thus it behoves us to do , that we may resemble our heavenly Father , and show ourselves to be his sons : For he sendeth his rain on the just and unjust . Thirdly , else shall we lose our reward : For if you love them that love you , what reward shall ye have ? Fourthly , because GOD hath selected and singled us out from the multitude of the world , therefore we must be singular and egregious for our conversation : If ye be friendly to your brethren only , what singular thing do ye ? do not even the Publicans likewise ? And shall Christians do no more them Publicans , than Turks , than Indians , then natural men ? Fiftly , it is by our Apostle commanded and commended unto us , When he saith ; Let us do good unto all ; if unto all , then unto our enemies ; Therefore if thine enemy hunger , feed him , saith he , If he thirst give him drink . Now if we must not deny him our beneficence , than not our benevolence for it is no good deed , if it be not of good will : And if we must recompense no man evil for evil , than not to our enemies ; and where there ought to be no maleficence , there should also be no malevolence ; as we must not work him ill , so we must not will , nor wish him ill . 

So then our Neighbour is to be loved , but how ? Even as ourselves ; which As doth not show partiality , or equality , but similitude ; not measure , but manner ; that is to say , Holily , justly , Truly , and Constantly : Holily , that is , for GOD , and not against GOD , under GOD , not above GOD : For he loves not GOD , that loves his neighbour with GOD , whom he loves not for GOD ; and he that loves his neighbour more than GOD , is unworthy of GOD , and makes his neighbour to be his GOD.  

justly , for a man must not love his neighbour in evil , or for evil , but in good , and for good : He must be so loved , as that his vices may be hated : He must be loved , if not ( quia iustus ) because he is just , yet ( ut sit iustus ) that he may become just . Love must not be the bond of unrighteousness ; we may not love a man so as to fall in love with , and to learn his vices . 

Truly , that is in the Truth , For ( nemo potest veraciter esse amicus hominis , nisi primitus fuerit amicus ipsius veritatis ) no man can be a true lover of a man unless first he be a lover of the truth . I say again truly , that is , the man must be loved , not his riches , honours , greatness , his good must be sought , and not his goods ; he , not his . Some love their neighbours , as dogs do bones , for the flesh that is on them ; or as men do Trees , for their fruit ; or as Kites do a Carcase , for relief : But we ought to love them even for themselves , for this , that they are men , or for this , that they are virtuous and good men . 

Lastly , our Neighbours are to be loved Constantly : With some men , friends are like flowers , which are esteemed of no longer , then whiles they are fresh . Many men's love is like to that of Harlots , who love , whiles there is lucre ; they love not the man , but his gifts : They are like the Gleads in the fable , that followed the old wife bearing Tripes to the Market , but forsook her homeward , when she returned empty . A man shall be loved in prosperity ; but it is a question whether the man , or his fortunes , be rather loved : Adversity will try the force of friendship , and virtue of love : He which forsakes his Neighbour in adversity , doth manifestly show that he loved him not in prosperity : It was not the man which was loved , but the man's prosperity . But we ought to be constant in our love : whiles we see either Humanity , or Christianity , we have cause to love . Let us not therefore be weary of welldoing : Let brotherly love continue . And so much for charity , which for perpetuity , and seruiceablenesse unto others , is more excellent , than either faith or hope . 

The next is Fidelity , when men are fast and faithful unto men for GOD , and unto GOD for GOD himself . This faithfulness unto GOD is demonstrated by fearing him vehemently , by obeying him constantly , by dispensing faithfully , by keeping things committed to him carefully , by loving him incessantly , and by suffering for him courageously . The reasons that should move us hereunto are many . 1.  GOD'S Commandment . Be thou faithful unto the death : 2.  His Promise , And I will give thee the Crown of life . I have fought a good fight , ( saith Saint Paul ) and have finished my course , I have kept the faith : here 's his Fidelity : From henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of Righteousness : there 's his reward . 3.  The example of GOD , and his servants : Of GOD , who fails not his people , forsakes not his inheritance , but Keeps his fidelity for ever , and will not depart from them to do them good . Of his Servants , as Abraham , job , Moses , Daniel , and the Martyrs , whom no death could daunt , no torment could affright , no pleasure hold , no promotion prevail with , no allurement enchant , but clave fast to GOD , and chused rather to die for Him , then to live against Him. 4.  We desire GOD to be faithful unto us , therefore we should show ourselves faithful unto Him. 5.  We exact fidelity of those , that are under us , therefore in reason we should behave ourselves faithfully to GOD , which is above us. 6.  Fidelity is a most certain argument of felicity , for he that endureth to the end shall be saved : Finally , unfaithfulness is punished with perdition : Fearful and unfaithful persons shall have their part in the lake , which burneth with fire and brimstone , which is the second death ; And so much for Fidelity . 

The last is Humility , whereby we do not overween ourselves , but behave ourselves humbly towards GOD , and Man Humility is to be showed towards a man's Superiors , Equals , and Inferiors . The Superior of all Superiors is GOD. Submit yourselves unto GOD : cast down yourselves before the LORD , and he will lift you up . GOD is Omnipotent , Alwise , most Just , and hath absolute authority over all flesh , therefore we ought to humble ourselves before him , and throw ourselves down before his Foot stool . Secondly , we ought to carry ourselves lowlily towards all our Betters . Therefore the Law saith , Honour thy father , and thy mother : And Saint Peter , ye younger submit yourselves unto the Elders . Thirdly , towards our Equals , For we must do , as we would be done by : we would have our equals give us due respect , and not by pride exalt themselves above us. In giving honour ( saith Saint Paul ) go one before another : Give to all men their due ; owe nothing to any man , but love . It was Pompey's too-great stateliness , that he would acknowledge no equal . Fourthly , towards our Inferiors : For it is a man's honour sometimes to neglect his honour , and his greatest Greatness , in case , not to know his greatness . I suppose there is in every man something , which craves our humility ; and even this should make us humble unto all , because life and death is common to us all , because by Nature we are sinners all , and it is nothing in us , that makes the difference , but the grace of GOD unto us , which was never deserved of us. For who hath separated thee ? and what hast thou , that thou hast not received ? It behoves us therefore ( as we are exhorted ) To submit ourselves one unto another , and to deck ourselves inwardly in lowliness of mind : For every man that exalteth himself , shall be brought low : and he that humbleth himself , shall be exalted . For GOD is gracious to the humble , but opposeth himself to the proud , he breaketh their branches , he teareth them up by the roots , he scattereth brimstone upon their dwellings , he tumbles them from their seats , and laughs at their downefals . 

Thus have I given you a say of that , which is more largely handled in this Book , which I Dedicated unto your Ladyship , in whom these three virtues , by the Grace of GOD , have met together , & do kiss each other , beseeching this good GOD still to increase his Graces in you , and at the length to Crown you with eternal glory in the heavens . 

Saint Giles in the Fields , August . 13. 1614  Your Ladyships in Christ jesus , Thomas Tuke . 

The Contents . 

Love in general described . page . 1 
Good , either true , or seeming , is the object of love . p●g . 3 
The property of love is to urite , or join . pag. 3 
The love of man to God described . p. 3 
Love is an affection of the heart . pag. 3. 4 
Love is a gracious affect . pag. 4 
Love riseth out of knowledge and Faith. pag. 4. 6. 7 
Love is a Celestial fire pag. 9 
Love is kindled by the holy Ghost p. 9 10 
Love knits us to God , and makes him our contentment . pag. 10. 11 
This love to God is necessary in six regardss . pag. 16. 18 
The equity of this love is showed in six respects . pag. 19 22 
Gods love to us is a descending love p. 19 
There are 6 benefits of this love . p. 23. 30 
This love is excellent in nine regards p. 32. 38.  
Of the Author , Nature , Ends , Effects , Subjects and Object of this love . pag. 32. 33. 34. 38.  
In five respects God is worthy of our love above all other things . p. 45. 48 
What jehovah , Kurios , Dominus , and our English word Lord doth signify . pag. 39 
Why the world should not be loved . p. 59 
Why riches should not have our heart . pag. 61 
Of the love of Pleasures , and why they seem so sweet . pag. 63 
Of the incertainty of honours . pag. 64 
Of the vanity of beauty . pag. 65 
How a man may love himself , and who is he . pag. 67 
Nine undoubted tokens of true love to God. pag. 69. 83 
God ought to be loved in his Church universal , and in every true visible society of believers . pag. 85 
Which is a true visible Church . p. 85. 87 
God ought to be loved in his Ministers . pag. 88 
A Minister is to be loved merely for his Office , Power , Work , and faithful execution thereof . pag. 88 89 
The note of a true Minister of God. p●g . 90 
God is to be loved in his people . pag. 91 
How Ministers ought to demonstrate their love to God in feeding their Flocks . pag 95 
God must be loved in Christ pag. 96 
Why CHRIST ought to be loved . pag. 96. 97 
Two special ways whereby love is showed to Christ . pag. 97 99 
A man may be said to be faithful in two respects . pag. 100 
Who have been counted faithful to the Lord pag. 101 
How God preserves the Faithful . Externally p. 102 
How God preserves the Faithful . Internally , p. 102 
How God preserves the Faithful . Eternally . p. 102 
Three reasons of Faithfulness pag. 103 
Five notes to know a Faithful Man pag. 103. 106 
Who is a Christian indeed . pag. 107 
A Commendation of love from some notable effects thereof . pag. 110 
Sundry similes to illustrate the worthiness of this virtue . p. 111.  
What pride is . p. 112.  
Seven ways of proud dealing against God. p. 113.  
How Pride against man discovers itself . p. 114.  
Twenty three examples of God's judgements upon the proud . p. 116. 120 
Two milder kinds of his punishments . p. 122 
Of the folly , baseness , inhumanity , impiety , and injustice of pride . p. 123.  
Of the contentiousnesse , ugliness , and wastfulnesse of Pride . p. 124. 125 
Pride like a Thief , like thunder , like a venomous beast , like a Moth , or worm . p. 126 
How pride is to be avoided . p. 127.  
An Exhortation to the love of God. pag. 128.  
If God love us , we need not so much fear the ill will of men : this cleared by two comparisons . pag. 129 
The Christians Lookingglass . 

PSALM . 31.  VER . 23.  

Love ye the LORD , all his Saints , for the LORD preserveth the faithful , and abundantly rewardeth the proud-doer . 



HOLY David , having in four verses next aforegoing declared the goodness of GOD to them that fear him : and among them to himself in special ; in this verse he exhorteth All Saints ; even all that the LORD hath sanctified to himself by his mercies , to devote and addict themselves to the LORD by love . 

In this verse two things are considerable : First , the Psalmist Exhortation , Love ye the LORD all his Saints ; And secondly his Reasons to set it on , drawn from an act of GOD'S grace to some , and of his justice to others , expressed in the words ensuing . 

In the exhortation three things are to be observed : first , the duty required , Love : secondly , the object of it , the LORD : thirdly , the persons , of whom it is to be performed , All his Saints . 

Of love first , Amor est affectus unionis . Love is an affection of union ; Quo cum re amatâ aut unimur , aut perpetuamus unionem : By the which we are either united , or do continue the union with the thing beloved . Or Love is a certain motion , whereby the heart is moved towards that , which either is Truly , or Seemingly good , desiring to draw the good unto itself , that it might enjoy it . For the object of love is good ; And though a man sometimes love an evil , yet it is to him a seeming good : And the Nature of love is to unite and Knit divers things together , and of sundry things to make one ; And a regular and truehearted love is that , which causeth us to love a thing ▪ because it is good in itself , and not for any base , or by-respect . With this love we ought to love GOD , and our neighbour for GOD.  

The love then , wherewith we are exhorted to love the LORD , is an Holy affection , Whereby we love GOD in CHRIST JESUS , for himself : Or it is , a Gracious affection of the Heart , arising out of Knowledge and Faith in GOD , and kindled in the soul by the HOLY GHOST , by which a man is joined & Knit to GOD , taking delight and content in him more , then in any thing besides . 

First , I call it an affection of the heart , because with it the heart is affected and inclined ; affections being certain motions of the heart , where they have their seat and being . 

Secondly , I said it is a Gracious affection ; for to love is a work of Nature , but to love an object W●ll , that 's truly Good , as is the LORD , is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a work of Grace . For we are not sufficient of ourselves to think any thing , as of ourselves : Therefore our sufficiency & strength to love a right object rightly , must needs be from the Grace of GOD , Who worketh in us both the will and the deed of his own good pleasure . 

Thirdly , I say this love ariseth out of the Knowledge and Faith in GOD. For Quod latet , ignotum est , ignoti nulla cupido ; Things unknown are unaffected , and love is according to a man's acquaintance : A man cannot love GOD , before he know that GOD is , and that he is good , and therefore worthy love , sweet and amiable , and according to that measure of knowledge , that men have of him , and of his benefits , and according as they ponder and remember them , so they may be said to love him : And for because our knowledge of him is in this world nothing so perfect as it shall be in the world to come , therefore also our love on earth is not so perfect , as it shall be in the heavens , when besides the vision of Grace we shall attain unto the vision of Glory , When We shall see face to face , and know as we are known , as the Apostle speaketh to the Corinthians . Will ye see this in the glass of human practice ? A child not knowing the worth of silver prefers a Counter to it ; Barbarous people not knowing the benefits of learning love it not . The covetous man knowing the virtue of gold , hoards it , loves it as his GOD : A good soul knowing the vileness and dangers of sin shuns it , loathes it ; and perceiving the benefits of true Religion loves it , follows it ; and experience shows that many men , places , things , are unloved , and unregarded , because their virtues , properties , excellencies are not known to them , that do looke-over and neglect them . He then that would love GOD , let him learn to know GOD : If men knew him well , they would not love him so ill . The reason why men commonly are so far in love with pleasures , profits , and preferments is because they know the sweetness of them , though they prove often bitter to them in the latter end , so as that they might justly wish they had not known them , or had known better how to have used them : So surely our knowledge of GOD would stir up our love , did we know him and understand his perfections well and truly , he would ravish our hearts , but the love of the world doth raise up such a mist within us , as that our eyes are darkened , the stars of our understanding are clouded , so that we see not , we think not of his lovely Nature , we cannot behold his Beauty : But let us disperse these fogs , and labour to know him , that we may be fit to love him . Love like a third sows our souls to GOD , but the way is prepared by knowledge as by a needle . 

And as concerning Faith , certain it is that faith in the love of GOD makes a man return his love unto GOD , for till a man believe that GOD doth love him , and is reconciled to him , he comes not to him : So long as he apprehends nothing but wrath , he fly's him as his enemy ; and being punished he repines and murmurres , as maleconted : But when a man comes to be persuaded of GOD'S favour to him , and begins to have affiance in his mercy , forthwith he begins to draw near by love unto him , he sets his heart upon him , and in love prefers him to all the world : And the more he believes , the more he loves , his soul is ready to say with David , thou art my LORD , and the portion of my inheritance : My soul praise thou the LORD , and all that is within thee praise his holy Name , which forgiveth all thine iniquity , and heals all thine infirmities , which redeemeth thy life from the grave , and crowneth thee with mercy and compassion ? 

The truth of which we see confirmed by Saint Paul , who saith that Love is out of a pure heart , and a good conscience , and of faith unfeigned : Without the which faith also there is neither pure heart , nor good conscience . This we may illustrate by the dealings of men , who will not make a league of love with them whom they trust not , but rather abandon all society with them : On the contrary , whom they dare trust them they dare live with ; in whom they have confidence , in them they do delight ; and of whose love they are persuaded , them they will love and show kindness too . And we see by experience that one flame licks another to it , and one fire draweth another ; so one love also begets and draws another . And if it hap that a man be hated of him to whom he beareth love , it is because he that is loved , takes no notice of , nor feels the love which is born unto him . Let us therefore have faith in GOD , for as we believe , so shall we love : Without doubt the brethren of joseph , when they met with him in Egypt , did not love him as their brother , till he had made himself known , and till they were verily persuaded that he was their brother ; so we shall never love GOD as his children , till we acknowledge him for our Father , and be by faith persuaded of his love . 

Fourthly , I said that love was Kindled in the soul : For the love of GOD is a Celestial Fire , serving to comfort and refresh the heart ▪ and to inflame it with an holy zeal and to consume these filthy vapours of malice , envy , pride , treachery , and such other noisome lusts , as ar● within him . 

Fiftly , I say it is kindled by th● HOLY SPIRIT , therefore Sai●● Paul calls it the Fruit of the Spirit ; for if the hatred of GOD be a work of the flesh , and from the motion of the Devil ; then the true love of GOD must needs be the work of the Spirit , who enlightens the mind , inspireth faith , and persuades the heart to love and delight in GOD : How much are we bound to GOD , of whose pure love to us it is , that we have any love to him : He comes down to us , before we go up to him ; He draws us before we run , and looks upon us before we turn our eyes to him : LORD , what is man that thou regardest him , or the son of man , that thou so thinkest on him ? What shall I render unto the LORD for all his benefits towards me ? OH my GOD and my King , I will extol thee , and will bless thy Name for ever and ever . 

Finally , I said that love doth knit our hearts to GOD , and makes a man take him for his chief contentment : For as hatred doth rend , disjoin , and separate : So love doth unite , knit , and tie together . Love's married jacob and Rahel , love united David and jonathan : and so our hearts by love are wedded and united to GOD , and for GOD to one another : That they might be knit together in love , saith Saint Paul 'T was Love ▪ that made our Saviour pray that all his Members might be One with Him , and his Father : and it is love also , that makes us deny ourselves and the world , and study to live so , as if we were not ours , but GOD'S : 't is hatred that breeds dislike , aversation , and discontentednesse : And so it is love , that causeth joy , delight , contentment : When love hath once possessed the soul , it moves it to joy in GOD , to make him her prime contentment , and to exclaim with the Psalmist : Whom have I in heaven but thee ? and I have desired none on earth with thee : GOD is the strength of mine heart and my portion for ever . And undoubtedly , what thing soever a man doth best love , that to him is his best contentment : for love causeth content , as the light doth comfort , and contentment is embarked and enbotled in it , as a Tree in a Bark , as water in the clouds ; Therefore the Greek word ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) signifying to love , signifies to rest in , or to be contented : And thus we have seen what love is . 

The Object , on whom this love here spoken of should be fixed , is the LORD , even he , who is gracious , and merciful , slow to anger , righteous in all his ways , and holy in all his works : Even he , whose greatness is incomprehensible , and whose wisdom is infinite , which made heaven and earth , the sea , and all that is therein ; and keepeth his fidelity for ever ; which executeth justice for the oppressed , giveth bread to the hungry , loveth the righteous , heals those that are broken in heart ; preserveth all that love him , fulfil the desires of all that fear him relieveth the fatherless and widow , and showeth mercy unto thousands to them that love him : Even he , I say , that remembered us in our base estate , cut the cords of the wicked , rescued us from our oppressors , delivered us from our sins , brought us from our errors , translated us out of Babylon , saved us from that Purple Harlot , showed us his Word , given us his Gospel , honoured us with peace ; delivered our Rulers , rescued his Anointed , and saved us all , both Church and Kingdom , from that Hel-made , horrid , and prodigious Powder . OH LORD , how great is thy love unto us ! how amiable is thy Name in all the world ! Blessed be thy Name for ever , and let all thy people say , Amen . 

The Person● who are exhorted to this Love are All GOD'S Saints , even all they , that have tasted of his love , and which in mercy he hath hallowed for himself ; even All of them , young and old , rich and poor , high and low , men , women , and children ; for in saying All , he ex●epteth None ; the Young men for their strength ; Old men for their wisdom , the Rich for their wealth , the Poor for their correction , the High for their greatness ; the Low for their meanness , with which virtue and piety commonly cottons best with ; Men for their supereminent honour , Women , because he hath graced their Sex , by bringing forth of a Saviour , and Children for his great care and manifold protection of them : and all in general for their Sanctification by grace on earth , and eternal Salvation in immortal glory in the Heavens . 

But are none bound to love the LORD but his Saints ? 

Yes , without doubt , the Law ties all , for all are of his making , his goodness reaches unto all , and he is the Saviour of all : But David here speaks unto Saints only , being such as himself most delighted in , and of whom he best hoped , being best affected , and such also as whom GOD doth most dear love , and honour with his greatest favours . 

Our lesson then from hence is this ; All of us , every mother's child , without exemption of any ; should love the LORD . 

But because , as he that speaks Greek or Latin to him , that is no Graecian or Latinist , is but as a Barbarian to him , and does but beat the air : So the Language and discourse of love to him , that loves not , is but barbarous and unpleasing , as sounding Brass , and a tinkling Cymbal : Therefore that we may conceiu● and reap profit by these things , which shall be delivered concerning our love of GOD , it behoves us to blow up the dying and fainting coals of this heavenly and holy fire within our breasts : And seeing that the ear tasteth words , as the palate doth meat , let us have understanding and attentive ears , that discerning the things , we shall hear , to be good , we may receive and digest them , and like prudent hearers shewforth the fruits thereof in our lives & conversations . 

First , than I say , Necessity lies upon us to love the LORD : Woe unto us , if we love him not . For first , it is GOD'S express commandment : thou shalt love the LORD thy GOD ; and now Israel ( saith Moses ) what doth the LORD thy GOD require of thee , but to fear and love him . This our Saviour calleth a Great Commandment ; the Commander is great , the Object is great , the use of the duty is great , and their reward is great , that take care to do it : And though there were no other reason to move us to it , but his bare command , yet were that reason strong enough to bind us : Sic vult , sic iubet , stet pro ratione u●luntas . The power of a King , the authority of a Father , the place of a Master , necessitatis , the subjection , and obedience of a Subject , Child , and Servant . But GOD is our King , our Father , and our Master , he hath an absolute , inevitable and uncontrollable power and jurisdiction over us : Therefore his very bare command should condition and control us without more ado . 

But secondly , besides the precept , there is a most heavy curse , which , unless a man do love GOD , he cannot scape : For though our love of GOD be not the caus● why , but a sign that GOD will bless us , yet our hatred , or Non-love , doth deserve his curse . Therefore Saint Paul denounceth him accursed , that loves not the LORD JESUS , who is GOD over all , blessed for ever , Amen . 

Thirdly , except we love GOD , we cannot worship him : For true worship is , Love joined with duty towards a man's superiors : So that , where there is no love , there is but sergeant service , or none at all . 

And indeed , as he that loves not GOD , cannot worship him , so neither can he love his neighbour for GOD , and in GOD : And He that loveth not his brother , is not of GOD but abideth in death : Certainly , he that loves not the father , as the father , loves not the son , as the son , loves not his brother as the child of GOD , as the brother of CHRIST , as the child of the Church : which we all aught , and who so doth not , shall have small reward . 

And that the necessity of this duty may yet appear , let us know , that as iron is unfit to be wrought on , unless it be heated in the fire : and as wax will not seal well , except it be warm and soft : even so are we , till we be inflamed with love , till that holy fire hath heated u● : Till then , the Word , the Sacraments , the Minister , his Binding , Losing , Preaching , Praying , Blessing , will be of no true reckoning with us , and we shall take no comfort in them . 

And say that a man had the love of all men ; say that he could speak all Languages in the world , and were able to remove Mountains , to cast out devils , to cure all diseases , to heal all wounds , and should crumble out all his goods to the poor , suffer for the truth , do and suffer many things for his Country , yet if he loved not GOD , he might truly say with Saint Paul ; He were Nothing : And thus we see the necessity of loving GOD.  

A second argument of this duty , is from the Equity thereof : For seeing Almighty GOD doth love us , as it appeareth by his Electing , Redeeming , Sanctifying , and Preserving us in CHRIST JESUS his beloved Son , it is a matter of equity that we should remonstrate our love unto him in that his Son ; and the rather also , because our love to him comes short in measure of his love to us : For GOD'S love is a Descending love , but our love to him is an Ascending love ; and love descending is more natural , more vigorous , and more vehement than love ascending : As we see in fathers and mothers , who love their children better than their children love them . And reason may be given hereof : For GOD knows us better than we know him : And there is no corruption , no vitiosity of nature in him , as there is in us : We are not so good and candid of nature , as He : Neither have we any thing of ours in GOD to love , as he hath in us ; for we , and every good thing in us is of GOD.  

Besides , GOD loves us , that deserve his hatred , being by nature dead in sins , and children of wrath , and bringing forth many roots of bitterness , and fruits of injustice ; how unequally then should we deal with him , if we should not love him , who deserves our love , being most lovely in himself , and bearing such love unto us. What is man ( saith David unto GOD ) that thou art so mindful of him , or the son of man , that thou thinkest on him ? And what is GOD , o man , that thou art so unmindful of him , bearing so small respect and love unto him ? If it be untolerable ingratitude for a man to be loved of a man , and to receive continual tokens of love from him , and yet in the mean time not to love his lover , and to show no signs of kindness towards him ? What horrible impiety , injustice , and unthankfulness , is it to be beloved of GOD , and to return no love unto him ; to receive daily testimonies of love from him , and yet to show no love unto his Name ? far be this uneven and unthankful dealing from us , that owe more love unto him , than we can express in work or word ? Nimis durus est animus , qui si dilectionem n●lebat impendere , n●lie rependere : His heart is Oak , not flesh , but flint , that though he will not begin to love , yet finding love will show no love : But GOD doth love us ; out of his love he sent his Son , his only Son , the Son of his love into the world to save us ; He sends us fruitful seasons , and fills our hearts with gladness : It is his mercies that we are not consumed , they are renewed every morning . Yea , we should be very unjust and injurious unto ourselves , if we will not love him , seeing ( as the Apostle teacheth ) All things ( life and death , health , and sickness , same and reproach , plenty and penury , prosperity and adversity ) work together for good unto those that love GOD. And what reason is there , that we should desire his love to us , and withhold ours from him ? Or what reason have we to require love of our wives , children , servants , neighbours , acquaintances , if we care not to show love to him , who hath adopted , married , and assumed us unto him ? Or finally , with what equity can we desire that our commands should be respected of those that depend on us , if we make no count of this duty ( which draws on all the rest ) which he exacteth and expecteth at our hands ? We see then that common sense and Equity , extorts it from us , and calls us to it . 

Thirdly , the commodities of this love should move us to the entertainment and performance of it . For first , by this love our faith produceth those good duties , which we owe to GOD. For Faith , is as an Hand Receiving , but by love we give and bestow , and without it we can do no good works well : Therefore the Apostle saith , that Faith worketh by love : And as Saint Austen speaketh , Our life and all our conversation is named of our love : Nec faciunt bonos vel malos mores , nisi boni vel mali sint amores : Which being good or bad , makes our manners to be thereafter ; such as the love is , such is the life ; a holy love , a holy life ; an earthly love , an earthly life : If a man's love be set on GOD , his life must needs be good : And though this be certain , A man is iustifyed by Faith , yet this is true ; The life of a man is justified by Love , a naughty love , a naughty life : Again , his life is good , whose love is fixed on good : and what greater good than GOD , who is the good of goods , and n●thing but Good ? 

Secondly , this love doth poise and season knowledge , which without love would be windy , light , flashy , and unsavoury : Knowledge without Charity makes a man to swell and bluster ; but the love of GOD and of man , for GOD will make the best learned most humble and officious . Meat undigested breeds corruption , but being digested , it affordeth nourishment and strength : so knowledge , unless it be boiled and concocted in the stomach of the soul , with this sacred fi●e of love to GOD , and of man for GOD , it engendereth crudities , windiness , and diseases , even corrupt conditions in heart and life ; but being by love digested it is very nourishable and of great use . Yea further , as showers of rain occasion store of weeds , except there be heat and dryness to receive , alter , and digest them : but being by the drought of the ground and heat of the Sun turned and concocted , they make the soil more fresh and fruitful . Even so the words of instruction , exhortation , admonition , communication , counsel , consolation , straining from the Scriptures in the Ministry of the Church , and falling upon men , become unprofitable and dangerous to them , except they be tempered and received by love : But being by love embraced , and as it were digested , they bring forth in them the fruits of righteousness , and make them more fat and fertile , much more serviceable to both GOD and Man : Yea , whereas meat by heat is turned into the body , and dews and showers into the earth and herbs : By love the word is not turned into us , but we rather into it , being brought under the obedience of it , and now no longer seeking and serving the flesh , but studying to conform ourselves to it , and wrestling against our lusts , that it might possess us , guide and order us. OH Love , by thee I go out of myself , that the Word of GOD might enter in , by thee I war against my self , that it might reign in peace within me , by thee I mortify mine earthly members , that it might live , might like , and prospero in me ! 

Thirdly , by the love of GOD we may know in what estate we are in . A man by grace within him may know the grace of GOD unto him : A may by looking upon a Dial may know the motion of the Sun in heaven ; so by sifting his own soul he may see the good will of GOD unto him . I see not the air , but I can perceive the operation of the air ; neither do I see the heart ( or love of GOD ) as it is in his own breast , but there are certain operations of his love , even in the hearts of men , which if they truly find , they may assure themselves of his love unto them . Now that love , whereby a man loves GOD , is a work of GOD'S love , whereby he loves man ; So that he that loves GOD , may conclude that GOD loves him . For GOD calls no man effectually , but out of his love unto him : But as Saint Paul showeth , he that loveth GOD is called of his purpose : And again , If any man love GOD , ( saith he ) the same is known ( scientiâ approbatiuâ ) That is , acknowledged , and loved , and approved , of him . And Saint john saith ; We love him , because he loved us first . For our love spring's out of his , as the Rivers from the Sea ; his love drawing our hearts unto him , as the Loadstone doth iron to it , or as the Sardius doth wood ; our love answering to his love , as an Echo to a man's voice , or as a face doth to a face in water : And as one candle doth lighten another , so the consideration of his love to us doth cause the reflection of our love to him : Which our consideration of his love unto us , is a gracious operation of his love within us , being a fruit , not of the flesh , which is bend against GOD , but of the Spirit , which proceedeth from GOD : And for because the haters of GOD , and the lovers of worldly things , are of Babylon , of the world of the devil ; and seeing the lovers of GOD are of jerusalem , of the Catholic Church our Mother , of GOD our Father , and have their sins forgiven ( Interoget se unusquisque quid amet , & inveniat unde sit civis ) Let every man but examine himself what he loves , and he shall find in what estate he is , and to what City he doth belong ; 't is true I confess a man is not loved because he loves , but because he is loved therefore he loves : And as the Sun shining upon a plate of silver is not idle and void of operation , but heats the plate , which sendeth from it both light and heat : So GOD shining with the resplendent and burning beams of his love upon us , is not now idle , and void of all success , but inflames our heart with love , by which we are both well affected towards him , and for his sake also towards others ; that as no man can stand by , or meddle with , that plate of silver , which shall not receive of the light and heat of it ; so no man can ( as it were ) pass by us , or have any dealing with us , but we shall sh●w our good affection towards him . 

Fourthly , the love of GOD is not lazy ; if it labour not it is no love . Our love of GOD engenders in us the love of the godly for GOD , which is also very comfortable : For as he that loves the King , as King , cannot but love his faithful and loyal subjects : And as he that loves the father , cannot , will not , doth not hate his child ; and as he that loves his friend , will not misuse his picture : So he that truly loves GOD , will also love those , that by their godly conversation do show themselves to be the servants and children of GOD , and which are the liveliest pictures of GOD , which mortals can see : And this kind of love is comfortable , because hereby we may assure ourselves to be the true Disciples of our LORD , and know ( as the Apostle teacheth ) that we are Translated from death to life . 

And as many boughs come from one root , and much water from one spring ; so many virtues arise from this love , and ( as Gregory speaketh , Non habet viriditatem ramus boni ope●● , nisi manserit in radiee charitatis ) the works of all virtues will but wither , except they remain in the greenness of this Root , except they be nourished by this love : The love of money , the love of mammon is the root and nourisher of all evil ; so the love of GOD is the mother and nurse of all good , of all pious Offices unto GOD , and Christian duties unto man  

And in one word , the love of GOD is as strong as death ; for as death doth kill the body , so our love to GOD doth mortify our love to the world , and like a strong wind it dispels the thick and stinking fogs of rancour , wrath , malice : And as the rising of the Sun doth drive away the cold and dulness of the night , and as the pouring in of wine into a vessel causeth the air to give place ; so the love of GOD doth diminish and send packing the inordinate love of worldly vanities , and when our hearts are once warmed with it , it causeth the coldness of our affections unto good to depart and lessen : When GOD comes into the heart ( as he doth when the heart doth love him ) Mammon must needs go out ; When we fix our eyes on heaven we remove them from the earth ; and when we fall into a league of love with GOD , it cannot be but that we must fall out of love , and into hatred , with all his enemies . Therefore David saith out of his love to GOD : Do not I hate them , OH LORD , that hate thee ? I hate them with an unfeygned hatred , as if they were mine utter enemies : And thus we have had a say of the commodiousness of this our love to GOD.  

The Excellency thereof remaineth yet to be discussed : True love , wherewith GOD is affected , is excellent in all these respects which follow . First , in respect of the Author of it , which is not man , but GOD : For love , as Saint john showeth , cometh of GGD : and whosoever loveth GOD , doth it by the finger and gift of GOD.  

Secondly , in respect of the true Ends thereof , which are not base but honourable , as the glory of GOD , the salvation of our soul , the edification of our brother , the honour of our calling , and that we might not grieve the Spirit of GOD.  

Thirdly , in respect of that of GOD'S , which moves us to love , which is his goodness , because he is good in himself , and good to us.  

Fourthly , in regard of the Subjects of it , or the persons , in whom it reigneth , which are only the beloved Saints and Servants of GOD , the excellentest of human race , and in them the Heart , even the best member in them is the Hearth or Altar , on which this heavenly fire kindled by the HOLY GHOST doth lie . 

Fiftly , in respect of the manifold and excellent Attendants and Companions , which wait upon it ; even all the virtues : For our love of GOD , is not forlorn and solitary , but like an honourable Lady , very well attended . 

Sixtly , for the perpetuity thereof , beyond faith and hope : For whereas they shall cease , when a man hath once obtained full fruition of the things which he doth believe and to expect have and enjoy ; love shall not cease , but become complete . 

Seventhly , our love of GOD , hath three most excellent Effects , to speak of no more . 

First , it makes a man officious to GOD , and for GOD to Man True obedience is the fruit of love ; and all obedience which is not of love , is hypocritical and unsavoury . We see the love of a child forces him to obey his father , though he had not a rod , not an arm : So GOD'S Child by his love is moved to serve GOD ; yea , and would study to obey hi● , though he would not strike , though there were no hell to be punished in for disobedience : Yea , the force of love is such , that it will make a man obey GOD , though there were no After-reward of obedience : Even as we see amongst men , love will enforce a man to do well unto one , whom he loves , even freely , then when the party receiving the benefit is not able now , nor likely hereafter , to make a requital of it . 

Secondly , it makes a man like to GOD ( for GOD is LOVE ) and it is not the least commendation of a child to be like his father . 

Thirdly , he that loveth GOD , doth , as it were , deprive himself of himself , and bestows himself on GOD , whom he doth love ; insomuch that he doth die , by little , and little , in himself ; but GOD , whom he loveth , lives in him : For the love of GOD ( if sincere and fervent ) is of a Ravishing disposition , by the which the lover is so rapt out of himself , that he forgets himself , denies himself , and is wholly in GOD , whom he loveth , and GOD , whom he affects , being in him . So that this love is able to make the lover say ; I live , but not I now , but GOD lives in me . For even as the love of the world makes the worldling live unto the world , and the world to live in him ; so , as it may be said of them in some sort : They two are become one : So our love to GOD doth cause us to live to GGD , and GOD ( as it were ) to live in us ; so as that we are now no more Ours , but His , no more Two , but One : Neither seek we ourselves , but Him : Non nostra sed sua ; not ours , but His.  

Eightly , our love of GOD may be said to be excellent , in respect of that excellent and supereminent Reward , wherewith GOD will recompense them , that love him , how poor or mean soever : and this is no less than a Crown , than a Kingdom , the Crown of Glory , the Kingdom of Heaven . Harken my beloved brethren ( saith Saint james ) Hath not GOD chosen the Poor of this world , that they should be rich in faith , and Heirs of the Kingdom , which he hath promised to them , that love him ? And Saint Paul likewise showeth , that the Crown of righteousness , even that , which CHRIST hath purchased by his righteousness , that which GOD hath in mercy promised , and in justice will perform , that wherewith righteous men shall be rewarded , shall be rendered to them , that love his coming , which only they do , that love him himself . Doubtless , he that loves not the judge , loves not his coming to judgement : He then that would live in heaven like a King , let him love GOD first on earth like a Subject : He that would have that Glory , let him have this Grace . Oh! how men love the world , whose pleasures are but for a season , and whose joys are but imperfect ? But in the presence of GOD there is fullness of joy , and at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore . O! how covetous are men of riches , how ambitious of a Crown ? And yet riches remain not always , nor the Crown from generation to generation : But the riches of Glory , that come By the love of GOD , are everlasting ; the Crown and Kingdom promised to them , that love him , is eternal and unchangeable . The preferments , profits and pleasures , which the earth can afford , are obvious to the eye , and not so goodly as foolish men imagine : But the things which GOD hath prepared for them that love him , are such as no eye hath seen , no ear hath heard , no heart hath conceived ; none can express them but they that enjoy them . O , that men would therefore set their love upon him , and remove it from the world ! For he , that loves GOD , loves him that will reward him with peeerelesse honour ; but he , that loves the world , loves his own betrayer , for the world says to the devils concerning him that is in love with her , as judas said to the jews : Whomsoever I shall kiss , it is he , take him : And as jael served Sis●ra ; so serves the world all those , that she lulles a sleep within her Tent : Well may she feed them with her milk and butter , but if she get them once a sleep , she pierces the very Temples of their souls , and nails them fast unto the ground . 

Finally , this love is excellent and matchless in respect of the Object of it , who is the Omni-potent , Omni-present , Omni-scient , Alwise , Euerliving , and Euer-loving GOD , who is Goodness , Mercy , justice , Love , and Life itself , who only is Verity , Virtue , Unity , Amity , the Beauty of Beauties , the Perfection of Perfections , even Beauty and Perfection itself . In Hebrew called JEHOVAH , because he is of , and for himself , all other things else being both from him and for him : In Greek 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , because he hath authority over all : In Latin DOMINUS , because he tameth , ruleth , and owneth all things : In English LORD , because he hath Honour and Authority , and for that he is IL-LAF-FORD ( where the word LORD by contraction , or corruption cometh ) which is as much as a Giver , , or an Affoorder of Bread : For he giveth food to all flesh , and bread , with all things needful , for this life present , and for the life to come , to all his servants that attend and fear him . 

The execellency therefore of the Object should move us to the love thereof : What Nature is there comparable to GOD'S ? Whose conditions is so sweet , so absolute , as his ? What canst thou love , that 's worthy love , which is not be found in him in all completeness ? Dost thou delight in the Mighty ? Behold ( saith he ) I am the LORD GOD of all flesh : Is there any thing too hard for me ? If he but speak the word , it 's done , his power is so great . 

Dost thou love Wisdom ? GOD is All-knowing and most Prudent : He scattereth the devices of the crafty , so that their hands cannot accomplish that , which they do enterprise : He taketh the wise in their craftiness , and the counsel of the wicked is made foolish . He is wise in heart , and mighty in strength : who hath been fierce against him and hath prospered ? With him is strength and wisdom : He causeth the Counsellors to go as spoilt , and maketh the judge's fools : There is no wisdom nor understanding , nor counsel against the LORD . 

Delightest thou in Valour and Stoutness of Spirit ? The LORD , is strong and mighty in Battle : He leads away Princes as a Prey , and overthroweth the Mighty : He poureth contempt upon Princes , and maketh the strength of the Mighty weak : The courage of all men , the fortitude of all Angels ; the stoutness of all creatures , is to GOD'S , as a drop of water to the vast Ocean , the light of a candle to the splendour of the Sun , or as a thing finite to infinite . 

Is thy delight in him , that deserves admiration ? The LORD doth great things , and unsearchable , yea marvellous things without number . Lo , when he goeth by me ( saith job ) I see him not , and when he passeth by , I perceive him not ! Behold , when he taketh a prey who can make him to restore it ? Who shall say unto him , what dost thou ? He sitteth upon the circle of the earth , and the inhabitants thereof are as Grasshoppers : He stretcheth out the heavens , as a curtain , and spreadeth them out as a Tent to dwell in : He bringeth the Princes to nothing , and maketh the judges of the earth as vanity : He blows upon them , and they whither , and his whirlwind takes them away as stubble . 

wilt thou love the Faithful and him that is constant in Truth ? GOD is faithful , he keepeth his fidelity for ever , and his truth endureth from generation to generation . 

Couldst thou affect one that is lust in all his proceedings ? The LORD is righteous in all his ways : He will judge the world with righteousness , and the people with his truth . 

Couldst thou find in thine heart to love him that is merciful by Nature , and which hath compassion on the poor , and him that is afflicted and weary ? The LORD is merciful and full of compassion : He relieveth the fatherless , and is a friend to the poor : He giveth strength unto him that fainteth , and unto him that hath no strength he increaseth power : He delivereth the poor in his affliction , and openeth their ear in trouble . 

wilt thou fix thy soul on him , that loves a good heart , and which hate's him , that is ill disposed ? Behold , GOD will not cast away an upright man , neither will he take the wicked by the hand . The LORD will give grace and glory , and no good thing will he withhold from them , that walk uprightly : but the hypocrite shall not come before him . 

Wouldst thou set thy heart on him , that is so complete in himself , as that he can neither be profited by the justice of any , nor hurt by the sin of any ? This is only the LORD : My goodness extendeth not to thee , saith David . May a man be profitable unto GOD ( saith Eliphaz ) as he , that is wise , may be profitable to himself ? Is it any thing to the Almighty that thou art righteous ? or is it profitable unto him that thou makest thy ways upright ? if thou sinnest , what ●ost thou against him ? Yea , when thy sins be many , what dost thou unto him ? If thou be righteous , what givest thou unto him ? or what receiveth he at thine hand ? Thy wickedness may hurt a man , as thou art : and thy righteousness may profit the Son of man : no man can give any thing to GOD , which he hath not , nor take aught from him which he hath . 

Finally , wilt thou love him , that will save them , that fear him , and preserve them that love him ? then love the LORD ; For his salvation is near to them that fear him : Because he hath loved me , therefore will I deliver him : The LORD preserveth all them that love him : And by his power he will guard them through faith , that in the end they shall attain to the end of their faith , the salvation of their souls in heaven . And in one word , because nothing doth more move a man to love another , than faith and constancy , than this , that a man loves one that is no flincher , no changeling , even this should provoke us to the love of GOD , Who changes not , and with whom ( as Saint james speaketh ) is no variableness , nor shadow of turning . His counsel shall stand ; he will do whatsoever he hath said : Whom he loveth once , he loveth with an everlasting love unto the end : And will never turn away from them to do them good : but will delight in them to do them good , & will not fail them nor forsake them . 

The truth is , there is no man , no nothing in the world , which doth deserve our love so as GOD doth , or which should stand cheek by jowl with him in our affections . 

For first , a man may love men , and yet not be loved of them : For ( as it sometimes falleth out ) the more that some are loved , the less they love , affecting them lest that love them most . But the more any man loves GOD , the more he may be sure that GOD loves him ; Not that GOD is drawn to love for the merit of our love : But because our love to him is a fruit of his love to us , and increaseth as his : Even as the more heat is , which cometh from a wall , or from the ground , the more it argues that the Sun beats upon it . 

Secondly , earthly things , as riches , honour , credit , preferments , and the like , cannot give a man such contentment , as may be found in GOD. For they are momentany and uncertain ; but GOD is cerraine , constant , and eternal . They are mingled with something , which may displease us : But GOD is altogether profitable , and full of pleasure : A man may be glutted with them , he may love them too well , he may surfeit on them , he may joy so long in them , as at last he may be punished with his own perdition : but no can be too full of GOD : He will cloy no man's stomach , no man can love him too much , too long ; for the measure of loving him is to love him without measure , the end is endless , it is a debt which is always due unto him , and for ever ; which a man must be ever a paying , and never have done paying : And further , although a man had all pleasures , all wealth and honour that the whole world could afford him , yet if he gave way unto his mind , he would still wish for more , and delight in change : For the Round world , and all that 's in it , is not able to fill man's heart , that is Triangular , and unsatiable as fire , that never ●aith it is enough ; For if any man be content , and think he hath enough , it is out of discretion because he sees no true contentment can come from earthly things : But GOD , because he is the fullness of good , a pure , and a perfect Truth , Beauty , and Perfection , is able to give true and full contentment to the soul , to all the souls of men , yea though there were 2 thousand thousand worlds of men . 

Thirdly , we love men , whose fury reaches not unto the soul , and whose love sometimes can do but little good : But the wrath of GOD is the woe of man , his anger reaches unto the soul , his indignation is more terrible than the roaring of ten thousand Lions : But in the light of his countenance is life , his favour is like the dew upon the grass , or as a cloud of the latter rain , his love is even our life , & the fountain from whence our holiness and happiness , our grace and glory , our comfort & contentment spring's . 

Fourthly , our love to the creature is joined with fear and care , lest the thing , we love should take some harm : Res est solliciti plena timoris amor : Our friends may be killed or hurt , goods may be stolen , houses may be burned , a man's stock may be wasted , his credit may be weakened , his servant seduced , his children misused , and his wife corrupted : A thousand mischances m●y happen unto these things , which are subject to fire and water , winds and weather , birds and beasts , sin and sickness , Men and devils : But GOD is liable to no such thing in himself , He is over all , under none , altogether blessed , Impassable , immutable , Invincible , Inviolable . 

Finally , whereas some will be loved of some , but contemn the love of others ; GOD , with whom there is no respect of persons , accepts of every man , that loves him , yea , though the love of all men can add nothing to him : even as also in loving other things , men are often jealous , envious , and malicious , and will endure no rivals , no competitors ; which is clean otherwise in our love of GOD ▪ for so powerful is the grace of GOD in those that love him , as that it makes men desirous of companions . A man that addicts himself to some man , is afraid of another , lest that he creeping into his love should hinder his gains : But GOD hath enough for all , that loves him , he is able to give them all so much , as that they themselves shall say , They have enough ; He is so well able to satisfy them all , as that every one of them might say ; The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places ; yea I have a fair heritage : thou dost anoint mine head with oil , and my cup runneth over . And though it fall out sometimes among us , that we will dislike him , that doth increase our acquaintants , followers , or such as shall hang upon us to be relieved and maintained by us ; yet it is not so with GOD : For if any man shall convert sinners unto him , and increase his friends , if true , though not uncostly to him , the same man doth a work pleasing to him , and doing it out of love he shall not lose his reward : For GOD is not unjust to forget your work , and labour of your love , ( saith Saint Paul ) which ye have showed unto his Name . And they ( saith the LORD ) that turn many to righteousness , shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever . And indeed wherefore were the Apostles sent abroad into the world , but to gather Disciples to him , and to increase his followers ? 

A●d that I may yet press this poi●t a little more , being of so great importance . Tell me , how shall man show himself thankful unto GOD. except he love him for creating him in his Image ? How shall he excuse himself , if he love him not , seeing he hath not planted him in a world unfurnished , but hath prepared him all things needful : Light for seeing , Air for breathing , Meats for feeding , Clotheses for covering , and hath given him rule over the Fish of the Sea , the Fowls of Heaven , and over every beast that moveth upon the earth ? 

We are forbidden to have any other GOD unto ourselves , but the LORD which hath brought us out of the land of darkness , the region of death , and delivered us from bondage under sin and sathan : which we shall never be able to observe , unless by love we devote and wed ourselves unto him . 

How shall we sanctify the Name of the LORD , and not defile it , except we love it ? How shall we merely upon GOD'S naked Precept forget an injury , and ●ot avenge ourselves , if ●he love of GOD do not persuade us ? 

Will any man with Moses post-pose his ow●e greatness to the glory of GOD , except he love ●im ? and will he be careful that those , which are committed to his care , should not behave themselves a● rebels , and startawaies , unless t●e love of GOD enforce him ? 

How can parents bring up their children religiously , instruct them in GOD'S Commandments carefully , and bring them up ( as they are required ) in the information of the LORD piously , except the love of GOD doth move them to it ? 

How shall we be able to meditate in the Law of GOD day and night , as we are exhorted , our dulness and averseness is so great by nature , except the love of GOD do spur us up and vanquish us ? 

How shall we with the children of Israel , turn quickly out of the way , wherein our fathers have walked , and go an whoring after the idol , idle and addle inventions of men ; specially if we were but put to it a little , except our love to GOD restrain and bridle us ? 

What soul will say to GOD , but that which loves him dear , as Ruth said to Naomi , Whether thou goest , I will go , and where thou dwellest I will dwell . It is lack of love , which makes men forsake him , deny him service , and depart out of his house . 

Will a mother with Hannah , dedicate her son unto the LORD , but that she loves him ? surely if her dedication be in devotion , it is the fruit of her love . 

Wouldst thou with David set all the Laws of GOD before thee , and not depart there from ? Wouldst thou be upright towards him , and keep thee from thy wickedness ? then love him ; For what was it , that made jonathan so sincere to David ? what caused him to say unto him , Whatsoever thy soul requireth , that will I do unto thee ? Even this , Because he loved him as his own soul . 

What but love forced the true mother of the child to say unto Solomon , Slay him not ; whereas the other for want of love said , Divide it . So nothing but the love of GOD makes a man study the peace & unity of his House , and causes his bowels to yearn at the dividing of it . 

What but the zeal of love to GOD , moved Hezekiah to break the images , to cut down the groves , ●nd to demolish the brazen Serpent ? So certainly thou shalt never ●leave fast to the LORD , and throw down those idols , that are within thee , and keep thy soul from inchastity , except thy love to GOD constrain thee . 

Wouldst thou have thy Religion costly , and not count it a burden to thee ? Wouldst thou be cheerful , and Free-spirited in all thine oblations and gifts unto GOD ? then must thou needs addict thy soul to GOD by love . It was this which made David say to Ornan , I will not take thine for the LORD ▪ nor offer burned offerings without cost . It was devotion , which moved the Israelites to bestow their silver and gold and precious stones unto the building of the Temple : Of whom it is written , that They offered willingly unto the LORD , with a Perfect ●eart . 

It was without question true love to GOD , which made S●lomon pray for wisdom and knowledge to govern the people of GOD , and build an house for the Name of the LORD : and which made David say ; I will not enter into the Tabernacle of mine house , nor come upon my palate or bed , nor suffer mine eyes to sleep , nor mine eyelids to slumber , until I find out a place for the LORD , an habitation for the mighty GOD of jacob . Even so do thou , whom CHRIST hath made a spiritual King , devote and bestow thyself on GOD by love , if ever thou desirest to govern thyself , to mortify thy lusts , and to make thine heart an house for GOD to dwell in : Wouldst thou not sleep till thou hast found out an house for GOD to dwell in ? then surely thy love must keep thee awake . 

Love unto God , and of his worship , made the people sing for joy and shout with a great shout , when the foundation of the LORD'S House was laid : Even so it behoves us truly to love GOD , if we would truly rejoice , when we see the Church , which is the House of GOD , newly founded or repaired , in any Kingdom , State , City , Town , Village , Family : or when we see the truth of CHRIST planted and received in any man  

We are commanded to sanctify the Sabboath day : and Nehemiah was very zealous for the keeping of it , and reproves the Rulers for the breach thereof . What evil thing is this ( saith he ) that ye do , and break the Sabboath day ? Did not yours fathers thus , and our GOD brought all this plague upon us , and upon this City ? yet ye increase the wrath upon Israel in breaking the Sabboath . Now certainly , unless by love we sanctify GOD in our hearts , we shall never sanctify the Sabbath for GOD. This is the cause that we steal away the Sabbath from GOD , because our lucre and pleasures do steal away our love , that is due to GOD , from us.  

It was love that made Ester say to the King : How can I suffer and see the evil that shall come upon my people ? or how can I suffer and see the destruction of my kindred ? Doubtless he loveth jacob , that pities the affliction of joseph . Love unto GOD will make the heart bleed at the bloodshed of the godly : thou canst not love GOD , if thou be'st not moved at the plots and practices of godless men against the people of GOD : I suppose him void of all love to GOD , that could have seen & suffered that execrable Powder-practise , or which now doth grieve in secret to see it disappointed . 

To conclude , what moved job to patience ? Love. What made him say , Though he slay me , yet will I trust in him , and I will reprove my ways in his sight ? Love. What made David say , thou art my LORD , thy Law is within mine heart ? Love. What made him so sing of GOD , and compose so many Psalms unto him ? Love. What made Agur pray , Feed me with food convenient , lest I be full , and deny thee , and say ; Who is the LORD ? and least I be poor , and steal , & take the Name of my GOD in vain ? Love. What made Solomon rise at the last , relinquish his lusts , cry All is vanity , & call us to the remembrance of GOD in our youth ? Love. What moveth the Church to speak thus unto her husband ; Let him kiss me with the kisses of his Mouth : Show me where thou feedest , where thou liest at noon ? Stay me with flagons & comfort me with Apples ? Nothing but Love. She is sick of love . What made Daniel venture upon the Lions , the three children upon the fire , and the Christian Martyrs upon all kinds of deaths ? Surely this , They loved not their lives unto the death , but out of their love unto GOD made more account of his glory , then of their own lives , liberties , pleasures , profits , and preferments , and held the truth at an higher rate , than all earthly things whatsoever . 

Lo then , what reason we have to love the LORD ! I all the wit and industry of flesh and blood were spent and exercised in arguing for the love of earthly things , yet all were nothing , of no validity , nor efficacy to remove our love from GOD to them . What shall detain our love ? the world . Know ye not , ( saith Saint james ) That the amity of the world is the enmity of GOD ? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world , maketh himself an enemy of GOD. Love not this world ( saith Saint john ) neither the things that are in this world ▪ if any man love this world the love of the FATHER is not in him What is the world , but a pleasant frenzy , a Theatre of vanity , a si●ke of sin , a shop of deceit , the centre of inquities , and a very mirror of misery ? She is like that scarlet Harlot , lovely to look on , but dangerous to deal with ; who makes the Kings and Inhabitants of the earth drunken with the wine which she presents unto them in her golden cup. He which follows the world , is like a fool or child , that follows a shadow , or a butterfly , a thing of no value , and which mocks them most , that love her best , and follow her fastest . But say , why wilt thou love the world ? because she is constant ? Err not : nothing is more inconstant than the world , constant in inconstancy , and as inconstant in her constancy : She is in nothing the same , save in this , that she loves not to be the same . But GOD is the same for ever . thou art the same , and thy years shall not fail : With thee there is no alteration , nor shadow of conversion . GOD is not as man , that he should lie ▪ nor as the son of man that he should repent : Hath he said it , and shall he not do it ? and hath he spoken , and shall he not accomplish it ? The world is fleeting and floating up and down in her love ; whom she favours to day , she forsakes to morrow : But whom GOD loveth once , he loveth ever : Once and Ever are all one with him ; The world will shake off her dearest lovers , as an Olive her leaves , or as a Colt doth his rider ; But GOD never casts off him , that loves him ( Et te nemo amittit , nisi qui te dimittit ) and no man doth lose him , but he that leaves him : then love the LORD , and let go the world : Why should thy Soul , which is of an heavenly beginning , be buried and closed up within the earth ? Why should it , which is immortal , be pinned on things , that are but mortal ? Why should it , which is a Spirit , and Invisible , be fixed on things that are gross and visible ? Amor rerum terrenarum est viscus spiritualium pennarum . The love of the world is the lime-twigs of the soul , Amicitia sol● est inimicitia poli . Friendship with the earth is enmity with heaven : But we will descend unto particulars . 

What wilt thou love ? Wealth and riches ? wilt thou cast thine eyes upon that , which is nothing ? For riches taketh her to her wings , as an Eagle , and flieth into heaven . riches have sold more , than they have redeemed ; and rich men have few friends , but many flatterers that follow them , as ants do Corn , or as crows do carrion : Praedan sequitur ista turba : non hominem : Such follow the prey , & not the person , love the riches , but care not for the man ; they would flay off his Hide to make themselves thongs with it . An Ethnique could say , when he had lost all his goods ; Perijssem , ni perijssent ; I had lost myself , if I had not lost them . But for GOD who is our greatest good ; whether we lose our goods or not , if we lose him , and will lose him ; if we love riches more than him , we lose ourselves , our comfort & contentment : Therefore if riches increase , set not thine heart upon them : If thou aboundest not , be contented , for he hath most that covereth least ; He is the richest that least admireth riches : He is the greatest , who is contented with the smallest portion . 

What then shall have thy love ? shall Pleasures ? What are pleasures but pleasing vanities ? What are pleasures to the pains of hell which wait upon them ? What sweetness is there in them to the sweetness which is in GOD ? If our souls were sweetened with the true taste of GOD'S love , all other things would seem bitter to us : And that men feel not the sweetness of GOD , it is because their mouths are out of taste , being corrupted with the ague of worldly love . Consider the example of Moses , who choose rather To suffer adversity with the people of GOD , then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season , esteeming the rebuke of CHRIST greater riches , than the treasures of Egypt . Remember that ironical speech of Solomon to voluptuous persons : Rejoiced young man in thy youth , and let thine heart cheer thee , whilst thou art young , and walk in the ways of thine heart , and in the sight of thine eyes ; but know that for all these things GOD will bring thee to judgement . Lysimachus to quench his thirst yielded himself to the Scythians , and when he had drunk their cold water , he said ; Quam brevis volupt●tis causâ quantam deposui foelieitatem ! OH what great happiness have I forgone for a short pleasure ! Let us beware that we part not with our Birthright for a little water-gruel , and that we lose not GOD , and forgo the joys of heaven , for a small portion of vain delights . Malorum esca voluptas , quâ homines cap●untur , ut hamo pisces . Pleasure is the bait of evils ( of devils ) wherewith men are caught , as fishes with an hook : Either therefore we must shun them utterly , or take heed of the hook which lies hid within them . 

But what wilt thou set thy love on ? Honour ? How uncertain is it , and subject to be lost ? Haman was Honourable , and hanged in one day . Olofernes was Honourable , and Headed in one night : How great and common are the falls of many ? He that is in account to day , may be contemned to morrow : In pratis ut flos , sic perit omnis honos : Honour vanisheth like a vapour , and great men are like great bubbles , and all the glory of the world like grass , like the flower of the grass . Caesar was stabbed in his height . Nebuchadnezer was abased in the midst of his greatness : Alexander was poisoned in the top of his honours . Herod was struck with an Angel then , when he was applauded as a GOD. How vain a thing is honour , which like smoke mounted aloft doth vanish , whiles a man is looking on it ? But great , constant , infinite are the honours , which are laid up for those that love GOD.  

But peradventure Beauty shall have thy love . Hear the judgement of beautifall Bathsheba unto Solomon her son . Favour is deceitful , and beauty is vanity , But a woman that feareth the LORD , she shall be praised . What is beauty ? indeed the Loadstone and delight of the eye , very pleasing to the sight , but exceeding brittle , mutable , and momentany , like Summer Apples which last not long : One wound , one fit of an ague , a little sickness , or a few years will mar it . Bion called it , Bonum alienum , a good but none of ours , being able neither to give it , nor to keep it : Socrates called it , modici semporis tyrannidem , a tyrant , which reigned but a while : Theophrastus said it was ; Tacitam deceptionem , aut silentem fraudem ; a Still deceiver , or Silent fraud : And as for beautiful persons , if vicious , and void of love to GOD , they are like Tulipees , goodly to look on , but of no good savour : Or like Alabaster boxes filled with vinegar ; like guilded potsherds ; or more properly , like a ring of gold in a Sow's snout ; or some precious jewel in a Bear's ear : And finally , if beauty , the gift of GOD , be of so great request , how much more than should GOD , the giver of it , who is so full of beauty , as that if His Beautifulness could be seen , it would draw the eyes and hearts of all , that saw it , to him ? 

But say , if none of these , what shall have thy love , Thyself ? Beware , if thou makest thyself thy GOD , thou makest thyself thy devil : Certainly thou mayst love thyself , so thou love GOD in thyself , and thyself in GOD ; and whilst thou dost love thyself under GOD , and not over GOD ; For GOD , and not against GOD : Otherwise , if thou dost love thyself , thou dost but hate thyself ; if thou wouldst save thy soul , thou shalt destroy thy soul ; For GOD is the Soul of thy soul , the joy of thy heart , the Strength of thy life , thy Shield and Shadow , thy Saviour and Deliverer : Much better were it therefore for a man to leave his body , and to lose his life , rather than by loving what he should not love at all , or more than is allowed , to lose and deprive himself of GOD , who is the true Light and Life , the Grace and Glory of all our souls , and bodies also . 

What shall therefore separate us from the love of GOD , the Father of our spirits ; the Breath of our nostrils , the Castle of our comfort , our Rock of defence , and the Fountain of Life ? What shall extinguish this Sacred and Celestial fire of love unto his Majesty within our breasts ? What shall unloose us , or cut the cords of our love , whereby we are tied unto him ? What shall wipe him out of the Table-books of our hearts , and blot him out of our memories ? Shall promotions , profits , pleasures , beauty , bravery , tribulations , life , death , men , or devils ? no , no : nothing : no not the whole world , and all that is therein . What were it to gain all the world , and to lose thy soul ? What were it to be Lord of all the world , and to be deprived of him , for whom all the world was made ? What were it to be beloved of all men , and yet to be hated of the GOD of men ? I will therefore love GOD , keep GOD ; for he that hath GOD wants nothing ; but he that wants GOD , hath nothing . 

Now because to love GOD truly , and as every good Christian ought , is a duty so needful , equal , excellent , and commodious ; and because men are much abused by their imaginations ( the heart of man being a Sea of subtlety , and a Mine of deceit , given to deceive and beguile itself ) I will therefore propound certain notes , whereby we may discern , if we love him truly with a sincere and regular affection ; or whether we only draw near unto him with our lips , being far from him in regard of hearty love . 

First , true love is not lither , but laborious , Si operari renuerit , amor non est : it if it will not labour it is not love . What pains will not the Soldier take that affects the victory ? what will not the worldling do to get or keep riches ? How did Ester labour to save her kindred & Countrymen the jews ? jacob endured the heat of the day , the frost of the night , and want of rest , even continual toil and travel in a service of fourteen years , under none of the kindest Masters ( Laban , his name turned , but his nature retained , a very Naball ) and all this for his love to Rahell . Our Gamesters will sit up night and day , at dice and cards : Our gallant Dames , out of their love of bravery , what cost will they spare , what time will they not spend in making , changing , dressing , pluming , pranking ? And is the love of GOD only lazy , sleepy , sluggish and unwilling both to do , and suffer ? It is not doubtless . 

Secondly , he that loves GOD truly , and with a well regulated love ▪ will love GOD , chiefly for GOD himself , even because he is Good , Excellent , Perfect , and Amiable in himself , and not for those Love-tokens only , which GOD in love doth deign to give him : For to love one merely for gain , is not to love him , that gives it , but ourselves , that take it . If this be well considered , it is to be feared that many men love GOD , as they use to love their friends ; that is , not for their friend's sake , but for themselves ; not because their friends are Religious , Just , Wise , Virtuous ; but because they receive benefits , as money , meat , credit , and such things by them . But Saint Paul was of a more generous , and truer Spirit : For he saith : I seek not mine own profit , but the profit of many , that they might be saved . And again , I seek not yours , but You ; and do all things , that you may be edified : And again , ye have done well that ye did communicate to mine affliction ; Not that I desire a gift , but I desire a fruit , which may further your reckoning : And yet more fully ; I could wish my sefe to be separated ( anathematised ) from CHRIST ( my life , my light , my glory ) For my brethren , that are my kinsmen in the flesh . If they might be received , he passed not though himself were rejected ; if they might be saved , he cared not though himself were excluded out of heaven : so they might be blessed , he could wish himself were accursed : Thus the Galatians loved the Apostle : They despised not his trials , not his poverty , and afflictions , but received him as an Angel of GOD , and to have done him good could have found in their hearts to have pulled out their own eyes , and have given them unto him . This true love also was seen in Moses to GOD , and his Countrymen : For when they had , in his absence , made them an Idol , and provoked GOD against them by their idolatry , insomuch that GOD speaking to Moses said ; Let Me alone , for I will consume Them , but I will make of Thee a mighty people : ( which was a tempting offer , but mark how Moses took it ) He most earnestly besought the LORD to spare them ; preferring their good , to his own greatness , which argued the truth of his love unto them ; and entreated the LORD to turn from his wrath , and why ? Lest his enemies should blaspheme his Name , and say ; He brought them out maliciously to slay them in the mountains ; esteeming more of GOD'S glory , than his own greatness , and advancement . Yea so loving he was of the people , but especially so jealous of GOD'S glory , that rather than he would have them destroyed , or it eclypsed , he wishes himself To be razed out of GOD'S Book . So likewise Abraham out of his devotion unto GOD is ready at GOD'S commandment to sacrifice , to slay his only Son , his Hope , and Honour . Indeed this is the nature of a man's sincere and regular love to GOD , to love GOD for himself , to obey him without scruple , and to neglect one's self for the respect of GOD. And though we ought to love GOD for those good blessings , which he communicates unto us , ( as a friend his friend for courtesies received ) yet we must not rest there , if we will prove our love to be upright and sound ; but we must go further , and learn to love him for that lovely and peerless Excellency , and that immense and profound Sea of Goodness , which is in him , esteeming those his benefits conferred on us as certain streams flowing from the same ; and prising of them , not so much in their own worth , as for being effects and tokens of his favour to us. Even as a man should not so much value the good turns of his friend , according as they are worth in their own nature , as because they are fruits and arguments of his vertu-full and bounteous disposition . And this is the purer degree or kind of love , such as was in job , who though GOD seemed to be his Enemy , ( For he saith that the arrows of the Almighty were in him , the venom whereof drunk up his Spirit , and that the terrors of GOD fought against him ; that he feared him with dreams , and astonished him with visions ) yet did he continue to love GOD , and professed that though GOD should slay him , yet his confidence should be reposed in him . 

Thirdly , whosoever shall love GOD cheerfully , and in conscience of GOD'S commandment , even because GOD bids him love him , he doth evidently declare the truth of his love unto him : For he , that doth a thing simply because he is bidden , doth show a loving and reverend respect unto the bidder . 

Fourthly , he demonstrates a sound heart , and entire love unto GOD , that suffers nothing to domineer within him but his GOD : Not Mammon , not Bacchus , not Venus ▪ not the love of any Man , not of Himself , nor of any other thing whatsoever , but deturbs and cast out all , that GOD alone may have possession of him , and reign within him : as he may be said to be a chaste and loving husband , who suffers no other to steal away his love from his lawful wife , to whom he hath vowed his love , and plighted his Troth : Non bene cum socijs Regna , Venusque manent : Nec Regna socium far , nec tede sciunt : Lordship and love will broke no fellowship : Aut Caesar , aut nullus : GOD will be either alone or gone : He will admit no copesmate ; He will not part stakes with any . He will allow thee to entertain some thing , that shall be subordinate , & under him , but none that shall stand in opposition unto him , or which shall draw against him : If therefore thou permit nothing to draw thine affection from him , it argues thy love is firm and fast unto him . 

Fiftly , as a worldly-minded man doth show his love of riches by his unsatiable desire of having more and more : For the more he hath , the more he would ; like those two daughters , which cry , Give , give ; or like the earth , That ( as Agur saith ) cannot be satisfied with water So may we prove our love of GOD , if whilst we live on earth , we covet to have more and more interest in ●im , and never rest contented , whiles any thing lives in us besides himself . And as Ahab was tormented in mind for Naboaths vineyard ; and as Ammon was so sore vexed , that he fell sick for his sister Tamar : And as the Spouse in the Canticles exclameth : Stay me with flagons , for I am sick of love ; Even so he that doth truly love GOD , is not quiet till he do enjoy him : And because there is no full fruition of Him , till we come in heaven , therefore if we truly love him , we shall not meet with full contentment , till we come in heaven : but shall , as that Spouse our Mother , be Sick of love , and wounded with longing after him , till we do enjoy him to the full . Indeed the sickness of mind is not love ; for love itself is most sweet and pleasing ; but it is the fruit of Desire , which waits upon love , till love do perfectly enjoy the thing it doth love : And if delay be made , that it cannot enjoy the thing , which it would , as it would , and so soon as it would , than this delay , by reason of the desire , doth engender a certain grief and sickness in the mind ; which sickness , and the desire which doth produce it , shall both end , when that , which is desired is perfectly obtained , and enjoyed . But then love hath that it would : and then ends not , as the desire ; but is at her highest pitch , in all her jollity , and in her proper element , there where she would be , and would never but be : Now whosoever hath in him this longing after GOD , this sickness and grief to torment and vex him , ( seeing that here on earth a man sometimes loses his feeling of GOD'S love unto him , and never enjoys him fully ) he may assure himself that he truly loveth GOD. And this grief of heart should be so far from causing diffidence , doubting , or desperation , that a man should rather gather strength and comfort by it : For where this is , there is the love of GOD ; as there is a love of drink , where there is a thirst and earnest desire after it , and a certain trouble and grief of soul , because it cannot be had , or is long a coming : As David saith , My soul thirsteth for thee , my flesh longeth greatly after thee : which argues the desire and languishment of his spirit ; so he likewise saith ; My soul cleaveth unto thee , which declares his love . Now he , that loveth GOD , may be bold to think that GOD loves him : And the proper and principal ground of our consolation and salvation is in this , that GOD loves us ; not in this that We love GOD , in this that GGD is gracious unto us , and not in this , That the graces of GOD are in us. Of which love and grace of GOD unto us , this ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) freegrace of Love wherewith our hearts are inflamed towards GOD , is an undoubted token and effect ( as breath is of life , or ice of cold ) appropriated to GOD'S Elect , and faithful Children . 

Sixtly , as the minds of adulterers run upon their harlots , as the thoughts of worldlings are on their wealth ; as the heads of the ambitious are occupied about their honours , as the hearts of Epicures are with their pleasures ; as the brains of Scholars are beat about their books ; as the mind of Soldiers is on the victory ; and as he that loves the Law , hath his meditations in the Law ; OH how I love thy Law ( saith David ! ) It is my meditation continually ; so he , that loves the LORD is still musing and thinking of him , of his Grace and Glory , his Power and Providence , his Truth , justice , Mercy , etc.  His Head is on him , his Heart goes with him , his Spirit is present with him ; For the soul is present as well ( Vbiamat , as ubi animate ) where it loves , as where it lives and lisens' : As GOD'S love to us made come down ( as it were ) to us ; so our love towards him , makes us go up to him , as his love to men made him converse with men ; so men's love to GOD , makes them converse with him : And as his love to us makes him present with us to help and guide us ; so our love to him makes us present with him to cleave unto him , and to follow him . His love causeth him to think on us , and our love maketh us to think on him : So that he which in heart is present with him , and doth meditate and think often on him , may be assured that the love of GOD is in him . It is true , a man cannot but be where GOD is , because he is every where ; Do not I fill heaven and earth , saith the LORD ? Yet this presence is rather absence , when our heart is absent ; even as his presence is but absence , if his love be absent : A friend is then present , when he is at hand to help , and his thoughts are to relieve ; and he loves truly , whose heart is present with his Love continually , not letting it to slide out of his memory . 

Seventhly , he that is not fickle and inconstant in his devotion and devote affection unto GOD , may know that he loves him truly : I say , if he love , like a true friend , At all times , as well when the whether is foul as fair ; in winter , as well as in Summer ; when the heavens are black , as well as when the Sun doth shine : For only true love is constant , it accounteth nothing hard , nothing grievous , and intolerable . Fel. quod amarum est , id m●l faciet : It will make gall , which is bitter to be sweet as honey : Periculis insultat , mortem irridet : si amor est , ●incit omnia : It contemneth dangers , it scorneth death ; if it be true love , it overcommeth all things , insomuch that though the lover may be killed , yet Inuictiu moritur , ●ee dies unvanquished : as we see in the Martyrs , whom neither pleasure , profit , nor promotion , on the one side ; nor any torture , or cruel kind of death on the other ; could beguile , inveigle , astonish , or deter : But through their love ( by Him , that did enable them ) they conquered , and contemned all things , stuck fast to GOD.  

Eighthly , the keeping of GOD'S Word ( in the mind to remember it , in the heart to believe and embrace it , and in the life to live by it ) and a contention of Spirit to obey his Precepts , is an infallible argument of true love unto him . This is the love of GOD ( saith Saint john ) that we keep his Commandments : A child by obedience demonstrates his childlike affection unto his parents : He shewe● his love and loyalty to the King , which makes account of his Edicts and Laws : In vain doth a servant say he loves his Master , except he be careful to obey his william So then , he that lives in any known enormity , and prefers his gain , pleasure , credit , and favour with men to GOD'S Commandments , doth plainly show that he wants the love of GOD : without which his Love , his Baptism , hearing of Sermons , receiving the Communion , and all his fair shows will stand him in no steed , but rather further his condemnation : And one thing more I add ; although he do many deeds , in appearance good , and seem to keep sundry precepts , yet it is not of love unto GOD ( without which his doing and keeping shall not be remembered in the world to come ) but for some other reason , if he shall in the mean while addict himself unto some one sin , which he knows to be a sin : For the power of true love is such , as it will move a man to humour his friend in every lawful and convenient thing : and he gives not his heart , that is disposed to thwart and resist him ( especially being his Governor ▪ ) in anything , that 's honest , and not unseemly : But GOD is our Supreme Moderator & LORD , and all his Commandments are lawful and good : For his Will is the rule of Law , and reason ; and all his Commandments ate according to his william  

To conclude , GOD will be loved in his Church , in his Ministers , in his Children , and finally in that his beloved Son CHRIST JESUS , so as that they , which hate these , love not him . 

First , for the Church , by which I understand not so much the Catholic Church , ( which is the Mother of us all , and which whosoever loveth not as his MOTHER , loveth not GOD as his FATHER , and so will prove himself to be some Bastard-plant ) as I mean all True visible Church's , or Congregations : And such I call True , which GOD hath honoured with True Doctrine ; or means sufficient unto salvation , and with such men , as have a True Power , or authority , to Minister , and Dispense the same . Now here , I say , whosoever loveth such a Church , because she is such a Church , whosoever loves her for GOD , and in GOD , without doubt it argues his love to GOD. He that loves a Ring for the Diamond , ●hat is set in it , or for the workman , that made it , questionless he loves ●he Diamond , and the Workman much more : So certainly , ●ee that loves a Church for the Word and Sacraments , and power ●f GOD , that is in her ; and because she is the Church of GOD planted by his gracious blessing , doth much more love GOD : Surely that thing , for which we love an other thing , that we cannot hate , but love . 

On the contrary , if thou shalt hate a true Church of GGD , how dwelleth the love of GOD in thee ? thou wilt say , I know , that i● thou wert assured that she is a true Church , thou weul●st not hate her , but join unto her . I say , again , art thou sure that the Church , which thou hatest , is false ? If thou be'st sure of it ▪ if thou darest pawn thy soul upon it ( but be sure thou be'st sure ) then avoid her , departed out of her , give her a Bill of Divorcement , let her go : But if thou be'st not sure , hate her not , sever not thyself from her . wilt thou hate and leave her most certainly , whiles thou art not certain what to judge of her ? thou dost not see her Truth ; but canst thou spy her falsehood ? A blind man cannot see the Sun at Noon , but they which ca● see , may see her : But what if a man be so blind , a● that , because he doth not see the Sun himself , therefore he thinketh the Sun is seen of none ? And what if thou , with a few more , as blind as thyself , dost hate and forsake a Church , because ye do not see her Truth ? I say , what if all her Sister-churches in Europ● , besides yourselves ( which were born within her jurisdiction for the most ) will say she is a true Church of GOD ? Whether are they to be believed or ye ? Or do ye think that all they are blind , and that ye are the only men , that see ? 

Well let us beware , if we think that we love GOD , let us show our love unto him by loving of his Church . 

Secondly , GOD is to be loved in his Minister's , which are called the Men of GOD , a●d Saints , by reason of their holy Office and authority , which GOD hath sanctified and set apart unto himself : And this their Function and Ministry , is not only Sanctified , but Sanctifying , and Saving . Now whosoever doth l●ue these Saints , as Saints , doth love God the Sanctifier of them : He that loves this Office simply , doth love him that hath ordained it : He that loves the man of GOD in this Name , doth undoubtedly l●ue G●D the MASTER . He that loves a Minister merely for his Ministry , or as Saint Paul exhorteth , F●r his work sake ; he , no question loveth GOD , whose servant he is , and for whom he worketh . On the contrary , they that love not the Minister for his Office and Labours , but rather malice and molest him , because he P●eacheth the Truth , w●ich they distaste ; or confuteth errors , that they foster ; or reproveth their sins , which they delight in ; as ignorance , pride , drunkenness , profane swearing , violating the Sabbath , contempt of the Ordinances , and Church of GOD : these men without doubt are offended at GOD , and did he come himself in the shape of a Man , they would deal with him , as they deal with his Messengers . But thou wilt say , thou for thy part dost love thy Minister ; I ask thee , Dost thou love him even because he is thy Minister , because he hath authority over thee in GOD , for the benefit of thy soul ? If thou dost love him simply in this respect , ( but do not delude thyself ) surely ●hy case is good , thou lovest GOD ; Receiving him , thou receivest GOD : But to love a Minister , for his Parentage , Alliance , riches , Advancements , and such worldly considerations , is no token of love to GOD , it is not to love the Minister , but some circumstances belonging to him . The love of the man for his Office , or for his careful execution of it , is Divine , a note of love indeed unto GOD : And to contemn , or persecute , him , for his very place and power , or the faithful dischargement of it , is devilish , and argues the love of darkness : He that that hate's the servant , how can he love the master ? They that hang head , look under the brows , stamp , and storm , at them , that deliver but their Master's errand , even for the very doing of it , they do it to the Master , that did appoint and send them : And refusing or disgracing the men , they dishonour their Master . 

But when I say GOD is to be loved in His Ministers , mistake not the men : For those are his True and Faithful Ministers , which are sent by GOD , and who delivers their Master's Errand , and not in steed thereof their own errors . For though he should deliver GOD'S Message , and adminster the Sacraments , yet if he have no power , no authority committed unto him by GOD , he runs unsent . And though he have a sending , yet if he do not that Message , which GOD appoint● him , but brings some Novelty , coy●ed in the brain of man , he abuses his power ; if he defile , or mangle , the Sacraments , he transcends his bounds , and transgresseth his authority , and therefore is to be reproved , and avoided . 

Thirdly , GOD is to be loved in his Children . All godly men have the Name of GOD called upon them , and a new Nature created in them , and are become holy , through the work of the HOLY SPIRIT in them . Now he that loves a godly man for his godliness , a Saint for his Sanctimony , a new Man , for his new Nature ; questionless , the same man loves GOD , who is the Author of it . O● the contrary , if any man say , I l●ue GOD , and hate his brother , he is a liar , ●or how can he , that loveth not his brother , whom he hath seen , love GOD whom he hath not seen ? He that hate's , dislikes , and persecutes his brother for the Truth's sake , for Virtue's sake , for that new Nature which his FATHER hath created in him , and because he lives not so riotously , as himself , doth hate , dislike , a●● persecute the FATHER Himself . Therefore CHRIST saith : Saul , Saul , why persecutest thou me ? Whereas not he personally ; b●t his Servants and Confessors , were persecuted of him . And if thi● be true , which is most true , That Every one , which loveth him which did beget , loveth him also , which is begotten of him : then certainly he , which hate's him , which is begotten , hate's him also , which did beget him . Let men therefore take heed ; for he that loves GOD , cannot but love a good man for GOD : and he that hate's the godly , hate's GOD , whose Image he sustains : He that hate's true Devotion , true Zeal , and a Sober Conversation in man , will never be able to excuse ●im of ●a●red unto GOD the Worker of them . There is a brood of men ( or of devil's rather , in the shape of men ) such as David speaks of , which are adversaries to their Neighbours . Because they follow goodness : These are enemies to GOD , whatsoever they think of themselves : Of such the Psalmist speaketh , when he saith ; Surely GOD will wound the head of his enemies , and the hairy pate of him , that walketh in his sins : And again , They that hate Zion shall be all ashamed and turned backward ; they shall be as the grass on the house tops , which withereth afore it cometh forth . It were good for them therefore to take up betimes , and to turn their hatred into love . 

There is , I confess , much love in the world , such as it is ; Natural love , Civil love , Domestical love , Matrimonial love , Fleshly love , Worldly love , Pot-love , Human love , but little godly charity is seen among us : For who loves godliness in a man ? Who seeks GOD in his Neighbour , Friend , Child , Servant , Familiar ? Who studies and strives , that Religion , justice , and true Christianity should flourish in his Children , Servants , Friends , and Neighbour's ? I doubt not but Turks , Moors , and other Pagans' , love Religious and true Christians sometimes , as I am persuaded some of our Merchants , and their Factors are , that live and traffic with them ? But love they their Religion , do they lou● them for their Christianity ? no , no : they could wish them as superstitious , as themselves : If therefore thou wilt give an infallible demonstration of thy love to GOD , love thy brother for GOD , and in GOD , love his Piety , his Christianity , and pray that the Kingdom of GOD may be planted , and established in him . 

And as all me● should show their love unto GOD by loving of his people : so especially the Ministers of GOD ; which they shall do by their diligent and faithful feeding of them . Therefore our LORD will have Peter express his love unto him by feeding his Flock : Peter ( saith he ) lovest thou me ? Feed my Lambs , feed my Sheep , Feed my Sheep : Pasce ment , pasce ore , pasce opere , pasce animi oration , verbi abhortatione , exempli exhibitione . Feed them ( saith Bernard ) with thy mind , Feed them with thy mouth , feed them with thy work , feed them with the prayer of thy heart , with the exhortation of the word , with setting them a good ensample . What other thing ( saith Saint August . ) is this , If thou love me , Feed my sheep , then if it had been said● ; If thou love me , do not think to feed thyself , but my Sheep ; Fe●d them as mine , not as thine ; seek my glory in them , not thine , my Lordship , not thine , my gains , not thine : Which speech when Saint Paul , ( as Chrysostome speaketh ) had heard was uttered to Saint Peter , he studied to declare this love 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 even in the superlative degree : And undoubtedly doubtedly there is no Minister , which doth truly love GOD , but he will be careful to feed the people of GOD , which are the Sheep of His Pasture , committed to him , and Depending on him . And he , that only looketh after the Fleece , but leaveth his Flock at six and seven , doth bewray his love of the world , but declares no love to GOD.  

Finally , GOD will be loved in his Son JESUS CHRIST , the Son of the Virgin Mary : For he that hates me ( saith CHRIST ) hates my FATHER also . Except ye believe that I am HE , ye shall die in your sins . Which shows the fearful estate of unbelieving Turks , jews , and Pagans' . And most worthy is he of our love : For he is White and Ruddy , the chiefest of ten thousand , and wholly delectable . Being GOD he hath married our flesh , He came down from heaven , that we might go up to heaven ; He served , to make us free ; He became poor , to make us rich ; He was made a curse , that we might be blessed ; He died , that we might live ; He was Crucified , that we might be Crowned : And that our love unto him might appear true , let us try it by these two notes . 

First , by our care to know and keep his Laws even to the death . For , saith CHRIST , If ye love me , keep my Commandments : He that keeps them loves me , He that loves me not , keepeth not my words . If we break them at our pleasure , and prefer our gain , or gaming , or any thing else to them , truly we love him not : For did we indeed love him , we would be loath to offend him , and would make more estimation of Him and his Word , then of any earthly thing . 

Secondly , try thy love to CHRIST by thine endeavour to be Like him : For true love causeth imitation . CHRIST was the mirror of Mercy , very Meek , Humble , Patient , and Zealous of GOD'S Glory : He went up and down doing good : He prayed for his persecutors , FATHER fogive them . Canst thou for CHRIST pray for thine enemies ? CHRIST forgave thee , wilt thou for CHRIST forgive him , that wrongs thee , that reviles thee to thy face , that bites thee behind thy back , that scorns thee , hate's thee , trouble's thee ? If thou dost , thou lovest him ; but if thy heart be so great , thou wilt not , where is thy love ? For understand thus much , where CHRIST is loved , there CHRIST loves , where CHRIST loves there he lives , and where he lives , there the flesh , with the lusts thereof dies ; so than he that lives out of Charity , in the spirit of rancour , hatred , and revenge , and will not control his corruptions , he is not CHRIST'S , CHRIST lives not in him , he lives not in CHRIST , he loves not CHRIST , he loves not God , but is in the state of death , how well soever he conceiveth of himself : For tell me , dost thou think that CHRIST lives in an heart of Oak , of Adamant ? no , no , but in an heart that is humble , meek and loving . And what thankfulness , what love is showed unto CHRIST , when thou wilt not pardon him , whom CHRIST doth pardon , when thou wilt not forgive him , whom CHRIST hath died for , when thou wilt not vouchsafe him thy pardon , to whom CHRIST hath given himself , when thou , I say , thou wilt not forgive , CHRIST having forgiven thee , and having given Himself unto thee , yea and thyself unto thyself , for by thy sins thou hadst lost thyself : Certainly therefore thou must forgive for CHRIST , or else ( believe it ) thou dost not love CHRIST . 

Let u● therefore deal truly with ourselves , examining our hearts and practices by the forenamed notes , and we shall easily see whether the love of GOD , and of his Son CHRIST JESUS be in us ; or whether the love of the world , and of ourselves , bear sway with in us. And so much concerning the Love of GOD , to which we are exhorted . 

The reasons , which the Psalmist useth to persuade us to this duty , follow : One is drawn from the Loving and courteous dealing of GOD with them , that are faithful in their love and service to him ; the other is taken from the severity of his justice against those , that out of pride and obstinacy cast of his yoke , and care not for to love and serve him . 

The former is set forth in these words . The LORD preserveth the faithful : A man may be said to be faithful in a double sense : First he , that believeth in GOD , and gives credit to his Word , is a faithful man ; and to this Faith , diffidence , and incredulity is opposed ; and by this kind of faith a man lays hold upon the mercy of GOD in CHRIST for his justification . Secondly , he that may be believed for his truth , he that is just and true in his words and dealings , is a faithful man : For faith ( Fides ) is of , fio , to be done : Fac quod dicis , & fides est , do what thou sayest , and it is Faith , saith Saint Austen . then ( saith Gregory ) are we truly faithful , if what we promise in word , we perform in deed . To this kind of faith , treachery , falsehood , and hypocrisy is opposed : So that he that doth truly love GOD , and is a faithful keeper of his Doctrine , and forgets not his promise to him in his Baptisms , but is careful and studious to perform it , he may be said to be a faithful man Such a faithful man was Caleb , Who followed GOD still , and had another Spirit , than those tempting and disobedient Israelites had , which were not suffered to enter into Canaan . Such a faithful man was Moses , who was faithful in GOD'S House : Such a one was David , of whom GOD spoke saying ; I have found David the son of jesse , a man after mine own heart , which will do all things that I will : Such were Zacharias and Elizabeth , that walked in all the Commandments , and Ordinances of GOD , without reproof : Finally , such were all the Martyrs of CHRIST , who rather than they would betray his truth , and make shipwreck of their faith and conscience , endured all manner of torments , and refused no kind of death which was devised for them . 

Now those that are thus faithful , GOD doth preserve them , saith David : Sometimes he preserves them by vouchsafing them deliverance from dangers ( as in his Wisdom he sees convenient ) whiles they live here : as he preserved Noah in the Flood , Let out of Sodom , David in many dangers , Daniel among the Lions , the three Confessors in the fire ; our Religious King , with many others , from that infernal Powder-plot , of the Papists ; and infinite are his savours of this kind . But further , he preserveth the saithfull as concerning their souls , and the spiritual and eternal happiness of both body and soul : For he hath engraven them upon the palms of his hands . He will Never turn away from them , to do them good , but guards them by his power through faith ( as Saint Peter teacheth ) unto salvation , that in the end they shall attain to the end of their faith , the felicity of their souls without end . 

This should stir us up to love this good GOD , and to show ourselves faithful to him in our service ; the Crown of life is promised to the faithful , we desire faith of GOD , and exact it of others , let us then be faithful ourselves . This faithfulness may be demonstrated five ways . 

First , by being careful to know the will of our Master , and diligent to keep all his Precepts : For if we will not endeavour to please him in all things , but will be Licentious Libertines in some things , we are very Herod's , hypocrites and disloyal , our hearts are not upright with Him , but do go an whoring after our own desires : He is no faithful servant , which will do but what he list himself . 

Secondly , faithfulness is seen in trouble : If thou be faint in the day of adversity , thy strength is small . A friend that forsakes in affliction , was no friend , but of himself : So he that shall forsake GOD , deny his Truth , embrace errors , by reason of persecution , doth betray GOD to his power , and shows a false and unfaithful spirit hath possessed him . Fidem nemo unquam perdit , nisi qui non habet : no man ever loses faith , but he that hath it not : For Faith ( if it be not feigned ) is very valorous and trusty : Nulla necessitate ad fallendum cogitur , nullo corrumpitur pramio : It is compelled to falsehood by no necessity , it is corrupted by no reward ; Vre , coede , occide ; Burn , beat , kill , do what you will , it will not perish : It is like Camomile , which being trodden upon smells , the better : or like the Chrysoprasus , which ( as Zanchy writeth ) shines more clearly in the dark , then in the light . 

Thirdly , a faithful servant will delight to save his Master's gain , and is glad to see his Master's customers increase ; even so he , that is faithful-hearted towards GOD , will rejoice to see his Kingdom flourish , his Word received , his Laws observed , his graces esteemed , and his Customers or Chapmen , that come to buy them of him , multiplied . 

Fourthly , if a Master shall allow his servant time to dispatch all his own businesses , but withal appoint him a certain time to do him service in : if this servant shall not only spend his own time ( allotted him by his Master ) as he list himself , but will also misspend that time , which his Master commands him to spend for him , misspend it ( I say ) in idleness , leudnes , gaming , wickedness or otherwise upon himself , and not upon his master , this servant is unfaithful to his master , and ( as I thi●k● ) if he will not break this c●stome , his master will not keep him , but turn him packing . So are t●ose unfaithful unto God , that profane his holy Sabbath , which he hath sanctified for himself , by their merchandising , gadding , gaming , rioting , and such profane behaviour . And I fear , tha● if th●y will not mend these manners : S●d vox faucib ●● h●r●t On the contrary , they that are careful to spend their master's time in their master's worship , as in prayer , reading , hearing , meditation , singing of Psalms , doing the works of mercy , and the like , these show themselves faithful to him : and as they are careful to keep his Sabbath on earth before him , so shall they certainly celebrate an everlasting Sabbath in heaven with him . 

Finally , a servant is not therefore to be counted faithful , because he is entertained in his Master's house , and wears his cloth , and eats his meat , and hears him speak : For say he be not afraid to displease him , suppose he shall corrupt an● pervert the minds of any of his fellows , and bring them to be stout and saucy , or lazy and untrue ; and imagine he doth secretly conspire with his Master's foes , and do service underhand , or openly for them , will ye say that this is a faithful servant , or rather a Falshearted and wicked Knave ? So , even so a man is not presently to be counted faithful and true to God , because he is admitted into his Ho●se , which is the Church , because he is baptised , which is his livery , because he is called or reputed his servant , because he receives the Sacrament , which is ( as it were ) his bread , because he hears his master speak unto him in his Ministers . For we may say of a Christian as Saint Paul saith of a jew , and of Baptism , as he speaks of Circumcision . All they are not Israel , which are of Israel : neither are they all Children , because they are the seed of Abraham . He is not a jew which is one outward ; neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh : but he is ●lew , that is one within , and the circumcision is of the Heart , in the Spirit , not in the Letter , whose praise is not of Men , but of God. So we may say , every man is not faithful unto God , that is counted or called Godly , but he that proves his heart and practices unto God. He is not faithful , that is come of faithful parents , unless he partake with them in their faith , as well as in their flesh . A man is not indeed a Christian , because he is so named , or reputed , except he be flesh of Christ's flesh , and bone of his bone , except he be anointed with the Oil of gladness , and have the Spirit of Christ to rule him . Neither is that Baptism which stands in water only , ( Flumine , non Flamine : ) For true Baptism is to be baptised with the Holy Ghost and Water , with the blood of Christ as well as with water . Neither hath he any benefit by the Sacrament , that doth not receive ( Panem Dominum ) the Lord , who is the bread and staff of our souls , as well as ( Panem Domini ) the bread of the Lord , which the Lords Steward doth dispense unto us. Those therefore , that fear not God's displeasure , that would seduce his servants from their allegiance to him , that are at a league ( as it were ) with sin , and conspire with Satan , and do him service , all these whatsoever , notwithstanding their place in the Church , their hearing of Sermons , their coming to Church , and receiving of Sacraments ; and albeit they be called Christians , and called godly , the truth is , they are not faithful unto God , but falsehearted wretches . On the contrary , those are truly faithful which truly fear God , which counsel and encourage their fellows to be faithful to him , and which do truly hate Sin , Satan , and the World , and are at no league or covenant with them , but keep continual watch and ward over their hearts , lest they should be surprised and drawn away . 

And thus we have seen the first reason that David useth to move us to the love of God , because he preserves them that are faithful to him : and therefore if we desire his preservation , or if we will show ourselves thankful to him for preserving us , or if we do take delight in that his so sweet & good disposition , who is by nature provident over , and careful for those that love him , and are faithful to him , it behoves us much to love him : and let us be assured , that except we love him truly , we do not truly love ourselves ; but certainly we do clean forget ourselves , if we forget to perform this duty to him : yea , we have lost ourselves , unless we have him to live in our hearts by love . OH Love ! what shall I speak i● thy commendation ? Magnaes' , & pr●ualeses , thou art great in power , and prevailest . thou art str●ng as Death , powerful as the grave , thy coals are fiery ▪ thy flames violent , the waters cannot quench thee , the floods cannot drown thee , thou dost subdue mine understanding for God , thou bringest mine ambitious and unruly conceits into bondage under Christ , thou leadest me Captive , yea thou kill'st me , that he may live within me . thou art a Fire to purify my mind from dross by meditation on him . thou art a Light to comfort and enlighten my soul with those lovely virtues that wait upon thee . thou art Honey to sweeten my soul with the feeling of God's favour , and to make sweet unto my soul , those ordinances of life and godliness which he hath erected in his house . thou art Wine to make my soul glad by enjoying my God , my Saviour , whose goodness is equal to his greatness , both of them infinite and unmatchable . If I lose thee , I lose myself , my soul , my Saviour . If thou live in me ▪ I live myself , nay I die , but God my Lord and Saviour doth live within me . 

And this is the Psalmists first reason to incite us to the love of God. The second is taken from his severe judgments against the Proud , which will not stoop to God and his Law , but are disobedient to him , and by their pride and insolency trouble and misufe other men better than themselves . The Psalmist saith ; God Rewardeth abundantly the proud doer : that is , he punisheth him for his pride with manifold and grievous puishments . 

Pride ( which is hateful before God and Man , as Syracides speaketh ) is a certain vice , or swelling of the heart , whereby we count ourselves worthy of more honour and dignity then there is reason , by reason of an overweening opinion of ourselves , imagining that we have those good things which we have not indeed , or that we have them in greater measure than we have . 

Now a man may show pride either against God , or against man  

Against God , pride is showed many ways , some whereof I will declare , that the madness of men may appear unto you . As first , when a man imagines himself to be God , and would be so conceited of men , as Caligula , who ( being an open mocker of all religion ) at length fell to think there was no other God than himself . Secondly , when men imagine , that what they have , they have it of themselves , or that , if God give them any thing , it is for their deserts . Thirdly , when men in their hearts say : He shall not reign over us , who shall control us ? and so contemn the ordinances of God , his Word , his Sacraments , his Ministers , their Work. their power . Fourthly , when a wan shall think he is perfect , breaks not the Law , and is able to do good deeds , whereby he shall merit everlasting life for the worthiness of them . Fiftly , when men imagine they can do good works by their own strength : or when in heart they say , we will do this and this , who shall let us ? we will go thither , or thither , who shall hinder ? Sixthly , when men will disobey the will of God under pretence of humility , as they that pled for their prayers to the Saints in heaven , because they say , it is a point of humility , to come to so great a King by such means : whereas God saith : Call upon me in the time of trouble . And Christ accordingly , Come unto me ye that are heavy lad●n , and I will ease you . Lastly , when men will murmur against God , and are angry with him when he doth afflict them . 

Pride against Man discovers itself many ways : for the proud person envies the good of another , as if he deemed himself either only worthy , or else the greatness of others to hinder his . He will acknowledge no superior , nor equal by his good will , as Agamemnen and Pomp●y , he useth his equals as inferiors , his inferiors as servants , his servants as beasts : he thunders , lightens , cracks , threatens , his words are great , his looks big , he is mad if he be not applauded : and as for humling himself to any man sincerely , he knows not how : if he give back , it is but to fetch a better leap : if he stoop a little , it is but to vaunt and climb the higher . If he be below , he will not patiently tarry till one come and bid him sit up higher ; but he will work by indirect courses , as by bribes , or slanders , or ( it may be ) poisons ; nothing being so horrible in his eye , as a mean or low degree . And when he is climbed up , he plucks up the ladder after him , if he can , that no man shall come up after , or but such as he pleaseth . 

To these proud and haughty persons God opposeth himself , these he resisteth , these he throweth from their pinnacles , and tumbles down headlong , shakes with his whirlwinds , strikes with his lightnings , beats with his thunderclaps , turns up their roots , and punisheth them ( when he pleaseth ) very severely , openly , and ( as David saith here ) ▪ Abundantly . But let us see some judgements of God upon the Proud.  

The wicked Angels for their pride were banished out of heaven , and are under wrath . When our first Parents would have been checkmate with God by pride , they brought a downfall of themselves and children . The builders of Babel for their pride were scattered , and their tongues confounded . Haman by pride broke his neck . God overthrew that vaunting Giant Goliath by David , then when he was in the top of his jollity . God threatened to visit the fruit of the proud heart of the King of Ashur , Senacherib , and his glorious and proud looks , because he said : By the power of mine own hand have I done it , and by my wisdom , because I am wise : and so he did , for by his Angel he killed in one night , an hundred fourscore and five thousand of his Army , gathered against Hezekiah , and not long after his own sons , Adramelek , and Sharezer slew him as he was in his Idols Temple worshipping of Nisrech his God. Proud Nabuchadnezzar for his pride was banished the company of men , and deprived of his kingdom : and after , coming to better sense , he could praise God , and say , That those which walk is pride he is able to abase . Proud and bragging H●lofernes by judith lost his head : so likewise was that wicked and insolent Antiochus met withal , as he had deserved , his head being first well battered with stones , and afterwards cut off . The judgements of God upon Pharaoh for exalting himself against God , and in his people , were many , and famous . Timotheus the Ateenian never prospered in any enterprise , after he had in his account given to the state , often intermingled this speech ; And in this fortune had no part ; so disclaiming God's providence , and sacrificing to his own nets . Apryes a king of Egypt , which gloried that neither God nor Man could put him by his kingdom , was afterwards strangled . Caphaneus , when he had said , that he would overthrow Thebes , Inuito Deo , whether God would or no , was struck with lightning . Aiax said , that Cowards could win with the help of God : But I ( saith he ) will win this glory without God : not long after God punished him by permitting him to kill himself with a sword , which he had received of Hector . Herod Agrippa for not giving glory unto God , when the people madly flatter him in their acclamation , The voice of God , and not of Man , was suddenly smitten by God's Angel , and eaten of worms , and so ended his life . Simon Magus also to nuzzle the people in their foolish opinion of him , who for his wonders thought him to be a God , boasted that he would fly into Heaven : and as he was in his flight , Saint Peter commanded the wicked spirit , by whose help he slew , to throw him down , so that he fell , and was bruised to death . Alexander the great was also sick of this disease : for he practised with the Priests at the Oracle of Hammon to be pronounced the Son of I●piter : but not long after he was wounded in India , which made him confess he felt the infirmities of a man , and a little after being returned to Babylon , as he was there in all his pomp and jollity , he was poisoned in a banquet after supper , and so died . Emp●docles desirous to be counted an immortal God , threw himself into Aetna , where he perished . Domitian likewise was so blinded with pride , that he would be called a God , and worshipped : but how did God reward him ? He was slain of his servants with daggers , by his wife's consent , in his privy chamber : his body was buried without honour , his memory cursed , and his trophies defaced . Demetrius , Alexander's successor , was by the foolish Athenians entitled a Saving God , and had a Priest to do Sacrifice unto him , which honour he liked well of : but how did God like of it ? He spoilt a number of his ships with his wind●ss , he overthrew him in battle by Saleuchus , and after this suffered him to stuff himself so full with victuals , that he burst in sunder . To all these we may add those , that have by their devices counterfeited lightnings and thunders , that they might be feared as Gods , as did Alladius , a king of the Latins before Romul●s' , and a certain king of Elide : both which were notably punished for their insolency by that God into whose th●one they would have advanced themselves . For Alladius had his house fired with true lightning , and overthrown with a tempest of rain , together with the overflowing of a pond hard by it : so that he perished by fire and water , being both burned and drowned all at once . The other was destroyed with a thunderbolt from heaven , and so suffered a just punishment of his wicked pride . Histories furthermore report , how Queen Venda , daughter to Gracus the famous King of Poland , out of her proud & stately nature , refused to be joined in marriage with any ; and at length , lest her fortunate government should be disgraced by some unlucky mishap , and so her pride eclypsed , to prevent this fear , desperately cast herself from an high bridge into the River Vistula , and so suffered the punishment of her proud and stately mind , by a shameful and base death . When jerusalem was taken by Herod and Sosius there was a jew , that had hid himself in a Cave with his wife and seven children ; to whom Herod offered both life and liberty , if he would come forth : But he , out of the pride and wilfulness of his spirit refusing this offer , first threw down his children from an high Rock , and broke their necks , than flung his wife after them , and lastly cast himself after them ; a fearful spectacle of a proud and obstinate spirit . And ▪ many ways doth the LORD meet with the pride of men ; sometimes giving them up to hardness and impenitency of heart ; sometimes bringing them into disgrace and open shame , and opprobry ; sometimes suffering them to fall into other sins , whereby the laws of men take hold of them , either to deprive them of their lives , or of their places , offices , and honours : One way or other he doth usually punish them , even i● this life , to say nothing of those punishments of the life to come . And his mildest and most merciful corrections of them are , when either by cutting their combs , and abasing them by some notable affliction , he teacheth them by his grace to confess their pride , and to see their weakness ; or when he suffers them to fall into some grievous sin , at which by his grace , he makes them to blush , and moves them to distaste their proud opinions of their own strength , and to seek in all humbleness of heart for his assistance and protection . By the former mean he schooled Nabuchadnezzar : and by the latter Saint Peter , who by his fall did learn ever after , not to vaunt , or build , upon his own strength , but to depend upon the grace and aid of GOD.  

Now the consideration of these things teacheth us these two duties . First to detest , eschew , and abandon pride ; then which nothing is more foolish , more base , more inhuman , more impious . 

For what can be more foolish , than not to see how frail , and brittle , all the things of the world are , how soon all things are changed , and by what sudden , and grievous chances men are deprived of their riches , glory , greatness , and life itself ? 

What can be more base and abject then to have the mind pinned and nailed to the ground , and not to look on heavenly things and eternal , but earthly and momentany , and to be puffed up with wealth and honours , mortal and vain things , that delight to flit , and change their Masters ? 

What more inhuman and less beseeming the state of man , then to contemn and scorn others , and esteem all as Ciphers in comparison of themselves ? 

What more ungodly , then to glory of riches , honours , dignities , nobleness of birth , wit , strength , beauty , virtue ; as if they were not ●he free-gift● of GOD ▪ as if men were not obliged to him for them ? 

Again , what more injust than pride ? For a proud man ascribes more to himself then is due , and takes that from others , which is due unto them . 

What more contentious than pride ? Therefore Solomon saith , Only by pride doth man make contention . Pride hath ever been a setter on foot of all heresies and schisms , that ever were in the Church ; and is a notorious Makebate in commonwealth , Kingdoms , Cities , and private houses . Harder it is for a man to keep peace with the proud , then with any ; and impossible it is for one proud person to agree sincerely with an other , except peradventure in such a case as this , when as one , out of his pride , will endure no man to be above him , and another being proud of humility , or humiliation rather , will not like that any should be under him : These two perhaps may live friendly together , being though both proud , yet in a different respect . 

Finally , what can be more mishapen and ugly than this vice of pride , which makes a man unlike to GOD ( whom to be like is man's greatest Honour ) and like to the devil , who is the father of pride , and by pride overthrew himself ? What more certain sign and effectual worker of any man's overthrow , than pride ? Pride goeth before destruction ( saith Solomon ) and an high mind before a fall . What more hateful and wasteful enemy to all virtues and all good things , a man hath then pride ? By p●ide a man is spoilt of them all : Therefore as men take heed of thieves , that rob and spoil , so and much more should we beware of pride ( Quae insidiatur bonis operibus , ut pereant ) which mars all good things , and turns them up side down . If an humble man be proud of his humility , he hath lost of his humble mind , and is become puffed with pride : If a man be proud of his beauty , he hath lost his true beauty , and is a beautiful fool . If a man be proud of his wisdom , he is become a fool ; if he be proud of his wit , an Ass hath it in keeping ; if he be proud of his poverty , he is rich in pride ; if he be proud of his riches , he is poor in piety . Now what a woeful and odious sin is pride , which is not only evil in itself , but it turns the nature of good things , as ( they say ) thunder doth good drink , and as venomous beasts turn , whatsoever they eat into venom ; so pride makes the proud man , turn all his thoughts , words , and works into pride , whiles he draweth and referreth every thing to his own praise and honour . Thus pride becomes like a moth , or worm , which frets the cloth , and eats the wood , wherein it was bred . For pride springing of virtue corrupts it , and there is no good thing so excellent , which becomes not evil , so soon as this wicked vice hath tainted it . 

It behoves us therefore to fly this wretched vice , which we cannot , unless we submit ourselves to GOD and his Ordinances , unless we confess him to be the Free-giver of all good things we have ; unless we cut off that error of conceit , whereby we think better of ourselves , than there is reason ; unless we seek to GOD for his help ; and finally , unless we remember that GOD resisteth the proud , but giveth grace to the humble , and that Pride ( as one prettely speaketh ) was bred in heaven , but having ( as it were ) forgotten which way it fell from thence , it could never afterwards find the way thither back again , 

Secondly , the consideration of God's judgements upon the Proud should teach us ( as David would have it ) to love the LORD who , hate's and punishes that sin abundantly , that is , or aught to be so odious to us. Seeing therefore GOD takes part with us against the proud , and by hating them shows the goodness of his own Nature , and in that he plagues them , being ever the bitterest enemies to his truest friends , it behoves us , and the rest of all GOD'S Saints to delight in GOD and love him , and in love to submit ourselves unto him . If we love not him , we do not love ourselves ; but if we love him truly , we do truly love ourselves , and we are , ( not in our own opinion only , but ) truly beloved of Him ; which is infinitely much more worth , then if all the world besides him did affect us. Neither need we care how ill the world thinks of us , if he think well of us ; as a sober and chaste woman cares not how other men are conceited of her , so be it her husband like well of her , and truly love her : or as a loyal subject , who makes more reckoning of his sovereigns' love , then of the friendship of all the traitors in the world . Now the God of love work and confirm this love within our hearts , that we may live and die in his love , and at length obtain a full and final fruition of him , whom we do love , receiving the reward of our love , the everlasting life and happiness of our souls , and that by the merits of that his beloved Son , jesus Christ our Saviour , to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost , three persons , but one Euerliving & Euerloving God , be all love , and honour , all praise and power , now , and evermore . Amen . 

FINIS . 

ERRATA . 

Page 25. l. 2. read commination . l. 3. read streaming . P. 39 l. 11. read Lafford . and whence . p. 58. and last line , read , if all . 





4.  Reasons of loving God. Math. 23. 9  jam. 1. 18.  Psalm . 139 13.  Psal . 71. 6.  job. 10. 8. 11. 12.  2.  Reason . 3. Reason  joh. 3. 16.  4.  Reason . job. 12. 7.  Psal . 8. 6. 7. 8.  Of the manner how we ought to love God.  Mat. 12. 37 1.  With all our heart . A Simile . Pro. 23. 26.  A Simile . Augus●ine . Si totum me debeo pro me facto , quid addam iam pro me refecto ? Bernard . A Simile . 2.  With all our soul . Our life and senses should be bestowed upon God  3.  With all our mind  God m● have o● though●● & understanding  Of self love Why and how a man should love himself . Augustine . Gregory . Why our neighbour is to be loved . 5.  Reasons of loving our enemies . Math. 5. 44  Colos . 1. 22  Rom. 5. 8.  Math. 5. 45 46.  Mat. 5. 47.  Gal. 6. 10.  Rom. 12. 20  Rom. 12. 17.  How our neighbour is to be loved . Mat. 22. 39  Sanctè . justè . Verè . August . Perseveranter . Of the constancy of love . Gal. 6. 9  Heb. 13. 1.  1.  Cor. 13. 13  Of faithfulness . 7.  Reason's o● Fidelity . Reu. 2. 20.  2.  Tim. 4. 7. 8.  Psal . 94. 14.  Psal . 146. 6.  jer. 32. 40.  Mat. 1● . 22.  Heb. 1● . 39  Reu. 21. 8  Of humility . jam. 4. 7. 10  Ex. 20. 12.  1.  Pet. 5. 5.  Math. 7. 12.  Rom. 12. 20  Rom. 13. 7. 8.  Why we must be humble toward our inferiors . 1.  Cor. 4. 7  1.  Pet. 5. 5.  Luk. 18. 14.  

Scal. ex . 301 Sec. 1.  What love is . The object of love . The property of love . Love of GOD what . Love is an affection . Love a grace . 1.  Cor. 3. 5.  Phil. 2. 13.  Ouid. Love is from knowledge  1.  Cor. 13. 9 12.  Vision of Grace , & of Glory . The last point cleared by Similes . Why men love GOD no better . Love is as a thread , and knowledge a Needle . Love spring's out of faith . Ps . 16. 2. 5.  & 103. 1. 3. 4  1.  Tim. 1. 5.  A Simile . A Simile . Why a man hate's him , that loves him . A Simile . Love a fire . Gal. 5. 22.  Love , the work of the Spirit . Ps . 144. 3.  Ps . 116. 12.  Psal . 145. 1.  Love knits us to God.  Col. 2. 2.  joh. 17. 21.  The fruits of hatred and love . Psa . 73. 25. 26.  A simile . GOD the object of this love . Ps . 145. 8. 17  Psal . 145. 3.  & 147. 5.  & 146. 6 7. 8.  & 147. 3  Ps . 145. 19 20.  & 146. 9  Ex. 20. 6.  Novem . 5. 1605.  Who ought to love GOD.  Object . Solution . Psal . 145.  Math. 5. 1.  Tim. 4 10  Doctrine . Barbarus his ego sum , cum non intellig●r ulli , Ouid.  job. 12. 11.  Reason 1.  Why we should love the LORD from the necessity thereof . Deut. 6. 5  & 10. 12.  Mat. 22. 38  GOD'S precept binds us to love him . Except we love GOD we shall be cursed . 1.  Cor. 16. 22.  Rom. 9 5.  no love no worship . Scal. ex 317 s . 3.  no love of GOD , n● lo●● of the go● . ● . h. 3.  ●● . 14 . GOD'S ordinances profit not him , that loves not GOD.  Without lo●e , good deeds , favour of ●ens , & ● . ●e nohing ●o●●h . 1.  Cor. 13. 2  2 d Reason , To love GOD is a matter of equity . GOD'S love to us descending  Ephe. 2.  Psal . 8. 4. 8. 144. 3.  August . joh. 3. 16.  Col. 1. 13.  Lam. 3. 22. 23.  Rom. 8. 28.  The equity of our love further explained . 3.  Reasons from the profit of love . 1.  Commodity . Gal. 5. 6.  ●ike as th● love 〈◊〉 the l●●e . 3.  Commodity . 1.  Cor. 8. 1.  A Simile . A Simile  3.  Commodity of love . By the love of GOD a man may know his estate before GOD.  Rom. 8. 28.  1.  Cor. 8. 3.  1.  joh. 4. 19  Eccles . 1. 7.  A Simile . A Simile . Luk. 7. 47.  Aug. in Ps . 64.  A Simile . 4.  Commodity of our love of GOD.  The love of GOD makes us to love the godly . A Simile . 1.  joh. 3. 14.  5.  Commodity . A Simile  A Simile . 6.  Commodity . A Simile . Psal . 139. 21 , 22.  4.  Arguments of love to GOD from the excellency o● it . Excel . 1. 1.  joh. 4. 7.  jam. 1. 17.  Excel . 2.  Excel . 3.  Excel . 4.  Excel . 5.  Excel . 6.  Excel . 7.  1.  Effect of love . 2.  Effect of love . 1.  joh. 4. 8.  3.  Effect . A Simile . Excel . 8.  The reward of the love of GOD.  jam. 2. 5.  2.  Tim. 4. 8.  Why it is called the crown of righteousness . Ps . 16. 11.  Pro. 27. 24.   By , I say , not For.  1.  Cor. 2. 9  Marinell ●4 . 44.  judg. 4. 19 22.  Excel 9  What JEHOVA , CURIOS , DOMINUS , and LORD do signity . Ps . 104. 27.  & 145. 16.  Psal . 3 4. 9 10.  jer. 32. 27.  job 5. 12. 23  job 9 4.  & 12. 16. 17.  Pro. 21. 30  Psal . 24. 8.  job 12. 19 21.  job. 9 10. 11.  Isa . 40. 22. 23.  1.  Cor. 1.  ● . Psa . 146 6 Psa . 100 5  Ps . 145. 17  Psa . 96. 13  Psa . 116. 5  Psal . 146. 9 2.  Sam. 22 28.  Isa . 40. 29  job. 36. 15.  job. 8. 20.  Psal . 84. 11.  job. 13. 16.  Psal . 16. 2.  job. 22. 2. 3  job. 35. 6. 7. 8.  Psal . 85. 9  & 91. 14.  & 145. 20. 1.  Pet. 1. 5. 9  Mal. 3. 6.  jam. 1. 17.  Is . 46. 10. 11  jer. 31. 3.  joh. 13. 1.  jer. 32. 40.  Psal . 94. 14.  Five reasons why GOD should be loved above all things . 1.  Reason . 2.  Cor. 12. 15.  2.  Reason . Pro. 30. 16.  3.  Reason . 4.  Reason . 5.  Reason . Act. 10. 34.  Psal . 16. 6.  Psal . 23. 5  Heb. 6. 10  Dan. 12. 3.  G●● . 1.  ●7 2● . Psalm . 8 7.  Exod. 20. 3  Levit. 19 12. 18.  Numb 14.  ● . 12 . 13.  Deut. 6. 7.  & 11. 19  Ephe. 6. 4.  josh . ● . 8.  judg. 2. 17.  Ruth 1. 16.  1.  Sam. 1. 11 24. 28.  2.  Sam. 22. 23. 24.  1.  Sam. 20 4. 17.  1.  King. 3. 26.  2.  King. 18. 4.  1 Chron. 21. 24.  1 C●●●n . 29.  ● . 2.  Chron. 1. 10.  & 2. 1  Psal . 132. 3.  Reu. 1. 6.  E●●a 3. 11.  1.  Tim. 3. 15  Neh. 13. 17  Ester 8. 6.  Novemb. 5. 1605.  job 13. 15.  Psal . 16. 2.  & 40. 8.  Prou. 30. 8.  Eccles . 1. 2  & 12. 1.  Cant. 1. 1. 6  & 2. 5.  jam. 4. 4.  Why men should not dote on the world . 1.  joh. 2 15.  What the world is . Reu. 17. 2. 4  A Simile . The world is unconstant . Ps . 102. 27.  jam 1. 17.  Num. 23. 19  john 13. 1.  jer. 32 4● . Psa . ●9 . 33.  August . Reasons against the love of the world . Prou 23. 5.  Why men should not love riches . Seneca . Psal . 62 1● . Who is most rich . Why the love of pleasures should not hinder our love to GOD.  Why GOD seemeth not so sweet to some . Heb. 11. 25  Eccles . 11. 9  Plutar.  T●ll . A Simile . Est . 7. 10.  Judith 13. 8  Why honour's should not steal away our hearts . A Simile . Act. 12. 22. 23.  A Simile  Pro. 31. 30.  The vanity of beauty . How beauty hath been called . A Simile . How a m● may love himself . Heb. 12. 9  Psal . 18. 2.  & 144. 2.  Mark. 8. 36.  1.  Note of true love . Gregor . True love is laborious . Gen. 31. 40 41.  2.  Note . GOD is to be loved for himself . 1.  Cor. 10. 33. 2.  Cor. 12. 14. 19  Phil. 4. 14 17.  Rome 9 3.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Gal. 4. 13 14. 15.  Ex. 32. 10. 12.  Ex. 32. 32.  Gen. 22.  GOD is to be loved for his blessings , and the order how . A Simile . job 6. 3.  & 8. 14.  job. 13. 15.  3.  Note of true love . 4.  Note of true love . A man loving GOD tru●●y , loves none more than GOD.  Ouid.  Seneca . GOD will have the Throne , or else be gone . How a man may love other things . 5.  Note of love . Pro. 30. 15. 16.  1.  King. 22.  2.  Sam. 13. 2.  Can. 2. 5.  Grief or sickness of soul wai●s on love . This sickness is not love , but from desire . Love ends not , when this desire ceaseth . N●te . A Simile . Psal . 63. 1.  9  Psal . 63. 3.  joh. 3. 16.  Eph. 2. 4. 8.  Tit. 3. 5.  Our love to GOD a sign of his to us.  6.  Note of true love . Ps . 119 97.  Bernard . The fruits of love Divine & Human . jer. 23. 24.  Presence in case i as absence . 7.  Note . Pro. 17. 17.  True love is constant . Plautus . The praise of the Martyrs . 8.  Note . 1.  john . 5. 3.  no loyalty , no love . Good deeds are , without love , of little or no account . The virtue of true love . GOD'S Will the Rule of Law.  9  Note of true love . GOD is to be loved in his Church . Every true visible Church is to be loved . The mark of such a Church . A Similitude . Mark this well . GOD is to be loved in hi● Minister's . Act. 1● . 1● . 1.  T●● . 4 ●6  A Minister ●s t● be lo●e f●r his 〈◊〉 . 1.  Thess . ● 1● . 〈…〉 . How a man should love his Minister . Who are GOD'S true Ministers .  Such , I mean , as evert●s the ground● of Faith , or go●d Manners , and which sets the Church in an uproar . GOD is to be loved in his people . 1.  john . 4. 20.  Hatred of godliness is the hatred of GOD.  Acts 9 4.  1.  joh. 5. 1.  Psal . 38. 20.  Psal . 68 21.  Ps . 129. 5. 6.  Many sorts of love , yet little true charity . A Turk may love a Christian , but not his Christianity . How M●●●st●rss hold show love to GOD.  joh. 21. 15. 16. 17.  Serm. 2. de resur . Aug. in joan. tract . 123.  Chrysost . praesat . in Epistolas . What Minister doth truly love GOD.  Psal . 100 3. 1.  Pet. 5. 2.  GOD must be loved in CHRIST . joh. 15. 23.  john 8. 24.  See 1  Cor. ●6 . 22.  Cant. 5. 10. 16.  Gal. 3. 13.  1.  Note of love to CHRIST . joh. 14. 15. 22. 23. 24.  2.  Note of love to CHRIST . Luk. 23. 34  Co● . 3. 13.  joh. 14 21.  We ought to forgive one another . The reasons of the exhortation . 1.  Reason . A man i● said to be faithful in two respects . Neh. 9 8.  Num. 14. 22 24.  Heb. 3. 5.  Act. 13. 22.  Luke 1. 6.  2.  Chron. 16. 8. 9  N●●● . 5. 16  ●5 . Isa . 49. 16.  jer. 32. 40.  1.  Pet. 1. 5. 9  Reu. 2. 20.  5.  Notes of faithfulness . 1.  Note . Mark. 6. 20  2.  Note . Pro. 24. 10.  Seneca . Ci● . l. 2.  Rhet.  Lib. 3. de Met. ter . c. 6. 3.  Note . Isai . 55. 1.  4.  Note . Mark this we●l . Of profaning the Saboth day . 5.  Note . 1.  Tim. 3. 15.  Rom. 9 6 7  Rom. 2.  2● . 29.  Who is a true Christian ▪  What true Baptism is . Who truly faithful . ●●e praise o● L●ue.  Can. 8. 6 ●  Love a fire  A Light.  Hony.  And Wine  The se●ond reason of the exhortation . Ecclus. 10. 7.  What pride is . Pride is against God and Man  1.  Note of pride against God 2.  Note . 3.  Note . 4.  Note . 5.  Note . 6.  Note . thou art unworthy to pray to God , but God is worthy to whom thou shouldst obey . Psal . 50. 15  Mat. 11.  2● 7.  Note . Of pride against Man  When men make great outward shows , & brave it in cost●y apparel , of purpose to be counted better men than they are , it is very pride . So painting of the face to be thought a beautiful creature , not being so , is very pride . 1.  Pet. 5. 5.  2.  Pet. 2. 4.  jude 6.  Gen. 3. 5. 6.  Gen. 11. 4. 9  1.  Sam. 17 10. 45. 50. 51.  Isaiah . 10. 12. 13.  Isaiah . 37. 36 38.  Dan. 4. 27. 28. 30. 31. 34.  judith . 6. 2 4.  & 13. 8. 2.  Mac. 1. 15. 16.  Nat. Comes Myth . l. 9 c. 25.  Guid. Iwenan Ter. Eun.  Act. 12. 22. 24.  joseph . Antiq . lib. 19  ● . 17 . Dio●●s . Hal●a●● . 1.  Antiq. R●m . Dio● . l●b . 4.  H●●● . H●● . Pol● . lib. 1. c. ● . I●s●p● . de ●●l jadd . 1.  ● . 12 . 13.  Many ways GOD punisheth the proud . The milder kind● of GOD'S judgements upon the proud are two . Dan. 4. 34  Osorius de Reg. Instit . l. 5 folio 151.  The folly of pride . The baseness of pride . The inhumanity of pride . The impiety of pride . The injustice of pride . P●o. 13 . ●● . Pride the mother of contentions . The ouglinesse of pride . Pro. 16. 18.  A Simile . August . Pride a waster . A Simile . Pride a moth . The way to withstand pride . jam. 4. 6.  Hugo lib. 1. de anima . He that loves GOD , loves himself . A Simile . 