ENGLAND'S HELICON . 

Casta placent superis , 
pura cum veste venite , 
Et manibus puris 
sumite fontis aquam . 
AT LONDON Printed by I R. for john Flasket , and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard , at the sign of the Bear . 1600.  

TO HIS LOVING KIND FRIEND , Master john Bodenham . 

Wit's Commonwealth , the first fruits of thy pains , 
drew on Wit's Theatre , thy second Son : 
By both of which ; I cannot count the gains , 
And wondrous profit that the world hath won . 
Next , in the Muse's Garden , gathering flowers , 
thou mad'st a Nosegay , as was never sweeter : 
who 's sent will savour to Time's latest hours , 
And for the greatest Prince no Poesy meeter . 
Now comes thy Helicon , to make complete 
And furnish up thy last imposed design : 
My pains herein , I cannot term it great , 
But whatsoever , my love ( and all ) is thine . 
Take love , take pains , take all remains in me : 
And where thou art , my hart still lives with thee . 
To his very loving friends , M. Nicholas Wanton , and M. George Faucet . ( ⸫ ) 

Though many miles ( but more occasions ) do sunder us ( kind Gentlemen ) yet apromise at parting , doth in justice claim performance , and assurance of gentle acceptance , would mightily condemn me if I should neglect it . Helicon , though not as I could wish , yet in such good sort as time would permit , having past the pikes of the Press , comes now to York to salute her rightful Patron first , and next ( as his dear friends and kindsmen ) to offer you her kind service . If she speed well there , it is all she requires , if they frown at her beer , she greatly not cares : for the wise ( she knows ) will never be other than themselves , as for such then as would seem so , but neither are , nor ever will be , she holds this as a main principle ; that their malice need as little be feared , as their favour or friendship is to be desired . So hoping you will not forget us there , as we continually shall be mindful of you here . I leave you to the delight of England's Helicon . 

Yours in all he may , A. B.  

To the Reader , if indifferent . 

Many honoured names have heretofore ( in their particular interest , ) patronised some part of these inventions : many here be , that only these Collections have brought to light , & not inferior ( in the best opinions ) to any before published . The travail that hath been taken in gathering them from so many hands , hath wearied some hours , which severed , might in part have perished , digested into this mean volume , may in the opinion of some not be altogether unworthy the labour . If any man hath been defrauded of any thing by him composed , by another man's title put to the same , he hath this benefit by this collection , freely to challenge his own in public , where else he might be robbed of his proper due . no one thing being here placed by the Collector of the same under any man's name , either at large , or in letters , but as it was delivered by some especial copy coming to his hands . no one man , that shall take offence that his name is published to any invention of his , but he shall within the reading of a leaf or two , meet with another in reputation every way equal with himself , whose name hath been before printed to his Poem , which now taken away were more than theft : which may satisfy him that would fain seem curious or be entreated for his fame . 

Now , if any Stationer shall find fault , that his Copies are robbed by any thing in this Collection , let me ask him this question , Why more in this , then in any Divine or human Author : From whence a man ( writing of that argument ) shall gather any saying , sentence , simile , or example , his name put to it who is the Author of the same . This is the simplest of many reasons that I could urdge , though perhaps the nearest his capacity , but that I would be loath to trouble myself , to satisfy him . Further , if any man whatsoever , in prising of his own birth or fortune , shall take in scorn , that a far meaner man in the eye of the world , shall be placed by him : I tell him plainly whatsoever so excepting , that , that man's wit is set by his , not that man by him . In which degree , the names of Poets ( all fear and duty ascribed to her great and sacred Name ) have been placed with the names of the greatest Princes of the world , by the most authentic and worthiest judgements , without disparagement to their sovereign titles : which if any man taking exception thereat , in ignorance know not , I hold him unworthy to be placed by the meanest that is but graced with the title of a Poet. Thus gentle Reader I wish thee all happiness . 

L. N.  

ENGLAND'S HELICON . 

¶ The Shepherd to his chosen Nimph.  

Only joy , now here you are , 
Fit to hear and ease my care : 
Let my whispering voice obtain , 
Sweet reward for sharpest pain . 
Take me to thee , and thee to me , 
no , no , no , no , my Deer , let be . 
Night hath closed all in her cloak , 
Twinkling stars Love-thoughts provoke , 
Danger hence good care doth keep 
jealousy itself doth sleep . 
Take me to thee , and thee to me : 
no , no , no , no , my Deer , let be . 
Better place no wit can find , 
Cupid's yoke to lose or bind , 
These sweet flowers on fine bed too , 
Us in their best language woe , 
Take me to thee , and thee to me : 
no , no , no , no , my Deer , let be . 
This small light the Moon bestows , 
Serves thy beams but to enclose , 
So to raise my hap more high , 
Fear not else , none can us spy . 
Take me to thee , and thee to me : 
no , no , no , no , my Dear , let be . 
That you heard was but a Mouse , 
Dumb sleep holdeth all the house , 
Yet asleep me thinks they say , 
Young folks , take time while you may . 
Take me to thee , and thee to me : 
no , no , no , no , my Dear , let be . 
Niggard Time threats , if we miss 
This large offer of our blisle , 
Long stay , ere he grant the same , 
( Sweet then ) while each thing doth frame , 
Take me to thee , and thee to me : 
no , no , no , no , my Deer , let be . 
Your fair Mother is a bed , 
Candles out , and Curtains spread , 
She thinks you do Letters write , 
write , but let me first indite . 
Take me to thee , and thee to me , 
no , no , no , no , my Deer , let be . 
Sweet ( alas ) why sane you thus ? 
Concord better fitteth us. 
Leave to Mars the force of hands , 
Your power in your beauty stands . 
Take me to thee , and thee to me : 
no , no , no , no , my Dear , let be . 
Woe to me , and you do swear 
Me to hate , but I forbear , 
Cursed be my destinies all , 
That brought me to so high a fall . 
Soon with my death I will please thee : 
no , no , no , no , my Dear , let be . 
S. Phil. Sidney . 

FINIS . 

THEORELLO . 

¶ A Shepherd's Edillion . 

You Shepherds which on hillocks sit , 
like Princes in their thrones : 
And guide your flocks , which else would flit 
your flocks of little ones : 
Good Kings have not disdained it , 
but Shepherds have been named : 
A sheephook is a Sceptre fit , 
for people well reclaimed . 
The Shepherd's life so honoured is and praised : 
That Kings less happy seem , though higher raised . 
The Summer Sun hath guilded fair , 
with morning rays the mountains : 
The birds do carol in the air , 
and naked Nymphs in Fountains . 
The Sylvans in their shagged hair , 
with Hamadryads trace : 
The shady Satyrs make a Choir , 
which rocks with Echo's grace . 
All breathe delight , all solace in the season : 
Not now to sing , were enemy to reason . 
Cosma my Love , and more than so , 
the life of mine affections : 
Nor life alone , but Lady too , 
and Queen of their directions . 
Cosma my Love , is fair you know , 
and which you Shepherds know not : 
Is ( Sophi said ) thence called so , 
but name's her beauty show not , 
Yet hath the world no better name than she : 
And then the world , no fairer thing can be . 
The Sun upon her forehead stands , 
( or jewel Sunlike glorious , ) 
Her forehead wrought with jove's own hands , 
for heavenly white notorious . 
Her golden locks like Hermus' sands , 
( or then bright Hermus' brighter : ) 
A spangled Cavil binds in with bands , 
than silver morning lighter . 
And if the Planets are the chief in skies : 
no other stars than Planets are her eyes . 
Her cheek , her lip ; fresh cheek , more fresh , 
then selfe-blowne buds of Roses : 
Rare lip , more red than those of flesh , 
which thousand sweets encloses : 
Sweet breath , which all things doth refresh , 
and words than breath far sweeter : 
Cheek firm , lip firm , not frail nor nesh , 
as substance which is fleeter . 
In praise do not surmount , although in placing : 
Her crystal neck , round breast , and arms embracing . 
The thorough-shining air I ween , 
is not so perfect clear : 
As is the sky of her fair skin , 
whereon no spots appear . 
The parts which ought not be seen , 
for sovereign worth excel : 
Her thighs with Azure branched been , 
and all in her are well . 
Long juorie hands , legs straighter than the Pine : 
Well shapen feet , but virtue most divine . 
Nor clothed like a Shepherdess , 
but rather like a Queen : 
Her mantle doth the forms express , 
of all which may be seen . 
Robe fitter for an Empress , 
then for a Shepherd's love : 
Robe fit alone for such a Lass , 
as Emperors doth move . 
Robe which heavens Queen , the bride of her own brother , 
Would grace herself with , or with such another . 
Who ever ( and who else but jove ) 
embroidered the same : 
He knew the world , and what did move , 
in all the mighty frame . 
So well ( belike his skill to prove ) 
the counterfeits he wrought : 
Of wood-gods , and of every groave , 
and all which else was aught . 
Is there a beast , a bird , a fish worth note ? 
then that he drew , and pictured in her coat . 
A veil of Lawn like vapour thin 
unto her ankle trails : 
Through which the shapes discerned been , 
as too and from it sails . 
Shape's both of men , who never lin 
to search her wonders out : 
Of monsters and of Gods a kin , 
which her impale about . 
A little world her flowing garment seems : 
And who but as a wonder thereof deems ? 
For here and there appear forth towers , 
among the chalky downs : 
Cities among the Country bowers , 
which smiling Sunshine crowns . 
Her mettle buskins decked with flowers , 
as th' earth when frosts are gone : 
Besprinkled are with Orient showers 
of hail and pebble stone . 
Her feature peerless , peerless her attire , 
I can but love her love , with zeal entire . 
OH who can sing her beauties best , 
or that remains unsung ? 
Do thou Apollo tune the rest , 
unworthy is my tongue . 
To gaze on her , is to be blessed , 
so wondrous fair her face is ; 
Her fairness cannot be expressed , 
in Goddesses nor Graces . 
I love my love , the goodly work of Nature : 
Admire her face , but more admire her stature . 
On thee ( o Cosma ) will I gaze , 
and read thy beauties ever : 
Delighting in the blessed maze , 
which can be ended never . 
For in the lustre of thy rays , 
appears thy parent's brightness : 
Who himself infinite displays 
in thee his proper greatness . 
My song must end , but never my desire : 
For Cosmas face is Theorellos fire . 
E. B.  

FINIS . 

Astrophels' Love is dead . 

Ring out your bells , let mourning shows be spread , 
For Love is dead . 
All love is dead infected 
With plague of deep disdain : 
Worth as naught worth rejected , 
And faith fair scorn doth gain . 
From so ungrateful fancy , 
From such a female frenzy , 
From them that use men thus : 
Good Lord deliver us.  
Weep neighbours weep , do you not hear it said 
That Love is dead ? 
His deathbed Peacock's folly , 
His winding sheet is shame : 
His will false , seeming holy , 
His sole exectour blame . 
From so ungrateful fancy , 
From such a female frenzy , 
From them that use men thus : 
Good Lord deliver us.  
Let Dirge be sunge , and Trentals richly read , 
For Love is dead . 
And wrong his Tomb ordaineth , 
My Mistress marble hart : 
Which Epitaph containeth , 
Her eyes were once his Dart. 
From so ungrateful fancy , 
From such a female frenzy , 
From them that use men thus : 
Good Lord deliver us.  
Alas , I lie , rage hath this error bred , 
Love is not dead . 
Love is not dead , but sleepeth 
In her unmatched mind : 
Where she his counsel keepeth , 
Till due desert she find . 
Therefore from so vile fancy , 
To call such wit a frenzy , 
Who love can temper thus : 
Good Lord deliver us.  
Sir. Phil. Sidney . 

FINIS . 

¶ A Palinode . 

AS withereth the Primrose by the river , 
As fadeth Sommers-sunne from gliding fountains ; 
As vanisheth the light blown bubble ever , 
As melteth snow upon the mossy Mountains . 
So melts , so vanisheth , so fades , so withers , 
The Rose , the shine , the bubble and the snow , 
Of praise , pomp , glory , joy ( which short life gathers , ) 
Fair praise , vain pomp , sweet glory , brittle joy . 
The withered Primrose by the mourning river , 
The faded Sommers-sunne from weeping fountains : 
The light-blowne bubble , vanished for ever , 
The molten snow upon the naked mountains , 
Are Emblems that the treasures we up-lay , 
Soon whither , vanish , fade , and melt away . 
For as the snow , whose lawn did overspread 
th' ambitious hills , which Giantlike did threat 
To pierce the heaven with their aspiring head , 
Naked and bare doth leave their craggy seat . 
When as the bubble , which did empty fly 
The dalliance of the undiscerned wind : 
On whose calm rolling waves it did rely , 
Hath shipwreck made , where it did dalliance find : 
And when the Sunshine which dissolved the snow , 
Cullourd the bubble with a pleasant vary , 
And made the rathe and timely Primrose grow , 
Swarth clouds withdrawn ( which longer time do tarry ) 
O what is praise , pomp , glory , joy , but so 
As shine by fountains , bubbles , flowers or snow ? 
E. B.  

FINIS . 

¶ Astrophil the Shepherd , his complaint to his flock . 

Go my flock , go get ye hence , 
Seek a better place of feeding : 
Where ye may have some defence 
From the storms in my breast breeding , 
And showers from mine eyes proceeding . 
Leave a wretch , in whom all woe , 
can abide to keep no measure : 
Merry Flock , such one forgo 
unto whom mirth is displeasure , 
only rich in mischief's treasure . 
Yet ( alas ) before you go , 
hear your woeful Master's Story : 
Which to stones I else would show , 
Sorrow only then hath glory : 
when 't is excellently sorry . 
Stella , fiercest Shepherdess , 
fiercest , but yet fairest ever : 
Stella , whom the heavens still bless , 
though against me she persever , 
though I bliss , inherit never . 
Stella , hath refused me , 
Stella , who more love hath proved 
In this caitiff hart to be , 
then can in good by us be moved : 
Towards Lambkin's best beloved . 
Stella , hath refused me , 
Astrophil that so well served . 
In this pleasant Spring must see 
while in pride flowers be preserved : 
himself only Winter-sterued . 
Why ( alas ) then doth she swear , 
that she loveth me so dear : 
Seeing me so long to bear 
coals of love that burn so clearly : 
and yet leave me helpless merely ? 
Is that love ? Forsooth I trow , 
if I saw my good dog grieved : 
And a help for him did know , 
my Love should not be believed : 
but he were by me relieved . 
no , she hate's me , well away , 
feigning love , somewhat to please me : 
Knowing , if she should display 
all her hate , Death soon would seize me : 
and of hideous torments ease me . 
then my dear Flock now adieu , 
but ( alas ) if in your straying , 
Heavenly Stella meet with you , 
tell her in your piteous blaying : 
her poor slaves unjust decaying . 
S. Phil. Sidney . 

FINIS . 

¶ Hobbinolls Ditty in praise of Eliza Queen of the Shepherds . 

Ye dainty Nymphs that in this blessed Brook 
Do bathe your breast ; 
Forsake your watery Bowers , and hither look 
At my request . 
And you fair Virgins that on Parnasse dwell , 
Whence floweth Helicon the learned well : 
Help me to blaze 
Her worthy praise , 
Who in her sex doth all excel . 
Of fair Eliza be your silver song , 
That blessed wight : 
The flower of Virgins , may she flourish long , 
In Princely plight : 
For she is Syrinx's daughter , without spot , 
Which Pan the Shepherd's God on her begot : 
So sprung her Grace , 
Of heavenly race : 
no mortal blemish may her blot . 
See where she sits upon the grassy green , 
OH seemly sight : 
Clad in scarlet , like a maiden Queen , 
And Ermines white . 
Upon her head a crimson Coronet , 
With Daffodils and Damask Roses set , 
Bay leaves between , 
And Primroses green : 
Embellish the sweet Violet . 
Tell me , have ye beheld her Angel's face , 
Like Phoebe fair ? 
Her heavenly behaviour , her Princely Grace , 
Can well compare 
The redrose meddled and the white yfere , 
In either cheek depeincten lively cheer . 
Her modest eye , 
Her Majesty , 
Where have you seen the like but there ? 
I saw Phoebus thrust out his golden head , 
On her to gaze : 
But when he saw how broad her beams did spread : 
It did him maze . 
He blushed to see an other Sun below , 
Ne durst again his fiery face out-show : 
Let him if he dare 
His brightness compare 
With hers , to have the overthrow . 
Show thyself Cynthia with thy silver rays , 
And be not abashed , 
When she the beams of her beauty displays , 
O how art thou dashed ? 
But I will not match her with Latona's seed , 
Such folly great sorrow to Niobe did breed , 
Now is she a stone , 
And makes deadly moan , 
Warning all other to take heed . 
Pan may be proud , that ever he begot 
Such a Bellibone : 
And Syrinx rejoice , that ever was her lot 
To bear such a one . 
Soon as my Younglings cryens for the dam , 
To her will I offer a milk-white Lamb. 
She is my Goddess plain , 
And I her Shepherd's Swain , 
Albe for-swonck and for-swat I am . 
I see Calliope speed her to the place , 
Where my Goddess shines : 
And after her the other Muses trace 
With their Violins . 
Been they not Baie-braunches which they do bear : 
All for Eliza in her hand to wear ? 
So sweetly they play , 
And sing all the way , 
That it a heaven is to hear . 
Lo how finely the Graces can it foot , 
to the Instrument : 
They dauncen deffely , and singen soot 
In their merriment . 
Wants not a fourth Grace to make the dance even ? 
Let that room to my Lady be given . 
She shall be a Grace , 
To fill the fourth place , 
And reign with the rest in heaven . 
And whether runs this bevie of Ladies bright , 
Ranged in a roe ? 
They been all Ladies of the Lake behight 
That unto her go : 
Chloris , that is the chief Nymph of all , 
Of Olive-braunches bears a Coronall : 
Olives been for peace 
When wars do surcease , 
Such for a Princess been principal . 
Bring hither the Pink and purple Cullumbine . 
With Gillyflowers 
Bring sweet Carnasions , and Sops in wine , 
Worn of Paramours . 
Strew me the ground with Daffi-down-dillies , 
And Cowslips , and Kings-cups , and loved Lilies , 
The pretty Paunce , 
And the Chevisaunce , 
Shall match with the fair flowerdelice . 
ye Shepherds daughters that dwell on the green , 
High you there a pace , 
Let none come there but such as Virgins been , 
To adorn her Grace . 
And when you come where as she is in place : 
See that your rudeness do not you disgrace . 
Bind your Fillets fast , 
And gird on your waist : 
For more fineness with a Tawdry lace . 
Now rise up Eliza , decked as thou art , 
In royal ray : 
And now ye dainty Damsels may depart , 
Each one her way . 
I fear I have troubled your troops too long : 
Let dame Eliza thank you for her Song . 
And if you come hither , 
When Damzins I gather 
I will part them all , you among . 
Edm. Spencer . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's Daffodil . 

Gorbo , as thou cam'st this way 
By yonder little hill , 
Or as thou through the fields didst stray , 
Saw'st thou my Daffodil ? 
she 's in a frock of Lincoln green , 
The colour Maids delight , 
And never hath her Beauty seen 
But through a veil of white . 
then Roses richer to behold , 
That dress up Lover's Bowers , 
The Pansie and the Marigold 
Are Phoebus' Paramoures . 
thou well describest the Daffodil , 
It is not full an hour 
Since by the Spring near yonder hill 
I saw that lovely flower . 
Yet with my flower thou didst not meet , 
Not news of her dost bring , 
Yet is my Daffodil more sweet 
Than that by yonder Spring . 
I saw a Shepherd that doth keep 
In yonder field of Lilies , 
Was making ( as he fed his sheep ) 
A wreath of Daffodils . 
Yet Gorbo : thou delud'st me still , 
My flower thou didst not see . 
For know ; my pretty Daffodil 
Is worn of none but me . 
To show itself but near her seat 
no Lily is so bold , 
Except to shade her from the heat , 
Or keep her from the cold . 
Through yonder vale as I did pass 
Descending from the hill , 
I met a smerking Bonny-lasse , 
They call her Daffodil . 
Whose presence as along she went 
The pretty flowers did greet , 
As though their heads they downward bend , 
With homage to her feet . 
And all the Shepherds that were nigh , 
From top of every hill ; 
Unto the Valleys loud did cry , 
There goes sweet Daffodil . 
I gentle Shepherd now with joy 
thou all my flock dost fill : 
Come go with me thou Shepherd's boy , 
Let us to Daffodil . 
Michael Drayton . 

FINIS . 

¶ A Canzon Pastoral in honour of her Majesty . 

Alas what pleasure now the pleasant Spring 
Hath given place , 
To harsh black frosts the sad ground covering , 
Can we poor we embrace , 
When every bird on every branch can sing 
Naught but this note of woe alas ? 
Alas this note of woe why should we found ? 
With us as May , September hath a prime , 
then birds and branches your alas is fond , 
Which call upon the absent Summer time : 
For did flowers make our May 
Or the Sunbeams your day . 
When Night and Winter did the world embrace , 
Well might you wail your ill and sing alas . 
Lo Matron-like the Earth herself attires 
In habit grave , 
Naked the fields are , bloomelesse are the brires , 
Yet we a Summer have , 
Who in our clime kindleth these living fires , 
Which blooms can on the briers save . 
no Ice doth christallize the running Brook , 
no blast deflowers the flowre-adorned field , 
Crystal is clear , but clearer is the look , 
Which to our climes these living fires doth yield : 
Winter though every where 
Hath no abiding here : 
On Brooks and Briers she doth rule alone , 
The Sun which lights our world is always one . 
Edmund Bolton . 

FINIS . 

¶ Melicertus Madrigale . 

What are my Sheep , without their wont food ? 
What is my life , except I gain my Love ? 
My Sheep consume , and faint for want of blood , 
My life is lost unless I Grace approve . 
no flower that sapless thrives , 
no Turtle without fere . 
The day without the Sun doth lower for woe , 
then woe mine eyes , unless they beauty see : 
My Son Samelaes' eyes , by whom I know , 
Wherein delight consists , where pleasures be . 
Naught more the hart revives , 
then to embrace his Dear . 
The stars from earthly humours gain their light , 
Our humours by their light possess their power : 
Samelaes' eyes fed by my weeping sight , 
Infuse my pains or joys , by smile or lower . 
So wends the source of love , 
It feeds , it fails , it ends . 
Kind looks , clear to your joy , behold her eyes , 
Admire her hart , desire to taste her kisses : 
In them the heaven of joy and solace lies , 
Without them , every hope his succour misses . 
O how I live to prove , 
Whereto this solace tends ? 
Ro. Greene.  

FINIS . 

¶ Old Damon's Pastoral . 

From Fortune's frowns and change removed , 
wend silly Flocks in blessed feeding : 
None of Damon more beloved , 
feed gentle Lambs while I sit reading . 
Careless worldlings , outrage quelleth 
all the pride and pomp of City : 
But true peace with Shepherds dwelleth , 
( Shepherds who delight in pity . ) 
Whether grace of heaven betideth , 
on our humble minds such pleasure : 
Perfect peace with Swains abideth , 
love and faith is Shepherd's treasure . 
On the lower Plains the thunder 
little thrives , and naught prevaileth : 
Yet in Cities breedeth wonder , 
and the highest hills assaileth . 
Envy of a foreign Tyrant 
threateneth Kings , not Shepherds humble : 
Age makes silly Swains delirant , 
thirst of rule garres great men stumble . 
What to other seemeth sorry , 
abject state and humble biding : 
Is our joy and Country glory , 
highest states have worse betiding . 
Golden cups do harbour poison , 
and the greatest pomp , dissembling : 
Court of seasoned words hath foison , 
treason haunts in most assembling . 
Homely breasts do harbour quiet , 
little fear , and much solace : 
States suspect their bed and diet , 
fear and craft do haunt the Palace . 
Little would I , little want I , 
where the mind and store agreeth , 
Smallest comfort is not scanty , 
lest he longs that little seeth . 
Time hath been that I have longed , 
foolish I , to like of folly : 
To converse where honour thronged , 
to my pleasures linked wholly . 
Now I see , and seeing sorrow 
that the day consumed , returns not : 
Who dare trust upon to morrow , 
when nor time , nor life sojourns not ? 
Thom. Lodge . 

FINIS . 

¶ Perigot and Cuddies Roundelay . 

IT fell upon a holy-eue , 
hey ho holiday : 
When holy-fathers' wont to shrive , 
now ginneth this Roundelay . 
Sitting upon a hill so high , 
hey ho the high hill : 
The while my flock did feed thereby , 
the while the Shepherd's self did spill . 
I saw the bouncing Bellybone , 
hey ho Bonny-bell : 
Tripping over the Dale alone , 
she can trip it very well . 
Well decked in a Frock of grey , 
hey ho grey is greet : 
And in a Kirtle of green Say , 
the green is for Maidens meet . 
A Chaplet on her head she wore , 
hey ho the Chaplet : 
Of sweet Violets therein was store , 
she 's sweeter than the Violet . 
My Sheep did leave their wont food , 
hey ho silly Sheep : 
And gazed on her as they were wood , 
wood as he that did them keep . 
As the Bonnilass passed by , 
hey ho Bonnilass : 
She rolled at me with glancing eye , 
as clear as the Christall-glasse . 
All as the Sunnie-beame so bright , 
hey ho the Sunbeam : 
Glanceth from Phoebus' face forth right , 
so love into my hart did stream . 
Or as the thunder cleaves the clouds , 
hey ho the thunder : 
Wherein the lightsome levin shrouds , 
so cleaves my soul asunder . 
Or as Dame Cinthia's silver ray , 
hey ho the moonlight : 
Upon the glistering wave doth play , 
such play is a piteous plight . 
The glance into my hart did glide , 
hey ho the glider : 
Therewith my soul was sharply gride , 
such wounds soon wexen wider . 
Hasting to raunch the arrow out , 
hey ho Perigot : 
I left the head in my hart root , 
it was a desperate shot . 
There it rankleth ay more and more , 
hey ho the arrow : 
Ne can I find salve for my sore , 
love is a cureless sorrow . 
And though my bale with death I bought , 
hey ho heavy cheer : 
Yet should thilk lass not from my thought , 
so you may buy gold too dear . 
But whether in painful love I pine , 
hey ho pinching pain : 
Or thrive in wealth , she shall be mine , 
but if thou can her obtain . 
And if for graceless grief I die 
hey ho graceless grief : 
Witness , she slew me with her eye , 
let thy folly be the preefe . 
And you that saw it , simple sheep , 
hey ho the fair flock : 
For priefe thereof my death shall weep , 
and moan with many a mock . 
So learned I love on a holy-eue , 
hey ho holiday : 
That ever since my hart did grieve , 
now endeth our Roundelay . 
Edm. Spencer . 

FINIS . 

¶ Phillida and Coridon . 

IN the merry month of May , 
In a morn by break of day , 
Forth I walked by the Wood side , 
When as May was in his pride : 
There I spied all alone , 
Phillida and Coridon . 
Much ado there was God wot , 
He would love , and she would not . 
She said never man was true , 
He said , none was false to you . 
He said , he had loved her long , 
She said , Love should have no wrong . 
Coridon would kiss her then , 
She said , Maids must kiss no men , 
Till they did for good and all . 
then she made the Shepherd call 
All the heavens to witness truth : 
Never loved a truer youth . 
Thus with many a pretty oath , 
Yea and nay , and faith and troth , 
Such as silly Shepherds use , 
When they will not Love abuse ; 
Love , which had been long deluded , 
Was with kisses sweet concluded . 
And Phillida with garlands gay : 
Was made the Lady of the May.  
N. Breton . 

FINIS . 

¶ To Colin Cloute.  

Beauty sat bathing by a Spring , 
where fairest shades did hide her . 
The winds blew calm , the birds did sing , 
the cool streams ran beside her . 
My wanton thoughts enticed mine eye , 
to see what was forbidden : 
But better Memory said , fie , 
so , vain Desire was chidden . 
hey nonnie , nonnie , etc.  
Into a slumber than I fell , 
when fond imagination : 
Seemed to see , but could not tell 
her feature or her fashion . 
But even as Babes in dreams do smile , 
and sometime fall a weeping : 
So I awaked , as wise this while , 
as when I fell a sleeping . 
hey nonnie , nonnie , etc.  
Shepherd Tony . 

FINIS . 

¶ Rowlands Song in praise of the fairest Beta . 

OH thou silver Thames , o clearest crystal flood , 
Beta alone the Phoenix is of all thy watery brood . 
The Queen of Virgins only she , 
And thou the Queen of floods shalt be . 
Let all the Nymphs be joyful then , to see this happy day : 
Thy Beta now alone shall be the subject of my Lay.  
With dainty and delightsome strains of sweetest Virelayes , 
Come lovely Shepherds sit we down , & chant our Betas praise . 
And let us sing so rare a verse , 
Our Betas praises to rehearse : 
That little birds shall silent be , to hear poor Shepherds sing : 
And Rivers backward bend their course , & flow unto the spring . 
Range all thy Swans fair Thames together on a rank : 
And place them duly one by one upon thy stately bank . 
then set together all a-good , 
Recording to the silver flood : 
And crave the tuneful Nightingale to help ye with her Lay ; 
The Osell and the Thrustlecocke , chief music of our May.  
OH see what troops of Nymphs been sporting on the strands , 
And they been blessed Nymphs of peace , with Olives in their hands . 
How merrily the Muses sing , 
That all the flowery meadows ring 
And Beta sits upon the bank in purple and in pall , 
And she the Queen of Muses is , and wears the Coronall . 
Trim up her golden tresses with Apollo's sacred tree , 
OH happy sight unto all those that love and honour thee , 
The blessed Angels have prepared 
A glorious crown for thy reward ? 
Not such a golden crown as haughty Caesar wears : 
But such a glittering starry crown as Ariadne bears . 
Make her a goodly Chaplet of azured Cullumbine , 
And wreath about her Coronet with sweetest Eglantine . 
Bedeck our Beta all with Lilies . 
And the dainty Daffodils , 
With Roses Damask , white and red , and fairest flowre-delice : 
With Cowslips of jerusalem , and Cloaves of Paradise . 
OH thou fair Torch of heaven , the days most dearest light , 
And thou bright-shining Cynthia , the glory of the night . 
You stars the eyes of heaven , 
And thou the gliding leven , 
And thou o gorgeous Iris , with all strange colours died : 
When she streams forth her rays , then dashed is all your pride . 
See how the Day stands still , admiring of her face , 
And Time lo stretcheth forth his arms thy Beta to embrace . 
The Sirens sing sweet Lays , 
The Tritons sound her praise , 
Go pass on Thames , and high thee fast unto the Ocean Sea : 
And let thy billows there proclaim thy Betas holiday . 
And water thou the blessed root of that green Olive tree , 
With whose sweet shadow all thy banks with peace preserved be . 
Laurel for Poets and Conquerors : 
And Myrtle for Love's Paramours . 
That fame may be thy fruit , the boughs preserved by peace , 
And let the mournful Cypress die , now storms and tempests cease . 
we 'll strew the shore with pearl , where Beta walks alone , 
And we will pave her Princely Bower with richest Indian stone . 
Perfume the air , and make it sweet , 
For such a Goddess it is meet . 
For if her eyes for purity contend with Titan's light : 
no marvel then , although they so do dazzle human sight . 
Sound out your Trumpets then from London's stately Towers , 
To beat the stormy winds aback , and calm the raging showers . 
Set to the Cornet and the Flute , 
The Orpharion and the Lute : 
And tune the Taber and the Pipe to the sweet Violons : 
And move the thunder in the air with loudest Clarions . 
Beta , long may thine Altar's smoke with yearly sacrifice , 
And long thy sacred temples may their Sabbaths solemnise . 
Thy Shepherd's watch by day and night , 
Thy Maids attend the holy light . 
And thy large Empire stretch her arms from East unto the West : 
And Albion on the Apennineses advance her conquering crest . 
Mich. Drayton . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Barginet of Antimachus . 

IN pride of youth , in midst of May , 
When birds with many a merry Lay , 
salute the Sun's uprising : 
I sat me down fast by a Spring , 
And while these merry Chanters sing , 
I fell upon surmizing . 
Amid my doubt and minds debate , 
Of change of time , of world's estate , 
I spied a boy attired 
In silver plumes , yet naked quite , 
Save pretty feathers fit for flight , 
wherewith he still aspired . 
A bow he bore to work men's wrack , 
A little Quiver at his back , 
with many arrows filled : 
And in his soft and pretty hand , 
He held a lively burning brand , 
wherewith he Lovers killed . 
Fast by his side , in rich array , 
There sat a lovely Lady gay , 
his mother as I guessed : 
That set the Lad upon her knee , 
And trimmed his bow , and taught him flee , 
and much Love professed . 
oft from her lap at sundry stoures , 
He leapt , and gathered Summer flowers , 
both Violets and Roses : 
But see the chance that followed fast , 
As he the pomp of prime doth waste , 
before that he supposes : 
A Bee that harboured hard thereby , 
Did sting his hand , and made him cry 
O Mother , I am wounded : 
Fair Venus that beheld her Son , 
Cried out alas , I am undone , 
and there-upon she swooned . 
My little Lad the Goddess said , 
Who hath my Cupid so dismayed ? 
he answered : Gentle Mother 
The hony-worker in the Hive , 
My grief and mischief doth contrive , 
alas it is none other . 
She kissed the Lad : Now mark the chance , 
And straight she fell into a trance , 
and crying , thus concluded : 
Ah wanton boy , like to the Bee , 
thou with a kiss hast wounded me , 
and hapless Love included . 
A little Bee doth thee affright , 
But ah , my wounds are full of spirit , 
and cannot be recured : 
The boy that kissed his Mother's pain , 
'Gan smile , and kissed her whole again , 
and made her hope assured . 
She sucked the wound , and swaged the sting , 
And little Love ycurde did sing , 
then let no Lover sorrow : 
To day though grief attaint his hart , 
Let him with courage bide the smart , 
amends will come to morrow . 
Thom. Lodge . 

FINIS . 

¶ Menaphons Roundelay . 

When tender Ewes brought home with evenings' Sun , 
Wend to their Folds , 
And to their holds 
The Shepherds trudge when light of day is done : 
Upon a tree , 
The Eagle jove's fair bird did perch , 
There rests he . 
A little Fly his harbour then did search , 
And did presume , ( though others laughed thereat ) 
To perch whereas the Princely Eagle sat . 
The Eagle frowned , and shook his royal wings , 
and charged the Fly 
From thence to high . 
Afraid , in haste the little creature flings , 
Yet seeks again , 
Fearful to pearke him by the eagle side . 
With moody vain 
The speedy post of Ganymede replied : 
Vassal avaunt , or with my wings you die . 
Is 't fit an Eagle seat him with a Fly ? 
The Fly craved pity , still the Eagle frowned . 
The silly Fly 
Ready to die : 
Disgraced , displaced , fell grovelling to the ground . 
The Eagle saw : 
And with a royal mind said to the Fly , 
Be not in awe , 
I scorn by me the meanest creature die . 
then seat thee here : The joyful Fly up-flings , 
And sat safe shadowed with the eagle wings . 
Ro. Greene.  

FINIS . 

¶ A Pastoral of Phillis and Coridon . 

ON a hill there grows a flower , 
fair befall the dainty sweet : 
By that flower there is a Bower , 
where the heavenly Muses meet . 
In that Bower there is a chair , 
frindged all about with gold : 
Where doth sit the fairest fair , 
that ever eye did yet behold . 
It is Phillis fair and bright , 
she that is the Shepherd's joy : 
She that Venus did despite , 
and did blind her little boy . 
This is she , the wise , the rich , 
that the world desire's to see : 
This is ipsa quae the which , 
there is none but only she . 
Who would not this face admire ? 
who would not this Saint adore ? 
Who would not this sight desire , 
though he thought to see no more ? 
O fair eyes , yet let me see , 
one good look , and I am gone : 
Look on me , for I am he , 
thy poor silly Coridon . 
thou that art the Shepherd's Queen , 
look upon thy silly Swain : 
By thy comfort have been seen 
dead men brought to life again . 
N. Breton . 

FINIS . 

¶ Coridon and Melampus Song . 

Cor.   Melampus , when will Love be void of fears ? 


Mel.   When jealousy hath neither eyes nor ears . 


Cor.   Melampus , when will Love be thoroughly shrieved ? 


Mel.   When it is hard to speak , and not believed . 


Cor.   Melampus , when is Love most malcontent ? 


Mel.   When Lovers range , and bear their bows unbent . 


Cor.   Melampus , tell me , when takes Love lest harm ? 


Mel.   When Swains sweet pipes are puffed , and Trulls are warm . 


Cor.   Melampus , tell me , when is Love best fed ? 


Mel.   When it hath sucked the sweet that ease hath bred . 


Cor.   Melampus , when is time in Love ill spent ? 


Mel.   When it earns meed , and yet receaves no rent . 


Cor.   Melampus , when is time well spent in Love ? 


Mel.   When deeds win medes , and words Loves works do prove . 


Geo. Peele . 

FINIS . 

¶ Tityrus to his fair Phillis . 

THE silly Swain whose love breeds discontent , 
Thinks death a trifle , life a loathsome thing , 
Sad he looks , sad he lies : 
But when his Fortune's malice doth relent , 
then of Love's sweetness he will sweetly sing , 
thus he lives , thus he dies . 
then Tityrus whom Love hath happy made , 
Will rest thrice happy in this Myrtle shade . 
For though Love at first did grieve him : 
yet did Love at last relieve him . 
I D.  

FINIS . 

¶ Shepherd . 

Sweet thrall , first step to Love's felicity , 
Shepherdess . 
Sweet thrall , no stop to perfect liberty . 
He .  OH life . 


Shee .  What life ? 


He .  Sweet life . 


Shee .  no life more sweet : 


He .  O Love.  


Shee .  What love ? 


He .  Sweet Love.  


Shee .  no love more meet . 


I M.  

FINIS . 

Another of the same Author . 

Fields were overspread with flowers , 
Fairest choice of Flora's treasure : 
Shepherds there had shady Bowers , 
Where they oft reposed with pleasure . 
Meadows flourished fresh and gay , 
where the wanton . Herds did play . 
Springs more clear than Crystal streams , 
Seated were the Groves among : 
Thus nor Titans scorching beams , 
Nor earth's drought could Shepherds wrong . 
Fair Pomonaes' fruitful pride : 
did the budding branches hide . 
Flocks of sheep fed on the Plains , 
Harmless sheep that roamd at large : 
here and there sat pensive Swains , 
Waiting on their wand'ring charge . 
Pensive while their Lasses smiled : 
Lasses which had them beguiled . 
Hills with trees were richly dight , 
Valleys stored with Vesta's wealth : 
Both did harbour sweet delight , 
Naught was there to hinder health . 
Thus did heaven grace the soil : 
Not deformed with workmen's toil . 
Purest plot of earthly mould , 
Might that Land be justly named : 
Art by Nature was controlled , 
Art which no such pleasures framed . 
Fairer place was never seen : 
Fittest place for Beauty's Queen . 
I M.  

FINIS . 

¶ Menaphon to Pesana . 

Fair fields proud Flora's vaunt , why is (null) you smile , 
when as I languish ? 
You golden Meads , why strive you to beguile 
my weeping anguish ? 
I live to sorrow , you to pleasure spring , 
why do ye spring thus ? 
What , will not Boreas tempests wrathful King , 
take some pity on us ? 
And send forth Winter in her rusty weed , 
to wail my bemoaning : 
While I distressed do tune my Country Reed 
unto my groan . 
But heaven and earth , time , place , and every power , 
have with her conspired : 
To turn my blissful sweet to baleful sower , 
since I this desired . 
The heaven whereto my thoughts may not aspire , 
ay me unhappy : 
It was my fault t' embrace my bane the fire 
that forceth me die . 
Mine be the pain , but hers the cruel cause , 
of this strange torment : 
wherefore no time my banning prayers shall pause . 
till proud she repent . 
Ro. Greene.  

FINIS . 

¶ A sweet Pastoral . 

Good Muse rock me a sleep , 
with some sweet Harmony : 
This weary eye is not to keep 
thy wary company . 
Sweet Love be gone a while , 
thou knowest my heaviness : 
Beauty is born but to beguile , 
my hart of happiness . 
See how my little flock 
that loved to feed on high : 
Do headlong tumble down the Rock , 
and in the Vallie die . 
The bushes and the trees 
that were so fresh and green : 
Do all their dainty colour lose , 
and not a leaf is seen . 
The Blackbird and the Thrush , 
that made the woods to ring : 
With all the rest , are now at hush , 
and not a note they sing . 
Sweet Philomele the bird , 
that hath the heavenly throat , 
Doth now alas not once afford 
recording of a note . 
The flowers have had a frost 
each herb hath lost her savour : 
And Phillida the fair hath lost , 
the comfort of her favour . 
Now all these careful sights , 
so kill me in conceit : 
That how to hope upon delights 
it is but mere deceit . 
And therefore my sweet Muse 
that knowest what help is best , 
Do now thy heavenly cunning use , 
to set my hart at rest . 
And in a dream bewray 
what fate shall be my friend : 
Whether my life shall still denay , 
or when my sorrow end . 
N. Breton . 

FINIS . 

¶ Harpalus complaint on Phillidaes' love bestowed on Corin , who loved her not , and denied him that loved her . 

Phillida was a fair maid , 
as fresh as any flower : 
Whom Harpalus the Herdsman prayed 
to be his Paramour . 
Harpalus and eke Corin , 
were Herdsmen both yfere : 
And Phillida could twist and spin , 
and thereto sing full clear . 
But Phillida was all too coy , 
for Harpalus to win : 
For Corin was her only joy , 
who forced her not a pin . 
How often would she flowers twine , 
how often garlands make : 
Of Cowslips and of Cullumbine , 
and all for Corins' sake ? 
But Corin he had Hawks to lure , 
and forced more the field : 
Of Lover's law he took no cure , 
for once he was beguiled . 
Harpalus prevailed naught , 
his labour all was lost : 
For he was furthest from her thought , 
and yet he loved her most . 
Therefore woxe he both pale and lean , 
and dry as clod of clay : 
His flesh it was consumed clean , 
his colour gone away . 
His beard it had not long been shave , 
his hair hung all unkempt : 
A man most fit even for the grave , 
whom spiteful Love had spent . 
His eyes were red and all fore-watcht , 
his face besprent with tears : 
It seemed unhap had him long hatched , 
in midst of his despairs . 
His clothes were black and also bare , 
as one forlorn was he : 
Upon his head he always beware 
a wreath of Willow-tree . 
His beasts he kept upon the hill , 
and he sat in the Dale : 
And thus with sighs and sorrows shrill , 
he 'gan to tell his tale . 
O Harpalus , thus would he say , 
unhappiest under Sun : 
The cause of thine unhappy day , 
by love was first begun . 
For thou wentest first by suit to seek , 
a Tiger to make tame : 
That sets not by thy love a Leek , 
but makes thy grief a game . 
As easy were it to convert 
the frost into a flame : 
As for to turn a froward hart 
whom thou so fain wouldst frame . 
Corin , he lives careless , 
he leaps among the leaves : 
He eats the fruits of thy redress , 
thou reap'st , he takes the sheaves . 
My beasts awhile your food refrain , 
and hark your Herdsman's sound : 
Whom spiteful Love alas hath slain , 
through-girt with many a wound . 
O happy be ye beasts wild , 
that here your pasture takes : 
I see that ye be not beguiled , 
of these your faithful makes . 
The Hart he feedeth by the Hind , 
the Buck hard by the Do : 
The Turtle-dove is not unkind 
to him that loves her so . 
The Ewe she hath by her the Ram , 
the young Cow hath the Bull : 
The Calf with many a lusty Lamb , 
do feed their hunger full . 
But well-away that Nature wrought , 
thee Phillida so fair : 
For I may say that I have bought 
thy beauty all too dear . 
What reason is 't that cruelty 
with beauty should have part ? 
Or else that such great tyranny , 
should dwell in woman's hart ? 
I see therefore to shape my death , 
she cruelly is pressed : 
To th' end that I may want my breath , 
my days been at the best . 
O Cupid grant this my request , 
and do not stop thine ears : 
That she may feel within her breast , 
the pain of my despairs . 
Of Corin that is careless , 
that she may crave her fee : 
As I have done in great distress , 
that loved her faithfully . 
But since that I shall die her slave , 
her slave and eke her thrall : 
write you my friends upon my grave , 
this chance that is befall . 
here lieth unhappy Harpalus , 
by cruel Love now slain : 
Whom Phillida unjustly thus , 
hath murdered with disdain . 
L. T. Haward , Earl of Surrie . 

FINIS . 

¶ An other of the same subject , but made as it were in answer . 

ON a goodly Summer's day , 
Harpalus and Phillida , 
He a true hearted Swain , 
She full of coy disdain , 
drove their flocks to field : 
He to see his Shepherdess , 
She did dream on nothing less , 
then his continual care , 
Which to grim-faced Despair , 
wholly did him yield . 
Corin she affected still , 
All the more thy hart to kill . 
Thy case doth make me rue , 
That thou shouldst love so true , 
and be thus disdained : 
While their flocks a feeding were , 
They did meet together there . 
then with a curtsy low , 
And sighs that told his woe , 
thus to her he plained . 
Bide a while fair Phillida , 
List what Harpalus will say 
Only in love to thee , 
Though thou respect not me , 
yet vouchsafe an ear : 
To prevent ensuing ill , 
Which no doubt betid thee will , 
If thou do not foresee , 
To shun it presently , 
than thy harm I fear . 
Firm thy love is , well I wot , 
To the man that loves thee not . 
Lovely and gentle maid , 
Thy hope is quite betrayed , 
which my hart doth grieve : 
Corin is unkind to thee , 
Though thou think contrary . 
His love is grown as light , 
As is his Falcon's flight , 
this sweet Nymph believe . 
Mopsus daughter , that young maid , 
Her bright eyes his hart hath strayde 
From his affecting thee , 
Now there is none but she 
that is Corins' bliss : 
Phillis men the Virgin call , 
She is Buxom , fair and tall , 
Yet not like Phillida : 
If I my mind might say , 
eyes oft deem amiss . 
He commends her beauty rare , 
Which with thine may not compare . 
He doth extol her eye , 
Silly thing , if thine were by , 
thus conceit can err : 
He is ravished with her breath , 
thine can quicken life in death . 
He praiseth all her parts , 
thine , wins a world of hearts , 
more , if more there were . 
Look sweet Nymph upon thy flock , 
They stand still , and now feed not , 
As if they shared with thee : 
Grief for this injury , 
offered to true love . 
Pretty Lambkins , how they moan , 
And in bleating seem to groan , 
That any Shepherd's Swain , 
Should cause their Mistress pain : 
by affects remove . 
If you look but on the grass , 
it 's not half so green as 't was : 
When I began my tale , 
But it is withered pale , 
all in mere remorse . 
Mark the Trees that bragged even now , 
Of each goodly greene-leau'd-bow , 
They seem as blasted all , 
Ready for Winter's fall , 
such is true love's force . 
The gentle murmur of the Springs , 
Are become contrary things , 
They have forgot their pride , 
And quite forsake their glide , 
as if charmed they stand . 
And the flowers growing by , 
Late so fresh in every eye , 
See how they hang the head , 
As on a sudden dead , 
dropping on the sand . 
The birds that chanted it erewhile , 
E'er they heard of Corins' guile , 
Sat as they were afraid , 
Or by some hap dismayed , 
for this wrong to thee : 
Hark sweet Phil , how Philomel , 
That was wont to sing so well , 
jargles now in yonder bush , 
Worse than the rudest Trush , 
as it were not she . 
Phillida , who all this while 
Neither gave a sigh or smile : 
Round about the field did gaze , 
As her wits were in a maze ; 
poor despised maid . 
And revived at the last , 
After streams of tears were passed , 
Leaning on her Shepherd's hook , 
With a sad and heavy look , 
thus poor soul she said . 
Harpalus , I thank not thee , 
For this sorry tale to me . 
Meet me here again to morrow , 
then I will conclude my sorrow 
mildly , if may be : 
With their flocks they home do fare , 
Either's hart too full of care , 
If they do meet again , 
Than what they further sayne , 
you shall hear from me . 
Shep. Tony . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Nymphs meeting their May Queen , entertain her with this Ditty . 

With fragrant flowers we strew the way , 
And make this our chief holiday . 
For though this clime were blessed of yore : 
Yet was it never proud before . 
OH beauteous Queen of second Troy : 
Accept of our unfeigned joy . 
Now th' Air is sweeter than sweet Balm , 
And Satyrs dance about the Palm , 
Now earth with verdure newly dight , 
Gives perfect signs of her delight . 
OH beauteous Queen , etc.  
Now birds record new harmony , 
And trees do whistle melody , 
Now every thing that Nature breeds , 
Doth clad itself in pleasant weeds . 
OH beauteous Queen , etc.  
Tho. Watson . 

FINIS . 

¶ Colin Cloutes mournful Ditty for the death of Astrophil . 

Shepherds that wont on pipes of Oaten reed , 
Ofttimes to plain your love's concealed smart ; 
And with your piteous Lays have learned to breed 
Compassion in a Country-lasses hart : 
Hearken ye gentle Shepherds to my song , 
And place my doleful plaint your plaints among . 
To you alone I sing this mournful verse , 
The mournfullest verse that ever man heard tell : 
To you whose softened hearts it may emprerse 
With dolours dart for death of Astrophil . 
To you I sing , and to none other wight : 
For well I wot , my rhymes been rudely dight . 
Yet as they been , if any nicer wit 
Shall hap to hear , or covet them to read : 
Think he , that such are for such one 's most fit ▪ 
Made not to please the living , but the dead . 
And if in him found pity ever place : 
Let him be moved to pity such a case . 
Edm. Spencer . 

FINIS . 

¶ Damaetas jig in praise of his Love.  

Jolly Shepherd , Shepherd on a hill 
on a hill so merrily , 
on a hill so cherily , 
Fear not Shepherd there to pipe thy fill , 
Fill every Dale , fill every Plain : 
both sing and say ; Love feels no pain . 
jolly Shepherd , Shepherd on a green 
on a green so merrily , 
on a green so cherily , 
Be thy voice shrill , be thy mirth seen , 
Herd to each Swain , seen to each Trull : 
both sing and say ; loves joy is full . 
jolly Shepherd , Shepherd in the Sun , 
in the Sun so merrily , 
in the Sun so cherily , 
Sing forth thy songs , and let thy rhymes run 
Down to the Dales , to the hills above : 
both sing and say ; no life to love . 
jolly Shepherd , Shepherd in the shade , 
in the shade so merrily , 
in the shade so cherily , 
joy in thy life , life of Shepherd's trade ; 
joy in thy love , love full of glee : 
both sing and say ; Sweet Love for me . 
jolly Shepherd , Shepherd here or there , 
here or there so merrily , 
here or there so cherily , 
Or in thy chat , either at thy cheer , 
In every jig , in every Lay : 
both sing and say ; Love lasts for ay . 
jolly Shepherd , Shepherd Daphnis Love , 
Daphnis love so merrily , 
Daphnis love so cherily , 
Let thy fancy never more remove , 
Fancy be fixed , fixed not to fleet , 
still sing and say ; loves yoke is sweet . 
john Wootton . 

FINIS . 

¶ Montanus praise of his fair Phoebe . 

Phaebe sat , 
Sweet she sat , 
sweet sat Phoebe when I saw her , 
White her brow 
Coy her eye , 
brow and eye , how much you please me ? 
Words I spent , 
Sighs I sent , 
sighs and words could never draw her , 
O my Love , 
thou art lost , 
since no sight could ever ease thee . 
Phoebe sat 
By a Fount , 
sitting by a Fount I spied her , 
Sweet her touch , 
Rare her voice , 
touch and voice , what may distain you ? 
As she sung , 
I did sigh , 
And by sighs whilst that I tried her , 
O mine eyes 
You did loose , 
her first sight whose want did pain you . 
Phoebe's flocks 
White as wool , 
yet were Phoebe's looks more whiter , 
Phoebe's eyes 
Dovelike mild , 
Dovelike eyes both mild and cruel , 
Montane swears 
In your Lamps , 
he will die for to delight her , 
Phoebe yield 
Or I die , 
shall true hearts be fancies fuel ? 
Thom. Lodge . 

FINIS . 

¶ The complaint of Thestilis the forsaken Shepherd . 

Thestilis a silly Swain , when Love did him forsake , 
In mournful wife amid the woods , thus 'gan his plaint to make . 
Ah woeful man ( quoth he ) fallen is thy lot to moon , 
And pine away with careful thoughts , unto thy Love unknown . 
Thy Nymph forsakes thee quite , whom thou didst honour so : 
That ay to her thou wert a friend , but to thyself a foe . 
ye Lovers that have lost your harts-desired choice : 
Lament with me my cruel hap , and help my trembling voice . 
Was never man that stood so great in Fortune's grace , 
Nor with his sweat ( alas too dear ) possessed so high a place : 
As I whose simple hart , ay thought himself still sure , 
But now I see high springing tides , they may not eye endure . 
She knows my guiltless hart , and yet she let's it pine : 
Of her untrue professed love , so feeble is the twine . 
What wonder is it then , if I berent my hairs : 
And craving death continually , do bathe myself in tears ? 
When Croesus' King of Lide , was cast in cruel bands , 
And yielded goods and life into his enemy's hands : 
What tongue could tell his woe ? yet was his grief much less 
Than mine , for I have lost my Love , which might my woe redress . 
ye woods that shrowded my limbs , give now your hollow sound : 
That ye may help me to bewail , the cares that me confound . 
ye Rivers rest a while , and stay your streams that run : 
Rue Thestilis , the woefull'st man that rests under the Sun . 
Transport my sighs ye winds , unto my pleasant foe : 
My trickling tears shall witness hear , of this my cruel woe . 
O happy man were I , if all the Gods agreed : 
That now the Sisters three should cut in twain my fatal thread . 
Till life with love shall end , I here resign all joy , 
Thy pleasant sweet I now lament , whose lack breeds mine annoy . 
Farewell my dear therefore , farewell to me well known , 
If that I die , it shall be said : that thou hast slain thine own . 
L. T. Howard , E. of Surrie . 

FINIS . 

¶ To Phillis the fair Shepherdess . 

MY Phillis hath the morning Sun , 
at first to look upon her : 
And Phillis hath morne-waking birds , 
her risings still to honour . 
My Phillis hath prime-featherd flowers , 
that smile when she treads on them : 
And Phillis hath a gallant flock , 
that leaps since she doth own them . 
But Phillis hath too hard a hart , 
alas that she should have it : 
It yields no mercy to desert , 
nor grace to those that crave it . 
Sweet Sun , when thou look'st on , 
pray her regard my moan . 
Sweet birds , when you sing to her , 
to yield some pity , woe her , 
Sweet flowers that she treads on , 
tell her ▪ her beauty deads' one . 
And if in life her love she nill agree me : 
Pray her before I die , she will come see me . 
S. E. D.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd Dorons lig . 

Through the shrubs as I can crack , 
for my Lambs pretty ones , 
amongst many little ones , 
Nymphs I mean , whose hair was black 
As the Crow . 
Like as the Snow 
Her face and brows shined I ween , 
I saw a little one , 
a bonny pretty one , 
As bright , buxom , and as sheen : 
As was she 
On her knee 
That lulled the God , whose arrows warms 
such merry little ones , 
such fair-faced pretty ones , 
As dally in Love's chiefest harms . 
Such was mine , 
Whose grey eyes 
Made me love : I 'gan to woo 
this sweet little one , 
this bonny pretty one . 
I wooed hard a day or two , 
Till she bade , 
Be not sad , 
Woo no more , I am thine own , 
thy dearest little one , 
thy truest pretty one . 
Thus was faith and firm love shown , 
As behoves 
Shepherds Loves . 
Ro. Greene.  

FINIS . 

¶ Astrophil his Song of Phillida and Coridon . 

Fair in a morn , ( o fairest morn ) 
was never morn so fair : 
There shone a Sun , though not the Sun , 
that shines in the air . 
For the earth , and from the earth , 
( was never such a creature : ) 
Did come this face , ( was never face , ) 
that carried such a feature . 
Upon a hill , ( o blessed hill , 
was never hill so blessed ) 
There stood a man , ( was never man 
for woman so distressed . ) 
This man beheld a heavenly view , 
which did such virtue give : 
As clears the blind , and helps the lame , 
and makes the dead man live . 
This man had hap , ( o happy man 
more happy none than he ; ) 
For he had hap to see the hap , 
that none had hap to see . 
This silly Swain , ( and silly Swains 
are men of meanest grace : ) 
Had yet the grace , ( o gracious guest ) 
to hap on such a face . 
He pity cried , and pity came , 
and pitied so his pain : 
As dying , would not let him die , 
but gave him life again . 
For joy whereof he made such mirth , 
as all the woods did ring : 
And Pan with all his Swains came forth , 
to hear the Shepherd sing . 
But such a Song sung never was , 
nor shall be sung again : 
Of Phillida the Shepherd's Queen , 
and Coridon the Swain . 
Fair Phillis is the Shepherd's Queen , 
( was never such a Queen as she , ) 
And Coridon her only Swain , 
( was never such a Swain as he . ) 
Fair Phillis hath the fairest face , 
that ever eye did yet behold : 
And Coridon the constants faith , 
that ever yet kept flock in fold . 
Sweet Phillis is the sweetest sweet , 
that ever yet the earth did yield : 
And Coridon the kindest Swain , 
that ever yet kept Lambs in field . 
Sweet Philomel is Phillis bird , 
though Coridon be he that caught her : 
And Coridon doth hear her sing , 
though Phillida be she that taught her . 
Poor Coridon doth keep the fields , 
though Phillida be she that owes them : 
And Phillida doth walk the Meads , 
though Coridon be he that mows them . 
The little Lambs are Phillis love , 
though Coridon is he that feeds them : 
The Gardens fair are Phillis ground , 
though Coridon be he that weeds them . 
Since than that Phillis only is , 
the only Shepherds only Queen : 
And Coridon the only Swain , 
that only hath her Shepherd been . 
Though Phillis keep her bower of state , 
shall Coridon consume away : 
no Shepherd no , work out the week , 
and Sunday shall be holiday . 
N. Breton . 

FINIS . 

¶ The passionate Shepherd's Song . 

ON a day , ( alack the day , ) 
Love whose month was ever May : 
Spied a blossom passing fair , 
Playing in the wanton air . 
Through the velvet leaves the wind , 
All unseen 'gan passage find : 
That the Shepherd ( sick to death , ) 
Wished himself the heaven's breath . 
Air ( quoth he ) thy cheeks may blow , 
Air , would I might triumph so . 
But alas , my hand hath sworn , 
Near to pluck thee from thy thorn . 
Vow ( alack ) for youth unmeete , 
Youth so apt to pluck a sweet . 
thou for whom jove would swear , 
juno but an Aethiope were , 
And deny himself for jove , 
Turning mortal for my Love.  
W. Shakespeare . 

FINIS . 

¶ The unknown Shepherd's complaint . 

MY Flocks feed not , my Ewes breed not , 
My Rams speed not , all is amiss : 
Love is denying , Faith is defying , 
Hearts renying , causer of this . 
All my merry jigs are quite forgot , 
All my Lady's love is lost God wot . 
Where her faith was firmly fixed in love , 
There a nay is placed without remove . 
One silly cross , wrought all my loss , 
OH frowning Fortune , cursed fickle Dame : 
For now I see , inconstancy 
more in women then in men remain . 
In black mourn I , all fears scorn I , 
Love hath forlorn me , living in thrall : 
Hart is bleeding , all help needing , 
OH cruel speeding , fraughted with gall . 
My Shepherd's pipe can sound no deal , 
My Wether's bell ring's doleful knell . 
My curtail dog that wont to have played , 
Plays not at all , but seems afraid . 
With sighs so deep , procures to weep , 
In howling-wise , to see my doleful plight : 
How sighs resound , through heartless ground , 
Like a thousand vanquished men in bloody fight . 
Clear Wells spring not , sweet birds sing not , 
Green plants bring not forth their die : 
Herds stand weeping , Flocks all sleeping , 
Nymphs back peeping fearfully . 
All our pleasure known to us poor Swains , 
All our merry meeting on the Plains . 
All our evening sports from us are fled , 
All our love is lost , for Love is dead . 
Farewell sweet Love , thy like ne'er was , 
For sweet content , the cause of all my moan : 
Poor Coridon must live alone , 
Other help for him , I see that there is none . 
Ignoto . 

FINIS . 

¶ Another of the same Shepherds . 

AS it fell upon a day , 
In the merry month of May , 
Sitting in a pleasant shade , 
Which a grove of Myrtles made . 
Beasts did leap , and birds did sing , 
Trees did grow , and plants did spring . 
Every thing did banish moan , 
Save the Nightingale alone . 
She poor bird , as all forlorn , 
Leaned her breast against a thorn , 
And there sung the doleful'st Ditty , 
That to hear it was great pity . 
Fie , fie , fie , now would she cry 
Teru , Teru , by and by . 
That to hear her so complain , 
Scarce I could from tears refrain . 
For her griefs so lively shown , 
Made me think upon mine own . 
Ah ( thought I ) thou mournest in vain , 
None takes pity on thy pain . 
Senseless trees , they cannot hear thee , 
Ruthless beasts , they will not cheer thee . 
King Pandion he is dead , 
All thy friends are leapt in Lead . 
All thy fellow birds do sing , 
Careless of thy sorrowing . 
Even so poor bird like thee , 
None alive will pity me . 
Ignoto . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's allusion of his own amorous infelicity , to the offence of Actaeon . 

Actaeon lost in middle of his sport 
Both shape and life , for looking but awry : 
Diana was afraid he would report 
What secrets he had seen in passing by . 
To tell but truth , the self same hurt have I : 
By viewing her for whom I daily die . 
I lose my wont shape , in that my mind 
Doth suffer wrack upon the stony rock 
Of her disdain , who contrary to kind 
Doth bear a breast more hard than any stock ; 
And former form of limbs is changed quite : 
By cares in love , and want of due delight . 
I lose my life , in that each secret thought , 
Which I conceive through wanton fond regard : 
Doth make me say , that life availeth naught , 
Where service cannot have a due reward . 
I dare not name the Nymph that works my smart , 
Though Love hath graven her name within my hart . 
Tho. Watson . 

FINIS . 

¶ Montanus Sonnet to his fair Phoebe . 

A Turtle sat upon a leavelesse tree , 
Mourning her absent fere , 
With sad and sorry cheer . 
About her wondering stood , 
The Citizens of wood . 
And whilst her plumes she rends , 
And for her Love laments : 
The stately trees complain them , 
The birds with sorrow pain them . 
Each one that doth her view , 
Her pains and sorrows rue . 
But were the sorrows known , 
That me hath overthrown : 
O how would Phoebe sigh , if she did look on me ? 
The lovesick Polypheme that could not see , 
Who on the barren shore , 
His fortunes did deplore : 
And melteth all in moan , 
For Galatea gone , 
And with his cries 
Afflicts both earth and skies , 
And to his woe betook , 
Doth break both pipe and hook . 
For whom complains the morn , 
For whom the Sea-nymphs mourn . 
Alas his pain is naught , 
For were my woe but thought : 
O how would Phoebe sigh , if she did look on me ? 
Beyond compare my pain , 
yet glad am I : 
If gentle Phoebe deign , 
to see her Montan die . 
Thom. Lodge . 

FINIS . 

¶ Phaebes Sonnet , a reply to Montanus passion . 

Down a down , 
Thus Phillis sung , 
By fancy once distressed : 
Who so by foolish Love are stung 
are worthily oppressed . 
And so sing I , with down a down , etc.  
When Love was first begot , 
And by the mother's will : 
Did fall to human lot ▪ 
His solace to fulfil . 
Devoide of all deceit , 
A chaste and holy fire : 
Did quicken man's conceit , 
And woman's breasts inspire . 
The Gods that saw the good , 
That mortals did approve : 
With kind and holy mood , 
began to talk of Love. 
Down a down , 
Thus Phillis sung 
By fancy once distressed , etc.  
But during this accord , 
A wonder strange to hear : 
Whilst Love in deed and word , 
Most faithful did appear ; 
False semblance came in place , 
By jealousy attended : 
And with a double face , 
Both love and fancy blended . 
Which made the Gods forsake , 
And men from fancy fly : 
And Maidens scorn a make , 
Forsooth and so will 1  
Down a down , 
Thus Phillis sung , 
By fancy once distressed : 
Who so by foolish Love are stung , 
Are worthily oppressed . 
And so sing I , with down a down , etc.  
Thom. Lodge . 

FINIS . 

¶ Coridon's supplications to Phillis . 

Sweet Phillis , if a silly Swain , 
may sue to thee for grace : 
See not thy loving Shepherd slain , 
with looking on thy face . 
But think what power thou hast got , 
upon my Flock and me : 
thou seest they now regard me not , 
but all do follow thee . 
And if I have so far presumed , 
with prying in thine eyes : 
Yet let not comfort be consumed , 
that in thy pity lies . 
But as thou art that Phillis fair , 
that Fortune favour gives : 
So let not Love die in despair , 
that in thy favour lives . 
The Deer do brouse upon the briar , 
the birds do pick the cherries : 
And will not Beauty grant Desire , 
one handful of her berries ? 
If it be so that thou hast sworn , 
that none shall look on thee : 
Yet let me know thou dost not scorn , 
to cast a look on me . 










That 〈◊〉 with Love's content 
〈◊〉 sworn the Shepherd's Queen . 
N. Bretan . 

FINIS . 

¶ Damaetas Madrigal in praise of his Daphnis . 

Tvne on my pipe the praises of my Love , 
Love fair and bright : 
Fill earth with sound , and airy heavens above , 
heaven's loves delight , 
with Daphnis praise . 
To pleasant Tempe Groves and Plains about , 
Plains Shepherds pride : 
Resounding Echoes of her praise ring out , 
ring far and wide 
my Daphnis praise . 
When I begin to sing , begin to sound , 
sounds loud and shrill : 
Do make each note unto the skies rebound , 
skies calm and still , 
with Daphnis praise . 
Her tresses are like wiers of beaten gold , 
Gold bright and sheen : 
Like Nysus golden hair that Scylla bold , 
Scill , o'erseen 
through Minos' love . 
Her eyes like shining Lamps in midst of night , 
Night dark and dead : 
Or as the Stars that give the Seamen light , 
Light for to lead 
their wand'ring Ships . 
Amid her cheeks the Rose and Lily strive , 
Lily , snow-white : 
When their contend doth make their colour thrive . 
Colour too bright 
for Shepherd's eyes . 
Her lips like Scarlet of the finest die , 
Scarlet blood-red : 
Teeth white as Snow , which on the hills doth lie , 
Hills overspread 
by Winter's force . 
Her skin as soft as is the finest silk , 
Silk soft and fine : 
Of colour like unto the whitest milk , 
Milk of the kine 
of Daphnis Heard . 
As swift of foot as is the pretty Roe , 
Roe swift of pace : 
When yelping Hounds pursue her to and from , 
Hounds fierce in chase , 
to reave her life . 
Cease tongue to tell of any more compares , 
Compares too rude : 
Daphnis deserts and beauty are too rare , 
then here conclude 
fair Daphnis praise . 
I Wootton . 

FINIS . 

¶ Dorons description of his fair Shepherdess Samela . 

Like to Diana in her Summer weed ▪ 
Gird with a Crimson robe of brightest die : 
goes fair Samela . 
Whiter then be the flocks that straggling feed , 
When washed by Arethusa , faint they lie , 
is fair Samela . 
As fair Aurora in her morning grey , 
Decked with the ruddy glister of her love : 
is fair Samela . 
Like lovely Thetis on a calmed day , 
When as her brightness Neptune's fancies move . 
shines fair Samela . 
Her tresses gold , her eyes like glassy streams , 
Her teeth are pearl , the breasts are juorie : 
of fair Samela , 
Her cheeks like Rose and Lily yield forth gleams , 
Her brows bright arches framed of Ebony , 
thus fair Samela 
passeth fair Venus in her brightest hue , 
And juno in the show of Majesty : 
for she 's Samela . 
Pallas in wit , all three if you well view , 
For beauty , wit , and matchless dignity , 
yield to Samela . 
Ro. Greene.  

FINIS . 

¶ Wodenfrides' Song in praise of Amargana . 

The Sun the season in each thing 
Revives new pleasures , the sweet Spring 
Hath put to flight the Winter keen : 
To glad our lovely Summer Queen . 
The paths where Amargana treads , 
With flowery tapestries Flora spreads . 
And Nature clothes the ground in green : 
To glad our lovely Summer Queen . 
The Groaves put on their rich array , 
With Hawthorne blooms embroidered gay , 
And sweet perfumed with Eglantine : 
To glad our lovely Summer Queen . 
The silent River stays his course , 
Whilst playing on the crystal source , 
The silver scaled fish are seen , 
To glad our lovely Summer Queen . 
The Woods at her fair sight rejoices , 
The little birds with their loud voices , 
In consort on the briers been , 
To glad our lovely Summer Queen . 
The fleecy Flocks do scud and skip , 
The wood-nimphs , Fawns , and Satyrs trip , 
And dance the Myrtle trees between : 
To glad our lovely Summer Queen . 
Great Pan ( our God ) for her dear sake , 
This feast and meeting bids us make , 
Of Shepherds , Lads , and Lasses sheen : 
To glad our lovely Shepherd's Queen . 
And every Swain his chance doth prove , 
To win fair Amarganaes' love , 
In sporting strifes quite void of spleen : 
To glad our lovely Summer Queen . 
All happiness let Heaven her lend , 
And all the Graces her attend . 
Thus bid me pray the Muses nine , 
Long live our lovely Summer Queen . 
W. H.  

FINIS . 

¶ Another of the same . 

Happy Shepherds sit and see , 
with joy , 
The peerless wight : 
For whose sake Pan keeps from ye 
annoy , 
And gives delight . 
Blessing this pleasant Spring , 
Her praises must I sing . 
List you Swains , list to me : 
The whiles your Flocks feeding be . 
First her brow a beauteous Globe , 
I deem , 
And golden hair ; 
And her cheek Aurora's robe , 
doth seem , 
But far more fair . 
Her eyes like stars are bright . 
And dazzle with their light , 
Rubies her lips to see , 
But to taste , Nectar they be . 
Orient pearls her teeth , her smile 
doth link 
the Graces three : 
Her white neck doth eyes beguile 
to think 
it juorie . 
Alas her Lilly-hand , 
How it doth me command ? 
Softer silk none can be : 
And whiter milk none can see . 
Circe's wand is not so straight , 
as is 
Her body small : 
But two pillars bear the weight 
of this 
majestic Hall. 
Those be I you assure , 
Of Alabaster pure , 
Polished fine in each part : 
Never Nature yet showed like Art  
How shall I her pretty tread 
express 
when she doth walk ? 
Scarce she doth the Primrose head 
depress , 
or tender stalk 
Of blue-veined Violets , 
Whereon her foot she sets . 
Virtuous she is , for we find 
In body fair , beauteous mind . 
Live fair Amargana still 
extolled 
In all my rhyme : 
Hand want Art , when I want will 
t' unfold 
her worth divine . 
But now my Muse doth rest , 
Despair closed in my breast , 
Of the valour I sing : 
Weak faith that no hope doth bring . 
W. H.  

FINIS . 

¶ An excellent Pastoral Ditty . 

A Careful Nymph , with careless grief oppressed , 
under the shadow of an Ashen tree : 
With Lute in hand did paint out her unrest , 
unto a Nymph that bore her company . 
no sooner had she tuned every string : 
But sobbed and sighed , and thus began to sing . 
Ladies and Nymphs , come listen to my plaint , 
on whom the cheerful Sun did never rise : 
If pities strokes your tender breasts may taint , 
come learn of me to wet your wanton eyes . 
For Love in vain the name of pleasure bears : 
His sweet delights are turned into fears . 
The trustless shows , the frights , the feeble joys , 
the freezing doubts , the guileful promises : 
The feigned looks , the shifts , the subtle toys , 
the brittle hope , the steadfast heaviness . 
The wished war in such uncertain peace : 
These with my woe , my woes with these increase . 
thou dreadful God , that in thy Mother's lap , 
dost lie and hear the cry of my complaint , 
And seest , and smilest at my sore mishap , 
that lack but skill my sorrows here to paint : 
Thy fire from heaven before the hurt I spied , 
Quite through mine eyes into my breast did glide . 
My life was light , my blood did spirit and spring , 
my body quick , my hart began to leap : 
And every thorny thought did prick and sting , 
the fruit of my desired joys to reap . 
But he on whom to think , my soul still tears : 
In bale forsook , and left me in the briers . 
Thus Fancy strung my Lute to Lays of Love , 
and Love hath rocked my weary Muse asleep : 
And sleep is broken by the pains I prove , 
and every pain I feel doth force me weep . 
then farewell fancy , love , sleep , pain , and sore : 
And farewell weeping , I can wail no more . 
Shep. Tony . 

FINIS . 

¶ Phillidaes' Love-call to her Coridon , and his replying . 

Phil.   Coridon , arise my Coridon , 
Titan shines clear : 


Cor.   Who is it that calleth Coridon , 
who is it that I hear ? 


Phil.   Phillida thy true-love calleth thee , 
arise then , arise then ; 
arise and keep thy flock with me : 


Cor.   Phillida my true-love , is it she ? 
I come then , I come then , 
I come and keep my flock with thee . 


Phil.   here are cherries ripe my Coridon , 
eat them for my sake : 


Cor.   here 's my Oaten pipe my lovely one , 
sport for thee to make . 


Phil.   here are threads my true-love , fine as silk , 
to knit thee , to knit thee 
a pair of stockings white as milk . 


Cor.   here are Reeds my true-love , fine and neat , 
to make thee , to make thee 
a Bonnet to withstand the heat . 


Phil.   I will gather flowers my Coridon , 
to set in thy cap : 


Cor.   I will gather Pears my lovely one , 
to put in thy lap . 


Phil.   I will buy my true-love Garters gay , 
for Sundays , for Sundays , 
to wear about his legs so tall : 


Cor.   I will buy my true-love yellow Say , 
for Sundays , for Sundays , 
to wear about her middle small . 


Phil.   When my Coridon sits on a hill , 
making melody : 


Cor.   When my lovely one goes to her wheel 
singing cherilie . 


Phil.   Sure me thinks my true-love doth excel 
for sweetness , for sweetness , 
our Pan that old Arcadian Knight : 


Cor.   And me thinks my true-love bears the bell 
for clearness , for clearness , 
beyond the Nymphs that be so bright . 


Phil.   Had my Coridon , my Coridon , 
been ( alack ) my Swain : 


Cor.   Had my lovely one , my lovely one , 
been in Ida plain . 


Phil.   Cynthia Endymion had refused , 
preferring , preferring 
my Coridon to play withal : 


Cor.   The Queen of Love had been excused , 
bequeathing , bequeathing , 
my Phillida the golden ball . 


Phil.   Yonder comes my Mother , Coridon , 
whether shall I fly ? 


Cor.   Under yonder Beech my lovely one , 
while she passeth by . 
Say to her thy true-love was not here , 
remember , remember , 
to morrow is another day : 


Phil.   Doubt me not , my true-love , do not fear , 
farewell then , farewell then , 
heaven keep our loves always . 


Ignoto . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's solace . 

Phaebus' delights to view his Laurel tree , 
The Poplar pleaseth Hercules alone : 
Melissa mother is and fautrixe to the Bee , 
Pallas will wear the Olive branch alone . 
Of Shepherds and their flocks Pales is Queen : 
And Ceres ripes the Corn was lately green . 
To Chloris every flower belongs of right , 
The Dryad Nymphs of woods make chief account : 
Oreades in hills have their delight , 
Diana doth protect each bubbling Fount . 
To Hebe lovely kissing is assigned : 
To Zephir every gentle-breathing wind . 
But what is Love's delight ? To hurt each where 
He cares not whom , with Darts of deep desire : 
With watchful jealousy , with hope , with fear , 
With nipping cold , and secret flames of fire . 
OH happy hour , wherein I did forgo : 
This little God , so great a cause of woe . 
Tho. Watson . 

FINIS . 

¶ Syrenus Song to Eugerius . 

Let now the goodly Springtide make us merry , 
And fields , which pleasant flowers do adorn : 
And Vales , Meads , Woods , with lively colours flourish , 
Let plenteous flocks the Shepherd's riches nourish , 
Let hungry Wolves by dogs to death be torn , 
And Lambs rejoice , with passed Winter weary . 
Let every River's Ferry . 
In waters flow , and silver streams abounding , 
And fortune , ceaseless wounding . 
Turn now thy face , so cruel and unstable , 
Be firm and favourable . 
And thou that killest our souls with thy pretences : 
Molest not ( wicked Love ) my inward senses . 
Let Country plainness live in joys not ended , 
In quiet of the desert Meades and mountains , 
And in the pleasure of a Country dwelling 
Let Shepherd's rest , that have distilled fountains 
Of tears : prove not thy wrath , all pains excelling , 
Upon poor souls , that never have offended . 
Let thy flames be incended 
In haughty Courts , in those that swim in treasure , 
And live in case and pleasure . 
And that a sweetest scorn ( my wont sadness ) 
A perfect rest and gladness 
And hills and Dales , may give me : with offences 
Molest not ( wicked Love ) my inward senses . 
In what law findest thou , that the freest reason 
And wit , unto thy chains should be subjected , 
And harmless souls unto thy cruel murder ? 
OH wicked Love , the wretch that flieth further 
From thy extremes , thou plagu'st . OH false , suspected , 
And careless boy , that thus thy sweets dost season , 
OH vile and wicked treason . 
Might not thy might suffice thee , but thy fuel 
Of force must be so cruel ? 
To be a Lord , yet like a Tyrant minded , 
Vain boy with error blinded . 
Why dost thou hurt his life with thy offences : 
That yields to thee his soul and inward senses ? 
He errs ( alas ) and foully is deceived 
That calls thee God , being a burning fire : 
A furious flame , a playning grief and clamorous , 
And Venus son ( that in the earth was amorous , 
Gentle , and mild , and full of sweet desire ) 
Who calleth him , is of his wits bereaved . 
And yet that she conceived 
By proof , so vile a son and so unruly : 
I say ( and yet say truly ) 
That in the cause of harms , that they have framed , 
Both justly may be blamed : 
She that did breed him with such vile pretences , 
He that doth hurt so much our inward senses . 
The gentle Sheep and Lambs are ever flying 
The ravenous Wolves and beasts , that are pretending 
To glut their maws with flesh they tear asunder . 
The milk-white Doves at noise of fearful thunder 
Fly home amain , themselves from harm defending . 
The little Chick , when Puttocks are a crying , 
The Woods and Meadows dying 
For rain of heaven ( if that they cannot have it ) 
Do never cease to crave it . 
So every thing his contrary resisteth , 
Only thy thrall persisteth 
In suffering of thy wrongs without offences : 
And let's thee spoil his hart and inward senses . 
A public passion , Nature's laws restraining , 
And which with words can never be declared , 
A soul 'twixt love , and fear , and desperation , 
And endless plaint , that shuns all consolation , 
A spendlesse flame , that never is impaired , 
A friendless death , yet life in death maintaining , 
A passion , that is gaining 
On him that loveth well , and is absented , 
Whereby it is augmented . 
A jealousy , a burning grief and sorrow , 
These favours Lovers borrow 
Of thee fell Love , these be thy recompenses : 
Consuming still their soul and inward senses . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd Arsileus reply to Syrenus Song . 

OH Let that time a thousand months endure , 
Which brings from heaven the sweet and silver showers , 
And joys the earth ( of comfort late deprived ) 
With grass and leaves , fine buds , and painted flowers . 
Echo , return unto the woods obscure . 
Ring forth the Shepherd's Songs in love contrived . 
Let old loves be revived , 
Which angry Winter buried but of late , 
And that in such a state 
My soul may have the full accomplishment 
Of joy and sweet content . 
And since fierce pains and griefs thou dost control : 
Good Love , do not forsake my inward soul . 
Presume not ( Shepherds ) once to make you merry , 
With springs , and flowers , or any pleasant Song , 
( Unless mild Love possess your amorous breasts ) 
If you sing not to him , your Songs do weary , 
Crown him with flowers , or else ye do him wrong , 
And consecrate your Springs to his behests . 
I to my Shepherdess 
My happy loves with great content do sing . 
And flowers to her do bring . 
And sitting near her by the River side , 
Enjoy the brave Springtide . 
Since than thy joys such sweetness doth enroll : 
Good Love , do not forsake my inward soul . 
The wise ( in ancient time ) a God thee named , 
Seeing that with thy power and supreme might , 
thou didst such rare and mighty wonders make : 
For thee a hart is frozen and inflamed , 
A fool thou mak'st a wise man with thy light , 
The coward turns courageous for thy sake . 
The mighty Gods did quake 
At thy command : To birds and beasts tranformed , 
Great monarchs have not scorned 
To yield unto the force of beauty's lure : 
Such spoils thou dost procure 
With thy brave force , which never may be told : 
With which ( sweet Love ) thou conquer'st every soul . 
In other times obscurely I did live 
But with a drowsy , base , and simple kind 
Of life , and only to my profit bend me : 
To think of Love myself I did not give , 
Or for good grace , good parts ; and gentle mind , 
Never did any Shepherdess commend me . 
But crowned now they send me 
A thousand Garlands , that I won with praise , 
In wrestling days by days , 
In pitching of the bar with arm most strong , 
And singing many a Song . 
After that thou didst honour , and take hold 
Of my ( sweet Love ) and of my happy soul . 
What greater joy can any man desire , 
then to remain a Captive unto Love : 
And have his hart subjected to his power ? 
And though sometimes he taste a little sour 
By suffering it , as mild as gentle Dove 
Yet must he be , in lieu of that great hire 
Whereto he doth aspire : 
If Lovers live afflicted and in pain , 
Let them with cause complain 
Of cruel fortune , and of times abuse , 
And let not them accuse 
Thee ( gentle-love ) that doth with bliss enfold 
Within thy sweetest joys each living soul . 
Behold a fair sweet face , and shining eyes , 
Resembling two most bringht and twinkling stars , 
Sending unto the soul a perfect light : 
Behold the rare perfections of those white 
And juorie hands , from griefs most surest bars 
That mind wherein all life and glory lies , 
That joy that never dies , 
That he doth feel , that loves and is beloved , 
And my delights approved , 
To see her pleased , whose love maintains me here , 
All those I count so dear , 
That though sometimes Love doth my joy's control : 
Yet am I glad he dwells within my soul . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ A Shepherd's dream . 

A Silly Shepherd lately sat 
among a flock of Sheep : 
Where musing long on this and that , 
at last he fell a sleep . 
And in the slumber as he lay , 
he gave a piteous groan : 
He thought his sheep were run away , 
and he was left alone . 
He whoopt , he whistled , and he called , 
but not a sheep came near him : 
Which made the Shepherd sore appalled , 
to see that none would hear him . 
But as the Swain amazed stood , 
in this most solemn vain : 
Came Phillida forth of the wood , 
and stood before the Swain . 
Whom when the Shepherd did behold , 
he straight began to weep : 
And at the hart he grew a cold , 
to think upon his sheep . 
For well he knew , where came the Queen , 
the Shepherd durst not stay : 
And where that he durst not be seen , 
the sheep must needs away . 
To ask her if she saw his flock , 
might happen patience move : 
And have an answer with a mock , 
that such demaunders prove . 
Yet for because he saw her come 
alone out of the wood : 
He thought he would not stand as dumb , 
when speech might do him good . 
And therefore falling on his knees , 
to ask but for his sheep : 
He did awake , and so did lose 
the honour of his sleep . 
N. Breton . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's Ode . 

Night's were short , and days were long , 
Blossoms on the Hawthorne hung , 
Philomel ( Night-musiques King , ) 
Told the coming of the Spring : 
Whose sweete-siluer-sounding-voyce , 
Made the little birds rejoice , 
Skipping light from spray to spray , 
Till Aurora showed the day . 
Scarce might one see , when I might see 
( For such chances sudden be . ) 
By a Well of Marble-stone , 
A Shepherd lying all alone . 
Weep he did , and his weeping 
Made the fading flowers spring . 
Daphnis was his name I ween , 
Youngest Swain of Summer's Queen . 
When Aurora saw 't was he 
Weep she did for company : 
Weep she did for her sweet Son , 
That ( when antique Troy was won ) 
Suffered death by luckless Fate , 
Whom she now laments too late : 
And each morning ( by Cock's crew ) 
Showers down her silver dew , 
Whose tears falling from their spring , 
Give moisture to each living thing 
That on earth increase and grow , 
Through power of their friendly foe . 
Whose effect when Flora felt , 
Tears , that did her bosom melt , 
( For who can resist tears often , 
But she whom no tears can soften ? ) 
Peering straight above the banks , 
Showed herself to give her thanks . 
Wondering thus at Nature's work 
( Wherein many marvels lurk ) 
Me thought I heard a doleful noise , 
Consorted with a mournful voice , 
Drawing near , to hear more plain , 
Hear I did , unto my pain , 
( For who is not pained to hear 
Him in grief whom hart holds dear ? ) 
Silly Swain with grief o'ergone 
Thus to make his piteous moan . 
Love I did , alas the while , 
Love I did , but did beguile 
My dear Love with loving so , 
Whom as then I did not know . 
Love I did the fairest boy 
That these fields did ere enjoy . 
Love I did fair Ganymede , 
Venus' darling , beauty's bed : 
Him I thought the fairest creature , 
Him the quintessence of Nature . 
But yet ( alas ) I was deceived , 
( Love of reason is bereaved . ) 
For since then I saw a Lass , 
Lass that did in beauty pass , 
Pass fair Ganymede as far 
As Phoebus doth the smallest star . 
Love's commanded me to love , 
Fancy bade me not remove 
My affection from the Swain 
Whom I never could obtain : 
( For who can obtain that favour 
Which he cannot grant the craver ? ) 
Love at last ( though loath ) prevailed , 
Love that so my hart assailed , 
Wounding me with her fair eyes 
Ah how Love can subtillize ? 
And devose a thousand shifts 
How to work men to his drifts . 
Her it is , for whom I mourn , 
Hircius , for whom my life I scorn . 
Her , for whom I weep all day , 
Her , for whom I sigh , and say 
Either she , or else no creature 
Shall enjoy my love : whose feature 
Though I never can obtain , 
Yet shall my true-love remain : 
Till ( my body turned to clay ) 
My poor soul must pass away , 
To the heavens ; where I hope 
It shall find a resting scope . 
then since I loved thee alone , 
Remember me when I am gone . 
Scarce had he these last words spoken , 
But me thought his hart was broken , 
With great grief that did abound , 
( Cares and grief the hart confound . ) 
In whose hart thus rived in three , 
Eliza written I might see 
In Characters of crimson blood , 
Whose meaning well I understood . 
Which , for my hart might not behold : 
I hied me home my Sheep to fold . 
Rich. Barnefielde . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's commendation of his Nimph.  

What Shepherd can express 
The favour of her face ? 
To whom in this distress 
I do appeal for grace . 
A thousand Cupids fly 
About her gentle eye . 
From which each throws a dart , 
That kindleth soft sweet fire 
Within my sighing hart , 
Possessed by desire . 
Nosweeter life I try 
then in her love to die . 
The Lily in the field , 
That glories in his white : 
For porenes now must yield 
And render up his right . 
Heaven pictured in her face , 
Doth promise joy and grace . 
Fair Cinthiaes' silver light , 
That beats on running streams : 
Compares not with her white , 
Whose hairs are all Sunbeams . 
So bright my Nymph doth shine 
As day unto my eyes . 
With this there is a red , 
Exceeds the Damaske-rose : 
Which in her cheeks is spread , 
Whence every favour grows . 
In Sky there is no star , 
But she surmounts it far . 
When Phoebus from the bed 
Of Thetis doth arise : 
The morning blushing red , 
In fair Carnation wise : 
He shows in my Nymph's face , 
As Queen of every grace . 
This pleasant Lily white , 
This taint of Roseate red : 
This Cinthiaes' silver light , 
This sweet fair Dea spread , 
These Sunbeams in mine eye , 
These beauties make me die . 
Earl of Oxenford . 

FINIS . 

¶ Coridon to his Phillis . 

Alas my hart , mine eye hath wronged thee , 
Presumptuous eye , to gaze on Phillis face : 
Whose heavenly eye no mortal man may see , 
But he must die , or purchase Phillis grace . 
Poor Coridon , the Nymph whose eye doth move thee : 
Doth love to draw , but is not drawn to love thee . 
Her beauty , Nature's pride , and Shepherd's praise , 
Her eye , the heavenly Planet of my life : 
Her matchless wit and grace , her fame displays , 
As if that love had made her for his wife . 
Only her eyes shoot fiery darts to kill : 
Yet is her hart as cold as Caucase hill . 
My wings too weak to fly against the Sun , 
Mine eyes unable to sustain her light : 
My hart doth yield that I am quite undone , 
Thus hath fair Phillis slain me with her sight . 
My bud is blasted , withered is my leaf : 
And all my corn is rotten in the sheaf . 
Phillis , the golden fetter of my mind , 
My fancy's Idol , and my vital power : 
Goddess of Nymphs , and honour of thy kind , 
This age's Phoenix , beauty's richest bower . 
Poor Coridon for love of thee must die : 
Thy beauty's thrall , and conquest of thine eye . 
Leave Coridon to plough the barren field , 
Thy buds of hope are blasted with disgrace : 
For Phillis looks no hearty love do yield , 
Nor can she love , for all her lovely face . 
Die Coridon , the spoil of Phillis eye : 
She cannot love , and therefore thou must die . 
S. E. Dyer . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's description of Love.  

Melibeus .  Shepherd , what 's Love , I pray thee tell ? 


Faustus .  It is that Fountain , and that Well , 
Where pleasure and repentance dwell . 
It is perhaps that sauncing bell , 
That toules all into heaven or hell , 
And this is Love as I heard tell . 


Meli.   Yet what is Love , I prithee say ? 


Fau.   It is a work on holiday , 
It is December matched with May , 
When lustie-bloods in fresh array , 
Hear ten months after of the play , 
And this is Love , as I hear say . 


Meli.   Yet what is Love , good Shepherd sane ? 


Fau.   It is a Sunshine mixed with rain , 
It is a toothache , or like pain , 
It is a game where none doth gain , 
The Lass saith no , and would full feign : 
And this is Love , as I hear sane . 


Meli.   Yet Shepherd , what is Love , I pray ? 


Fau.   It is a yea , it is a nay , 
A pretty kind of sporting fray , 
It is a thing will soon away , 
then Nymphs take vantage while ye may : 
And this is love as I hear say . 


Meli.   Yet what is love , good Shepherd show ? 


Fau.   A thing that creeps , it cannot go , 
A prize that passeth too and from , 
A thing for one , a thing for more , 
And he that proves shall find it so ; 
And Shepherd this is love I trow . 


Ignoto . 

FINIS . 

¶ To his Flocks . 

Feed on my Flocks securely , 
Your Shepherd watcheth surely , 
Run about my little Lambs , 
Skip and wanton with your Dams , 
Your loving Herd with care will tend ye : 
Sport on fair flocks at pleasure , 
Nip Vesta's flowering treasure , 
I myself will duly hark , 
When my watchful dog doth bark , 
From Wolf and Fox I will defend ye . 
H. C.  

FINIS . 

¶ A Roundelay between two Shepherds . 

1.  Shep.   Tell me thou gentle Shepherd's Swain , 
who 's yonder in the Vale is set ? 


2.  Shep.   O it is she , whose sweets do stain , 
The Lily , Rose , the Violet . 


1.  Shep.   Why doth the Sun against his kind , 
Fix his bright Chariot in the skies ? 


2.  Shep.   Because the Sun is strooken blind , 
With looking on her heavenly eyes . 


1.  Shep.   Why do thy flocks forbear their food , 
Which sometime were thy chief delight ? 


2.  Shep.   Because they need no other good , 
That live in presence of her sight . 


1.  Shep.   Why look these flowers so pale and ill , 
That once attired this goodly Heath ? 


2.  Shep.   She hath robbed Nature of her skill , 
And sweetens all things with her breath . 


1.  Shep.   Why slide these brooks so slow away , 
Whose bubbling murmur pleased thine ear ? 


2.  Shep.   O marvel not although they stay , 
When they her heavenly voice do hear . 


1.  Shep.   From whence come all these Shepherd's Swains , 
And lovely Nymphs attired in green ? 


2.  Shep.   From gathering Garlands on the Plains , 
To crown our fair the Shepherd's Queen . 


Both.   The Sun that lights this world below . 
Flocks . flowers , and brooks will witness bear : 
These Nymphs and Shepherds all do know , 
That it is she is only fair . 


Mich. Drayton . 

FINIS . 

¶ The solitary Shepherd's Song . 

OH Shady Vales , o fair enriched Meads , 
OH sacred woods , sweet fields , and rising mountains : 
OH painted flowers , green herbs where Flora treads , 
Refreshed by wanton winds and watery fountains . 
OH all you winged Queristers of wood , 
that perched aloft , your former pains report : 
And straight again recount with pleasant mood , 
your present joys in sweet and seemly sort . 
OH all you creatures whosoever thrive 
on mother earth , in Seas , by air , by fire : 
more blessed are you then I here under Sun , 
love dies in me , when as he doth revive 
In you , I perish under beauty's ire , 
where after storms , winds , frosts , your life is won . 
Thom. Lodge . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's resolution in love . 

IF love himself be subject unto Love , 
And range the woods to find a mortal prey , 
If Neptune from the Seas himself remove , 
And seek on sands with earthly wights to play : 
then may I love my Shepherdess by right ; 
Who far excels each other mortal wight ? 
If Pluto could by Love be drawn from hell , 
To yield himself a silly virgin's thrall . 
If Phoebus could vouchsafe on earth to dwell , 
To win a rustic Maid unto his call : 
then how much more should I adore the sight , 
Of her in whom the heavens themselves delight ? 
If Country Pan might follow Nymphs in chase , 
And yet through love remain devoide of blame , 
If Satyrs were excused for seeking grace , 
To joy the fruits of any mortal Dame : 
My Shepherdess , why should not I love still 
On whom nor Gods nor men can gaze their fill ? 
Tho. Watson . 

FINIS . 

¶ Coridon's Hymn in praise of Amarillis . 

Would mine eyes were crystal Fountains , 
Where you might the shadow view 
Of my griefs , like to these mountains 
Swelling for the loss of you . 
Cares which cureless are alas , 
Helpless , hapless for they grow : 
Cares like tares in number pass , 
All the seeds that love doth sow . 
Who but could remember all 
Twinkling eyes still representing ? 
Stars which pierce me to the gall , 
'Cause they lend no more contenting . 
And you Nectar-lips , alluring 
Human sense to taste of heaven : 
For no Art of man's manuring , 
Finer silk hath ever weaven . 
Who but could remember this , 
The sweet odours of your favour ? 
When I smelled I was in bliss , 
Never felt I sweeter savour . 
And your harmless hart anointed , 
As the custom was of Kings : 
Shows your sacred soul apppointed , 
To be prime of earthly things . 
Ending thus remember all , 
Clothed in a mantle green : 
't is enough I am your thrall , 
Leave to think what eye hath seen . 
Yet the eye may not so leave , 
Though the thought do still repine : 
But must gaze till death bequeath , 
Eyes and thoughts unto her shrine . 
Which if Amarillis chance , 
Hearing to make haste to see : 
To life death she may advance . 
Therefore eyes and thoughts go free . 
T. B.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd Carillo his Song . 

Guarda mi las Vaccas 
Carillo , por tu fe , 
Besa mi Primero , 
Yo te las guardare . 
Ipre-thee keep my kine for me 
Carillo , wilt thou ? Tell. 
First let me have a kiss of thee , 
And I will keep them well . 
If to my charge or them to keep , 
thou dost commend thy kine or Sheep , 
For thee I do suffice : 
Because in this I have been bred , 
But for so much as I have fed 
By viewing thee , mine eyes ; 
Command not me to keep thy beast : 
Because myself I can keep least . 
How can I keep , I prithee tell , 
Thy Kie , myself that cannot well 
defend , nor please thy kind 
As long as I have served thee ? 
But if thou wilt give unto me 
a kiss to please my mind : 
I ask no more for all my pain , 
And I will keep them very fain . 
For thee , the gift is not so great 
That I do ask , to keep thy Neat , 
but unto me it is 
A guerdon , that shall make me live . 
Disdain not then to lend , or give 
so small a gift as this . 
But if to it thou canst not frame : 
then give me leave to take the same . 
But if thou dost ( my sweet ) deny 
To recompense me by and by , 
thy promise shall relent me : 
Hereafter some reward to find , 
Behold how I do please my mind , 
and favours do content me , 
That though thou speakest it but in jest : 
I mean to take it at the best . 
Behold how much love works in me ; 
And how ill recompensed of thee 
that with the shadow of 
Thy happy favours ( though delayed ) 
I think myself right well apayed , 
although they prove a scoff . 
then pity me , that have forgot : 
Myself for thee , that carest not . 
OH in extreme thou art most fair , 
And in extreme unjust despair 
thy cruelty maintains : 
OH that thou wert so pitiful 
Unto these torments that do pull 
my soul with senseless pains , 
As thou show'st in that face of thine : 
Where pity and mild grace should shine . 
If that thy fair and sweetest face 
Assureth me both peace and grace , 
thy hard and cruel hart : 
Which in that white breast thou dost bear , 
Doth make me tremble yet for fear 
thou wilt not end my smart . 
In contraries of such a kind : 
Tell me what succour shall I 〈◊〉 ? 
If then young Shepherdess thou crave 
A Herdsman for thy beast to have , 
with grace thou mayst restore 
Thy Shepherd from his barren love , 
For never other shalt thou prove , 
that seeks to please thee more : 
And who to serve thy turn , will never eat , 
The nipping frost , and beams of parching Sun.  
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Corins dream of his fair Chloris . 

What time bright Titan in the Zenith sat , 
And equally the fixed poles did heat : 
When to my flock my daily woes I chat , 
And underneath a broad Beech took my seat . 
The dreaming God which Morpheus Poets call 
Augmenting fuel to my Aetna's fire , 
With sleep possessing my weak senses all , 
In apparitions makes my hopes aspire . 
Me thought I saw the Nymph I would embrace , 
With arms abroad coming to me for help : 
A lust-led Satire having her in chase , 
Which after her about the fields did yelp . 
I seeing my Love in such perplexed plight , 
A sturdy bat from off an Oak I reft : 
And with the Ravisher continued fight , 
Till breathless I upon the earth him left . 
then when my coy Nymph saw her breathless foe , 
With kisses kind she gratifies my pain : 
Protesting rigour never more to show , 
Happy was I this good hap to obtain . 
But drowsy slumbers flying to their Cell , 
My sudden joy converted was to bale : 
My wont sorrows still with me do dwell , 
I looked round about on hill and Dale : 
But I could neither my fair Chloris view , 
Nor yet the Satire which erewhile I slew . 
W. S.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd Damon's passion . 

AH trees , why fall your leaves so fast ? 
Ah Rocks , where are your robes of moss ? 
Ah Flocks , why stand you all aghast ? 
Trees , Rocks , and Flocks , what , are ye pensive for my loss ? 
The birds me thinks tune naught but moan , 
The winds breathe naught but bitter plaint : 
The beasts forsake their dens to groan , 
Birds , winds , and beasts , what , doth my loss your powers attaint ? 
Floods weep their springs above their bounds , 
And Echo wails to see my woe : 
The robe of ruth doth cloth the grounds , 
Floods , Echo , grounds , why do ye all these tears bestow ? 
The trees , the Rocks and Flocks reply , 
The birds , the winds , the beasts report : 
Floods , Echo , grounds for sorrow cry , 
We grieve since Phillis nill kind Damon's love consort . 
Thom. Lodge . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd Musidorus his complaint . 

Come Shepherds weeds , become your Master's mind , 
Yield outward show , what inward change he tries : 
Nor be abashed , since such a guest you find , 
Whose strongest hope in your weak comfort lies . 
Come Shepherds weeds , attend my woeful cries , 
Disuse yourselves from sweet Menalcas voice : 
For other be those tunes which sorrow ties , 
From those clear notes which freely may rejoice . 
then pour out plaints , and in one word say this : 
Helpless his plaint , who spoils himself of bliss . 
S. Phil. Sidney . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's brawl , one half answering the other . 

1.   WE love , and have our loves rewarded ? 


2.   We love , and are no whit regarded . 


1.   We find most sweet affections snare : 


2.   That sweet but sour dispairefull care . 


1.   Who can despair , whom hope doth bear ? 


2.   And who can hope , that feels despair ? 


All.   As without breath no pipe doth move : 
no Music kindly without love . 


S. Phil. Sidney . 

FINIS . 

¶ Dorus his comparisons . 

MY Sheep are thoughts , which I both guide and serve , 
Their pasture is fair hills of fruitless love : 
On barren sweets they feed , and feeding starve , 
I wail their lot , but will not other prove . 
My sheephook is won hope , which all upholds : 
My weeds , desires , cut out in endless folds . 
What wool my Sheep shall bear , while thus they live : 
In you it is , you must the judgement give . 
S. Phil. Sidney . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd Faustus his Song . 

A fair Maid wed to prying jealousy , 
One of the fairest as ever I did see : 
If that thou wilt a secret Lover take , 
( Sweet life ) do not my secret love forsake . 
Eclipsed was our Sun , 
And fair Aurora darkened to us quite , 
Our morning star was done , 
And Shepherd's star lost clean out of our sight , 
When that thou didst thy faith in wedlock plight . 
Dame Nature made thee fair , 
And ill did careless Fortune marry thee , 
And pity with despair 
It was , that this thy hapless hap should be , 
A fair Maid wed to prying jealousy . 
Our eyes are not so bold 
To view the Sun , that fly with radiant wing : 
Unless that we do hold 
A glass before them , or some other thing . 
then wisely this to pass did Fortune bring 
To cover thee with such a veil : 
For heretofore , when any viewed thee , 
Thy sight made his to fail , 
For ( sooth ) thou art : thy beauty telleth me , 
One of the fairest as ever I did see . 
Thy graces to obscure , 
With such a froward husband , and so base 
She meant thereby most sure 
That Cupid's force , and love thou shouldst embrace , 
For 't is a force to love , no wondrous case . 
then care no more for kin , 
And doubt no more , for fear thou must forsake , 
To love thou must begin , 
And from henceforth this question never make , 
If that thou shouldst a secret Lover take ? 
Of force it doth behoove 
That thou shouldst be beloved , and that again 
( Fair Mistress ) thou shouldst love , 
For to what end , what purpose , and what gain , 
Should such perfections serve ? as now in vain 
My love is of such art , 
That ( of itself ) it well deserves to take 
In thy sweet love a part : 
then for no Shepherd , that his love doth make , 
( Sweet life ) do not my secret love forsake . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Another of the same , by Firmius the Shepherd . 

IF that the gentle wind 
doth move the leaves with pleasant sound , 
If that the Kid behind 
Is left , that cannot find 
her dam , runs bleating up and down : 
The Bagpipe , Reed , or Flute , 
only with air if that they touched be , 
With pity all salute , 
And full of love do brute 
thy name , and sound Diana , seeing thee : 
A fair Maid wed to prying jealousy . 
The fierce and savage beasts 
( beyond their kind and nature yet ) 
With piteous voice and breast , 
In mountains without rest 
the self same Song do not forget . 
If that they stayed at ( Fair ) 
and had not passed to prying jealousy : 
With plaints of such despair 
As moved the gentle air 
to tears : The Song that they did sing , should be 
One of the fairest as ever I did see . 
Mishap , and fortunes play , 
ill did they place in Beauty's breast : 
For since so much to say , 
There was of beauty's sway , 
they had done well to leave the rest . 
They had enough to do , 
if in her praise their wits they did awake : 
But yet so must they too , 
And all thy love that woe , 
thee not too coy , nor too too proud to make , 
If that thou wilt a secret Lover take . 
For if thou hadst but known 
the beauty , that they here do touch , 
thou woul'dst then love alone 
Thyself , nor any one , 
only thyself accounting much . 
But if thou dost conceive 
this beauty , that I will not public make , 
And meanest not to bereave 
The world of it , but leave 
the same to some ( which never peer did take , ) 
( Sweet life ) do not my secret love forsake . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Damelus Song to his Diaphenia . 

Diaphenia like the Daffadown-dillie , 
White as the Sun , fair as the Lily , 
heigh ho , how I do love thee ? 
I do love thee as my Lambs 
Are beloved of their Dams , 
how blessed were I if thou wouldst prove me ? 
Diaphenia like the spreading Roses , 
That in thy sweets all sweets encloses , 
fair sweet how I do love thee ? 
I do love thee as each flower , 
loves the Sun's lifegiving power . 
for dead , thy breath to life might move me . 
Diaphenia like to all things blessed , 
When all thy praises are expressed , 
dear joy , how I do love thee ? 
As the birds do love the Spring : 
Or the Bees their careful King , 
then in requite , sweet Virgin love me 
H. C.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd Eurymachus to his fair Shepherdess Mirimida . 

When Flora proud in pomp of all her flowers 
sat bright and gay : 
And gloried in the dew of Iris showers , 
and did display 
Her mantle chequered all with gaudy green , 
then I 
alone 
A mournful man in Ericine was seen . 
With folded arms I trampled through the grass , 
Tracing as he 
That held the throne of Fortune brittle glass , 
And love to be 
Like Fortune fleeting , as the restless wind 
Mixed 
with mists 
Whose damp doth make the clearest eyes grow blind . 
Thus in a maze , I spied a hideous flame , 
I cast my sight , 
And saw where blithely bathing in the same 
With great delight 
A worm did lie , wrapped in a smoky sweat : 
And yet 
' was strange , 
It careless lay , and shrunk not at the heat . 
I stood amazed , and wondering at the sight , 
while that a dame , 
That shone like to the heaven's rich sparkling light , 
Discoursed the same , 
And said , My friend , this worm within the fire : 
Which lies 
content , 
Is Venus' worm , and represents desire . 
A Salamander is this princely beast , 
Decked with a crown , 
Given him by Cupid as a gorgeous crest , 
'Gainst Fortune's frown , 
Content he lies , and baths him in the flame , 
And goes 
not forth , 
For why , he cannot live without the same . 
As he , so Lovers live within the fire 
Of fervent love : 
And shrink not from the flame of hot desire , 
Nor will not move 
From any heat that Venus' force imparts : 
But lie 
content , 
Within a fire , and waste away their hearts . 
Up flew the Dame , and vanished in a cloud , 
But there stood I , 
And many thoughts within my mind did shrowded 
My love : for why 
I felt within my hart a scorching fire , 
And yet 
as did 
The Salamander , ' was my whole desire . 
Ro. Greene.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd Firmius his Song . 

Shepherds give ear , and now be still 
Unto my passions , and their cause , 
and what they be : 
Since that with such an earnest will , 
And such great signs of friendship's laws , 
you ask it me . 
It is not long since I was whole , 
Nor since I did in every part 
freewill resign : 
It is not long since in my sole 
Possession , I did know my hart , 
and to be mine . 
It is not long , since even and morrow , 
All pleasure that my hart could find , 
was in my power : 
It is not long , since grief and sorrow , 
My loving hart began to bind , 
and to devour . 
It is not long , since company 
I did esteem a joy indeed 
still to frequent : 
Nor long , since solitarily 
I lived , and that this life did breed 
my sole content . 
Desirous I ( wretched ) to see , 
But thinking not to see so much 
as then I saw : 
Love made me know in what degree , 
His valour and brave force did touch 
me with his law . 
First he did put no more nor less 
Into my hart , than he did view 
that there did want : 
But when my breast in such excess 
Of lively flames to burn I knew , 
then were so scant 
My joys , that now did so abate , 
( My self estranged every way 
from former rest : ) 
That I did know , that my estate , 
And that my life was every day , 
in deaths arrest . 
I put my hand into my side , 
To see what was the cause of this 
unwonted vain : 
Where I did find , that torment's hied 
By endless death to prejudice 
my life with pain . 
Because I saw that there did want 
My hart , wherein I did delight , 
my dearest hart : 
And he that did the same supplant , 
no jurisdiction had of right 
to play that part . 
The judge and Robber , that remain 
Within my soul , their cause to try , 
are there all one : 
And so the giver of the pain , 
And he that is condemned to die 
or I , or none . 
To die I care not any way , 
Though without why , to die I grieve , 
as I do see : 
But for because I heard her say , 
None die for loan , for I believe 
none such there be . 
then this thou shalt believe by me 
Too late , and without remedy 
as did in brief : 
Anaxarete , and thou shalt see , 
The little she did satisfy 
with after grief . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's praise of his sacred Diana . 

Praised be Diana's fair and harmless light , 
Praised be the dews , wherewith she moists the ground : 
Praised be her beams , the glory of the night , 
Praised be her power , by which all powers abound . 
Praised be her Nymphs , with whom she decks the woods , 
Praised be her Knights , in whom true honour lives : 
Praised be that force , by which she moves the floods , 
Let that Diana shine which all these gives . 
In heaven Queen she is among the Spheres , 
She Mistresse-like makes all things to be pure : 
Eternity in her oft change she bears , 
She beauty is , by her the fair endure . 
Time wears her not , she doth his Chariot guide , 
Mortality below her Orb is placed : 
By her the virtue of the stars down slide . 
In her is virtue's perfect Image cast . 
A knowledge pure it is her worth to know : 
With Circe's let them dwell , that think not so , 
FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's dump . 

Like desert Woods , with darksome shades obscured , 
Where dreadful beasts , where hateful horror reigneth , 
Such is my wounded hart , whom sorrow paineth . 
The Trees are fatal shafts , to death enured , 
That cruel love within my hart maintaineth , 
To whet my grief , when as my sorrow waineth . 
The ghastly beasts , my thoughts in cares assured , 
Which wadge me war , whilst hart no succour gaineth , 
With false suspect , and fear that still remaineth . 
The horrors , burning sighs , by cares procured , 
Which forth I send , whilst weeping eye complaineth , 
To cool the heat the helpless hart containeth . 
But shafts , but cares , sighs , horrors unrecured , 
Were naught esteemed , if for their pains awarded : 
Your Shepherd's love might be by you regarded . 
S. E. D.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Nymph Diana's Song . 

When that I poor soul was born , 
I was born unfortunate : 
Presently the Fates had sworn , 
To foretell my hapless state . 
Titan his fair beams did hide , 
Phoebe ' clipsed her silver light : 
In my birth my Mother died , 
Young and fair in heavy plight 
And the Nurse that gave me suck , 
Hapless was in all her life : 
And I never had good luck , 
Being maid or married wife . 
I loved well , and was beloved , 
And forgetting , was forgot : 
This a hapless marriage moved , 
Grieving that it kills me not . 
With the earth would I were wed , 
then in such a grave of woes 
Daily to be buried , 
Which no end nor number knows . 
Young my Father married me , 
Forced by my obedience : 
Syrenus , thy faith , and thee 
I forgot without offence . 
Which contempt I pay so far , 
Never like was paid so much : 
jealousies do make me war , 
But without a cause of such . 
I do go with jealous eyes , 
To my folds , and to my Sheep : 
And with jealousy I rise , 
When the day begins to peep . 
At his table I do eat , 
In his bed with him I lie : 
But I take no rest , nor meat , 
Without cruel jealousy . 
If I ask him what he ails , 
And whereof he jealous is ? 
In his answer than he fails , 
Nothing can he say to this . 
In his face there is no cheer , 
But he ever hangs the head : 
In each corner he doth peer , 
And his speech is sad and dead . 
Ill the poor soul lives iwis : 
That so hardly married is . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Rowlands Madrigal . 

Fair Love rest thee here , 
Never yet was morn so clear , 
Sweet be not unkind , 
Let me thy favour find , 
Or else for love I die . 
Hark this pretty bubbling spring , 
How it makes the Meadows ring , 
Love now stand my friend , 
here let all sorrow end , 
And I will honour thee . 
See where little Cupid lies , 
Looking babies in her eyes . 
Cupid help me now , 
Lend to me thy bow , 
to wound her that wounded me . 
here is none to see or tell , 
All our flocks are feeding by , 
This bank with Roses spread , 
O it is a dainty bed , 
fit for my Love and me . 
Hark the birds in yonder Groave , 
How they chant unto my Love , 
Love be kind to me , 
As I have been to thee , 
for thou hast won my hart . 
Calm winds blow you fair , 
Rock her thou sweet gentle air , 
OH the morn is noon , 
The evening comes too soon , 
to part my Love and me . 
The Roses and thy lips do meet , 
O that life were half so sweet , 
Who would respect his breath , 
That might die such a death , 
o that life thus might die . 
All the bushes that be near , 
With sweet Nightingales beset , 
Hush sweet and be still , 
Let them sing their fill , 
there 's none our joys to let . 
Sun why dost thou go so fast ? 
O why dost thou make such haste ? 
It is too early yet , 
So soon from joys to flit , 
why art thou so unkind ? 
See my little Lambkins run , 
Look on them till I have done , 
Hast not on the night , 
To rob me of her sight , 
that live but by her eyes . 
Alas , sweet Love , we must depart , 
Hark , my dog begins to bark , 
Some body 's coming near , 
They shall not find us here , 
for fear of being chid . 
Take my Garland and my Glove , 
Wear it for my sake my Love , 
To morrow on the green , 
thou shalt be our Shepherd's Queen , 
crowned with Roses gay . 
Mich. Drayton . 

FINIS . 

¶ Alanius the Shepherd , his doleful Song , complaining of Ismeniaes' cruelty . 

no more ( o cruel Nymph , ) now hast thou prayed 
Enough in thy revenge , prove not thine ire 
On him that yields , the fault is now appayed 
Unto my cost : Now mollify thy dire 
Hardness , and breast of thine so much obdured : 
And now raise up ( though lately it hath erred , ) 
A poor repenting soul , that in the obscured 
Darkness of thy oblivion lies interred . 
For it falls not in that , that should commend thee : 
That such a Swain as I may once offend thee . 
If that the little Sheep with speed is flying 
From angry Shepherd ( with his words afraid ) 
And runneth here and there with fearful crying , 
And with great grief is from the flock estrayed : 
But when it now perceives that none doth follow , 
And all alone , so far estraying mourneth , 
Knowing what danger it is in , with hollow 
And fainting bleats , then fearful it returns 
Unto the flock , meaning no more to leave it : 
Should it not be a just thing to receive it ? 
Lift up those eyes ( Ismenia ) which so stately 
To view me , thou hast lifted up before me , 
That liberty , which was mine own but lately , 
Give me again , and to the same restore me : 
And that mild hart , so full of love and pity , 
Which thou didst yield to me , and ever owe me ; 
Behold ( my Nymph ) I was not then so witty 
To know that sincere love that thou didst show me : 
Now woeful man , full well I know and rue it , 
Although it was too late before I knew it . 
How could it be ( my enemy ? ) say , tell me , 
How thou ( in greater fault and error being 
then ever I was thought ) shouldst thus repel me ? 
And with new league and cruel title seeing 
Thy faith so pure and worthy to be changed ? 
And what is that Ismenia , that doth bind it 
To love , whereas the same is most estranged , 
And where it is impossible to find it ? 
But pardon me , if herein I abuse thee : 
Since that the cause thou gav'st me doth excuse me . 
But tell me now , what honour hast thou gained , 
Avenging such a fault by thee committed , 
And thereunto by thy occasion trained ? 
What have I done , that I have not acquitted ? 
Or what excess that is not amply paid , 
Or suffer more , that I have not endured ? 
What cruel mind , what angry breast displayed , 
With savage hart , to fierceness so adiured ? 
Would not such mortal grief make mild and tender : 
But that , which my fell Shepherdess doth render ? 
Now as I have perceived well thy reasons , 
Which thou hast had , or hast yet to forget me , 
The pains , the griefs , the guilts of forced treasons , 
That I have done , wherein thou first didst set me : 
The passions , and thine ears and eyes refusing 
To pear and see me , meaning to undo me : 
Cam'st thou to know , or be but once perusing 
Th'vnsought occasions , which thou gav'st unto me : 
thou shouldst not have wherewith to more torment me : 
Nor I to pay the fault my rashness lent me . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Montana the Shepherd , his love to Aminta . 

I Serve Aminta , whiter than the snow , 
Straighter than Cedar , brighter than the glass : 
more fine in trip , than foot of running Roe , 
more pleasant than the field of flowering grass . 
more gladsome to my withering joys that fade : 
Than Winter's Sun , or Summer's cooling shade . 
Sweeter than swelling Grape of ripest wine , 
Softer than feathers of the fairest Swan : 
Smother than jet , more stately than the Pine , 
Fresher than Poplar , smaller than my span . 
Clearer than Phoebus' fiery pointed beam : 
Or Icy crust of Crystals frozen stream . 
Yet is she curster than the Bear by kind , 
And harder hearted than the aged Oak : 
more glib than Oil , more fickle than the wind , 
more stiff than steel , no sooner bend but broke . 
Lo thus my service is a lasting sore : 
Yet will I serve , although I die therefore . 
Shep. Tony . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's sorrow for his Phaebes disdain . 

O Woods unto your walks my body hies , 
To lose the traitorous bonds of tiring Love , 
Where trees , where herbs , where flowers , 
Their native moisture pours 
From forth their tender stalks , to help mine eyes , 
Yet their united tears may nothing move . 
When I behold the fair adorned tree , 
Which lightnings force and Winter's frost resists , 
Than Daphne's ill betid , 
And Phoebus' lawless pride 
Enforce me say , even such my sorrows be : 
For self disdain in Phaebes hart consists . 
If I behold the flowers by morning tears 
Look lovely sweet : Ah then forlorn I cry 
Sweet showers for Memnon shed , 
All flowers by you are fed . 
Whereas my piteous plaint that still appears , 
Yields vigour to her scorns , and makes me die . 
When I regard the pretty glee-full bird , 
With tearful ( yet delightful ) notes complain : 
I yield a terror with my tears . 
And while her music wounds mine ears , 
Alas say I , when will my notes afford 
Such like remorse , who still beweep my pain ? 
When I behold upon the leafless bow 
The hapless bird lament her Love's depart : 
I draw her biding nigh , 
And sitting down I sigh , 
And sighing say : Alas , that birds avow 
A settled faith , yet Phoebe scorns my smart . 
Thus weary in my walk , and woeful too , 
I spend the day , fore-spent with daily grief : 
Each object of distress 
My sorrow doth express . 
I dote on that which doth my hart undoo : 
And honour her that scorns to yield relief . 
Ignoto . 

FINIS . 

¶ Espilus and Therion , their contention in Song for the May-ladie . 

Espilus .  Tvne up my voice , a higher note I yield , 
To high conceit , the Song must needs need be high : 
more high than stars , more firm than flinty field 
Are all my thoughts , in which I live and die . 
Sweet soul to whom I vowed am a slave : 
Let not wild woods so great a treasure have . 


Therion .  The highest note comes oft from basest mind , 
As shallow Brooks do yield the greatest sound : 
Seek other thoughts thy life or death to find , 
Thy stars be fallen , ploughed is thy flinty ground . 
Sweet soul , let not a wretch that serveth Sheep , 
Among his Flock so sweet a treasure keep . 


Espilus .  Two thousand Sheep I have as white as milk , 
Though not so white as is thy lovely face : 
The pasture rich , the wool as soft as silk , 
All this I give , let me possess thy grace . 
But still take heed , lest thou thyself submit : 
To one that hath no wealth , and wants his wit.  


Therion .  Two thousand Deer in wildest woods I have , 
Them can I take , but you I cannot hold : 
He is not poor who can his freedom save , 
bound but to you , no wealth but you I would . 
But take this beast , if beasts you fear to miss : 
For of his beasts the greatest beast he is . 
Both kneeling to her Majesty . 


Espilus .  judge you , to whom all beauty's force is lent : 


Therion .  judge you of love , to whom all love is bend . 


This Song was sung before the Queen's most excellent Majesty , in Wansted Garden : as a contentention between a Forester and a Shepherd for the May-ladie . S. Phil. Sidney . 

FINIS . 

¶ Old Melibeus Song , courting his Nimph.  

Loues' Queen long waiting for her true-love , 
Slain by a Boar which he had chased , 
Left off her tears , and me embraced , 
She kissed me sweet , and called me new-love . 
With my silver hair she toyed , 
In my stayed looks she joyed . 
Boys ( she said ) breed beauties sorrow : 
Old men cheer it even and morrow . 
My face she named the seat of favour , 
All my defects her tongue defended , 
My shape she praised , but most commended . 
My breath more sweet than Balm in savour . 
Be old man with me delighted , 
Love for love shall be requited . 
With her toys at last she won me : 
Now she coys that hath undone me . 
M. F G.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd Syluanus his Song . 

MY life ( young Shepherdess ) for thee 
Of needs to death must post : 
But yet my grief must stay with me , 
After my life is lost . 
The grievous ill , by Death that cured is , 
Continually hath remedy at hand : 
But not that torment that is like to this , 
That in slow time , and Fortune's means doth stand . 
And if this sorrow cannot be 
Ended with life ( at most : ) 
What then doth this thing profit me , 
A sorrow won or lost ? 
Yet all is one to me , as now I try 
a flattering hope , or that that had not been yet : 
For if to day for want of it I die , 
Next day I do no less for having seen it . 
fain would I die , to end and free 
This grief , that kills me most : 
If that it might be lost with me , 
Or die when life is lost . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Coridon's Song . 

A Blithe and bonny Country-lasse , 
heigh ho bonny-lasse , 
Sat sighing on the tender grass , 
and weeping said : will none come woe me ? 
A smicker Boy , a lither Swain , 
heigh ho a smicker Swain : 
That in his love was wanton fain , 
with smiling looks straight came unto her . 
When as the wanton Wench espied , 
heigh ho when she espied , 
The means to make herself a Bride , 
she simpred smooth like bonnie-bell : 
The Swain that saw her squint-eyed kind , 
heigh ho squint-eyed kind , 
His arms about her body twined 
and said , Fair Lass , how fare ye , well ? 
The Country-kit said , well forsooth , 
heigh ho well forsooth , 
But that I have a longing tooth , 
a longing tooth that makes me cry : 
Alas ( said he ) what garres thy grief , 
heigh ho what garres thy grief ? 
A wound ( quoth she ) without relief , 
I fear a maid that I shall die . 
If that be all , the Shepherd said , 
heigh ho the Shepherd said , 
I 'll make thee wive it gentle Maid , 
and so recure thy malady : 
Hereon they kissed with many an oath , 
heigh ho many an oath , 
And fore God Pan did plight their troth , 
so to the Church apace they high . 
And God send every pretty peat , 
heigh ho the pretty peat , 
That fears to die of this conceit , 
so kind a friend to help at last : 
then Maids shall never long again , 
heigh ho to long again , 
When they find ease for such a pain , 
thus my Roundelay is past . 
Thom. Lodge . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's Sonnet . 

MY fairest Ganymede disdain me not , 
Though silly Shepherd I , presume to love thee , 
Though my harsh Songs and Sonnets cannot move thee : 
Yet to thy beauty is my love no blot : 
Apollo , jove , and many Gods beside 
S'dained not the name of Country Shepherd's Swains , 
Nor want we pleasures , though we take some pains . 
We live contentedly : A thing called pride 
Which so corrupts the Court and every place , 
( Each place I mean where learning is neglected , 
And yet of late , even learning's self 's infected , ) 
I know not what it means in any case . 
We only ( when Molorchus 'gins to peep , 
Learn for to fold , and to unfold our Sheep . 
Rich. Barnefielde . 

FINIS . 

¶ Seluagia and Silvanus , their Song to Diana . 

Sel.   I See thee jolly Shepherd merry , 
And firm thy faith , and sound as a berry . 


Sil.   Love gave me joy , and Fortune gave it , 
As my desire could wish to have it . 


Sel.   What didst thou wish , tell me ( sweet Lover , ) 
Whereby thou mightst such joy recover ? 


Sil.   To love where love should be inspired : 
Since there 's no more to be desired . 


Sel.   In this great glory , and great gladness , 
think'st thou to have no touch of sadness ? 


Sil.   Good Fortune gave me not such glory : 
To mock my Love , or make me sorry . 


Sel.   If my firm love I were denying , 
Tell me , with sighs wouldst thou be dying ? 


Sil.   Those words ( in jest ) to hear thee speaking : 
For very grief this hart is breaking . 


Sel.   Yet wouldst thou change , I prithee tell me , 
In seeing one that did excel me ? 


Sil.   OH no , for how can I aspire , 
To more , then to mine own desire ? 


Sel.   Such great affection dost thou bear me : 
As by thy words thou seem'st to swear me ? 


Sil.   Of thy deserts , to which a debtor 
I am , thou mayst demand this better . 


Sel.   Sometimes me thinks , that I should swear it , 
Sometimes me thinks , thou shouldst not bear it . 


Sil.   Only in this my hap doth grieve me , 
And my desire , not to believe me . 


Sel.   Imagine that thou dost not love mine , 
But some brave beauty that 's above mine . 


Sil.   To such a thing ( sweet ) do not will me : 
Where feigning of the same doth kill me . 


Sel.   I see thy firmness gentle Lover , 
more than my beauty can discover . 


Sil.   And my good fortune to be higher 
Than my desert , but not desire . 


Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Montanus his Madrigal . 

IT was a Vallie gaudy green , 
Where Diana at the Fount was seen , 
Green it was , 
And did pass 
All other of Diana's bowers , 
In the pride of Flora's flowers . 
A Fount it was that no Sun sees , 
Circled in with Cipres trees , 
Set so nigh , 
As Phoebus' eye 
could not do the Virgin's scathe , 
To see them naked when they bathe . 
She sat there all in white , 
Colour fitting her delight , 
Virgins so 
Aught to go : 
For white in Armoury is placed 
To be the colour that is chaste . 
Her taffeta Cassock you might see , 
Tucked up above her knee , 
Which did show 
There below 
Legs as white as Whale's bone , 
So white and chaste was never none . 
Hard by her upon the ground , 
Sat her Virgins in a round , 
Bathing their 
Golden hair , 
And singing all in notes high : 
Fie on Venus' flattering eye . 
Fie on Love , it is a toy , 
Cupid witless , and a boy , 
All his fires , 
And desires , 
Are plagues that God sent from on high : 
To pester men with misery . 
As thus the Virgins did disdain 
Lover's joy and Lover's pain , 
Cupid nigh 
Did espy 
Grieving at Diana's Song , 
Slily stole these Maids among . 
His bow of steel , darts of fire , 
He shot amongst them sweet desire , 
Which straight fly's 
In their eyes , 
And at the entrance made them start , 
For it ran from eye to hart . 
Calisto straight supposed love , 
Was fair and frollique for to love . 
Diana she , 
Scaped not free , 
For well I wot hereupon , 
She loved the Swain Endymion . 
Clitia , Phoebus , and Chloris eye 
Thought none so fair as Mercury . 
Venus thus 
Did discuss 
By her Son in darts of fire : 
None so chaste to check desire . 
Diana rose with all her Maids , 
Blushing thus at Loves braides , 
With sighs all 
Show their thrall , 
And flinging thence , pronounced this saw : 
What so strong as Love's sweet law ? 
Ro. Greene.  

FINIS . 

¶ Astrophil to Stella , his third Song . 

IF Orpheus voice had force to breathe such music's love 
Through pores of senseless trees , as it could make them move : 
If stones good measure danced , the Theban walls to build 
To cadence of the tunes , which Amphyons Lyre did yield : 
more cause a like effect at leastwise bringeth , 
OH stones , o trees , learn hearing , Stella singeth . 
If Love might sweet'n so a boy of Shepherd's brood , 
To make a ●yzard dull to taste loves dainty food : 
If Eagle fierce could so in Graecian Maid delight , 
As his light was her eyes , her death his endless night : 
Earth gave that Love , heaven I trow Love defineth , 
OH beasts , o birds , look , Love , lo , Stella shines . 
The birds , stones , and trees feel this ; and feeling Love , 
And if the trees , nor stones stir not the same to prove : 
Nor beasts , nor birds do come unto this blessed gaze , 
Know , that small Love is quick , and great Love doth amaze . 
They are amazed , but you with reason armed , 
OH eyes , o ears of men , how are you charmed ? 
S. Phil. Sidney . 

FINIS . 

¶ A Song between Syrenus and Syluanus . 

Syrenus .  Who hath of Cupid's cates and dainties prayed , 
May feed his stomach with them at his pleasure : 
If in his drink some ease he hath assayed , 
then let him quench his thirsting without measure : 
And if his weapons pleasant in their manner , 
Let him embrace his standard and his banner . 
For being free from him , and quite exempted : 
joyful I am , and proud , and well contented . 


Syluanus .  Of Cupid's dainty cates who hath not prayed , 
May be deprived of them at his pleasure : 
If wormwood in his drink he hath assayed , 
Let him not quench his thirsting without measure : 
And if his weapons in their cruel manner , 
Let him abjure his standard and his banner : 
For I not free from him , and not exempted , 
joyful I am , and proud , and well contented . 


Syrenus .  love 's so expert in giving many a trouble , 
That now I know not why he should be praised : 
He is so false , so changing , and so double , 
That with great reason he must be dispraised . 
Love in the end is such a jarring passion , 
That none should trust unto his peevish fashion , 
For of all mischief he 's the only Master : 
And to my good a torment and disaster . 


Syluanus .  love 's so expert in giving joy , not trouble , 
That now I know not but he should be praised : 
He is so true , so constant , never double , 
That in my mind he should not be dispraised . 
Love in the end is such a pleasing passion , 
That every one may trust unto his fashion . 
For of all good he is the only Master : 
And foe unto my harms , and my disaster . 


Syrenus .  Not in these sayings to be proved a liar , 
He knows that doth not love , nor is beloved : 
Now nights and days I rest , as I desire , 
After I had such grief from me removed . 
And cannot I be glad , since thus estranged , 
Myself from false Diana I have changed ? 
Hence , hence , false Love , I will not entertain thee : 
Since to thy torments thou dost seek to train me . 


Syluanus .  Not in these saying to be proved a liar , 
He knows that loves , and is again beloved : 
Now nights and days I rest in sweet desire , 
After I had such happy fortune proved . 
And cannot I be glad , since not estranged , 
Myself into Seluagia I have changed ? 
Come , come , good Love , and I will entertain thee : 
Since to thy sweet content thou seekest to train me . 


Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Ceres Song in emulation of Cynthia . 

Swell Ceres now , for other Gods are shrinking , 
Pomona pineth , 
Fruitless her tree : 
Fair Phoebus shines 
Only on me . 
Conceit doth make me smile whilst I am thinking , 
How every one doth read my story , 
How every bough on Ceres lowreth , 
'Cause heaven plenty on me poureth , 
And they in leaves do only glory , 
All other Gods of power bereaven , 
Ceres' only Queen of heaven . 
With robes and flowers let me be dressed , 
Cynthia that shines 
Is not so clear : 
Cynthia declineth 
When I appear . 
Yet in this Isle she reigns as blessed , 
And every one at her doth wonder , 
And in my ears still fond fame whispers 
Cynthia shall be Ceres' Mistress , 
But first my Car shall rive in sunder . 
Help Phoebus help , my fall is sudden : 
Cynthia , Cynthia must be Sovereign . 
This Song was sung before her Majesty , at Bissam , the Lady Russels , in progress . The Author's name unknown to me . 

¶ A Pastoral Ode to an honourable friend . 

AS to the blooming prime , 
Bleak Winter being fled : 
From compass of the clime , 
Where Nature lay as dead , 
The Rivers dulled with time , 
The green leaves withered , 
Fresh Zephyri ( the Western brethren ) be : 
So th' honour of your favour is to me . 
For as the Plains revive , 
And put on youthful green : 
As plants begin to thrive , 
That disattired had been : 
And Arbours now alive , 
In former pomp are seen . 
So if my Spring had any flowers before : 
Your breaths Favonius hath increased the store . 
E. B.  

FINIS . 

¶ A Nymphs disdain of Love.  

Hey down a down did Diana sing , 
amongst her Virgins sitting : 
then love there is no vainer thing , 
for Maiden's most unfitting , 
And so think I , with a down down derry . 
When women knew no woe , 
but lived themselves to please : 
men's feigning guiles they did not know , 
the ground of their disease . 
Unborn was false suspect , 
no thought of jealousy : 
From wanton toys and fond affect , 
the Virgin's life was free . 
Hey down a down did Diana sing , etc.  
At length men used charms , 
to which what Maids gave ear : 
Embracing gladly endless harms , 
anon enthralled were . 
Thus women welcomed woe , 
disguised in name of love : 
A jealous hell , a painted show , 
so shall they find that prove . 
Hey down a down did Diana sing , 
amongst her Virgins sitting : 
then love there is no vainer thing , 
for Maiden's most unfitting . 
And so think I , with a down down derry . 
Ignoto . 

FINIS . 

¶ Apollo's Lovesong for fair Daphne . 

MY hart and tongue were twins , at once conceived , 
The elder was my hart , born dumb by destiny : 
The last my tongue , of all sweet thoughts bereaved , 
Yet strung and tuned , to play heart's harmony . 
Both knit in one , and yet asunder placed . 
What hart would speak , the tongue doth still discover : 
What tongue doth speak , is of the hart embraced , 
And both are one , to make a newfound Lover . 
Newfound , and only found in Gods and Kings , 
Whose words are deeds , but deeds nor words regarded : 
chaste thoughts do mount , and fly with swiftest wings , 
My love with pain , my pain with loss rewarded . 
Engrave upon this tree Daphne's perfection : 
That neither men nor Gods can force affection . 
This Ditty was sung before her Majesty , at the right honourable the Lord Chandos , at Sudley Castell , at her last being there in progress . The Author thereof unknown . 

¶ The Shepherd Delicius his Ditty . 

Never a greater foe did Love disdain , 
Or trod on grass so gay , 
Nor Nymph green leaves with whiter hand hath rend , 
more golden hair the wind did never blow , 
Nor fairer Dame hath bound in white attire , 
Or hath in Lawn more gracious features tied , 
then my sweet Enemy . 
Beauty and chastity one place refrain , 
In her bear equal sway : 
Filling the world with wonder and content . 
But they do give me pain and double woe , 
Since love and beauty kindled my desire , 
And cruel chastity from me denied 
All sense of jollity . 
There is no Rose , nor Lily after rain , 
Nor flower in month of May , 
Nor pleasant mead , nor green in Summer sent , 
That seeing them , my mind delighteth so , 
As fair flower which all the heavens admire , 
Spending my thoughts on her , in whom abide 
All grace and gifts on high . 
Me thinks my heavenly Nymph I see again 
Her neck and breast display : 
Seeing the whitest Ermine to frequent 
Some plain , or flowers that make the fairest show . 
OH Gods , I never yet beheld her nigher , 
Or far , in shade , or Sun , that satisfied 
I was in passing by . 
The Mead , the Mount , the River , Wood , and Plain , 
With all their brave array , 
Yield not such sweet , as that fair face that 's bend 
Sorrows and joy in each soul to bestow 
In equal parts , procured by amorous fire 
Beauty and Love in her their force have tried , 
to blind each human eye . 
Each wicked mind and will , which wicked vice doth stain , 
her virtues break and stay ▪ 
All airs infect by air are purged and spent , 
Though of a great foundation they , did grow . 
OH body , that so brave a soul dost hire , 
And blessed soul , whose virtues ever pried 
above the starry sky . 
Only for her my life in joys I train 
my soul sings many a Lay : 
Musing on her , new Seas I do invent 
Of sovereign joy , wherein with pride I row . 
The deserts for her sake I do require , 
For without her , the Springs of joy are dried 
and that I do defy . 
Sweet Fate , that to a noble deed dost strain , 
and lift my hart to day : 
Sealing her there with glorious ornament , 
Sweet scale , sweet grief , and sweetest overthrow . 
Sweet miracle , whose fame cannot expire , 
Sweet wound , and golden shaft , that so espied 
such heavenly company 
Of beauty's graces in sweet virtues died , 
As like were never in such years descried . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Amintas for his Phillis . 

Avrora now began to rise again , 
From watery couch , and from old Tithonus' side : 
In hope to kiss upon Acteian plain , 
Young Shafalus , and through the golden glide 
On Eastern coast he cast so great a light , 
That Phoebus thought it time to make retire 
From Thetis bower , wherein he spent the night , 
To light the world again with heavenly fire . 
no sooner 'gan his winged Steeds to chase 
The Stygian night , mantled with dusky vale : 
But poor Amintas hasteth him a pace , 
In deserts thus , to weep a woeful tale . 
You silent shades , and all that dwell therein , 
As birds , or beasts , or worms that creep on ground : 
Dispose yourselves to tears , while I begin 
To rue the grief of mine eternal wound . 
And doleful ghosts , whose nature fly's the light , 
Come seat yourselves with me on every side : 
And while I die for want of my delight , 
Lament the woes through fancy me betid . 
Phillis is dead , the mark of my desire , 
My cause of love , and shipwreck of my joys , 
Phillis is gone that set my hart on fire , 
That clad my thoughts with ruinous annoys . 
Phillis is fled , and bides I wot not where , 
Phillis ( alas ) the praise of womankind : 
Phillis the Sun of this our Hemisphere , 
Whose beams made me , and many others blind . 
But blinded me ( poor Swain ) above the rest , 
That like old Oedipus I live in thrall : 
Still feel the worst , and never hope the best , 
My mirth in moan , and honey drowned in gall . 
Her fair , but cruel eyes , bewitched my sight , 
Her sweet , but fading speech enthralled my thought : 
And in her deeds I reaped such delight , 
As brought both will and liberty to naught . 
Therefore all hope of happiness adieu , 
Adieu desire the source of all my care : 
Despare tells me , my weal will ne'er renew , 
Till thus my soul doth pass in Charon's Crare . 
Mean time my mind must suffer Fortune's scorn , 
My thoughts still wound , like wounds that still are green : 
My weakened limbs be laid on beds of thorn , 
My life decays , although my death 's foreseen . 
Mine eyes , now eyes no more , but Seas of tears , 
Weep on your fill , to cool my burning breast : 
Where love did place desire , 'twixt hope and fears , 
( I say ) desire , the Author of unrest . 
And would to God , Phillis where ere thou be , 
Thy soul did see the sour of mine estate : 
My joys eclipsed , for only want of thee 
My being with myself at foul debate . 
My humble vows , my sufferance of woe , 
My sobs and sighs , and ever-watching eyes : 
My plaintive tears , my wand'ring to and from , 
My will to die , my never-ceasing cries . 
no doubt but then these sorrows would persuade , 
The doom of death , to cut my vital twist : 
That I with thee amid th' infernal shade , 
And thou with me might sport us as we list . 
O if thou wait on fair Proserpina's train , 
And hearest Orpheus near th' elysian springs : 
Entreat thy Queen to free thee thence again , 
And let the Thracian guide thee with his strings . 
Tho. Watson . 

FINIS . 

¶ Faustus and Firmius sing to their Nymph by turns . 

Firmius .  OF mine own self I do complain , 
And not for loving thee so much , 
But that in deed thy power is such : 
That my true love it doth restrain , 
And only this doth give me pain , 
For fain I would 
Love her more , if that I could . 


Faustus .  thou dost observe ▪ who doth not see , 
To be beloved a great deal more : 
But yet thou shalt not find such store ▪ 
Of love in others as in me : 
For all I have I give to thee . 
Yet fain I would 
Love thee more , if that I could . 


Firmius .  OH try no other Shepherd Swaine , 
And care not other loves to prove , 
Who though they give thee all their love : 
thou canst not such as mine obtain . 
And wouldst thou have in love more gain ? 
OH yet I would 
Love thee more , if that I could . 


Faustus .  Impossible it is ( my friend ) 
That any one should me excel 
In love , whose love I will refel , 
If that with me he will contend : 
My love no equal hath , nor end . 
And yet I would 
Love her more , if that I could ▪ 


Firmius .  Behold how Love my soul hath charmed , 
Since first thy beauties I did see , 
( Which is but little yet to me , ) 
My freest senses I have harmed 
( To love thee ) leaving them unarmed : 
And yet I would 
Love thee more , if that I could . 


Faustus .  I ever gave , and give thee still 
Such store of love , as Love hath lent me : 
And therefore well thou mayst content thee , 
That Love doth so enrich my fill : 
But now behold my chiefest will , 
That fain I would 
Love thee more , if that I could . 


Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Sireno a Shepherd , having a lock of his fair Nymph's hair , wrapped about with green silk , mourns thus in a Love-dittie . 

What changes here , o hair , 
I see since I saw you ? 
How ill fits you this green to wear , 
For hope the colour due ? 
In deed I well did hope , 
Though hope were mixed with fear : 
no other Shepherd should have scope 
Once to approach this hear . 
Ah hair , how many days , 
My Diana made me show , 
With thousand pretty childish plays , 
If I beware you or no ? 
Alas , how oft with tears , 
( O tears of guileful breast : ) 
She seemed full of jealous fears , 
Whereat I did but jest ? 
Tell me o hair of gold , 
If I then faulty be : 
That trust those kill eyes I would , 
Since they did warrant me ? 
Have you not seen her mood , 
What streams of tears she spent : 
Till that I swore my faith so stood , 
As her words had it bend ? 
Who hath such beauty seen , 
In one that changes so ? 
Or where one loves , so constant been , 
Who ever saw such woe ? 
Ah hairs , you are not grieved , 
To come from whence you be : 
Seeing how once you saw I lived , 
To see me as you see . 
On sandy bank of late , 
I saw this woman sit : 
Where , Sooner die then change my state , 
She with her finger written . 
Thus my belief was stayed , 
Behold Loves mighty hand 
On things , were by a woman said , 
And written in the sand . 
Translated by S. Phil. Sidney , out of Diana of Montmaior . 

¶ A Song between Taurisius and Diana , answering verse for verse . 

Taurisius .  The cause why that thou dost deny 
To look on me , sweet foe impart ? 


Diana .  Because that doth not please the eye . 
Which doth offend and grieve the hart . 


Taurisius .  What woman is , or ever was , 
That when she looketh , could be moved ▪ 


Diana .  She that resolves her life to pass , 
Neither to love , nor to be loved . 


Taurisius .  There is no hart so fierce and hard . 
That can so much torment a soul : 


Diana .  Nor Shepherd of so small regard , 
That reason will so much control . 


Taurisius .  How falls it out Love doth not kill 
Thy cruelty with some remorse ? 


Diana .  Because that Love is but a will , 
And freewill doth admit no force . 


Taurisius .  Behold what reason now thou hast , 
To remedy my loving smart : 


Diana .  The very same binds me as fast , 
To keep such danger from my hart . 


Taurisius .  Why dost thou thus torment my mind , 
And to what end thy beauty keep ? 


Diana .  Because thou call'st me still unkind , 
And pitiless when thou dost weep . 


Taurisius .  Is it because thy cruelty 
In kill me doth never end ? 


Diana .  Nay , for because I mean thereby , 
My hart from sorrow to defend . 


Taurisius .  Be bold so foul I am no way 
As thou dost think , fair Shepherdess : 


Diana .  With this content thee , that I say , 
That I believe the same no less . 


Taurisius .  What , after giving me such store ▪ 
Of passions , dost thou mock me too ? 


Diana .  If answers thou wilt any more . 
Go seek them without more ado . 


Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Another Song before her Majesty at Oxford , sung by a comely Shepherd , attended on by sundry other Shepherds and Nymphs . 

Herbs , words , and stones , all maladies have cured , 
Herbs , words , and stones , I used when loved : 
Herbs smells , words wind , stones hardness have procured , 
By stones , nor words , nor herbs her mind was moved . 
I asked the cause : this was a woman's reason , 
Amongst herbs are weeds , and thereby are refused : 
Deceit as well as truth speaks words in season , 
False stones by foils have many one abused . 
I sighed , and then she said , my fancy smoked , 
I gazed , she said , my looks were follies glancing : 
I sounded dead , she said , my love was choked , 
I started up , she said , my thoughts were dancing . 
O sacred Love , if thou have any Godhead : 
Teach other rules to win a maidenhead . 
Anonymous . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's Song : a Carol or Hymn for Christmas . 

Sweet Music , sweeter far 
Than any Song is sweet : 
Sweet Music heavenly rare , 
Mine ears ( o peers ) doth greet . 
You gentle flocks , whose fleeces pearled with dew , 
Resemble heaven , whom golden drops make bright : 
Listen , o listen , now , o not to you 
Our pipes make sport to shorten weary night , 
But voices most divine , 
Make blissful Harmony : 
Voices that seem to shine , 
For what else clears the sky ? 
Tunes can we hear , but not the Singers see : 
The tunes divine , and so the Singers be . 
Lo how the firmament , 
Within an azure fold : 
The flock of stars hath penned , 
That we might them behold . 
Yet from their beams proceedeth not this light , 
Nor can their Crystals such reflection give : 
What then doth make the Element so bright ? 
The heavens are come down upon earth to live . 
But hearken to the Song , 
Glory to glories King : 
And peace all men among , 
These Queristers do sing . 
Angels they are , as also ( Shepherds ) he , 
Whom in our fear we do admire to see . 
Let not amazement blind 
Your souls ( said he ) annoy : 
To you and all mankind , 
My message bringeth joy . 
For lo the world's great Shepherd now is born 
A blessed Babe , an Infant full of power : 
After long night , uprisen is the morn , 
Renowning Bethlem in the Saviour . 
Sprung is the perfect day , 
By Prophets seen a far : 
Sprung is the mirthful May , 
Which Winter cannot mar . 
In David's City doth this Sun appear : 
Clouded in flesh , yet Shepherds sit we here . 
E. B.  

FINIS . 

¶ Arsileus his Carol , for joy of the new marriage , between Syrenus and Diana . 

Let now each Mead with flowers be depainted , 
Of sundry colours sweetest odours glowing : 
Roses yield forth your smells so finely tainted , 
Calm winds the green leaves move with gentle blowing , 
The Crystal Rivers flowing 
With waters be increased : 
And since each one from sorrow now hath ceased ▪ 
From mournful plaints and sadness . 
Ring forth fair Nymphs your joyful Songs for gladness . 
Let Springs and Meads all kind of sorrow banish , 
And mournful hearts the tears that they are bleeding : 
Let gloomy clouds with shining morning vanish , 
Let every bird rejoice that now is breeding . 
And since by new proceeding , 
With marriage now obtained , 
A great content by great contempt is gained , 
And you devoid of sadness , 
Ring forth fair Nymphs your joyful Songs for gladness . 
Who can make us to change our firm desires , 
And soul to leave her strong determination , 
And make us frieze in Ice , and melt in fires , 
And nicest hearts to love with emulation , 
Who rids us from vexation , 
And all our minds commandeth ? 
But great Felicia , that his might withstandeth , 
That filled our hearts with sadness , 
Ring forth fair Nymphs your joyful Songs for gladness . 
Your fields with their distilling favours cumber 
( Bridegroom and happy Bride ) each heavenly power 
Your flocks , with double Lambs increased in number , 
May never taste unsavoury grass and sour . 
The Winter's frost and shower 
Your Kids ( your pretty pleasure ) 
May never hurt , and blessed with so much treasure , 
To drive away all sadness : 
Ring forth fair Nymphs your joyful Songs for gladness . 
Of that sweet joy delight you with such measure , 
Between you both fair issue to engender : 
Longer than Nestor may you live in pleasure , 
The Gods to you such sweet content surrender , 
That may make mild and tender , 
The beasts in every mountain , 
And glad the fields , and woods , and every Fountain , 
Abiuring former sadness , 
Ring forth fair Nymphs your joyful Songs for gladness . 
Let amorous birds with sweetest notes delight you , 
Let gentle winds refresh you with their blowing : 
Let fields and Forests with their good requite you , 
And Flora deck the ground where you are going . 
Roses and Violets strowing , 
The jasmine and the Gillyflower , 
With many more , and never in your bower , 
To taste of household sadness : 
Ring forth fair Nymphs your joyful Songs for gladness . 
Concord and peace hold you for ay contented , 
And in your joyful state live you so quiet : 
That with the plague of jealousy tormented 
You may not be , nor fed with Fortune's diet . 
And that your names may fly yet , 
To hills unknown with glory . 
But now because my breast so hoarse , and sorry 
It faints , may rest from singing : 
End Nymphs your Songs , that in the clouds are ringing . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Philistus farewell to false Clorinda . 

Clorinda false adieu , thy love torment's me : 
Let Thirsis have thy hart , since he contents thee . 
O grief and bitter anguish , 
For thee I languish , 
Feign I ( alas ) would hide it , 
O , but who can abide it ? 
I can , I cannot I abide it . 
Adieu , adieu then , 
Farewell , 
Leave my death now desiring : 
For thou hast thy requiring . 
Thus spoke Philistus , on his hook relying : 
And sweetly ●ell a dying . 
Out of M. Morleyes' Madrigals . 

FINIS . 

¶ Rosalindes Madrigal . 

Love in my bosom like a Bee , 
doth suck his sweet : 
Now with his wings he plays with me , 
now with his feet . 
Within mine eyes he makes his nest , 
His bed amid my tender breast , 
My kisses are his daily feast , 
And yet he robs me of my rest . 
Ah wanton will ye ? 
And if I sleep , then pierceth he , 
with pretty slight : 
And makes his pillow of my knee , 
the livelong night . 
Strike I my Lute , he tunes the string , 
He music plays if I but sing , 
He lends me every lovely thing , 
Yet cruel he my hart doth sting . 
Whist wanton , still ye . 
Else I with Roses every day 
will whip ye hence : 
And bind ye when ye long to play , 
for your offence . 
I 'll shut mine eyes to keep ye in , 
I 'll make you fast it for your sin , 
I 'll count your power not worth a pin . 
Alas , what hereby shall I win 
If he gainsay me ? 
What if I beat the wanton boy 
with many a rod ? 
He will repay me with annoy , 
because a God. 
then sit thou safely on my knee , 
And let thy bower my bosom be : 
Lurk in mine eyes , I like of thee . 
OH Cupid , so thou pity me , 
Spare not , but play thee . 
Thom. Lodge . 

FINIS . 

¶ A Dialogue Song between Syluanus and Arsilius . 

Syl.   Shepherd , why dost thou hold thy peace ? 
Sing , and thy joy to us report : 


Arsil.   My joy good Shepherd ) should be less , 
If it were told in any sort . 


Syl.   Though such great favours thou dost win , 
Yet deign thereof to tell some part : 


Arsil.   The hardest thing is to begin , 
In erterprises of such Art  


Syl.   Come make an end , no cause omit , 
Of all the joys that thou art in : 


Arsil.   How should I make an end of it , 
That am not able to begin ? 


Syl.   It is not just , we should consent , 
That thou shouldst not thy joys recite : 


Arsil.   The soul that felt the punishment , 
Doth only feel this great delight . 


Syl.   That joy is small , and nothing fine , 
That is not told abroad to many : 


Arsil.   If it be such a joy as mine , 
It never can never be told to any . 


Syl.   How can this hart of thine contain 
A joy , that is of such great force ? 


Arsil.   I have it , where I did retain 
My passions of so great remorse . 


Syl.   So great and rare a joy is this , 
no man is able to withhold : 


Arsil.   But greater that a pleasure is , 
The less it may with words be told . 


Syl.   Yet have I heard thee heretofore , 
Thy joys in open Songs report : 


Arsil.   I said , I had of joy some store , 
But not how much , nor in what sort . 


Syl.   Yet when a joy is in excess , 
Itself it will ofttimes unfold : 


Arsil.   Nay , such a joy would be the less , 
If but a word thereof were told . 


Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Montanus Sonnet . 

When the dog 
Full of rage 
With his ireful eyes 
Frowns amid the skies : 
The Shepherd to assuage 
The fury of the heat , 
Himself doth safely seat 
By a Fount 
Full of fair , 
Where a gentle breath 
Mounting from beneath , 
tempereth the air . 
There his flocks 
Drink their fill , 
And with ease repose , 
While sweet sleep doth close 
Eyes from toiling ill , 
But I burn , 
Without rest , 
no defensive power 
Shields from Phoebus' lower , 
sorrow is my best . 
Gentle Love 
Lower no more , 
If thou wilt invade 
In the secret shade , 
Labour not so sore 
I myself 
And my flocks , 
They their Love to please , 
I myself to ease , 
Both leave the shady Oaks , 
Content to burn in fire , 
sith Love doth so desire . 
S. E. D.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Nymph Seluagia her Song . 

Shepherd , who can pass such wrong , 
And a life in woes so deep ? 
Which to live is to too long , 
As it is too short to weep . 
Grievous sighs in vain I wast , 
Losing my affiance , and 
I perceive my hope at last 
with a candle in the hand . 
What time then to hope among 
bitter hopes , that never sleep ? 
When this life is to too long , 
as it is too short to weep . 
This grief which I feel so rife , 
( wretch ) I do deserve as hire : 
Since I came to put my life 
in the hands of my desire . 
then cease not my complaints so strong , 
for ( though life her course doth keep : ) 
It is not to live so long , 
as it is too short to weep . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Herdsman's happy life . 

What pleasure have great Princes , 
more dainty to their choice , 
then Herdsmen wild , who careless , 
in quiet life rejoice ? 
And Fortune's Fate not fearing , 
Sing sweet in Summer morning . 
Their dealings plain and rightful 
are void of all deceit : 
They never know how spiteful , 
it is to kneel and wait ; 
On favourite presumptuous , 
Whose pride is vain and sumptuous . 
All day their flocks each tendeth , 
at night they take their rest : 
more quiet than who sendeth 
his ship into the East ; 
Where gold and pearl are plenty , 
But getting very dainty . 
For Lawyers and their pleading , 
they'steeme it not a straw : 
They think that honest meaning , 
is of itself a law ; 
Where conscience judgeth plainly , 
They spend no money vainly . 
O happy who thus lives , 
not caring much for gold : 
With clothing which sufficeth , 
to keep him from the cold . 
Though poor and plain his diet : 
Yet merry it is and quiet . 
Out of M. Birds set Songs . 

FINIS . 

¶ Cynthia the Nymph , her Song to fair Polydora . 

Near to the River banks , with green 
And pleasant trees on every side , 
Where freest minds would most have been , 
That never felt brave Cupid's pride , 
To pass the day and tedious hours : 
amongst those painted meads and flowers . 
A certain Shepherd full of woe , 
Syrenus called , his flocks did feed : 
Not sorrowful in outward show , 
But troubled with such grief indeed , 
As cruel Love is wont t' impart 
Unto a painful loving hart . 
This Shepherd every day did die , 
For love he to Diana bore : 
A Shepherdess so fine perdie , 
So lively , young , and passing fair , 
Excelling more in beauty's feature : 
then any other human creature . 
Who had not any thing , of all 
She had , but was extreme in her , 
For meanly wise none might her call , 
Nor meanly fair , for he did err 
If so he did : but should devose 
Her name of passing fair and wise . 
Favours on him she did bestow , 
Which if she had not , then be sure 
He might have suffered all that woe 
Which afterwards he did endure 
When he was gone , with lesser pain : 
And at his coming home again . 
For when indeed the hart is free 
From suffering pain or torments smart : 
If wisdom doth not oversee 
And beareth not the greatest part ; 
The smallest grief and care of mind : 
Doth make it captive to their kind . 
Near to a River swift and great , 
That famous Ezla had to name : 
The careful Shepherd did repeat 
The ●earess he had by absence blame , 
Which he suspect where he did keep : 
And feed his gentle Lambs and Sheep . 
And now sometimes he did behold 
His Shepherdess , that there about 
Was on the mountains of that old 
And ancient Leon , seeking out 
From place to place the pastures best : 
Her Lambs to feed , herself to rest . 
And sometime musing , as he lay , 
When on those hills she was not seen : 
Was thinking of that happy day , 
When Cupid gave him such a Queen 
Of beauty , and such cause of joy : 
Wherein his mind he did employ . 
Yet said ( poor man ) when he did see 
Himself so sunk in sorrow's pit : 
The good that Love hath given me , 
I only do imagine it , 
Because this nearest harm and trouble : 
Hereafter I should suffer double . 
The Sun for that it did decline , 
The careless man did not offend 
With fiery beams , which scarce did shine , 
But that which did of love depend , 
And in his hart did kindle fire : 
Of greater flames and hot desire . 
Him did his passions all invite , 
The green leaves blown with gentle wind : 
Crystalline streams with their delight , 
And Nightingales were not behind , 
To help him in his loving verse : 
Which to himself he did rehearse . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd to the flowers . 

Sweet Violets ( Love's Paradise ) that spread 
Your gracious odours , which you couched bear 
Within your paly faces : 
Upon the gentle wing of some calme-breathing-winde 
That plays amid the Plain , 
If by the favour of propitious stars you gain 
Such grace as in my Lady's bosom place to find : 
Be proud to touch those places . 
And when her warmth your moisture forth doth wear , 
Whereby her dainty parts are sweetly fed : 
Your honours of the flowery Meads I pray , 
You pretty daughters of the earth and Sun : 
With mild and seemly breathing strait display 
My bitter sighs , that have my hart undone . 
Vermilion Roses , that with new days rise 
Display your crimson folds fresh looking fair , 
Whose radiant bright , disgraces 
The rich adorned rays of roseate rising morn , 
Ah if h●● Virgin's hand . 
Do pluc●●●r pure , ere Phoebus view the land , 
And veil your gracious pomp in lovely Nature's scorn . 
If chance my Mistress traces 
Fast by your flowers to take the Summer's air : 
then woeful blushing tempt her glorious eyes , 
To spread their tears , Adonis' death reporting , 
And tell Love's torments , sorrowing for her friend : 
Whose drops of blood within your leaves consorting , 
Report fair Venus' moans to have no end . 
then may remorse , in pitying of my smart : 
Dry up my tears , and dwell within her hart . 
Ignoto . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd Arsilius , his Song to his Rebeck . 

Now Love and Fortune turn to me again , 
And now each one enforceth and assures 
A hope , that was dismayed , dead , and vain : 
And from the harbour of mishaps assures 
A hart that is consumed in burning fire , 
With unexpected gladness , that admires 
My soul to lay aside her mourning tire , 
And senses to prepare a place for joy , 
Care in oblivion endless shall expire . 
For every grief of that extreme annoy , 
Which when my torment reigned , my soul ( alas ) 
Did feel , the which long absence did destroy , 
Fortune so well appayes , that never was 
So great the torment of my passed ill : 
As is the joy of this same good I pass . 
Return my hart , sursaulted with the fill 
Of thousand great unrests , and thousand fears : 
Enjoy thy good estate , if that thou will , 
And wearied eyes , leave off your burning tears , 
For soon you shall behold her with delight , 
For whom my spoils with glory Cupid bears . 
Senses which seek my star so clear and bright , 
By making here and there your thoughts estray : 
Tell me , what will you feel before her sight ? 
Hence solitariness , torment's away , 
Felt for her sake , and wearied members cast 
Of all your pain , redeemed this happy day . 
OH stay not time , but pass with speedy haste , 
And Fortune hinder not her coming now , 
OH God , betides me yet this grief at last ? 
Come my sweet Shepherdess , the life which thou 
( Perhaps ) didst think was ended long ago , 
At thy command is ready still to bow . 
Comes not my Shepherdess desired so ? 
OH God , what if she 's lost , or if she stray 
Within this wood , where trees so thick do grow ? 
Or if this Nymph that lately went away , 
Perhaps forgot to go and seek her out : 
no , no , in ( her ) oblivion never lay . 
thou only art my Shepherdess , about 
Whose thoughts my soul shall find her joy and rest ▪ 
Why com'st not then to assure it from doubt ? 
OH seest thou not the Sun pass to the West ? 
And if it pass , and I behold thee not : 
then I my wont torments will request 
And thou shalt wail my hard and heavy lot . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Another of Astrophil to his Stella . 

IN a Groave most rich of shade , 
Where birds wanton music made ; 
May , then young , his pied weeds showing , 
New perfumed , with flowers fresh growing . 
Astrophil with Stella sweet , 
Did for mutual comfort meet 
Both within themselves oppressed , 
But each in the other blessed . 
Him great harms had taught much care , 
Her fair neck a foul yoke bare : 
But her sight his cares did banish , 
In his sight her yoke did vanish . 
Wept they had , alas the while . 
But now tears themselves did smile . 
While their eyes by Love directed , 
Enter changeably reflected . 
Sigh they did , but now betwixt , 
Sighs of woes , were glad sighs mixed , 
With arms crossed , yet testifying 
Restless rest , and living dying . 
Their ears hungry of each word , 
Which the dear tongue would afford , 
But their tongues restrained from walking , 
Till their hearts had ended talking . 
But when their tongues could not speak , 
Love itself did silence break , 
Love did set his lips asunder , 
Thus to speak in love and wonder . 
Stella , Sovereign of my joy , 
Fair triumpher of annoy , 
Stella , star of heavenly fire , 
Stella , Lodestar of desire . 
Stella , in whose shining eyes , 
Are the lights of Cupid's skies , 
Whose beams where they once are darted , 
Love therewith is straight imparted . 
Stella , whose voice when it speaks , 
Senses all asunder breaks . 
Stella , whose voice when it singeth . 
Angels to acquaintance bringeth . 
Stella , in whose body is 
Written each Character of bliss , 
Whose face all , all beauty passeth , 
Save thy mind , which it surpasseth . 
Grant , o grant : but speech alas 
Fails me , fearing on to pass . 
Grant , o me , what am I saying ? 
But no fault there is in praying . 
Grant ( o dear ) on knees I pray , 
( Knees on ground he then did stay ) 
That not I , but since I love you , 
Time and place for me may move you . 
Never season was more fit , 
Never room more apt for it . 
Smiling air allows my reason , 
The birds sing , now use the season . 
This small wind , which so sweet is , 
See how it the leaves doth kiss , 
Each tree in his best attyring 
Sense of love to love inspiring . 
Love makes earth the water drink , 
Love to earth makes water sink : 
And if dumb things be so witty , 
Shall a heavenly grace want pity ? 
There his hands in their speech , fain 
Would have made tongues language plain . 
But her hands , his hands repelling : 
Gave repulse , all grace excelling . 
then she spoke ; her speech was such , 
As not ears , but hart did touch : 
While such wise she love denied , 
As yet love she signified . 
Astrophil , said she , my Love , 
Cease in these effects to prove . 
Now be still , yet still believe me , 
Thy grief more than death doth grieve me . 
If that any thought in me , 
Can taste comfort but of thee , 
Let me feed with hellish anguish , 
joylesse , helpless , endless languish . 
If those eyes you praised , be 
Half so dear as you to me : 
Let me home return stark blinded 
Of those eyes , and blinder minded . 
If to secret of my hart 
I do any wish impart : 
Where thou art not foremost placed ; 
Be both wish and I defaced . 
If more may be said , I say 
All my bliss on thee I lay . 
If thou love , my love content thee , 
For all love , all faith is meant thee . 
Trust me , while I thee deny , 
In myself the smart I try . 
Tyrant , honour doth thus use thee , 
Stellaes' self might not refuse thee . 
Therefore ( dear ) this no more move , 
Lest , though I leave not thy love , 
Which too deep in me is framed : 
I should blush when thou art named . 
Therewithal , away she went , 
Leaving him to passion rend : 
With what she had done and spoken , 
That therewith my Song is broken . 
S. Phil. Sidney . 

FINIS . 

¶ Syrenus his Song to Diana's Flocks . 

Passed contents , 
O what mean ye ? 
Forsake me now , and do not weary me . 
Will't thou hear me o memory , 
My pleasant days , and nights again , 
I have appaied with sevenfold pain . 
thou hast no more to ask me why , 
For when I went , they all did die 
As thou dost see : 
OH leave me then , and do not weary me . 
Green field , and shadowed valley , where 
Sometime my chiefest pleasure was , 
Behold what I did after pass . 
then let me rest , and if I bear 
Not with good cause continual fear : 
Now do you see , 
OH leave me then , and do not trouble me . 
I saw a hart changed of late , 
And wearied to assure mine : 
then I was forced to recure mine 
By good occasion , time , and fate . 
My thoughts that now such passions hate 
OH what mean ye ? 
Forsake me now , and do not weary me . 
You Lambs and Sheep that in these Lays , 
Did sometime follow me so glad : 
The merry hours , and the sad 
Are passed now , with all those days . 
Make not such mirth and wunted plays 
As once did ye . 
For now no more , you have deceived me . 
If that to trouble me you come , 
Or come to comfort me in deed : 
I have no ill for comforts need . 
But if to kill me : then ( in some ) 
Now my joys are dead and dumb , 
Full well may ye 
Kill me , and you shall make an end of me . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ To Amarillis . 

Though Amarillis dance in green , 
Like Fairy Queen , 
And sing full clear , 
With smiling cheer . 
Yet since her eyes make hart so sore , 
hey ho , I 'll love no more . 
My Sheep are lost for want of food 
And I so wood 
That all the day : 
I sit and watch a Heard-mayde gay , 
Who laughs to see me sigh so sore : 
hey ho , I 'll love no more . 
Her loving looks , her beauty bright , 
Is such delight , 
That all in vain : 
I love to like , and lose my gain , 
For her that thanks me not therefore , 
hey ho , I 'll love no more . 
Ah wanton eyes , my friendly foes , 
And cause of woes , 
Your sweet desire 
Breeds flames of ice , and frieze in fire . 
You scorn to see me weep so sore : 
hey ho , I 'll love no more . 
Love ye who list , I force him not , 
sith God it wot 
The more I wail : 
The less my sighs and tears prevail . 
What shall I do , but say therefore , 
hey ho , I 'll love no more ? 
Out of M. Birds set Songs . 

FINIS . 

¶ Cardenia the Nymph , to her false Shepherd Faustus . 

Faustus' , if thou wilt read from me 
These few and simple lines , 
By them most clearly thou shalt fee , 
How little should accounted be 
Thy feigned words and signs . 
For noting well thy deeds unkind , 
Shepherd , thou must not scan : 
That ever it came to my mind , 
To praise thy faith like to the wind , 
Or for a constant man  
For this in thee shall so be found , 
As smoke blown in the air : 
Or like Quicksilver turning round , 
Or as a house built on the ground 
Of sands that do impair . 
To firmness thou art contrary , 
more slipp'rie than the Ecle : 
Changing as Weathercock on high , 
Or the Chameleon on the die , 
Or Fortunes turning wheel . 
Who would believe thou wert so free , 
To blaze me thus each hour ? 
My Shepherdess , thou livest in me , 
My soul doth only dwell in thee , 
And every vital power . 
Pale Atropos my vital string 
Shall cut , and life offend : 
The streams shall first turn to their spring . 
The world shall end , and every thing , 
Before my love shall end . 
This love that thou didst promise me , 
Shepherd , where is it found ? 
The word and faith I had of thee , 
OH tell me now , where may they be , 
Or where may they resound ? 
Too soon thou didst the title gain 
Of giver of vain words : 
Too soon my love thou didst obtain , 
Too soon thou lov'dst Diana in vain , 
That naught but scorns affords . 
But one thing now I will thee tell , 
That much thy patience moves : 
That though Diana doth excel 
In beauty , yet she keeps not well 
Her faith , nor loyal proves . 
thou than hast chosen , each one saith , 
thine equal , and a shrew : 
For if thou hast undone thy faith , 
Her Love and Lover she betrayeth , 
So like to like may go . 
If now this Sonnet which I send 
Will anger thee : Before 
Remember Faustus ( yet my friend , ) 
That if these speeches do offend , 
Thy deeds do hurt me more . 
Thus let each one of us amend , 
thou deeds , I words so spent : 
For I confess I blame my pen , 
Do thou as much , so in the end , 
They deeds thou do repent . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Of Phillida . 

AS I beheld , I saw a Herdsman wild , 
with his sheephook a picture fine deface : 
Which he sometime his fancy to beguile , 
had carved on bark of Beech in secret place . 
And with despite of most afflicted mind , 
through deep despair of hart , for love dismayed : 
He pulled even from the tree the carved rind , 
and weeping sore , these woeful words he said . 
Ah Phillida , would God thy picture fair , 
I could as lightly blot out of my breast : 
then should I not thus rage in deep despair , 
and tear the thing sometime I liked best . 
But all in vain , it booteth not God wot : 
What printed is in hart , on tree to blot . 
Out of M. Birds set Songs . 

FINIS . 

¶ Melisea her Song , in scorn of her Shepherd Narcissus . 

Young Shepherd turn aside , and move 
Me not to follow thee : 
For I will neither kill with love , 
Nor love shall not kill me . 
Since I will live , and never show , 
then die not , for my love I will not give 
For I will never have thee love me so , 
As I do mean to hate thee while I live . 
That since the lover so doth prove , 
His death , as thou dost see : 
Be bold I will not kill with love , 
Nor love shall not kill me . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ His answer to the Nymph's Song . 

IF to be loved it thee offend , 
I cannot choose but love thee still : 
And so thy grief shall have no end , 
whiles that my life maintains my william  
OH let me yet with grief complain , 
since such a torment I endure : 
Or else fulfil thy great disdain , 
to end my life with death most sure . 
For as no credit thou wilt lend , 
and as my love offends thee still : 
So shall thy sorrows have no end , 
whiles that my life maintains my william  
If that by knowing thee , I could 
leave off to love thee as I do : 
Not to offend thee , than I would 
leave off to like and love thee too . 
But since all love to thee doth tend , 
and I of force must love thee still : 
Thy grief shall never have an end , 
whiles that my life maintains my william  
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Her present answer again to him . 

MENANDER thinks thou tak'st the worse way , 
( Enamoured Shepherd ) and in vain 
That thou wilt seek thine own decay , 
To love her , that doth thee disdain . 
For thine own self , thy woeful hart 
Keep still , else art thou much to blame : 
For she to whom thou gav'st each part 
Of it , disdains to take the same . 
follow not her that makes a play , 
And jest of all the grief and pains : 
And seek not ( Shepherd ) thy decay . 
To love her that thy love disdains . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ His last reply . 

Since thou to me wert so unkind , 
Myself I never loved , for 
I could not love him in my mind , 
Whom thou ( fair Mistress ) dost abhor . 
If viewing thee , I saw thee not , 
And seeing thee , I could not love thee : 
Dying , I should not live ( God wot ) 
Nor living , should to anger move thee . 
But it is well that I do find 
My life so full of torments , for 
All kind of ills do fit his mind 
Whom thou ( fair Mistress ) dost abhor . 
In thy oblivion buried now 
My death I have before mine eyes : 
And here to hate myself I vow , 
As ( cruel ) thou dost me despise . 
Contented ever thou didst find 
Me with thy scorns , though never ( for 
To say the truth ) I joyed in mind , 
After thou didst my love abhor . 
Bar. Yong.  

FINIS . 

¶ Philon the Shepherd , his Song . 

While that the Sun with his beams hot , 
Scorched the fruits in vale and mountain : 
Philon the Shepherd late forgot , 
Sitting besides a Crystal Fountain : 
In shadow of a green Oak tree , 
Upon his Pipe this Song played he . 
Adieu Love , adieu Love , untrue Love , 
Untrue Love , untrue Love , adieu Love : 
Your mind is light , soon lost for new love . 
So long as I was in young sight , 
I was as your hart , your soul , and treasure : 
And evermore you sobbed and sighed , 
Burning in flames beyond all measure . 
Three days endured your love to me : 
And it was lost in other three . 
Adieu Love , adieu Love , untrue Love. etc.  
Another Shepherd you did see , 
To whom your hart was soon enchained : 
Full soon your love was leapt from me , 
Full soon my place he had obtained . 
Soon came a third , your love to win : 
And we were out , and he was in . 
Adieu Love. etc.  
Sure you have made me passing glad , 
That you your mind so soon removed : 
Before that I the leisure had , 
To choose you for my best beloved . 
For all my love was past and done : 
Two days before it was begun . 
Adieu Love. etc.  
Out of M. Birds set Songs . 

FINIS . 

¶ Lycoris the Nymph , her sad Song . 

IN dew of Roses , steeping her lovely cheeks , 
Lycoris thus sat weeping . 
Ah Dorus false , that hast my hart bereft me , 
And now unkind hast left me . 
Hear alas , o hear me , 
Ay me , aye me , 
Cannot my beauty move thee ? 
Pity , yet pity me , 
Because I love thee . 
Ay me , thou scornest the more I pray thee : 
And this thou dost , and all to slay me . 
Why do then , 
Kill me , and vaunt thee : 
Yet my Ghost 
Still shall haunt thee . 
Out of M. Morleyes' Madrigals . 

FINIS . 

¶ To his Flocks . 

Bvrst forth my tears , assist my forward grief , 
And show what pain imperious love provokes 
Kind tender Lambs , lament Loves scant relief , 
And pine , since pensive care my freedom yokes , 
O pine , to see me pine , my tender Flocks . 
Sad pining care , that never may have peace , 
At Beauty's gate , in hope of pity knocks : 
But mercy sleeps , while deep disdains increase , 
And Beauty hope in her fair bosom yokes : 
O grieve to hear my grief , my tender Flocks . 
Like to the winds my sighs have winged been , 
Yet are my sighs and suits repaid with mocks : 
I plead , yet she repineth at my teen , 
OH ruthless rigour , harder than the Rocks , 
That both the Shepherd kills , and his poor Flocks . 
FINIS . 

¶ To his Love.  

Come away , come sweet Love , 
The golden morning breaks : 
All the earth , all the air , 
Of love and pleasure speaks . 
Teach thine arms then to embrace , 
And sweet Rosy lips to kiss : 
And mix our souls in mutual bliss . 
Eyes were made for beauty's grace , 
Viewing , ruing Loves long pain : 
Procured by beauties rude disdain . 
Come away , come sweet Love , 
The golden morning wastes : 
While the Sun from his Sphere 
His fiery arrows casts , 
Making all the shadows fly , 
Playing , staying in the Groave : 
To entertain the stealth of love . 
Thither sweet Love let us high 
Flying , dying in desire : 
Winged with sweet hopes and heavenly fire . 
Come away , come sweet Love , 
Do not in vain adjourn 
Beauty's grace that should rise 
Like to the naked morn . 
Lilies on the River's side , 
And fair Cyprian flowers new blown , 
Desire no beauties but their own . 
Ornament is Nurse of pride , 
Pleasure , measure , Love's delight : 
Hast then sweet Love our wished flight . 
FINIS . 

¶ Another of his Cynthia . 

Away with these selfe-loving-lads , 
Whom Cupid's arrow never glads . 
Away poor souls that sigh and weep , 
In love of them that lie and sleep , 
For Cupid is a Meadow God : 
And forceth none to kiss the rod.  
God Cupid's shaft like destiny , 
Doth either good or ill decree . 
Desert is born out of his bow , 
Reward upon his feet doth go . 
What fools are they that have not known , 
That Love likes no laws but his own ? 
My songs they be of Cinthia's praise , 
I wear her Rings on Holly-dayes , 
On every Tree I write her name , 
And every day I read the same . 
Where Honour , Cupid's rival is : 
There miracles are seen of his . 
If Cynthia crave her ring of me , 
I blot her name out of the tree . 
If doubt do darken things held dear : 
then welfare nothing once a year . 
For many run , but one must win : 
Fools only hedge the Cuckoo in . 
The worth that worthiness should move , 
Is love , which is the due of love . 
And love as well the Shepherd can , 
As can the mighty Noble man 
Sweet Nymph 't is true , you worthy be , 
Yet without love , naught worth to me . 
FINIS . 

¶ Another to his Cynthia . 

MY thoughts are winged with hopes , my hopes with love , 
Mount love unto the Moon in clearest night : 
And say , as she doth in the heavens move , 
On earth so wanes and waxeth my delight . 
And whisper this but softly in her ears : 
Hope oft doth hang the head , and trust shed tears . 
And you my thoughts that some mistrust do carry , 
If for mistrust my Mistress do you blame : 
Say , though you alter , yet you do not vary , 
As she doth change , and yet remain the same . 
Distrust doth enter hearts , but not infect , 
And love is sweetest , seasoned with suspect . 
If she for this , with clouds do mask her eyes , 
And make the heaven's dark with her disdain : 
With windy sighs disperse them in the skies , 
Or with thy tears dissolve them into rain . 
Thoughts , hopes , and love , return to me no more , 
Till Cynthia shine , is she hath done before . 
¶ These three ditties were taken out of Master john Dowlands book of tabulature for the Lute , the Authors name's not there set down , & therefore left to their owners . 

FINIS . 

Montanus' Sonnet in the woods . 

Alas , how wander I amid these woods , 
Whereas no day bright shine doth find access ? 
But where the melancholy fleeting floods , 
( Dark as the night ) my night of woes express , 
Disarmde of reason , spoilt of Nature's goods , 
Without redress to salve my heaviness 
I walk , whilst thought ( too cruel to my harms , ) 
With endless grief my heedless judgement charms . 
My silent tongue assailed by secret fear , 
My traitorous eyes imprisoned in their joy : 
My fatal peace devoured in feigned cheer , 
My hart enforced to harbour in annoy . 
My reason robbed of power by yielding care , 
My fond opinions , slave to every joy . 
O Love , thou guide in my uncertain way : 
Woe to thy bow , thy fire , the cause of my decay . 
S. E. D.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's sorrow , being disdained in love . 

Muses help me , sorrow swarmeth , 
Eyes are fraught with Seas of languish : 
Hapless hope my solace harmeth , 
Minds repast is bitter anguish . 
Eye of day regarded never , 
Certain trust in world untrustie : 
Flattering hope beguileth ever , 
Weary old , and wanton lusty . 
Dawne of day beholds enthroned , 
Fortune's darling proud and dreadless : 
Darksome night doth hear him moaned , 
Who before was rich and needless . 
Rob the Sphere of lines united , 
Make a sudden void in nature : 
Force the day to be benighted , 
Reave the cause of time and creature . 
E'er the world will cease to vary , 
This I weep for , this I sorrow : 
Muses , if you please to tarry , 
Further help I mean to borrow . 
Courted once by Fortune's favour , 
Compassed now with Envy's curses : 
All my thoughts of sorrow's savour , 
Hope's run fleeting like the Sources . 
Ay me , wanton scorn hath maimed 
All the joys my hart enjoyed : 
Thoughts their thinking have disclaimed , 
Hate my hopes have quite annoyed . 
Scant regard my weal hath scanted , 
Looking coy , hath forced my lowering : 
Nothing liked ▪ where nothing wanted , 
Weds mine eyes to ceaseless showering . 
Former love was once admired , 
Present favour is estranged : 
Loathed the pleasure long desired , 
Thus both men and thoughts are changed . 
Lovely Swain with lucky speeding , 
Once , but now no more so friended : 
You my Flocks have had in feeding , 
From the morn , till day was ended . 
Drink and fodder , food and folding , 
Had my Lambs and Ewes together : 
I with them was still beholding , 
Both in warmth and Winter weather . 
Now they languish , since refused , 
Ewes and Lambs are pained with pining : 
I with Ewes and Lambs confused , 
All unto our deaths declining . 
Silence , leave thy Cave obscured , 
Deign a doleful Swain to tender : 
Though disdains I have endured . 
Yet I am no deep offender . 
Phillip's Son can with his finger 
hide his scar , it is so little : 
Little sin a day to linger , 
Wise men wander in a tittle . 
Trifles yet my Swain have turned , 
Though my Sun he never showeth : 
Though I weep , I am not mourned , 
Though I want , no pity groweth . 
Yet for pity , love my Muses , 
Gentle silence be their cover : 
They must leave their wont uses , 
Since I leave to be a Lover . 
They shall live with thee enclosed , 
I will loathe my pen and paper : 
Art shall never be supposed , 
Sloth shall quench the watching Taper . 
Kiss them silence , kiss them kindly , 
Though I leave them , yet I love them : 
Though my wit have led them blindly , 
Yet a Swain did once approve them . 
I will travail soils removed , 
Night and morning never merry : 
thou shalt harbour that I loved , 
I will love that makes me weary . 
If perchance the Shepherd strayeth , 
In thy walks and shades unhaunted : 
Tell the teen my hart betrayeth , 
How neglect my joys have daunted . 
Thom. Lodge . 

FINIS . 

¶ A Pastoral Song between Phillis and Amarillis , two Nymphs , each answering other line for line . 

Fie on the sleights that men devose , 
heigh ho silly sleights : 
When simple Maids they would entice , 
Maids are young men's chief delights . 
Nay , women they witch with their eyes , 
eyes like beams of burning Sun : 
And men once caught , they soon despise , 
so are Shepherds oft undone . 
If any young man win a maid , 
happy man is he : 
By trusting him she is betrayed , 
fie upon such treachery . 
If Maids win young men with their guiles , 
heigh ho guileful grief : 
They deal like weeping Crocodiles , 
that murder men without relief . 
I know a simple Country Hind , 
heigh ho silly Swain : 
To whom fair Daphne proved kind , 
was he not kind to her again ? 
He vowed by Pan with many an oath , 
heigh ho Shepherds God is he : 
Yet since hath changed , and broke his troth , 
trothplight broke , will plagued be . 
She had deceived many a Swain , 
fie on false deceit : 
And plighted troth to them in vain , 
there can be no grief more great . 
Her measure was with measure paid , 
heigh ho , heigh ho equal meed : 
She was beguiled that had betrayed , 
so shall all deceavers speed . 
If every Maid were like to me , 
heigh ho hard of hart : 
Both love and lovers scorned should be , 
scorners shall be sure of smart . 
If every Maid were of my mind , 
heigh ho , heigh ho lovely sweet : 
They to their Lovers should prove kind , 
kindness is for Maidens meet . 
Me thinks love is an idle toy , 
heigh ho busy pain : 
Both wit and sense it doth annoy , 
both sense & wit thereby we gain . 
Tush Phillis cease , be not so coy , 
heigh ho , heigh ho coy disdain : 
I know you love a Shepherd's boy , 
fie that Maidens so should feign . 
Well Amarillis , now I yield , 
Shepherd's pipe aloud : 
Love conquers both in town and field , 
like a Tyrant , fierce and proud . 
The evening star is up ye see , 
Vesper shines , we must away : 
Would every Lover might agree , 
so we end our Roundelay . 
H. C.  

FINIS . 

The Shepherd's Anthem . 

Near to a bank with Roses set about , 
Where pretty Turtles joining bill to bill : 
And gentle springs steal softly murmuring out , 
Washing the foot of pleasures sacred hill . 
There little Love sore wounded lies , 
his bow and arrows broken : 
Bedewde with tears from Venus' eyes , 
O that it should be spoken . 
Bear him my hart , slain with her scornful eye , 
Where sticks the arrow that poor hart did kill : 
With whose sharp pile , yet will him ere he die , 
About my hart to write his latest william 
And bid him send it back to me , 
at instant of his dying : 
That cruel , cruel she may see , 
my faith and her denying . 
His Hearse shall be a mournful Cypress shade , 
And for a Chauntrie , Philomel's sweet lay : 
Where prayer shall continually be made , 
By Pilgrim lovers , passing by that way . 
With Nymphs and Shepherds yearly moan , 
his timeless death beweeping : 
And telling that my hart alone , 
hath his last will in keeping . 
Mich. Drayton . 

FINIS . 

The Countess of Pembroke's Pastoral . 

A Shepherd and a Shepherdess , 
sat keeping sheep upon the downs : 
His looks did gentle blood express , 
her beauty was no food for clowns . 
Sweet lovely twain , what might you be ? 
Two fronting hills bedecked with flowers , 
they choose to be each others seat : 
And there they stole their amorous hours , 
with sighs and tears , poor lover's meat , 
Fond Love that feedest thy servants so . 
Fair friend , quoth he , when shall I live , 
That am half dead , yet cannot die ? 
Can beauty such sharp guerdon give , 
to him whose life hangs in your eye ? 
Beauty is mild , and will not kill . 
Sweet Swain , quoth she , accuse not me , 
that long have been thy humble thrall : 
But blame the angry destiny , 
whose kind consent might finish all , 
Ungentle Fate , to cross true love . 
Quoth he , let not our Parents hate , 
disjoin what heaven hath linked in one : 
They may repent , and all too late 
if chyldlesse they be left alone . 
Father nor friend , should wrong true love . 
The Parents frown , said she , is death , 
to children that are held in awe : 
From them we drew our vital breath , 
they challenge duty then by law , 
Such duty as kills not true love . 
They have , quoth he , a kind of sway , 
on these our earthly bodies here : 
But with our souls deal not they may , 
the God of love doth hold them dear . 
He is most meet to rule true love . 
I know , said she , 't is worse than hell , 
when Parents choice must please our eyes : 
Great hurt comes thereby , I can tell , 
forced love in desperate danger dies . 
Fair maid , then fancy thy true love . 
If we , quoth he , might see the hour , 
of that sweet state which never ends , 
Our heavenly gree might have the power , 
to make our Parents as dear friends . 
All rancour yields to sovereign love . 
then God of love , said she , consent , 
and show some wonder of thy power : 
Our Parents , and our own content , 
may be confirmed by such an hour , 
Grant greatest God to further love . 
The Fathers , who did always tend , 
when thus they got their private walk , 
As happy fortune chanced to send , 
unknown to each , heard all this talk . 
Poor souls to be so crossed in love . 
Behind the hills whereon they sat , 
they lay this while and listened all : 
And were so moved both thereat , 
that hate in each began to fall . 
Such is the power of sacred love . 
They showed themselves in open sight , 
poor Lovers , Lord how they were amazed ? 
And hand in hand the Father's plight , 
whereat ( poor hearts ) they gladly gazed . 
Hope now begins to further love . 
And to confirm a mutual band , 
of love , that at no time should cease : 
They likewise joined hand in hand , 
the Shepherd and the Shepherdess . 
Like fortune still befall true love . 
Shep. Tom . 

FINIS . 

Another of Astrophil . 

The Nightingale so soon as April bringeth 
Unto her rested sense a perfect waking : 
While late bare earth , proud of new clothing springeth , 
Sings out her woes , a thorn her Song-booke making . 
And mournfully bewailing 
Her throat in tunes expresseth , 
What grief her breast oppresseth , 
For Tereus' force , on her chaste will prevailing . 
O Philamela fair , o take some gladness , 
That here is juster cause of plaintfull sadness . 
thine earth now spring's , mine fadeth : 
Thy thorn without , my thorn my hart invadeth . 
Alas , she hath no other cause of languish 
But Tereus' love , on her by strong hand wrought : 
Wherein she suffering all her spirits languish , 
Full woman-like complains , her will was broken . 
But I , who daily craving , 
Cannot have to content me : 
Have more cause to lament me , 
sith wanting is more woe , than too much having . 
O Philamela fair , o take some gladness , 
That here is juster cause of plaintfull sadness , 
thine earth now spring's , mine fadeth : 
Thy thorn without , my thorn my hart invadeth . 
S. Phil. Sidney . 

FINIS . 

¶ Fair Phillis and her Shepherd . 

Shepherd , saw you not 
my fair lovely Phillis , 
Walking on this mountain , 
or on yonder plain ? 
She is gone this way to Diana's Fountain , 
and hath left me wounded , 
with her high disdain . 
Ay me , she is fair , 
And without compare , 
Sorrow come and sit with me : 
Love is full of fears , 
Love is full of tears , 
Love without these cannot be . 
Thus my passions pain me , 
For my love hath slain me , 
Gentle Shepherd bear a part : 
Pray to Cupid's mother , 
For I know no other 
that can help to ease my smart . 
Shepherd , I have seen 
thy fair lovely Phillis 
Where her flocks are feeding , 
by the River's side : 
O , I must admire 
she so far exceeding 
In surpassing beauty , 
should surpass in pride . 
But alas I find , 
They are all unkind 
Beauty knows her power too well : 
When they list , they love , 
When they please , they move , 
thus they turn our heaven to hell . 
For their fair eyes glancing , 
Like to Cupid's dancing , 
roll about still to deceive us : 
With vain hopes deluding , 
Still dispraise concluding , 
Now they love , and now they leave us.  
Thus I do despair , 
have her I shall never , 
If she be so coy , 
lost is all my love : 
But she is so fair 
I must love her ever , 
All my pain is joy , 
which for her I prove . 
If I should her try , 
And she should deny 
heavy hart with woe will break : 
Though against my will , 
Tongue thou must be still , 
for she will not hear thee speak . 
then with sighs go prove her , 
Let them show I love her , 
gracious Venus be my guide : 
But though I complain me , 
She will still disdain me , 
beauty is so full of pride . 
What though she be fair ? 
speak , and fear not speeding , 
Be she ne'er so coy , 
yet she may be won : 
Unto her repair , 
where her Flocks are feeding , 
Sat and tick and toy 
till set be the Sun . 
Sun then being set , 
Fear not Vulcan's net , 
though that Mars therein was caught : 
If she do deny 
Thus to her reply 
Venus laws she must be taught . 
then with kisses move her , 
that 's the way to prove her , 
thus thy Phillis must be won : 
She will not forsake thee , 
But her Love will make thee , 
When Love's duty once is done . 
Happy shall I be , 
If she grant me favour , 
Else for love I die 
Phillis is so fair : 
Boldly then go see , 
thou mayst quickly have her , 
Though she should deny , 
yet do not despair . 
She is full of pride , 
Venus be my guide , 
help a silly Shepherd's speed : 
Use no such delay , 
Shepherd , go thy way , 
venture man and do the deed . 
I will sore complain me , 
Say that love hath slain thee , 
if her favours do not feed : 
But take no denial , 
Stand upon thy trial , 
spare to speak , and want of speed . 
I G.  

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's Song of Venus and Adonis . 

Venus' fair did ride , 
silver Doves they drew her , 
By the pleasant lands 
ere the Sun did rise : 
Vesta's beauty rich 
opened wide to view her , 
Philomela records 
pleasing Harmonies . 
Every bird of spring 
cheerfully did sing , 
Paphos Goddess they salute : 
Now loves Queen so fair , 
had of mirth no care , 
for her Son had made her mute . 
In her breast so tender 
He a shaft did enter , 
when her eyes beheld a boy : 
Adonis was he named , 
By his Mother shamed , 
yet he now is Venus' joy . 
Him alone she met , 
ready bound for hunting , 
Him she kindly greets , 
and his journey stays : 
Him she seeks to kiss 
no devices wanting , 
Him her eyes still woo , 
him her tongue still prays . 
He with blushing red 
Hangs down the head , 
not a kiss can he afford : 
His face is turned away , 
Silence said her nay , 
still she wooed him for a word . 
Speak she said thou fairest , 
Beauty thou impairest , 
see me , I am pale and wan : 
Lovers all adore me , 
I for love implore thee , 
crystal tears with that down ran . 
Him herewith she forced 
to come sit down by her , 
She his neck embrac'de 
gazing in his face : 
He like once transformed 
stirred no look to eye her 
Every herb did woo him 
growing in that place . 
Each bird with a ditty , 
prayed him for pity 
in behalf of beauty's Queen : 
Waters gentle murmur , 
craved him to love her , 
yet no like could be seen . 
Boy she said , look on me , 
Still I gaze upon thee , 
speak I pray thee my delight : 
Coldly he replied , 
And in brief denied , 
to bestow on her a sight . 
I am now too young , 
to be won by beauty , 
Tender are my years 
I am yet a bud : 
Fair thou art , she said 
than it is thy duty , 
Wert thou but a blossom 
to effect my good . 
Every beauteous flower , 
boasteth in my power , 
Birds and beasts my laws effect : 
Myrrha thy fair mother , 
most of any other , 
did my lovely hests respect . 
Be with me delighted , 
thou shalt be requited , 
every Nymph on thee shall tend : 
All the Gods shall love thee , 
Man shall not reprove thee , 
Love himself shall be thy friend . 
Wend thee from me Venus , 
I am not disposed , 
thou wring'st me too hard , 
prithee let me go : 
Fie , what a pain it is 
thus to be enclosed , 
If love begin with labour , 
it will end in woe . 
kiss me , I will leave , 
here a kiss receive , 
a short kiss I do it find : 
wilt thou leave me so ? 
yet thou shalt not go , 
breathe once more thy balmy wind . 
It smelleth of the Mirh-tree , 
That to the world did bring thee , 
never was perfume so sweet : 
When she had thus spoken , 
She gave him a token , 
and their naked bosoms meet . 
Now he said , let 's go , 
hark , the hounds are crying , 
Grisly Boar is up , 
Huntsmen follow fast : 
At the name of Boar , 
Venus seemed dying , 
Deadly coloured pale , 
Roses overcast . 
Speak said she , no more , 
of following the Boar , 
thou unfit for such a chase : 
Course the fearful Hare , 
Venison do not spare , 
if thou wilt yield Venus' grace . 
eat the Boar I pray thee , 
Else I still will stay thee , 
herein he vowed to please her mind , 
then her arms enlarged , 
Loath she him discharged , 
forth he went as swift as wind . 
Thetis Phoebus' Steeds 
in the West retained , 
Hunting sport was past , 
Love her love did seek : 
Sight of him too soon 
gentle Queen she gained , 
On the ground he lay 
blood had left his cheek . 
For an orped Swine , 
smit him in the groin , 
deadly wound his death did bring : 
Which when Venus found , 
she fell in a swoon , 
and awaked , her hands did wring . 
Nymphs and Satyrs skipping , 
Came together tripping , 
Echo every cry expressed : 
Venus by her power , 
Turned him to a flower , 
which she weareth in her crest . 
H. C.  

FINIS . 

¶ Thirsis the Shepherd his death's song . 

Thirsis to die desired , 
marking her eyes that to his hart was nearest : 
And she that with his flame no less was fired , 
said to him : O heart 's love dearest : 
Alas , forbear to die now , 
By thee I live , by thee I wish to die too . 
Thirsis that heat refrained , 
wherewith to die poor lover than he hasted , 
Thinking it death while he his looks maintained , 
full fixed on her eyes , full of pleasure , 
and lovely Nectar sweet from them he tasted . 
His dainty Nymph , that now at hand espied 
the harvest of love's treasure , 
Said thus , with eyes all trembling , faint and wasted : 
I die now , 
The Shepherd than replied , 
and I sweet life do die too . 
Thus these two Lovers foutunately died , 
Of death so sweet , so happy , and so desired : 
That to die so again their life retired . 
Out of Master N. Young his Musica Transalpina . 

FINIS . 

¶ Another stanze added after . 

Thirsis enjoyed the graces , 
Of Chloris sweet embraces , 
Yet both their joys were scanted : 
For dark it was , and candlelight they wanted . 
Wherewith kind Cynthia in the heaven that shined , 
her nightly veil resigned , 
and her fair face disclosed . 
then each from others looks such joy derived : 
That both with mere delight died , and revived . 
Out of the same . 

FINIS . 

¶ Another Sonnet thence taken . 

Zephirus brings the time sweetly scenteth 
with flowers and herbs , which Winter's frost exileth : 
Progne now chirpeth , Philomela lamentesh , 
Flora the Garlands white and red compileth : 
Fields do rejoice , the frowning sky relenteth , 
jove to behold his dearest daughter smileth : 
The air , the water , the earth to joy consenteth , 
each creature now to love him reconcileth . 
But with me wretch , the storms of woe persever , 
and heavy sighs which from my hart she straineth 
That took the key thereof to heaven for ever , 
so that singing of birds , and spring-times flowering : 
And Ladies love that men's affection gaineth , 
are like a Desert , and cruel beasts devouring . 
FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's slumber . 

IN Peascod time , when Hound to horn , 
gives ear till Buck be killed : 
And little Lads with pipes of corn , 
sat keeping beasts a field . 
I went to gather Strawberries though , 
by Woods and Groaves full fair : 
And parched my face with Phoebus so , 
in walking in the air . 
That down I laid me by a stream , 
with boughs all over-clad : 
And there I met the strangest dream , 
that ever Shepherd had . 
Me thought I saw each Christmas game , 
each revel all and some : 
And every thing that I can name , 
or may in fancy come . 
The substance of the sights I saw , 
in silence pass they shall : 
Because I lack the skill to draw , 
the order of them all . 
But Venus shall not pass my pen , 
whose maidens in disdain : 
Did feed upon the hearts of men , 
that Cupid's bow had slain . 
And that blind boy was all in blood , 
be-bathed to the ears : 
And like a Conqueror he stood , 
and scorned Lovers tears . 
I have ( quoth he ) more hearts at call , 
than Caesar could command : 
And like the Dear I make them fall , 
that runneth o'er the lawnd . 
One drops down here , another there , 
in bushes as they groan ; 
I bend a scornful careless ear , 
to hear them make their moan . 
Ah Sir ( quoth Honest Meaning ) then , 
thy boy-like brags I hear : 
When thou hast wounded many a man , 
as Huntsman doth the Dear . 
Becomes it thee to triumph so ? 
thy Mother will's it not : 
For she had rather break thy bow , 
than thou shouldst play the sot . 
What saucy merchant speaketh now , 
said Venus in her rage : 
Art thou so blind thou knowest not how 
I govern every age ? 
My Son doth shoot no shaft in waist , 
to me the boy is bound : 
He never found a hart so chaste , 
but he had power to wound , 
Not so fair Goddess ( quoth Freewill , ) 
in me there is a choice : 
And cause I am of mine own ill , 
if I in thee rejoice . 
And when I yield myself a slave , 
to thee , or to thy Son : 
Such recompense I ought not have , 
if things be rightly done . 
Why fool stepped forth Delight , and said , 
when thou art conquered thus : 
then lo dame Lust , that wanton maid , 
thy Mistress is iwus . 
And Lust is Cupid's darling dear , 
behold her where she goes : 
She creeps the milk-warme flesh so near , 
she hides her under close . 
Where many privy thoughts do dwell , 
a heaven here on earth : 
For they have never mind of hell , 
they think so much on mirth . 
Be still Good Meaning , quoth Good Sport , 
let Cupid triumph make : 
For sure his Kingdom shall be short 
if we no pleasure take . 
Fair Beauty , and her play-feares gay , 
the virgin's Vestalles too : 
Shall sit and with their fingers play , 
as idle people do , 
If Honest Meaning fall to frown , 
and I Good Sport decay : 
then Venus' glory will come down , 
and they will pine away . 
Indeed ( quoth Wit ) this your device , 
with strangeness must be wrought , 
And where you see these women nice , 
and looking to be sought : 
With scowling brows their follies check , 
and so give them the Fig : 
Let Fancy be no more at beck , 
when Beauty looks so big . 
When Venus heard how they conspired , 
to murder women so : 
Me thought indeed the house was fired , 
with storms and lightning though . 
The thunderbolt through windows burst . 
and in their steps a wight : 
Which seemed some soul or spirit accursed , 
so ugly was the sight . 
I charge you Ladies all ( quoth he ) 
look to yourselves in haste : 
For if that men so wilful be , 
and have their thoughts so chaste ; 
And they can tread on Cupid's breast , 
and march on Venus' face : 
then they shall sleep in quiet rest , 
when you shall wail your case . 
With that had Venus all in spite , 
stirred up the Dames to ire : 
And Lust fell cold , and Beauty white , 
sat babbling with Desire . 
who 's muttering word's I might not mark , 
much whispering there arose : 
The day did lower , the Sun wext dark , 
away each Lady goes . 
But whether went this angry flock , 
our Lord himself doth know : 
Wherewith full loudly crew the Cock , 
and I awaked so . 
A dream ( quoth I ? ) a dog it is , 
I take thereon no keepe : 
I gauge my head , such toys as this , 
doth spring from lack of sleep . 
Ignoto . 

FINIS . 

IN wont walks , since wont fancies change , 
Some cause there is , which of strange cause doth rise : 
For in each thing whereto my mind doth range , 
Part of my pain me seems engraved lies . 
The Rocks which were of constant mind , the mark 
In climbing steep , now hard refusal show : 
The shading woods seem now my sun to dark , 
And stately hills disdain to look so low . 
The restful Caves , now restless visions give , 
In dales I see each way a hard assent : 
Like late mown Meads , late cut from joy I live , 
Alas , sweet Brooks , do in my tears augment . 
Rocks , woods , hills , caves , dales , meads brooks answer me : 
Infected minds infect each thing they see . 
S. Phil. Sidney . 

FINIS . 

¶ Of disdainful Daphne . 

Shall I say that I love you , 
Daphne disdainful ? 
Sore it costs as I prove you , 
loving is painful . 
Shall I say what doth grieve me ? 
Lover's lament it : 
Daphne will not relieve me , 
late I repent it . 
Shall I die , shall I perish , 
through her unkindness ? 
Love's untaught love to cherish , 
showeth his blindness . 
Shall the hills , shall the valleys , 
the fields the City , 
With the sound of my outcries , 
move her to pity ? 
The deep falls of fair Rivers , 
and the winds turning : 
Are the true music givers , 
unto my mourning . 
Where my flocks daily feeding , 
pining for sorrow : 
At their master's hart bleeding , 
shot with Love's arrow . 
From her eyes to my heartstring , 
was the shaft lanced : 
It made all the woods to ring , 
by which it glanced . 
When this Nymph had used me so , 
than she did hide her : 
Hapless I did Daphne know ; 
hapless I spied her . 
Thus Turtle-like I wailed me , 
for my loves losing : 
Daphne's trust thus did fail me , 
woe worth such choosing . 
M. H. Nowell . 

FINIS . 

¶ The passionate Shepherd to his love . 

Come live with me , and be my love , 
And we will all the pleasures prove , 
That Valleys , groves , hills and fields , 
Woods , or steepy mountain yields . 
And we will sit upon the Rocks , 
Seeing the Shepherds feed their flocks , 
By shallow Rivers , to whose falls , 
Melodious birds sings Madrigals . 
And I will make thee beds of Roses , 
And a thousand fragrant poesies , 
A cap of flowers , and a kirtle , 
Embroidered all with leaves of Myrtle . 
A gown made of the finest wool , 
Which from our pretty Lambs we pull , 
Fair lined slippers for the cold : 
With buckles of the purest gold . 
A belt of straw , and ivy buds , 
With Coral clasps and Amber studs , 
And if these pleasures may thee move , 
Come live with me , and be my love . 
The Shepherd's Swains shall dance & sing , 
For thy delight each May-morning , 
If these delights thy mind may move ; 
then live with me , and be my love . 
Chr. Marlowe . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Nymph's reply to the Shepherd . 

IF all the world and love were young , 
And truth in every Shepherd's tongue , 
These pretty pleasures might me move , 
To live with thee , and be thy love . 
Time drives the flocks from field to sold , 
When Rivers' rage , and Rocks grow cold , 
And Philomel becometh dumb , 
The rest complains of cares to come . 
The flowers do fade , & wanton fields , 
To wayward winter reckoning yields , 
A honey tongue , a hart of gall , 
Is fancies spring , but sorrows fall . 
Thy gowns , thy shoes , thy beds of Roses , 
Thy cap , thy kirtle , and thy poesies , 
Soon break , soon wither , soon forgotten : 
In sollie ripe , in reason rotten . 
Thy belt of straw and ivy buds , 
Thy Coral clasps and Amber studs , 
All these in me no means can move , 
To come to thee , and be thy love . 
But could youth last , and love still breed , 
Had joys no date , nor age no need , 
then these delights my mind might move , 
To live with thee , and be thy love . 
Ignoto . 

FINIS . 

¶ Another of the same nature , made since . 

Come live with me , and be my dear , 
And we will revel all the year , 
In plains and groaves , on hills and dales : 
Where fragrant air breeds sweetest gales . 
There shall you have the beauteous Pine , 
The Cedar , and the spreading Vine , 
And all the woods to be a Screen : 
Lest Phoebus kiss my Summer's Queen . 
The seat for your disport shall be 
Over some River in a tree , 
Where silver sands , and pebbles sing , 
Eternal ditties with the spring . 
There shall you see the Nymphs at play , 
And how the Satyrs spend the day , 
The fishes gliding on the sands : 
Offering their bellies to your hands . 
The birds with heavenly tuned throats , 
Possess woods Echoes with sweet notes , 
Which to your senses will impart , 
A music to inflame the hart . 
Upon the bare and leafless Oak , 
The Ringdoves woo will provoke 
A colder blood than you possess , 
To play with me and do no less . 
In bowers of Laurel trimly dight , 
We will outwear the silent night , 
While Flora busy is to spread : 
Her richest treasure on our bed . 
Ten thousand Glow-worms shall attend , 
And all their sparkling lights shall spend , 
All to adorn and beautify : 
Your lodging with most majesty . 
then in mine arms will I enclose 
Lilies fair mixture with the Rose , 
Whose nice perfections in love's play : 
Shall tune me to the highest key . 
Thus as we pass the welcome night , 
In sportful pleasures and delight , 
The nimble Fairies on the grounds , 
Shall dance and sing melodious sounds . 
If these may serve for to entice , 
Your presence to Love's Paradise , 
then come with me , and be my Dear : 
And we will straight begin the year . 
Ignoto . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Woodmans' walk . 

Through a fair Forest as I went 
upon a Summer's day , 
I met a Woodman quaint and gentleman , 
yet in strange array . 
I marvelled much at his disguise , 
whom I did know so well : 
But thus in terms both grave and wise , 
his mind he 'gan to tell . 
Friend , muse not at this fond array , 
but list a while to me : 
For it hath holp me to furuay 
what I shall show to thee . 
Long lived I in this Forest fair , 
till weary of my weal : 
Abroad in walks I would repair , 
as now I will reveal . 
My first days walk was to the Court , 
where Beauty fed mine eyes : 
Yet found I that the Courtly sport , 
did mask in sly disguise . 
For falsehood sat in fairest looks , 
and friend to friend was coy : 
Court-favour filled but empty books , 
and there I found no joy . 
Desert went naked in the cold , 
when crouching craft was said : 
Sweet words were cheaply bought and sold , 
but none that stood in stead , 
Wit was employed for each man's own , 
plain meaning came too short : 
All these devices seen and known , 
made me forsake the Court. 
Unto the City next I went , 
in hope of better hap : 
Where liberally I launched and spent , 
as set on Fortune's lap . 
The little stock I had in store , 
me thought would ne'er be done : 
Friends flocked about me more and more , 
as quickly lost as won . 
For when I spent , they were kind , 
but when my purse did fail : 
The foremost man came last behind , 
thus love with wealth doth quail . 
Once more for footing yet I strove , 
although the world did frown : 
But they before that held me up , 
together trod me down . 
And lest once more I should arise , 
they sought my quite decay : 
then got I into this disguise , 
and thence I stole away . 
And in my mind ( me thought ) I said , 
Lord bless me from the City : 
Where simpleness is thus betrayed , 
and no remorse or pity . 
Yet would I not give over so , 
but once more try my fate : 
And to the Country than I go , 
to live in quiet state . 
There did appear no subtle shows , 
but yea and nay went smoothly : 
But Lord how Country-folks can gloze , 
when they speak most sooth . 
more craft was in a buttoned cap , 
and in an old wives rail : 
then in my life it was my hap , 
to see on Down or Dale . 
There was no open forgery , 
but under-handed gleaning : 
Which they call Country policy , 
but hath a worse meaning . 
Some good boldface bears out the wrong , 
because he gains thereby : 
The poor man's back is cracked ere long , 
yet there he let's him lie . 
And no degree among them all , 
but had such close intending : 
That I upon my knees did fall , 
and prayed for their amending . 
Back to the woods I got again , 
in mind perplexed sore : 
Where I found ease of all this pain , 
and mean to stray no more . 
There , City , Court , nor Country too , 
can any way annoy me : 
But as a woodman ought to do , 
I freely may employ me . 
There live I quietly alone , 
and none to trip my talk : 
wherefore when I am dead and gone , 
think on the Woodmans' walk . 
Shep. jonie . 

FINIS . 

¶ Thirsis the Shepherd , to his Pipe.  

Like Desert woods , with darksome shades obscured , 
Where dreadful beasts , where hateful horror reigneth . 
Such is my wounded hart , whom sorrow payneth , 
The Trees are fatal shaft , to death enured , 
That cruel love within my breast maintaineth , 
To whet my grief , when as my sorrow waineth . 
The ghastly beasts , my thoughts in cares assured , 
Which wage me war , while hart no succour gaineth : 
With false suspect , and fear that still remaineth . 
The horrors , burning sights by cares procured , 
Which forth I send , whilst weeping eye complaineth : 
To cool the heat , the helpless hart containeth . 
But shafts , but cares , but sighs , horrors unrecured , 
Were enough esteemed , if for these pains awarded : 
My faithful love by her might be regarded . 
Ignoto . 

FINIS . 

¶ An excellent Sonnet of a Nimph.  

Virtue , beauty , and speech , did strike , wound , charm , 
My hart , eyes , ears , with wonder , love , delight : 
First , second , last , did bind , enforce , and arm , 
His works , shows , suits , with wit , grace , and vowes-might . 
Thus honour , liking , trust , much , far , and deep , 
Held , pierced , possessed , my judgement , sense , and will ; 
Till wrongs , contempt , deceit , did grow , steal , creep , 
Bands , favour , faith , to break , defile , and kill . 
then grief , unkindness , proof , took , kindled , taught , 
Well grounded , noble , due , spite , rage , disdain : 
But ah , alas , ( in vain ) my mind , sight , thought , 
Doth him , his face , his words , leave shun , refrain . 
For nothing , time , nor place , can lose , quench , ease : 
Mine own , embraced , sought , knot , fire , disease . 
S. Phil. Sidney . 

FINIS . 

¶ A Report Song in a dream , between a Shepherd and his Nimph.  

Shall we go dance the hay ? The hay ? 
Never pipe could ever play 
better Shepherds Roundelay . 
Shall we go sing the Song ? The Song ? 
Never Love did ever wrong : 
fair Maids hold hands all along . 
Shall we go learn to woe ? To woe ? 
Never thought came ever too , 
better deed could better do . 
Shall we go learn to kiss ? To kiss ? 
Never hart could ever miss 
comfort , where true meaning is . 
Thus at base they run , They run , 
When the sport was scarce begun : 
but I waked , and all was done . 
N. Breton . 

FINIS . 

¶ Another of the same . 

Say that I should say , I love ye ? 
would you say , 't is but a saying ? 
But if Love in prayers move ye ? 
will you not be moved with praying ? 
Think I think that Love should know ye ? 
will you think , 't is but a thinking ? 
But if Love the thought do show ye , 
will ye lose your eyes with winking ? 
write that I do write you blessed , 
will you write , 't is but a writing ? 
But if truth and Love confess it : 
will ye doubt the true enditing ? 
no , I say , and think , and write it , 
writ , and think , and say your pleasure : 
Love , and truth , and I indite it , 
you are blessed out of measure . 
N. Breton . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's conceit of Prometheus . 

Prometheus' , when first from heaven high , 
He brought down fire , ere then on earth unseen : 
Fond of delight , a Satire standing by , 
Gave it a kiss , as it like sweet had been . 
Feeling forthwith the other burning power , 
Wood with the smart , with shouts and shriek shrill : 
He sought his ease in River , field , and bower , 
But for the time his grief went with him still . 
So silly I , with that unwonted sight , 
In human shape , an Angel from above : 
Feeding mine eyes , th' impression there did light , 
That since I run , and rest as pleaseth Love. 
The difference is , the Satyrs lips , my hart : 
He for a while , I evermore have smart . 
S. E. D.  

FINIS . 

¶ Another of the same . 

A Satire once did run away for dread , 
with sound of horn , which he himself did blow : 
Fearing , and feared thus , from himself he fled , 
deeming strange evili in that he did not know . 
Such causeless fears , when coward minds do take , 
it makes them fly that , which they fain would have : 
As this poor beast , who did his rest forsake , 
thinking not why , but how himself to save . 
Even thus might I , for doubts which I conceive 
of mine own words , mine own good hap betray : 
And thus might I , for fear of may be , leave 
the sweet pursuit of my desired prey . 
Better like I thy Satire , dearest Dyer : 
Who burned his lips , to kiss fair shining fire . 
S. Phil. Sidney . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's Sun . 

Fair Nymphs , sit ye here by me , 
on this flowery green : 
While we this merry day do see , 
some things but seldom seen . 
Shepherds all , now come sit around , 
on yond checquerd plain : 
While from the woods we here resound , 
some come for Love's pain . 
Every bird sits on his bow , 
As brag as he that is the best : 
then sweet Love , reveal how 
our minds may be at rest ? 
Echo thus replied to me , 
Sat under yonder Beechen tree , 
And there Love shall show thee 
how all may be redressed . 
Hark , hark , hark the Nightingale , 
in her mourning lay : 
She tells her stories woeful tale , 
to warn ye if she may . 
Fair maids , take ye heed of love , 
it is a perilous thing : 
As Philomele herself did prove , 
abused by a King. 
If Kings play false , believe no men , 
That make a seemly outward show : 
But caught once , beware then , 
for than begins your woe . 
They will look babies in your eyes , 
And speak so fair as fair may be : 
But trust them in no wise , 
example take by me . 
Fie , fie , said the Threstle-cocke , 
you are much too blame : 
For one man's fault , all men to blot , 
inpayring their good name . 
Admit you were used amiss , 
by that ungentle King , 
It follows not that you for this , 
should all men's honours wring . 
There be good , and there be bad , 
And some are false , and some are true : 
As good choice is still had 
amongst us men , as you . 
Women have faults as well as we , 
Some say for our one , they have three . 
then smite not , nor by't not , 
when you as faulty be . 
Peace , peace , quoth Madge-howles then , 
sitting out of sight : 
For women are as good as men , 
and both are good alike . 
Not so , said the little Wren , 
difference there may be : 
The Cock always commands the He●●● 
than men shall go for me . 
then Robbin-redbrest stepping in , 
Would needs take up this tedious strife , 
Protesting , true-loving , 
In either legthened life . 
If I love you , and you love me , 
Can there be better harmony ? 
Thus ending contending , 
Love must the umpsere be . 
Fair Nymphs , Love must be your guide , 
chaste , unspotted love : 
To such as do your thralls betide , 
tesolu ' de without remove . 
Likewise jolly Shepherd Swains 
if you do respect , 
The happy issue of your pains , 
true love must you direct . 
You hear the birds contend for love , 
The bubbling springs do sing sweet love , 
The Mountains and Fountains 
do Echo naught but love . 
Take hands than Nymphs & Shepherds all , 
And to this River's musics fall 
Sing true love , and chaste love 
begins our Festuall . 
Shep. Tony . 

FINIS . 

¶ Colin the enamoured Shepherd , singeth this passion of love . 

OH Gentle Love , ungentle for thy deed , 
thou makest my hart , 
a bloody mark , 
With piercing shot to bleed . 
Shoot soft sweet Love , for fear thou shoot amiss , 
for fear too keen , 
thy arrows been : 
And hit the hart , where my beloved is . 
Too fair that fortune were , nor never I 
shall be so blessed , 
among the rest : 
That love shall cease on her by sympathy . 
then since with Love my prayers bear no boot , 
this doth remain , 
to ease my pain , 
I take the wound , and die at Venus' foot . 
Geo. Peele . 

FINIS . 

¶ Oenone's complaint in blank verse . 

Melpomene the Muse of tragic songs , 
With mournful tunes in stole of dismal hue , 
Assist a silly Nymph to wail her woe , 
And leave thy lusty company behind . 
This luckless wreath becomes not me to wear , 
The Poplar tree for triumph of my love , 
then as my joy , my pride of love is left ; 
Be thou unclothed of thy lovely green . 
And in thy leaves my fortunes written be , 
And then some gentle wind let blow abroad , 
That all the world may see , how false of love , 
False Paris hath to his Oenone been . 
Geo. Peele . 

FINIS . 

¶ The Shepherd's Consort . 

Hark jolly Shepherds , 
hark yond lusty ringing : 
How cheerfully the bells dance , 
the whilst the Lads are springing ? 
Go we then , why sit we here delaying : 
And all yond merry wanton lasses playing ? 
How gailie Flora leads it , 
and sweetly treads it ? 
The woods and groaves they ring , 
lovely resounding : 
With Echo's sweet rebounding . 
Out of Ma. Morleys' Madrigals . 

FINIS . 

