AN Excellent Poem , upon the longing of a blessed heart : which loathing the world , doth long to be with Christ. With an Addition , upon the definition of love . 

Compiled by Nicholas Breton , Gentleman . 

Cupio dissolui , & esse cum Christo.  

Imprinted at London , for john Browne , and john Deane , 1601.  

To the Right Honourable , my singular good Lord , the Favourer of all good Studies , and Lover of all virtues , the Lord North , Nicholas Breton wishes increase of honour , continuance of health , and eternal happiness . 

Right Honourable , knowing the nature of men so different , that it is hard for one to speak of all ; & the delights of the most part of the world so far from longing after heaven , that if the mercy of God were not the greater , the Devil would make too great a Harvest on the Earth : sorry to see the dispositions of the wicked , and wishing the number of the virtuous were increased ( among the which , if I might without flattery speak a truth , I should note your Honour , for a kind of Phoenix among men ) I have , upon my knowledge of your worthiness , in the good regard of all well disposed Spirits , presumed , out of the humble Meditations of no worldly mind , to present your Honour , with a little volume of the vain delights of the worldly , and the better longinge of the godly . In which , I am persuaded , when your Honour , hath noted , what is love , and what is worth the loving , you will love me nothing the worse , for my love's longing . But leaving to your honourable discretion , the liking of my soul's labour , and commandment of my heart's love : in the humility of affectionate service , I rest 

Your Honours , in all humble and bounden duty , Nicholas Breton . 

To the Reader . 

IF you love yourself , or like to be loved , it were good , you did first know what love is ; where it is to be sought ; and how to be had : which in this little lesson following , you may hap to hit on . For if you mistake the matter , as many have done , that set their wits a woll-gathering , upon the back of a Woodcock , in thinking love to be either nothing , or at least as little worth ; or such a kind of Riddle as is scarcely worth the reading : you may hap either never find what it is , repent the seeking , or not care for the having of it ; or standing in your own light , be but little beloved for your lost labour . But , if with the eye of a careful heart , you will look into the love of the soul , there I would be glad to see you longing , and wish you ( having not to trouble you with more words than matter ) the love of God , you to love me as I do you , and God to love us all : and so I end . 

Yours , in the love of charity , Nicholas Breton . 

Two hopeful Twins , joint issues of one brain , 
A Ravished Soul , and longing Spirit sends 
Into your bosoms high and heavenly train , 
That are wits kinsmen , and the Muse's friends . 
Embrace them , love them , and with judgements view 
Eye them . Believe me , Reader , thou shalt find 
Their limbs well measured , and proportions true ; 
no part dissenting from their perfect kind . 
Only the fashion sits not on their clothes , 
To make them sightly to fantastic eyes . 
Pallas , not Venus , did the work dispose , 
Cutting their garments from Angelic skies . 
Plain is their habit , yet Divine and sweet : 
Fit for the wise , but for the wisest meet . 
H. T. Gent.  

Ad Librum . 

Go Book , and balk those eyes , 
That love but shadows sights : 
And let them gape for flies , 
That make but Buzzards flights . 
And tell the humble heart , 
That lunges in better love , 
To him thou wilt impart 
Thy spirits Turtle dove . 
Whose flesh , the soul doth feed , 
With that eternal sweet , 
Wherein hearts eyes may read , 
How life and love do meet , 
To make the blessed see 
The love , that longeth best : 
And what those longinge be , 
Whose love is never blessed . 
That love not misconceived in thought , 
May never long for that is naught . 
Bretons Longing . 

What life hath he that never thinks of Love ? 
And what such love , but hath a special liking ? 
And , what such liking , but will seek to prove ? 
The best to find , the comfort of his seeking ? 
But , while fond thoughts in folly's pack are peeking , 
Better conceited wits may easily find 
The truest wealth that may enrich the mind . 
But , since the difference 'twixt the good , and bad , 
Is easily seen in notes of their delights : 
And that those notes are needful to be had , 
To see whose eyes are of the clearest sights : 
Whose are the days , and whose may be the nights : 
From the poor Crouch , unto the Princely Crown , 
I will the difference , as I find , set down . 
The worldly Prince lunges to increase his State , 
To conquer Kingdoms , and to wear their Crowns , 
A foreign power , by forces to abate , 
To make but footstools , of their fairest Towns , 
And , hate's the spirits of those home-made Clowns , 
That will not venture life for Victory , 
But yet , forgets that God should have the glory . 
The worldly Counsellor doth beaten his brains , 
How to advise his Sovereign for the best , 
And in his place , doth take continual pains , 
To keep his Prince in such a pleasing rest , 
That he may still be leaning on his breast , 
Thinking his hap unto a heaven so wrought : 
But yet perhaps , God is not in his thought . 
The Soldier , he delighteth all in Arms , 
To see his colours in the field displayed , 
And lunges to see the issue of those harms , 
That may reveal an enemy dismayed , 
A Fort defeated , or a Town betrayed , 
And still to be in action , day and night : 
But little thinks on God in all the fight . 
The worldly Scholar loves a world of Books , 
And spends his life in many an idle line : 
Mean while his heart , to heaven but little looks , 
Nor loves to think upon a thought divine : 
These thoughts of ours ( alas ) so low incline , 
We seek to know , what nature can effect : 
But unto God , have small , or no respect . 
The Poet , with his fictions , and his fancies , 
Pleaseth himself with humorous inventions : 
Which well considered , are a kind of franzies , 
That carry little truth in their intentions : 
While wit and reason , falling at contentions , 
Make wisdom find , that follies strong illusion 
Brings wit and senses wholly to confusion . 
The worldly Lawyer studyeth right and wrong : 
But how he judgeth , there the question lies . 
For , if you look for what his love doth long , 
It is the profit of his plea doth rise , 
There is the worldly Lawyer's Paradise : 
He neither lunges , the right , nor wrong , to see : 
But to be fingering of the golden fee.  
The Cosmographer doth the world survey , 
The hills , and dales , the nooks and little crooks , 
The woods , the plains , the high , and the by-way , 
The Seas , the Rivers , and the little brooks : 
All these he finds within his compassed books ; 
And with his needle , makes his measure even : 
But , all this whlie he doth not think of heaven . 
Th'astronomer stands staring on the Sky , 
And will not have a thought beneath a star : 
But , by his speculation doth espy 
A world of wonder , coming from afar ; 
And tells of times , and natures , peace and war : 
Of Mars his sword , and Mercury his Rod : 
But all this while , he little thinks on God.  
The worldly Merchant ventreth far and near ? 
And shuns nor Land , nor Sea to make a gain , 
Thinks neither travail , care , nor cost too dear , 
If that his profit countervail his pain , 
While so his mind is on the getting vain , 
That if his Ship , do safely come on shore , 
Gold is his God , and he desire's no more . 
The worldly Courtier learns to crouch and creep , 
Speak fair , wait close , observe his time and place , 
And wake , and watch and scarcely catch a sleep , 
Till he have got into some favours' grace , 
And will all cunning in his course embrace , 
That may unto Authority advance : 
But if he think of God , it is a chance . 
The worldly Farmer fills his Barns with Corn , 
And ploughs , and sows , and digs , and delves , & hedges , 
Looks to his cattle , will not lose a horn , 
Fels down his woods , and falls unto his wedges , 
And grinds his Axes , and doth mend their edges , 
And dear sells , that he good cheap hath bought : 
But , all the while God is not in his thought . 
The Sailor , he doth by his compass stand , 
And weighs his anchors , and doth hoist his sails , 
And lunges for nothing , but to get on land , 
While many a storm his starting spirit quails , 
And fear of Pirates , his poor heart assails : 
But once on shore , carouse and casts off fear , 
Yet scarcely thinks on God that set him there . 
The worldly Preacher talks of Sacrifice , 
Of Sacraments , and holy Mysteries : 
Mean while , he lunges but for the Benefice , 
That should preserve his purse from beggary's , 
Because he loves no worldly miseries . 
For many a Preacher , that God's word hath taught , 
Shows by his life , God lives not in his thought . 
The world's Physician , that in sickness tries 
The nature of the herbs and Minerals : 
And , in his simples , and his compounds spies , 
Which way to make the Patient's funerals , 
Or profit by his Cures in generals , 
Lunges but to see how long they may endure : 
But scarcely thinks on God in all the Cure.  
The world's Musician , that doth tune his voice , 
Unto such notes as Musics skill hath set : 
Whose heart doth in the harmony rejoice , 
Where pleasing Consorts are most kindly met : 
But still perhaps his spirit doth forget , 
In all his hymns , and songs , and sweetest lays , 
To think of God , or of his worthy praise . 
The Politician hath a world of plots , 
In which his spirit hath his special spies , 
Ties , and unties a Thousand sundry knots , 
In which the substance of his study lies : 
And many tricks his close experience tries , 
How to deceive the world with many a wile : 
But never thinks on God in all the while . 
The Traveller delighteth in the view 
Of change and choice of sundry kind of creatures : 
To mark the habits , and to note the hue 
Of far born people , and their sundry natures , 
Their shapes , their speech , their gates , their looks , their features , 
And lunges abroad to make his life's abode : 
Yet haply never lunges to be with God.  
The Painter in his colours takes delight , 
And near the life , to make the livelihood : 
While only shadows do deceive the sight , 
That take such pleasure in a piece of wood : 
But doth not long for that same living food , 
Which neither eye hath seen , nor heart conceived , 
The God of truth , that never soul deceived . 
The Lover , he , but on his Lady thinketh , 
And how to catch her in a kind content , 
And looks , and leers , and trolls the eye , and winketh , 
And seeks how thoughts in silence may be sent , 
And lunges to see the end of his intent , 
And thinks himself a King , to get a kiss : 
But where is God , in all these thoughts of his ? 
th' artificer that hath a work to do , 
And brings his hand unto his heads devose , 
Lunges till he see , what it will come unto , 
And how his pains have profit in the price , 
And having cast it over twice or thrice , 
joys in his heart : but scarcely hath a thought , 
To thank his God , that him the cunning taught . 
The Churl , that sits and champes upon his chaff , 
And will not stir a foot from his Barn flower , 
Except it be , among his bags to laugh , 
He can the poor so with his purse devour , 
Lunges but to use the poison of his power , 
T' enrich himself , to bring a world to naught , 
Shows , that God never dwells within his thought . 
As for those beggarly conditions 
Of basest trades , that like to miry hogs , 
Do show their spirits dispositions , 
In digging with their noses under logs , 
For slime and worms : or like to ravening dogs , 
Long but for that , which doth the belly fill , 
Most of them think on God against their william  
These are the worldlings , and their world's delights , 
Whose longing , God knows , is not worth the loving : 
These are the objects of those evil sights , 
That virtue hath from her fair eyes removing . 
These are the passions of corruptions proving : 
But , they that love , and long for God his sight , 
In worldly trifles never take delight . 
The Prince anointed with the oil of grace , 
Who sits with mercy , in the seat of peace , 
Will long to see his Saviour in the face , 
And , all his right into his hands release , 
( Whose only sight would make all sorrow cease ) 
And lay both Crown , and Kingdom at his feet , 
But of his presence to enjoy the sweet . 
The Counsellor with heavenly grace inspired , 
Where wisdom guide's the lineaments of wit , 
Although he hath to honour's place aspired , 
His heart doth show , it lunges not after it : 
His love desire's , a higher mark to hit : 
For while he leaneth on his Prince's breast , 
His longing is , but with his God to rest . 
The Courtier , that is once in God his grace , 
What ever countenance in the Court he bears , 
His heart aspireth to a better place : 
Which humble love doth long for with those tears , 
Which all too naught , the pride of pleasure wears , 
And never rests until his God he see , 
With whom his soul in love doth long to be . 
The Soldier , that hath fought the spirits fight , 
Will put off war , and long to live in peace , 
And not in discord , but concord delight , 
Where gracious kindness , makes all quarrels cease , 
While patience , doth all passions so appease , 
That , he shall find that Soldier only blessed , 
Whose faith , in God , doth set his soul at rest . 
The Lawyer , that hath read the Laws of God , 
And in his heart is touched with his love : 
And knows the smart of the supernal Rod , 
Will one day work , for silly souls behoove . 
Who have their comfort in the heavens above , 
Will leave all golden fees , to see the grace , 
That mercy's justice shows in jesus face . 
The Scholar , that begins with Christ his cross , 
And seeks good speed , but in the holy Ghost , 
Finds by his book , that silver is but dross , 
And all his labour , in his study lost , 
Where faith , of mercy , cannot sweetly boast , 
And love doth long for any other bliss , 
then , what in God , and in his grace is . 
And such a Poet as the Psalmist was , 
Who had no mind , but on his Master's love : 
Whose Muses did the world in Music pass , 
That only song but of the souls behoove , 
In giving glory to the God above , 
Would all world's fictions wholly say aside , 
And only long , but with the Lord to bide . 
The Cosmographer , that by rules of grace , 
Surueys the City of the heavenly Saints , 
Will never long for any earthly place , 
That either pen prescribes , or Painter paints : 
But in the faith , that never fails , nor faints , 
Will long to see in heavens jerusalem , 
The gracious God of glories Diadem . 
The true Astronomer , that sees the Sun , 
And knows that God , from whom it takes his light , 
And in the course , the Moon and stars do run , 
Finds the true guider of the day and night , 
Lunges but to see his only blessed sight , 
Who Sun , and Moon , and stars their brightness gives , 
And , in whose face , all brightness glory lives . 
The Mariner , that oft hath past the Seas , 
And in his perils , seen the power of God , 
Whose only mercy doth the storms appease , 
And brings the Ship unto his wished Road , 
Will never long , on earth to make abode : 
But in the heavens , to see that blessed hand , 
That , at his beck , so rules both Sea and land  
The Merchant , that hath cast within his mind , 
How much the spirits gain the flesh surmounts , 
And by his faith , in mercy's love doth find 
The joyful sum of such a soul's accounts , 
As to salvation of the whole amounts , 
Will leave the world , but on Christ's face to look , 
Which all the faithful make their living Book . 
The Farmer , that hath felt his neighbour's need , 
And found , how God , and charity are one : 
And knows there is a better kind of feed , 
then grass , or Corn , or flesh , or blood , or bone , 
Will wish himself from his world's treasure gone , 
Upon those joys to feed in mercy's bliss , 
Where Christ his presence is heaven's Paradise . 
The true Physician that doth know the natures , 
And dispositions of each Element , 
And knows that God created hath all Creatures 
Beneath , and eke above the Firmament , 
And over all , hath only Government , 
Will only long that glorious God to know , 
That gives the sickness and doth cure it so . 
The soul's Musician , that doth find the ground , 
Of truest Music , but in God his grace , 
Will think all singing , but an idle sound , 
Where God his praise hath not the highest place , 
And only lunges to see that blessed face , 
Which makes the Virgins , Saints , and Angels sing , 
An Halleluiah , to their heavenly King.  
The Preacher , that doth in his soul believe 
The word of God , which to the world he teacheth , 
And in his spirit inwardly doth grieve , 
He cannot live so heavenly as he preacheth , 
While faith no further then to mercy reaches , 
Would wish in soul , to leave his Benefice , 
To make himself to Christ a Sacrifice . 
The Politician , that hath plotted much , 
In worldly matters greatly to his gain , 
Will find , if God do once his spirit touch , 
Zacheus heart will have another vain , 
To climb aloft , and to come down again , 
And leave all plots , to come but to that place , 
Where he might see sweet jesus in the face . 
th' artificer , that hath a work in hand , 
And feels the grace of God within his heart : 
And by the same , doth surely understand , 
How God alone perfecteth every part , 
And only is the giver of all Art , 
Will gladly leave his work , and long to be , 
Where he might Christ his soul's workmaster see . 
The Painter , that doth paint a dainty Image , 
So near the life as may be to the same , 
And makes an Ass unto an Owl do homage , 
While shadows bring the senses out of frame , 
If God his heart , once with his love inflame , 
His Pictures all will under foot be trod , 
And he will long , but for the living God.  
The Traveller , that walks the world about , 
And sees the glorious works of God on high , 
If God his grace once kindly find him out , 
And unto heaven do lift his humble eye , 
His soul in faith , will such perfections spy , 
That leaving all , that he on earth can see , 
His love will long , but with the Lord to be . 
The Churl , that never chanced upon a thought 
Of charity , nor what belongs thereto , 
If God his grace , have once his spirit brought , 
To feel what good the faithful almers do , 
The love of Christ will so his spirit woo , 
That he will leave Barnes corn , and bags of Coin , 
And land and life , with jesus love to join . 
Thus , from the Prince , unto the poorest state , 
Who seems to live , as void of reason's sense , 
If God once come , who never comes too late , 
And touch the soul , with his sweet Quintessence 
Of mercies gracious glorious patience : 
His soul will leave what ever it doth love , 
And long to live , but with the Lord above . 
Now , to the tenure of that longing time , 
That loving spirits think too long will last , 
The maid new married , in her pregnant prime , 
Lunges till the time of forty weeks be past , 
And blameth time , he makes no greater haste , 
Till in her arms , she sweetly have received , 
Her Comforts fruit within her womb conceived . 
Thus forty weeks , she labour's all in love , 
And at the last doth travail all in pain : 
But , shortly after doth such comfort prove , 
As glads her heart , and makes all whole again : 
So , in her Infants pretty smiling vain , 
Pleasing herself , that all her grief is gone , 
When she may have her babe to look upon . 
Penelope , at her dear loves departing , 
In sober kindness did conceal her care : 
Though in her heart she had that inward smarting , 
That times continuance after did declare : 
Where constant love did show , without compare , 
A perfect passion of true virtues vain , 
Longing but for Ulysses home again . 
How many years , the Story doth set down , 
In which she felt , the gall of absence grief : 
When constant faith , on foul effects did frown , 
Which sought to be to charity a thief , 
Of nature's beauty , the true honour chief : 
Long languishing in absence cruel hell : 
But , when she saw his presence all is well . 
But , if I may in holy lines begin , 
To speak of joseph ▪ and his longing love 
Unto his brethren , but to Benjamin 
To note the passion , nature did approve , 
Which did such tears in his affection move , 
That well from thence , the Proverb sweet might spring , 
The love of brethren is a blessed thing . 
Well may I see the notes of nature's grief , 
In absence of the object of affection : 
And longing for the substance of relief , 
In presence find the life of love's perfection , 
While eye , and heart , are led by one direction . 
Yet all this while , I do not truly prove 
The blessed longing of the spirits love . 
When Mary Magdalene , so full of sin , 
As made her heart a harbour of ill thought , 
Felt once the grace of God to enter in , 
And drive them out that her destruction sought : 
Her soul was then to jesus love so wrought , 
As that with tears in true affect did prove 
The pleasing longing of the Spirits love . 
In grief she went all weeping to his grave , 
Longing to see him , or alive or dead : 
And would not cease until her love might have 
Her longed fruit on which her spirit fed : 
One blessed crumb of that sweet heavenly bread 
Of Angel's food , but of her Lord a sight ; 
Whose heavenly presence proved her soul's delight . 
Midas did long for nothing else burr Gold , 
And he was kindly choked for his choice : 
Such longing love doth with too many hold , 
Which only do in worldly dross rejoice . 
But did they harken to the heavenly voice , 
Their Diamonds should not so for dross be sold , 
And they would long for God , and not for gold . 
Zacheus , too long , longed for such dross , 
Till jesus came , his spirits further joy ; 
And then he found his gain did yield but loss , 
While sin in conscience bred the souls annoy , 
And unto heaven the world was but a toy : 
He left it all and climbed up a tree , 
To show his longing , how but Christ to see . 
And well he longed that so his love received ; 
Who sweetly saw , and kindly called him down : 
His stature low ; but his love high conceived : 
Who so was graced by mercy's glories crown , 
As , having cause upon his sins to frown , 
Forgave the works that did deserve damnation , 
And filled his house with glory of salvation . 
A blessed longing of a blessed Love. 
Would so all souls did love , and so did long : 
And in their longing might so sweetly prove 
The gracious ground of such a glorious song , 
As kills all sin , that doth the spirit wrong : 
And sing with Simeon at his Saviour's sight , 
O now my soul depart in peace delight . 
O blessed Simeon , blessed was thy love , 
And thy Love's longing for thy Saviour so : 
Who wrought so sweetly for thy souls behoove , 
As , from thy prayers would not let thee go , 
Till to thy love , he did his presence show : 
Which made thee sing , when sorrows all did cease ; 
Lord , let thy Servant now depart , in peace . 
For I , according to thy word , have seen 
The glorious substance of my soul's salvation : 
Thy word , in whom my trust hath ever been , 
And now hath found my comforts confirmation , 
Thus did he make a joyful declaration 
Of that sweet sight of his sweet Saviour's face , 
That was the glory of his spirits grace . 
How many years , he all in prayer spent , 
For the beholding of his blessed love : 
What was the issue of his hopes event , 
And how his prayers did prevail above , 
That so his God did unto mercy move , 
As to his arms , to send his only Son , 
The Story doth all th'apostles run . 
He was well called , good Simeon , for that grace , 
That God had given the spirit of his love : 
That love that longed , but in his Saviour's face , 
To see the blessing of his souls behoove : 
And blessed prayer , that did truly prove , 
A blessed soul , that could not prayer cease , 
Till Christ his presence came to give it peace . 
So should all souls , their Love's chief longing have , 
All souls I mean , of every Christian hart , 
That seek or hope , both heart and soul to save , 
From Hell , damnation , and supernal smart : 
This is the love , that in the living part , 
Of mercy's power , shall find that blessedness , 
That is the spirits only happiness . 
Nor can love look to limit out a time , 
But now , and then , and evermore attend : 
For he shall never to that comfort clime , 
That will not all his life in prayer spend , 
Until he see his Saviour in the end : 
In whose sweet face , doth all and only rest 
The heavenly joy , that makes the spirit blessed . 
Blessed be the spirit , that so longs and loves 
As did Zacheus and good Simeon : 
And , from his faithful prayer never moves , 
Until he find his life to look upon : 
And , in such love is all so over gone , 
That , in such joy his heart and spirit dwells , 
As , having Christ , it cares for nothing else . 
O blessed Christ , the essence of all bliss , 
All blessed souls loves longings chief delight : 
What heart can think , how that soul blessed is , 
That ever hath his Saviou●r in his sight ? 
The sunny day that never hath a night . 
O that my spirit might so ever pray , 
That I might live to see that blessed day . 
The day that only springeth from on high , 
That high day light , wherein the heavens do live : 
The life that loves , but to behold that eye , 
Which doth the glory of all brightness give , 
And from th'enlightned , doth all darkness drive : 
Where Saints do see , and Angels know to be 
A brighter light , than Saints or Angels see . 
In this lights love , O , let me ever live , 
And let my soul have never other love , 
But , all the pleasures of the world to give , 
The smallest spark of such a joy to prove , 
And ever pray unto my God above , 
To grant my humble soul good Simeons' grace , 
In love to see my Saviour in the face . 
OH face more fair , than fairness can contain : 
OH eye more bright than brightness can declare : 
OH light more pure , than passion can explain : 
OH life more blessed , then may with bliss compare : 
OH heaven of heavens , where such perfections are , 
Let my soul live to love , to long , to be 
Ever in prayer , but to look on thee . 
But , o unworthy eye of such a sight : 
And all unworthy heart of such a love : 
Unworthy love , to long for such a light : 
Unworthy longing such a life to prove : 
Unworthy life , so high a suit to move . 
Thus , all unworthy of so high a grace , 
How shall I see my Saviour in the face . 
All by the prayer of true penitence , 
Where faith in tears attendeth grace's time , 
My Soul doth hope in mercy's patience , 
My heart all cleansed from my sinful crime , 
To see the springing of Aurora's prime , 
In those bright beams of that sweet blessed Sun 
Of my dear God , in whom all bliss begun . 
And that my soul may such a blessing see , 
Let my heart pray , and praying never cease , 
Till heart and soul may both together be : 
Blessed in thy sight all sorrows doth release : 
And with good Simeon then depart in peace . 
O then ; but then , and only ever then , 
Blessed be my soul , sweet jesus say Amen . 
Gloria in excelsis Deo.  

What is Love.  

Men talk of love , that know not what it is . 
For could we know what love may be indeed , 
We would not have our minds so led amiss , 
With idle toys , that wanton humours feed : 
But , in the rules of higher reason read 
What love may be , so from the world concealed : 
Yet , all too plainly , to the world revealed . 
Some one doth fain , Love is a blinded God , 
His blindness , him more half a Devil shows . 
For Love , with blindness , never made abode : 
Which all the power of wit and reason knows : 
And from whose grace , the ground of knowledge grows : 
But such blind eyes , that can no better see , 
Shall never live to come , where love may be . 
Some only think it only is a thought , 
bred in the eye , and buzzeth in the brain , 
And breaks the heart , until the mind be brought , 
To feed the senses , with a sortie vain , 
Till wits once gone , come never home again : 
And then too late , in mad conceit do prove , 
Fantastic wits are ever void of love . 
Some think it is a babe of beauties getting , 
Nursed up by Nature , and times only breeding : 
A pretty work , to set the wits a whetting , 
Upon a fancy of an humours feeding ; 
Where reason finds but little sense in reeding . 
no , no : I see , children must go to School ; 
Philosophy is not for every fool . 
And , some again think there is no such thing ▪ 
But in conceit , a kind of coined jest : 
Which only doth of idle humours spring , 
Like to a Bird within a Phoenix nest ; 
Where never yet did any young one rest . 
But let such fools take heed of blasphemy : 
For love is high in his Divinity . 
But to be short , to learn to find him out , 
't is not in beauties eyes , nor babies hearts : 
He must go beaten another world about , 
And seek for love , but in those living parts 
Of reasons light , that is the life of Arts ; 
That will perceive , though he can never see 
The perfect essence whereof love may be . 
It is too clear a brightness for man's eye : 
Too high a wisdom for his wits to find : 
Too deep a secret for his sense to try : 
And , all too heavenly , for his earthly mind ▪ 
It is a grace of such a glorious kind , 
As gives the soul , a secret power to know it . 
But gives no heart , nor spirit power to show it . 
It is of heaven and earth the highest beauty , 
The powerful hand of heavens and earth's creation ▪ 
The due commander of all spirits duty , 
The Deity of Angel's Adoration : 
The glorious substance of the soul's salvation : 
The light of Truth , that all perfection trieth , 
And life that gives the life that never dieth . 
It is the height of God , and hate of ill , 
Triumph of Truth , and falsehood's overthrow : 
The only worker of the highest will ; 
And only knowledge , that doth knowledge know : 
And only ground where it doth only grow : 
It is in sum the substance of all bliss , 
Without whose blessing all thing nothing is . 
But in itself , itself , it all containeth : 
And from itself , but of itself it giveth : 
It nothing loseth , and it nothing gaineth , 
But in the glory of itself , it lives : 
A joy , which soon away all sorrow driveth : 
The proved truth , of all perfections story , 
Our God incomprehensible in glory . 
Thus , is it not a Riddle to be read : 
And yet , a secret to be found in reading : 
But , when the heart joins issue with the head , 
In settled faith to seek the spirits feeding , 
While in the wounds that ever fresh are bleeding , 
In Christ his side , the faithful soul may see , 
In perfect life , what perfect love may be . 
no further seek , then for to find out love , 
then in the lives of everliving bliss , 
Where careful conscience may in comfort prove , 
In sacred love , that heavenly substance is , 
That never guide's the gracious mind amiss : 
But makes the soul , to find in life's behoof , 
What thing indeed , end nothing else is love ? 
then make no doubt of either good or bad , 
If this or that , in substance , or in thought : 
And by what means , it may be sought or had : 
Whereof it is , and how it may be wrought : 
Let it suffice the word of truth hath taught , 
It is the grace , but of the living God , 
Before beginning , that with him abode . 
It brought forth power to work , wisdom to will , 
justice to judge , Mercy to execute , 
Virtue to plant , Charity to fill , 
Time to direct , Truth falsehood to confute , 
Pity to plead , in pemtences suit , 
Patience to bide , and peace to give the rest , 
To prove how love doth make the spirit blessed . 
And this is God , and this same God is love . 
For God , and love in charity are one : 
And charity is that same God above , 
In whom doth live that only love alone , 
Without whose grace , true love is never none . 
then seek no further , what is love to find ? 
But only carry God within thy mind . 
Leave in the world to look for any love : 
For on the earth is little faith to find ; 
And faithless hearts , in too much truth do prove 
Love doth not live , where care is so unkind : 
Men in their natures differ from their kind . 
Sin fills the world so full of secret evils : 
Men should be Gods to men , but they are devils . 
Christ loved to death , yet love did never die . 
For , love , by death , did work the death of death . 
O living love , o heavenly Mystery , 
To great a glory , for this world beneath ; 
The blessed breathing , of the highest breathe , 
Blessed are they born , that only find in thee , 
O blessed God , what blessed love : nay be . 
Let then the Poets leave their idle humours , 
That write of love where there is no such thing : 
And let the world not harken to those rumours , 
That speak of love , or whence that life doth spring : 
Except it be in this our blessed king , 
And Lord of life , in whom our fowls may prove 
The only life of everliving love . 
Let wantoness weep , that laughing sought for love , 
Within the Gems of their mistaken joys : 
And turn with tears , that perfect path to prove , 
That leads the spirit , from the world's annoys , 
Unto that treasure , that admits no toys : 
But in the riches of the soul doth prove 
The heavenly life of blessed spirits love . 
And , let the wise ( if any such there be , 
As God forbid , but there were many such , 
That in their souls by secret wisdom see , 
In the true trial of true virtues touch , 
The worth that faith can not affect too much ) 
Confess , they find , in truths effects alone , 
That God is love , without whom there is none . 
Amid the sky , there is one only sun , 
Amid the air , one only Phoenix fly's : 
One only Time , by which all hours do run : 
One only life , that lives and never dies : 
One only eye , that every thought descries : 
One only light , that shows one only love : 
One only love , and that is God above . 
To say yet further , what this love may be , 
It is a holy heavenly excellence , 
Above the power of any eye to see , 
Or wit to find by world's experience : 
It is the spirit of life's Quintessence : 
Whose rare effects , may partly be perceived : 
But to the full , can never be conceived . 
It is repentance sweet restorative , 
The Rosa solis , the ficke soul reviveth , 
It is the faithful heart's preseruative : 
It is the haven , where happy grace arriveth ; 
It is the life , that death of power depriveth : 
It is in sum , the everlasting bliss , 
Where , God alone in all his glory is . 
It is a joy that never comes in jest : 
A comfort , that doth cut off every care ; 
A rule , wherein the life of life doth rest , 
Where all the faithful find their happy fare , 
A good , that doth but only God declare . 
A line , that his right hand doth draw so even , 
As leads the soul , the high way unto heaven . 
If then henceforth you ask what thing is love : 
In light , in life , in grace , in God , go look it : 
And if in these you do not truly prove , 
How , in your hearts , you may for ever book it ; 
Unhappy think yourselves , you have mistook it . 
For why the life that death hath over-trod , 
Is but the love of Grace : and that is God.  
All kind of love but this , is but mistaken : 
And all conceit but this , is misconceived : 
All kind of love but this must be forsaken : 
All trust , but in this truth may be deceived : 
All in this love , all truth may be perceived : 
All heart's belief , and all souls seal unto it , 
All what is good , this love doth only do it . 
What shall I say ? but 't is beyond my saying , 
To tell you all may of this love be said : 
And yet , that truth be free from all betraying , 
That hath no more , than what she knows , bewrayed , 
Let me but stay , but where as she hath stayed , 
And say but this as I have said before , 
That love is God , and I can say no more . 
Solus Amor Deus . 

Solus in toto laudandus Deus . 

O blessed love , the life of blessedness , 
If ever thou didst ●elpe a sinner's heart , 
Behold my tears , and in thy holiness , 
Assist my spirit with thy sacred Art , 
That all the world may joy to hear me sing 
The holy praises of my heavenly King.  
Inspire me with that understanding power , 
Which may conceive , and by desert commend 
The top of truth on that triumphant Tower , 
Where graces dwell , and glories never end : 
Let some such Angel help me in devising , 
As speaks of praise in glories ever rising . 
O love , how gracious is that beauty held , 
That gives the world but shadows to behold ! 
But , o what glory mayst thou justly yield , 
Unto that life , which doth thy life unfold ! 
And while all shadows fade , and fall away , 
Is ever bright , and never can decay . 
In nature's beauty , all the best can be 
Are shadowing colours to deceive the eye : 
But in this beauty , may our spirits see 
A light wherein we live , and cannot die ; 
A light whereby we see that most avails us , 
The comfort of our faith , that never fails us.  
How bountiful is that fair hand accounted , 
That of his store , a little stint bestoweth ! 
But , how in bounty hath that hand surmounted , 
That ever giving , ask over-goeth : 
And for no gift , shall in true grace be scanting , 
Doth give itself , to see no comfort wanting . 
How wise is he , that teacheth how to wield 
The world at will , by wicked wits devose ! 
But wiser much that finds that wit beguiled , 
That never seeks the way to Paradise : 
O blessed love , none but thy Lord of light 
Doth give the soul that perfect heavenly light . 
How kind is he , that doth his friend relieve , 
In time of need , of worldly minds reputed ? 
But he that helps the heart , that him doth grieve , 
To such a mind , what praise may be imputed ! 
How kind is then our Christ , let his death try , 
Who hated sin , yet did for sinners die . 
How valiant is he held , that can subdue , 
By force of hand , the fury of his foe ! 
But , in whose hand such valour ever grew , 
As gave both death and hell their overthrow ? 
None but thy Lord my love , that God of light , 
Who makes all powers to tremble at his sight . 
How patient is that poor conceit esteemed , 
That can put up a wrong , or cross , or two ? 
But , how more patient may our Christ be deemed , 
That bore all wrongs that all the world could do ! 
O , peerless pattern of true patience power , 
That conquered death , in passions dying hour ! 
How just is he , who as the Law doth bear , 
The likeliest truth his judgement doth pronounce ! 
But , how more just , whom neither hope nor fear 
could ever move to challenge or denounce ! 
Sweet jesus Christ , who never Caesar wrongeth , 
And gives to God , that unto God belongeth . 
How gracious is that creature to be thought , 
That doth repent him of his wickedness ! 
But , how more gracious , in whom God hath wrought 
The perfect height of Grace's holiness ! 
It is thy life , my love , our Lord and God , 
Who by his Grace , all sin hath over-trod . 
How comfortable is esteemed that hand , 
That heals the sick , although not near to death ! 
But , what more comfort in that power doth stand , 
then to the dead can give a living breath ! 
My love thou knowest that Lazarus can tell , 
When Mary's tears did please our master well . 
What should I in particulars proceed ? 
When all and sum , that heaven and earth can show ▪ 
Are short to find how far he doth exceed 
The praise of praise , where highest praises go . 
But , worship him in whom all Graces live , 
Worthy more glory than the world can give . 
And since my God and everliving Lord , 
All in himself , all height of glory holdeth : 
And to the faithful only doth afford 
no more to know , them mercies care unfoldeth : 
Let my souls love but humbly fall before him , 
In admiration , wholly to adore him . 
For beauty , bounty , wisdom , valour , kindness , 
Grace , patience , comfort , justice , truth , perfection : 
In whom all these do live , what reasons blindness 
Can think to reach in praises due perfection ? 
Where in the height , to have all glory sounded , 
Both heavens and earth , and Angels are confounded . 
And since far more then most that can be thought , 
lives in the light of his incomprehension : 
Which never sense , that ever proudly sought , 
But perished in the instant of intention : 
Ler my soul sing , when all hearts strings are broken , 
His praise is more , then can in praise be spoken . 
Gloria in excelsis Deo.  

When the Angels all are singing , 
All of glory ever springing , 
In the ground of high heaven's graces , 
Where all virtues have their places : 
O that my poor soul were near them , 
With an humble heart to hear them . 
then should faith in love's submission , 
joying but in mercy's blessing , 
Where that sins are in remission , 
Sing the joyful souls confessing , 
Of her comforts high commending , 
All in glory , never ending . 
But , ah wretched sinful creature , 
How should the corrupted nature 
Of this wicked heart of mine , 
Think upon that love divine , 
That doth tune the Angel's voices , 
While the host of heaven rejoices ! 
no , the song of deadly sorrow , 
In the night , that hath no morrow , 
And their pains are never ended , 
That have heavenly powers offended , 
Is more fitting to the merit , 
Of my foul infected spirit . 
Yet while mercy is removing 
All the sorrows of the loving , 
How can faith be full of blindness ? 
To despair of mercy's kindness , 
While the hand of heaven is giving , 
Comfort from the everliving . 
no , my soul be no more sorry : 
Look unto that life of glory , 
Which the grace of faith regardeth , 
And the tears of love rewardeth : 
Where the soul the comfort getteth , 
That the Angels music setteth . 
There when thou art well conducted , 
And by heavenly grace instructed , 
How the faithful thoughts to fashion 
Of a ravished lovers passion : 
Sing with saints , to Angels nighest , 
Halleluiah , in the highest . 
Gloria in excelsis Deo.  

