ALCILIA . 

Philoparthens loving Folly.  

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED Pygmalion's Image . 

WITH The Love of AMOS and LAURA . 

And also EPIGRAMS BY Sir I H. and others . 

Never before imprinted . 

LONDON : Printed for Richard Hawkins , dwelling in Chancery Lane , near Sarjeants-inne . 1613.  

A LETTER , written by a Gentleman , to the Author his friend . 

Friend Philoparthens , in perusing your Loving-folly , and your declining from it , I do behold Reason conquering Passion . The infirmity of loving argueth you are a man ; the firmness thereof discovereth a good wit , and the best nature ; and the falling from it , true virtue , Beauty was always of force to misled the wisest , and men of greatest perfection have had no power to resist Love. The best are accompanied with Vices , to exercise their Virtues , whose glory shines brightest in resisting motives of pleasure , and in subduing affections . And though I cannot altogether excuse your Loving-folly ; yet I do the less blame you , in that you loved such a one as was more to be commended for her virtue then beauty ; albeit even for that too , she was so well accomplished with the gifts of nature , as in mine own conceit ( which , for good cause , I must submit as inferior to yours ) there was nothing wanting , either in the one or the other , that might add more to her worth , except it were a more due and better regard of your love , which ●hee requited not according to your deserts , nor answerable to herself in her other parts of perfection : Yet herein it appeareth you have made good use of reason , that being heretofore lost in youthful vanity , have now by timely discretion found yourself . Let me entreat you to suffer these your passionate Sonnets to be published , which may peradventure make others , possessed with the like humour of Loving , to follow your example in leaving , and move other Alciliaes' ( if there be any ) to embrace deserving love while they may . Hereby also she shall know , and ( it may be ) inwardly repent the loss of your love , and see how much her perfections are blemished by ingratitude , which will make your happiness greater , by adding to your reputation , than your contentment could have been in enjoying her love : At the least wise the wiser sort , howsoever in censuring them , they may dislike of your errors ; yet they cannot but commend and allow of your reformation ; and all others that shall with indifferency read them , may reap thereby some benefit or contentment : Thus much I have written as a testimony of the good will I bear you , with whom I do suffer or rejoice , according to the quality of good hap , or misfortune , and so I take my leave , resting , as always , 

Yours av-s_d assured PHILARETES . 

Author ipse Philopartheos' ad Libellum suum . 

Parue Liber Domini vanos dicture labores , 
Insomnes noctes , sollicitosque dies , 
Errores varios , sanguentis taedia vitae , 
Moerores certos , gaudia certa minus , 
Peruigi●es curas , suspiria , vota , querelas , 
Et quaecunque pati dura coegit amor . 
I precor intrepidus , duram comiterque salutans 
Haec me eius causa sustinuisse refer . 
Te grato excipiet vultu rubicundula , nomen 
Cum titulo inscriptum viderit esse suum . 
Forsitan & nostri miserebitur illa doloris , 
Dicet , & ah quantum deseruisse dolet : 
Seque nimis saevam , crudelemabque ; ipsa vocabit , 
Cui non est fidei debita cura meae ; 
Quod siquidem eveniet , Domino solaminis illud , 
Et t●bi surremi muneris instar erit . 
Si quis ( ut est aequum ) f●tuos damnaverit ignes , 
Pigritiae fructus ingnijque levis : 
Tu Dominum caecis tenchris errasse , sed ipsum 
Err●ris tandem pae 〈…〉 visse sui , 
Me quoque re u●ra nec tot , nec tauta tulisse , 
Se● ficta ad placitum multa fuisse refer . 
Ab quanto satius ( nisi mens mihi vana ) fuisset 
Illa meo penitùs delituisse sinu : 
Quam levia in lucem prodire , aut luce carentis 
Insanam Domini prodere stultitiam . 
Nil Amor est aliud , quam mentis morbus , & error . 
Nil sapienter agit , nil bene , quisquis amat . 
Sed non cuique datur sapere , aut melioribus uti , 
Forte erit alterius , qui meus error erat . 
Cautior incedat , quinanquam labitur , atqui 
jam proprio cuadam cautior ipse malo . 
Si cui dilicto granior mea poena videtur , 
Illius in laudes officiosus eris . 
Te si quis simili qui carpituri i● ne videbit , 
Ille suam sortem flebit , & ille meam . 
ALCILIAE obsequium supplex praestare memento , 
Non minima officij pars erit illa tui . 
Te fortasse sua secura recondet in a●ca , 
Et Solis posthaec luminis orbus eris . 
Nil referet , fateor me non prudenter amass ; 
Vltima deceptae sors erit illa spei . 
Bis proprio Phoebus cursu lustrover at orbem , 
Conscius erroris , stultitiaeque meae , 
A quo primus Amor coepit penetrare medullas , 
Et falsa accensos nutrijt arte focos . 
Desino iam nugas amplecti , seria posthaec 
( Vt Ratio monet ) ac utiliora sequar . 
AMORIS PRAELUDIUM : VELURE , Epistola ad Amicam . 

TO thee Alcilia , solace of my youth , 
These rude and scattered rhymes I have addressed : 
The certain witness of my love and truth , 
That truly cannot be in words expressed ; 
Which if I shall perceive thou tak'st in gree , 
I will from henceforth write of none but thee . 
Here may you find the wounds yourself have made 
The many sorrows I have long sustained : 
Here may you see that Love must be obeyed ; 
How much I hoped , how little I have gained : 
That as for you the pains have been endured , 
Even so by you they may at length be cured . 
I will not call for aid to any Muse , 
It is for learned Poets so to do : 
Affection must my want of Art excuse , 
My works must have their patronage from you , 
Whose sweet assistance if obtain I might , 
I should be able both to speak and wright . 
Mean while vouchsafe to read this , as assigned 
To no man's censure , but to yours alone : 
Pardon the faults , that you therein shall find , 
And think the Writers heart was not his own . 
Experience of examples daily prove 
That no man can be well advised , and love . 
And though the work itself deserve it not , 
Such is your worth with my great wants compared : 
Yet may my Love unfeigned , without spot 
Challenge so much , ( if more cannot be spared , ) 
then ( lovely Virgin ) take this in good part , 
The rest unseen is sealed up in the hart . 
judge not by this the depth of my Affection , 
Which far exceeds the measure of my skill : 
But rather note herein your own perfection , 
So shall appear my want of Art , not William 
Whereof , this now as part , in lieu of greater 
I offer as an insufficient debtor . 
Sic incipit stultorum Tragicomedia . 

IT was my chance ( unhappy chance to me ) 
As all alone I wandered on my way : 
Void of distrust , from doubt of dangers free , 
To pass a grove , where LOVE in Ambush lay . 
Who aiming at me with his feathered Dart , 
Conveyed it by mine Eye unto my Hart.  
Where ( reckless Boy ) he let the Arrow stick , 
Where I , as one amazed , senseless stood : 
The hurt was great , yet seemed but a prick , 
The wound was deep , and yet appeared no blood , 
" But inwardly it bleeds , Proof teacheth this , 
" When wounds do so the danger greater is . 
Pausing a while , and grieved with my wound , 
I looked about , expecting some relief : 
Small hope of help , no ease of pain I found , 
Like all at once to perish in my grief : 
When hastily I plucked forth the Dart. 
But left the head fast fixed in my Hart.  
Fast fixed in my Hart I left the head ; 
From whence I doubt it will not be removed : 
Ah what unlucky chance that way me lead ? 
OH Love , thy force thou mightst elsewhere have proved , 
And showed thy power , where thou art not obeyed ; 
" The conquest 's small , where no resist is made . 
But naught ( alas ) avails it to complain , 
I rest resolved with Patience to endure : 
The Fire being once dispersed through every vein , 
It is too late to hope for present cure . 
Now Philoparthen must new follies prove , 
And learn a little , what it is to love . 
These Sonnets following , were written by the Author , ( who giveth himself this feigned name of Philoparthen , as his accidental attribute ) at diverse times , and upon diverse occasions , and therefore in the form and matter they differ , and sometimes are quite contrary one to another , considering the nature and quality of LOVE , which is a Passion full of variety , and contrariety in itself . 

I  

Unhappy Eyes that first my Heart betrayed , 
Had you not seen , my grief had not been such : 
And yet how may I justly you upbraid , 
Since what I saw delighted me so much ? 
But hence , alas , proceedeth all my smart , 
Unhappy Eyes that first betrayed my Hart.  
II  

To seek adventures , as Fate hath assigned , 
My slender Bark now floats upon the Main : 
Each troubled thought an Oar , each sigh a wind , 
who 's often puffs have rend my Sails in twain . 
LOVE steers the Boat , which , for that sight he lacks , 
Is still in danger of ten thousand wracks . 
III  

What sudden chance hath changed my wont 
Which makes me other then I seem to be ? ( cheer , 
My days of joy , that once were bright and clear , 
Are turned to night , my mirth to misery . 
Ah , well I ween that somewhat is amiss , 
But sooth to say , I know not what it is . 
FOUR  

What , am I dead ? then could I feel no smart : 
But still in me the sense of grief reviveth . 
am I alive ? Ah no , I have no heart ; 
For she that hath it , me of life depriveth . 
O that she would restore my heart again , 
Or give me hers , to countervail my pain . 
v.  

If it be LOVE , to waste long hours in grief ; 
If it be LOVE , to wish , and not obtain ; 
If it be LOVE , to pine without relief ; 
If it be LOVE , to hope , and never gain : 
then may you think that he hath truly loved , 
Who for your sake , all this and more have proved . 
VI  

If aught that in mine Eyes have done amiss , 
Let them receive deserved punishment : 
For so the perfect rule of justice is , 
Each for his own deeds should be praised or shent . 
then doubtless it is both against Law and sense 
My Heart should suffer for mine Eyes offence . 
VII . 

I am not sick , and yet I am not sound ; 
I eat and sleep , and yet me thinks I thrive not : 
I sport and laugh , and yet my griefs abound ; 
I am not dead , and yet me thinks I live not . 
What uncouth cause hath these strange passions bred , 
To make at once , sick , sound , alive , and dead ? 
VIII . 

Some thing I want , but what I cannot say ; 
OH now I know , it is myself I want : 
My Love with her hath ta'en my Heart away . 
Yea , Heart and all ; and left me very scant . 
Such power hath LOVE , & naught but LOVE alone , 
To make divided Creatures live in one . 
IX . 

Philo. Come gentle Death , & strike me with thy dart 
Life is but loathsome to a man oppressed . 
Death . How can I kill thee when thou hast no heart ? 
That which thou hadst is in another's breast . 
Philo. then must I live , and languish still in pain ? 
Death . Yea , till thy Love restore thy heart again . 
X.  

Were Love a fire , my tears might quench it lightly ; 
Or were it water , my hot heart might dry it ; 
If Air , then might it pass away more slightly , 
Or were it Earth , the world would soon descry it . 
If Fire , nor Water , Air nor Earth it be , 
What then is it that thus tormenteth me ? 
XI . 

To paint her outward shape and gifts of mind 
It doth exceed my wit and cunning far : 
She hath no fault , but that she is unkind . 
All other parts in her so complete are 
That who to view them thoughly would devose , 
Must have his body nothing else but Eyes . 
XII . 

Fair is my Love , whose parts are so well framed 
By Nature's special order and direction : 
That she herself is more than half ashamed , 
In having made a work of such perfection . 
And well may Nature blush at such a feature , 
Seeing herself excelled in her creature . 
XIII . 

Her body is strait , slender , and upright ; 
Her visage comely , and her looks demure , 
Mixed with a cheerful grace that yields delight ; 
Her eyes like stars , bright shining , clear , and pure , 
Which I describing , Love bids stay my pen , 
And says it 's not a work for mortal men . 
XIIII : 

The ancient Poets write of Graces three , 
Which meeting altogether in one Creature , 
In all points perfect make the same to be , 
For inward virtues , and for outward feature . 
But smile Alcilia , and the world shall see , 
That in thine eyes an hundred graces be . 
xv.  

As Love had drawn his Bow ready to shoot , 
Aiming at me with resolute intent : 
Strait Bow and Shaft he cast down at his foot , 
And said , why needless should one Shaft be spent ? 
I 'll spare it then , and now it shall suffice 
In stead of Shafts to use Alciliaes' eyes . 
XVI . 

Blush not my Love , for fear lest Phoebus' spy , 
Which if he do , then doubtless he will say 
thou seekest to dim his clearness with thine eye , 
That clearness which from East brings gladsome day . 
But most of all , lest jove should see I dread , 
And take thee up to heaven like Ganymede . 
XVII . 

Philo. What is the cause Alcilia is displeased ? 
Lo. Because she wants that which should most content her 
Phil. OH did I know it , soon should she be eased . 
Love. Perhaps thou dost , and that doth most torment her . 
Phil. Yet let her ask what she desire's to have . 
Love. Guess by thyself ; for maidens must not crave . 
XVIII . 

My Love by chance her tender finger pricked , 
As in the dark I strived for a kiss : 
Whose blood I seeing , offered to have licked , 
But half in anger she refused this . 
OH that she knew the difference of the smart , 
'twixt her pricked finger and my wounded hart . 
XIX . 

Philo. I pray the tell , what makes my hart to tremble 
When on a sudden I Alcilia spy ? 
Love. Because thy heart cannot thy joy dissemble , 
Thy life and death are both lodged in her eye . 
Phil. Dost thou not her with selfsame passion strike ? 
Love. OH no , her heart and thine are not alike . 
xx.  

Such are thy parts of body and of mind , 
That if I should not love thee as I do ; 
I should too much degenerate from kind , 
And think the world would blame my weakness to . 
For he , whom such perfections cannot move , 
Is either senseless , or not born to love . 
XXI . 

Alcilia's eyes have set my heart on fire , 
The pleasing object that my pain doth feed : 
Yet still to see those eyes I do desire , 
As if my help should from my hurt proceed . 
Happy were I , might there in her be found , 
A will to heal , as there was power to wound . 
XXII . 

Unwise was he that painted Love a Boy , 
Who for his strength a Giant should have been : 
it 's strange a child should work so great annoy : 
Yet howsoever strange , too truly seen . 
" But what is he that dares at Love repine 
" Whose works are wonders , and himself divine ? 
XXIII . 

My fair Alcilia , gladly would I know it , 
If ever loving passion pierced thy hart : 
O no ; for than thy kindness soon would show it , 
And of my pains thyself would bear some part . 
Full little knoweth he that hath not proved , 
What hell it is to love , and not be loved . 
XXIIII . 

Love , art thou blind ? nay , thou canst see too well ; 
And they are blind that so report of thee : 
That thou dost see , myself by proof can tell , 
A hapless proof thereof is made by me : 
For sure I am , hadst thou not had thy sight , 
thou never couldst have hit my heart so right . 
XXV . 

Long have I languished , and endured much smart , 
Since hapless I the cruel fair did love , 
And lodged her in the centre of my heart , 
Who there abiding , reason should her move , 
Though of my pains she no compassion take , 
Yet to respect me , for her own sweet sake . 
XXVI . 

In midst of Winter season , as the Snow , 
Whose milk-white mantle over-spreds the ground : 
In part the colour of my love is so , 
Yet their effects I have contrary found . 
For when the unneappeares , Snow melts anon , 
But I melt always when my Sun is gone . 
XXVII . 

The sweet content at first I seemed to prove , 
While yet Desire vnfledged could scarcely fly : 
Did make me think there was no life to Love , 
Till all too late Time taught the contrary . 
For , like a Fly , I sported with the flame , 
Till , like a Fool , I perished in the same . 
XXVIII . 

After dark night , the cheerful day appeareth ; 
After an ebb , the river flows again ; 
After a storm , the cloudy heaven cleareth : 
All labours have their end , or ease of pain ; 
Each creature hath relief and rest , save I , 
Who only dying live , and living dye . 
XXIX . 

Sometimes I seek for company to sport , 
Whereby I might my pensive thoughts beguile : 
Sometimes again I hide me from resort , 
And muse alone ; but yet alas the while , 
In changing place I cannot change my mind , 
For where so ever I fly , myself I find . 
XXX . 

fain would I speak , but strait my hart doth tremble 
And checks my tongue that should my griefs reveal : 
And so I strive my passion to dissemble , 
Which all the Art I have cannot conceal : 
Thus standing mute , my hart with longing starveth 
It grieves a man to ask what he deserveth . 
XXXI . 

Since you desire the cause of me to know , 
For which these diverse passions I have proved : 
Look in your glass , which will not fail to show 
The shadowed portrait of my best beloved . 
If that suffice not , look into my hart , 
Where it 's engraven in a newfound Art  
XXXII . 

The painful Ploughman hath his heart's delight , 
Who through his daily toil his body tyreth : 
Yet merrily comes whistling home at night , 
And sweetly takes the ease his pain requireth . 
But neither days nor nights can yield me rest , 
Born to be wretched , and to live oppressed . 
XXIII . 

OH well were it , if Nature would devose , 
That men with men together might engender : 
As Grafts from Trees , one from another rise , 
then naught of due to women should we render , 
But vain conceit , that Nature should do this , 
Since well we know , herself a woman is . 
XXIIII . 

Upon the Altar where Love's fire burned ; 
My sighs and tears for sacrifice I offered : 
When Love in rage from me his countenance turned , 
And did reject , what I so humbly proffered . 
If he my heart expect , alas it 's gone , 
How can a man give that is not his own ? 
XXXV . 

Alcilia said , she did not know my mind , 
Because my words did not declare my love : 
Thus where I merit most , least help I find , 
And her unkindness all too late I prove . 
Grant Love , that she of whom thou art neglected , 
May one day love , and little be respected . 
XXXVI . 

The Cynic being asked when he would love , 
Made answer , when he nothing had to do : 
For Love was sloth ; but he did never prove 
By his experience what belonged thereto . 
For had he tasted but as much as I , 
He would have soon reformed his heresy . 
XXXVII . 

OH judge me not , sweet Love , by outward show , 
Though sometimes strange I seem , and to neglect thee : 
Yet didst thou but my inward passions know , 
thou shouldst perceive how highly I respect thee . 
" When looks are fixed , the hart oft times doth tremble , 
Little loves he that cannot much dissemble . 
XXXVIII . 

Parting from thee , even from myself I part , 
thou art the star by which my life is guided : 
I have the body , but thou hast the hart ; 
The better part is from itself divided . 
Thus do I live , and this do I sustain , 
Till gracious fortune make us meet again . 
THIRTY-NINE . 

Open the sluices of my feeble eyes , 
And let my tears have passage from their fountain : 
Fill all the earth with plaints , the air with cries , 
Which may pierce rocks , & reach the highest mountain 
That so loves wrath by these extremes appeased , 
My griefs may cease , and my poor heart be eased . 
XL.  

" After long sickness , health brings more delight ; 
" Seas seem more calm , by storms once overblowne ; 
" The day's more cheerful by the passed night ; 
" Each thing is by his contrary best known ; 
" Continual ease is pain ; Change sometimes meeter ; 
" Discords in Music , make the Music sweeter . 
XLI . 

Fear to offend , forbids my tongue to speak , 
And signs and sighs must tell my inward woe : 
But ( ay the while ) my heart with grief doth break , 
And she by signs my sorrows will not know , 
The stillest streams we see in deepest fords ; 
And love is greatest when it wanteth words . 
XLII . 

" no pain so great , but may be eased by Art , 
" Though much we suffer , yet despair we should not 
" In midst of griefs Hope always hath some part , 
" And Time may heal , what Art & Reason could not . 
O what is then this passion I endure , 
Which neither Reason , Art , nor Time can cure ? 
XLIII . 

" Pale jealousy , fiend of eternal night , 
" Mishapen creature , born before thy time , 
" The Imp of horror , foe to sweet delight , 
" Making each error seem a heinous crime : 
" Ah too great pity ( were there remedy , ) 
" That ever Love should keep thee company . 
XLIIII . 

The days are now come to their shortest date , 
And must in time by course increase again : 
But only I continue at one state , 
Void of all hope of help , or ease of pain . 
For days of joy must still be short with me , 
And nights of sorrow must prolonged be . 
XLV . 

Sleep now my Muse , and henceforth take thy rest , 
Which all too long thyself in vain haste wasted : 
Let it suffice I still must live oppressed , 
And of my pain the fruit must never be tasted . 
" then sleep my Muse : Fate cannot be withstood , 
" Its better sleep then wake and do no good . 
XLVI . 

Why should I love , since she doth prove ungrateful ? 
Since for reward I reap naught but disdain : 
Love thus to be requited it is hateful , 
And Reason would I should not love in vain . 
Yet all in vain , when all is out of season , 
For Love hath no society with Reason . 
XLVII . 

Hearts-ease and I have been at odds too long , 
I follow fast , but still he Hies from me : 
I sue for grace , and yet sustain the wrong , 
So gladly would I reconciled be . 
Love make us one : so shalt thou work a wonder , 
Uniting them , that were so far asunder . 
XLVIII . 

Uncouth , unkist , our ancient Poet said , 
And he that hides his wants , when he hath need : 
May after have his want of wit bewrayed , 
And fail of his desire , when others speed . 
then boldly speak : the worst is at first entering ; 
" Much good success men miss for lack of venturing . 
XLIX . 

Declare thy griefs wherewith thou art oppressed , 
And let the world be witness of thy woes : 
Let not thy thoughts lie buried in thy breast , 
But let thy tongue thy discontents disclose . 
" For who conceals his pain when he is grieved , 
" May well be pitied , but no way relieved . 
L.  

Wretched is he , that loving sets his hart 
On her , whose love from pure affection swerved : 
Who doth permit each one to have a part 
Of that which none but he alone deserveth . 
Give all or none : For once of this be sure , 
Lordship and Love no partners may endure . 
li.  

Who spends the weary day in pensive thought , 
And night in dreams of horror , and affright : 
Whose wealth is want , whose hope is come to naught ; 
Himself the mark for Love and Fortune's spite : 
Let him appear , if any such there be , 
His case and mine most fitly will agree . 
LII . 

Fair tree , but fruitless , sometimes full of sap , 
Which now yields naught at all that may delight me : 
Some cruel frost , or some untimely hap 
Hath made thee barren , only to despite me . 
Such Trees in vain with hope do feed desire , 
And serve for fuel to increase Love's fire . 
LIII . 

In company , while sad and mute I sit , 
My thoughts elsewhere , then there I seem to be 
Possessed with some deep Melancholy fit , 
One of my friends observes the same in me , 
And says in jest , ( which I in earnest prove ) 
He looks like one , that had lost his first Love.  
LIIII . 

'twixt Hope and Fear in doubtful balance peazed , 
My Fate , my Fortune , and my Love depends : 
Sometime my Hope is raised , when Love is pleased . 
Which fear weighs down , when ought his will offends 
The heavens are sometimes clear , and sometimes lower 
" And he that loves , must taste both sweet and sour . 
LU.  

Retire my wand'ring thoughts unto your rest , 
Do not henceforth consume yourselves in vain : 
no mortal man in all points can be blessed , 
What now is mine , may be another's pain . 
The watery clouds are clear , when storms are past , 
And things in their extremes long cannot last . 
LVI . 

The fire of Love is first bred in the eye , 
And thence conveys his heat unto the hart : 
Where it lies hid , till Time his force descry : 
The tongue thereto adds fuel for his part . 
The touch of lips , which doth succeed the same , 
Kindles the rest , and so it proves a flame . 
LVII . 

The tender sprigs that sprowted in the field , 
And promised hope of fruit to him that planted : 
In stead of fruit doth naught but blossoms yield , 
Though care and pain to prune it never wanted , 
Even so my hopes do naught but blossoms prove , 
And yield no fruits to recompense my love . 
LVIII . 

Though little sign of love in show appear , 
Yet think true love of colours hath no need : 
it 's not the glorious garments which men wear 
That make them others then they are indeed . 
" In meanest show the most affection dwells , 
And richest pearls are found in simplest shells . 
LIX . 

Let not thy tongue thy inward thoughts disclose , 
Or tell the sorrows that thy heart endures : 
Let no man's ear be witness of thy woes , 
Since pity neither help nor ease procures . 
And only he is truly said to moan , 
Whose griefs none knoweth but himself alone . 
LX.  

A thousand times I curse these idle rhymes , 
Which do their maker's follies vain set forth : 
Yet bless I them again as many times , 
For that in them I blaze Alcilia's worth . 
Mean while I fare as doth the Torch by night , 
Which wastes itself in giving others light . 
LXI . 

Enough of this : for all is naught regarded , 
And she not once with my complaints is moved : 
Die hapless Love , since thou art not rewarded ; 
Yet ere thou die , to witness that I loved , 
Report my truth , and tell the fair unkind , 
That she hath lost , what none but she shall find . 
LXII . 

Lover's lament you that have truly loved ; 
For Philoparthen now hath lost his love : 
The greatest loss that ever Lover proved ; 
OH let his hard hap some compassion move . 
Who had not rued the loss of her so much , 
But that he knows the world yields no more such . 
LXIII . 

Upon the Ocean of conceited error , 
My weary spirit many storms have past , 
Which now in harbour , free from wont terror , 
joy the possession of their rest at last : 
And henceforth safely they may lie at road ; 
And never rove for had-i-wist abroad . 
Love's Accusation at the judgement-seate of Reason , wherein the Authors whole success in his love is covertly described . 

IN Reason's Court , myself being Plaintiff there , 
Love was by process summoned to appear . 
That so the wrong which he had done to me 
Might be made known ; and all the world might see , 
And seeing , rue , what to my cost I proved , 
While faithful , but unfortunate I loved . 
After I had obtained audience , 
I thus began to give in evidence . 
The Author's Evidence against Love.  

Most sacred Queen , and Sovereign of man's heart , 
Which of the mind dost rule the better part : 
First bred in Heaven , and from thence hither sent 
To guide men's actions by thy regiment ; 
Vouchsafe a while to hear the sad complaint 
Of him that Love hath long kept in restraint : 
And as to you it properly belongs , 
Grant justice of my undeserued wrongs . 
I 〈◊〉 two years ( as I remember well ) 
Since first this wretch , sent from the nether hell , 
To plague the world with newfound cruelties , 
Under the shadow of two Crystal eyes , 
Betrayed my sense ; and as I slumbering lay , 
Feloniously conveyed my heart away , 
Which most unjustly he detained from me , 
And exercised thereon strange tyranny . 
Sometime his manner was to sport and game ; 
With Bry'rs and Thorns to raze and prick the same ; 
Sometime with Nettles of desire to sting it ; 
Sometime with Pinsons of despair to wring it : 
Sometime again , he would anoint the sore , 
And heal the place that he had hurt before ; 
But hurtful helps , and ministered in vain , 
Which served only to renew my pain : 
For after that more wounds he added still , 
Which pierced deep , but had no power to kill . 
Unhappy medicine , which in stead of cure , 
Gives strength to make the patient more endure ! 
But that which was most strange of all the rest , 
Myself b●ing thus 'twixt life and death distressed , 
oft times when as my pain exceeded measure , 
He would persuade me that the same was pleasure . 
My solemn sadness , but contentment meet ; 
My travel , rest ; and all my sower , sweet ; 
My wounds , but gentle strokes : whereat he smiled , 
And by these sleights my careless youth beguiled . 
Thus did I far , as one that living died ; 
( For greater pains I think hath no man tried , ) 
Disquiet thoughts , like Furies , in my breast 
Nourished the poison that my spirits possessed . 
Now grief , than joy , now war , then peace unstable : 
Naught sure I had , but to be miserable . 
I cannot utter all , ( I must confess , ) 
Men may conceive more than they can express . 
But to be short , ( which cannot be excused , ) 
With vain illusions Love my hope abused , 
Persuading me I stood upon firm ground , 
When unawares myself on sands I found . 
This is the point which most I do enforce , 
That Love without all pity or remorse 
Did suffer me to languish still in grief , 
void of contentment , succour , or relief : 
And when I looked my pains should be rewarded , 
I did perceive that they were naught regarded : 
For why ( alas ) these hapless eyes did see , 
Alcilia loved another more than me : 
So in the end , when I expected most ; 
My Hope , my Love , and Fortune thus were crossed . 
Proceeding further , Reason bade me stay ; 
For the defendant had something to say . 
then to the judge , for justice loud I cried , 
And so I paused , and Love thus replied . 
Love's Reply to the Author . 

Since Reason ought to lend indifferent ears 
Unto both parts , and judge as truth appears : 
Most gracious Lady , give me leave to speak , 
And answer his complaint , that seeks to wreak 
His spite and malice on me without cause , 
In charging me to have transgressed thy Laws . 
Of all his Follies he imputes the blame 
To me poor Love , that naught deserves the same : 
Himself it is that hath abused me , 
As by mine answer shall well proved be . 
Fond youth , thou know'st what I for thee effected , 
( Though now I find it little be respected ) 
I purged thy wit which was before but gross , 
The mettle pure I severed from the dross : 
And did inspire thee with my sweetest fire . 
That kindled in thee courage and desire . 
Not like unto those servile Passions 
Which cumber men's imaginations 
With avarice , ambition , or vainglory , 
Desire of things fleeting and transitory . 
no base conceit , but such as Powers above 
Have known and felt , I mean th' instinct of Love : 
Which making men all earthly things despise , 
Transports them to a heavenly Paradise . 
Where thou complainest of sorrows in thy heart , 
Who lives on earth but therein hath his part ? 
Are these thy fruits ? Are these the best rewards 
For all the pleasing glances , sly regards , 
The sweet stolen kisses , amorous conceits , 
So many smiles , so many fair entreats , 
Such kindness as Alcilia did bestow 
All for my sake , as well thyself dost know ? 
That Love should thus be used it is hateful , 
But all is lost that 's done for one ungrateful . 
Where he allegeth that he was abused , 
In that he truly loving was refused : 
that 's most untrue , and plainly may be tried : 
Who never asked , could never be denied . 
But he affected rather single life , 
then yoke in Marriage , matching with a wife . 
And most men now make love to none but heirs : 
Poor love ( God wot ) that poverty impairs : 
Worldly respects Love little doth regard ; 
Who loves , hath only love for his reward . 
He meriteth a Lover's name indeed 
That casts no doubts , which vain suspicion breed , 
But desperately at hazard threwes the Dice , 
Neglecting due regard of friends advice ; 
That wrestles with his Fortune and his Fate , 
Which had ordained to better his estate ; 
That hath no care of wealth , no fear of jack , 
But venter's forward , though he see his wrack ; 
That with Hope's wings , like Icarus , doth fly , 
Though for his rashness he like fortune try ; 
That to his fame the world of him may tell , 
How , while he soared aloft , adown he fell . 
And so true Love awarded him this doom , 
In scaling heaven , to have the Sea his Tomb : 
That making shipwreck of his dearest fame , 
Betrays himself to poverty and shame : 
That hath no sense of sorrow , or repent ; 
no dread of perils far , or imminent , 
But doth prefer before all pomp or pelf , 
The sweet of Love , as dearer than himself : 
Who were his passage stopped with sword or fire , 
Would make way through to compass his desire . 
For which he would ( though heaven and earth forbade it , ) 
Hazard to lose a Kingdom , if he had it . 
These be the things wherein I glory most , 
Whereof this mine accuser cannot boast : 
Who was indifferent in his loss or gain , 
And better pleased to fail then to obtain . 
All qualified Affection Love doth hate , 
And likes him best that 's most intemperate . 
But hence proceeds his malice and despite , 
While he himself bars of his own delight : 
For when as he Alcilia first affected , 
Like one in show thou little love respected , 
He masqued disguised , and entertained his thought , 
With hope of that which he in secret sought : 
And still forbore to utter his desire , 
Till his delay received her worthy hire . 
And well we know what Maids themselves would have . 
Men must sue for , and by petitions crave . 
But he regarding more his wealth then will , 
Had little care his fancy to fulfil . 
Yet when he saw Alcilia loved another , 
The secret fire which in his breast did smother , 
began to smoke , and soon had proved a flame 
If Temperance had not allayed the same : 
Which afterwards so quenched he did not find 
But that some spark remained still behind . 
Thus when time served he did refuse to crave it , 
And yet envied another man should have it : 
As though fair Maids should wait at young men's pleasure , 
While they , 'twixt sport and earnest , love at leisure . 
Nay , at the first , when it is kindly proffered 
Maids must accept , lest twice it be not offered : 
Else though their beauty seem their good t' importune , 
Yet may they lose the better of their fortune . 
Thus as this fondling coldly went about it , 
So in the end he clearly went without it : 
For while he doubtful seemed to make a stay , 
A Mongrel stole the Maiden's heart away : 
For which though he lamented much in show ; 
Yet was he inward glad it fell out so . 
Now Reason , you may plainly judge by this , 
Not I , but he the false dissembler is : 
Who while fond love his lukewarm blood did feed , 
Made sign of more than he sustained indeed : 
And filled his Rhymes with fables and with lies , 
Which without passion he did oft devose . 
So to delude the ignorance of such 
That pitied him , thinking he loved too much , 
And with conceit rather to show his wit , 
then manifest his faithful love by it . 
Much more than this could I lay to his charge , 
But time would fail to open all at large . 
Let this suffice to show his bad intent , 
And prove that Love is clear and innocent . 
Thus at the length , though late , he made an end , 
And both of us did earnestly attend 
The final judgement Reason should award , 
When thus he 'gan to speak : With due regard 
The matter hath been heard on either side , 
For judgement you must longer time abide : 
The cause is weighty and of great import , 
And so she smiling did adjourn the Court : 
Little availed it then to argue more : 
So I returned in worse case than before . 
Love's deciphered . 

LOVE , and I , are now divided , 
Conceit by Error was misguided : 
Alcilia hath my love despised , 
" no man loves that is advised . 
Time at length hath Truth directed , 
Love hath missed what he expected : 
Yet missing that which long he sought , 
I have found that I little thought . 
Errors in time may be redressed ; 
" The shortest follies are the best . 
Love and Youth are now asunder , 
Reason's glory , Nature's wonder . 
My thoughts long bound are now enlarged , 
My folly's penance is discharged . 
Thus Time hath altered my state , 
Repentance never comes too late . 
Ah well I find that Love is naught 
But folly , and an idle thought : 
The difference is 'twixt Love and me , 
That Love is blind , and I can see . 
Love is honey mixed with gall ; 
A thraldom free , a freedom thrall ; 
A bitter sweet , a pleasant sour , 
Got in a year , lost in an hour ; 
A peaceful war , a warlike peace , 
Whose wealth brings want , whose want increase ; 
Full long pursuit , and little gain ; 
Uncertain pleasure , certain pain ; 
Regard of neither right nor wrong ; 
For short delights , repentance long . 
Love is a sickness of the thought , 
Conceit of pleasure dear bought ; 
A restless passion of the mind ; 
A Labyrinth of errors blind ; 
A sugared poison , fair deceit ; 
A bait for fools , a furious heat ; 
A chilling cold ; a wondrous passion 
Exceeding man's imagination : 
Which none can tell in whole nor part , 
But only he that feels the smart . 
Love is sorrow mixed with gladness , 
Fear with hope , and hope with madness . 
Long did I love , but all in vain , 
I loving was not loved again ; 
For which my heart sustained much woe , 
It fits not Maids to use men so . 
Just deserts are not regarded , 
Never love so ill rewarded : 
But all is lost that is not sought , 
oft wit proves best that 's dearest bought . 
Women were made for men's relief , 
To comfort , not to cause their grief . 
Where most I merit , lest I find , 
no marvel , since that Love is blind . 
Had she been kind as she was fair , 
My case had been more strange and rare : 
But women love not by desert , 
Reason in them hath weakest part . 
then henceforth let them love that list , 
I will beware of had-i-wist , 
These faults had better been concealed , 
then to my shame abroad revealed : 
Yet though my youth did thus miscarry , 
My harms may make others more wary . 
Love is but a youthful fit ; 
And some men say its sign of wit ; 
But he that loves as I have done , 
To pass the day and see no Sun , 
Must change his note , and sing , Erravi , 
Or else may chance to cry Peccavi . 
The longest day must have his night , 
Reason triumphs in Love's despite , 
I follow now Discretions lore , 
Henceforth to like , but love no more . 
then gently pardon what is past , 
For Love draws onward to his last . 
He walks ( they say ) with wary eye , 
Whose footsteps never tread awry . 
My Muse a better work intends , 
And here my Loving-folly ends . 
After long storms and tempests past , 
I see the Haven at the last , 
Where I must rest my weary Bark , 
And there unlade my care and cark : 
My pains and travels long endured , 
And all my wounds must there be cured : 
joys out of date shall be renewed , 
To think of perils passed eschewed : 
When I shall sit full blithe and jolly , 
And talk of Lovers and their folly . 
then Love and Folly both adieu , 
Long have I been misled by you : 
Folly may new adventures try , 
But Reason says that Love must die : 
Yea , die indeed although it grieve him , 
For my cold heart cannot relieve him : 
Yet for her sake , whom I once loved , 
( Though all in vain , as Time have proved ) 
I 'll take the pains ( if she consent ) 
To write his Will and Testament . 
Love's last Will and Testament . 

MY spirit I bequeath unto the air ; 
My body shall unto the earth repair ; 
My burning brand unto the Prince of hell , 
T' increase men's pains that there in darkness dwell : 
For well I ween , above nor underground , 
A greater pain than that may not be found : 
My sweet conceits of pleasure and delight 
To Erebus , and to eternal night : 
My sighs , my tears , my passions , and laments , 
Distrust , despair , all these my hourly rents , 
With other plagues that Lover's minds enthral , 
Unto Oblivion I bequeath them all . 
My broken Bow and Shafts I give to Reason ; 
My cruelties , my sleights , and forged treason , 
To womenkind , and to their seed for ay , 
To wreak their spite , and work poor men's decay ; 
Reserving only for Alcilia's part , 
Small kindness , and less care of Lover's smart : 
For she is from the vulgar sort excepted , 
And had she Philoparthens love respected , 
Requiting it with like affection , 
She might have had the praise of all perfection . 
This done ; if I have any faith or troth 
To Philoparthen I assign them both ; 
For unto him of right they do belong , 
Who truly loving suffered too much wrong . 
Time shall be sole Executor of my Will , 
Who may these things in order due fulfil . 
To warrant this my Testament for good , 
I have subscribed it with my dying blood . 
And so he died that all this bale had bred , 
And yet my heart misdoubts he is not dead : 
For sure I fear should I Alcilia spy , 
She might eftsoons revive him with her eye . 
Such power divine remaineth in her sight , 
To make him live again in Death's despite . 
The Sonnets following were written by the Author , after he began to decline from his passionate affection , and in them he seemeth to please himself , with describing the vanity of LOVE , the frailty of Beauty , and the sour fruits of Repentance . 

I  

Now have I spun the web of my own woes , 
And laboured long to purchase my own loss : 
Too late I see , I was beguiled with shows , 
And that which once seemed gold , now proves but dross . 
Thus am I both of help and hope bereaved , 
He never tried that never was deceived . 
II  

Once did I love , but more than once repent , 
When vintage came , my grapes were sour , or rotten 
Long time in grief and pensive thoughts I spent , 
And all for that which Time hath made forgotten . 
OH strange effects of Time , which once being lost ; 
Makes men secure of that they loved most . 
III  

Thus have I long in th' air of error hovered , 
And run my ship upon Repentance shelf : 
Truth hath the vale of Ignorance uncovered , 
And made me see , and seeing , know myself . 
Of former follies now I must repent , 
And count this work part of my time ill spent . 
FOUR  

" What thing is Love ? A Tyrant of the mind , 
" begot by heat of youth , brought forth by sloth ; 
" Nursed with vain thoughts , & changing as the wind 
" A deep dissembler , void of faith and troth : 
" Fraught with fond errors , doubts , despite , disdain , 
" And all the plagues that earth and hell contain . 
v.  

Like to a man that wanders all the day 
Through ways unknown , to seek a thing of worth 
And at the night sees he hath gone astray : 
As near his end as when he first set forth , 
Such is my case , whose hope untimely crossed , 
After long errors , proves my labour lost . 
VI  

Failed of that hap , whereto my hope aspired , 
Deprived of that which might have been mine own , 
Another now must have that I desired , 
And things too late by their events are known : 
Thus do we wish for that cannot be got , 
And when it may , than we regard it not . 
VII . 

Ingrateful Love , since thou hast played thy part , 
Enthralling him , whom Time hath since made free , 
It rests for me to use both wit and Art , 
That of my wrongs I may revenged be : 
And in those eyes where first thou tookest thy fire , 
Thyself shalt perish through my cold desire . 
VIII . 

Grieve not thyself for that can not be had , 
And things once cureless , let them careless rest : 
Blame not thy fortune , though thou deem it bad , 
what 's past and gone , can never be redressed . 
" The only help for that can not be gained , 
" Is to forget it might have been obtained . 
IX . 

How happy once did I myself esteem , 
While Love with hope my fond desire did cherish ? 
My state as blissful as a Kings did seem , 
Had I been sure my joys should never perish . 
The thoughts of men are fed with expectation , 
" Pleasures themselves are but imagination . 
X.  

Why should we hope for that which is to come , 
Where the event is doubtful and unknown ? 
Such fond presumptions soon receive their doom , 
When things expected we count as our own . 
Whose issue oft times in the end proves naught 
But hope , a shadow , and an idle thought . 
XI . 

In vain do we complain our life is short , 
Which well disposed , great matters might effect : 
While we ourselves in toys and idle sport , 
Consume the better part , without respect : 
And careless , as though time should never end it , 
'twixt sleep and waking prodigally spend it . 
XII . 

Youthful desire is like the Summer season , 
That lasts not long , for winter must succeed : 
And so our passions must give place to reason , 
And riper years more ripe effects must breed . 
Of all the seed youth sowed in vain desires , 
I reaped naught but thistles , thorns , and briers . 
XIII . 

To err , and do amiss , is given to men by kind : 
Who walks so sure , but sometimes treads awry ? 
But to continue still in errors blind , 
A bad and bestial nature doth descry . 
Who proves not , fails not , and brings naught to end ; 
Who proves and fails , may afterwards amend . 
XIIII . 

There was but one , and doubtless she the best , 
Whom I did more than all the world esteem : 
She having failed , I disavow the rest : 
For now I find things are not as they seem . 
" Default of that wherein our will is crossed , 
" oft time's unto our good availeth most . 
xv.  

I fare like him , who now his land-hope spent , 
By unknown Seas sails to the Indian shore , 
Returning thence no richer than he went , 
Yet cannot much his fortune blame therefore , 
Since who so venter's forth upon the Main , 
Makes a good Mart , if he return again . 
XVI . 

Lover's conceits are like a flattering Glass , 
That makes the lookers fairer than they are : 
Who pleased in their deceit , contented pass , 
Such one was mine , who thought there was none fair , 
None witty , modest , virtuous but she . 
Yet now I find the Glass abused me . 
XVII . 

Adieu fond Love , the mother of all error , 
Replete with hope and fear , with joy and pain : 
False fire of fancy , full of care and terror , 
Shadow of pleasures fleeting , short and vain , 
Die loathed love , receive thy latest doom , 
Night be thy grave , Oblivion be thy tomb . 
XVIII . 

Who so would be rapt up into the heavens , 
To see a world of strange imaginations ; 
Who careless would leave all at six and seven , 
To wander in a Labyrinth of passions ; 
Who would at once all kinds of folly prove : 
When he hath naught to do , then let him love . 
XIX . 

" What thing is Beauty ? Nature's dearest Minion , 
" The snare of youth ; like the inconstant Moon , 
" Waxing and waning ; error of opinion ; 
" A morning's flower , that withereth ere noon ; 
" A swelling fruit , no sooner ripe than rotten , 
" Which sickness makes forlorn , and time forgotten . 
xx.  

The Spring of youth which now is in his prime . 
Winter of age with hoary frosts shall nip : 
Beauty shall then be made the prey of Time , 
And sour remorse deceitful pleasures whip . 
then henceforth let Discretion rule Desire , 
And Reason quench the flame of Cupid's fire . 
XXI . 

OH what a life was that sometime I led , 
When Love with passions did my peace encumber 
While like a man neither alive nor dead , 
I was rapt from myself , as one in slumber ? 
Whose idle senses charmed with fond illusion , 
Did nourish that which bred their own confusion 
XXII . 

The child for ever after dreads the fire 
That once therewith by chance his finger burned : 
Water of Time , distilled , doth cool desire , 
And far he ran ( they say ) that never turned . 
After long storms I see the Port at last , 
Folly farewell , for now my love is past . 
XXIII . 

Base servile thoughts of men too much dejected , 
That seek , and crouch , & kneel for woman's grace , 
Of whom your pain and service is neglected , 
Yourselves despised : Rivals before your face : 
The more you sue , the less you shall obtain , 
The less you win , the more shall be your gain . 
XXIIII . 

In looking back unto my follies past , 
While I the present with times past compare : 
And think how many hours I then did waste , 
Painting on clouds , and building in the air : 
I sigh within myself , and say in sadness , 
This thing , which fools call Love , is naught but madness . 
XXV . 

" The things we have , we most of all neglect ; 
" And that we have not greedily we crave ; 
" The things we may have little we respect ; 
" And still we covet that we cannot have : 
" Yet howsoever in our conceit we prize them , 
" no sooner gotten but we strait despise them . 
XXVI . 

Who seats his love upon a woman's will , 
And thinks thereon to build an happy state : 
Shall be deceived , when least he thinks of ill , 
And rue his folly when it is too late . 
He ploughs on sand , and sows upon the wind , 
That hopes for constant love in women kind . 
XXVII . 

I will no longer spend my time in toys , 
Seeing Love is error , folly , and offence : 
An idle fit for fond and reckless boys , 
Or else for men deprived of common sense , 
'twixt Lunacy and Love these odds appear , 
th' one makes fools monthly , th' other all the year . 
XXVIII . 

While season served to sow , my plough lay still ; 
My Grafts unset , when others Trees did bloom ; 
I spent the Spring in sloth , and slept my fill : 
But never thought of Winter's cold to come , 
Till Spring was spent , and Summer well nigh gone , 
then I awaked , and saw my Harvest none . 
XXIX . 

Now Love sits all alone in black attire , 
His broken Bow and Arrows lying by him ; 
His fire extinct , that whilom fed desire , 
Himself the scorn of Lovers that pass by him : 
Who this day freely may disport and play , 
For it is Philoparthens Holiday . 
XXX . 

Nay , think not Love , with all thy cunning slight , 
To catch me once again : thou comest too late : 
Stern Industry puts Idleness to flight , 
And Time hath changed both my name and state : 
then seek else where for Mates that may befriend thee ; 
For I am busy , and cannot attend thee . 
XXXI . 

loose Idleness , the nurse of fond Desire ; 
Root of all ills that do our youth betid , 
That whilom didst through Love my wrack conspire , 
I banish thee , and rather wish t' abide 
All austere hardness , and continual pain , 
then to revoke thee , or to love again . 
XXXII . 

The time will come , when looking in a Glass , 
Thy riveled face with sorrow thou shalt see : 
And sighing say , it is not as it was , 
These cheeks were wont more fair and fresh to be : 
But now what once made me so much admired , 
Is least regarded , and of none desired . 
XXXIII . 

Though thou be fair , think Beauty is a blast , 
A morning's dew , a shadow quickly gone , 
A painted flower , whose colour will not last : 
Time steals away when least we think thereon ; 
Most precious Time , too wastefully expended , 
Of which alone the sparing is commended . 
XXXIIII . 

How vain is youth , that crossed in his desire , 
Doth fret and fume , and inwardly repine , 
As though against heaven itself he would conspire , 
And with his frailty against his Fate combine : 
Who of itself continues constant still , 
And doth us good oft times against our william  
XXXV . 

In prime of youth when years and wit was ripe , 
Unhappy Will to ruin led the way : 
Wit danced about , when Folly 'gan to pipe , 
And Will and he together went astray . 
Naught then but pleasure was the good they sought 
Which now Repentance proves too dearly bought . 
XXXVI . 

He that in matters of delight and pleasure 
Can bridle his outrageous affection : 
And temper it in some indifferent measure , 
Doth prove himself a man of good discretion . 
In conquering Will true courage most is shown , 
And sweet temptations make men's virtues known . 
XXXVII . 

Each natural thing by course of kind we see , 
In his perfection long continueth not : 
Fruits once full ripe will then fall from the Tree , 
Or in due time not gathered soon will rot . 
It is decreed by doom of Powers divine , 
Things at their height must thence again decline . 
XXXVIII . 

Thy large smooth forehead wrinkled shall appear 
Vermilion hue , to pale and wan shall turn ; 
Time shall deface what Youth hath held most dear ; 
Yea those clear eyes which once my hart did burn , 
Shall in their hollow circles logde the night , 
And yield more cause of terror than delight . 
THIRTY-NINE . 

Lo here the record of my follies past , 
The fruits of wit unstaid , and hours misspent : 
Full wise is he that perils can forecast , 
And so by others harms his own prevent . 
All worldly pleasure that delights the sense , 
Is but a short sleep , and times vain expense . 
XL.  

The Sun hath twice his annual course performed , 
Since first unhappy I began to love : 
Whose errors now by Reasons rule reformed , 
Conceits of Love but smoke and errors prove . 
Who of his folly seeks more praise to win , 
Where I have made an end , let him begin . 
I C.  

FINIS . 

THE METAMORPHOSIS OF Pygmalion's Image . 

LONDON : Printed for Richard Hawkins , dwelling in Chancery-lane , near Sarjeants-inne . 1613.  

THE ARGUMENT of the Poem . 

Pigmalion whose chaste mind all the beauties in Cyprus could not ensnare , yet at the length having carved in ivory an excellent proportion of a beauteous woman , was so deeply enamoured on his own workmanship , that he would oftentimes lay the Image in bed with him , and fond use such petitions and dalliance , as if it had been a breathing creature . But in the end , finding his fond dotage , and yet persevering in his ardent affection , made his devout prayers to Venus , that she would vouchsafe to inspire life into his Love , and then join them both together in marriage . Whereupon Venus graciously condiscending to his earnest suit , the Maid ( by the power of her Deity ) was metamorphosed into a living woman . And after , Pygmalion ( being in Cyprus ) begat a Son of her , which was called Paphus ▪ whereupon , that Island Cyprus , in honour of Venus , was after , and is now , called by the Inhabitants , Paphos . 

To his Mistress . 

MY wanton Muse lasciviously doth sing 
Of sportive love , of lovely dallying . 
OH beauteous Angel , deign thou to infuse 
A sprightly wit into my dulled Muse. 
I invocate none other Saint but thee , 
To grace the first blooms of my Poesy . 
Thy favours , like Promethean sacred fire , 
In dead and dull conceit can life life inspire . 
O● , like that rare and rich Elixir stone , 
Can turn to Gold , Leaden invention : 
Be gracious then , and deign to show in me 
The mighty power of thy Deity . 
And as thou readest ( Fair ) take compassion , 
Force me not envy my Pygmalion . 
then when thy kindness grants me such sweet bliss , 
I 'll gladly write thy Matamorphosis . 
PYGMALION . 

I  

Pigmalion , whose high Love-hating mind , 
Disdained to yield servile affection , 
Or amorous suit to any womankind , 
Knowing their wants and men's perfection . 
Yet Love at length forced him to know his Fate , 
And love the shade , whose substance he did hate . 
II  

For having wrought in purest ivory 
So fair an Image of a woman's feature , 
That never yet proudest mortality 
could show so rare and beauteous a Creature , 
( Unless my Mistress all-exceeding face , 
●hich gives to beauty beauties only grace . ) 
III  

He was amazed at the wondrous rareness 
Of his own workmanships' perfection : 
He thought that Nature never produced such fairness 
In which all beauties have their mansion . 
And thus admiring was enamoured 
Of that fair Image himself portrayed . 
FOUR  

And naked as it stood before his eyes , 
Imperious Love declares his Deity : 
OH what alluring beauties he descries 
In each part of his fair imagery ! 
Her nakedness each beauteous shape contains , 
All beauty in her nakedness remains . 
v.  

He though he saw the blood run through the vein , 
And leap , and swell with all alluring means : 
then fears he is deceived ; and then again 
He thinks he sees the brightness of the beams 
Which shoot from out the fairness of her eye , 
At which he stands as in an ecstasy . 
VI  

Her Amber-coloured fair shining hair , 
Makes him protest , the Sun hath spread her head 
With golden beams and made her far more fair : 
But when her cheeks his amorous thoughts have fed 
then he exclaims such red , and such pure white 
Did never bless the eye of mortal sight . 
VII . 

then viewed her lips , no lips did seem so fair 
In his conceit , through which he thinks doth fly 
So sweet a breath , that doth perfume the air . 
then next her dimpled chin he doth descry , 
And views and wonders , and yet views her still : 
" Love's eyes in viewing never have their fill . 
VIII . 

Her breasts like polished ivory appear , 
Whose modest mount , do bless admiring eye , 
And makes him wish for such a Pillow bear . 
Thus fond Pygmalion striveth to descry 
Each beauteous part , not letting overslip 
One parcel of his curious workmanship . 
IX . 

Until his eye descended so far down , 
That it descried Love's Pavilion ; 
Where Cupid doth enjoy his only crown , 
And Venus hath her chiefest mansion : 
There would he wink , and winking look again , 
Both eyes and thoughts would gladly there remain . 
X.  

Who ever saw the subtle City Dame 
In sacred Church , when her pure thoughts should pray , 
Peire through her fingers , so to hide her shame , 
When that her eye her mind would fain bewray . 
So would he view and wink , and view again , 
A chaster thought could not his eyes retain . 
XI . 

He wondered that she blushed not when his eye 
Saluted those same parts of secrecy : 
Conceiting not it was imagery 
That kindly yielded that large liberty . 
O that my Mistress were an Image too , 
That I might blameless her perfections view . 
XII . 

But when the fair proportion of her thigh 
Began appear : OH Ovid would he cry , 
Did ere Corinna show such juorie , 
When she appeared in Venus' livery ? 
And thus enamoured dotes on his own Art , 
Which he did work to work his pleasing smart . 
XIII . 

And fond doting oft he kissed her lip , 
oft would he dally with her ivory breasts : 
no wanton Love-trick would he overslip , 
But still observed all amorous behests , 
Whereby he thought he might procure the love 
Of his dull Image , which no plaints could move . 
XIIII . 

Look how the peevish Papists crouch and kneel 
To some dumb Idol , with their offering , 
As if a senseless carved stone could feel 
The ardour of his bootless chattering : 
So fond he was , and earnest in his suit 
To his remorseless Image , dumb , and mute . 
xv.  

He oft doth wish his soul might part asunder , 
So that one half in her had residence : 
oft he exclaims , o beauties only wonder , 
Sweet model of delight , fair excellence , 
Be gracious unto him that form thee , 
Compassionate his truelove's ardency ! 
XVI . 

She with her silence seems to grant his suit , 
then he all jocund like a wanton Lover , 
With amorous embracements doth salute 
Her slender waste , presuming to discover 
The vale of Love , where Cupid doth delight 
To sport , and dally all the sable night . 
XVII . 

His eyes , her eyes , kindly encountered , 
His breast , her breast , oft joined close unto , 
His arms embracements oft she suffered : 
Hands , arms , eyes , tongue , lips , & all parts did woo ; 
His thigh with hers , his knee played with her knee : 
" A happy consort when all parts agree . 
XVIII . 

But when he saw poor soul he was deceived , 
( Yet scarce he could believe his sense had failed , ) 
Yet when he found all hope from him bereaved , 
And saw how fond all his thoughts had erred , 
then did he like to poor Ixion seem , 
That clipped a cloud in stead of heaven's Queen . 
XIX . 

I oft have smiled to see the foolery , 
Of some sweet Youths , who seriously protest 
That Love respects not actual luxury : 
But only joys to dally , sport , and jest , 
Love is a child contented with a toy , 
A Busk-point , or some favour stills the Boy 
xx.  

Mark my Pygmalion whose affections ardour 
May be a mirror to posterity : 
Yet viewing , touching , kissing , ( common favour ) 
could never satiate his love's ardency . 
And therefore ( Ladies ) think that they never love you 
Who do not unto more than kissing move you . 
XXI . 

For my Pygmalion kissed , viewed , and embraced , 
And yet exclaims ; Why were these women made 
( OH sacred Gods ) and with such beauties graced ? 
Have they not power as well to cool and shade , 
As for to heat men's hearts ? Or is there none ? 
Or are they all , like mine , relentless stone ? 
XXII . 

With that he takes her in his loving arms , 
And down within a Downbed softly laid her : 
then on his knees he all his senses charms , 
To invocate sweet Venus for to raise her 
To wished life , and to infuse some breath , 
To that which dead , yet gave a life to death . 
XXIII . 

thou sacred Queen of sportive dallying , 
( Thus he begins ) loves only Empress , 
Whose kingdom rests in wanton revelling , 
Let me beseech thee show thy powerfulnesse 
In changing stone to flesh ; make her relent , 
And kindly yield to thy sweet blandishment . 
XXIIII . 

OH gracious Gods , take compassion , 
Instill into her some celestial fire , 
That she may equalise affection , 
And have a mutual love , and love's desire . 
thou knowest the force of Love , then pity me , 
Compassionate my true love's ardency . 
XXV . 

Thus having said , he riseth from the floor , 
As if his soul divined him good fortune , 
Hoping his prayers to pity moved some Power ; 
For all his thoughts did all good luck importune : 
And therefore strait he strips him naked quite , 
That in the bed he might have more delight . 
XXVI . 

then thus , Sweet sheets , he says , which now do cover 
The Idol of my soul , the fairest one 
That ever loved , or had an amorous Lover , 
Earth's only model of perfection : 
Sweet happy sheets deign for to take me in , 
That I my hopes and longing thoughts may win . 
XXVII . 

With that his nimble limbs do kiss the sheets , 
And now he bows him for to lay him down ; 
And now each part with her fair parts do meet , 
Now doth he hope for to enjoy Love's crown : 
Now do they dally , kiss , embrace together , 
Like Leda's Twins at sight of fairest weather . 
XXVIII . 

Yet all 's conceit : but shadow of that bliss , 
Which now my Muse strives sweetly to display 
In this my wondrous Metamorphosis . 
Deign to believe me , now I sadly say ; 
The stony substance of his Image feature , 
Was strait transformed into a living Creature . 
XXIX . 

For when his hands her fair formed limbs had felt , 
And that his arms her naked waist embraced , 
Each part like Wax before the Sun did melt : 
And now , o now , he finds how he is graced 
By his own work . Tut , women will relent 
When as thy find such moving blandishment . 
XXX . 

Do but conceive a Mother's passing gladness , 
( After that Death her only son hath seized , 
And overwhelmed her soul with endless sadness ) 
When that she sees him gin for to be raised 
From out his deadly sound to life again : 
Such joy Pygmalion feels in every vein . 
XXXI . 

And yet he fears he doth but dreaming find 
So rich content , and such celestial bliss : 
Yet when he proves , and finds her wondrous kind 
Yielding soft touch for touch , sweet kiss for kiss , 
he 's well assured no fair Imagery 
could yield such pleasing love's felicity . 
XXXII . 

OH wonder not to hear me thus relate , 
And say to flesh transformed was a stone ; 
Had I my Love in such a wished state 
As was afforded to Pygmalion , 
Though flinty hard , of her you soon should see 
As strange a transformation wrought by me . 
XXXIII . 

And now me thinks some wanton itching ear 
With lustful thoughts and ill attention , 
List's to my Muse , expecting for to hear 
The amorous description of that action 
Which Venus seeks , and ever doth require , 
When fitness grants a place to please desire . 
XXXIIII . 

Let him conceit but what himself would do 
When that he had obtained such a favour 
Of her to whom his thoughts were bound unto , 
If she , in recompense of his love's labour 
Would deign to let one pair of sheets contain 
The willing bodies of those loving twain . 
XXXV . 

could he , o could he , when that each to either 
Did yield kind kissing , and more kind embracing ; 
could he when that they felt , and clipped together , 
And might enjoy the life of dallying , 
could he abstain , midst such a wanton sporting , 
From doing that which is not fit reporting ? 
XXXVI . 

What would he do when that her softest skin 
Saluted his with a delightful kiss ? 
When all things fit for love's sweet pleasuring , 
Invited him to reap a Lover's bliss ? 
What he would do , the selfsame action 
Was not neglected by Pygmalion . 
XXXVII . 

For when he found that life had taken his seat 
Within the breast of his kind beauteous Love , 
When that he found that warmth and wished heat , 
Which might a Saint and coldest spirit move , 
then arms , eyes , hands , tongue , lips , and wanton thigh , 
Were willing agents in Love's luxury . 
XXXVIII . 

Who knows not what ensues ? OH pardon me 
Ye gaping ears that swallow up my lines , 
Expect no more . Peace idle Poesy : 
Be not obscene , though wanton in thy rhymes . 
And chaster thoughts , pardon if I do trip , 
Or if some loose lines from my pen do slip . 
THIRTY-NINE . 

Let this suffice , that that same happy night 
So gracious were the Gods of Marriage , 
Midst all their pleasing and long wished delight , 
Paphus was got : of whom in after age 
Cyrus was Paphos called , and evermore 
Those Islanders do Venus' name adore . 
FINIS . 

THE LOVE OF AMOS AND LAURA . 

Written by S. P.  

VIRESCIT VULNERA VERITAS 

TC 

LONDON Printed for Richard Hawkins , dwelling in Chancery-lane : near Sarieants-inne , 1613.  

TO MY APPROVED AND MUCH RESPECTED FRIEND , 〈…〉 : W ▪ 

TO thee thou more than thrice beloved friend , 
I too unworthy of so great a bliss : 
These harsh tuned lines I he●e to thee commend , 
thou being cause it is now as it is : 
For hadst thou held thy tongue by silence might , 
These had been buried in oblivions night . 
If they were pleasing , I would call them thine , 
And disavow my title to the verse : 
But being bad , I needs must call them mine , 
no ill thing can be clothed in thy verse . 
Accept them then , and where I have offended , 
Raze thou it out , and let it be amended . 
S. P.  

THE AUTHOR TO HIS BOOK . 

GO little book into the largest world , 
And blaze the chasteness of thy maiden Muse : 
Regardless of all envy on thee hurled , 
By the unkindness that the reader's use : 
And those that envy thee by scruples letter , 
Bid them take pen in hand and make a better . 
THE LOVE OF Amos and Laura . 

IN the large confines of renowned France 
There lived a Lord , whom Fortune did advance , 
Who had a Daughter , Laura called the fair ; 
So sweet , so proper , and so debonair , 
That strangers took her for to be none other , 
then Venus' self , the God of Loves own Mother . 
Not far from thence was situate a Town , 
The Lord thereof a man of great renown ; 
Whom likewise Fortune blessed with a Son , 
Amos by name , so modest , civil , young , 
And yet in fight so wondrous and so bold , 
As that therein he passed uncontrolled : 
So kind to strangers , and so meek to all ; 
Of comely grace , and stature somewhat tall . 
As the wide world not two such Imps affords , 
As were the offsprings of these happy Lords . 
Hunting he loved , and therefore in a morn 
He shakes off sleep ( for case he laughs to scorn ) 
Before the sable Curtains of the East 
Proclaimed the Sun's approach unto the west ; 
Or Titan , Lordly Ruler of the morn , 
Had in his Chariot , left the night forlorn ; 
Or sounded sleep to them , with whom ( men say ) 
it 's dark some night when we enjoy the day : 
He braced his Hounds , and striding over his Steed , 
Hope with a conquest did the youngster feed : 
Which done , he hies him to a mighty wood , 
That joined where Laura's Father's Palace stood . 
Thither being come , a Boar he raised , whose pace 
Did make our huntsman lose his Hounds in chase : 
Ranging the woods , he light into a Grove , 
more pleasant far then that where Venus strove 
To win Adonis to her hearts desire , 
Moved by the burning zeal of sweet Love's fire . 
In this sweet Grove God Pan did keep his Court , 
And summoned all the petty God's resort , 
As Satyrs , Nymphs , and others , to the same , 
Where all sing praises unto Laura's name . 
Into this Grove ( near to her chamber side ) 
( To take the Air ) she comes forth ; soon espied 
Of the young Huntsman , who made haste unto her , 
And thus the Novice there begins to woo her : 
Paragon of beauty , divine , though earthly creature , 
And yet Celestial in thy heavenly feature . 
This sudden courting , and unwelcome sight , 
Made her add wings to fear , and to that , flight : 
He following after , caught her by the train , 
That in a rage the Maid turned back again , 
And did demand why he without remorse , 
durst cause her stay , against her will , by force . 
Moved by the rosiate colour of thy face , 
( Wherein consists ( quoth he ) all heavenly grace ) 
I was too bold , I must confess indeed , 
To touch the seluage of thy sacred weed : 
For which myself I 'll punish as thou wilt , 
With any pain , for my deserved guilt . 
Do but pronounce the sentence of my death , 
These hands shall be the butchers of my breath : 
But since the merit of my fault 's no deeper , 
O let me be thy Prisoner , thou my Keeper ; 
So shall thine eyes be witness of the woe , 
Which for my bold offence I 'll undergo . 
Pronounce thy sentence then . Wherewith she spoke , 
You are your Crafts-man Sir : and there she broke . 
Yet turning back , quoth she , o would ' were true , 
Your love were firm to me , as mine to you ! 
And here she ceased : for when he came near her , 
She was afraid that he would overhear her . 
And art thou so unwilling then , quoth he , 
To doom the sentence which I ask of thee ? 
Persuade thyself it is thy purer mind 
That will not let thy heart prove so unkind : 
OH would that mind were mine , to join thy hart 
Either to end my life , or ease my smart . 
Love is my suit . Nor hate is my reply , 
Quoth she . Quoth he , I cannot court it I ; 
They which but view the error in my looks , 
May find I never learned in Cupid's books : 
But like a stone rough hewn from the rocks , 
And after polished by the Masons knocks , 
The former shows but base then in compare , 
So to my love my speech disgraces are : 
For were my speech true pattern of my mind , 
Not as it doth ,   come , but far more kind . 
Like as the Merchant hearing of a loss , 
Is wondrous sorry for so great a cross ; 
And after heareth by a true report , 
His goods are safely landed in the Fort , 
Cannot express the joy he doth conceive : 
For why ? it doth his senses quite bereave ; 
And yet with sign of sorrow blames th' event , 
Although it seem most plain and evident . 
Or like a Ship tossed by tempestuous weather , 
Now here , then there ; now back again , then thither 
That whirlwinds meeting ( roaring out aloud ) 
Make watery mountains show the ship each cloud : 
then with such fury they descend the deep , 
From top of triple-cedar-mountaines steep , 
As of the Seas rich oriental show , 
Against their wills they take a counterview . 
So fares his mind , which tossed to and from , 
Sometimes doth joy , and other times is woe : 
Sometimes from depth ascends into the air , 
And though he hope , he hides it with despair . 
So long with fervent zeal he moved his suit , 
Only for want of words his tongue was mute . 
" Where true affection rules in hottest fires , 
" Dumb signs and tokens than show men's desires ▪ 
For what he thought he showed , he could not utter , 
Which made him oft when he should speak to mutter . 
She that was wounded with the selfsame dart , 
Revealed with tongue that which she wished with hart 
And framed her answer , so muched could not grieve him , 
For 't was a salve to wound and to relieve him . 
Say I could love , quoth she , my milder mind , 
( Unless you further move ) cannot unkind , 
Frame you an answer : for we are by nature 
So much addicted to man's heavenly feature , 
That though your faults are great by your abuse , 
To blind the same it is our woman's use . 
then as thou found'st me , leave me , if thou wilt ; 
That shall be all I tender for thy guilt : 
Further I will not credit thy report : 
Farewell ; be gone , for I am missed in Court. 
With that she flies , and in her flight she leaves 
A well wrought Scarf , which strait the wind up heaves ; 
And proud of such a prize , they do infer 
With their embassage unto jupiter , 
And there presented it : who , as 't was right , 
Did make the winds returneed with swiftest flight , 
Unto the place where Amos stood amazed 
At that which happed , who like a madman gazed , 
Wondering what she by this illusion meant , 
When to allure him was her whole intent : 
But led in admiration most of all , 
At the rich Scarf which from the Maid did fall . 
He views the work , where finding of Apollo 
Chase a Nymph , who swifter than a Swallow 
Flieth his arms , for fear did lend her wings 
To fly from him which after her soon flings . 
Himself a fool he calls , that wanting skill , 
Being allured , he had not known her william 
Doubtful , he fears offence committed to her , 
That he so rashly , gainest her will , durst woo her . 
To clear himself of which offence he flies , 
Resolved to win the Maid , or lose the prize , 
With prosperous haste . O may thy haste well speed , 
Whose wondrous love did virtuously proceed : 
Not from the flames of filthy lusts desire , 
As was that Rome-borne Tarquin's lustful fire : 
But as unspotlesse from that filthy thought , 
From that most hell-deseruing thing of naught , 
As ever heart lodged in a loyal breast , 
Or tongue , untaught to lie , ever expressed . 
But why do I digress the path I tread , 
Cloying your ears with that your eyes do read ? 
Pardon my boldness , and give ear a while 
To that , of him , which my inferior stile 
Shall now express : thought not with honour stands , 
He thinks one pair of legs worth twice two hands . 
The arrow swift sent from the sturdy bow , 
May be accounted ( to his flight ) but slow : 
At last he gained the Court , to which being come , 
It showed like to the Palace of the Sun 
Described in Ovid : for in length and fairness , 
None might surpass the workmanship and rareness . 
Through which his way lies , & he needs must pass , 
The pavement Marble was , the walls of Glass : 
Whereunder was so lively carved the Story 
Of great jove's love , his wondrous works , & glory , 
With many others love : which to rehearse 
Would add a mighty volume to my Verse , 
Besides mine own weak wit : for I do know it , 
He was a better workman , than I Poet. 
Yet could not this abate the Lover's pace : 
For he still holds the lovely Maid in chase . 
Passing the Court , he comes into a green , 
Which was in midst of the Palace seen : 
Through the midst there ran a pleasant Spring , 
On each side with a brickwall of Brick hemmed in , 
Only in midst , a Style ; beyond , a Plank , 
Which for a Bridge did serve to either bank . 
Over this Style as Laura lightly skips , 
In her rend garment happily it slips , 
And held her there a while till he came to her , 
Where once again the Novice 'gins to woe her . 
Fly not thy friend , our Maker willeth so , 
Things reasonless approve and wish it to ; 
If without sense and reason all things than 
Observe a better course then human men , 
How savage were we then offending so , 
Committing that which we offence do know ? 
OH were my tongue a second Orpheus Harp , 
That to my love I might allure thy hearr ! 
Or were thy love but equal unto mine , 
then would thou seek his favour who seeks thine ! 
Me thinks unkindness cannot come from thence , 
Where beauty reigns with such magnificence , 
I mean from thee , whom nature hath endowed 
With more than Art would willingly allowed : 
And though by nature you are born most fair , 
Yet Art would add a beauty to your share : 
But it being spotless doth disdain receipt 
Of all unpolished painting sergeant . 
Your beauty is a snare unto our ways , 
Wherein once caught , we cannot brook delays ; 
Which makes us oft through grief of mind grow sad , 
Grief follows grief , then malcontent & mad . 
Thus by denial do you cause our woe , 
And then do triumph in our overthrow . 
What is it to be fair ? only a vanity , 
A fading blossom of no perpetuity . 
Consider this ; for beauty is a flower , 
Subject to ill occasions every hour ; 
It is a tenure holden as we lee 
Durante Dei placito , not in fee. 
Measure my Love then , prove it by a trial : 
Let me not languish still by your denial . 
If in my suit I err , as by mischance , 
Blame not my Love but count it ignorance . 
The tongue is but an instrument of naught , 
And cannot speak the largeness of the thought : 
For when the mind abounds , and almost breaketh , 
then through abundance of the heart it speaketh : 
no man can speak but what he hath in mind , 
Than what I speak I think , be not unkind 
Unto your servant , who obedience proffers , 
And makes firm love the object of his offers . 
I will not boast of Parentage , or Line , 
For all are base , respecting thee divine : 
Nor will I boast of wealth , or riches store , 
For in thy face consists all wealth , and more . 
Pure are my thoughts as skin between thy brows , 
And eke as chaste my speech , my oaths , & vows . 
Speak sweetest fair , but one kind word to me , 
How can alas that be offence in thee ? 
There was a Dame a modern Poet sung , 
Hero by name , like thee , both fair and young : 
And both so fair , that you did others pass 
As far as rarest Diamonds common glass . 
Whom young Leander courted on a green , 
A Maid so fair ( but thee ) was never seen . 
She granted love , which he ( alas ) to gain , 
To reap those joys , did cross the brinish Maine . 
My love to thee , I now compare to his ; 
Accounting danger , so requited , bliss . 
There are no Seas to separate our joy , 
no future danger can our Love annoy : 
then grant to me what she denied not him ; 
If good in her , in thee it is no sin . 
The Sun hath shined thus long , o let not now 
The Sun be darkened by thine angry brow . 
But rather let each look a Comet be 
That may presage my happy destiny . 
I could to you a short discourse impart , 
That would relent the direst stony hart , 
Were 't not offence . it 's no offence quoth she . 
then thus the same I 'll briefly tell , quoth he : 
A poor old man by chance did break his leg , 
And he was told where he was wont to beg , 
That such a Surgeon ( telling of his name , ) 
If that he pleased , could quickly cure the same . 
Which when he heard , to him for help he goes , 
And craves for God's sake he would ease his woes . 
The Surgeon greedy to have coin therefore , 
But finding none , he would not heal the sore : 
Which caused the poor old man to keep his bed , 
That he for want of help in time was dead . 
Alas poor soul ; ( quoth she ) and did he die ? 
Would I were judge , or he were such as I , 
I so would use the Surgeon , as that he 
Should feel the grief which he before did see . 
Thus you confess your wrong to me sweet Maid , 
If you perform ( quoth he ) the words you said . 
I am the man , who wounded , seek relief : 
And you , the causer of my endless grief ; 
You are the Surgeon , whom I urge the more 
To cure the wound because you made the sore : 
Be not obdurate then , sith my disease 
Is quickly cured , if the Surgeon please . 
And this I vow water shall turn to fire , 
Huge massy mountains to the clouds aspire ; 
The Sun shall leave his course , the Moon her brightness , 
Night turn to day , and day shall lose his lightness ; 
fishes shall fly , birds swim ; and Hare shall hunt 
The Hound , which to pursue the Hare was wont : 
Air , Earth , Fire , Water , all things which you view 
Shall change their natures , ere I turn from you : 
And longer than I breathe a loyal friend , 
Let me ( o heavens ) endure a wicked end . 
Silence ( quoth she ) and here let cease thy suit , 
'Cause of distrust in love did make me mute : 
Ask why I yielded in so short a season , 
Because I love , that is a woman's reason . 
Yet Maids are fearful ; for by men's abuse , 
Courting is turned to a common use , 
How is he held , that cannot in these days 
Fashion his words to each fantastic phrase ? 
Which makes us oft with one word to debase 
Him from our bosoms , whom our hearts embrace : 
And , as you men do for a Proverb make it , 
That which we love we oft say nay and take it . 
Delays breed danger , wherefore what I said , 
And what agrees with Honour , and a Maid , 
I yield to thee , but yet on this condition , 
thou shalt not dare t' attempt the least fruition 
Of my chaste thoughts , by drawing them aside , 
Before in wedlock I am made thy Bride . 
This said ; she to the Court , he to his Hounds , 
Where they had slain a Boar , whose blood abounds : 
Glad of his prey , he hasteneth home amain , 
With short return he comes to her again , 
And having joined themselves in Hymen's bands , 
The sacred Priest uniteth heart and hands : 
They reap those joys which elder lovers know , 
And thus my Tale doth end , thus ends their woe . 
FINIS . 

EPIGRAMS . 

Don Pedro's Debt . 

DONE Pedro's out of debt , be bold to say it ; 
For they are said to own , that mean to pay it . 
Sextus Wit.  

TO have good wit is Sextus thought by many ; 
But sure he hides it all , he shows not any . 
Of casting out Spirits by Prayer , without Fasting . 

A Virtuous Dame , who for her state and quality , 
Did ever love to keep great Hospitality ; 
Her name I must not name in plain reciting , 
But thus , The chief Instrument of writing , 
Was by Duke Humphrey's Guests so boldly haunted , 
That her good mind therewith was sorely daunted : 
She sighing said , one day , to a careless lester , 
These ill-bred guests my board and house so pester , 
That I pray God oft times with all my heart , 
That they would leave their haunt , and hence depart . 
He that by his own humour haply guest , 
What manner Spirit these smell-feasts had possessed ; 
Told her the surest way such Spirits out-casting , 
Was to leave Prayer a while , and fall to Fasting . 
Of wicked Prayers . 

A Husband and a Wife oft disagreeing , 
And either weary of the others being , 
In choler great either devoutly prays 
To God , that he would shorten th' other's days : 
But more devout than both their Son and Heir 
Prays God that he would grant them both their prayer . 
The Author , of his Fortune . 

Take Fortune as it falls , so one adviseth , 
But Heywood bids me take it as it riseth : 
And while I think to do as both do teach , 
It falls and riseth quite besides my reach . 
Of Misse-pointing . 

Dame's are endued with virtues excellent : 
What man is he can prove that ? they offend 
Daily , they serve the Lord with good intent 
Seld , they displease their Husbands to the end 
Always , to please them well they do intend 
Never , in them one shall find shrewdnesse much , 
Such are their humours , and their grace is such . 
To his Wife . 

MY Mall , the former Verses this doth reach you , 
That some deceive , some are deceived by shows : 
For this that in your praise so firmly goes , 
With one false point and stop will over reach you , 
And turn the praise to scorn , the Verse to Prose , 
By which you may be slandered , all as shrews , 
And some perhaps may speak , and say no treason , 
The Verses had more time , the Prose more reason . 
Of a Precise Tailor . 

A Taylor thought a man of upright dealing , 
〈◊〉 but for lying , honest but for stealing : 
Di● fall one day extremely seek by chance , 
And on the sudden , was i● wondrous trance . 
The fiends of hell mustering in fearful manner , 
Of sundry coloured ●●lkess displayed a banner 
Which he had stol●e , and wished as they did tell , 
That he might find it all one day in hell . 
The man affrighted with this apparition , 
Upon recovery gre●● a great precision : 
He bought a Bible of the best translation , 
And in his life he shown great reformation . 
He walked mannerly , he talked meekly , 
He heard three lectures , and two sermons weekly . 
He voued to eat all company unruly , 
And in his speech he used no oath but truly . 
And zealously to keep the saboths rest , 
His meat for that day on the eve was dressed . 
And lest the custom which he had to steal , 
Might cause him sometime to forget his zeal , 
He gives his journyman a special charge , 
That if the stuff allowance being large , 
He found his fingers were to filch inclined , 
Bid him to have the banner in his mind . 
This done , I scant can tell the rest for laughter , 
A captain of a ship came three days after , 
And brought three yards of velvet , and three quarters , 
To make venetians down below the garters . 
He that precisely knew what was enough , 
Soon slipped aside three quarters of the stuff . 
His man espying it , said in derision , 
Master remember how you saw the vision . 
Peace knave quoth he , I did not see one rag , 
Of such a coloured silk in all the flag . 
Of a Citizen and his Son 

A Citizen that dwelled near Temple bar , 
By hap one day fell with his son at jar : 
Who for his evil life and lewd demerit , 
He oft affirmed he would quite disinherit . 
And vowed his goods and lands all to the poor : 
His son what with his play , what with his ( ) 
Was so consumed at last , that he did lack , 
Meat for his mouth , and clothing for his back . 
OH crafty poverty , his father now , 
May give him all he hath , yet keep his vow . 
Mistaking a word . 

AN English Lad long wooed a lass of Wales , 
And entertained her with such pretty tales , 
As though she understood not , yet to try him , 
She gave consent at last to underly him . 
Both having dallied to their full society , 
The wench to show some womanly sobriety , 
Told in her language she was well ypaide , 
And Diggon , Diggon once or twice she said . 
Dig on in welsh doth signify enough , 
Which he mistaking , answers thus in snuff : 
Diggon that can ( quoth he ) for I so sore 
Have diggde already , I can dig no more . 
Of his Cook , named Cornish . 

MY Cornish Cook in rage and fury great , 
Did chase , and chide , and curse & swear , and sweat . 
Because the turn-broach burned had the meat . 
And with the basting ladle did him beat . 
Was not my Cook a rash and angry Cullion , 
When he should baste the meat , to baste the Scullion 
Of his writings . 

MY writings oft displease you . what 's the matter ? 
You love not to hear truth , nor I to flatter . 
Of a Lady's Cabinet . 

A Virtuous Lady sitting in a muse , 
As oftentimes fair virtuous Lady's use , 
Did lean her elbow on her knee full hard , 
The other distant from it half a yard . 
Her Knight to taunt her with some privy token , 
Said , Wife , awake , your Cabinet stands open . 
She rose , and blushed , and smiled , and soft did say , 
then look it if you list , you keep the key . 
Of Wife's ruling . 

Concerning Wives , hold this a certain rule , 
That if at first , you let them have the rule , 
Yourself at last , with them shall have no rule , 
Except you let them evermore to rule . 
Of Gella's Periwig . 

See you the goodly hair that Gella wears 
't is certain her own hair , one would have thought it . 
She swears it is her own , and true she swears : 
For hard by Temple-bar last day she bought it . 
So fair an hair upon so foul a forehead , 
Augments disgrace , and shows her grace was borrowed . 
Of a Prater , out of Marshal . 

Who so is hoarse , yet still to prate doth press , 
Proves he can neither speak , nor hold his Peace . 
Of trusting to his Friend . 

IF you will shroud yourself from all mishaps , 
And eat the cause of many afterclaps ; 
Put not in any one too much belief , 
Your joy will be the less , so will your grief . 
Of Faustus , a stealer of Verses . 

I Hear that Faustus oftentimes rehearses 
To his chaste Mistress certain of my Verses : 
In which , by use , so perfect he is grown ; 
That she , poor fool , doth think they are his own . 
I would esteem it ( trust me ) grace , not shame , 
If Danyel , or if Davies did the same . 
Nor would I storm , or would I quarrels pick , 
I when I list , to them could do the like . 
But who can wish a man a fouler spite , 
then have a blind man take away his sight ? 
A begging thief is dangerous to my purse , 
A beggage Poet to my Verse is worse . 
An Epitaph by a man of his Father . 

GOD works wonders now and than , 
Here lies a Lawyer was an honest man  
An Epitaph of Aretine . 

Here lies Aretine that poisonous Toad , 
Whose spiteful tongue and Pen , all Saints beshrew him , 
Did rail on Prince and Priest , and all but God , 
And said for his excuse he did not know them . 
FINIS . 





Diogenes .   Chaucer 

●he Antipodes . 