THE THIRD AND FOURTH BOOK OF AIRS : Composed BY Thomas Campian . So as they may be expressed by one Voice , with a Viol , Lasts , or Orphari●m . 

LONDON : Printed by Thomas Snodham . 

Cum P●i●ilegio 

A Table of all the Songs contained in the two Books following . 

The table of the first Book . 

OF● have I sighed . I 
Now let her change . TWO 
Were my hearts as . III 
Maids are simple some men say . FOUR 
So tired are all my thoughts . v 
Why presumes thy pride . VI 
Kind are her answers . VII 
OH grief , OH spite . VIII 
OH never to be moved . IX 
Break now my heart and die . X 
It Love loves truth . XI 
Now winter nights enlarge . XII 
Awake thou spring . XIII 
What is it that men possess ? XIIII 
Fire that must flame . XV 
If thou longest so much . XVI 
Shall I come sweet love ? XVII 
Thrice toss these Oaken . XVIII 
Be thou then my beauty . XIX 
Fire , fire , fire , fire , lo here . XX 
OH sweet delight . XXI 
Thus I resolve . XXII 
Come , o come my life 's XXIII 
could my heart more . XXIIII 
Sleep angry beauty , XXV 
Silly boy 't is full M●one yet . XXVI 
Never love unless you can . XXVII 
So quick , so hot . XXVIII 
Shall I then hope . XXIX 
The Table of the second Book . 

Leave prolonging . I 
Respect my faith , TWO 
thou joyest fond boy . III 
Veil love mine eyes . FOUR 
Every Dame affects good fame . v 
So sweet is thy discourse . VI 
There is a Garden in her face . VII 
To his sweet Lute . VIII 
Young and simple though I am . IX 
Love me or not . X 
What means this folly ? XI 
Dear if I with guile . XII 
OH Love where are thy shafts ? XIII 
Beauty is but a painted hell . XIIII 
Are you what your ? XV 
Since she even she . XVI 
I must complain . XVII 
Thinkest tho● to seduce . XVIII 
Her fair inflaming eyes . XIX 
Turn all thy thoughts . XX 
If any hath the heart to kill . XXI 
Beauty since you . XXII 
Your fair looks . XXIII 
Feign would I wed . XXIIII 
FINIS . 

TO MY HONOURABLE FRIEND , S R. THOMAS MOUNSON , KNIGHT AND BARONET . 

Since now those clouds , that lately overcast 
Your Fame and Fortune , are dispersed at last : 
And now since all to you fair greetings make , 
Some out of love , and some for pities sake : 
Shall I but with a common stile salute 
Your new enlargement ? or stand only mute ? 
ay , to whose trust and care you durst commit 
Your pined health , when Art despaired of it ? 
ay , that in your affliction often viewed 
In you the fruits of manly fortitude , 
Patience , and even constancy of mind , 
That Rocke-like stood , and scorned both wave , and wind ? 
Should I for all your ancient love to me ▪ 
Endowed with weighty favours , silent be ? 
Your merits , and my gratitude forbid 
That either should in Lethean Gulf lie hid 
But how shall I this work of fame expre●●e ? 
How can I better , after pensivenesse , 
then with light strains of Music , made to move 
Sweetly with the wide-spreading plumes of love ? 
These youth-borne Airs then , prisoned in this Book , 
Which in your Bowers much of their being took , 
Accept as a kind offering from that hand 
Which joined with heart your virtue may command . 
Who love a sure friend as all good men do , 
Since such you are , let those affect you to : 
And may the joys of that Crown never end , 
That innocence doth pity , and defend . — 
Yours devoted , THOMAS CASPIAN . 


oft have I sighed , oft have I sighed , oft have I 


sighed for him that hears me not : Who absent hath both love and me for-got . 


O yet I languish still , yet I languish still , yet I languish still through his de-lay . 


Day's seem as years , when wished friends break their day . 

BASSUS . 




● 〈◊〉 he but loved as common lovers use , 
His faithless stay some kindness would excuse : 
OH yet I languish still , still constant mourn 
For him that can break vows , but not return . 

Now let her change and spare not , Since ●he proves strange I care not : Feigned love charmed so 


my de-light , That still I doted on her sight . But she is gone new ●oiess embracing And my deires dis-gracing . 

BASSUS . 


2 

When did I err in blindness ? 
Or vex her with unkindness ? 
If my cares served her alone ; 
Why is she thus untimely gone ? 
True love abides to t'houre of dying ; 
False love is eu●●●ving . 
3 

False then farewell for ●u●r : 
Once false proves faithful never . 
He that boasts now of thy lou● , 
Shall soon my pr●●ent to●tuneses prove . 
Were he as fair at bright Ad●mu ; 
Faith is not had where none ●● . 
CANTUS . III  


WF●● my hart as some men's are , thy errors would not move me : But thy faults I cu-rious 
Patience is a thing d● 


find and speak , because I love thee : 
vine , and far I grant a-bove me . 

BASSUS . 


2 

Foes sometimes be friend us more , our blacker deeds objecting , 
then th'obs●quious bosom guest , with false respect affecting : 
Friendship is the glass of Truth , our hidden stains detecting . 
3 

While I use of eyes enjoy , and inward light of reason , 
Thy observer will I be , and c●●sor , but in season : 
Hidden mischief to conc●●●e in Sease , and Love is 〈◊〉 o● . 

Maids' are simple some men say , They forsooth will trust no men : 


But should they men's wills o. bey , Maids were very simple then . 

BASSUS . 


2 

Truth a rare flower now is grown , 
Few men wear it in their hearts ; 
Lovers are more easily known 
By their follies , than deserts . 
3 

Safer may we credit give 
To a faithless wand'ring jew , 
then a young man's vows believe , 
When he swears bis 〈◊〉 we . 
2 

Love they make a poor blind child , 
But let none trust such as Fee ; 
Rather then to be beguned 
Ever let me simple be . 
CANTUS . v.  


SO tired are all my thoughts , that sense and spirits fail ; Mourning I pine , and 


know not what I ail . OH what can yield ease to a mind , toy in nothing that can find ? 

BASSUS . 


2 

How are my powers sore-spoke ? what strange distaste is this ? 
Hence cruel hate of that which sweetest is : 
Come , come delight , make my dull brain 
Feel once heat of joy ag●●ne . 
3 

The lover's tears are sweet , their moner makes them so : 
Proud of a wound the bleeding Soldiers grous : 
Poor I alone , dreaming , endure 
Grief that knows nor cause , nor cure . 
And whence can all this grow ? even from an idle mi●de , 
That no delight in any good can find . 
Action alone makes the soul blessed ; 
Virtue dies with too much reft . 

Why presumes thy pride on that that must so private be ? Scarce that it can 
Best of all t●at 


good be called , though it seems best to thee . 
Nature framed , or cu-rious eye can see . 

BASSUS . 


2 

't is thy beau'y , soc'●sh Maid , that like a blossom grows , 
Which who views no more enjoys then on a bush a Rose , 
That by manies handling fades ; and thou 〈◊〉 one of those . 
3 

If to one thou sh●lt prove true , and all beside reject , 
then art thou but one man's good , which yields a poor effect ; 
For the commonest good by larre deserves the best respect . 
4 

But if for this goodness thou thy self ●●lt● common make , 
thou art then not good at all ; so thou canst no way 〈◊〉 
But to prove the meanest good , or else all good foretake . 
5 

Be not then of be ●●ry proud , but so her colours bears , 
That they prove not stains to her that them ●or 〈◊〉 ●●ould we●●● ; 
So shalt thou to all more fair than thou west born appear . 
CANTUS . VII . 


Kind are her answers , but her per-formance keeps no day . All her free favours & smooth words 
Breaks time as dancers from their own Music when they stray : 


wing my hopes in vain . OH did ever voice so sweet but only fain ? Can true love yield such delay , conver-ting joy to pain ? 

BASSUS . 


2 

Lost is our freedom , 
When we submit to women so : 
Why do we need them , 
When in their best they work our woe ? 
There is no wisdom 
Can alter ends by Fate prefixed ; 
OH why is the good of man with evil mixed ? 
Never were days yet ca ' d two , 
But one night went betwixt . 

OH Grief , OH spite , to see poor Virtue scorned , Truth far ex - ned , False art loved : 


Vice adored , Fr●e justice sold , worst causes best adorned , Right cast by Pour , Pity in vain imploted ! 


OH who in such an age could wish to live , When none can have or hold but such as give ? 

BASSUS . 




2 

OH times ' OH men ! to Nature rebel's grown ; 
Poor in desert ; in name rich ; proud of shame ; 
Wise , but in ill : your styles are not your own , 
Though dear bought , honour is honest fame . 
Old Stories only goodness now contain , 
And the true wisdom , that is just , and plain . 
〈…〉 


OH Never to be moved , OH beauty un relen-ting ; Why did I dream 
Hard hart too dear loved , Fond love too late repen-ting ! 


of too much bliss ? Deceitful hope was cause of this . OH hear , o hear , o bear me speak , OH 


hear me speak this and no more , this and no more , this and no more , Live you in joy , while I 


my woes , my woes de-plore . 

BASSUS . 




2 

All comforts despaired 
Distaste your bitter scorning , 
Great sorrows unrepayred 
Admit no mean in mourning : 
Die wretch , since hope from thee is fled ; 
He that must die is better dead . 
OH dear delight , yet ere I die 
Some pity show , though you relief deny . 
CANTUS . X.  


Break now my heart and die , O no , o no , she may re-lent . Should she now 
Let my despair prevail , o stay , o stay , hope is not spent . 


fix one smile on thee , where were despair ? The loss is but easy which smiles can repair . 
A stranger would please thee , if she were as fair 

BASSUS . 


2 

Her must I love or none , so sweet none breathes as she , 
The more is my despair , alas she loves not me : 
But cannot time make way for love through ribs of steel ? 
The Graecian enchanted a●l parts but the heel , 
At last a shaft daunted which his hart did feel . 
CANTUS . XI . 


IF Love loves truth , than women do not love : Their passions all are but dis-sembled shows , 
Now kind and free of favour if they prove . Their kindness strait a tempest overthrows . 


then as a Seaman the poor lover fares , The storm drowns him ere he can drown his cares . 
BASSUS . 


2 

But why accuse I women that deceive ? 
Blame then the Foxes for their subtle wile : 
They first from Nature did their craft receive : 
It is a woman's nature to beguile . 
Yet some I grant in loving steadfast grow ; 
But such by use , are made , not nature so . 
OH why had Nature power at once to frame 
Deceit and Beauty , traitors both to Love ? 
O would Deceit had died when Beauty came 
With her divinenesse every heart to move ! 
Yet do we rather wish what ere befall , 
To have fair women false , than none at all . 

Now winter nights en-large the number of their hours , And clouds their 
Let now the chimneys blaze , and cups overflow with wine : Let well-tuned 


storms discharge upon the airy towers , Now yel-low waxen lights shall wait on honey 
words a-maze with harmony divine . 


Love , While youthful Revels , Masks , and Courtly sights , sleeps leaden spells re-move . 

BASSUS . 



2 

This time doth well dispense 
With lovers long discourse ; 
Much spe●ch hath some defence , 
Though beauty no remorse . 
All do not all things well ; 
Some measures comely tread ; 
Some knotted Riddles tell ; 
Some Poems smoothly read . 
The Summer hath his joys , 
And Winter his delights ; 
Though Love and all his pleasures are but toys , 
They shorten tedious nights . 
〈…〉 


Awake thou spring of spea-king grace , mute rest becomes not thee ; 
They fairest women , while they sleep , and Pictures equal be . 


OH come and dwell in love's dis●our-ses , old renewing , new cre-a-ting . 
The words which thy rich tongue discour-ses , are not of the common ra-ting . 

BASSUS . 


2 

Thy voice is ●s an ●●cho clear● , which Music doth beget ; 
Thy spee●● is ●n Or●●● , which no●e can coun●et●t : 
For thou ●one 〈◊〉 ●●nchanting 
And I co●d hear 〈◊〉 w●●●out ending , 
Other com●o● : never wanting . 
3 

Some little reason brutish lives w●●● human glory share , 
But language is our proper grace ●●om which they ●●uer dare . 
As brutes in reason man ●u●pass 
Men in speech excelle 〈◊〉 other : 
If speech be then the best of ●●acess , 
Do it not in slumber smother . 
CANTUS . XIIII . 


What is it all that men possess among themselves conversing ? Wealth or fame , or 
Women only 


som● such boast , searce worthy the rehearsing . 
are men's good with them in love conversing . 


BASSUS . 


2 

If weary , they prepare us rest ; if sick , their hand attends us. 
When with grief our hearts are preft , their comfort best befriends us : 
Sweet or sour they willing go to share what fortune sends us.  
3 

What pretty babes with pain they bear our name & torm presenting ? 
What we get , how wise they keep , by sparing , wants preventing ; 
Sorting all their household cares to our observed contening . 
4 

All this of whose large use I sing , in two words is exp●sle ▪ 
Good wife is the good I praise , if by good men possessed , 
Bad with bad in ill fate well , but good with good ●ue 〈◊〉 . 
CANTUS . xv.  


Fire that must flame is with apt fuel fed , Flowers that will thrive in sunny soil are bred ; 


How can a hart feel heat that no hope finds ? Or can he love on whom no comfort shines ? 

BASSUS . 


2 

Fair , I confess there 's pleasure in your sight : 
Sweet , you have pour I grant of all delight . 
But what is all to me if I have none ' 
Churl that you are t' enjoy such wealth alone . 
3 

Prayers move the heavens , but find no grace with you ; 
Yet in your looks a heavenly form I view : 
then will I pray again , hoping to find 
As well as in your looks , heaven in your mind . 
4 

Saint of my heart , Queen of my life , and love , 
OH let my vows thy doing spirit move : 
Let me no longer mourn through thy disdain , 
But with one touch of grace cure all my pain : 
CANTUS . XVI . 


IF thou longest so much to learn ( sweet boy ) what 't is to love . Little suit at first shall win 
Do but fix thy thought on me , and thou shalt quick-ly prove . 


Way to thy abashed desire : But then will I hedge thee in , Salamander-like with fire . 

BASSUS . 


2 

With thee dance I will , and sing , and thy fond dalliance bear ; 
We the grovy hil● will climb , and play the wantoness there . 
Other whiles we 'll gather flowers , 
Lying dallying on the grass , 
And thus our delightful hours 
Full of waking dreams shall pass . 
3 

When thy joys were thus at height my love should turn from thee , 
Old acquaintance than should grow as strange as strange might be , 
Twenty rituals thou shouldst find 
Breaking all their hearts for me , 
When to all I 'll prove more kind , 
And more forward then to thee . 
4 

Thus thy silly youth enraged would soon my love d●f●e ; 
But alas poor soul too late , eclipse wings can never fly 
Those sweet hours which we had pi●t 
Called to mind thy heart would burn : 
And couldst thou fly never so fast , 
They would make thee strait return . 
〈◊〉 XVII . 


Shall I come sweet Love to thee , When the evening beams are set ? 


Shall not ex-cluded be ? Will you find no feigned letter ? Let me not for pity 


more , Tell the long , long hours , tell the long hours at your door . 

BASSUS . 



2 

Who can tell what thief or foe , 
In the covert of the night , 
For his prey will work my woe ; 
Or through wicked foul despite : 
So may I die unredrcft , 
E'er my long love be possessed . 
3 

But to let such danger's paste , 
Which a lover's thoughts disdain : 
't is enough in such a place 
To attend love's joys in vain , 
Do not mock me in thy bed , 
While these cold nights frieze me dead . 
CANTUS . XVIII . 


Thrice toss these Oaken ashes in the air ; then thrice three times tie 
Thrice sit thou mute in this enchanted chair : 


up this true love's knot , And murmur soft she will , or she will not . 

BASSUS . 


2 

Go burn these poisonous weeds in you blue fire , 
These Screech-owl's feathers , and this prickling briar , 
This Cypress gathered at a dead man's grave ; 
That all thy fears and cares an end may have . 
3 

then come you Fairies , dance with me a round , 
Melt her hard hart with your melodious sound : 
In vain are all the charms I can devose , 
She hath an Art to break them with her eyes . 
CANTUS . XIX . 


BE thou then my beauty named , Since thy will is to be mine : others 
For by that am I inflamed , Which on all alike doth shine . 


may the light ad-mire , I only truly feel the fire . 

BASSUS . 


2 

But if lofty titles move thee , 
Challenge then a Sovereign's place : 
Say I honour when I love thee , 
Let me call thy kindness grace . 
State and Love things diverse be , 
Yet will we teach them to agree . 
3 

Or if this be not sufficing ; 
Be thou styled my Goddess then : 
I will love thee sacrificing , 
In thine honour Hymns I 'll pen. 
To be thine , what canst thou more ? 
I 'll love thee , serve thee , and adore . 
CANTUS . xx.  


Fire , fire , fire , fire , lo here I burn , I burn in such desire ▪ That all 


the tears that I can strain out of mine idle empty brain , Cannot alloy my scorching pain . 


Come Trent and Humber , and fair Thames , Dread Ocean haste with all thy streams : And 


if you cannot quench my fire , OH drown both 〈◊〉 drown both me , and my de-sire . 

BASSUS . 




2 

Fire , fire , fire , fire . 
There is no hell to my desire : 
〈◊〉 all the Rivers backward fly , 
And th' Ocean doth his waves deny , 
For fear my heat should drink them dry . 
Come heavenly showers than poring 〈◊〉 : 
Come you that once the world did drow●e : 
Some than you spared , but now save all , 
That else must burn , and with me fall . 
CANTUS . XXI . 


OH Sweet delight , OH more than human bliss , With her to live that 


ever loving is : To hear her speak whose words so well are placed , That she by them , as they in 


her are graced : Those looks to view that feast the viewers eye . How blessed is he that 


may so live and die ? 

BASSUS . 



2 

Such love as this the golden times did know , 
When all did reap , yet none took care to sew : 
Such love as this an endless Summer makes , 
And all distaste from frail affection takes . 
So loved , so blessed , in my beloved 〈◊〉 I , 
Which till their eyes a●●e let iron men envy . 
〈◊〉 XXII . 


Thus I resolve and time hath taught me so , Since she is 


fair and ever kind to me , Though she be wild and wanton-like in show , Those little 


stains in youth I will not see : That she be constant heaven I oft im-plore ; If 


prayers prevail not , I can do no more . 

BASSUS . 




2 

Palm tree the more you press , the more is grows , 
Leave it alone it will not much exceed : 
Free beauty if you strive to yoke , you loose , 
And for affection strange distaste you breed . 
What Nature hath not taught no Art can frame ; 
Wild born be wild still , though by force made 〈◊〉 . 
CANTUS . XXIII . 


Come , OH come my life's de-light ; Let me not in langour , pine● 


Love loves no de-lay : thy sight , The more enjoyed , the more divine . O 


come and take from me The pain of being deprived of thee . 

BASSUS . 



2 

thou all sweetness dost enclose , 
Like a little world of bliss : 
Beauty guards thy looks , the Rose 
In them pure and eternal is . 
Come then and make thy flight 
As swift to me as heavenly light . 
CANTUS . XXIIII . 


Could my heart more tongues employ , then it harbours thoughts of grief ; 
It is now so far from joy , That it fierce could ask relief . 


Truest hearts by deeds unkind , To despair are most inclined . 

BASSUS . 


2 

Happy minds that can redeem 
then engagements how they please ; 
That no joys , or hopes esteem 
Half so precious as their ease . 
Wisdom should prepare men so 
As if they did all fore know . 
3 

Yet no Art or Caution can 
Grown affections easily change ; 
Use is such a Lord of Man , 
That he brooks worst what is strange . 
Better never to be blessed , 
then to lose all at the best . 
CANTUS . XXV . 


Sleep angry beauty , sleep , and fear not me ; For who a sleeping Lion dares provoke ? 
It shall suf-fice me here to sit and see Those lips shut up that never kindly spoken . 


What sight can more content a lover's mind , then beauty seeming harmless if not kind ? 

BASSUS . 


2 

My words have charmed her , for secure she sleeps , 
Though guilty much of wrong done to my love ; 
And in her slumber see she close-eyed weeps , 
Dreams often more than waking passions move . 
Plead sleep my cause , and make her soft like thee , 
That she in peace may wake and pity me . 
CANTUS . XXVI . 


Silly boy , 't is full Moon yet , Thy night as day shines clearly , Had thy youth but 


wit To fear , thou couldst not love so dear : Shortly wilt thou mourn when all thy pleasures are be - 


reaved ; Little knows he how to love that never was deceived . 

BASSUS . 



2 

This is thy first maiden flame that triumphs yet unstayned ; 
All is artless now you speaks , not one word yet is feigned ; 
All is heaven that you behold , and all your thoughts are blessed : 
But no Spring can want his Fall , each Troylesses hath his Crossoid . 
3 

Thy well-ordered locks ere long shall rudely hang neglected ; 
And thy lively pleasant cheer , reads grief on earth dejected : 
Much than wilt thou blame thy Saint that made thy heart so holy . 
And with sighs confeste , in love , that too much faith is folly . 
4 

Yet be just and constant still , Love may beget a wonder ; 
Not unlike a Summer's frost , or Winter's fatal thunder : 
He that holds his Sweetheart true unto his day of dying , 
lives of all that ever breathed most worthy the ●●●ying . 
〈◊〉 XXVII . 


Never love unless you can Bear with all the faults of man : Men sometimes will 


jealous be , Though but little cause they see , And hang the head as discon-tent , And speak what 


strait they will re-pent . 

BASSUS . 



2 

Men that but one Saint adore , 
Make a show of love to more : 
Beauty must be scorned in none , 
Though but truly served in one ; 
For what is courtship but disguise ? 
True hearts may have dissembling eyes . 
3 

Men when their affairs require , 
Must a while themselves retire ; 
Sometimes hunt , and sometimes hawk , 
And not ever fit and talk . 
If these and such like you can bear , 
then like , and love , and never fear . 
CANTUS . XXVIII . 


SO quick , so hot , so mad is thy fond foot , So rude , so 
That fain I would with loss make thy tongue mute , And yield some 


te-dious grown in urging me . An hour with thee I care not to con-verse : For I would not 
little grace to quiet thee . 


be coun-ted too perverse . 

BASSUS . 



2 

But roofs too hot would prove for men all fire , 
And hills too high for my unused pace ; 
The grove is charged with thorns and the bold briar ; 
Grey Snakes the meadows shroud in every place : 
A yellow Frog alas will fright me so 
As I should start and tremble as I go . 
3 

Since then I can on earth no fit room finds , 
In heaven I am resolved with you to meet ; 
Till then for Hopes sweet sake reft your tired mind , 
And not so much as see me in the street : 
A heavenly meeting one day we shall have , 
But never , as you dream , in bed , or grave . 
CANTUS . XXIX . 


Shall I then hope when faith is fled ? Can I seek love when 


hope is gone ? Or can I live when Love is dead ? Poorly he lives that 


can love none . Her vows are broke , and I am free , She lost her faith in losing me . 

BASSUS . 




2 

When I compare mine own events , 
When I weigh others like annoy ; 
All do but heap up discontents , 
That on a beauty build their joy . 
Thus I of all complain , since she● 
All faith hath lost in losing me . 
3 

So my dear freedom have I gained , 
Through her unkindness , and disgrace , 
Yet could I ever live enchained , 
As she my service did embrace . 
But sh●●● i● changed , and I am free , 
Faith failing her , Love died in me . 
TO MY WORTHY FRIEND , M R. JOHN MOUNSON , Son and Heir to Sir Thomas Mounson Knight and Baronet . 

ON you th' affections of your Father's Friends , 
With his Inheritance by right descends ; 
But you your graceful youth so wisely guide , 
That his you hold , and purchase much beside . 
Love is the fruit of Virtue , for whose sake 
Men only liking each to other take . 
If sparks of virtue shined not in you then , 
So well how could you win the hearts of men ? 
And since that honour and well-suted Praise 
Is Virtue's Golden Spur ; let me now raise 
Unto an act mature your tender age , 
This half commending to your Patronage : 
Which from your Noble Fathers , but one side 
Ordained to do you honour , doth divide . 
And so my love betwixt you both I part , 
On each side placing you as near my heart . 
Yours ever , THOMAS CAMPIAN . 

To the READER . 

THE Apothecaries have Books of Gold , whose leaves being opened are so light as that they are subject to be shaken with the least breath , yet rightly handled , they serve both for ornament and use ; such are light Airs . But if any squeamish stomaches shall check at two or three vain Ditties in the end of this Book , let them pour off the clearest , and leave those as dregss in the bottom . How soever if they be but conferred with the Canterbury Tales of that venerable Poet Chaucer , they will then appear toothsome enough . Some words are in these Books , which have been clothed in Music by others , and I am conten● they then served their turn : yet give me now leave to make use of mine own . Likewise you may find here some three or four Songs that have been published before , but for them I refer you to the Player's Bill that is failed , Newly revived with Additions , for you shall find all of them reform either in Words or Notes . To be brief , all these Songs are mine if you express them well , otherwise they are your own , Farewell . 

Yours as you are his , THOMAS CAMPIAN . 

CANTUS . I  


Leave pro-longing , leave pro-longing , thy distress , All de - 


lays afflict the dying . Many lost sighs long I spent , to her for mer-cy cry - 


ing : But now vain mour-ning cease , I 'll die , I 'll die , and mine own grief's release . 

BASSUS . 



2 

Thus departing from this light 
To those shades that end all sorrow , 
Yet a small time of complaint , a little breath I 'll borrow , 
To tell my once delight 
I die alone through her despite . 
CANTUS . II  


Re-spect my faith , re-gard my service past ; The hope you winged call home to 
Great prize it is that I in you shall gain : So great for you hath been my 


you at last . My wits I spent and time for you alone ; Observing you and losing all for one . 
loss & pain . 

BASSUS . 


2 

Some raised to rich estates in this time are , 
That held their hopes to mine interior fairs ; 
Such scoffing me , or pitying me , say thus , 
Had he not loved he might have lived like us. 
OH then dear sweet for love and pittits sake 
My faith reward , and from me scandal take . 
CANTUS . III  


Thou joyest fond boy to be by many loved : For this dost thou thy na - 〈◊〉 
To have thy beauty of most dames approved . Thy glass thou coun-cel'st more 〈◊〉 


worth disguise , And play'st the Sy-co-phant t'observe their eyes , 
durne thy skin , That first should school thee to be fair within . 

BASSUS . 


2 

't is childish to be caught with Pearl , or Amber , 
And woman-like too much to cloy the chamber ; 
Youths should the Field affect , heat their rough Steeds 
Their hardened nerves to fit for better deeds . 
Is 't not more joy strong Holds to force with swords , 
Than woman's weakness take with looks or words ? 
2 

Men that do noble things all purchase glory , 
One man for one brave Act hath proved a story : 
But if that one ten thousand Dames o'creime , 
Who would record it if not to his shame ? 
't is far more conquest with one to live true , 
then every hour to triumph Lord of new . 
CANTUS . FOUR  


Veil love mine eyes , OH hide from me The plagues that charge the curious mind : 


If beauty private will not be , Suffice it yet that she proves kind . Who can usurp heaven's light alone ? 


Stars were not made , Stars were not made to shine on one . 

BASSUS . 



2 

Griefs past recure fools try to heal , 
That greater harms on less inflict : 
The pure offend by too much zeal , 
Affection should not be too strict . 
He that a true embrace will find 
To beauty's faults must still be blind . 
〈…〉 


Every Dame af-fects good fame , what ere her doings be : But true praise is Virtues 
Borrowed guise fits not the wife , a simple look is best : Na-tive grace becomes a 


Baves , which none may wear but she . Now such newfound toys are sold these women to dis-guise , 
face , though never so rude-ly dreft . 


That before the year grows old the new-est fashion dies . 

BASSUS . 



2 

Dames of yore contended more in goodness to exceeds , 
then in pride to be envied for that which left they need : 
Little Lawn than ferued the Pawn , it Pawn at all there were ; 
Homespun thread , and household bread than held out all the year : 
But th'attyres of women now wear out both house and land , 
That the wives in silks may flow at ebb the Goodmen stand . 
3 

Once again Astrea then from heaven to earth descend , 
And vouchsafe in their behalf these errors to amend : 
Aid from heaven must make all e'en , things are so out of frame ; 
For let man strive all he can , he needs must please his Dame. 
Happy man content that gives , and what he gives enjoys ; 
Happy Dame content that lives , and breaks no sleep for toys . 

SO sweet , so sweet is thy dis-course to me , And so delightful is thy 


sight , As I taste nothing right but thee . OH why inven-ted Nature light ? Was it alone for 


beauty's sake , That her graced words might better take ? 

BASSUS . 



2 

no more can I old joys recall , 
They now to me become unknown , 
Not seeming to have been at all . 
Alas how soon is this love grown 
To such a spreading height in rise , 
As with it all must shadowed be ? 

There is a Garden in her face , Where Roses and white Lilies grow ; 


A heavenly paradise is that place , wherein all pleasant fruits do flow . There Cherries 


grow which none may buy , Till Cherry ripe , till Cherry ripe , till Cherry ripe , Cherry ripe , ripe , ripe , Cherry 


ripe , Cherry ripe themselves do cry . 

BASSUS . 



2 

Those Cherries fairly do enclose 
Of Orient Pearl a double row , 
Which when her lovely laughter shows , 
They look like Role-buds filled with snow , 
Yet them nor Peer , nor Prince can buy , 
Till Cherry ripe themselves do cry . 
3 

Her Eyes like Angels watch them still ; 
Her Brows like bent bows do stand , 
Threatening with piercing frowns to kill 
All that attempt with eye or hand 
Those sacred Cherries to come nigh , 
Till Cherry ripe themselves do cry . 

TO his sweet Lute Apollo sung the motion's of the Spheres ; 


The wondrous order of the Stars , whose course divides the years : And all the My-steries above ; 


But none of this could Midas move , Which purchased him his Ass' ears . 

BASSUS . 



2 

then Pan with his rude Pipe began the Country-wealth t' advance ; 
To boast of dattle , flocks of Sheep , and Goats , on hills that dance , 
With much more of this churlish kind : 
That quite transported Midas mind , 
An held him rapt as in a trance . 
3 

This wrong the God of Music scorned from such a sottish judge , 
And bend his angry bow at Pan , which made the Piper trudge 
then Midas head he so did trim , 
That every age yet talks of him 
And Phoebus right revenged grudge . 
CANTUS . IX . 


Young and simple though I am , I have heard of Cupid's name : Guess I can what 


thing it is , Men desire when they do kill . Smoke can never burn they say , But t●e 


flames that follow may . 

BASSUS . 



2 

I am not so foul or fair , 
To be proud , nor to desparye ; 
Guess I can what thing it is 
Men desire when they do kiss . 
Smoke can never burn they say , 
But the flames that follow may . 
3 

Faith 't is but a foolish mind , 
Yet me thinks a heat I find , 
Like thirst longing that doth bide 
Ever on my weaker side : 
Where they say my heart doth move , 
Venus grant it be not love . 
4 

If it he , alas , what then ? 
Were not women made for men ? 
A good ' twete a thing were passed , 
That must needs be done at last . 
Roses that are overblown 
Grow less sweet , then fall alone . 
5 

Yet nor Churl , nor ●●lken Gull 
Shall my Maiden blossom pull : 
Who shall not I soon can tell , 
Who shall would I could as well : 
This I know who ere he be 
Love he must , or flatter me . 
CANTUS . X.  


Love me or not , love her I must or die . OH that her grace would my wished 
Leave me or not , follow her needs must 1  


comforts give . How rich in her , how happy should I live ? 

BASSUS . 


2 

All my desire , all my delight should be 
Her to enjoy , her to unite to me : 
Envy should cease , her would I love alone , 
Who loves by looks , is seldom true to one . 
3 

could I enchant , and that it lawful were , 
Her would I charm so●tly th●t none should hear : 
But love enforced rarely yields firm content , 
So would I love that neither should repent . 
CANTUS . XI 


What means this folly now to brave it so , And then to use submission ? 


Is that a friend that strait can play the foe ? Who loves on such conditi-on ? 

BASSUS . 


2 

Though Briers breed Roses , none the Briar affect , 
But with the flower are pleased : 
Love only loves delight , and soft respect , 
He must not be diseased . 
3 

These thorny passions spring from barren breasts , 
Or such as need much weeding : 
Love only loves delight , and soft respect , 
But sends them not home bleeding . 
4 

Command thy humour , strive to give content , 
And shame not love's profession : 
Of kindness never any could repent 
That made choice with discretion . 

Dear if I with guile would gild a true in-tent , Heaping flattries that 


in heart were never me●nt : Easily could I then obtain what now in vain I force . Falsehood much doth 


gain , Truth yet holds the bet-ter course . 

BASSUS . 



2 

Love forbid that through dissembling I should thrive , 
Or in praising you , myself of truth deprive : 
Let not your high thoughts debase 
A simple truth in me ; 
Great is beauty's grace , 
Truth is yet as fair as ●hee . 
3 

Praise is but the wind of pride if it exceeds , 
Wealth prized in itself no outward value needs . 
Fair you are , and passing fair , 
You know it , and 't is true , 
Yet let none despair 
But to find as fair as you . 
〈…〉 

OH Love , where are thy Shafts , thy Quiver and thy Bow ? Shall my wounds 


only weep and hea ungaged go ? Be just and strike him to , that dares contemn thee so . 

BASSUS . 


2 

no eyes are ●ike to t●ine , though men suppose thee blin●● , 
So fair they l●uell when the make they at to find : 
then strike , o strike the heart ' hat hears the cruel mind . 
3 

Is my sound sight deceived ? or do I Cupid spy 
Close aiming at his breast , by whom defined I die ? 
Shoot home sweet Love , and wound him that h●e may no fly . 
4 

OH t●en we both will s●●● some unhaunted shade , 
And 〈…〉 he●s wound which L●ve hath ●ustly made : 
OH 〈…〉 too vain , now quickly dost thou sade ? 
5 

〈…〉 ●onderss still , his heart is free from pain , 
W●●●e se●● si●ne I ●p●●● and t●ar●● , but pomell 〈◊〉 in vain : 
Yet Love thou kn●w ' it by right I should not thus complain . 
CANTUS . XIIII . 


Beauty is but a 〈…〉 me , ●aye me , thee wounds them that admire 


it , She kills them that desire it . Give her pride but ●uell , no fire is more cruel . 

BASSUS . 


2 

Pity from every heart is fled , 
Ay me , aye me , 
Since false desire could borrow 
Tears of dislembled sorrow , 
Constant vows turn truthless , 
Love cruel , Beauty ruthl●sle . 
3 

Sorrow can laugh and Fury sing , 
Ay me , aye me ; 
My raving g●●● 〈◊〉 
I ●ued too 〈◊〉 a loner : 
The first st●p to madness . 
Is the excess of sadness . 
〈…〉 


Are you what your fair looks express ? O then be kind , From law of 


Nature they digress , Whole form suits not their mind . Fairness seen in th' outward shape is 


but th' inward beauties Ape . 

BASSUS . 



2 

Eyes that of earth are mortal made 
What can they view ? 
all 's but a colour or a shade , 
And neither always true . 
Reason's sight that is eterne , 
e'en the substance can discern . 
3 

Soul is the Man ; for who will so 
The body name ? 
And to that power all grace we owe 
That decks our lining frame . 
What , or how had houses been , 
But for them that dwell therein ? 
4 

Love in the bosom is begot , 
Not in the eyes : 
no beauty makes the eye more hot , 
Her flames the spirit surprise : 
Let our loving minds than meets , 
For pure meetings are most sweet . 
CANTUS . XVI . 


Since she , e'en she , for whom I lived , Sweet she by Fate from me is torn , 


Why a n not I of sense deprived . Forgetting I was ever born ? Why should I lan-guish hating 


light ? Bet-ter to sleep an endless night . 

BASSUS . 



2 

Be 't either true or aptly feigned , 
That some of Lethe's water write , 
't is their best medicine that are pained , 
All thought to lose of past delight . 
OH would my anguiths vanish so ! 
Happy are they that neither know . 
〈…〉 


I Must complain , yet do enjoy my Love , She is too fair , too rich in lovely parts : 
Thence is my grief , for Nature while she strove With all her graces and divinest Arts 


To form her too too beautiful of hue , She had no leisure left to make her true . 

BASSUS . 


2 

Should I aggrieved then wish thee were less fair ? 
That were repugnant to mine own desires : 
She is admired , new lovers still repair , 
That kindles daily loves forgetful fires . 
Rest jealous thoughts , and thus resolve at last , 
She hath more beauty than becomes the chaste . 
CANTUS . XVIII . 


think'st thou to se-duce me then with words that have no mea-ning ? Parats so 
Nurses teach 


can learn to prate our speech by pie-ces glea-ning . 
their chilren so , about the time of wea-ning . 

BASSUS . 


2 

Learn to speak first , then to woo , to wooing much pertaineth : 
He that court's us wanting Art , soon falters when he sayneth : 
Looks asquint on his discourse , and smiles when he complaineth . 
3 

Skilful Anglers hide their hooks , fit baits for every season ; 
But with crooked pin's fish thou , as babes do that want reason , 
Gogions only can be caught with such poor tricks of treason . 
4 

Ruth forgive me if I erred from human hearts compassion , 
When I laughed sometimes too much to see thy foolish fashion : 
But alas , who less could do that found so good occasion ? 
〈…〉 


Her fair inflaming eyes , chief authors of my cares , 


I prayed in humblest wife , With grace to view my tears : They be-held me broad awake , But a - 


lass no ruth would take . 

BASSUS . 



2 

Her lips with kisses rich , 
And words of fair delight , 
I fairly did beseech 
To pity my sad plight : 
But a voice from them broke forth 
As a whirlwind from the North.  
3 

then to her hands I fled , 
That can give heart and all , 
To them I long did pled , 
And loud for pity call : 
But alas they put me off , 
With a touch worse than a scoff . 
4 

So back I strait returned , 
And at her breast I knocked ; 
Where long in vain I mourned , 
Her heart so fast was locked ; 
Not a word could passage find , 
For a Rock enclosed her mind . 
5 

then down my prayers made way 
To those most comely parts , 
That make her fly or stay , 
As they affect deserts : 
But her angry feet thus moved 
Fled with all the parts I loved . 
6 

Yet fled they not so fast 
As her enraged mind : 
Still did I after haste , 
Still was I left behind , 
Till I found 't was to no end 
With a Spirit to contend . 

Turn all thy thoughts to eyes , Turn all thy hairs to ears ; Change all thy friends to spies , 


And all thy loves to fears . True Love will yet be free Inspite of jealousy . 

BASSUS . 


2 

Turn darkness into day , 
Constructures into truth : 
Believe what th' envious say , 
Let age interpret youth 
True love will yet be free , 
Inspite of jealousy . 
3 

wrest everylword and look , 
Rack every hidden thought : 
Or fish with golden hook , 
True love cannot be caught , 
For that will still be free , 
In spite of jealousy . 
CANTUS . XXI . 


IF any hath the he 〈…〉 kill , Come rid me of this woeful pain : 
For while I live I so 〈…〉 still , This cruel torment all in vain . 


Yet none alive but one can guess What is the cause of my distress . 

BASSUS . 


2 

Thanks be to heaven , no grievous smart , 
no maladies my limbs annoy : 
I bear a sound and sprightful heart , 
Yet live I quite deprived of joy ; 
Since what I had in vain I crave , 
And what I had not now I have . 
3 

A Love I had so fair , so sweet , 
As ever wanton eye did see : 
Once by appointment we did meet , 
She would , but ah it would not be : 
She gave her heart , her hand she gave , 
All did I give , she naught could have . 
4 

What Hag did then my powers forespeak , 
That never yet such ta'en did feel ? 
Now she rejects me as one weak , 
Yet am I all composed of steel . 
Ah this is it my heart doth grieve , 
Now though she sees she 'll not believe . 
〈…〉 


Beauty , since you so much desire , to know the place of Cupid's fire : A - 


bout you somewhere doth it rest , Yet never harboured in your breast : Nor gout-like in your heel or 


toe ; What fool would seek Love's flame so low ? But a little higher , but a little higher but a , 


a little higher , but a little higher : There , thereô there lies Cupid's fire . 

BASSUS . 




2 

Think not when Cupid av-s_d you scorn , 
Men judge that you of Ice were born : 
For though you cast love at your heel , 
His fury yet sometime you feel , 
And where-aboves if you would know , 
I tell you still not in your toe : 
But a little higher , but a little higher ; 
There , there , o there lies Cupid's fire . 
CANTUS . XXIII . 


Your fair looks urge my de-sire , Calm it sweet with love , If Love 
Stay , o why will you re-tire ? Can you churlish prove ? 


may persuade , loves pleasures dear de-ny not : Here is a grove secured with shade , OH then be 


wise and fly not . 

BASSUS . 



2 

Hark the Birds delighted sing , 
Yet our pleasure sleeps : 
Wealth to none can profit bring , 
Which the miler keeps : 
OH come while we may , 
Let 's chain Love with embraces , 
We have not all times time to stay , 
Not safety in all places . 
3 

What ill find you now in this ; 
Or who can complain ? 
There is nothing done attrisse 
That breeds no man pain . 
't is be now flowery May , 
But e'en in cold December , 
When all these leaves are blowwne away 
This place shall I remember . 
CANTUS . XXIIII . 


Feign would I wed a fair young man , that day and night could please me : 
When my ●●ler bo 〈◊〉 bo-dy grieved that ha●●e power to ease me . 


Maid's 〈…〉 lo-ging 〈…〉 , that b●●ed a bloodless sickness ▪ oft I have been 
An 〈…〉 I hear men say , is only cured by quickness . Many for a 


〈…〉 I : Hat this foolish 〈◊〉 of mine stra 〈…〉 loathes 〈◊〉 re - 
〈…〉 dear loved ; If to love be sin in me , that sin is 〈◊〉 


solued . Sure I think I shall as last ●●ve to some holy Order ; Yet I would not 
solued . When I once 〈…〉 settled there then can I fly no farther : As I was by 


die a maid , because I had a mot●e● . 
one brought forth I woul● bring forth another . 

BASSUS . 


FINIS . 

