Psal. 150.  

Praise GOD upon the Lute and Vi - oll . 

THE SECOND BOOK of Songs or Airs , of 2. 4. and 5. parts : With Tabulature for the Lute or Orpherian , with the Viol de Gamba . 

Composed by JOHN DOWLAND Bachelor of Music , and Lutenist to the King of Denmark : Also an excellent lesson for the Lute and Base Viol , called Dowlands adieu . 

Published by George Eastland , and are to be sold at his house near the green Dragon and Sword , in Fleetstreet . 

LONDON : Printed by Thomas Este , the assign of Thomas Morley . 1600.  

TO THE RIGHT Honourable the Lady Lucy Comptesse of BEDFORD . 

Excellent Lady : I send unto your Lady : from the Court of a foreign Prince , this volume of my second labours : as to the worthiest Patroness , of Music : which is the Noblest of all Sciences : for the whole frame of Nature , is nothing but Harmony , as well in souls , as bodies : And because I am now removed from your sight , I will speak boldly , that your La : shall be unthankful to Nature herself , if you do not love , & defend that Art , by which , she hath given you so well tuned a mind . 

Your Ladyship hath in yourself , an excellent agreement of many virtues , of which : though I admire all , Yet I am bound by my profession , to give especial honour , to your knowledge of Music : which in the judgement of ancient times , was so proper an excelencie to Women , that the Muses took their name from it , and yet so rare , that the world durst imagine but nine of them . 

I most humby beseech your Lady : to receive this work , into your favour : and the rather , because it cometh far to begit , of you . From Helsingnoure in Denmark the first of june . 

1600.  

Your Ladyships 

in all humble devotion : 

john Dowland . 

A. ij . 

To the right Noble and Virtuous Lady , Lucy Comptesse of BEDFORD . 

G. Eastland . To I Dowlands Lute . 

Lvte arise and charm the air , 
Until a thousand forms she bear , 
Conjure them all that they repair , 
Into the circles of her ear , 
Ever to dwell in concord there , 
By this thy tunes may have access , 
Even to her spirit whose flowering treasure , 
Doth sweetest Harmony express , 
Filling all ears and hearts with pleasure 
On earth , observing heavenly measure , 
Right well can she Judge and defend them , 
Doubt not of that for she can mend them . 
To the courteous Reader . 

Gentlemen , if the consideration of mine own estate , or the true worth of money , had prevailed with me , above the desire of pleasuring you , and showing my love to my friend , this second labours of Master Dowland , ( whose very name is a large preface of commendations to the book , ) had for ever lain hid in darkness , or at the least frozen in a cold and foreign country . I assure you that both my charge and pains in publishing it , hath exceeded ordinary , yet thus much I have to assure me of requital , that neither the work is ordinary nor are your judgements ordinary to whom I present it , so that I have no reason but to hope sor good increase in my labours , especially of your good favours toward me , which of all things I most esteem . Which if I find in this , I mean shortly ( God willing ) to set at liberty for your service , a prisoner taken at Cales , who if he discovers not something ( in matter of Music ) worthy your knowledge , let the reputation of my judgement in Music answer it . In the mean time , I commend my absent friend to your remembrance , and myself to your favourable conceits . 

George Eastland . 

From my house near the green Dragon and sword in Fleetstreet . 

A TABLE OF ALL the Songs contained in this BOOK . 

Songs to two voices . 

I saw my Lady weep : I 
Flow my tears fall from your springs : TWO 
Sorrow sorrow stay , lend true repentant tears : III 
Die not before thy day : FOUR 
Mourn , mourn , day is with darkness fled : FIVE 
Time's elder son , old age the heir of ease : First part . VI 
then sit thee down , & say thy Nunc demittis : Second part . VII 
When others sings Venite exultemus : Third part . VIII 
Songs to 4. voices . 

Praise blindness eyes , for seeing is deceit : IX 
OH sweet woods , the delight of solitarienesse : X 
If floods of tears could cleanse my follies past : XI 
Fine knacks for Ladies , cheap , choice , brave and new : XII 
Now cease my wand'ring eyes : XIII 
Come ye heavy states of night : XIIII 
White as Lilies was her face : XV 
Woeful heart with grief oppressed : XVI 
A Sheperd in a shade his plaining made : XVII 
Faction that ever dwells in court : XVIII 
Shall I sue , shall I seek for grace : XIX 
Finding in fields my Silvia all alone : XX 
Songs to 5. voices . 

Clear or Cloudy sweet as April showering : XXI 
Humour say what mak'st thou here : XXII 
FINIS . 

I  

CANTO . 

To the most famous , Anthony Holborn . 

I saw my Lady - dy weep , and sor - row proud to be advanced so : in those fair eyes , ij . where all perfections keep , her face was full of woe , full ofwoe , but such a woe ( believe me ) as wins more hearts , than mirth can do , with her , ij . in ty - sing parts . 

Sorrow was there made fair , 
And passion wise , ears a delightful thing , 
Silence beyond all speech a wisdom rare , 
She made her sighs to sing , 
And all things with so sweet a sadness move , 
As made my heart at once both grieve and love . 
OH fairer than aught else , 
The world can show , leave of in time to grieve , 
Enough , mough , your joyful looks excels , 
Tears kills the heart believe , 
OH strive not to be excellent in woe , 
Which only breeds your beauty's overthrow . 
I CANTO . 

To the most famous , Anthony Holborn . 

I saw my Lady weep , two . ij . ij . and sorrow proud , to be advanced so , in those fair eyes , ij . where all perfections keep : Her face was full full of woe , But such a woe , as wins more hearts , then mirth can do , with her enticing parts . 

II  

CANTO . 

Lacrime : 


Flow my tears fall from your springs , Exiled for e - ver : Let me 
Down vain lights shine you no more , no nights are dark e - enough for 

morn where nights black bird her sad infamy sings , there let me live for - lorne . 
those that in dis - pair their last fortunes deplore , light doth but shame dis - close . 

Never may my woes be re - lieved , since pit - tie is fled , and tears , and sighs , and groans 
Fron the highest spire of con - tentment , my for - tune is thrown , and fear , and grief , and pain 

my weary days , ij . of all joys here the - pri - ved . 
for my de - serts , ij . are my hopes since hope is gone . 

Hark you shadows that in darkness dwell , learn to contemn light , Happy , happy they ☞ 

☞ 
☞ that in hell feel not the worlds des - pite . ☞ 

II BASSO . 

LACRIME . 


Flow tears from your springs , Ex - I 'd for e - for let me mourn : where 
Down lights shine no more , no night is dark enough for those : that 

night's black bird her sad in - fa - mies sings , there let me live forlorn . 
in does - pair their fortunes de-plore , light doth but shame disclose . 

Ne - ver may my woes , my woes , be re - lie - ved , since pitt'is fled : and tears , and 
From the high-est spire , highest spire of contentment , my fortunes thrown , and fear , and 

sighs , and groans , my wea-ry days , ij . all joys have deprived . Hark that in 
grief , and pain , for my de - serts , ij . are hopes , hope is gone . 

darkness dwell , learn to contemn light , Happy : ij . they that in hell feel not the world's despite . 
III  

CANTO . 

Sorrow sorrowstay , lend true repentant tears , to a woeful , ij . wretched wight , hence , ij . dis - pair with thy for - menting fears : do not , OH do not my heart poor heart affright , pity , ij . ij . ij , ij , ij , help now or never , mark me not to endless pain , ij . a - las I am condempneed , ij . I am condemned ever , nohope , no help , there doth re - main , but down , down , down , down I fall , ij . down ☞ ☞ 

☞ and arise , ij . I ne - for shall , but down , down , down ☞ down , I fall , ij . down and a - rise , ij . I ne - for shall . 

III BASSO . 

Sorrow sorrow stay , lend true repentant tears , lend true repentant repentant tears , to a woeful woeful wretched wight : Hence hence despair , with thy tormenting fears , ij . O do not my poor hart my poor hart affright : Pity pity help now or never , mark me not to endless pain , ij . alas I am condemned , condemned ever : ij . I am condemned ever , no hope no help there doth remain , but down d. d. d. d. I fall , but down d. d. d. d. d. I fall , down & arise , down and a - rise , a - rise I never shall , but down d.  d. d. d. I fall , but down d. d. d. d. d. I fall , down & arise , down & a - rise , a - rise , arise , ij . ij . ij . I never shall . 

FOUR  

CANTO . 

Die not be - fore thy day , poor poor man condemned , But life thy low looks , ij . from the humble earth , Kiss not despair & see sweet hope con - temned : The hag hath no delight , but moan but moan for mirth , OH fie poor fond ▪ lings , ij . fie fie be willing , to pre - serve thyself from kill : Hope thy keeper glad to free thee , Bids thee go and will not see thee , ☞ ☞ 

☞ hie thee quickly from thy wrong , so she ends her willing song . ☞ 

FOUR BASSO . 

Die not before thy day poor man condéned , but lift thy low looks ij . thy looks from t'humble earth , kiss not despair & see sweet hope cótemned : The hag hath no delight but moan but moan for mirth , OH fie OH fie fie poor fondling fie fie be willing , to preserve thyself from kill , Hope hope thy keeper is glad for to free thee , and bids thee go and will not see thee , hie thee quickly from thy wrong , so she ends her willing song . 

v 

CANTO . 

Mourn , mourn , day is with darkness fled , what heaven then governs earth , o none , but hell in heaven's stead , chokes with his mists our mirth . Mourn mourn , look now for no more day nor night , but that from hell , then all must as they may in darkness learn to dwell . But yet this change , must needs change our delight , that thus the Sun , ij . the Sun should harbour with the night . 

v. BASSO . 

Mourn days with darkness fled , What heaven then governs earth , OH none but hell in heaven's stead , Chokes with his mists our mirth . Mourn look now for no more day , nor night but that from hell , then all must as they may , In darkness learn to dwell , But yet this change , this change , must change must change delight , That thus the Sun should harbour with the night . 

VI  

CANTO . 

Time's elder son , old age the heir of ease , Strengths foe , loves woe , and foster to devotion , bids gallant youths in marshal prowess please , as for himself , he hath no earth-ly motion , But thinks sighs , tears , vows , prayers , and sa - cri-fi-ces , As good as shows , masks , jousts , or tilt de - vi-ses . But thinks . 

¶ First part . VI BASSO . 

Time's elder son old age old age the heir of ease , strength's foe , loves woe and foster to devotion : Bids gallant youths in martial prowess please , as for him self he hath no earthly motion , but thinks but thinks sighs tears , vows , prayers , and sacrifices , as good as shows , masks , justs , or Tilt devices . But thinks : 

VII . 

CANTO . 

Second part . 

Then sit thee down , and say thy Nune Demittis , with De profundis , Credo , and Te Deum , Chant Mise-re-re for what now so fit is , as that , or this , Paratum est cor meum , OH that thy Saint would take in worth thy hart , thou canst not please her with a better part . OH that thy 

VII . BASSO . 

Second part . 

Then sit thee down and say thy Nunc demittis with De profundis , Credo , and Te deum , chant Mi-serere , for what now so fit is , as that or this , Paratum est cor meum , OH that thy Saint would take in worth thy heart , thou canst not please her with a better part . OH that thy 

VIII . 

CANTO . 

Third part . 

When others sings Venite exultemus , stand by and turn to Noli emulari , For quare fremu - erunt use oremus Vivat E - li-za , Vittori - vat E - li - za , Foran ave mari , and teach those swains that lives about thy cell , to say A - men A - men when thou dost pray so well . 

here endeth the Songs of two parts , 

VIII . BASSO . 

Third part . 

When others sings Venite venite exul - temus , stand by and turn to noli to noli emulari , for quare fremuerunt use Oremus , Vittori - vat E - li - za , Vittori - vat E - li - za for an Aue Mari , and teach those swains that lives a - 'bout thy cell : to sing A - men A - men , when thou dost pray so well . 

here endeth the songs of two parts . 

IX . 

CANTO . 

Praise blindnesseeys , for see - king is deceit , Be dumb vain tongue , words are but flattering winds , break hart & bleed for there is no receipt , to purge in-constancy from most men's Envoy : minds . And so I wackt amazed and could not move , I know my dream was Envoy : true , and yet I love . 

And if thine ears false Heralds to thy hart , 
Convey into thy head hopes to obtain , 
then tell thy hearing thou art deaf by art , 
Now love is art that wont to be plain , 
Now none is bald except they see his brains , 
Affection is not known till one be dead , 
Reward for love are labours for his pains , 
Love's quiver made of gold his shafts of lead . 
And so I wackt , etc.  
IX . ALTO . 

Praise blindness eyes , for seeing is deceit , be dumb vain tongue , words are but flattering winds , Envoy : break hart & bleed , for there is no receipt , to purge inconstancy , from most men's minds . And so I wackt amazed and could not move , I know my dream was true and yet I love . 

IX . BASSO . 

Praise blindness eyes for seeing is deceit , be dumb vain tongue words are but flattering winds , break hart and bleed for there is no receipt , Envoy : to purge inconstancy from most men's minds . And so I wackt a - mazed and could not move , I know my dream was true , and yet I love . 

IX . TENORE . 

Praise blindness eyes for seeing is deceit , be dumb vain tongue , words are but flattering winds , Envoy : break hart & bleed , for there is no receipt , to purge inconstancy from most men's minds . And so I wackt amazed and could not move , I know my dream my dream was true and yet I love . 

X.  

CANTO . 

To Master Hugh Holland . 

OH Sweet woods the de - light of so - livre - ta - ri - nesse , OH how much do I love your so - livre - ta - ri - resse . From fame's desire , from love's delight retired , In these sad groves an Hermit's life I led , And those false pleasures which I once add - mired , With sad re - mem-brance of my fall , ij I diead , To birds , to trees , to earth , in - part I this , For she less see - cret , and as sense - less is . 

Experience which repentance only brings , 
Doth bid me now my hart from love estrange , 
Love is disdained when it doth look at Kings , 
And love lo placed base and apt to change : 
There power doth rake from him his liberty , 
Her want of worth makes him in cradle die . 
OH sweet woods , etc.  
OH how much , etc.  
You men that give false worship unto Love , 
And seek that which you never shall obtain , 
The endless work of Sisyphus you procure , 
Whole end is this to know you strive in vain , 
Hope and desire which now your Idols be , 
You needs must lose and feel despair with me . 
OH sweet woods , etc.  
OH how much , etc.  
You woods in you the fairest Nymphs have walked , 
Nymphs at whose sight all hearts did yield to Love , 
You woods in whom dear lovers oft have talked , 
How do you now a place of mourning prove , 
Wansted my Mistress saith this is the doom , 
thou art love's Childbed , Nursery , and Tomb . 
OH sweet woods , etc.  
OH how much , etc.  
X. ALTO . 

OH Sweet woods sweet woods the delight of Solitariness , OH how much do I love your solitariness . From fame's desire , from love's delight retired , in these sad groves an Hermit's life I led , I led , and those , ij . false pleasures which I once admired , with fad remembrance of my fall , ij . I dread , to birds , to trees , to earth , ij . impart I this , for she less secret & as senseless is . 

X. BASSO . 

To Master Hugh Holland . 

OH How much do I love your so - livre - ta-rinesse . From fame's desire , from love's delight retired , In those sad groves an Hermit's life I led , I led , And these false pleasures which I once admired , With sad remembrance of my fall , ij I dread , to birds , to trees , to earth , ij . impart I this , For she less secret and as senseless is . 

X. TENORE . 

OH Sweet woods the delight of solitariness , OH how much do I love your solitari - nesse . From Fame's desire , from love's delight retired , in these sad groves an Hermit's life I led , I led , and those false pleasures which I once admired , with sad remembrance of my fall , ij . I dread , to birds , to trees , to earth , ij . impart I this , for she less secret and as senseless senseless is . 

XI . 

CANTO . 

IF floods of tears could cleanse my follies past , And smokes of sighs might sa - cri - fice for sin , If groaning cries might salve my fault at last , Or endless moan , for error pardon win , then would I cry , weep , sigh , and ever moan , mine er - rors , fault , sins , follies past and gone . 

I see my hopes must wither in their bud , 
I see my favours are no lasting flowers , 
I see that words will breed no better good , 
then loss of time and lightning but at hours , 
Thus when I see then thus I say therefore , 
That favours hopes and words , can blind no more ▪ 
XI . ALTO . 

IF floods of tears could cleanse my follies past , and smokes of sighs might sacrifice for sin , If groaning cries might salve my fault at last , or endless moan for error pardon win , then would I cry , weep , sigh and ever moan , mine errors fault , errors fault , sins follies past and gone . 

XI . BASSO . 

IF floods of tears could cleanse my follies past , & smokes of sighs might sacrifice for sin , if groaning cries might salve my fault at last , or endless moan for error pardon win , then would I cry , weep , sigh and ever moan , mine errors ij . faults , sins follies past and gone . 

XI . TENORE . 

IF floods of tears could elense my follies past , And smokes of sighs might sacrifice for sin , If groaning cries might salve my fault at last , Or endless moan for error pardon win , then would I cry , weep , sigh , and ever moan , Mine errors , ij . faults , sins , sins , follies past and gone . 

XII . 

CANTO . 

Fine knacks for ladies , cheap choice brave and new , Good pennyworths but money cannot move , I keep a fair but for the fair to view , a beggar may be liberal of love , Though all my wares be trash the hart is true , the hart is true , the hart is , true . 

Great gifts are guiles and look for gifts again , 
My trifles come , as treasures from my mind , 
It is a precious jewel to be plain , 
Sometimes in shell th'orienst pearls we find , 
Of others take a sheaf , of me a grain , 
Of me a grain , 
Of me a grain . 
Within this pack pins points laces & gloves , 
And diverse toys fitting a country fair , 
But my hart where duty serves and loves , 
Turtles & twins , court's brood , a heavenly paier , 
Happy the hart that thinks of no-removes , 
Of no removes , 
Of no removes . 
XII . ALTO . 

Fine knacks for Ladies , cheap , choice , brave and new , good peniworthes , but money cannot move , I keep a fair , but for the fair to view , a beggar may be liberal of love , though all my wares be trash , the heart is true , ij . ij . is true . 

XII . BASSO . 

Fine knacks for Ladies cheap , choice , brave and new , good peni - worths , but money cannot move , I keep a fair , but for the fair to view , a beggar may be liberal of love : though all my wares be trash , the heart is true , is true , the heart is true , ij . the heart is true . 

XII . TENORE . 

Fine knacks for Ladies , cheap , choice , brave and new , good peniworthes but money cannot move , I keep a fair but for the fair to view , a beggar may be liberal of love , though all my wares be trash , the heart , the heart is true . ij . is true , the heart is true , the heart is true . 

XIII . 

CANTO . 


Now cease my wand'ring eyes , Strange beauties to admire , One faith 
In change least comfort lies , Long joys yield long desire . New hopes 

one love , Makes our frail pleasures eternal , And in sweetness prove . 
new joys , Are still with sorrow decli-ning , Unto deep a - noys . 

One man hath but one soul , 
Which art cannot divide , 
If all one soul must love , 
Two loves most be denied , 
One soul one love , 
By faith and merit united cannot remove , 
Distracted spirits , 
Are ever changing & hapless in their delights . 
Nature two eyes hath given , 
All beauty to impart , 
Aswell in earth as heaven , 
But she hath given one hart , 
That though we see , 
Ten thousand beauties yet in us one should be , 
One steadfast love , 
Because our hearts stand fixed although our eyes do move . 
XIII . ALTO . 


Now cease my wand'ring eyes , strange beaw - ties to admire . One faith one 
In change least comfort lies , long joys yield long the - sire . New hopes new 

love makes our frail pleasures eter - awl , and in sweetness prove . 
joys are still with sore - row decli - ning , un - to deep a - 'noys . 
XIII . BASSO . 


Now cease my wand'ring eyes , strange beauties to admire : 
In change least com-fort lies , long joys yield long the - sire . 

One faith one love makes our frail pleasures eternal , and in sweetness prove . 
New hopes new joys are still with sore - row decli-ning , un - to deep a - 'noys . 
XIII . TENORE . 


Now cease my wand'ring eyes , strange bew - ties to admire . One faith one 
In change least comfort lies , long joys yield long desire . New hopes new 

love , ij . makes our frail pleasures eternal , and in sweetness prout . 
joys , ij . are still with sorrow declining , un-to deep a - 'noys . 
XIIII . 

CANTO . 

Come ye heavy states of night , Do my father's spirit right , Sound - ings baleful let me borrow , Burdened my song with sorrow , Come sorrow come her eyes that sings , By thee are tur - ned in - to springs . 

Come you Virgins of the night , 
That in Dirges sad delight , 
Quire my Anthems , I do borrow 
Gold nor pearl , but sounds of sorrow : 
Come sorrow come her eyes that sings , 
By thee are turned into springs . 
XIIII . ALTO . 

Come come ye heavy states of night , do my father's spirit right , sounding baleful let me borrow , burdened my song with sorrow , Come sorrow come come her eyes that sings , by thee are turned , are turned in - to springs . 

XIIII . BASSO . 

Come , come ye heavy states of night , Do my father's spirit right , Sound - dings baleful let me borrow , Burdened my song with sorrow , Come sorrow come her eyes that sing , By thee are turned in-to spring . 

XIIII . TENORE . 

Come come ye heavy states of night , do my father's spirit right , sounding baleful let me borrow , burdened my song with sorrow , Come sore - row come her eyes that sings , by thee are tur - ned , are turned into springs . 

xv.  

CANTO . 

White as Lilies was her face , When she smiled , She be - guiled , Quitting faith with foul disgrace , Virtue service thus neglected , Heart with for - rows hath in-fected . 

2 When I swore my hart her own , 
She disdained , 
I complained , 
Yet she left me overthrown , 
Careless of my bitter groaning , 
Ruthless bent to no relieving . 
3 Vows and oaths and faith assured , 
Constant ever , 
Changing never , 
Yet she could not be procured , 
To belecue my pains exceeding , 
From her sçant neglect proceeding . 
4 O that Love should have the art , 
By surmises , 
And disguises , 
To destroy a faithful hart , 
Or that wanton looking women , 
Should reward their friends as foemen . 
5 All in vain is Lady's love , 
Quickly choosed , 
Shortly loosed , 
For their pride is to remove , 
Out alas their looks first won us , 
And their pride hath strait undone us.  
6 To thyself the sweetest fair , 
thou hast wounded , 
And confounded , 
Changles faith with foul despair , 
And my service hath envied , 
And my succours hath denied . 
7 By thine error thou haste loft , 
Hart unfeigned , 
Truth unstained , 
And the swain that loved most , 
more assured in love then many , 
more despised in love then any , 
8 For my hart though set at naught , 
Since you will it , 
Spoil and kill it , 
I will never change my thoughts , 
But grieve that beauty ere was born . 
xv. ALTO . 

White as Lilies was her face , When she smiled she beguiled , Quitting faith with soul dis - grace , Virtue service thus neglected , Heart with sorrows hath in - fected . 

xv. BASSO . 

White as Lilies was her face , When she smiled , She beguiled , Quit - ting faith with foul disgrace , Virtue service thus neglected , Heart with sorrows hath infected . 

xv. TENORE . 

White as Lilies was her face , When she smiled , She beguiled , Quitting faith with foul dis - grace , Virtue service thus neg - lected , heart with sorrows with sorrows hath in - sected . 

XVI . 

CANTO . 

Woeful hart with grief oppressed , Since my fortunes most does - tressed , From my joys hath me re - mother - ved , follow those sweet eyes adored , Those sweet eyes where - in are stored , All my plea - sures best be - loved . 

Fly my breast , leave me forsaken , 
Wherein Grief his seat hath taken , 
All his arrows through me darting , 
thou mayst live by her Sunne-shining , 
I shall suffer no more pining , 
By thy loss , then by her parting . 
XVI . ALTO . 

Woeful heart with grief oppressed , since my fortunes most distressed , From my joys my joys hath me removed , follow those sweet eyes a - dored , those fair eyes wherein are stored , all my ple - sures best be - loved . 

XVI . BASSO . 

Woeful heart with grief oppressed , since my fortunes most di - stressed , from my joys hath me re - moved , follow those sweet eyes , sweet eyes a - dored , all my plea - sures best beloved . 

XVI . TENORE . 

Woeful heart with grief oppressed , since my fortunes most distressed , From my joys , my joys hath me re - moved , follow those sweet eyes those sweet eyes adored , those sweet eyes where - in are stored , all my pleasures best pleasures best be - loved . 

XVII . 

CANTO . 


A Shepherd in a shade , his plaining made , Of love and lovers wrong , 
Since love and Fortune will , I honour still , your fair and lovely eye , 

Vn - to the fairest lass , That trod on grass , And thus began his song , 
What conquest will it be , Sweet Nymph for thee , It I for sorrow die , Restore , restore my 

hart again , Which love by thy sweet looks hath slain , Lest that enforced by your disdain , I sing , 

Fie fie on love , ij . it is a foolish thing . 

My hart where have you laid OH cruel maid , 
To kill when you might save , 
Why have ye cast it forth as nothing worth , 
Without a tomb or grave . 
OH let it be entombed and lie , 
In your sweet mind and memory , 
Lest I resound on every warbling string , 
Fyefye on love that is a foolish thing . 
XVII . ALTO . 


A Shepherd in a shade , his plaining made , of love & lovets wrong , un - to the fairest lass , 
Since love and fortune will , I honour still , your fair & lovely eye , what conquest will it be , 

ij . that trod on grass , and thus be - 'gan his song . Restore restore my heart a - 
ij . sweet Nymph for thee , if I for sorrow die . 

gain , which love by thy sweet looks hath slain , by your disdain I sing , fie fie on love , fie fie on love , 

fie , it is a foolish thing . 
XVII . BASSO . 


A A Shepherd in a shade , his plaining made , of love & 
Since love and fortune will , I ho-nour still , your fair & 

lovers wrong , un - to the fairest lass , that trod on 
love-ly eye , what conquest will it be , sweet Nymph for 

grass , and thus began his song . Restore restore my heart a - 
thee , if I for sorrow die . 

gain , which love by thy sweet looks hath slain , lest that enforced 

by your disdain I sing , fie fie on love , fie fie on love fie it 

is a foolish thing . 
XVII . TENORE . 


A Shepherd in a shade , his playning made . of love and lovers wrong , un - to the fairest lass , 
Since love & fortnue will , I ho-nour still , your fair and lovely eye , what conquest will it be , 

ij . that trod on grass , and thus be - 'gan his song . Restore restore my heart a - 
sweet Nymph for thee , if I for sorrow die . 

gain , which love by thy sweet sweet looks hath slain , lest that enforced , enforced by your disdain , ij . 

I sing fie fie on love , fie fie fie on love it is a foolish thing . 
XVIII . 

CANTO . 

Faction that ever dwells , In court where wits excels , hath set de - fiance , Fortune and love hath sworn , That they were never born , of one alliance . 

1 Fortune swears , weakest hearts 
The book of Cupid's arts 
Turn with her wheel , 
Senses themselves shall prove 
Venture her place in love 
Ask them that feel . 
2 This discord it beget 
Atheist that honour not 
Nature thought good , 
Fortune should ever dwell 
In court where wits excel 
Love keep the wood . 
3 So to the wood went I 
With love to live and die 
Fortune forlorn , 
Experience of my youth 
Made me think humble truth 
In desert born . 
4 My saint is dear to me , 
And jone herself is she 
jone fair and true , 
jone that doth ever move , 
Passions of love with love 
Fortune adieu . 
XVIII . ALTO . 

Faction that e - ver dwells , in Court where wits excels , hath set defiance , fortune and love , hath sworn , that they were ne - ver born of one a - liance . 

XVIII . BASSO . 

Faction , that ever dwells , in Court where wits excels , hath set de - fiance , fortune , and love hath sworn , that they were never born , of ove alliance . 

XVIII . TENORE . 

Faction , that ever dwells , in Court where wits excels , hath set de-fiance : Forrune and love , hath sworn , that they were ne - ver born , of one a - liance . 

XIX . 

CANTO . 

Shall I sue shall I seek for grace ? Shall I pray shall I prove ? Shall I strive to a heavenly joy , with an earthly love ? Shall I think that a bleeding hart or a wounded eye , Or a sigh can ascend the clouds to attain so high . 

2 Silly wretch forsake these dreams , of a vain desire , 
OH bethink what high regard , holy hopes do require . 
Favour is as fair as things are , treasure is not bought , 
Favour is not won with words , nor the wish of a thought . 
3 Pity is but a poor defence , for a dying hart , 
Ladies eyes respect no moan , in a mean desert . 
She is to worthy far , for a worth so base , 
Cruel and but just is she , in my just disgrace . 
justice gives each man his own , though my love be just , 
Yet will not she pity my grief , therefore die I must , 
Silly hart then yield to die , perish in despair , 
Witness yet how fain I die , When I die for the fair . 
XIX . ALTO . 

Shall I sue , shall I seek for grace , shall I pray , shall I prove , shall I strive to a heavenly joy , with an earthly love , shall I think that a bleeding heart , ij . or a wounded eye , or a sigh can ascend the clouds , ascend the clouds , to attain so high . 

XIX . BASSO . 

Shall I sue shall I seek for grace , shall I pray shall I prove , shall I strive to a heavenly joy with an earthly love : Shall I think , ij . that a bleeding heart or a wounded eye , or a sigh , can ascend the clouds to attain so high . 

XIX . TENORE . 

Shall I sue , shall I seek for grace , shall I pray , shall I prove , shall I strive to a heavenly joy with an earthly love , Shall I think that a bleeding heart or a wounded eye , or a sigh can ascend the clouds , the clouds , to attain so high . 

xx.  

CANTO . 

for Finding in fields : ye shall find a better ditty . 

Toss not my soul , OH love 'twixt hope and fear , Show me some ground where I may firm - lie stand or sure - lie fall , I care not which a - pear , So one will close me Envoy : in a cer - ta'en band . When once of ill the utter - most is Envoy : known , The strength of sore - row quite is over thrown . 

Take me Assurance to thy blissful hold , 
Or thou Despair unto thy darkest Cell , 
Fach hath full rest , the one in joys enrolled , 
th' other , in that he fears no more , is well : 
When once the uttermost of ill is known , 
The strength of sorrow quite is overthrown . 
The end of the four parts . 

xx. ALTO . 

Toss not my soul ( OH love ) 'twixt hope and fear , show me some ground where I may firm - lie stand , or surely fall , ij . I care not which appear , so one will close me in a Envoy : certain band , in a certain band . When once of ill , the uttermost is known , ij . the strength of sorrow quite is overthrown . 

xx. BASSO . 

Toss not my soul : Show me some ground where I may firmly stand , or surely fall , ij . I care not which appear , so one will close , ij . Envoy : will close me in a certain band . When once of ill the uttermost is known , the strength of sorrow quite is over thrown . 

The end of the four parts . 

xx. TENORE . 

Toss not my soul , ( OH love , ) 'twixt hope & fear , ij . Show me some ground where I may firmly stand or surely fall , or fall , or surely fall , I care not which appear , ij . Envoy : so one will close , me in a certain band . When once of ill , the utter - most , when once of ill the uttermost is known , the strength of sorrow quite is over thrown . 

XXI . 

QVINTO . 

For a treble Vidl . 

Clear or Cloudy : Of that night bird that singeth , Who thought all sweet , ij . Yet jarring notes out ring . 

XXI . CANTO . 

Clear or cloudy sweet as April showering , Smooth or frowning so is her face to me , Pleased or smiling like mild May all flowering , When skies blue silk and me - dove's carpets be , Her speeches notes of that night bird that singeth , Who thought all sweet yet larring notes out - ring - eth . 

Her grace like june , when earth and trees be trimde , 
In best attire of complete beauty's height , 
Her love again like summer's days be dimmed , 
With little clouds of doubtful constant faith , 
Her trust her doubt , like rain and heat in Skies , 
Gently thundering , she lightning to mine eyes , 
Sweet summer spring that breatheth life and growing , 
In weeds as into herbs and flowers , 
And sees of service diverse sorts in sowing , 
Some haply seeming and some being yours , 
Rain on your herbs and flowers that truly serve , 
And let your weeds lack dew and duly starve . 
XXI . ALTO . 

Clear or cloudy sweet as April showering , smooth or frowning , so is her face to me , pleased or smiling , like mild may all flowering , when Skies blue filke and meadows car - pets be , her speeches , notes of that night bird that sings , who thought all sweet , yet jarring notes out ring . 

XXI . BASSO . 

Clear or Cloudy , sweet as April showering , smooth or frow - ning , so is her face to me , pleased or smiling , like mild May all flowering , when Skies blue filke and meadows carpets be , her speeches notes of that night bird that singeth , who thought all sweet , yet jarring notes out ring . 

XXI . TENORE . 

Clear or cloudy sweet as April showering , smooth or frowning so is her face to me , pleased or smiling like mild May all flowering , when Skies blue silk blue silk and Meadows carpets be , her speeches notes of that night bird that fingeth , who thought all sweet yet jarring notes out ring . 

XXII . 

QVINTO . 

For a treble Viol . 

Humour : Princes Chorus : 

XXII . CANTO . 

A Dialogue . 

Humour say what mak'st thou here , In the presence of a Queen , thou art a heavy leaden mood , Chorus : But never Hu - mor yet was true , but that but that but that that that that that that that which only only pleaseth you . 

1 OH , I am as heavy as earth , 
Say then who is Humour now . 
1 Why then 't is I am drowned in Woe , 
But never Humour , etc.  
1 Mirth then is drowned in sorrow's brim , 
O , in sorrow all things sleep . 
1 In her presence all things smile , 
Humour frolic then a while . 
But never Humour , etc.  
XXII . ALTO . 

Humour : Chorus : But never humour yet was true , but that but that but that that that that that that that that which only only pleaseth you . 

XXII . BASSO . 

Humour : Princes hold conceit most dear , all conceit in humour seen : Humour is inventions food : Chorus : but never humour yet was true , but that but that but that that that that that that that that which one - lie pleaseth you . 

2 I am now inclined to mirth , humour I as well as thou . 
2 no no wit is cherished so , but never humour : etc.  
2 no no fool the light 's things swim ▪ heavy things sink to the deep : but never humour : etc.  
XXII . TENORE . 

Humour : Chorus : But never humour yet was true , but that but that but that that that that that that that that which only pleaseth you . 

BASSO . 

Dowlands adieu , 

FINIS . 

Dowlands adieu for Master Oliver Cromwell . 



FINIS . 

