THE Country's Concurrence WITH THE London United Ministers In their late HEADS of AGREEMENT : SHOWING The Nature and Advantages of a General Union among protestants . 

In Two Discourses , Delivered before an Assembly of Ministers in the County of Southampton . 

By SAMVEL CHANDLER , Author of The Excellency of the Christian Religion . 

LONDON , Printed for john Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry , and john Salusbury at the Rising-sun over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill , 1691.  

TO THE READER . 

THE late happy Union between Two prevailing Parties among us , is a fit Subject of Joy and Thankfulness : That Differences , which have been managed with too much heat for so many Years , should now be so happily composed , and the Contending Parties should mutually condescend and concur together in so fair an Agreement , is a Blessing we have reason gratefully to acknowledge ; that the Country should so readily and unanimously agree with their brethren in the City on the same Terms , and throughout the whole Nation there should be such a willing consent to lay aside those distinguishing Names and Terms which have hitherto so miserably divided us : These things afford sufficient matter for praise , to that God who rules the Hearts of Men , and still's the ragings of the People . I have long waited that some Abler Pen should publicly express the Country's Sense of this great Mercy ; I said , Days should speak , and Multitude of Years should teach Wisdom : But there is a Spirit in Man , and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding , job 32. 7 , 8.  Being invited by my brethren to Preach before them on this occasion , I composed the following Meditations , and have now made them public for more general use . I hope the honesty of the Intention will atone for the weakness and unskilfulness of the Manager . I am willing to believe that Irenicums will now be more acceptable than they have hitherto been in this wrangling , divided Age , and the Sons of Peace will be no longer liable to Reproach and Scorn . OH how happy would it be if this Union were more extensive , and an end were put to that Ceremonious War that hath infested our Borders ever since the Reformation ! God seems by his Providences to make way for such a glorious work ; he hath not long since ( by putting us in mind of our common danger , ) inclined us to be more favourable one towards another : He hath by surprising Providences exalted to the Throne a Prince of known Piety and Moderation , who hath placed such in the Episcopal Chairs as are Men Famous for their healing truly Christian Spirits ; happy endeavours have been used for stopping that inundation of Wickedness and Profaneness , which hath so woefully overrun our land All these are happy preparations for a general Union , and blessed presages , that God hath yet Designs of Mercy towards us , and will not suffer our Enemies to prevail against us . Let us all therefore help on so good a work by our Hearty Prayers , Holy Lives , and endeared Love : Let us maintain an unity in Love and Affection , though we arrive not at Uniformity in Rituals , and the Ceremonial parts of Religion . In a word , to conclude all with the Expressions of excellent Bishop Hall , Let us be at Peace with ourselves , and at War with none but Hell and Rome . 

That these Discourses may be some way useful for the advancement of Love and Peace , is the Hearty Earnest Prayer of a Lover of Peace and Truth , 

Samuel Chandler . 

1 Thes. 5. 13.  

And be at Peace among yourselves . 

Notwithstanding the frequent commands of our Lord to Love and Unity , and the earnest Calls and Persuasions of all his Apostles ; yet how apt we are to forget and overlook them all , our unpeaceable Strifes and censorious uncharitable Contentions , are too sad a Witness . Though our God be the God of Love , and our Saviour the Prince of Peace , and Love be the last Legacy and earnest Request of our dying Redeemer ; yet he that beholds the bitter malice and envy , wrath and unchristian Jars of the Professors of the same Faith , and Followers of the same Blessed Jesus , must needs think it his great Duty to attempt the reviving that Love which is very much decayed , and that Charity which hath almost forsaken the Earth : When we see the Blood , and feel the Smart , and hear the Noises of Professed Christians , armed with Malice and Spite against each other , 't is the duty of every Messenger of Peace to sound a Retreat from this unnatural War , and persuade the furious Combatants to cease those Strifes , and forbear those hot Contentions which do so much dishonour God , disparage Religion , grieve our Friends , and make such ridiculous sport for our Enemies . That therefore I may endeavour to allay these unnatural heats and disorders , I have chosen the Words read ; and if St. Paul had any reason in those early Ages of Christianity , ( when Love most flourished , and Christians were most peacefully united together , ) to call upon them to be at Peace among themselves ; surely we have now far greater occasion to do so , since Christianity is broken into so many odious fractions and by-names , and every little difference is apt to provoke our Anger , and cause our Passions to boil up to too excessive heights . God hath indeed highly favoured us by his Providence , by now calming our Spirits , removing our Jealousies and Misunderstandings one of another , and reconciling those Differences which have unhappily divided us many Years : So that now we can strengthen one anohers Hands in the work of our Lord , and glory in the title of United brethren : We are now come together solemnly to testify our Thankfulness to God for this happy Union , which many of us have long sighed , and prayed , and waited , and laboured for in vain . Suffer me therefore to show you the nature and excellencies of Peace , and direct myself and you to those Gospel methods whereby our Happiness may be continued and promoted ; Be at Peace among yourselves . 

For the connexion of these Words , we need look back no further than ver . 12. where the Apostle having persuaded the Thessalonians to a due respect to their Ministers and Spiritual Guides for their Works sake , exhorts them here as a means to this , to be at Peace among themselves ; as if he should have said , unpeaceable disorders will grieve your Ministers hearts , detract from that just esteem , which is due to their Office , and render their labours often useless and unsuccessful ; therefore be at Peace among yourselves . 

The Words are plain and easy in themselves , and need rather an hearty Meditation , and diligent improvement , than any laborious Explication . 

The Observation I shall raise from the Words is this , 

That it is the duty and should be the practice of Christian Churches to be at Peace among themselves . 

In handling whereof , I shall use this Method . 

1.  Explain the nature of Peace . 
2.  Show the Advantages of Peace in Christian Churches . 
3.  Add some Directions for the better maintaining and promoting it . 
1.  The nature of Peace . 

1.  Peace implies a command over irregular Passions ; ungovernable Lusts are the great Makebates and Dividers ; he that hath not attained a Government over his Passions , is unprepared for Peace . Selfishness and Pride , Covetousness and Ambition , Envy and Malice and Revenge are the bitter Fruits that grow upon the stock of our Ill Natures , and are the sad occasion of all the disturbances in Church and State , and have rendered Christendom a Field of Blood. Till these Lusts are therefore subdued , and we have gained a victory within , outward Peace is impossible ; he that cannot rule his own Spirit , will never long live at Peace with others . An Angry Man will stir up Strife , prov. 29. 22.  Be ye therefore angry and Sin not , Eph. 4. 26.  Let not your Anger boil up to any sinful Excesses . 

2.  Peace implies hearty Love ; 't is very hard and difficult long to maintain Peace with those we do not heartily love , and utterly impossible to keep it up with those we hate ; Peace without Love is is no better than politic Dissembling , and Peace with Hatred an insidious cover of Enmity . Love is the only sure and lasting Bond of Peace , and Hatred the Fountain of Discord and Violence : If we would therefore forbear and forgive one another , and let the Peace of God rule in our Hearts , we must above all things put on Charity as a Rich Robe , our best Ornament , and the proper Livery of Christians . This is indeed the distinguishing badge of Christ's true Disciples , whereas the Disciples of the Pharisees were known by the broadness of their Phylacteries , and enlarging the Borders of their Garments ; and of john Baptist's , by their Leanness , contracted by Austerities , much Fasting and Abstinence : Christ would have ● known by their undissembled Love , unfeigned Kindness , and obliging Condescensions for each others good . 

3.  Peace implies a diligent performance of all Offices of Justice and Humanity ; we must not love in word and Tongue only , but in deed and in truth , 1 John 3. 18.  Justice is the Guardian , and Humanity the Nurse of Peace ; the only Sovereign Remedy to prevent Disorders , and put an end to Strife . Punctual observance of Contracts , truth in our Words , and sincerity in our Promises ; injuring none in their Estates by fraudulent Encroachments , or in their good Names by slanderous Reports , is a great conserver of Peace , and keeps off those Contentions which otherwise will avoidable arise . A tender Compassion to those in Want , and hearty readiness to advice and assist , relieve and comfort one another according to our particular Exigencies and Wants , is also very necessary in order to the advancing Peace among brethren . 

4.  Peace implies courtesy and respectfulness ; this is not only an argument of a generous Education and good Reading , but also a great ornament of Religion , and required of every Christian : Christ indeed came into the World to sweeten our Passions , calm our Natures , abate the sourness , and polish the roughness of our Humours . A sour Look , sullen Spirit , and scornful Carriage , is very unbecoming a Christian , is the indication of a Mind averse from Peace , and provokes disdain in others : But on the contrary , respectful Gestures , courteous Language , civil Salutations , and an affable Behaviour , are accompanied with such winning Charms as few can resist : And when a Man's ways thus please the Lord , they will please men too , and our very Enemies will be at Peace with us , prov. 16. 7.  

5.  Peace implies candid and favourable Opinions ; rash Censures , uncharitable Surmises , severe Reprehensions , and unkind Misconstruction of our Neighbours Actions , tend mightily to provoke Wrath , and stir up Strife : whereas equity in our Censures , mildness in our Reproofs , putting the best Construction upon , and making the most favourable interpretation of our Neighbour's Carriage and Behaviour , is the surest way to conciliate Peace and promote it . Christianity indeed teacheth us to be very severe in observing our own Sins , but very favourable in reflecting on the Miscarriages of our Neighbours . Let others usurp God's Prerogative that they may do the Devils Work , turn Searchers of Hearts , that they may become Accusers of the brethren . The true Christian hath so much to do at Home , that he hath very little leisure to look abroad ; is so employed in covering his own Deformities , that he hath not time to gaze on the nakedness of others ; hides his Neighbour's Faults with the Mantle of Love , and makes all possible allowances that the nature of the action will bear ; will not conclude a Sin from an inevident sign , as Eli from Hannah's Fervency concluded her Drunkenness . If our Neighbour be overtaken with a Fault , the Peaceable Christian will not from one particular act conclude an Habit , nor call that a Mortal Plague , which may be only one of the Spots of God's Children : Nor will he pre-judge a Scandalous Sinners future State , but pity and pray for him , and seek to win him to Repentance . 

6.  Peace implies restraint of Pragmaticalness ; if we would be quiet and at Peace , we must mind our own Business , 1 Thes. 4. 11.  Those that impertinently meddle with things beyond their Sphere of Activity , are disorderly Walkers , 2 Thes. 3. 11. out of their proper rank and station , are like him that taketh a Dog by the Ears , prov. 26. 17. may only irritate the anger of others , and cause them to turn upon them and bite them . He is therefore no Peaceable Minded Man , that plays the Bishop in another Diocese , 1 Pet. 4. 15.  

2 General . 

The advantages of Peace in Christian Churches . 

1.  This renders the Church most like to God ; he is the God of Peace , the Father of Mercies , and not only full of Love , but love it self , 1 john 4. 16.  He is all that is good in the most eminent degree , but he is love in a more especial and peculiar manner ; though all his Attributes be infinite , yet his Love and Goodness is peculiarly Sovereign . The best description we can frame of him in our Minds , or whereby we can represent him to others , is , that he is Omnipotent , Alwise , Immutable Goodness ; under the old Testament , a dispensation of Terror , when the riches of Divine Love were not displayed , yet even then he accounts his Goodness as his greatest Glory , and the most charming Beauty of his Nature . And now what better way is there for his Church to be like him , than to be at Peace and abound in all mutual Offices of Kindness and Love ? 

2.  Peace is the Church's greatest Beauty and Ornament ; 't was this commended Christianity of old ; hence Christian were called not Christiani , but Chrestiani , from a Greek Word signifying their benignity and sweetness of Disposition : and Se● how the Christians love one another was a common Proverb in th● Mouths of Heathens themselves What can be more glorious than to behold the most harmonious Union and Communion of Saint● in the pleasant ways of true Wisdom and Goodness ! Rage and Fury may be the excellency's o● Beasts , but Peace and Love is th● ornament of Men. How calm is the Mind , how serene the Countenance , how cheerful the Discourse , how sweet the Sleep , and how full of Content is the whole Life of the Peaceable Minded Man ! How lovely a melody in the Ears of God and Men , doth an Assembly of such Christians make when united together in acts of Religious Worship ! How much more pleasant are the smooth and even ways of Peace , than the rugged Paths of Discord and Contention ! Is it not much more delightful to behold the Heavens smiling upon us with a serene and cheerful Countenance , than frowning with Clouds , or big with Storms and Thunder ? Is it not much more sweet to sail in a quiet and calm Sea , than to be tossed about with a Tempest , and be continually in fear of every rolling unruly Wave ; to hear Harmonious Sounds , than grating Janglings ; and to dwell in a well , Governed City , than in a wild and savage Wilderness ? Peace is the way to the truest Pleasure , and indeed is itself the greatest Felicity : Hence the Angels in their holy Anthem , when they wished the greatest Happiness to Men , knew not how better to express their Sense , than by saying , On Earth Peace , Good Will to Men , Luke 2. 14.  

3.  Peace is the Church's strength ; Peace is the sinew of Society , as Money is of War ; the Cement that holds the parts together , and distinguishes the Congresses of Men from Herds of Beasts , or which is as bad , the tumultuous Confusions of the Rabble . Christian Churches might be immortal , did they not kill themselves by Divisions ; the deepest Wounds have been given to Christianity in the Houses of its pretended Friends , by Heresies and Schisms , rending and tearing the unity of the Body . He must be a great Stranger in the History of the Church , who knows not that it flourished while it walked in love , and enjoyed Peace among its Children ; but the adding to the Foundation the Wood and Hay , and Stubble of their own Inventions , and dividing thereupon , gave occasion to the rise of Turk and Pope , and all the dismal consequences thereof . Divisions stopped the progress and cramped the growth of Christianity , and hath so of Reform Christianity to this day : The most successful policy of our Enemies whereby they have done us the greatest mischief of all , hath been by fomenting , encouraging and cursedly improving our intestine Feuds : We have foolishly put Weapons into their Hands , or rather been destroying ourselves , while they have looked on with Scorn and Laughter . Were we but peacefully united among ourselves , we should quickly dishearten our Enemies , and laugh at all the attempts of Rome and France and Hell for our ruin and Destruction . Peace would be a mighty Bulwark to defend us , and would better prevent the Invasions of our Foes , than all our Wooden Walls on the Sea , or Fortresses and Castles by land  

4.  Peace tends to the comfort of the Church ; there can be no comfortable communion of Saints , no bearing each others burdens , no communicating the experiences of the workings of God's Spirit in one another's Souls , of the answer of our several Prayers , and various methods of God's dealings with us in his different ways of Discipline and Comfort , so long as we are at variance among ourselves . When Souls groan under the burden of Sin and Gild , never was Drink so welcome to the Thirsty Traveller , as the converse of truly Spiritual Christians to restore such in the Spirit of Meekness , and speak Peace unto them from the Scripture and their own Experience . But where Divisions are , this cannot be had , or if it be in some measure , is often confined to an inconsiderable Party , and each particular division wants the assistance of the rest ; so that the breach of their Catholic Love and Communion necessarily makes a breach in their comfort , and hinders the mutual sympathising assisting and comforting one another . 

5.  Peace tends to the increase of the Church ; when our Lord repeated his Petitions for Unity , he twice allegeth one and the same reason , that the World might know that God had sent him ; John 17. 21 , 23 : As if the union and love of his Followers were the strongest proof of the Divinity of their Master , and the powerfullest persuasive to Jews and Heathens to acknowledge and receive him for their Lord and Saviour ; as if his excellent Doctrine ▪ admirable Precepts and extraordinary Miracles would not do without it ; and indeed though Instruction be necessary , and People perish for want of Knowledge ; yet Instruction without Example will do little good , and no Example is more open to observation than that of Peace and Love , and the want thereof in the Preachers of Truth makes the best Doctrine in their Mouths suspected , hardens the Wicked in their sin , and tempts many to Atheism : If you speak with disagreeing Tongues , Unbelievers will say you are Mad , and sit down in the Seat of the Scorner , to allude to 1 Cor. 14. 23.  

6.  Peace is a great means of Edifying by the means of Grace : The Apostle in Eph. 4. 16. speaks of the close and intimate Union of the Body of Christ , as a necessary means to receiving increase from Christ , and edifying itself in love ; and Col. 2. 2. being knit together in love , is laid down as a means to the full assurance of understanding , to the full practical persuasion of the Truth , and excellency of the Gospel ; and the want of this rendered the solemn Assemblies of the Corinthians fruitless and barren , 1 Cor. 11. 17.  St. Paul charges them with a sad miscarriage in their Spiritual Traffic , growing worse in the use of what should have made them better , the Holy Supper of the Lord ; and the reason is given Ver. 18.  I hear there be Divisions among you . Divisions abate the fervency of our Prayers , blunt the edge of our Devotions , seize on the vitals of Christianity , evaporate the life and power of Religion in impertinent squabble ; and unless Almighty Grace prevent , will quickly spread like a Gangrene , so as to eat out the heart thereof . 

7.  Peace in Christian Churches is an Emblem of Heaven ; the more that part of the Church which is Militant here below doth abound in Love and Peace , the more it resembles that part which is triumphant above : This is indeed the great difference between Angels and Devils , Heaven and Hell ; the Devils have great degrees of Power and Knowledge , perhaps not much below what Angels have ; but Angels and Glorified Saints abound in Love , Sweetness Benignity , and live in the joyful uninterrupted exercise of mutual Endearments ; whereas a Spirit of Malice and Envy , Hatred and Revenge , is the very complexion of Satan , and temper of Hell. But OH how happy will it be to dwell in that Society , where there 's no Mistake or Envy , Ignorance or Prejudice , or carnal Interest to occasion the least Jar or Discord , but all pure Peace , Seraphic Love and perfect Harmony , as with God , so also between themselves ; where the strange Fire of misguided Zeal is extinguished by the more powerful Flames of Heavenly Love , and the unhappy names of dividing Sects are no more known ; where dark and deep Mysteries , little doubtful Truths , and ambiguous Words and Phrases no longer occasion any Brawls or Contentions ; where Luther and Calvin and all the Saints of God perfectly accord together , speak the same Language , join in the same Praises , and pleasingly entertain and embrace one another , with all the endearments of intimate Friends and Companions . And as we long for this Blessed State , so 't is our great Duty , and will be our Happiness to let down as much of Heaven on Earth as we can , to anticipate our future joys by an enlarged love towards all Saints , and being at Peace among ourselves . 

III General . 

Directions for the maintaining and promoting of Peace . 

1.  Remove the Causes of unpeaceableness ; the Effects will not be taken away , except the Causes cease . This Disease will prove Mortal , and still Torment us , except the Fuel that feeds it be taken away ; except that Generation of Vipers be slain , which hath for so many Ages torn out the Bowels of our Common Mother , the Church , we must never expect our wide breaches will be healed . I shall therefore take a short view of those Distempers , that have so miserably infected us , that the discovery may help to their Cure , and restore the primitive healthful Temper of Christianity ; and while I mention the Achans' that have sickened our Camp , and infected our Israel , I beseech you , that you would cast them out of your Hearts , and have no fellowship with these unfruitful Works of Darkness . Be ashamed of complaining for want of Peace , if you wilfully cherish that poisonous Brood , that will otherwise prove your ruin . 

1.  Unmortifyed Sin. Ungodliness is the great Divider ▪ and till we are partakers of the same sanctifying Spirit , 't is impossible we should love as brethren . 't is as possible for the Wolf to lie down with the Lamb , as for Wicked Men to love the truly Godly . While we will not work in the same Vineyard , nor walk in the same way , nor choose the same Employment , nor delight in the same Spiritual Duties , how can it be possible to agree together ? 't is a vain thing to pretend agreement in Articles of Faith , while we will not lovingly agree in practical Holiness . 't is highly unreasonable for wicked Wretches to rail against Christians ( like Ahab against Elijah ) as Troublers of Israel , when they themselves are the Grand Incendiaries : These Men , like Nero of old , cast Firebrands into the Sanctuary , and then lay their guilt at true Christians Doors : They hold the most damnable Errors , and practical Heresies , and thus render Union impossible : They pretend pity to the Wounded Church , and yet throw away the Salve and Plaster that should cure it : They complain that the Garment of Christ is rend , and yet throw away the Needle that should sow it up : They pretend to be grieved to see the spiritual Building shaking , yet throw away the Lime and Mortar , the Pins and the Nails that should cement and join the Parts together . Thus do they who cry up Love and Unity , and yet hate Holiness wherein Christian Union consists : To hear an Ungodly Man , who is really of no Religion at all , but against the life and practice of all , cry out of the many ways of Religion among Christians , is as if a Blackmoor should blame another for a Spot in his Face , or a Murderer rebuke a Man for an angry Word , follow Peace therefore with all Men , and Holiness , without which no Man shall see the Lord , Heb. 12. 14.  

2.  Pride : This we find already arraigned by the wisest of Men as the great Makebate and Troubler of the World ; prov. 13. 10.  Only by Pride cometh Contention . As this is true of Civil Strifes , so more especially of Religious or rather Irreligious Jars and Contentions ; Men are so Wise in their own Conceits , that they are angry with every one that is not of the same level , and impatient of Contradiction ; while many are very hot in Exclamations against the Political Antichrist , they observe not this Antichristian Temper in themselves ; they are justly offended at others for usurping God's Prerogative , sitting in his Throne , and claiming a Title of Infallibility ; but do not these Fools envy the Pope , and like Adam desire to be God's that their Name may be honoured , and their Will be done through the Earth ? Let us therefore entertain an humble suspicion of our own Understandings , remembering that an over confident persuasion of our own Knowledge is a certain sign of Ignorance , and he that thinks he knows most , is commonly most mistaken : 'T was not for nothing that the wisest of Men doth so frequently give that caution , Be not Wise in thy own Conceit , prov. 3. 3. 26. 12.  

3.  Censoriousness : The censorious Backbiter is the Devils Minister to Preach down Love , abate Charity , and exhort to the hatred of the brethren . Have not our unnatural heats been owing to this original ? Are not we too apt to censure those that agree not with us in every punctilio , and readily take up an evil Report against them ? Is not this contrary to the lovely Grace of Charity , which thinketh no Evil , misconstrues not the Actions and Intentions of others , rejoiceth not in Iniquity , but believeth all things , and hopeth all things , is unapt to believe ill without apparent grounds , and hopes as long as there is any reason for hope ? 

4.  Undue admiration of particular persons or Parties : This was the Corinthian Error that divided and miserably shattered that flourishing Church ; one liked the powerful plainness of Paul , another the eloquence of Apollo's , and a third the perspicuity of Peter , and a fourth was above all outward Ordinances , pretending to the immediate Teaching of Christ. Upon this , they vilified all others , except those that they had set up for an Oracle : We may suppose them disputing one with another after this manner . 

One , I am of Paul , did you never hear Paul Preach ? how clearly doth he unfold the deep Mysteries of Salvation ! how sweetly doth he display the unsearchable riches of Christ ! how convincingly doth he argue , and how excellently doth he direct in the way to Salvation ! As for Apollo's , he guilds over his Discourses with specious Eloquence and gaudy Bravery ; but Paul shows the truth in the plainest Dress , which best becomes her ; and as for Cephas , he is indeed fit to Catechise weak and ignorant Christians , but he tells me nothing but what I knew before ; they therefore show themselves Men of small Judgement , that are for Apollo's or Cephas ; I am for Paul Another I am of Apollo's : Let who will be for Paul and Cephas , could I sit always under Apollo's his Ministry , how happy should I be ? How movingly doth he Preach , with what a happy fluency doth he insinuate himself into his Hearers , and by his Pathetical Eloquence almost constrain attention ! One while he clothes his Speech in a Silken Dialect , dips each Word in a Tear , and steeps each Phrase in Honey , that he may win on his Auditors ; another while , he breathes out Flames and Terrors , and cause's the stoutest Heart to quake and tremble . As for Paul he is rude in Speech , homely in his Expressions , and hath no Majesty nor Presence in a Pulpit : I admire therefore their Ignorance that are for him ; I am for Apollo's . A Third , I am for Cephas : How doth he stoop to the lowest and meanest capacity ! doth not Preach about such deep Mysteries as Paul , nor with such flaunting Eloquence as Apollo's , but feeds us with the sincere Milk of the Word , and teaches so plainly that the most Ignorant may understand him : I wonder therefore he is no more followed , and that Paul and Apollo's are preferred before him : I am for Cephas . Thus we may suppose the Corinthians might jangle among themselves , for which St. Paul so sharply reproves them ; and may not we take his Reproofs to ourselves ? are not we apt to heap up to ourselves Teachers , and have men's persons in admiration , so to value some , as unreasonably to scorn and slight others , forgetting that they are all the Servants of Christ , deputed and sent by him , that in much Wisdom and Mercy hath given them various Gifts for the Edification of the Church ; that as one is eminent in some respects , so in others 〈◊〉 brethren may exceed them 〈◊〉 must consider they all Preach 〈◊〉 same Doctrine , and direct to the same way to Salvation ; and it is more the fault of our own corrupt Hearts , than of the Minister , if we profit not by their Labours . 

2.  Be much in Contemplation of the Love of God in Christ : This will blow up a holy Flame of Love to him and all his Members ; when we remember how dearly and tenderly Christ love's all his Saints , this will constrain us to lay aside all Wrath and Bitterness , and live in Peace ; such a glorious precedent must needs be a cogent Argument , and can hardly be resisted . Love and Peace is the very Image of our Heavenly Father , the Copy Christ hath set us , and the Lesson he hath written for our Learning in Lines of his own Blood. An hearty Love to God will engage us to be at peace with the whole fraternity of Christians , and love them without Dissimulation . 

3.  Make the great design of Religion yours , viz. the advancement of Holiness , and recovery of the Image of God in the Souls of Men : Remember Religion is not designed merely to fill your Heads with airy notions , to tip your Tongues for Discourse , or enable you to talk plausibly for the truth ; that it consists not in little Speculative Opinions , or Ceremonious Trifles ; but the great design of it is to direct us in the government of our Passions , subduing our Lusts , and conquering the Impediments that hinder our Recovery and Salvation . In a word , Religion consists in a penitent return to God by Faith in Christ , and Obedience to his Gospel ; let us take this to be our main business , than we shall have so much work to do at home , that we shall have little inclination to pry into the Infirmities of others , or quarrel with them . That Man would be esteemed by all as bereaved of his Wits , that should be picking causeless Quarrels with his Neighbours about a Chip of Wood , or a broken Hedge , when a Fire in his House is consuming his Goods and Children . We all stand on the Borders of the Grave , and Confines of Eternity ; our great business is to quench the Flames of Lust , which otherwise will prepare us for Everlasting burnings , and therefore surely we should not waste our precious Minutes in strife and contention . 

4.  Avoid Extremes in disputable Points . Every Truth lies in the middle between two Falsehoods , and he that goes far from one is apt to slip into the other . After all the confidence and boast of disputers , there will be uncertainty in lesser Points , and when we travel in uncertain Roads , 't is best to choose the middle ; here we may be sure to meet with Charity and Peace , and very probably Truth in their Company . The great occasion of our Differences hath been that Men have looked so much at the evil of one Extreme as to forget the Error on the other side ; like an ignorant Physician , who to Cure a Man of a dead Palsy casts him into a Frenzy . I dare with some confidence affirm , that most of those Disputes , that are so hotly agitated among protestants , are in the Extremes , and consist more in words than things , because the Curse of Babel has so confounded our Languages , that though our Sentiments are much the same , we understand not one another's meaning : And if Men would but harken to calm dispassionate Reason , they might soon find out such healing Reconciling Principles , as would quickly make us one among ourselves , and a terror to our Romish Adversaries . Let the Apostles Counsel be in this sense therefore obeyed , Phil. 4. 5.  Let your Moderation be known unto all Men.  

5.  Avoid unpeaceable Dividers ▪ those who make it their work to soment Differences , and stir up Strife , and sow Seeds of Discord among brethren , are said to be an abomination to the Lord ; take upon them a very ill employment , and carry on a design quite contrary to the Gospel of Peace and therefore are to be avoided that they may be ashamed : I speak not this of myself , but the Apostle Paul is very earnest in the same Advice , Rom. 16. 17 , 18.  Now I beseech you brethren , mark them which cause Divisions and Offences contrary to the Doctrine which ye● have learned , and avoid them ; for they that are such serve not our Lord jesus Christ , but their own Belly , and by good Words and fair Speeches deceive the Hearts of the Simple . 

6.  Frequently join together in the same Exercises of Religious Worship : When Christians come together in the same Assemblies , this naturally tends to abate their strangeness , calm their Spirits , remove unreasonable Jealousies and Suspicions , and inclines them to a Cordial Endeared Love. This was one great means of promoting that hearty affection , which was among the Members of the primitive Church , They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship , and breaking of Bread and Prayer : Acts 2. 42.  And the same method would retrieve that love and peace , the want of which hath crumbled us into parties , and been the unhappy occasion of so many woeful Effects . Did we but more frequently resort to the House of Prayer , more diligently harken to , and more faithfully improve Ministerial Instructions , more readily submit to Pastoral Discipline , more carefully watch over one another , and more tenderly advice , and reprove , and edify one another ; more solemnly pray with and for one another , and more constantly celebrate that uniting Ordinance , the Lords Supper , together , we should soon see the Blessed peaceful effects of so doing . Did Neighbouring Churches counsel each other , and maintain mutual correspondences for the advancement of Love and Holiness , occasionally communicate together , when convenient , and look upon themselves , not as divided Bodies , or carrying on separate Interests , but all united under the same Head , acting according to the same Rule , and for the same end , this would engage us to mutual offices of peace , and we should readily comply with the Apostle's Counsel , Eph. 4. 3.  Keep the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of peace . 

Many more Directions might be added , but these , if well practised , would quickly extinguish those Heats and Animosities , which have made Earth so like to Hell ; and produce those Heavenly Fruits of peace , which might create a Paradise here below , make the Church , which in a very sad sense is now Militant , nearly resemble the Church Triumphant . 

And now Men and brethren , what remains , but that we put in practice the Duties recommended ? then might we hope our Land would become a Goshen , not only in respect of Spiritual Light , but also of its freedom from those Locusts and Caterpillars , dividing Lusts , that have so long wasted and consumed us . Blessed be God that he hath in so great a measure healed our Breaches , and thus far united us together : May not we hope , that this is but the beginning of what God designs for us , like the dawning of the Morning in order to a perfect day ? May not we hope , that those Glorious Times are hastening , when the Lord shall be one , and his Name one ; Zach. 14. 9 and that that Promise is near its accomplishment , jer. 32. 39  I will give them one Heart , and one way , that they may fear me for ever , for the good of them , and of their Children after them ? May not we hope , that the Philadelphian state , which some expect , now draws nigh , when Brotherly Love shall flourish , and be more enlarged . How happy would it be , if this Union were yet more extensive , if the Name of Reform Christian were only known , and all those divided Names laid aside , whereby we have been unhappily distinguished ! By Mutual Compliances and Condescensions this is no impossible Task . And who knows but this beginning may issue in so happy a Conclusion ? This may well be the subject of our Wishes , and earnest constant Prayers . 

John 13. 34.  

A new Commandment I give unto you , that ye love one another , as I have loved you ; that ye also love one another . 

Among all the advantages of the Christian Religion , wherein it exceeds the defective Rules of Pagan Philosophy , and obscure Institutions of Moses , there is nothing wherein it more excels than in the Doctrine of Love and Charity ; a Duty which is urged in the plainest Words , and pressed by the strongest Arguments , and made not the high qualification of some eminent Saints , but a necessary essential part of the new Creature : A Duty not only necessary to some inferior uses , but to all the great ends of Religion , and not to be dispensed with on any pretence : A Duty that is made the Badge and Character of Christ's Disciples , and that which our dying Redeemer strictly charged his Followers to observe ; as in the Text , A new Commandment I give unto you , that ye love one another . 

Our Saviour knowing the time of his Departure was near at hand , in this Chapter gives his Disciples an admirable instance of his condescending Love in stooping to that servile Office of washing their Feet : And this he did on purpose that they should imitate him , and not think the lowest Offices of Charity for their brethren's good , too mean and base for them . Afterwards having given the Sop to judas who went out with an intention to betray him , he tells his Disciples of his speedy Separation from them ; and lest they should be too much cast down at hearing of his Departure , he tells them that he should be Glorified , and God the Father in him ; i e. that he should give great discoveries of his Deity , and God the Father would discover the unsearchable depths of his Wisdom , inconceivable heights of his Love , and infinite strictness of his Holiness and Justice by his Death , and advance him straightway to the highest degrees of Glory : And then being filled with an affectionate love to them , he speaks as an indulgent Father to the Sons of his Love , Little Children , yet a little while I am with you , ver . 33. and as if he should have said , OH my Disciples whom I love with no lesle ardent affection than a Father doth his darling and tender Infant ; there remains but a small space wherein I shall make my abode with you in the Flesh , therefore as I said to the Hardened jews , whither I go , ye cannot yet come : One Request and Command I your dying Lord leave with you , Let my Love to you be the rule and measure of your Love to one another . 

A New Commandment I give unto you . 

There is some difference among Expositors concerning the Sense of this Expression . 

Some tender it this renewed Commandment , this Command that hath been almost obliterated by the corrupting Doctrines of the Pharisees , and false Glosses of the Jewish Teachers , I now by my Doctrine and Example renew unto you . Some by New , understand most excellent : Thus we read of a New Song , a most excellent Song , of New Wine , of the most delicious sort and kind ; q. d. Whatever commands you neglect , be sure to comply with this the most excellent of all . Subjects take care to observe the New Commands of their Princes ; let your careful Obedience to this be as if it were newly promulged : So others understand it . 

A New Commandment , say others , because we must be still renewing it ; owe no Man any thing but to love one another , Rom. 13 8.  Pay all your Debts , but this Debt ▪ of Love you must be always paying and yet always owing . 

I rather think it is called a New Commandment , because it is expounded after a New manner , directed according to a new Rule , and required in higher measures and degrees than ever before ; for though this Duty was not wholly unknown to Mankind before , yet never was it so taught or encouraged ; never was such an illustrious example given of it , nor such weight and stress laid upon it in any former Institution ; and special Measures of Assistance proper to Gospel times are vouchsafed to work it in our Hearts . So that it is as if our Saviour should have said , Whereas it hath been said ▪ by them of old time , thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thyself , I give you a new Rule , as I have loved you , so love one another , after a more indearing manner than the jews , that the World may see the excellency of my Doctrine above that of Moses Love ; bear an hearty esteem one for another , and employ yourselves in mutual Offices of Kindness , as acknowledging one another to be brethren and Fellow Disciples . As I have loved you ; though you cannot love one another to such a degree , yet testify your love by such instances , and to such degrees as your nature is capable of . 



This is the meaning of the Text ; Christ came into the World to demonstrate and exercise his Father's Love and his own : Love he came to kindle in the Souls of Men , and therefore gives us this excellent Commandment . 

The Words being thus explained , the Observation I shall raise from them is this , 

That the last and great Command of our dying Saviour , is , that Christians should love one another , as Christ hath loved them . 

In Handling of which I shall observe this Method : 1.  I shall inquire who are the Objects of this Love.  
2.  In what respects must we love one another as Christ hath loved us . 
3.  Make some Practical improvement of the whole Discourse . 


1.  The Objects of this Love.  

1.  There is a common Love due to Men as Men ; all Men are God's Workmanship , bearing his natural Image , and capable of being serviceable to his Glory : Thus , thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thyself ; all Men are our Neighbours , as partakers of the same Nature and capable of the same Happiness . Special love to Christians doth not diminish , but enlarge our common love to Men : Wherever we see any part of God's Image , we must love it . Our Saviour when he beheld that rich young Gentleman , Mark 10. 21. he loved him ; he could not but be well pleased with his Morality , though he was displeased he went no further . Thus all the footsteps of Divine Goodness must be loved : Virtue even in an Heathen is to be admired : This will constrain us to Pity , Pray for , and h●lp all in distress , according to our ability . We must not be like the unconcerned Priest and merciless Levite in the Parable , Luke 10. 30. who passed by the wounded Man , and would not relieve him , but like the good Samaritan , who spoke comfortably to him , supplied his Wants , and bound up his Wounds . 

2.  There is a Love due to Enemies . Other men's Faults and Sins against us , give us no dispensation for the nonpayment of this great Debt of Nature's Law , Loving all of the same kind . Christ came to mortify all Inclinations to Rage and Revenge , and commands Affections and Words , and Actions of Kindness and Benignity , to those that have expressed the contrary unto us : We must love our Enemies , Mat. 5. 44. be cordially affected towards them ; wish them all the good in the World ; especially when they most need , the good of their Souls ; Their Conviction , Reformation and Amendment . Other men's Enmity must not pervert or blind our Judgements , or hinder us from discerning what is amiable in them ; nor must it corrupt our Affections , or hinder us from loving what is truly lovely . We must bless them that curse us . Not render reviling for reviling , but give them friendly courteous words , though they rail against us . We must do good to them , feed and clothe them , if hungry or naked ; rescue them if in danger ; comfort them if in distress , and all without the least Tincture of Malice or Revenge . We must pray for them : Forgive them ourselves , and pray to God to forgive them too . Thus did our Saviour ; in the midst of his dying Agonies forgets not this Testimony of his Love to his imbittered Adversaries , and with a generosity beyond Example , pleads excuses for their Sin , saying , Father forgive them , for they know not what they do , Luke 23. 34.  

3.  There is a special Love due to all whom we charitably hope to be true Christians . To this we are directed by the Text. Whoever makes a seemingly serious profession of Faith and Holiness , and doth not disprove it by a contrary practice , is to be allowed the Name and special Love of a Christian. 't is God's Prerogative to see the Heart ; 't is our Duty to observe the Life ; and he that makes a credible Profession , and doth not live in wilful Sin is charitably to be esteemed as a Member of Christ. Though he differ from us in many Points , yet if he holds the Foundations of the Christian Faith , and manifests the Grace of God in his Life , 't is uncharitable for us to judge he is not the object of God's special Love , and therefore it is unreasonable he should not be the object of ours . Though he be weak in Parts and Gifts , subject to many Passions and Infirmities consistent with real Grace ; though his Profession reach not to that height as to make him Eminent , and his Conversation be not so exact as to make you confident of his Sincerity , yet if he profess to be a true Christian , and live not in any Sin , which is the certain mark of an unbeliever , he is to be loved as Christ hath loved us . God's Love indeed is Guided by Infallibility , he love's none with a special Affection but sincere penitent Believers ; but our Love must be guided by our own weak and fallible discerning . Where we see the Fruits of Piety in men's Lives , we must judge of the truth of their Graces according to the probability which those signs discover . Though all be not so Eminent in Grace as Peter , james and john , yet as the weakest Disciples it sincere are accepted by God , so ought they to be embraced by us . Christ will not break the bruised Reed , nor quench the smoking Flax. Nor ought we to despise the Babes in Christ , but love them as Members of the same Body , and Heirs of the same Inheritance . 

2.  In what respects must we love one another , as Christ hath loved us ? 

Ans. Not in all Respects ▪ Christ so loved us as to purchase Grace and Glory for us . But we are not capable of thus Loving one another . We cannot pay down a valuable satisfaction for our own Sins , much lesle can we super-erogate or purchase pardon for others . Our own Oil must be perfumed with the Incense of Christ's Merits , before it can make our Faces shine before God ; and we have so little for ourselves that we have none to spare for our brethren . Christ alone paid down a complete satisfaction for them and us ; nor can we love our brethren with an equal degree of Love to what Christ did . He had not the Spirit by measure , but the fullness of the Godhead dwelled in him ; and therefore he loved us without any sinful mixture or imperfection ; but our Love as well as other Graces admit of very great defects . The word ( As ) therefore doth not denote equality in degree , but likeness in kind . Our Love to one another must bear some likeness and resemblance of Christ's Love to us . 

1.  In the Inward Properties of it . 

2.  In the outward Expressions of it . 

1.  In the inward Properties of it . 

1.  Our Love must be sincere and unfeigned as Christ's was . Christ did not Hypocritically pretend Love , or Dissemblingly feign Affection to us , but sincerely loved us . His Protestations of Love were all real and hearty ; not in Word and in Tongue only , but in Deed and in Truth . Thus ought our Love to be without Dissimulation , Rom. 2. 9  A pretended Disciple indeed may like judas kiss and betray , make large Protestations of kindness to the Saints , and under this pretext of Affection hide a malicious heart , and contrive their ruin . But the true Christians Professions of Love as well as Prayers to God proceed not from feigned Lips.  

2.  Our Love to one another must be fervent as Christ's was . 'T was Love incomprehensibly great and ardent , that brought our Lord from Heaven to Earth , carried him through the difficulties of Poverty , Reproach and Scorn , enabled him to bear the contradiction of Sinners , and the pain and shame of the Cross ; herein Christ as well as God the Father commended his love towards us , Rom. 5. 8. rendered it great and admirable beyond all expression or parallel , In that while we were yet Sinners Christ died for us . We must act according to this pattern , Love one another with a pure heart fervently , 1 Pet. 1. 22.  Our Love must not be cold and indifferent , frozen or congealed ; but we must entertain a fervent Affection one for another . 

3.  Our Love must be prevailing as Christ's was . Christ loved us above Gold or Silver , or Earthly Pomp and Greatness , above his own Temporal Ease and Delight ; and was ready to wade through Storms and Dangers , and Difficulties for our sakes . So must we love our brethren , above our Carnal Interest , Honour , Wealth and Pleasure . Thus Moses evidenced his Love to the people of God by forsaking the dazzling Honours and bewitching Pleasures of Pharaoh's Court , and choosing Affliction with them rather than Sin. Thus must we be willing to renounce our own Ease and Liberty for their sakes , when God and his Honour calls . Nay we must Love them better than the nearest ungodly Relations . Christ loved those that were related to him in the Spirit , far better than the nearest ungodly Relations according to the Flesh. There is indeed a natural sensitive Love and Propension towards near Relations , and we are ordinarily bound in the first place to provide for them , supply their wants , and give them these outward effects of our Love : But still we must have a higher rational esteem of the godly and value their Graces above the most lovely natural perfections of others ; and the best must be preferred in point of Honour , though others may be preferred in point of Maintenance . 

4.  Our Love must be impartial and universal as Christ's was . He did not confine it to his own Countrymen the Jews , and die to procure Pardon , Grace and Glory for them only , but for us Gentiles also , while he was upon Earth : The Faith of the Centurion , and importunity of the Canaanitish Woman ( though Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel ) attracted his Esteem and Admiration ; and wherever he beheld the Grace of God and Image of Holiness , he loved it . 

't is very observable , he is more sharp and severe in his Invectives against the Pharisees than any other persons ; because of their stingy narrow Spirit , confining Religion to their own particular Sect , and scorning and despising all that were not of their own Party ; as if all the rest of Mankind were in a Reprobate Damnable State.  

Our Christian Love must thus resemble our Saviour's . It must be enlarged to all Saints , to the whole Fraternity of Christians . To be partial in our Love is a sign 't is unsound ; to make our own Opinions the Shiboleth to distinguish between a true and sergeant Christian , is very unreasonable . Where there is a Profession of the Baptismal Covenant , the Essentials of the Christian Faith , and a Life in some measure answerable ; we must love such as Christians , not withstanding their mistakes and erroneous Principles in lesser points . We justly condemn the Church of Rome for confining Salvation to themselves , and Damning all the World besides : Let us take heed how we condemn ourselves by contracting the Church of God into a narrower compass , lest we censoriously damn those whom Christ will save , and perhaps place on higher Seats of Glory than ourselves . We know who it was that said , Lord , I thank thee , I am not as this Publican , when he was really in a far worse condition : Our Love to a Party must not blind our Judgements , or pervert our Affections as to all the rest : Keep up therefore an impartial universal Love to all professed . Christians as such , and hate a dividing Spirit . Take heed how you ▪ stigmatize those with the Name of Heretics , who shall stand at the Right Hand of Christ ; and take not up the Devil's accursed Employment to become Accusers of those that are really your brethren . 

5.  Our Love must be proportioned to the degrees of their Grace , as Christ's was . Christ , that certainly knows who are most furnished with Divine Grace , must needs love these with an higher degree than others of a lower Form and Classis in Christianity . St. john who it seems had the most ardent love and Eminent degrees of Grace among the Apostles , was his peculiar Favourite and Darling Disciple , had the highect , place next his Lord , lay in his Bosom , according to the custom of those ▪ Eastern Countries , which was to lie and not to sit at Meals , and is called the Disciple whom jesus loved , John 13. 23.  Christ's love was not a fond unaccountable Passion , but the result of his Reason and Judgement . Because he loved him best we may therefore justly conclude he was really above the rest in Piety . Thus must our love be proportioned : Some are but weak Christians , and we can have but small and doubtful persuasions of their sincerity : Others are stronger , and we may be more confident as to them . The one must be loved as Christians , but the other with an higher degree , as bearing more lively representations of the holy God : We must not respect the persons of any , but their goodness ; and love those best that are really so . This Property will discover the Hypocrisy of many , who will bear with Holiness in a lower degree , and speak well of those who ( though Godly in the main ) are too remiss and careless in their Conversations , but swell with Rage and Malice against those that are most Eminent for Piety . What doth this Temper show but a Graceless Heart ? if we bear not the highest Love to the best Christians how dwelleth the Love of God in us ? Alas ! can infinite perfect Holiness be loved by him , that love's not the best Representations of it , that this imperfect ▪ state affords ? If the light of the Moon , which is not without its spots , doth offend us ; how can we bear the far more resplendent brightness of the Sun itself ? 

How unmeet is he for the Communion of Angels and perfected Spirits , that is not pleased ; much more that is offended with the highest degrees of Holiness in this state of Imperfection ? The true Christian having a prevailing Love to God , will Love his Image wherever he finds it ; and where it is more clear and unsullied , and drawn out in more Beautiful Characters , his Love will be proportionably greater and more affectionate . 

6.  Our Love must be compassionate and sympathising . Christ could not refrain from weeping when he beheld jerusalem , where was the then visible Church of God , and laments her foreseen destruction : When Peter . denied him not once , but thrice , with Curses and Imprecations : He did not disregard him , as he might justly do , such a perfidious Servant ; but though he was unconcerned for himself , and silently bore the slanders of the Witnesses ; yet he manifests his concern for Peter ; by his compassionate looks , testified his sorrow for his Sin , and drew not his Eyes away till he had looked him into Repentance . Nay , though our Head be now in Heaven , yet he hath a compassionate sense of the Extremities of his Members , and accounts all the Affronts , Persecutions and Reproaches offered to them , as done to himself . Thus when Saul ( than a Persecutor ) breathed out nothing but Blood and Slaughter against the Churches , He cries from Heaven , Saul , Saul , why persecutest thou me , Acts 9 4.  He is a merciful faithful Highpriest that is touched with a feeling of our Infirmities , and bears a compassionate Love to all his Members in Misery : And the same mind ought to be in us that was in him ; we ought to sympathise with our Fellow Members in distress , and remember the afflicted , as being ourselves in the Body , Heb. 13. 2. liable to the same Trials and Parts of the same Mystical Body of Christ. If any Member be in pain , all the rest are discomposed , and when some of the Members of Christ are discomposed , 't is natural for the rest to sympathise with them , and be compassionately sensible of their trouble . Thus we are commanded to weep with them that weep , Rom. 12. 15.  To bear one another's Burdens , and so fulfil the Law of Christ , Gal. 6. 2.  

7.  Our Love must be constant and abiding as Christ's love was ; Christ's love to us was not for a small space of time , but lasting and uninterrupted , He loved his own , and he loved them to the end , John 13. 1.  And the nearer his end appeared , the higher marks of his Love did he give them ; the failing and miscarriages of his Disciples did not remove his Love , or cause him to withdraw his affection ; their ignorance and unbelief after all his Teaching and Instructions , their fiery unseasonable Rage against the Samaritans , their Pride and Ambition , Rashness and Cowardice , and the base Perfidiousness of Peter did not incline him to lay aside his Thoughts of Love , or leave the work of our Redemption unfinished ; but he still loved them to the Death : Thus must we love our brethren , overlook their Failing , pass by their Infirmities , admire what is lovely , and neglect what may cool our Affections . This new Commandment must be every day renewed by us ; this is a Lesson we must be always Learning , and a Duty we must be always employing ourselves about . We must still be abiding in our Love , till we enter among that happy Society , where all Sins and unlovely Imperfections shall be done away , and we shall always solace ourselves with pleasing views of the Divine Purity and Holiness , and the numerous Pictures and Representations of it among Angels and Glorified Saints . 

2.  Our Love to one another must resemble Christ's Love to us in the outward Expressions of it . 

1.  In the intimacies of our Friendship and Familiarity one with another ; Christ so love's all true Christians , as to enter into the strictest bands of amity with them ; he is nearly united to them as their Head and Husband , and calls them his Friends and his Spouse ; he is the Head and they are the Members ; the Vine , and they are the Branches ; the Foundation , and they are the Building ; the Root , and they are the Fruit. The Communications of his Grace , the quickening assistances and influences of his Spirit are imparted to them ; he writes his Law in their Hearts , and causeth them to run in the way of his Commandments ; sanctifies their Natures , pardons their Sins , prevailingly intercedes for them , and prepares them by Grace for Glory : He hath communion with them in his Ordinances , familiarly converseth with them in his Sacraments , and is continually sitting them for that happy Fellowship with Father Son and Holy Spirit which glorified Saints enjoy . While he was on Earth , he selected some few persons , prepared them by Grace for his Society , and then made them his familiar Friends . To them he clearly revealed the Mind and Will of God ; to them he unfolded the Mysteries of his Love , and commands of his Father ; to them he explained what was spoken to others in Parables ; these he blessed with his Heavenly Discourses and Pious Instructions with the special tokens of his Love , and familiar Expressions of his Friendship . Indeed he did entertertain a judas in his Family , but he made a strict Profession as well as the other Disciples , and was not known to be Hypocritical by any but Christ himself ; and had not the wisdom of God designed by his means to bring about the great work of our Redemption , no doubt but this Son of Perdition would have been discarded and disowned . He did indeed eat with Publicans and Sinners , but though for this he was falsely accused as their Friend and Companion , yet he was not so ; he eat with them as their Physician , and not as their Companion ; did not own them for his Friends , but sought by his holy Discourse and obliging Carriage to make them so : And the same Mind ought to be in us that was also in him . 

Though Christianity allows not moroseness and incivility towards others , yet all needless familiarity with Wicked Men is forbidden : Our Eyes ( with David's ) ought to be upon the Faithful in the Land , Psal. 101. 6.  To delight in wicked Company may justly fill us with doubts of our own sincerity ; we may know we are passed from Death to Life , if we love the brethren , 1 John 3. 14.  And we have just reason to fear we are yet in a state of Death if we delight in the Ungodly . Common civilities may be paid to Wicked Men , but special friendship is to be reserved only for those who we hope are the Friends of God. If we love God above all , surely we shall associate most with them that may warm our Hearts , and raise our Affections , and provoke us by their Example to an holy imitation . We ought to imitate the Royal Psalmist , who was a Companion of all them that feared God , Psal. 119. 63.  The Poverty and Meanness of such did not lessen his delight ; he prized a Saint in Rags , beyond a Wicked Man though clothed in Princely Robes , or Imperial Purple . We ought to have a friendly regard to all true Christians ; and though some because of their eminency in Grace , suitableness to our Temper , Neighbourhood , and the like reasons , may be our more intimate Friends : Yet must not we despise any because of their meanness , but as we have opportunity ▪ give them the special tokens of our Friendship too . Vile persons must be contemned , and Scandalous Professors must especially be avoided ; but our intimate Acquaintance ought to be the Servants of God ; and the more Holy any are , the more ambitious should we be of their Friendship and Converse . 

2.  In our hearty Prayers one for another . Christ was very earnest in his Prayers for true Believers ; they were the peculiar objects of his Love , and purchase of his Death , and therefore he prays for them in a peculiar manner : For Peter , he prays for strengthening confirming Grace , Luke 22. 31. and he put up a famous Prayer for his . Disciples , and all that should believe on him , john 17. that they might persevere in the Faith , live in Unity , increase in Grace , and at last be translated to Heaven , and abide with him in Glory . And he hath laid a special Obligation on us to do likewise . Hence in that excellent Form and Directory of Prayer , Mat. 6. 9 he teaches us to say , Our Father , intimating that if we would gain acceptance for ourselves , we must come to God as in union with Christ and his universal Church . Our Prayers must not be only for ourselves , but for the whole Church of God throughout the World ; we must hold Communion with all Christians in Faith and Love , and an holy Profession thereof ; and while absent in Body , must be as present with them in Spirit , and still beg of God for them a freedom from the same Spiritual Evils , and enjoyment of the same Spiritual Privileges we would desire for ourselves . 

If the Psalmist under the old Law prayed for the Peace of jerusalem , Psal. 122. 6. 137. 5 , 6. and makes such solemn Protestations never to forget her ; surely it is our great duty ▪ now the Church is surrounded with Enemies so potent and numerous , never to forget Spiritual Zion , but always be mindful of our jerusalem . If the legal Priests and Watchmen were bound to be God's Remembrancers , and give him no rest till he establish and make jerusalem a Praise in the Earth , Isa. 62. 6 , 7.  then surely it is the duty of Spiritual Watchmen under the Gospel , to put up their Petitions with fervour for the distressed Christian Churches and Servants of God. We ought with the Apostle to give Thanks to God always for all Saints , and make mention of them in our Prayers , Eph. 1. 16.  Be compassionately sensible of all their Troubles , and continually bow our Knees before God , that all his dealings may tend to their good ; that their Lives may be a credit to their Profession ; and that their Faith and Love , and Patience and Humility , and Selfdenial , may be effectual to convince Unbelievers , enlarge the Kingdom of Grace , and add new Inhabitants to the Kingdom of Glory . 

3.  In forgiving one another . Christ so loved us , as to forgive all the injuries and affronts we have offered to him ; pardon of Sin is the great purchase of his Death . And though our Sins be more numerous than the Hairs of our Head , and exceed the Sands of the Sea for Multitude , yet if we sincerely repent of them , we may be assured they shall be forgiven . And as Christ doth thus testify his love to us , so must we testify our love to one another : Have they wronged and injured us ? we must not bear a Spirit of Revenge , but freely forgive them : God will not forgive us except we forgive others , Mat. 6. 11 , 14 , 15.  Where God pardon's any , he gives them a heart to forgive others . That Servant in the Parable was very disingenuous , who when his Lord forgave him Ten Thousand Talents , cast his Fellow Servant into Goal , and would not forgive him an Hundred pence . Mat. 18. 23.  And are not we guilty of the same disingenuity , who when we know what numerous Talents God hath forgiven us , cannot pass by a small injury of our Brother against us ? This act of Christian Love you see is strictly required , and a special degree of it ▪ is due to true Christians above all others . We are bound indeed to forgive Enemies while continuing and remaining such , so far as not to return Evil for Evil , to entertain no revengeful Thoughts , and perform all general Offices of Justice and Charity towards them . But a Friend and true Christian that hath offended us , and returns to his Fidelity , must be forgiven and again treated and entrusted as a Friend , if he gives sufficient Evidences of his Sorrow and Repentance for former Faults : For is he the Friend of God , and shall he be esteemed as our Enemy ? Is God reconciled to him , and shall we still retain our Enmity against him ? Surely if God be his reconciled Father , we ought to be his reconciled brethren also : Accounted him no longer an Enemy , but a Brother beloved , Philem. 16.  

4.  In our Alms and Bounty to the Necessitous . Christ though he himself lived on the Charity of others , and had not a sufficient supply for himself and Disciples , yet we find he did out of that small pittance give something to the Poor ; for in this Chapter judas who was the Steward of Christ's Family , bore the Bag , and was to disburse Money for those uses for which his Lord designed it : When he went out after his receiving the Sop , the Disciples thought he was gone either to buy Provisions for the approaching Passover , or to give something to the Poor , John 13. 29 ; thereby implying it was our Saviour's custom to give to the Poor . And if he thus loved his poor Members , surely we ought to do so likewise : Those who have a fruitless love to others , have but a fruitless Faith to themselves : They who pretend love to their brethren , and yet relieve them not according to their ability , their Professions of Religion are vain : We are bound indeed to supply the Wants of all , even of Strangers and Enemies , according to our ability and opportunities . But to true Christians , we are bound to open our hands more wide , and be more liberal and bountiful : Do good to all , especially to the Household of Faith , Gal. 6. 10.  God hath made us but Stewards of the Earthly Blessings we enjoy , and given us our Stock of Worldly Goods , that we might lay them out on those whom Providence hath made the Objects of our Charity ; he interprets that as done to himself , which is done to his Servants and Christ's distressed Members . Christ is resolved at the day of Judgement to insist on this Duty more than on any other . The true Christian is himself devoted to God , and therefore will devote all he hath to him ; will honour him with his Substance , and the first Fruits of his Increase ; expend the Blessings received , to Cloth , Feed and Supply the Naked , Hungry and Distressed . If God hath entrusted him with many Talents , he will not be so unreasonable as to think he hath therefore liberty given to pamper his Lusts , or gratify his Fleshly Appetite ; but like a Wise Steward will seek out fit Objects for his Charity ; and seeing his Lord Redeemer out of that little which he had , gave to the Poor , will imitate his great Example 3. and because much is given , will be proportionably liberal and bountiful . 

5.  In our Counsels and admonitions : Christ was very frequent and earnest in his pious Counsels and Instructions , he did not only heal the Diseases of men's Bodies , but the chief design of his coming was to free the Sons of Men from all their Spiritual Maladies and Distempers . Throughout his whole Life he was still explaining to Men the whole Will of God , and to his Disciples more plainly than to others , Mat. 13 11.  This evidence of Brotherly Love we ought to give also . 't is not only the duty of Ministers , but of every private Christian in his Station , to counsel and instruct his brethren , to inform the Ignorant , and seek their Conversion ; tell them their duty and danger , and show them how they may flee from the wrath to come . 

And it will be their wisdom and interest thus to win Souls to Christ , and save Sinners from Death and Hell. This must we do to the most vicious as we have opportunity : But as we owe a special degree of Love to Fellow Christians , so we are especially to counsel and admonish them : To advice them in difficulties , explain what they do not understand , endeavour to impart our Light to them , to increase their knowledge , make additions to their Grace , and further their Happiness . He that love's his Brother will seek to help his Ignorance , rectify his Mistakes , free him from Error , and communicate his own Experiences to preserve him from Sin , encourage him in Duty , and make his passage to Heaven more pleasant and delightful . 

6.  In kind and friendly Reproofs . Christ frequently gave this Testimony of his Love to his Disciples , reproved the smallness of their Faith , Pride and Ambition , and unbecoming Passions , and the like Sins . Thus must we also act : Smooth Flattery is an Argument of Hatred , and neglecting Reproofs when necessary is a piece of negative Flattery ; but a smart rebuke is oftentimes a great Argument of Love , Le●it . 19 17.  When therefore we see our Brother erring from his way , we must seek by moderate Reproofs to stir up his dying Graces , and bring him back to his Duty . Here indeed much Christian Prudence and Discretion is necessary : We are too apt to aggravate the failing of others , and extenuate our own far greater offences . Therefore let us be more ready to behold our own stains , than the lesser spots of others , and first cover our own nakedness before we cast the Stones of Reproof at our Brother . Neither must we reprove upon bare Rumours and Suspicions , without certain knowledge of our Brother's offence : This is to shoot the Arrow before we see the mark . If we are not certainly assured either from our own personal Knowledge , or the undoubted Testimony of credible Witnesses , that our Brother is guilty , our reproofs will be but Slanders , and our Charity in offering the Cure will not be half so great as our uncharitableness in believing the Disease . Neither must we reprove sharply for small offences , for every unvoluntary slip and failing : To dip our Reproofs in Gall and Satyr upon every little miscarriage , is a piece of impertinent officiousness , and shows we are very much in Love with the Office. Further , our Reproofs must be seasonable , prov. 15. 23.  When our Brother is most calm and sedate , his Passions hushed and still , and his reason Reseated on the Throne , as Water falling on a red hot Iron only cause's a great deal of noise and disturbance , so Reproofs just upon the very act of Sin , when our Brother's Passions are in disorder , will only cause him to fume and fret the more . Moreover our reproofs must be given in gentle Language , Gal. 6. 1.  Rebukes in reviling words look like the upbraid of an Enemy , and not like the kindness of a displeased Friend . Nay , let not your Reproofs be before others , lest it alienate thy Brother's Heart , and make him suspect 't is hatred and not love that puts thee upon this ungrateful Employment ; but let them be between him and thee alone , with all the secrecy and privacy possible : That he may see 't is thy love that urgeth thee to this Office of Kindness ; and good Men will harken and endeavour to amend whatever is amiss , Psal. 141. 5.  Rebuke a Wise Man and he will love thee , prov. 9 8.  

8.  In dying for one another . The greatest Testimony of Christ's Love was his dying for us , john 15. 13.  Rom. 5. 8.  Hereby perceive we the Love of God , in that he laid down his Life for us , and we ought to lay down our Lives for the brethren , 1 john 3. 16.  If Christ who was so much exalted above us in Glory and Majesty , did lay down his Life for us , much more ought we to die for our brethren , who are of the same mould by Nature , partakers of the same precious Faith by Grace , and heirs of the same Inheritance in Glory . If Christ died for Enemies and Strangers , Slaves to Satan , and Rebels against Heaven , surely we ought not to accounted it hard to die for Friends linked to us by the nearest Bonds of Union , Members of the same Body , and belonging to the same Glorious Head ; seeing Christ did not accounted his Life too dear for us , we ought not to accounted this command an hard saying , or burden too difficult to be born . 

But this Duty is only to be performed when we are specially called to it , and the public good of Christianity requires it ; to lay down our Lives without such a Call is to become Murderers of ourselves , and may be to the wrong , and not the benefit of our brethren : For thereby we are incapacitated from doing them any further service in this World. The great instance wherein we are to lay down our Lives for our brethren is , when we are called to seal the Truth with our Blood. The Glory of God and Spiritual Good of our brethren ought to be so dear to us , that we ought willingly to Sacrifice our Lives , rather than by any base and sinful compliances harden Unbelievers , unsettle weak and wavering Christians , or grieve the Hearts of confirmed Saints . 

3.  Some Practical Improvement . I shall conclude all with a word of Exhortation . 

1.  To my brethren in the Ministry . I have taken upon me the Office of putting you in remembrance of your Duty . 

We all call ourselves the Messengers of Peace , and Ambassadors of the God of Love , and are now come together to testify our Love to one another . Let us now therefore take up an unanimous Resolution , that we will live together as united brethren , and imitate the great Example of our Lord Redeemer , who hath given us our Commission . Let us not be strange or shy , or suspicious one of another ; harbour any envy , ill-will or hard thoughts ; Take up any evil reports , or harken to the Tales of Whisperers and Backbiters , who make it their Business to sow Seeds of Discord among brethren : While we all profess the same Holy Religion , worship God after the same manner , and pursue the same design of winning Souls to Christ ; why should we be angry or displeased , if perhaps we have not the same Sentiments in some lesser Matters of difficulty ; any more than because we are not of the same Age , Stature or Complexion ? Why should we envy one another's Parts , or Gifts , or Success ; Or be offended because perhaps the Assemblies of others may be larger than our own ? It ought to be our Joy if our Lord and Masters Work be carried on by others better than by ourselves ; and we ought to embrace our brethren for their Piety , Warmth and Zeal , and be highly pleased that God makes them Glorious Instruments for the Conversion of Souls . 

The Apostle Paul could say that though some preached Christ out of envy and strife , Phil. 1. 15 , 18. yet Christ was preached , and therein he did rejoice ; yea , and would rejoice : We all preach Christ , and I am persuaded none of us with contentious Spirits : Let us therefore rejoice in one another's success in the Work of the Ministy ; and make it our business to strengthen one another's Hands in the service of our Lord : Let not our Love be Complimental and Ceremonious , but let it be real and hearty , as becomes the Ministers of Christ : Let it be expressed in all the instances forementioned , by the Intimacies of our Friendship , by our earnest and hearty Prayers ; by a readiness to forbear and forgive one another by our kind Counsels and Admonitions , communicating to each other that Light and Knowledge we think we may have gained in the Mysteries of Religion , by our friendly and gentle Reproofs one of another , if there be occasion ; by our hearty faithfulness in informing each other of our faults , and directing how we may best discharge the Work of the Ministry committed to us . These , my brethren , are the great Duties God expects from us ; and the obligations of Christianity forcibly engage us to the performance of them . As we have therefore begun to do thus , let us hold on , that our Union together may be for the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ , and enlargement of the Gospel , and an earnest and happy presage of a yet larger and more extensive Union among all the Faithful Ministers of Christ throughout the Land , and ( if it be Gods will ) throughout the whole Christian World.  

2.  To the people , and indeed to us all in general . Let us all be persuaded to the practice of this Duty . The Plague of Uncharitableness hath dangerously Infected the generality of Christians , and therefore it concerns every Messenger of peace to cry aloud and persuade Men to Love and Union . This was the dying command of our Lord and Saviour , and shall we neglect it ? How can we expect the Legacies and Benefits he hath bequeathed , if we omit the commands he hath given ? That must be a very unnatural Son that despises the last words and commands of his Father pronounced with his dying Breath ; and are not we very unnatural if we neglect the dying Admonitions of our Dear Redeemer ? When Men are just departing out of the World , and ( especially good Men ) they use not to spend their Breath about Trifles , but speak what they apprehend of greatest moment , and what they desire may be more especially regarded . Our Lord Jesus did not trifle with us when he was leaving the World : And therefore seeing this was one of his last Commands , we may be assured he laid great weight upon it , and earnestly desired it might be principally observed by his Followers . Nay , he himself makes it the distinguishing Character of his Disciples whereby they may be known from all the rest of the World. By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples if ye have love one to another , John 13. 35.  Do you therefore show your respect to your Dying Lord , and make it appear to the World that you are his true Disciples by a constant unintermitted Exercise of Love to one another . 

FINIS . 

Books lately Printed for John Dunton . 

Practical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery , in several Sermons , as they were lately preached in a Congregation in London . By Timothy Rogers , M. A. after his Recovery from a Sickness of near two Years continuance . 

— His Treatise Entitled , Early Religion . 

The Vanity of Childhood and Youth . By Daniel William's Minister of the Gospel . 

The Life and Death of the Renowned john Eliot , the first Preacher of the Gospel to the Heathens in America . Written by Mr. Cotton Mather . 

Mr. Barkers Book , Entitled , Flores Intellectuales , or Select Notions , Sentences and Observations . Collected out of several Authors . 

Mr. lees Joy of Faith.  

Casuistical Morning-exercises , the 4 th' Volume . By several Ministers in and about London ; preached in October 1689.  

Books Printed for , and Sold by John Salusbury . 

THE Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits ; fully evinced by unquestionable Histories of Apparitions and Witchcrafts , Operations , Voices , etc.  Proving the Immortality of Souls , etc. By Richard Baxter . 

An end of Doctrinal Controversies , which have lately troubled the Churches by Reconciling Explication , without much Disputing . By Richard Baxter . In Octavo . 

A Rational Defence of Nonconformity : Wherein the Practice of Nonconformists is vindicated from promoting Popery , and ruining the Church ; imputed to them by Dr. Stillingfleet , in his Vnreasonableness of Separation . By Gilbert Rule , Minister of the Gospel . In Quarto . 

The Harmony of the Divine Attributes , in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ. By T. Cruso . In Twelves . 





james 4. 1.  Col. 3. 12 , 13 , 14.  john 13. 36.  Gal. 6. 10.  Heb. 13. 15.  1 Pet. 3. 8.  Mat. 7. 1.  Rom. 14. 4.  james 3. 1.  Exod. 34. 6 , 7.  Eph. 5. 1. 2.  prov. 20. 3.  Psal. 133. 1.  Mat. 12. 26.  Gal. 5. 15.  Phil. 2. 1 , 2.  Jam. 4.  ● . Eph. 4. 3.  Cor. 13. 4 , 5.  Psal. 15. 3.  Rom. 14. 4.  1 Cor. 1. 12. 3. 4.  1 john 4. 7 , 8.  Eph. 5. 1 , 2.  prov. 6. 16 , 19  

Ver. 13 , 14 , 15 , 28.  Ver. 31 , 32.  Psal. 33. 3.  Mat. 26. 29.  Bishop Tillotson's Sermon on this Text.  1 Thes. 4. 9  2 Cor. 8. 8.  Heb. 11. 25 , 26.  Mark 3. 35.  Philem. 9  Col. 1. 4.  1 Pet. 1. 17.  Luke 18. 12.  1 Cor. 1. 10.  Luke . 19 41 , 42.  Eph. 5. 32.  john 15.  ● . joh. 14. 22.  Psal. 15. 4.  1 Cor. 5. 11.  Luk. 17. 3.  Ium . 1. 27.  1 john 3. 17.  Mat. 25 ▪ 34.  prov. 11. 30.  jam. 5. 20.  Mat. 8. 26. 18. 1.  Luke 9 55 , 56.  Bishop Hopkins Serm. on Leu. 19 17.  