Christian good-fellowship : or , love , and good works , held forth in a sermon preached at Michael's Cornhill London , before the gentlemen , natives of Warwickshire , at their feast , November the 30. 1654.  

By Samuel Clarke pastor of the church in Bennet Fink London . 

manus pauperum gazophylacium christi . 

Who so stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor , he also shall cry himself , but shall not be heard . 

prov. 21. 13.  



London , printed for Thomas Underhill at the anchor in Paul's churchyard . 1655.  

To the right worshipful Sir John Burgoin , Sir Richard temple , &c. and to the rest of his dearly beloved countrymen , citizens of London , but born in Warwickshire . 

Sirs , 

When your steward 's made choice of me to this service , i laboured to find out , and pitch upon such a subject , as Might through God's blessing , bring most glory to him , edification to your souls , and advantage to our native country and whereby you Might be minded of the principal ends of your meeting : and as the Lord was pleased to direct me to this ensuing subject , so did he of his infinite mercy appear so far in his own ordinance , that there generally appeared in you a readiness to concur in advancing those good works which were proposed to your Christian considerations : it was intended that after dinner a general subscription should have been promoted amongst you : but by reason of the shortness of time , and multiplicity of other businesses wherewith your stewards were taken up , it was not carried on amongst a fifth part then present : yet was there more done by those few , than hath been done by any one county of England in their late meetings : and amongst the rest of you , Mr. John Howkins ( Whose name i cannot but mention with honour , though he is unknown by face to me ) subscribed four score pounds , towards the placing of poor boys born in Rugbie , apprentices in London . 

its pity so good a foundation should want its superstructure , and therefore at the request of your stewards ( Though i never thought any sermon of mine worthy the press ) i have adventured to publish this , hoping that the same good word of God that so warmed your hearts in hearing , May by the same blessing , revive , and quicken your affections in reading , so as to perfect what was then so well begun amongst you . 

The names of the stewards ( Who are to have the oversight in disposing of your monies ) i thought fit to , set down at the end of this epistle : men , i hope without exceptions , whose prudence , and fidelity you need not to suspect in the ordering of it . Amongst them col. Thomas Clark at the King's head within Algate , is chosen treasurer , to whom if you please to send in what it shall please God to move your hearts to contribute to so good a work , i doubt not but as many shall have the benefit , so your own souls will find the comfort of it hereafter . 

Let not any one say that this sermon Might have been preached in Rome , or Spain where good works are in such request whilst they hope to merit heaven by them . No , it will rather vindicate our doctrine from their fowl , and false aspersions whilst they call us solifidians , and charge us as if we preached only faith , without good works : whereas on the contrary we still call upon our hearers to show their faith by their fruits , and tell them that faith without works is dead , and can minister no true comfort , and therefore exhort them to grow up to fruitfulness which will sweetly seal up their calling to glory , and virtue , as the budding of Aaron's rod did his calling to the priesthood , yea , we tell them , that if they be new creatures , they are create in Christ Jesus unto good works , which God hath before ordained that they should walk in them ; and that if Christ be their redeemer , he hath redeemed them from all iniquity , and purifieth them to himself a peculiar persons , zealous of good works : but i fear to exceed my limits , and therefore my prayer for you all is , that the god of hope will fill you with all joy , and peace in believing : and make all grace abound towards you , that ye always having all sufficiency in all things , May abound to every good work . 

Amen . 

from my study in Thridneedle street . dec. 19 1654.  I rest Sirs yours in the service of your faith , and to further your comfort and joy , Samuel Clark . 

Old stwards . 

Col. tho. Clark treasurer 
Mr. Nicholas Enos . 
Mr. William hickocks . 
Mr. tho. Barnhurst . 
Mr. tho. Ashby . 
Mr. John Norris . 
Mr. edw. Johnson : 
M. tho. underhil . 
New stewards . 

Col. James drax.  
Mr. tho. Hopkins . 
Mr. Laurence Warkman . 
L. col. tho. Randall . 
Mr. rich. Chandler : 
Maior Ralph Tasker . 
Mr. rich. Smith . 
Mr. William Bridges . 
heb. 10. 34.  

let us consider one another , to provoke unto love , and to good works . 

These meetings of countrymen are no new thing , though of late years they have been interrupted by reason of the sad calamities , and distracted times , which our sins had plunged us into . They have formerly , and May again be improved to a twofold benefit , and advantage . 

First , that by acquaintance , and society of countrymen , love Might be bred , nourished , and increased amongst them . 

Secondly , that upon consideration of God's goodness , bounty , and mercy to ourselves here in this city , we May take occasion to remember the place of our nativity , and provoke one another to think upon , and do some good works which May conduce , and tend to the public benefit of the same . Now these being the principal ends of our present meeting , give me leave ( Dear countrymen ) to bespeak you , as our apostle doth his countrymen here in my text . 

let us consider one another to provoke unto love , and to good works . 

But that we May better understand the occasion of these words , we must look back to what went before : and we shall find that the principal scope of the apostle in the former part of this epistle is to prove that Christ by his priestly office , and offering up himself a sacrifice to his father , hath fulfilled , and also abolished all the legal sacrifices ; and purchased eternal redemption for his persons : in the former part of this chapter he sums up this doctrine in few words , and then tells us what sweet use May be made of the same . As first , that therefore we should be constant in the faith of Christ . ver. 23.  let us ( Saith he ) hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering . 2ly . That we should be sincere in mutual love in our private conversing together . ver. 24.  let us consider one another to provoke unto love . 3.  At unity in public church-assemblies . ver. 25.  not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together , as the manner of some is . 4.  Patient under the cross of Christ , from ver. 32. to the end of the chapter . 

verse 22. he had exhorted them to draw near unto God with a true heart in full assurance of faith , and ver. 23.  To adhere unto , and avow the doctrine of Christ , and that in times of trial , and persecution upon this ground , because he is faithful that hath promised , and thereupon in this verse of my text he shows how they May be furthered therein . viz. if they would consider one another to provoke unto love , and to good works . wherein we have . 

1.  The duty pointed out : let us consider one another . 
2.  The end of the duty . to provoke unto love , and to good works . 
Let us consider one another : the words in the original are , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , observemus : let us observe one another ; it doth not barely signify to look into , or consider , sed magno studio mentem in rem intendere . but to bend the mind with the greatest study , and diligence that can be to find out a matter . 

To provoke : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : which word is taken two ways in scripture . 1.  In a bad sense , for a sharp contention : as act. 15. 39 where speaking of the difference which arose between Paul , and Barnabas about taking John mark along with them , the text saith , the contention was so sharp between them , that they departed asunder one from the other . or such a provoking as makes all the body to tremble , or that sets the teeth on edge : of {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} and {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . acetum , vinegar ; but here secondly : it 's used in a good sense for stirring up , or quickening one another to a necessary duty . 

From the context , as this verse looks back to the two and twentieth , we May gather this proposition . 

That there is no true faith which is not accompanied with love , and good works . The apostle James : chap. 2.  Tells us of a twofold faith : a dead faith , and a living faith : a dead faith is that which consists in words and profession only without good works . ver. 14.  what ( Saith he ) doth it profit , my brethren , though a man saith he hath faith ; and hath not works ? Can faith save him ? he means , such a liveless , sapless faith : for ( Saith he ) ver. 17.  faith if it hath not works , is dead being alone : for ( According to the usual maxim ) as faith justifies our persons , so works justify our faith : and Paul writing to Titus , chargeth him to teach this doctrine to his hearers , : this is a faithful saying , and these things i will that thou affirm constantly , that they which have believed in God Might be careful to maintain good works . 

This therefore cashieres from the number of true believers all those rough , and rugged Esau's , who , salamander-like , love to live in the fire of contention , and are never well but when they are embroiled in quarrels . Or that instead of provoking to love , do all that they can to make national , and church divisions by distinctive names , and titles seeking to divide , and subdivide us till they have crumbled us all to pieces . A most diabolical sin , who is the author of division , and among the vulgar is known by his cloven foot : whereas God is the god of peace : Jesus Christ the Prince of peace : the gospel , the gospel of peace : Christ's ministers the ambassadors of peace : and therefore all his persons should cry with David : i am for peace . psal. 120. 7.  

Secondly , all such solifidians , as boast much of their faith , but are not careful to maintain good works . These are barren figtrees that bear fair leaves of profession without any fruit at all : but when Christ shall come with his basket and turn up their fair leaves , and find no fruit , he will set down his basket , and take up his axe : as mat. 3. 10.  now also is the axe laid unto the root of the trees therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit , is hewn : down , and cast into the fire . or else he will curse them for their barrenness , as he did that tree . mar. 11. 14.  no man eat fruit of thee hereafter for ever . 

let us consider one another : hence observe . 

That Christians should with much seriousness , and diligence consider , and acquaint themselves each with other . 

quest . but what is it that they are to observe each in other ? 

Answ.  1.  Their gifts , graces , experiences , and virtues to draw them forth for their mutual benefit . 
2.  Their wants , and weakness to pity , cover , and heal them . 
3.  Their dispositions , and temper , that we May know the better how to deal with them : according to that of jud. verse 22. 23.  of some have compassion , making a difference : and others save with fear , pulling them out of the fire . 


Therefore when we meet together we should not squander away our precious time in frothy , and idle discourses , or in vain , and fruitless impertinences : but according to the apostles counsel here : we should consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works . and this brings me to the principal point , for which i made choice of this text . viz.  

That it 's the duty of all Christians to provoke one another to love , and to good works ; which point you see consists of two branches : first , that we should provoke one another to love ; so did Abraham speaking to Lot . Gen. 13. 8.  let there be no strife i pray thee , between me and thee , and between my herdsmen , and thy herdsmen , for we be brothers . and Joseph speaking to his brethren . gen. 45. 24.  see that ye fall not out by the way . and Peter speaking to all Christians , saith , love the brotherhood . 1 pet. 2. 17.  

quest . What is this love that we must provoke one another to ? 

Answ. it 's a Christian virtue , or grace infused into us by the holy ghost , whereby we sincerely love God for himself , and our brethren for God's sake . I call it a Christian virtue , or grace to distinguish it from the natural affection of love which we bring into the world with us . And from that moral virtue which May be acquired by our own diligence , and industry : whereas this is the work of God's spirit in us , and an evidence of our future salvation . 1 ioh. 3. 14.  for we know that we have passed from death to life , because we love the brethren , & he that loveth not his brother ( With this holy love ) abideth in death . this love you see hath a two fold objection . God , and man : the latter i conceive is principally meant in this text , & therefore i shall speak to that , & it is an uniting , and cementing grace , that solders men's hearts one to another , as Jonathan's to David . 1 sam. 18. 1.  the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David , and he loved him as his own soul . and this is that which the apostle exhorts us to . eph. 4. 2. 4.  — forbearing one another in love , endeavouring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace . and col. 2. 2.  that their hearts Might be comforted being knit together in love . and this is that for which the primitive Christians were so famous . act. 4. 32.  the multitude of them that believed were of one heart , and of one soul , &c.  

quest . What arguments May we use to provoke one another to love ? 

Answ. 1.  propter praeceptum : because of the command of God , and were there no other reason for it , this should be instar omnium , instead of all : because God will have it so : indeed i May say of this as David doth of Goliaths sword . there is none to that : we see how peremptorily our apostle requires it here . provoke unto love , and our saviour Christ is not less urgent . joh. 13. 34.  a new commandment i give unto you , that ye love one another : and this precept he backs with the best precedent : as i have loved you that ye also love one another . and that beloved disciple that seems to be wholly composed of love , doth often inculcate it . 1 ioh. 3. 16.  He would have our love so ardent , as to lay down our lives for the brethren , and ver. 18.  let us not love in word , neither in tongue ( Only ) but in deed and in truth ▪ and ver . 23.  this is his commandment — that we love one another ▪ and chap. 4. 7.  let us love one another : for love is of God , and every one that loves is born of God , and knows God , and verse 11.  if God so loved us , we ought also to love one another . and ver. 12.  if we love one another , God dwelleth in us , and his love is perfected in us : and in diverse other places of his epistles . But to this , diverse other arguments May be added . as 

2.  propter unitatem : because of that unity , and oneness that is amongst us : we are all men ; therefore of the same kind : and the apostle tells us . act. 17. 26. that God hath made of one blood all nations of men , for to dwell on all the face of the earth . yea more : we are all Christians , and therefore should love one another . Yet more : we are all English men , and therefore should love one another . Once again : we are all the same county , Warwickshire men , and therefore should love one another : to all which unities May be added one more , if we are the same in truth , as we are in profession , we are all members of the same mystical body whereof Christ is the head . rom. 12. 5.  we being many , are one body in Christ , and every one members one of another . 

3.  propter bonitatem , & pulchritudinem : because of the goodness , and comeliness of it . Love is an amiable grace , as afterwards i shall show . it 's lovely in the eyes both of God & man : yea , they which want it themselves , yet admire , and love it in others . psa. 133. 1.  David set's an ecce before it . ecce quam bonum , &c. behold how good , and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity . 

4.  propter firmitatem . because it strengthens us against adversaries : the old maxim is , divide , & impera : they are easy to be ridden by every usurper , who are first divided amongst themselves : hence it was that Micypsa lying on his death-bed called all his sons together , and caused them to write this sentence in golden letters . concordiâ parvae res crescunt ; discordiâ magnae dilabuntur : by concord small things are increased , and strengthened : but by discord the greatest are overthrown . 

And you know the story of scillurus , who likewise calling for his eighty sons upon his deathbed , told them that whilst they continue knit together in brotherly love , like a bundle of darts , or sheaf of arrows , they would be altogether invincible , but if once disjoined , or severed by ▪ hatred , they would quickly become a prey to their adversaries . 

5.  propter similitudinem : because of that likeness that is amongst us : and , similitudo gignit amorem : likeness breeds love . We see it in all tame , and profitable creatures , who loving each other in regard of likeness , feed and flock together : similis gaudet simili , like loves his like . And truly we are more brutish than they , if this moves us not to love one another . Indeed it 's the property of wild beasts , as of lions , bears , tigers , &c. to love solitude in howling wildernesses , and to walk abroad alone , and if they meet to intertear one another : but though the great tyrants of the world join house to house , and field to field that they May dwell alone . yet seeing God hath made us sociable creatures , and religion hath made us Christians : let us provoke one another to love . 

6.  propter propinquitatem . because of that near alliance , and kindred that is amongst us : if we be real as well as nominal Christians ? we have all one father : God : one mother : the church : one redeemer : Jesus Christ : one sanctifier : the holy ghost . Are nourished at the same breasts : the sincere milk of God's word : are heirs to the same kingdom . The kingdom of heaven , and are often told by God's word , that we are all brethren . Hence the apostle Peter infers that we should love as brethren . 1 pet. 3. 8.  

7.  Because it is the best ornament that we can put upon us : better than a chain to the neck , or a ring to the finger . Yea , we should clothe ourselves with love as with a garment . col. 3. 14.  above all put on charity , which is the bond of perfectness . but alas ! it 's now almost out of fashion : many talk indeed of love , but show no fruits of it : as some boast of costly garments in their wardrobes , or chests , but wear them not , whereas God hath given us this garment of love to wear ; neither need we fear wearing of it out , as we May other garments : for it 's the better for using , as gold is for rubbing that shines the brighter : yet , as we are not born with clothes on our back , nor with chains about our neck : so neither are we born with this grace of love in our hearts , but are by nature hateful , and hating one another . tit. 3. 3.  

8.  The sacred scriptures heap up many motives to stir us up to love : as 1.  It will prove us to be true disciple of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ , not spurious , nor bastards . ioh. 13. 35.  by this shall all men know that you are my disciple , if ye have love one to another . 2.  It will be a great ornament to our profession , and will beautify the gospel of Jesus Christ : Tertullian tells us , that in his time the mutual love amongst Christians was so eminent , and remarkable , that the heathens taking notice of it , could say , ecce quam invicem se diligunt christiani : behold how loving the Christians are one to another . 3.  It will declare , and demonstrate the truth of our faith . gal. 5. 6  for in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing , nor uncircumcision , but faith which worketh by love . 4.  It shows that we are translated from death to life . 1 ioh. 3. 14. and hereby we May know that we are so . Yea , fifthly , love is the life of God , angels , and heaven : of God , for God is love . 1 John 4. 8.  Of the blessed angels : for there is nothing but love , and concord amongst them . Of heaven : for that will perfect ▪ our love , & put an end to all the differences which are too rife even amongst God's own persons in this world : when holy Grynaeus lay upon his death-bed , he told a friend that came to visit him , that he was going to that place , ubi Luthero cum zuinglio optime ▪ convenit , where Luther , and Zuinglius agreed well , though they could never agree upon earth . 5.  In regard of the eternity of this grace it is that the apostle 1 cor. 13. 8. tells us , that charity never fails ; and in this regard prefers it before faith , and hope . verse 13.  now abides faith , hope , and charity , but the greatest of these is charirity . 6.  it 's a sign we walk by the light of God's word , and spirit . 1 ioh. 2. 10.  he that loveth his brother abideth in the light , and there is no occasion of stumbling in him . 7.  This grace is of God , and showeth that we are born of God . 1 ioh. 4. 7.  let us love one another , for love is of God , and every one that loveth is born of God . 8.  Without this grace of love no duty is accepted though never so difficult , or specious in the eyes of the world ▪ 1 cor. 13. 3.  though i bestow all my goods to feed the poor , and though i give my body to be burned , and have not charity , it profiteth me nothing . 9  Love will draw love from others : cos amoris amor love is the whetstone , or load stone rather of love ; ut ameris ama : if you would be beloved of others , you must love others . Love is a coin that must be returned in its own kind : the excellent properties of it are further set forth by the apostle Paul . 1 cor. 13. 4. 5. &c. charity suffereth long , and is kind , &c.  But we must remember ( As was said before ) that love comes from God , and therefore must be begged of God ▪ 1 ioh. 4. 7.  All these things considered , will furnish you with arguments enough wherewith to provoke both yourselves and one another to love . Especially if on the contrary we do but remember what evils are attributed by the spirit of God to the contrary vice of hatred . 1 ioh. 2. 11.  he that hates his brother is in darkness , and walks in darkness . 1.  John 3. 15.  who soever hateth his brother is a murderer , and we know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him . 1 John 4. 4. 20.  if any man say , i love God and hateth his brother , he is a liar : for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen , how can he love God whom he hath not seen ? and thus i have opened , and proved the first part of my doctrine , i am come now to the second . 

that it 's the duty of all Christians to provoke one another to good works . 

Now in the prosecution of this thesis , or position , we shall dispatch three things . First , to speak something by way of explication . Secondly , by way of confirmation . Thirdly , by way of application . First , for explication , we shall answer several queries . as 

quest . What work May be called good ? 

Answ. there are three ingredients required to make up good works . 

1.  They must be good materialiter , or in the matter of them : they must be such things as are either commanded , or at least approved of by God . Else he will say unto us , who hath required these things at your hands ? there are indeed many actions which glister much in the eyes of the world , and yet are an abomination in the eyes of God . As the popish fastings , pilgrimages , bead-prayers , giving their prayers to God by number , not by weight ; of which i May say as the apostle . col. 2. 23.  which things indeed have a show of wisdom in will-worship , and humility , and neglecting of the body , and yet the Lord abhors them . 

2.  They must be good quoad fontem , they must proceed from a right principle : a good heart , a pure conscience , and faith unfeigned . 1 tim. 1. 5.  now the end of the commandment ( Saith the apostle ) is charity out of a pure heart , &c.  Charity we know is a work commended by God : and yet it 's not accepted except it come from a good fountain , a good heart , and a pure conscience . For the same apostle tells us . tit. 1. 15.  unto the pure all things are pure : but unto them that are defiled , and unbelieving is nothing pure : because their mind , and conscience is defiled . he tells us also , heb. 11. 6. that without faith it is impossible to please God ; and therefore all works , though materially good , if done by unbelievers , they are but splendida peccata , as the father said : but specious and glittering sins . 

3.  They must be good , quoad finem : they must tend to a right end . viz. the glory of God in our own , and the salvation of others . christus opera nostra non tam actibus , quam finibus pensat : saith Zanchy : God doth not so much judhe of , and weigh our works by the actions as by the ends : the want of a right end made Cain's sacrifice , and 〈◊〉 zeal , and the Pharisees fastings , and prayers , and alms abomination to the Lord , who searcheth the heart , and trieth the reins , and knows all our thoughts a far of . We must therefore look well to our end in all our works , and see , that as the sun puts out the light of the fire , so the glory of God puts out all other selfish ends whatsoever . 

quest . But what good works should we provoke one another to upon this occasion . 

Answ. the most seasonable is at this our feast to remember the place of our nativity , the country where we were born , and to do some good for that . I shall humbly propose these good works to your Christian considerations . First , laying down this position : that the chiefest work of mercy is that which tends to the benefiting and enriching of other men's souls : the gospel indeed hath ( Through God's mercy ) been preached , and professed in Warwickshire ever since the first reformation in King Edward the sixth his days of glorious memory , and many blessed martyrs suffered there for the truth under that Marian persecution which followed : as sincere Sanders , gracious glover , and many others . I could also name unto you many famous lights set up in the candlestick of Warwickshire in the reign of our three late sovereigns : besides such as are now there living ; so that that country hath been a Goshen , when many other parts of the nation have been in a Cimmerian , and Egyptian darkness ; yea , give me leave to tell you that which it May be you have not formerly taken notice of , that in Warwickshire about the year of our Lord 1519. the little park by Coventry was perfumed with the odours of six of the saints bodies burned in it upon one day for their profession , and perseverance in the truth : besides diverse others which suffered not long after : so that it appears , that before the name of Luther was heard of in the Christian world , religion was propagated in our native country . yet 

1.  Are there not some blind , and barren places in the same overspread with popery , and profaneness , where the persons perish for lack of knowledge , and that for want of a godly , able , and faithful ministry : and that for want of means to maintain such amongst them ? And May we not some way or other be instrumental this day to help them to the bread of life , where we first drew in our breath of life ? 

2.  Is there not a great want of schools in some parts of the county , whereby the poorer sort of inhabitants , who cannot maintain their children abroad at public schools , are disabled to breed them up in knowledge , and learning as otherwise they Might , and would do ? 

3.  Are there not many widows , and orphans of godly ministers , and Christians , whose husbands , and parents have been ruined , and undone in the late plundering times , ( Warwickshire having born as great a share therein as most counties in England ) and whose present , and pressing necessities cry aloud unto us for relief , and pity ? 

4.  Are there not many hopeful youths whose parents are unable to send , and place them in this city , who Might be far more serviceable to God , and their country , ( As your own experience manifesteth ) and May there not be some stock of monies raised for the taking of , and placing forth such , and when they come out of their time to lend unto them gratis upon good security for a certain time , which Might enable them to live comfortably all their life after ? Christian friends , i take not upon me to prescribe which ▪ or how many of these shall be taken into your consideration : but surely to further such good works will be very acceptable to God , and worthy our present meeting : let us therefore according to the words of my text , provoke one another to love , and to good works . 

Quest . but who are they that must do such good works ? 

Answ. 1.  it 's a duty that most especially is incumbent upon rich men , the scripture everywhere calling upon them to be rich in good works , as 1 tim. 6. 17 , 18.  charge them that are rich in this world that they be not high minded , nor trust in uncertain riches , but in the living God , who giveth us richly all things to enjoy : that they do good , that they be rich in good works , ready to distribute , willing to communicate : for God gives them not riches to hoard up , and to lie by them , but to do good with them : and for this cause there are poor always with us , that rich men Might never want objects of their charity , and liberality , whereas the earth being the Lords , and the fullness thereof , he could make all rich , but he will not do it : as mar. 14. 7.  Our saviour Christ tells us . the poor ye have always with you , and whensoever you will , you May do them good . yea , we must do good unto them , and if we have any love to God , we cannot but express it by showing our love this way to his poor members . For 1 John 3. 17.  who so hath this world's good , and seeth his brother hath need , and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him , how dwelleth the love of God in him ? by which interrogation is employed a more vehement negation : viz. that certainly the love of God dwelleth not in such a man . Yea , the apostle James thundereth against such merciless , and hard-hearted rich men , as are nothing affected with the miseries , and wants of their poor brethren . jam. 2. 13.  he shall have judgement without mercy that showeth no mercy . as we see in the example of the rich man in hell that was denied a drop of water , because he had denied to relieve poor Lazarus : non habuit guttam , quia non dedit micam , saith saint Augustine : he had not a drop of water , because he had denied a crumb of bread . What good then will all your riches do you , whilst gaining the world you lose your own souls ▪ yea , i desire covetous rich men often to read that flaming text . iam. 5. 1 , 2 , 3.  go to now ye rich men , weep , and howl for the miseries which shall come upon you : your riches are corrupted , and your garments motheaten : your gold , and silver is cankered , and the rust of them will be a witness against you , and shall eat your flesh as it were fire , ye have heaped up treasure together for the last days . 

2.  Yet the poorer sort also must give something out of their poverty : for there are none of us here present that are so poor but there are others poorer , and in such a case we must remember the widow . mar. 12. 42.  who cast in two mites , which make a farthing : and see how grateful this was unto Christ , who did not only take notice of it , and commend it to his disciple ; but hath left it upon record to her everlasting credit , that she of her want did cast in all she had , even {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} all her life , or livelihood . How also doth the holy apostle Paul commend the poor Macedonians for their bounty to their poor brethren in Judeah . 2 cor 7. 2 , 3.  that in a great trial of affliction , the abundance of their joy , and their deep poverty , abounded unto the riches of their liberality . For to their power ( i bear record ) and beyond their power they were willing of themselves : where we see their poverty was no hindrance to their liberality towards those that were poorer than themselves : and though such persons have little to give , yet let them give a little of that little , and they shall not lose their reward . mat. 10. 42.  whosoever shall give to drink , to one of these little ones a cup of cold water only , in the name of a disciple , verily i say unto you ( saith Christ ) he shall in no wise lose his reward . ye know how the Lord blessed the poor widow of Sarepta for relieving the prophet Elijah in his wants 1 king. 17. 16.  

3.  But suppose thou hast nothing to give ( Though it can hardly be supposed ) yet look upon the wants of thy native country , and contribute prayers for those that are in misery there . This will cost thee nothing out of thy purse : yea bleed over their necessities , and let the bowels of thy compassion earn over them . et si nihil al•ud habes , da lachrymulam : magnum enlm solatium afflicto est in sericordia : saith Gregory Nazianzen . if thou hast nothing else , give a tribute of tears : for it 's a great comfort for those that are in misery to be commiserated , and pitied : look upon the blind places of the country which are overgrown with popery and profaneness , and do as thy Master Christ commands : mat. 9 37. 38.  the harvest truly is plenteous , but the labourers are few : pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that he will send forth labourers into his harvest . look also upon their bodily wants , and if thou hast not wherewithal to supply them , be active in persuading others to liberality . It was the great commendations of ephrem Syrus , that when he had nothing himself to give to the poor , by his sweet , and attractive sermons , he stirred up the hearts of others to relieve them . The like we read of saint Basil , that in the time of a famine he sold his lands , and all his other goods to relieve the poor , and stirred up other rich merchants by scripture and sweet speeches to contribute to their necessities . 

Thus having answered such objections as Might lie in the way to obstruct , and hinder your bounty , and liberality at this your meeting : i am come in the next place to give you some motives , and arguments why you should take this present opportunity of provoking one another to good works for the public benefit of our country . 

1.  Consider how much it May tend to the advancement of God's glory , when thanksgivings are returned by many unto God in your behalf . The Italians boast that Italy is the garden of the world , and Tuscany the garden of Italy : how much trulier May i say that England is the garden of the world ? For if Italy abounds with superfluities ? I am sure that England much more abounds with all manner of necessaries for the life of man : it being a land ( As Palestine ) flowing with milk and honey , which is the glory of all lands : and wherein God feeds us with the fat of the kidneys of wheat : or if Italy abounds , or exceeds us in temporals ! I am sure England far exceeds in spirituals , being a Goshen , whist the other is an Egypt : a land wherein ( Through God's infinite mercy ) we enjoy the light of the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ , whilst Italy sits in darkness , and in the region , and shadow of death : and as they call Tuscany the garden of Italy , i May call Warwickshire the garden of England , or England epitomised in the woodland , and Fielden parts of it : the one abounding with flourishing , and fruitful pastures , for dairies : the other with rich , and fertile arable land for corn . Yet this garden in some places of it wants weeding , and some tender plants want nourishment , and if God shall please to make you this day instrumental for the promoting of either , or both these works , i May say with the apostle Paul . 2 cor. 9 12.  the administration of this service will not only supply the wants of the saints ; but will be abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God in your behalf : give me leave therefore to bespeak you in the words of Cyprian , ne dormiat in thesauris tuis , quod pauperi prodesse potest : let not that sleep , & rust in thy treasury , which May be profitable to the poor . And again , quod aliquando de necessitate amittendum est , sponte pro divina remuneratione distribuendum est . that which a man must sometime necessarily part with : its wisdom for him to distribute it so , that God May everlastingly reward him . 

2.  Consider how exceeding advantageous your liberality in this kind will be to yourselves , seeing hereby you make God your debtor . pro. 19 17.  he that gives to the poor , dareth to the Lord . yea , faeneratur domino , he lends upon usury , and the Lord binds himself to repay it : and in that text gives him security under his own hand for it . that which he hath given will he repay him again . the Hebrew word implies that he will do it fully , and abundantly : mostly in this world , but infallably in the world to come . 

quest . But how doth the Lord use to repay such mercy , and good works ? 

answ. 1.  With spiritual blessings : those that for conscience sake , and in obedience unto God do such good works , he will make them to abound in every grace . Observe ( I beseech you ) what God by Solomon hath promised . pro. 11. 25.  the liberal soul shall be made fat , and he that watereth , shall be watered also himself . and what the prophet Esay c. 58. 10 , 11.  if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry , and satisfiest the afflicted soul : then shall thy light arise in obscurity , and thy darkness be as the noon day : and the Lord shall guide thee continually , and satisfy thy soul in drought , and make fat thy bones : and thou shall be like a watered garden , like a spring of water whose waters fail not . and what by the prophet David . Psal. 112. 9  he hath dispersed , he hath given to the poor , his righteousness endureth for ever : his horn shall be exalted with honour . 

2.  With variety of temporal blessings : for God usually blesseth such . 

1.  In their outward estate , increasing that . pro. 11. 24.  there is that scattereth , and yet increaseth : and there is that withholdeth more than is meet , but it tendeth to poverty . bounty ( Saith one ) is the most compendious way to plenty ; neither is getting , but giving the best way to thrift . For in works of mercy , and charity , our scattering is increasing , no spending , but a lending , no laying out but a laying up . pro. 11. 24.  The Emperor Tiberius the second , being a valiant , godly , and liberal Prince , the more bountiful that he was to the poor , the more his riches increased ; so that he had such quantities of gold , silver , and precious things as none of his predecessors ever attained the like . I suppose you are not strangers to that story , of a certain godly , and charitable Bishop of Milan , who journeying with his servant , was met by some poor persons that begged an alms of him : the Bishop commanded his man to give them all that little money that he had , which was three crowns : but his servant thinking to be a better husband for his Master , gave them but two crowns , reserving the third for their expenses at night . Soon after certain noble men meeting the Bishop , and knowing him to be a good man , and liberal to the poor , commanded two hundred crowns to be delivered to the Bishop's servant for his Master's use : the man having received the money , run with great joy , and told his Master of it : ah , said the Bishop , what wrong hast thou done both to me , and thyself ? si enim tres dedisses , trecent as accepisses : if thou hadst given those three crowns as i appointed thee , thou shouldst have received three hundred : as Melancthon relates the story . And indeed such openhanded , and openhearted Christians have more then once God's word of promise for such an ample retribution . deut. 15. 7.  if there be among you a poor man of any of thy brethren , thou shalt not harden thy heart , nor shut thy hand from thy poor brother : ver. 8. but shalt open thine hand wide unto him . ver. 10.  thou shalt surely give him , and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou givest unto him : because that for this thing the Lord thy god shall bless thee in all thy works ; and in all that thou puttest thine hand unto . and psal. 41. 2.  The Lord promiseth such a merciful man that he shall be blssed upon the earth : he shall not only have the upper ( As before ) but the nether springs : he shall be blessed with the dew of heaven , and with the fatness of the earth . And psal. 112. 3.  wealth , and riches shall be in his house . and pro. 3 , 9 , 10.  honour the Lord with thy substance , and with the first fruits of all thine increase . So shall thy barns be filled with plenty , and thy presses shall burst out with new wine , 

2.  The Lord hath promised them safety , and protection in perilous , and dangerous times . ps. 41. 1 , 2.  blessed is he that considereth the poor : the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble : the Lord will preserve , and keep him alive , and thou wilt not deliver him unto the will of his enemies . again , isa. 58. 8.  the glory of the Lord shall be his rearward , for his safety , and defence against dangers . Paulinus Bishop of Nola having consumed all his estate , in redeeming poor Christian captives : at length having nothing left , pawned himself for a certain widow's son : but the barbarians ( Moved with his goodness , and charity ) returned him home , and many captives with him freely 

3.  The Lord will support , and comfort such with divine consolations upon their bed of sickness , when all worldly , and creature comforts fail them ; and when such soul-ravishing comforts are more worth than all the world . psa. 41. 3.  the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing , thou wilt make all his bed in his sickness . Ps. 112. 4. unto such there ariseth light in darkness : v. 7.  he shall not be afraid of evil tidings : his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord . yea , see that sweet promise . isa. 58. 9  then shalt thou call and the Lord shall answer ; thou shalt cry , and he shall say , here i am . 

4.  You May hereby make God your debtor at death to send his blessed angels to guard , and transport your souls through the territories , and regions of the Prince of the air into Abraham's bosom . According to the counsel of our saviour Christ . luk. 16. 9  make to yourselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness , that when you fail they May receive you into everlasting habitations . hereby indeed we shall do as the blessed apostle Paul adviseth us . 1 tim. 6. 19  lay up in store for ourselves a good foundation against the time to come that ye May lay hold on eternal life . and for our further encouragement , let us remember what wise Solomon tells us . eccles. 11. 1.  cast thy bread up on the waters : for thou shalt find it after many days . 

5.  Yea , such liberal-hearted persons after death leave a blessed memorial behind them : and Solomon tells us . eccles. 7. 1. that a good name is better than precious ointment : yet that will leave a sweet sent in the room when it is removed : how much more shall the name of such merciful men be continue ? See it in the example of good Obadiah , who took the Lord's prophets , and hide them by fifty in a cave , and fed them with bread and water . How sweet is the memorial of that merciful proselit Cornelius ? whose prayers , and alms as they were had in remembrance before God , so are they recorded in the sacred scriptures to his everlasting commendations . the like May be said of Dorcas , and many others . Our own histories likewise furnish us with plentiful examples of this kind : as of Master Bradford , Georg Wiseheart , Giles of Brussels , doctor Tailor , Master Fox , Master Hooper ; and of later time , the young Lord Harrington , Mr. Wheatley of Banhury , &c.  

6.  Lastly , God is made a debtor to such to bless their posterities after them : to such saith the Lord . is. 58. 12.  they that shall be of thee shall build the old wast places : thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations : and thou shalt be called the repairer of the breach : and psa. 112. 2.  his seed shall be mighty upon earth : the generation of the upright shall be blessed : neither do we want examples of God's faithful performance of this promise : how well did Mephibosheth fare for the mercy which his father Jonathan showed to David ? and what said David to old Barzillai , who had mercifully fed him , and his wearied men when he fled from Absalon ? 2 sam. 19 38.  the King answered , Chimham ( Thy son ) shall go over with me , and i will do to him that which shall seem good unto thee : and whatsoever thou shalt require of me , that will i do . i shall only add one famous example of our own : Queen Ann Bullen , wife to King Henry the eighth , was a very charitable woman , she used to carry a little purse about her for the poor , thinking no day well spent , wherein some had not fared the better at her hand : she also kept her maids , and such as were about her in working , and sowing garments for the poor ; and see how the Lord dealt with her , in her only child our renowned qu.  eliz. whom the Lord wonderfully delivered from death in the reign of her sister qu.  Marry , and after advanced her to the throne , preserved her from the rage of Rome , Spain , and the devil , giving her a long life , and glorious reign to the comfort of her friends , and terror of her enemies . 

And thus i have showed you how by your charity , and liberality you make God your debtor , though , non ex merito , yet ex promisso , not out of merit ( As the Papists teach ) yet by virtue of his promise , which ( We use to say ) is due debt : now i proceed to give you some further motives and arguments to quicken you to this duty . 

3.  We should therefore take the present opportunity of doing some public good for our country , because we know not how little a while we May enjoy our estates : we have of late seen civil war , and plundering times wherein many of plentiful means have been suddenly brought to poverty : and sure i am , that the same sins which brought down those judgements are still common . Yea , i fear , i May truly say , that instead of amendment we wax worse , and worse , and our provocations are greater than formerly : why May we not then expect some sweeping , and desolating judgement to be impendent over our heads ? and should we by a general , or some particular hand of God be emptied of that fullness which we now enjoy , we shall then be disabled to do such good works though we would : but methinks i hear some objecting , and saying , that because we know not how little a while we shall enjoy what we have , it 's therefore good to make much of it whilst we have it , and to lay up against a rainy day ? 

To which i answer , that the spirit of God which is much wiser than we , hath made the contrary inference . eccl. 11. 2.  give a portion to seven , and also to eight , for thou knowest not what evil shall be upon the earth : and the apostle Paul . Gal. 6. 10.  Bids us whilst we have opportunity to do good to all men : but especially to the household offaith . 

4.  it 's the readiest , and surest way to obtain mercy from God in our need , if we carefully , and conscientiously relieve others in their needs : we have Christ's own testimony for this . mat. 5. 7.  blessed are the merciful , for they shall obtain mercy : and the same is largely held forth by the prophet isa. 58. from 7. to 13. as before . 

5.  It will afford much inward peace , and comfort : for as light and influence accompanieth the sun : and as heat goes along with the fire : and as every flower hath its peculiar sweetness : so every good work carries meat in the mouth , comfort in the performance . pro. 21. 15.  its joy to the just to do judgement . the like May be said of works of mercy : it will afford joy to them that do them : whereas cruelty , and unmercifulness shall be a sting in the consciences , and a dagger at the heart of those that are guilty thereof . 

6.  God expects that like the tree of life mentioned . rev. 22. 21. we should bring forth fruit every month . That we should be like the lemon tree that ever and anon sends forth young lemons , so soon as the other fall off through ripeness . Or like the Egyptian figtree , which Solinus speaks of , which beareth fruit seven times in the year . Or , more perennis aquae : like fountains which continually send forth fresh streams of water . But alas ! most Christians on the contrary are like unto the cypress tree that is fair , and tall , but altogether fruitless : or like that figtree mentioned in the parable , luk. 13. 6 , 7.  a certain man ( Said Christ ) had a figtree planted in his vineyard , and he came , and sought fruit thereon but found none . Then said he to the dresser of his vineyard , ( Mark the doom of such ) behold these three years came i seeking fruit on this figtree , and find none ; cut it down : why cumbreth it the ground ? 

7.  Lastly , God will make honourable mention of such merciful , and liberal persons at the day of judgement where your labour of love showed to the poor members of Jesus Christ shall not be forgotten . mat. 25. 34 , 35.  come ye blessed of my father , inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world : for i was an hungered and ye gave me meat : i was therstie and ye gave me drink : i was a stranger , and ye took me in : naked and ye clothed me : i was sick , and ye visited me : i was in prison , and ye came unto me : — verse 40.  in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren , ye have done it unto me . 

Therefore it exhorts us all here present to improve this our meeting , as the apostle adviseth us here , to provoke one another unto love , and to good works . but many think that it will be time enough for them to think of doing good works when they come to make their wills before their death . Truly i will not discourage men from this duty at any time : but give me leave to tell you in the words of a reverend divine : good works ( Saith he ) done at a man's death are like a dark-lanthorn that gives light only to those that come after it : but good works done in a man's life , are like a torch that equally gives light both to those that go before , and to those that follow after it . Yea , defer it not till another year , as some would persuade , for you know not whether ye May live till an other year . Yea , what saith the apostle , i am . 4. 14.  ye know not what shall be on the morrow : for what is your life ? It is even a vapour that appeareth for a little time , and then vanisheth away . 

Take therefore the present opportunity : as Paul exhorts you . gal. 6. 10.  non semper estas erit : summer will not last always : post est occasio calva : a precious opportunity once lost , May never be recovered again . bis dat qui cito dat . he that gives speedily , gives twice . Remember Solomon's advice . pro. 3. 28.  say not to thy neighbour , go , and come again , and to morrow i will give , when thou hast it by thee . remember how grateful a sacrifice it is to God . heb. 13. 16.  to do good and to distribute forget not ; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased . hence Cyprian , qui pauperi eleemosynam dat , deo suavitatis odorem sacrificat , he that give an alms to the poor , offers a sweet smelling sacrifice unto God , and the same father tells us , that dives sine eleemosyna , arich man without alms is one of the great absurdities in the life of man : and saith Gregory Nyssen : there is no excuse for hard-heartedness : for where can a rich man cast his eyes , but he May behold objects for his charity . As the husbandman casts some of his corn into a fruitful soil , whereby in due time he reaps with advantage . So do you with your worldly blessings , sow them in the bowels , and on the backs of your poor countrymen , members of Christ , and in the day of harvest you shall find a great increase . Only by way of caution let me give you this advice : sow not sparingly . For 2 cor. 9 6.  he which soweth sparingly shall reap sparingly ; and he that soweth bountifully ; shall reap bountifully . and pro. 22. 9  he that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed : for he giveth of his bread to the poor . hence eccl. 11. 2.  give a portion to seven , and also to eight , and verse 6.  in the morning sow thy seed , and in the evening withhold not thy hand . but especially remember the words of our saviour Christ . luk. 6. 38.  give and it shall be given unto you , good measure , pressed down , shaken together , and running over shall men give into your bosom ▪ for with the same measure you meet withal , it shall be measured to you again . again give not grudgingly : every man ( Saith the apostle . 2 cor. 9 7.  ) according as he purposeth in his heart , so let him given •ot grudgingly , or ofnecessity : for God loveth a cheerful giver . rom. 12. 8.  he that showeth mercy must do it with cheerfulness . They must be ready to distribute , willing to communicate : and for your further encouragement herein , i am requested to give you notice , that what God shall stir up your hearts to contribute at this time , shall be faithfully employed to good uses by your stewards , who will be accountable to you for the same at the next feast . Consider what hath been spoken , and the Lord stir up your hearts to provoke one another unto love , and to good works . 

Amen . 

Errata 

Pag. 4. l. 34. r. Goliah's for Goliaths . p. 5. l. 14. r. we are all of the same county . p. 8. l. 36. r. judge , for judhe . 

Finis . 





eph. 2. 10.  tit. 2. 14.  rom. 15. 13 , 

doct.  use . doct.  use . doct.  est ignis ab igne spiritus accensus pros.  isa. 5. 8.  aa . 2. 12.  mat. 6. 2. &c.  see my English martyrology . pag. 64.  isa. 58. 10.  see his life in my first part of lives . p. 97.  eodem p. 100  2 cor.  . 7.  see my mirror in charity . paulus diaconus . ps. 112. 6. 9  1 king. 18. 13.  act. 10. 2  act. 9 36.  see my mirror p. 117. etc  see her life in my 2d . part of lives . object . answ.  use . 1 tim. 6. 18  




















