Amorous ORONTUS : OR The Love in Fashion . 

ACTUS I  

SCENA I  

ORONTUS , CLITON . Orontus .  Hast done my Message ? 


Clinton .  Yes , Sir , 


Orontus .  And conveyed 
My Letter to the hands of the fair Maid ? 


Cliton .  To her own , Sir , 


Orontus .  And she , I 'll warrant paused 
Ever she would read the torment's her eyes caused , 
Would have returned it coldly back , — and feigned .... 


Cliton .  Quite contrary , — Without being constrained ; 
Without demurs , or ifs , — or and 's , — or stops , 
She read it thr'ough . 


Orontus .  This was above my hopes ! 
't is more than my fond heart could dare believe ; 
And she scorns not , for aught I can perceive . 


Cliton .  Cupid , with 's keenest Shaft , her heart did hit , 
And you have , this time , more Success then Wit.  


Orontus .  Above expectation ! 


Cliton .  In what you designed , 
You have the Tide both for you , and the Wind : 
You sail in a smooth Sea , and may go far , 
Unless some Rival-pyrare prove a bar . 


Orontus .  thou knowest what Wracks my vessel 's subject to . 


Cliton .  From all poor fears , here 's that will secure you . 


Orontus .  What is 't ? 


Cliton .  Letter for letter , Favour for 
Favour . 


Orontus .  What hath she answered ? 


Cliton .  Yes , Sir , — or 
I 'm much mistaken , — for I long did stay , 
Till this kind Paper brought me glad away . 


Orontus .  Let 's open 't , — all my hopes I here shall see . 
reads a line or two to himself . I wrote in Verse , in Verse she answers me : 
she 's skilled in all perfections the world knows . 


Cliton .  Yes , — Ladies now can do 't in Verse or Prose : 
They handle any good — thing well of late ; 
So great perfection's in our Female state . 


Orontus reads the Letter . In barture of your Love , which you do prize so high 
Orontus , you have dared presume to ask me mine ; 
Thomas I sometimes admit of Love , indeed , yet I 
Mean it shall cost me naught , else I should soon decline . 
To give you heart for heart , such an exchange would be , 
no merit ever durst aspire so high before : 
You proffer homage here , ' cause you my worth do see : 
And I your service own , — Why should you whine for more ? 
I shall not value yours , at any higher rate . 
Can it be justly thought , your Love should be more great ; 
then let us cast account exact without deceit , 
That neither be Trapand and after , cry , — a Cheat ! 
If those heart-renting sighs , which you do breathe so oft , 
Do flatter you with hopes , I shall your Suit approve ; 
Believe me , when I say , my breast is not so soft ; 
Nor does a thousand sighs weigh one poor grain of Love.  
However let us try , — put your sighs in one scale , 
And in the other lay , the honour of my Chains , 
Swear to abide the teste , — if my weights chance to fail , 
I 'll add my heart thereto , and ease you of your pains . 
DOROTHEA . 

Her Answer is as subtle as 't is witty ; 
Such superficial arrogancy's pretty . 
This charming pride of her affected stile , 
Throws as strong Chains upon me , as her smile . 


Cliton .  Your Song was shrill , the Echo answers loud . 


Orontus .  Nor is it strange to me , that she seems proud : 
't is like to like , my Letter boasted mine ; 
And she in here's , makes her own Merits shine . 


Cliton .  Strange , or not strange , y' are paid in your own Art  


Orontus .  It was the surest way to take my heart . 
Presumption , in a Woman that begins . 
To wield Love's Sceptre , best her Subjects wins : 
It speaks her power and grandeur , puts her Worth 
Upon its Throne ; sets all her Glories forth : 
Teaching us , we must humbly wait below , 
And ever a favour she on us bestow , 
By fair degrees of service , we should strive 
Unto some height of Merit to arrive . 
So 't is no fault ; brave Spirits count it none ; 
Or else they find it a most pleasing one . 
My humour 's such , that as I had before 
Prized myself much , I 'd have her prise her more . 
I like they should , in a slight fashion 
Look coily in Our newborn passion ; 
An show us 't is no easy task to win 
The Fort , nor should One summons let us in : 
Those that meet no resistance on one part , 
Not bravely gain , but poorly beg a heart ; 
And she whose easiness takes up no shield , 
Rather to pity does , then merit yield . 
I scorn so tame a purchase , — for in short 
There most I love , where I have paid most for 't . 
All cheap Commodities I still despise . 


Cliton .  Strange Trader in these Love-commodities ! 
But Flora , — what of her ? 


Orontus .  she 's ill attended , 
Her froward humour hath her Reign soon ended . 


Cliton .  And yet , Sir , you love to be roughly used ? 


Orontus .  Yes , — but provided I be not abused , 
no Rival set above me ; — Or if she 
Seem scornful , let her scorn still noble be : 
Let her reproach my want of worth or fame , 
So to increase , not quench the growing flame . 
But Dorothea , though a while she may 
Dissemble openly , — Her heart does say 
In secret , — I do love : — Though she deny 
It to the world ; 't is woman's policy 
To appear nice . — So though she 'll not avow 
Her heart submits , I 'm sure she love's me now . 
The title of invincible's laid down ; 
I measure her thoughts as I do my own . 


Cliton .  no doubt , you think so , — You have Faith good store , 
And thanks to heaven ! one excellent Virtue more ! 
You stoop at all Game . 


Orontus .  ay ! 


Cliton .  Yes , you , — pray be 
Not Angry , for all this I know and see : 
And is not this a Prize of great regard , 
Part of One heart amongst a thousand shared ? 


Orontus .  Nay , — that 's to many . 


Cliton .  Reckon , — let me see . 


Orontus .  Why , then i'faith , i  this day loved — but three — 
And of those three , that thou may'st be disproven , 
This being loveliest , Now — is only loved . 


Cliton .  If so , Nay then her fortune 's very fair : 
But three , — and — 


Orontus .  Peace ! — I spy Erastes there 


Cliton .  Something of moment leads him here apace . 


ACT. I SCEN. II  

ORONTUS . ERASTES , CLITON . Orontus .  Friend , I read Joy upon your tell-tale face . 


Erastes .  there 's much more in my heart , i  got the day 
Of a stern beauty ; after much delay , 
And fierce repulses , my most faithful flame 
Will crown me with her happy Bridegroom's name . 


Orontus .  What , have you loved and kept the fire so hid ? 


Erastes .  Discretion does discoveries forbid . 


Orontus .  Yet , friendship somewhat claims . 


Erastes .  't is very true , 
It does , and warrants this address to you , 
Whereby I shall this mystery unlock , 
And give you the full knowledge , ere you knock 
At my heart's closet . — Know , the Lady , then , 
Whose love makes me the happiest of men : 
This morning as a favour sent to me 
A Letter , — which , although it dubiously 
Does seem to speak , — Yet nothing lesle than Love 
could dictate it , or her acquaint Pen thus move , 
For she that writes in such a pleasant stile 
Is yielding , — though she parley yet a while . 


Orontus .  So that your courtship shall its ends acquire ? 


Erastes .  Let me obtain of you but one desire , 
And it completes my Wishes . 


Orontus .  Sir , to doubt 
My readiness would wrong me . 


Erastes .  Hear me out . 
This Embassie unanswered yet , — and will 
Without assistance be unanswered still : 
't is written in drolling Verse , and such a strain 
As does surpass the reach of my weak brain . 
Pray write it for me . 


Orontus .  Sir , — my former care 
In often serving you , shall make me spare 
All compliment : — I never could deny 
To do a friend so slight a courtesy . 
I 'll do 't , and try my skill in Poetry . 


Erastes .  This speaks you noble , and obliges me . 
Adieu . 


Exit . ACT. I SCEN. III  

ORONTUS . CLITON . Cliton .  A Fine request , i'faith I say . 


Orontus .  Next this , — may I not hope himself , one day 
Will come and court me , to make Love for him ? 
OH , What a brave condition am I in ! 
Have I not reason confident to be 
Of my own Suit , when such crave help of me 
To write Epistles : — What thinkst thou of it ? 


Cliton .  Why , Sir , I think , if it be want of Wit 
In him to ask , 't is worse in you to do . 


Orontus .  thou speakest freely . 


Cliton .  Shall I tell you true , 
Now I perceive how wildly you engaged 
Your Talents for another , I 'm enraged . 
— When near some Beauty , I oft hear you swear 
Your heart 's possessed only by her , — though there 
Are forty more , have more room there then she 
Whom you court only for Variety ; 
Meaning with Compliment her Wit to prove , 
Or rather show your own Wit , in the Love 
You do but feign for pastime . — Here , now I 
Your Lies approve , cause for yourself you lie . 
This I'm content with . — But when there 's no end 
Except the feeble interest of a friend , 
That you should lie for them ! — as if before 
You had not sins enough upon your score ! 
For to say truth , how can you know his heart 
That never knew your Own ? — Yet on his part 
you 'll write he love's , — are you sure this is truth ? 
May he not feign ? — Yet you 'll swear for this Youth . 


Orontus .  I might have waved it very easily , 
And any else had been denied ; — But I 
Knowing him Lucia's brother , One o' th' three 
who 's almost equal Beauties tempted me : 
And also knowing , he a neighbour dwells 
Near Dorothea , who somewhat excels 
At present , ' cause most kind , — could not refuse 
Him , whom sometimes as Brother , I may use , 
Sometimes as Neighbour . 


Cliton .  This was well fore-seen , 
And a far off ! 


Orontus .  The dullest souls have been , 
Sometimes most useful : — And 't was this indeed 
Made me so soon resolve to help his need . 
— But , — whilst I talk , my Task I quite forget ; 
— Come , — let 's examine how she does him treat . 


Cliton .  Perhaps she jeers him . 


Orontus .  I dare swear't almost 
Or if she soothes him 't wil be to his cost . 


He opens the Letter Erastes left with him and reads . In barture of your Love , which you do prize so high 
Erastes you have dared presume to ask me mine ; 
Sometimes I may admit of Love indeed , yet I 
Mean it shall cost me naught , — else I should soon decline . 
To give you heart ..... 


He takes out his own Letter and confronts with this which Erastes left . Have I took one for tother ? 
Cliton .  Yes , sure , — for Twins are not more like each other . 


Orontus .  Ne'er did my Optics meet the like surprise ; 
't is word for word the same , if I have eyes . 
— Nay , — having well examined , — Now I see 
If mine 's th' Original , this must Copy be : 
Both writ by the same hand i'faith .... 


Cliton .  And troth , 
She finds one block doth fit the heads of both ; 
no matter though ; Your Dorothea may 
Dissemble , — well guessed , — Yet her Heart does say 
In secret , ( as this plainly now does prove ) 
ORONTUS IS THE ONLY SPARK I LOVE . 
The Pride of her affected Lines , — you know , — 
Was the best snare to catch your Heart , — for though , 
She seemed to Drole with Love in a New style , 
It was true Love did Dictate all the while . 
O! — Might I laugh before my Master now ? 


Orontus .  Do , I 'll not hinder — prithee laugh on — do , 
Laugh loud , — I 'll laugh myself , — and never be sad . 


Cliton .  off with your Vizard , — why , it makes me mad 
For your sake ; — And can you set this good face 
On such ill luck ! Curse her ! for in this case , 
Constraint will sorrow swell . — Oh! 't is most rare ; 
Good lord , Sir , — how contented you still are ! 
A subtle Wooer , Fox-like's full of Wyles : 
But she is subtler far , that him beguiles . 
no Wit to Woman's , — Where you thought to take , 
yourself beguiled . — This were enough to make 
One hang himself , 


Orontus .  't is somewhat odd , — and I 
Confess a Puny , might sigh dolefully ; 
then thump his breast , void of experience ; 
Accuse his squinting Planets influence ▪ 
But , ay , who understand the ways of Love , 
Such trivial chances never shall me move . 
If every object please , — What loss is One ? 
I 'm ne'er enslaved , my heart still keeps its own ; 
To give or take , — To gain or else to lose , 
Prepared ; — then at the least Repulse I choose 
A new ; — Nay whatsoever I proclaim 
To them , I still am Master of my flame . 
Thus diverse objects every day does bring 
Fresh satisfaction to my Mind , — The thing 
I solely aim at . — And let none explode 
Me for 't , though it seem strange , — 't is a la mode ▪ 


Cliton .  Preserve this humour , you may need it still . 


Orontus .  My crosses never sunk deeper , nor ever william 
If one prove false , — mothers Love is sure : 
And I for every grief do find a eure , 
Hence comes the gain to have Mistresses in store . 


Cliton .  Hylas , when living understood not more . 


Orontus .  His Fancy , though differed from mine , for I 
Love where I 'm loved without inconstancy : 
But if their lightness make them in the end 
Love change , — In troth , — I 'm so much my own friend ▪ 
I dare not harbour trouble in my breast ; 
But , without whining , keep my heart at rest , 
By filling up , the vacant place again , 
With new ones , — So 't is all one , shine or Rain . 


Cliton .  Your heart at this rate yields a good Rent , Sir , 


Orontus .  It does , — Now Luce has half , — i  given 't her : 
And such as 't is , there 's many envy me . 


Cliton .  But why divided ; good Sir , let it be 
Entirely hers , — Or give her no room there , 
Lest she neglect your flame too , — for I fear 
This Madam Lucia , though as yet she smile , 
May like the other in the end beguile . 


Orontus .  I have no cause to doubt this should prove so ; 
Lucia did still with judgement act , you know . 
Her conduct's regular ; she 's Modest , Wise , 
Above the fears of paltry jealousies . 
I only find in her one grand default . 


Cliton .  What is 't ? 


Orontus .  Why , she love's Me , more than she ought . 


Cliton .  A grand default indeed ! 


Orontus .  't is I declare , 
For Lovers quarrels ever Lovely are : 
't is pleasing when the object we do love 
Seems to suspect our Vows , our faith to prove : 
By this our interest is more fortified , 
love 's born a new , when newly justified : 
So that whatever Storms such doubts can breed , 
The Calme's more sweet , when Pardon does succeed . 
And then , fresh Favours meeting in the close , 
Needs must th' accused gain , more than he can lose : 
But where a Lovers Wishes glutted are , 
no Peace is made , ' cause there was never War. 
A dull and sated Lover , life's at 's ease , 
Serves but by habit , takes no thought to please ; 
Keeps the old Road , — but strives for nothing new , 
't is ever — You love me , And I love you . 
Who would not hate that gross and vulgar Trade ? 


Cliton .  Rare are the Observations you have made ; 
You studied this Point well it does appear , 


ACT. I SCEN. IU.  

ORONTUS , FLORAME , CLITON . Florame .  Friend , I am happy thus to find you here , 
I sought you all about , 


Orontus .  What would Florame ? 


Florame .  Tell you the Secret of my Amorous flame . 


Orontus .  Some Love intrigue ? 


Florame .  It is so , — I am now 
Destined to Marriage by a Father's Vow ; 
And though he found me irresolved to this , 
In secret it by him concluded is . 
The party 's Gallant , — of a Noble Strain ; 
But , — Oh! another in my Soul doth Reign . 
And whatsoever obstacles arise , 
My heart 's not mine , but while 't is Lucia's prize . 


Orontus .  Lucia's ? 


Florame .  there 's reason why you should admire . 


Cliton .  ( aside . there 's my brave Gallant out o' th' Pan i' th' Fire . 


Florame .  The old contest which from her brother parts 
My company , might well divide our hearts . 
But all such slight impediments are vain , 
T' oppose his Laws , who is sole Sovereign . 
Love by his Tyranny subdues us still , 
Summon we yield ; Obey , ask what he will : 
Who as he list , though blind and young , yet knows 
When , and to whom our Hearts he will dispose . 
Thus spite of interest , Love my hate dismissed , 
Nor can I longer Lucias charms resist : 
Thomas , to attain unto my wished End , 
Time is my greatest hope , and surest friend . 


Orontus .  That may alone her brothers hate subdue ; 
Time stranger things effects . 


Florame .  it 's very true , 
I do expect that Miracle from it . 
In the mean while , this Night the time is set 
By Lucia's Maid , who at my Rendez-vous , 
Upon a sign , let 's me into their house : 
Where , by her sweet converse , she 'll bless my flame . 
But , since the place suspicious is , — I came 
To beg your company , — Say ? shall I speed ? 


Orontus .  You shall , — I never failed a friend at need . 


Florame .  At your own home I 'll call . 


Exit . ACT. I SCEN. v.  

ORONTUS . CLITON . Cliton .  she 's Modest , Wise , 
Above the fears of petty jealousies : 
Her Conduct's regular ; and bating this 
Grand fault , That she too much your Lover is ; 
she 's exquisite in other Qualities . 


Orontus .  Now you 'll repeat twenty new fooleries , 


Cliton .  None other ever her esteem could get . 
Say , now , Sir , Does it make you stark Mad yet ? 


Orontus .  What ? 


Cliton .  So disguised , Sir , will you ever be ? 
y' are Mad , I say , Or else the Dev'l take me : 
Not Mad , and lose two Loves both in one Day ? 


Orontus .  This only sets me a New Game to play : 
And soon as ever Lucia or Doll , I see . 


Cliton .  What you 'll speak to'um . 


Orontus .  Yes , infallibly : 
I long to meet'um , — then will I set forth 
My Passion to the height of Zeal and Worth : 
First , shall my Sighs begin to charm their Ears ▪ 
And if they fruitless prove , — I 'll use my Tears : 
Ten thousand Sobs , next , shall them entertain ; 
Yet all this while , my Heart shall feel , no pain : 
Last , Death I 'll summon too , for my redress ; 
Yet , Joy to see another them possess . 


Cliton .  Thomas ever with you , y' are above my ken . 


Orontus .  Patience a while , thou 'lt know me fully then . 
In th' interim , this place is not so ill , 
But I know where to play my Rest on still . 


Cliton .  And you think some will hear , and yet give ease ? 


Orontus .  Yes , Cliton , with much gladness , when I please . 
Last night a certain Brown-lass took my Eye , 
And was the object of my Gallantry 
For a long space , whilst we walked in the cool 
Shade of St. James' , where so much a Fool 
I was to proffer her my Diamond Ring : 
My new Acquaintance soon accepts the thing : 
Thomas all , I from this Beauty could command 
then , — Was to wait her home , and kiss her Hand . 


Cliton .  And you went in ? 


Orontus .  no , — she for reasons , then 
forbid , — but , bid me this day come again . 
It satisfied me , I her house did know ; 
Now she expects my Visit , and I 'll go : 
She might unkindly take it , should I miss . 
follow , — this Turning brings us where it is . 


Cliton .  Ever you go further , One word , good Sir , yet . 
she 's blithe ? 


Orontus .  Yes , wonderful 


Cliton .  And called ? 


Orontus .  Lyset . 


Cliton .  March off , march off , your Visits at an end . 


Orontus .  Rascal ..... 


Cliton .  March off , I pray ; None can pretend : 
None has to do with her . 


Orontus .  Why ? 


Cliton .  Sir , I know . 


Orontus .  She promised me this day ..... 


Cliton .  'T was craft , if so ▪ 


Orontus .  You know her well , then ? 


Cliton .  Yes , too well for me , 
She is my Mistress , Sir , she is my Shee . 


Orontus .  She has a Lady's Dress , and Garb.  


Cliton .  TO my sorrow 
Her pride confounds all I can beg , steal , borrow ; 
And having found my Purse now ebbed too low , 
To serve a Lady , she this day did go . 


Orontus .  What Lady ? 


Cliton .  This night , Sir , she will me tell . 
Mean time , — changing your Course you would do well : 
For if your hopes are all on Lyset placed , 
Indeed 't will prove , labour in vain , at last . 
Your heart being vacant , therefore , you may hire 
It out again , to she , shall first inquire . 


Orontus .  Spite of the fatal shock , thy news does bring , 
Soon shalt thou see 't , well furnished again . 


Cliton .  A thousand new ones , may solicite-yee , 
But who believsed not , shall not damned be . 
Pray vaunt not ▪ though , your great skill any more ; 
This morn , you had three Mistresses in store ; 
The 〈…〉 seemed engrossed by you alone ; 
A 〈…〉 all are gone ! 



Orontus .  〈…〉 Judgement on appearance give . 


Cliton .  Sir , you do well , yet upon hopes to live : 
Troubles are light to those thereon can feed . 


Orontus .  'T were ill done to reject hope in my need , 
Since to regain the two first , — happily , 
Suspicion does combine with Jealousy : 
And to bring Lyset to my Lure , — This Spell 
Of Gold and sparkling Jewels promise well . 
These oft work Wonders , more than you expect . 
— But — stay , — Eraste's Letter I neglect . 
I must go home and write . — Come . 


Cliton .  Now I say , 
If I know aught , you 'll vanquish every way . 


Orontus .  Let Time work out my Ends , — swear not at all ; 
Expect the Issue , 't is the End Crowns all . 


The End of the First ACT.  

ACTUS II  

SCENA I  

FLORAME , LUCIA , LYCUS . Florame .  Meet my respects with so severe an Eye ? 


Lucia .  To you Florame , 't is due severitye . 


Florame .  When will you treat with more compassion ? 


Lucia .  When you cease offering me , what 's not your own . 


Florame .  My Love-sick-heart gains little , all this while . 


Lucia .  I 'll not enrich myself with others spoil . 


Florame .  How shamefully you do my Faith suspect . 


Lucia .  Inconstant men , no better can expect . 


Florame .  What , have I dared some other Face adore ? 


Lucia .  It is not fit that I should tell you more . 
Thomas indiscreet our Sex esteemed be , 
Florame , I promised strict secrecy . 


Florame .  Some person near you does me an ill turn , 
But all is vain against me , — still I burn 
For you , Dear Lucia , heaven 's my Witness , I , .... 


Lucia .  When I require , yourself then justify . 
Pray leave me now , for many eyes do see 
Us here , and that may much discredit me . 
more talk at present in this place may prove 
Loss to my Honour , no gain to your Love.  


Florame .  This coyness quells my Joys , and makes me griever . 
Yet I obey , — but , What must I believe ? 


Lucia .  That I not cruel am , but still preserve 
As much esteem for you , as you deserve . 


Florame .  To this esteem add but some Love withal . 


Lucia .  Pretend to others right were criminal ; 
I told you that before . 


Florame .  Would you speak clear ...... 


Lucia .  I do believe this may obscure appear : 
But if your soul herein its troubles find , 
Consult but Dorothea to ease your mind , 
She knows the Mystery , — Adieu . Exit . 


ACT. II SCEN. II  

FLORAME , LYCUS . Florame .  all 's lost ! 
Whence knows she this intended Match , that crossed 
My will so much , though by a Father pressed ? 


Lycus .  Is aught so secret , it may not be guessed ? 
It may be Dorothea brags through pride . 


Florame .  no , she the issue dreads too , on her side : 
For if the troubles on her face speak true , 
Not Love , but duty makes her yield thereto . 


Lycus .  What are your hopes , Sir , then ? 


Florame .  Love still , and die , 
Rather than Change shall slain my constancy . 
My mournful Story yet may Lucia move . 


Lycus .  True , — But — Where can you meet to tell your love , 
And not be spied ? Her Brother and you are 
At enmity , so that must be a bar 
To keep you from the house ; And should you meet , 
Guided by Love , at Church , or in the Street , 
The many Witnesses at th'interview , 
Would scarce oblige her to hear all from you , 


Florame .  All this I know , too well , and 't is my grief : 
Nor is it thus , I do expect relief . 
Who can presume , since this Denial , she 
Would openly give willing ear to me . 
But , with great Presents , I her woman late 
Have bribed , who now is my confederate , 
And this night , th'rough a back door brings me , where 
I 'll hast my Triumph , or my Doom to hear . 
There in my Transports , at her feet , I 'll lie , 
And beg her Sentence , Or to live , or die 
So this night Love , or Hate shall me befriend , 
If Love , it ends my griefs ; Hate — life shall end . 


Lucia .  But , — should your two hearts join to one intent , 
How can you hope Erastes shall consent ? 


Florame .  Those petty Quarrels , haste does oft engage 
Us in , — are best made up by Marriage . 
Lycus , if I could bring it but so near ? 


Lycus .  But — then again ...... 


Florame .  thou But'st it every where . 
Allow some hopes , at least , with all thy talk . 
Stay , — Who leads yonder Lady down this Walk ? 
it 's Dorothea ! Gods ! let 's steal aside . 


ACT. II SCEN. III  

DOROTHEA , LYSET . Dorothea .  This pleasant Walk shows Nature in her Pride . 


Lyset .  About this time the Gentry use to appear . 


Dorothea .  This is their Rendez-vous , they all flock here ; 
Especially those Gallants , who each night 
In telling their Amours take great delight ▪ 
Which is to say , Lyset , so many Lies . 


Lyset .  Indeed , I think , th' are most but Rallaries , 


Dorothea .  True , — Here they come , and their Love-tales relate ; 
And I , like others , come to hear'um prate : 
But , — So deceitful they are , 't is Love's disease ! 
Yet we must quit the World , or strive to please . 
For Beauty a sad Ornament would prove , 
Did it not others charm , and gain their love . 
The sweetest Features which a face adorn 
Without this quality , life's but forlorn : 
Like hidden Treasures , they for nothing serve , 
While Miser-like , the rich , they pine and starve . 
I have my Method , and I like it well , 
I study to please all , if possible ; 
Endeavour by all means so fair to be 
That they may like me well , and tell it me . 
Those prccious quality's I little prize , 
Whose hidden Luster dazzles not all Eyes . 
Not , that I am so easy to be won ; 
Whining never moves me to soft passion . 
Affected sadness is a fruitless art ; 
Their sighs do much more cool , then warm my heart 
My Courage , Prompted by our Sex's Pride , 
Makes me maintain th' advantage on Our side 
By my imperious carriage , and some Scorn ; 
For knowing We to give men Laws were born , 
I make those feel the weight that wear my Chain ▪ 
Imposing on them , as their Sovereign . 
Or if their griefs I flatter , — I near stoop , 
But make them court long for a little Hope ; 
And that 's the grand reward they gain at last , 
For all their Passion , and their Service past . 


Lyset .  Strange kind of Method this must surely prove ? 


Dorothea   't is now in use , and as we ought to Love. 
If we bend never so little we expose 
Our hearts to the proud Triumph of our Foes . 
A flattered Lover swelled with Victory , 
Blots all Submission out of Memory : 
To keep him still our slave , he must be crossed , 
And frowned upon , — These Fetters off , he 's lost ! 


Lyset .  And with such Empire you rest satisfied ? 


Dorothea .  I shall confess , — what yet some shame would hide . 
But since one day gains thee so much good will , 
Hear all discreetly , — but be secret still . 


Lyset .  If one day be too short my Faith to try , 
more time shall make good my fidelity , 
And show your secrets safe with me remain . 


Dorothea .  then know — That men are now become so vain , 
That for this Month , — nay more I might have said , 
Hardly three Lovers have me Homage paid . 
Of these , The one woos me to be his Wife ; 
Which I so fear , it makes me hate my life ; 
My Father for Florame , consent would get ; 
The man I prise for wealth , for Mien , for Wit : 
But whatsoever Plea's Hymen can bring , 
I dread that Slave , that should become my King ! 
Next , — there 's Erastes a brave Gallant , whom I 
Think for a need , for constancy would die . 
But , — he so out of Mode and Courtship is , 
He may compare with any Amadis . 
't is true , — since that , Orontu's late defeat 
Makes his low Triumph up , he 's so complete . 


Lyset .  That Blade your servant ? 


Dorothea .  Is he known to thee ? 


Lyset .  i  heard him praised . 


Dorothea .  O! how he pleases me ! 
An Air so noble , Garb so full of state ; 
So gay a Humour , never importunate . 
His Voice so charming , his Converse so rare , 
Speaking so well , yet Writing better far . 
His glory all to his own Virtue owes , 
Knows his great Worth , not proud of what he knows . 
Somewhat for him I feel , — more than I 'll tell , 
And would he still sigh for me it were well . 
Although I dearly love to keep my heart , 
I might at length resolve with it to part . 
From whence , judge what condition I am in . 


Lyset .  showing the two Letters . One of these Tickets , came not then from him ? 
Since you neglect to read it all this while . 


Dorothea .  Give me'um , Lyset , and prepare to smile . 
( Which just delivered as from home I came 
I had not time till now to read the same . ) 
And though Orontus is concerned i' th' jest , 
It well deserves our laughter , I protest . 
He and Eraste's here send their Loves ; — And troth 
't is the same Letter they do Answer both . 


Lyset .  How ? 


Dorothea .  't is an accident may breed delight . 
This morning I did to Orontus Write ; 
When finding it would fit the other , — strait 
( Glad to oblige him at so cheap a rate . ) 
I did Transcribe it , without more ado , 
And so dispatched him with that Copy too . 
What Answer , now , his slender Wit does give 
I long to read . 
She breaks open Eraste's Letter . Ha! Verses , as I live ! 
I knew not he could Rhyme . 


Lyset .  Some end 's of Plays . 
Or Leaves dropped from old Poets withered Bays . 
Wherewith each youngster now does Deck his head ; 
To be on all occasions furnished . 


Dorothea .  ( reads . Transparent Beauty , whose most open Heart ! 

that 's such a conjuring Phrase it makes me start ! 
Your Soul unto the bottom makes me see . 

't is well begun , — Ridiculous Poetry . 
But leave that there , — The other I 'll peruse ; 
Orontus , Answers with a smother Muse , 
And I dare wager , ever I look there-on 
Each Line will claim our Admiration . 
How different from that his style will be ? 


Lyset .  How well this thought of his Transparancy ? 


Dorothea .  reads Orontus Letter . Transparent Beauty . 


Lyset .  then 't is good and new , 
If wise Orontus use Transparent too . 


Dorothea .  ( reads . Whose open heart ▪ 
Ha! what have I got here ! 
This speaks the same ! 


Lyset .  I think 't will so appear . 


Dorothea .  no matter , I 'll see all ; let us compare ; 
Read you Eraste's , this will show what they are . 


Lyset .  reads the Letter . Transparent Beauty , whose most open heart 
The bottom of your Soul does make me see , 
Now I confess , of me you have the start , 
Since in your breast my Heart life's doubtfully . 
I thought it should have found its Palace there , 
Where you did mean to treat it as your King ; 
But I have mourned , sobbed , sighed , dropped many a Tear , 
And still have languished without profiting . 
Yet will I not accounted at all with you , 
What you propound will be but to your shame : 
Should you for every sigh , and shower that 's due , 
Stand debtor , it the Reckoning would inflame . 
My doleful Sighs do ever make you smile . 
Thomas like a Tempest in my breast they throng : 
Your Heart my weights disdains ; take heed the while , 
Light as they are , th' outweigh not yours ever long . 




Dorothea .  This was designed , — it does appear , too plain ; 
And 't is Orontus only laid this Train . 
Erastes is too dull . 


Lyset .  I 'm of that mind : 
But , now what difference of style d' ye find ? 


Dorothea .  Well , this same day without much more ado● — 
But , Gods ! — My Fathers here ! 


Lyset .  Orontus too , 
With him . 


Dorothea .  He knows thee not , — then prithee stay , 
Whilst I aloof watch till he goes away ; 
then when the old man going hence you see , 
Speak to Orontus , that he stay for me . 


Lyset .  pulling her Hood over her face . She leaves me here a pretty Part to Act.  


ACT. II SCEN. IU  

ARGANTE , ORONTUS . LYSET . Argante .  IN fine , i  passed my word for the Contract ▪ 
With Dorothea ; and by Hymen she 
Must to another's Will subjected be . 
In th' interim , it seems , you love her well , 
And near my House oft stand as Sentinel : 
A neighbour notes it , and does seem to scoff 
At your vain Love , — Pray therefore break short off . 
The honour had been mine , if you , dear friend . 
My son had proved ; but now , you can't pretend . 


Orontus .  If by your house I every day appear , 
A hundred others I oft speak wit 〈…〉 ere 
Of Love , and they are no mean Beauties , too . 
But to explain ..... 


Argante .  I know they talk how you 
Love Lucia still , our neighbour ; but since we 
So tender of our Credit ought to be , 
Pray do not force me , Sir , against my choice ▪ 
By such deportment to make further noise . 
Only forbearing eight days to appear , 
Would stifle all the Whispers you bred here . 
Adieu , — Pray study to give this content . Exit . 


Orontus .  A fair Remonstrance , and to good intent . 
How many Visions , does that age attend ? 


ACT II SCEN. v.  

ORONTUS , LYSET . Lyset .  Ssst Ss st ... 
My Cavalier , turn this way friend . 


Orontus .  Who calls me ? 


Lyset .  Sir , 't is I , — do you not see ? 


Orontus .  An Envious Cloud eclipses you from me . 
This Hood to me , does a strange torment prove ; 
Should we Act thus ? We , who each other Love ? 


Lyset .  A pretty Compliment , and shows much wit ; 
We Love each other then ? 


Orontus .  no doubt of it . 


Lyset .  Well , I believe 't for once , — since you say so , — 
And sure our equal Merits bred it ; — Thomas — 
Till now I ignorant hereof did live . 


Orontus .  Nay I myself this scarcely yet perceive . 
But Love's Almighty Power , as 't is said , 
Ever we can think on 't , does our hearts invade . 
And grant this Maxim true , you must allow 't , 
We may each other Love , Yet hardly know 't . 


Lyset .  You never want a paint to make all fair : 
But ever this time I knew , Sir , what you were ; 
And how your best Affection most times is 
Subject to caution ; — But to clear all this , 
am I deceived ? 


She turns up her Hood . Orontus .  Is 't thou ? ah ! sweet Surprise ! 
Lyset , how Heaven does this day bless my Eyes ! 
To meet thee I esteem such bliss , — that — 


Lyset .  ..... soft . 
I know what fuel heats your breast too oft : 
Hear but my hasty Message , ever you stir ? 


Orontus .  A Message , and from whom ? 


Lyset .  Your Mistrist ▪ Sir.  


Orontus .  't is then from thee ▪ 


Lyset .  that 's good , — but I must tell 
How Dorothea . — 


Orontus .  OH , I know 't full well . 


Lyset .  Permit . — 


Orontus .  no , no , your cause of plaint I see , 
You think her Beauty only Captives i ; 
But ne'er alarm thyself , nor credit it . 
I value lesle her Beauty , than her Wit. 
Her counterfeited Graces lesle than these , 
Whilst thou art worth fifty such Dorothoe's . 


Lyset .  You think to jeer me thus , — but really , 
I 'm worth another , that 's lesle worth than I 


Orontus .  Thy Eyes have gained such power on me this day , 
That — 


Lyset .  I believe , yet more than you would say . 
And will not now dissemble , you shall see 't . 
For though some Features here may seem lesle sweet : 
Yet , hath my face enough to breed delight , 
And more inclines to tempt , then to affright . 
This Air , nor Port is like a Common Clown : 
And I 'm like some body , when my Hood's down . 
Look ! 


She spies Cliton coming and pulls her Hood over her Face . Orontus .  Thy gay humour makes thy Face more fair . 


ACT. II SCEN. VI  

ORONTUS , LYSET , CLITON . Cliton .  ( aside . Is 't not my Master with my Gossip there ? 


Lyset .  ( aside . What will he say , if Cliton know 't is I ? 


Cliton .  ( aside . He shall let go his Prize , or tell me why . 


To Orontus .  Quick , Sir , Quick , Quick , — lord , I am out of breath . 


Orontus .  What ailst ? 


Cliton .  Sir , they are gone into the field of death . 


Orontus .  Who ? 


Cliton .  They will fight unless your succour come . 


Orontus .  What are they ? 


Cliton .  Florame and Erast . — 


Orontus .  I run . 
A Moment brings me back . 


Cliton , to Lyset .  — Gipsy ! must you , 
Because new clothed , play with these Feathers too ? 


He points to Orontus . Orontus .  Come , Cliton , come , their steps let 's follow . 


Cliton .  — Sir , 
One is enough . — 


Orontus .  Come ! 


Cliton .  Not I , — I 'll not stir . 
Should we be forced to draw . 


Orontus .  Rogue , — must I drive ? 


Cliton , to Lyset .  You scape it fair , I 'll teach you how to live . 


Exit ambo . Lyset .  His anger he will hardly long refrain . 
But , — where 's my Mistress , she comes not again ? 
I 'll seek her out , and know what stops her there . Exit . 


ACT. II SCEN. VII . 

Dorothea .  Enters from the other side of the Theatre , her Hood down . Neither Orontns nor Lyset appear ? 
What strange capricious Fate guide's me this day ? 
A Father frights me hence , — Who , when away , 
By some mistake , I cannot apprehend . 
Orontus , he , vouchsafes not to attend . 
— But he returns . 


ACT. II SCEN. VIII . 

ORONTUS . DOROTHEA , CLITON . 

Orontus .  Rascal , if ever again . 


Cliton .  But , Sir , if Lucia . — 


Orontus .  But 's , and ifs , are vain . 


Cliton .  What then ? could I think that you could divine 
she 'd this night see ye at Window , — by a sign ? 
And if I had not thus alarmed you , what — 


Orontus   And why not stay ? 


Cliton .  So I might have forgot : 
You know my memory 's short , and will forgive . 


Orontus .  Peace ! , — stay you there . 


Cliton .  ( aside . May I these eyes believe ? 
The Slut yet waits him ? shall I suffer all ! 


Orontus , to Dorothea .  Excuse that heat , which you blind Zeal might call . 
The Alarm was false , — And I return once more 
To swear I die for you , — whom I adore , 
To tell you Dorothea needs must be 
An object of disdain , whilst I know Thee : 
For she 's so dull a Beauty , I scarce come 
Into her sight , but I am like to swoon . 


Cliton .  ( aside . The devil a word before me , she can find ! 


Orontus .  This severe silence shows you too unkind : 
And without much more cruelty beside , 
You cannot still your Beauteous Face thus hide . 
Should my weak eyes grow dazzled with the light , 
I must . — 


She lists up her Hood . Dorothea .  Take heed you faint not at the sight ! 


Orontus .  Madam , is 't you ? 


Dorothea .  became your Hate you said . 


Cliton .  Ha! — Ha! — Why , Lyset's Metamorphosed ! 


Orontus .  Heaven knows . — 


Dorothea .  It knows , but what it ought to know ; 
I see , but what I thought to see ; — And so 
You now appear , but what you should appear , 
A gross Deceiver , such I find you here . 
This at your birth , your Sex by oath , doth seal . 


Orontus .  I from your Judgement justly might appeal : 
But if sometimes , th' effects belie our hearts ; 
Frequenting much your Schools we learn those arts . 


Dorothea .  Should I relate ; or weigh your lightness well . 


Orontus .  Perhaps , some truth's we might each other tell : 
But I 'll never mind what anger now brings forth : 
You know what such a man as I am worth , 
Speak not of hate , nor lightness , — wave self-ends ; 
Let 's quit each other , and become good friends . 


Dorothea .  Shall I forget so soon your late affront ? 


Orontus .  You run the hazard else , to lose more on 't . 
Should you refuse 't agree , — I 'll tell thee plain , 
It would be hard to woo me back again . 


Dorothea .  'T were fit , indeed , that I should satisfy . 


Orontus .  When I do proffer Peace thus handsomely . 


Dorothea .  My anger justly does revenge pursue . 


Orontus .  I have some reason to complain of you . 


Dorothea .  Yes , witness what your late Discourse did say . 


Orontus .  And witness also what you wrote to day . 


Dorothea .  You thought to Court another to my shame . 


Orontus .  You , with your double Letter mocked my flame . 


Dorothea .  Do not object , that harmless Plot , whereby 
I of your weakness made discovery : 
Believing that betwixt Erast and you , 
Nothing was hid ; I tried and found it true : 
Whose vanity , and poor injustice did 
Bring that to light , which else , had yet lyen hid . 


Orontus .  And I , even now , did rude disdain express , 
Not but I knew to whom I made address : 
But purposely dissembling , lay at watch , 
To show you oft Deceivers meet their match : 
And that if you the Trappan did intend , 
I would be sure to fit you in the end . 


Dorothea .  th' Excuse is cold enough . 


Orontus .  Examine yours . 


Dorothea .  But your late carriage your great Crime assures . 
Which Lovers Laws call Treason ' 'gainst their State ; 
So that your guilt deserves no more debate . 
To satisfy my Honour 't shall suffice , 
I banish you both from my Heart and Eyes ; 
And yet am milder than those Laws were meant . 


Orontus .  We shall resolve upon this banishment . 
— But , — by so great a Subjects loss we may 
Foretell , your Empire quickly will decay . 


Dorothea .  I 'll raised again , take you no care for us . 


Orontus .  't is but your interest makes me speak thus . 
In fine , I love you , and have no desire 
But to obey your will , till I expire . 


Dorothea .  Who shall secure this ? 


Orontus .  You , if you will hear . 


Dorothea .  Let 's know then wherefore you so scornful were ? 


Orontus .  Our Innocence is never so manifest 
As — 


Dorothea .  This night , at my house , I 'll hear the rest : 
And to confirm your fair intents , — expect 
Your due submission joined with true respect . Exit . 
Adieu . 


Orontus .  This strange retreat does much surprise , 


Cliton .  Upon the point to yield , away she fly's : 
Believing it were better stay till night . 
— But , — I begin to find what caused her flight ; 
Eraste's coming hither , driven her hence . 


ACT. II SCEN. IX . 

ORONTUS , ERASTES , CLITON . Erastes , to Orontus .  Friend , may I speak to you with confidence ? 


Orontus .  You know me . 


Erastes .  I have partly likewise known 
Florame is late a secret Lover grown : 
And I , for weighty reasons , fain would come 
To find the object of his Martyrdom . 
Now , since to watch him still , might trouble breed , 
Do not refuse assistance at my need . 
He haunts , and Love's you , and can never hide 
That long from you , which is his joy and pride : 
Pray , in my favour , seek to dive into 't . 


Orontus .  I 'll go , just now , and try if I can do 't . 


Erastes .  Adieu , — I 'll leave you then . Exit . 


ACT II SCEN. X.  

ORONTUS . CLITON . Cliton .  Is 't your Will , Sir , 
He know , Florame's Lucia's Idolater ? 


Orontus .  no , — but to meet Florame , — fright him , — and say 
Her Brother knows , he burns for Lucia . 
— This night , — thou sayest , Fair Lucia does expect 
My coming ; Now , if she through fear , suspect 
Erastes watch's him , — Keeping away , 
I shall have freedom what I please to say . 


Cliton .  But tother Rendez-vous , — How goes that on ? 
For Dorothea looks . — 


Orontus .  Let me alone 
And , Cliton , thou shalt find things ordered so , 
Had I a hundred , — I through all would go . 


Exeunt . The End of the Second ACT.  

ACTUS III  

SCENA I  

ORONTUS , CLITON . Orontus .  Not one word now , — What Melancholly's this 
lock 's up thy folly , which so pleasing is ? 
I hear thee sigh , and oft bemoan thee , too . 


Cliton .  Ah! Sir , — why am I not content like you ? 


Orontus .  Truly , — being freed from waiting on Florame , 
Who dares not go , where summoned by his flame ? 
I 'm very well content , my fortune 's such . 


Cliton .  I wish that I could likewise say as much . 
But , — a strange Malady does me attaque . 


Orontus .  What is 't ? 


Cliton .  My honour 's Hypocondriaque . 
And this so much the more torment's my heart , 
' cause few to Cure our Honour have the Art  


Orontus .  That I believe ; — But say , Where didst it get ? 
Art angry , ' cause thou seest me serve Lyset ? 


Cliton .  Not because you serve her , I 'll tell ye true ; 
But I 'm displeased more , because she serves you . 


Orontus .  Fool , dost not thou , thy own advantage see ? 
Whilst she receives homage thus from me , 
Her Merits in an higher Orb do move , 
My Passion more enobling thy mean Love.  


Cliton .  that 's it , — I fear , — lest by your courtship — ay — 
Receive my Patent of Nobility ! 
i  no ambition for it ; — I confess , — 
I should do well without such Nobleness . 


Orontus .  So great a Favour , you but ill repay . 


Cliton .  You do for me , much more , than I do pray . 


Orontus .  Go , never grieve thyself , ever a Week's spent , 
Perhaps , I may leave her , to thy content : 
That time may Wonders work , to satiate Me , 
And then I 'll prove no obstacle to Thee , 


Cliton .  Mean while , — to oblige me , till that happy day 
You will my Sove Ennoble , Sir , you say . 
I shall be much engaged . 


Orontus .  more than I 'll tell . 


Cliton ,  The favour will deserve the Chronicle . 


Orontus .  Cliton , I 'll tell thee , without Raillery , 
Lyset has Charms would tempt the chastest Eye ; 
Whose Beauty I above all else prefer , 
She having all , a heart can wish , in her : 
So that believe me , I deal modestly , 
To borrow her , only eight days of Thee . 


Cliton .  Since you such treasures find there , if you will 
But give me double wages , keep her still . 
As well , I 'm quite disgusted with her now : 
And you have puffed her so with Pride , — I vow 
Out of mere Scorn , the Baggage , when I came , 
Forgot , or would not tell , her Mistress name ▪ 


Orontus .  Villain , how dar'st thou so profane to be , 
As to mis-name who 's Worshipped by me ? 


Cliton .  Pardon me Sir ; — But though such honour's due 
To this new Saint , thus famed for — blessing you . 
And though at such a height she now doth stand , 
I must not speak , but with my Cap in hand : 
— If in some House alone , we chance to meet , 
Or Fortune lead me to her in the street , 
May , I not then — with all humility , 
And those respects due to her quality , 
As a return of thanks , for what I hear , 
Give her in Love , one or two Cuffs o' th' Ear ? 


Orontus .  Consult with Reason , then — what that says , choose . 
— But , here 's the place of my two Rendez-vous . 
And , if I am not much deceived , — See there ! 
Lucia does at her Window now appear . 
Oh! how she pleases me ! 


Cliton .  But — Lyset more ? 


Orontus .  Not for the present . 


Cliton .  Wondering I 'll give o'er ! 
Why — butfair Dorothea ? 


Orontus .  Lesle than she . 


Cliton .  then cannot I guests , what your heart can be . 
Just now . — 


Orontus .  't is thus , — I love for Recreation , 
And seldom feed on bare Imagination . 
The greatest Beauty , be it never so bright , 
Tempts me no more , as soon as out of sight ; 
A thousand lovely Charms , may wound me , — when , 
In thirty paces all is healed again . 
The present Beauty , though inferior far , 
Makes me forget the Sun , to adore a Star : 
And since what ever object does me move , 
Is loved by me , only out of self-love ; 
It leaves my heart to all Impressions free , 
And she still fairest seems , whom last I see . 


Cliton .  then Lyset ceasing in your Eve to appear ? 


Orontus .  The next I meet , — will please me more — I 'll swear . 
But I must go , and with an Amorous Tone , 
Tell Lucia that my heart love's her alone . 


Cliton .  But whilst you tune your Tongue to speak her fair , 
Do you remember that you Jealous were ? 


Orontus .  thou mak'st me timely recollect my part . 
I'so shape my speech with a Complainants' art . 


ACT. III SCEN. II  

ORONTUS , LUCIA , CLITON . Orontns .  calling up to Lucia at the Window . Are you there Madam ? 


Lucia .  Is 't Orontus ? 


Orontus .  — I 
Who should reproach your Infidelity , 
Did I not think you were so just withal 
Net to condemn , were I not criminal . 


Lucia .  Orontus , this Alarm , shows very ill . 
Can I betray you ? — I not love you still ? 


Orontus .  Oh! do not think that I shall dare complain : 
My Tongue shall with respect its griefs refrain ! 
And though , that must increase my sufferings too , 
Yet they are welcome , ' cause they come from you . 
I gloried to possess your Heart ; — but then 
Not being worthy , — you resumeed again . 
Now from your Mouth the Sentence I would hear , 
And sacrifice what I do hold most dear . 
Happy , — if ill Success no crime you deem , 
And ▪ though I loose your Love , keep your Esteem 


Lucia .  What kill Accents do your Lips express ! 
Raving of Crimes , and of Unhappiness ! 
Oh! do not hold me longer in suspense ; 
But pray , unfold this Riddles dubious sense . 
And that your Moans , may Cause or Colour show , 
Declare this guilt , and this Misfortune too . 


Orontus .  A Rival's entertained in secret , Lo 
that 's my Mishap , — my Crime I do not know 
Yet I must say , — since you love him , and hate 
Me , — I'm as Guilty as Unfortunate : 
For to suspect you of injustice , I 
So heinous hold , I should deserve to die . 
Oh! lay the cause , then , of your Change on me 
Which must bejust , though I no reason see . 


Lucia .  This strange Reproach puts me into a maze . — 


Orontus .  Ah! why should Misery meet such delays ! 
Torments are but increased , that are deferred . 
Say , then , a Nobler Rival is preferred ; 
That my Defects adds glory to his name , 
That his bright Lustre , dims my dying flame . 
That to inform me of this choice , you here 
For the last time summon me to appear : 
While , afterwards , to end this Amorous strife , 
In absence , I must linger out my life . 
't is too severe , will Lovesick Judges say , 
Yet , though I perish Lucia , I 'll obey : 
With so much care , that my sad presence sha' 
Never mind you of your first-faith's Funeral 


To Cliton , aside .  Did I Act well my Part ? 


Cliton .  Rarely , indeed ! 
you 'd make a acquaint Comedian for a need . 


Lucia .  This Story so confounds me , to say true , 
I scarce have Reason left to answer you . 
Nor can I pled my Faith to justify , 
Which you accuse , but nothing specify : 
— Yet , if I freely may declare my sense , 
Your grief Orontus speaks such Eloquence 
That I believe it lesle ; — how ever it hit , 
A Real grief , than wantonness of Wit. 
A Lover , who with real sorrow 's struck , 
Uses no Rhet'rique but a Dying Look . 
Waves all fine words , no Advocate will Fee , 
Only deep Sighs whispers his Misery . 
Yet , if you know , I thus ungrateful prove , 
Name me this Rival that usurps your love ? 
Leave nothing to Evince my breach of Faith : 
Declare what Favours he received hath . 


Orontus .  Those bosom Secrets , long may keep at home 
If they must be concealed till Florame come . 
Who , though he fond hug his passion , 
This night will fail your assignation . 
Some Remora , unlooked for , keeps him hence ; 
To morrow , you may know the consequence . 


Lucia .  So , so , 't is this begets your Jealousy , 
Florame was this night to have met with me ? 


Orontus .  he 's ravished with the Joy he feels within ! 


Lucia .  You heard this from himself , — no doubt ? 


Orontus .  — From him : 
But , ah ! — how far would your blind Rigour go ? 
Must I have seen your Heart yield to my Foe ? 
Was 't not enough to satiate him with bliss ; 
But to Damn me , too , I must witness this ? 


Lucia .  Since your Suspicions have no Wyles refused . 
You little merit to be disabused . 
And any other , after so great wrong . — 
( Softly . But — stay — I see a Man sure come along , 
I 'll change my Note , for 't is my Brother's come . 
( aloud , to Orontus . My Brother is not here , Sir , he 's from home . 
Nor do I know exactly , to say right 
At what time he 's used to return at Night . 
't is often late , — Wherever he does go . 
Adieu . 


She shuts the Window . Orontus .  What Counter-talk ? 


Cliton .  't is pleasant — though . 


Orontus .  The more I study , lesle I apprehend . 


Cliton .  y' are crafty , — yet still overreached i' th' end . 
They find you but dissemble — and so forth . 
And here they plant ye , just for what y' are worth . 


Orontus .  Peace ! here comes one . 


ACT. III SCEN. III  

ORONTUS , FLORAME , CLITON . Cliton .  who 's there . 


Florame .  — Orontus' Friend 
Florame . 


Orontus .  The worse for me , ill luck attend . 
What make you here , — had we not late agreed 
That — 


Florame .  't is but Curiosity , indeed . 
A certain Fancy guided me this way , 
Without design to speak with Lucia . 
— But , — sure , I heard some one bid you adieu . 


Orontus .  Yes . 


Florame .  What design makes me , here meet with you 
Thus late . 


Orontus .  My great desire to meet Eraste 
And ease your Mind , transported me with haste , 
Being confident , how ever he doubts your Love , 
A little talk , would all his Fears remove . 
But this my diligence is fruitless grown , 
His Sister telling me , he 's still in Town . 


Florame .  Do not deny I Love , — there 's ways enough , 


Orontus .  What ? 


Florame .  I am thinking . 


Orontus , to Cliton aside .  Cliton , there 's it now ! 
Lucia Love's Florame , and t' avoid being caught 
She spying him , feigned , I her Brother sought . 
Inconstant Sex , — Who can rely on such ? 


Cliton .  The best of them , indeed , are not worth much . 


Florame .  To fix his thought 's some other way , — I 'll choose 
Rather fair Dorothea's Name to use ▪ 
Tell him , 't is Love ofher feeds my desire . 


Orontus .  What can that do ? 


Florame .  Much , if he should inquire . 
He may discover , how I ought to Wed — 


Orontus .  — Her , — is 't she 's destined to your Nuptial Bed ? 


Florame .  The same . — Now judge , if this be not the way . 


Orontus .  Friend , they from Lucia's can hear all we say : 
Let 's go from hence , I 'll speak my Mind elsewhere . 


Cliton , to Orontns apart .  you 'll miss your second Rendez-vous — ay fear , 
Think on it , Sir.  


Orontus .  Take you no care thereof , 
Ever I go twenty steps , I 'll shake him off . Exeunt . 


ACT III SCEN. IU  

DOROTHEA , LYSET . Dorothea .  This must discover , — be he false , or true . 
But , — how — he stay 's 


Lyset .  The Door stands open too , 
And from above , the Light will guide his Eye . 
Do you believe he 'll come , or else pass by ? 


Dorothea .  If he want Innocence to pled his Cause , 
He may — 


Lyset .  If Mute , then he 's condemned by th' Laws . 
H 'as too much Wit to vows Apologie . 


Dorothea .  What said he , Lyset , — When he talked with thee ? 


Lyset .  For you he languished , and for you did look : 
And , I believe he wilfully mistake . 
What do you think ? 


Dorothea .  I know no more than you . 
But — he 's excusable if he spoke true . 
If he played false , — 't was managed with such Wit , 
That I do long to see th' Event of it . 
In th' interim , not knowing what will be , 
My heart affects only Neutrality . 
— But the Door creaks . 


Lyset .  Orontus , — Never fear ▪ 


Dorothea ▪   Shut the Door after him , that none may hear . 


Lyset .  To see me with her , will his thoughts perplex . 


ACT III SCEN. v.  

DOROTHEA , ERASTES , LYSET . Erastes .  Madam , The greatest glory of your Sex — 


Dorothea .  What brings you hither with so bold a Face . 


Lyset .  ( aside . here 's work indeed ! — a wrong man takes his place ! 


Erastes .  Finding the Door not shut , you talking by , 
At that sweet Voice , Love lent me wings to fly . 


Dorothea .  We wait my Father's coming home , — and see 
You haste away , or else you Ruin me : 
he 's hard by , — pray be gone . 


Erastes .  My Joy , — and Sorrow ! 
Alas — 


Dorothea .  O! Keep alas , Sir ▪ for to Morrow . 


Erastes .  What! — no compassion ? 


Dorothea .  Yes , — towards myself , 
My Honour else is wracked upon this Shelf . 
Time presses , — go , go forth pray , — 't is my will 
Sure , you were born to persecute me still ! 
Will you for ever gaze , — and not reply ? 


Erastes .  O! Spell my Sighs , — and read my weeping Eye ! 


Dorothea .  't is not the season now to count your tears 
When pity has resigned my heart to fears . 
Pray , Sir , haste forth ▪ — look warily before — 
But 't is too late , — ah ! me ! he 's at the Door 
He Knocks , where will ye go ? — there 's no way forth . 


Erastes .  I 'm ready , if you please , to meet his wrath . 


Dorothea .  Rather a thousand times . — 


Lyset .  To prevent all 
I 'll lead him to the Garden , th'rough the Hall. 
There he 's secure . Exeunt . 


Dorothea .  th' advice is good I 'll swear . 
Go , — open as you pass . 


ACT. III SCEN. VI  

ORONTUS , DOROTHEA . Orontus .  to Cliton within . Cliton , stay there . 
Orontus Enters , leaving Cliton at the door . What , — is all vanished ? this seems strange to me , 
I heard much noise , — yet can no body see ! 
To use me thus , is ill , I tell you true , 
I neither came to scare , — nor hinder you . 


Dorothea .  Surely   taken me to task , this day . 


Orontus .  no , — but free humours hate such boe-peep play . 
And 't is my trouble , that with so much care 
You should disguise yourself from what you are . 
What ever Gallant 't is , — let him come forth : 
My Passion dares all Eyes , to try its worth . 
Nor shall my Zeal wax lesle on such a score , 
I love a Mistress , all men do adore . 
And I had little hopes in this Essay , 
Should I not court you , now , in your own way . 
Variety the Heaven of your bliss ; 
then must I cherish what your Humour is . 
Did I oppose the Freedom you like best , 
That were to seek mine , not your Interest : 
And would pervert the noblest ends of Love ; 
Instead of Subject , I should Tyrant prove . 


Dorothea .  A neat evasion , made to this intent , 
By taxing me , to show you innocent . 
This is smart Policy , — worthy your fame . 


Orontus .  So mild a Censure , cannot be your shame . 


Dorothea .  This good opinion of me 's noble too . 


Orontus .  I find you act , but as you ought to do . 
The best of Men have not a hope so vain , 
Ever to confine you in a shorter Chain ; 
They , from all parts in throngs to you do press , 
Whilst you alone share out their happiness . 
Were not this glory then , diminished , 
Should you heap all these Favours on One head ? 
So great a Treasure , such a plenteous Feast , 
Was never , sure , meant for one Miser guest . 
For , though , I do adore , what is so rare , . 
And favour crave , — yet not above my share . 
I 'll not aspire , ( though in your flames I burn ) 
TO enjoy you solely , — I 'll but take my turn . 


Dorothea .  What means all this , speak plain and tell me true ? 


Orontus .  That here , — some secret Rival courted you . 
And if you further conference desire , 
I would not hinder , — but shall soon retire . 


Dorothea .  This weak suspicion is the Child of fear . 
That any other . — 


Orontus .  i  a faithful Ear , 
That perfectly discerneth every Voice . 
If. — 


Dorothea .  't is most like , — this time was a fit choice , 
And you no promise had to day before ? 


Orontus .  Oh! you have Wit can go th'rough this and more . 
Who with one Letter answer 's too , — Allows 
One nights enough to exalt as many vow 's . 


Dorothea .  Your false conjectures , then , are raised from thence . 


Orontus .  no , no , I speak on clearer Evidence . 
Knocking at Door , — some noise made me begin 
To doubt whether 't might please , should I come in : 
Some I heard walk and speak , and midst the noise , 
Unless I 'm much deceived , I heard a voice 
Say , There he 's come , What shall we do with this ! 
Yet , I 'll believe but what your pleasure is . 


Dorothea .  This I should never endeavour to confute , 
Did it not stick some shame on my Repute ; 
But really to undeceive you , know 
That having bid my Woman wait below , 
Whilst I above stood as my Father's spy . — 


Lyset Enters .  But here she comes will clear the Mystery . 


ACT. III SCEN. VII . 

ORONTUS , DOROTHEA , LYSET . Dorothea .  Come hither Lyset . 


Orontus ,  ( aside . Gods , what is 't I see ! 
Lyset serves here ! 


Dorothea ,  aside to Lyset . Take the whole fault on thee : 
no matter . 


Orontus ,  ( aside . All my Pranks will now come forth . 


Lyset ,  softly to Orontus . Now , — am I fifty Dorothea's worth ? 


Dorothea ,  aloud to Lyset . Who was 't spoke with you , when Orontus Knocked ? 


Lyset .  With me ? 


Dorothea .  Yes , you ? — believe I 'll not be mocked . 


Lyset .  What do ye take me ? — 


Dorothea ▪   no excuse , Unless — 


Lyset .  Dear Madam , 


Dorothea .  Some Gallant 


Lyset .  I must confess . 


Cliton ,  begins to appear . 't was one that love's me without compliment , 
And I love him , faith , with no ill intent . 


Cliton ,  ( Enters . he 'll be my Husband . 


ACT. III SCEN. VIII . 

ORONTUS , DOROTHEA , LYSET , CLITON , Cliton .  ha ! good Hypocrite , 
Your Husband . 


Lyset .  Cliton . 


Orontus ,  to Cliton whilst he takes the Candle from the Table . whither with that light ? 
Say. — 


Cliton ,  To find out this Husband she will have , 
I 'll bring 't again , when I have killed the slave . 


Orontus .  Keep back your folly . 


Cliton .  Ah! in my distress . 


Orontus .  Take comfort Cliton , that will make it lesle . 


Dorothea .  This satisfies ? 


Orontus .  Yes , if you please , and more . 


Argante ,  ( within . Lycante we are robbed ! stand at that door . 


Cliton ,  ( to Orontus . Sir , — now we are caught ! 


Dorothea ▪   O! infinite disgrace . 
My Father comes here , hie away apace . 


To Lyset .  Take up the Candle , — slip in here with me . 


To Orontus .  Save , you my honour . 


Cliton .  Devil , but who saves me ? 
we are left alone . 


Orontus .  My honour now lies on 't 
To see . — 


Cliton .  Let 's fly , — and think no more upon 't , 
For fear some ranting Hector , otherwise 
Should come , and this love-folly so chastise — . 
But — 't is too late . 


ACT III SCEN. IX . 

ARGANTE , ORONTUS , CLITON . Enter Argante , his sword drawn . Don't I Orontus see ? 
OH Daughrer ! whose wild love dishonours me . 
Die thou vile tempter . 
Orontus .  Hold your threatening sword ! 


upon his knees . Cliton .  Before you kill us , good Sir , hear one word ! 


Argante .  What vain excuse , — 


Orontus .  Mine , is both just and true , 
For , though unhappy , — I am guiltless too . 
Being , fair Lucia's fond idolater , 
Her Brother , this night found me there with her . 
And having no way left to scape him there , 
I leaped his Garden wall , and got in here . 


Cliton .  In so short time , I never made more way . 


Argante .  I heard some stir i' th' Garden , as you say , 
And from my Window , did perceive one go 
With haste enough , who 't was I could not know . 
But , though there be some colour , Sir , in this 
Excuse , — yet so great the importance is 
To my whole Family , ever I proceed 
This truth upon my daughter's face I 'll read . 
Her looks will bring the certainty to light . 
I 'll strait return . ( Argante goes out . 


Cliton .  Ah! Sir , bid him good night . 


Orontus .  Dost fear ? 


Cliton .  I ? no , but I small courage have : 
You , like a Torch i' th' wind , all storms outbrave 
And may escape , But — ( Oh! the Colic gripe's . ) 
Poor Cliton shall be sent to bed with stripes . 


Orontus .  Hark! for they talk . 


Argante ,  speaking to Eraste , whom he finds in his house , and shutting the door upon him to prevent his seeing of Orontus . Pray , Sir , do you stay there . 


Cliton .  He locks this door ! Oh! how I quake for fear . 


Argante ,  ( to Orontus . Go , Sir , make haste , for your relation's true . 
Your enemy ! — I shake . 


Orontus .  What ? 


Argante .  Does pursue . 


Orontus .  Who is 't ? 


Argante .  d' ye ask ? Erastes . 


Orontus .  — Ha.  


Argante .  — Again ? 
I met him there . 


Orontus .  then , that 's the stratagem . 
By what strange paths this truth comes in my way . 


Argante .  You both are ruined if ye longer stay . 
Make quick dispatch . 


Orontus ,  ( to Cliton . See , Woman's fickleness . 


Cliton .  Take comfort Sir , 't will make your griefs the lesle . Ex. Oront . Cliton . 


Argante .  ( ●oh●s . This danger was prevented well in troth , 
I 'll send this after , then good night to both . 


ACT III SCEN. X.  

ARGANTE , ERASTES , Argante .  ( opening the door . Erastes . 


Erastes .  ( aside . Who can guests this mystery ? 
Surprise me here , yet deal thus lovingly . 


Argante .  What brought you here , I pardon , for your sake ; 
But no noise on 't , if you my counsel take ; 
Upon such accidents , wise men should wink . 


Erastes .  Think not . — 


Argante .  I know Sir , what I ought to think , 


Erastes .  I doubt that — 


Argante .  no , no , I shall let it sleep . 


Erastes .  Perhaps . — 


Argante .  — Be sure , I shall the secret keep : 
Adieu . 


Erastes .  But — 


Argante .  't is high time , be gone I pray . 
Make haste . 


Erastes .  I understand not what he 'd say . ( Exit . 


Argante .  ( Solus . Thomas , now I 'm freed , I tremble yet for fear . 
How timely these by me discovered were , 
— Now in the street , fight , or embrace at ease : 
Long may they scuffle ever it me displease . 
If they each other drill till I go forth , 
Their skins to morrow will be little worth . 


The End of the Third ACT.  

ACTUS iv.  

SCEN. I  

ORONTUS . CLITON . Orontus .  How ill thou arguest ! what , thou thinkest then ? 


Cliton .  But , Sir , it puzzles me above all ken 
Till doomsday , I might thus be arguing , 
Yet still i' th' dark for all my reasoning . 


Orontus .  Confess then , I know how one ought to live . 


Cliton .  Such are your flights , that none can you retrieve . 
For my part , I renounce . — After th' abuse 
You late received at your two Rendez-vous , 
Who would not swear , that in your choler , you 
Should blinking Cupid curse , — and his Mam too : 
Sigh , groan , sob , howl , and tumble all the night , 
And from your nest , in three days make no flight ; 
Your brain 's unhinged , your heart consumed with care , 
Whereas you sing and friskings more gay than c're ; 
Nay , Rant , — and in all company laugh most ▪ 
And bear 't as you had neither wone nor lost . 
Most Heteroclite does your carriage seem ! 


Orontus .  And where 's the wonder ? they leave me , — ay them . 


Cliton .  If towards you , some Fickleness they show , 
They but return you back , a quid pro quo . 
For Mistress , waiting-maid , Fair , Black , red , Brown 
You fear no colours , but storm every Town ! 
Your eager Appetite with all makes bold , 
And to your Stomach , none 's too hot or cold . 


Orontus .  there 's all the pleasure that in Love I find ! 


Cliton .  And they begin to love you in your kind . 


Orontus .  I 'm not displeased . 


Cliton .  then , must I say , indeed , 
I think your love 's but some new bastard-breed . 


Orontus .  And thus I whip him to my own desire . 


Cliton .  more I examine , I the more admire , 
Sometimes , you play the sprightly Gallants part ; 
then , naught but sadness sits about your heart . 
A Jovial air , ' amongst these disbands all fears ; 
The next you Court , — you soften with your Tears . 
So to the life , myself deceived I find . 
You , groan , and sing , and sigh , — and all 's but wind . 
What juggling tricks ! 


Orontus .  And this does wonder breed ? 


Cliton .  I never knew such Chameleon Love indeed , 
At each new Face it 's hue so changed to be ! 


Orontus .  This but prevents Love , from enslaving me . 
I dare him thus , — make all his Plots prove vain , 
So I the pleasures taste , without the pain . 


Cliton .  At once to give and take a Heart in jest , 
Is this Love ? 


Orontus .  This is Love , and 't is the best . 


Cliton ,  But , is not Love , Sir , a controling heat ▪ 
( For I 'm a Scholar since I served Lyset . ) 
A frying in the Frost , freezing in Fire , 
Which storms the Brain , and Fetters the Desire 
To one alone ; Pleasing , though Incomode ? 


Orontus .  It was of old , — but , now 't is out of Mode . 


Cliton .  't is out of Mode ! 


Orontus .  And dull , as shall be tried . 


Cliton .  How must we do , to have it Modified ? 


Orontus .  My conduct will instruct thee in the right . 
Examineed well . 


Cliton .  't is beyond my dull sight . 
If you 'll instruct me , you must bring it near . 


Orontus .  Listen , and the whole secret will appear . 
" To every She , the like complaisance pay ; 
" Swear Love by rote , not minding what you say . 
" Court out of custom for diversion's sake . 
" Speak much of grief , but let your heart never ache . 
" Your Face ( the Index ) much of Love must show ; 
" But what you promise , let your Breast not know . 
" Of an Un-truth , a Verity compile , 
" At need , and weep , ( though in your thoughts you smile , ) 
" Raving of Passion , pain , trouble's of Mind . 
" And not to hazard aught by womankind , 
" Pay the whole Sex , your Adoration 
" In gross , — but singly , — slight them one by one . 
This is my Rule . 


Cliton .  The Science I approve , 
You thus extract the Quintessence of Love. 
— But , — as for Lyset , be it understood 
You take or leave her quite , for both our good . 
Otherwise . — 


Orontus .  Without wrangling , — I yet may 
Leave thee sole Tenant ever we pass one day . 
For now again Fortune does me provide , 
Since Dorothea's true , I 'm satisfied . 


Cliton .  Erast ' being there hid , though , shows some Ginn ? 


Orontus .  I know the whole Intrigue . 


Cliton .  From whom ? 


Orontus .  — From him . 
Who walking home , late , when our Plot was laid , 
Passed by their door , where by some hazard stayed 
Finding it open , and she standing by , 
Surprised her out of curiosity . 
Believing with her Maid , — she had intent 
To pass some moments there in merriment . 
His pleasing converse hardly did begin 
When he must hide , — the Father coming in . 
And , now , what scruple can there be in this ? 


Cliton .  Born under some Smock Star.  


Orontus .  — The best on 't is , 
Florame , that sought who held Erastes heart , 
Found Dorothea claimed his Sister's part . 
When , he expressing by what rigour they 
Forcing his will , tore him from Lucia : 
So wone upon him , he consent did speak , 
Provided they the first Contract would break . 
They strait embrace , and both this Match approve , 
Which turns their hate into a nobler Love. 
Thus Florame and Erastes are agreed 
To banish Feud , and let kind Peace succeed . 


Cliton .  So Florame , now , his promise has obtained ? 


Orontus .  Th'rough my endeavour , full consent was gained . 


Cliton .  you 'll no more see her ? 


Orontus .  ay ! — as oft as ever . 


Cliton .  She soothes you still with flat ' ring hopes , I fear ▪ 
And while she to another destined is , 
Makes you . — 


Orontus .  Did I not think as much as this 
Of Dorothea yesterday ? — yet I 
Mistake . 


Cliton .  This gulls you more apparently ▪ 


Orontus .  Why I may err as much in this perchance ▪ 


Cliton .  Sure you believe Florame . 


Orontus .  He does advance . 
Now I shall know the truth , how he proceeds ▪ 


ACT. IU. SCEN. II  

ORONTUS , FLORAME , CLITON . Orontus .  you 're satisfied , I hope , now all succeeds ? 


Florame .  Yes , — but to gain the brother will not do 
Alone , — Your help is necessary too . 
In vain , — I thought the other Match unknown , 
Since Fame the News o'er all this place hath blown ; 
And with fair Lucia so much credit gained , 
She swears my flames for her , are only feigned . 
But , — you , — whose friendship dives into my heart , 
And knows its closest Projects , take my part ; 
Wait on that Beauty , — Woo her not to eat 
Such real Love , — Complete what you begun . 


Orontus .  Is not this Raillery you speak , — tell true ? 
If you love Lucia , does not she love you ? 
To give you meeting ever Erast consent , 
Does make her Love appear most Evident : 
Yet you suspect ? Ah! what must I suppose . 


Cliton ,  ( aside . How slyly does he squeeze the worm from 's Nose . 


Florame .  Since to hide aught from you , a crime I deem , 
Know her love yet , resides but in esteem . 
And that appointment , you so happy guess , 
To confidence , had owed for its success . 
Since I th'rough favour had in vain assayed : 
And then with Presents had suborned her Maid ; 
Who , still unknown to her , engaged last night 
To gain me admittance to her sight . 
This was the reason , made me think it vain , 
Headlong to run , where was more loss then gain : 
You otherwise had never dissuaded me . 


Orontus .  Good-faith , I thought 't was better than I see . 
But — having gained what was most difficult , 
The Oracle we need no more consult . 
The Victory is Ours , — I 'll bring 't about . 


Florame .  You being Second , 't is a sin to doubt . 
Mean while , I 'll try what is her temper , now 
Her brother 's ours , and what hope she 'll allow . 


ACT. VI SCEN. III  

ORONTUS , CLITON . Orontus .  Well Cliton . 


Cliton .  I conceive . — 


Orontus .  'T was I conceived 
The right . 


Cliton .  't is true . 


Orontus .  Your doubt . 


Cliton .  Had me deceived . 
Lucia is wholly yours — say what they can , 
For Politics you are a dreadful man ! 
And if that Devil , who writeth your sins down , 
Omits not One , h 'as a shrewd head on 's own . 
we are Stratagems who lies within your power . 
Lucia , in fine . — 


Orontus .  I 'll love more from this hour . 


Cliton .  , 't is well , and Dorothea . 


Orontus .  More and more . 


Cliton .  then , sure , you 'll quickly give poor Lyset o'er . 


Orontus .  Yes , she 's too lean a thing to satisfy : 
She may pass Muster in a vacancy , 
For want of better . 


Cliton .  Better ! — ah speak well . 
A Goat , set Horns aside , would her excel . 
If she pass Muster , 't is for want indeed ! 


ACT III SCEN. IU  

ORONTUS , LYSET , CLITON . Lyset .  Truly , Sir , Cliton's Manners now exceed . 
The Dev'l , lay's horns away , like theeed appear . ( to Cliton . 


Cliton .  Now I am muzzled . 


Orontus .  Leave that Puppy there , 
Who jealous cause I love thee , — thus the Elf 
Would black thee ? 


Lyset .  Love me ? 


Orontus .  Yes , introth , thyself . 


Cliton ,  ( aside . Mark but the Juggler . 


Lyset .  Thus. — 


Cliton .  — On Cliton's faith . 


Lyset .  Go , go , I heard too well . 


Cliton .  What is 't she saith ? 


Lyset .  there 's want indeed , when I can Muster pass . 


Cliton .  I sung a Mean , — and you interpret Base . 


Orontus .  If you give ear , he 'll never have done his part . 


Cliton .  Command me . — 


Orontus .  Silence . 


Cliton .  Now begins his Art 
Lay on , my back is broad . 


Orontus .  Still dear Lyset 
My real love does little faith beget . 
In thy long absence , I have torments tried . 


Lyset .  I must believe 't . 


Cliton ,  ( aside . Ware being Noblyfyed . 


Orontus .  My pleasant humour thinks all 's Raillery ; 
But falsely you believe 't is flattery . 
For when an object , like thee , charms this breast , 
I think on 't more than once . 


Lyset .  And loved at l 〈…〉 
I 'll help ye out . 


Orontus .  Ah! thus to doubt my flame ! 
Is. — 


Lyset .  no , I think I highly cherished am . 
But since your Love with me 's but left in pawn ; 
't is ten to one it will be soon with-drawn . 
My Mistress — . 


Orontus .  thou believest she blows my Fire ? 
Go , if my heart to serve her ever aspire , 


Lyset .  Last Night , you saw her , then , for the last time ? 


Orontus .  Drawn for thy sake , that obligation 's thine ▪ 


Lyset .  Mine ? 


Orontus .  Dost thou doubt ? 


Lyset .  Most like you , Sir , it is . 


Orontus .  What , not believe ? 


Lyset .  Yes , I know more than this . 


Orontus .  Prithee , once more , my Oath upon it take , 
I went last Night but only for thy sake , 
Her entertainment 's hateful to my ear ; 
But having learned thy Residence was there , 
Thomas sure to have that odious Object by 
I ran , in hopes to Woe thee with my Eye . 
That Language Lovers ever held the best . 


Lyset .  How you 're composed of Subtilty and Jest . 
You found her though , alone . 


Orontus .  At which being sad , 
I studied in Revenge to make her Mad ; 
Paid her Respects were much more strange , then true , 
Contemned , her most , when I most Praised her too . 
But my high Style , lost her in the Midway . 


Lyset .  You may repair that fault again to day . 
She must speak with you . This I 'm sent to tell . 
Make haste , and follow . 


Orontus .  thou love'st Mirth so well ▪ 


Lyset .  Faith , — she expects you , and will let you know 
When you come there . — 


Orontus .  I 'll not consent to go . 


Lyset .  You must , — What will you make her else suspect , 
That I omit her Message , th'rough neglect ? 


Orontus .  I shall have much ado . 


Lyset .  I 'll take your part ▪ 


Orontus .  I 'm loath to go , I speak it from my Heart , 
And I believe you think so , — seriously ; 
But at the Interview , observe my Eye . 
At the least word of Love , look you on me 
And what I say to her , — take all for thee . 


Lyset .  I shall not fail , — 't is done , — do but proceed 


Orontus .  You Jibe ? 


Lyset .  Like you . 


Orontus .  Faith I Love thee , indeed 
And to make good , in thy Society 
My dearest Pleasures Sov'raign Bliss does lie . 
That thy commands are my chief glory , too , 
Here — 
He feels in his Pocket . 

Lyset .  You at length , may make me think all true , 


Orontus .  Time , will discover , what as yet lies hid 


Cliton ,  ( aside . My Nobleness goes on , the Price is bid . 
I cannot hold . — Hola ! 
Cliton cries out with a shrill voice . 

Orontus .  — What devil 's Cry ? 


Cliton , to Orontus .  ' 'Gainst all Events , having a Remedy , 
Vouchsafe one Favour , now my heart 's so sad ? 


Orontus .  What is (null) ? 


Cliton .  Sir , keep me pray from running Mad ! 


Orontus ,  ( spying Lucia . If — but , who 's this I see ? 


Cliton ,  ( aside . — Good , — here 's relief 


Lyset ,  ( aside . Ah! he put 's up his Purse again , the Thief ! 


Orontus ,  ( to Lyset . What ever I say , — let it create no doubt , 
we 'll laugh anon . 


Lyset .  Now , I must stand it out . 
Hopes of his present does invite my stay . 


ACT IU. SCEN. v.  

ORONTUS , LUCIA , LYSET , CLITON ▪ Orontus .  Blessed with your Presence , once more Lucia . 


Lucia .  A common joy , — But with regret , Sir , I 
Thus interrupt your wished Secrecy . 
Surely you treated with great Confidence . 


Orontus .  What , you suspect I held Intelligence . 
And think design , what accidental proves ? 
Cliton knows . — 


Cliton .  Yes , he 's honest , where he Love's . 
Lucia , pointing to Lyset . Though this fresh ▪ Object , to my shame , I see — 


Cliton .  He Courted her , indeed , but 't was for me , 


Orontus .  If you believe that Fool — 


Lucia .  What I behold , 
I dare believe , — but not all I am told . 


Crontus .  then on your part , my Ruin is assured ? 


Lucia .  What Persecution , I for you endured . 
Whilst a harsh Brother for Florame , this day — 


Orontus .  I more deserve than he , — so to obey . 
Much your own loss , and prejudice would be , 
And you oblige yourself , whilst just to me . 


Lucia .  Take heed ! least this presumption to reprove , 
I yield him up — at last — my faith and love ! 


Orontus .  't is but three sighs more , added to the heap . 
But , — ever you do 't consult , look ever you leap . 
And get your heart's consent to it before 


Lucia .  What! would my loss affect you then no more ? 


Orontus .  What ? you 'll betray yourself , and therefore I 
Must yield myself a prey to grief — and die ! 
Let it sting those it does most nearly touch . 
Grief almost killed me last night 't was so much ; 
For having known how well Florame was used 
By you , I hasted to you much confused : 
There wept and wailed , and all sad means did try , 
Low at your feet , to break this heart and die . 
But since I find it inconvenient prove , 
I 'll blow it off , and try new fashion love . 


Lucia .  Your fashion , — to deceive , and be ingrate . 


Orontus .  That love's most pleasing , is least delicate , 
And where we once resolve , no Jealousy , 
Should 


Lucia .  Without reason than it ceazes me ? 
Nor may I credit give to my own eyes . 


Orontus .  You should pass by such things , if you were wise . 
Let 's make the agreement thus , betwixt you and me : 
To have no jealous thoughts , — but ever free 
From all vain fears , think either's faith most true , 
And if you never doubt me , I 'll never doubt you . 
Thus when I swear , believe 't I love you well : 
I 'll do the same , when you Love-stories tell ▪ 
All this observed , our Contract shall remain ; 
But the least trip , infringes it again . 


Lucia .  True love , sublimed , will all this disavow , 
He makes a Monster on 't , does this allow . 


Orontus .  Allowing what we like , but makes us find 
The troubles lesle , — pleasures more unconfined . 


Lucia .  no , he that can divided Love endure , 
And not die rather , has small courage sure ? 


Orontus .  If , in effect , this Maxim bore the sway , 
Men were in danger to die every day . 
Can any lightness with your own compare , 
Last night one , — now another , — so y'all are . 


Lucia .  The better to delude us , thus ye pled : 
But , think how many th'rough such grief are dead . 
And oft have had the applause of learned men . 


Orontus .  The example 's dangerous , I renounce it then . 


Lucia .  Your heart 's too cold , where such brave dangers are . 


Orontus .  Let , who 's will do 't , and take my honour's share . 
Should I expire your Martyr , — for a day 
Or two , perhaps , the world should hear you say 
He was a Faithful Lover , — I regret 
For me he died ! — Much I by this should get . 


Lucia .  Is an an illustrious Memory no gain ? 


Orontus .  Heavens' grant my Epitaph lesle sad , and vain ! 


Lucia .  And yet you 'll say ; you love men'eretheless . 


Orontus .  Ask but my heart , my heart which you possess . 


ACT. IU. SCEN. VI  

ORONTUS , ERASTES , LUCIA , LYSET . CLITON , LYSTOR . Erastes ,  ( to Lystor . They do adore each other , — I am told . 


Lucia , —  pulling down her Hood . My brother 's here , — OH Gods ! 


Erastes ▪   I see him , — hold ! 


Lystor .  A Lady with him . 


Erastes .  then it must be she ▪ 
't is Dorothea . 


Lucia   ( to Orontus . Think of leaving me . 


Erastes —  showing Lyset to Lystor . This night with her , he through the Garden went ; 
I know her — 


Orontus ,  ( to Lucia . What ? and must I then consent ? 


Lucia .  Yes , for I dare not go , till after you ; 
Pray loose no time , be gone , — bid me adieu . 


Orontus .  I do obey you . — Cliton ! 


Cliton .  Sir , what now ? 


Orontus .  Stop Lyset here , but stop her mouth close too , 
promise her any thing , — do 't ever you stir . 


Orontus goes off one way , and immediately Lucia goes another . Lystor ,  ( to Erastes . She goes 


Erastes .  Ingrateful ! but I 'll follow her . 
For without doubt , her woman does abide , 
That if we ask who 't is , she be denied . 
But , following after , I her plots destroy . 


ACT. IU. SCEN. VII . 

CLITON . LYSET . Cliton .  How shall I act the part of th' angry Boy ? 


Lyset .  Cliton . 


Cliton .  no quarter . 


Lyset .  Such severe ill will ? 


Cliton .  Provide elsewhere . 


Lyset .  Dost keep thy anger still 
Cliton ? 


Cliton .  Yes still I keep 't , and keep it shall . 


Lyset .  Look up ? 


Cliton .  — No. — 


Lyset .  But — 


Cliton .  I 'll bate thee naught at all . 


Lyset .  What you 'll forsake me , — You , whose grizzled Pate , 
And snuffling Nose , proclaims ye out of date ? 
You will forsake me , — Mendoza , who more or lesle , 
The whole Town dotes on , for my prettiness . 
Me , whose dear Love so hotly they pursue , 
It makes them look on Thee , with envy too . 
Who thus abase my thoughts . — 


Cliton .  Yes , — you , — you , — you ? 
Who squeezed my Purse , and then laughed at me too . 


Lyset .  Your gifts , I 'll warrant , Trick me up thus brave . 


Cliton .  Pox , Now I apprehend this Female knave . ( aside . 
Before my face , your liberty 's so bold 
't has made my wont charity catch cold . 
— Every one Courts you now . 


Lyset .  — Yes , and those words 
Alone a daily Revenue affords ▪ 


Cliton .  And this to me , you think must comfort bring ? 


Lyset .  Cliton , speak wisely , and leave quarrelling . 
You knew my humour , and my Method knew , 
That I loved clothes in fashion , — often new . 
Each day I purchase somewhat , and protest 
What I do cut or sow , — is of the best 
Either the Draper or the Mercer sells . 
And whilst my Cash holds , I do little else . 
Now , — think what this must cost ? For , to go neat ; 
Wishing , nor Witchcraft , will not do the feat : 
Your Wages , whatsoever , — hardly brings 
Enough for Gloves , and such small trifling things . 
So that to prove too Coy , would prove my shame , 
My Pride would fall , — And then Adieu — Fine Dame.  


Cliton .  't is right , — but come — to wave all you have said , 
What have I reaped for all my Wages paid ? 
From day to day , my Passion has increased ; 
Yet with my finger never durst feel your — Breast . 


Lyset .  I loved thee , — that 's sufficient I conceive . 


Cliton .  Loved me ! 


Lyset .  To doubt , yourself were to deceive ; 
You know . 


Cliton ,  I 'm left in Hell , Love's Barleybreak ▪ 


Lyset .  Does not six sighs a Day , my true love speak ? 


Cliton .  Great comfort that , to troubled Souls does prove . 


Lyset .  Do you so light esteem those mark 's of Love ? 


Cliton .  Just next to nothing , so I find , — And sure , 
Since Love was ever held an Epicure 
And glutton , when the Boy you thus do Treat , 
Sighs cannot nourish they are such hollow Meat . 


Lyset .  I loose my time here , you but love to prate ; 
And thy weak reason turns my love to hate . 
Adieu . — 


Cliton .  But stay , if not for Love , for Gold ; 
For twenty Crowns , can you One Secret hold ? 


Lyset .  One , yes a score . 


Cliton .  Hold ! that 's too much for Thee ! 


Lyset .  I 'll do 't , I 'll warrant , let it rest on me . 
Can you disburse-em ? 


Cliton .  Yes , — but prithee hear ! 
Keep but your Tongue , out of your Mistress ' Ear. 
My Master . — 


Lyset .  I 'll conceal his Pranks , — never doubt . 
Let 's see the Money ? 


Cliton .  't is not yet told out . 


Lyset .  Your promises on hopes , will ill succeed . 


Cliton .  I 'll pawn my Honour . 


Lyset .  A fair pledge indeed . 
Go , I 'll discover all that ever past . 


Cliton .  Beware he do not Noose you , too , at last . 


End of the Fourth ACT 

ACTUS v.  

SCEN. I  

ARGANTE , DOROTHEA Dorothea .  AT least defer it , till my troubled mind 
Composed , — to this sad Hymen be inclined . 
Do not precipitate — 


Argante .  You hope in vain ▪ 
By prayer to blast , my just design again : 
Yours I perceive , I read it in your soul : 
But Florames Father now has my Parole , 
Which I must keep , — he claims you thereupon , 
And so to morrow Hymen makes you One ▪ 


Dorothea .  But he so little values me , you see 
He hardly . — 


Argante .  That , but an effect may be 
Of what 's reported , by Orontus , who 
Is said to have pretences for you to . 
Florame alarmed therewith , does colder prove , 
Fearing his Rival , more than him you love . 
From his disturbed thoughts I gather it , 
Which since a misreport does thus beget , 
I ought to hasten on this Nuptial Tie , 
To set all right , and them to satisfy . 
Think on 't , Adieu . — I 'll to his Fathers run , 
And there consult what more is to be done . Exit . 


Dorothea ,  ( alone . In vain this Man , for Husband you 'd prefer ; 
My Eyes herein , shall be my Counsellor . 
But , Lyset comes , Love take thou my defence . 


ACT. v. SCEN. II  

DOROTHEA , LYSET . Dorothea .  I Stayed thy coming with impatience . 
Well , — is he found , what 's his reply , tell true ? 


Lyset .  I have at once both found and lost him too . 


Dorothea .  How , did he slight the Message thou didst tell ? 


Lyset .  You do not know him yet ; sure , very well . 
he 's too much versed in 's way to blanche at that . 


Dorothea .  then prithee let me know how 't is , and what ? 
Didst say I wait him ? — Shall I see him here ? 


Lyset .  no doubt he 'll come , — but pray beware a snare . 
If you 'll believe me , give him word for word ; 
Pay him in 's own coin , but no more afford . 
Engage no farther , than you find him go . 


Dorothea .  What does induce thee to speak of him so ? 
Is he inconstant , false ? 


Lyset .  That shall appear , 
Be Judge yourself , pray , Madam do but hear . 
i' th' street I met him in a certain place , 
Who smiling , when he first beheld my Face , 
Approached me with such joy , as made me deem 
His Love was noble , and deserved esteem . 
This did his words confirm , for he did say , 
He ever would to you obedience pay . 
Scarce were these words pronounced , when I protest 
A Lady coming , — here 's the main o' th' jest , — 
— He without why , or wherefore , dared presume 
To sing her the same Song , to the same Tune : 
And without blushing , though I stood close by , 
Discoursed of Love to her most pleasantly . 


Dorothea .  Unworthy Man , — had he the confidence 
Before your Face to own a new pretence , 
And mention Love to her ? 


Lyset .  Yes , in my sight . 


Dorothea .  Dissembling Traitor ! 


Lyset .  't is his whole delight . 


Dorothea .  But , than the Lady , what became of her ? 
Go on . 


Lyset .  A long while they did there confer , 
When , suddenly , ( 't was plotted I dare say ) 
They part , and each retired a several way . 


Dorothea .  And you never followed to inquire her name ? 


Lyset .  I would , and much I longed to know the same ; 
But , then Orontus servant made me stand , 
Who having popped some Sweetmeats in my hand , 
In earnest of some better thing ever long , 
Promised me Mountains for to hold my tongue : 
But I , — what do you think I am so base ? 
then throwing all the Sweetmeats in his face , 
Sirrah ( cried I ) — I 'll never prove false for these , 
Nor do I use to sell my Mistresses ▪ 
If I need Money , she such plenty hath 
In store for me , I need not break my Faith. 
then did my courage prompt me to engage . — 


Dorothea .  Thy Zeal does ravish me . 


Lyset .  I swelled with rage . 
What , I betray you ? — sell you ? where 's his wit ? 
He proffer . — 


Dorothea .  Go , — thou shalt not lose by it . 
In the mean time , see my unhappy Fate ? 
And with what reason I did all men hate : 
Since this Orontus , for whose Love , — my Pride 
And noble Haughtiness I laid aside ; 
Like a Dissembler does me slight and brave , 
And puts on others Chains , who was my slave . 
But , — truly this was timely brought to light , 
E'er I consulted that false Man to night ; 
Or how to break this other Hymen asked 
Advice . 


Lyset .  You hope in vain , there 's promise passed : 
Your Father urges it , and having power . 


Dorothea ,  Let him urge still , I 'll quash all in one hour . 


Lyset .  But Florame has his word , his heart , his love . 


Dorothea .  Florame , at need , my help herein would prove , 
Since to endeavour this our union he 
Too much aversion ever met in me . 
In vain these impotent old Parents try 
Upon our wills to act their tyranny . 
Each others coldness being mutual , 
We dread not their authority at all . 
But , — who is 't locks that door ? what is 't they do ? 


ACT. v. SCEN. III  

DOROTHEA , LUCIA , LYSET . Lucia .  her Hoood down . Protect me , from a brother does pursue 
To find me out , — whose wrath and jealousy 
For walking forth , will harshly light on me . 
In vain , by twenty turns , from street to street 
I sought to steal away , and he not see 't . 
He followed still , and keeping me in sight 
Constrained me now , lest on me he should light 
To step in here , where I your aid implore . 
For shelter , till — this danger may blow o'er . 
See who 't is begs . ( she takes off her Hood . 


Dorothea .  Ah! Lucia is it thee ? 


Lucia .  't is I , whose cruel Brother's jealousy — 
But , there he knocks , — to save me from his frown 
Pray , feign you just now come in from the Town . 
My Hood , I 'll leave you . 
she puts her hood upon Dorothea's head . 

Dorothea   hide you quickly , do . 


Lucia .  ( runs in In here ! 


Lyset .  d' ye know ? 


Dorothea .  Open the door , go , go . 
Make haste . 


Lyset .  no matter , she shall make it good . 


Dorothea ,  What will he think on 't ? 


ACT. v. SCEN. IU.  

ERASTES , DOROTHEA , LYSET . Dorothea ,  giving her Hood to Lyset as if she newly came into the house . Lyset , take my Hood . 
Lyset goes out with the Hood , and enters again about the latter end of the Scene . 

Erastes .  Pardon th' intrusion ; you may well suspect , 
void both of Love to you , and of respect . 
I follow my despair , and with much pain 
The storms of my just anger now refrain . 


Dorothea .  Your humour 's much disturbed to day , I find : 
I thought so smooth a Calm reigned in your mind , 
That still immoveable at all events , 
Your soul no anger knew , nor discontents . 


Erastes .  None , but for you , caused by my too great Faith 
And Love — 


Dorothea .  then I 'm the object of this wrath . 


Erastes .  Deny , ungratefully you scorn my flame ; 
Deny , my Rival's happiness , your shame ; 
What yet I saw , must treason be confessed ? 


Dorothea .  Believe me , Sir , you rave ! 


Erastis .  But yet , at least 
You will agree , since many eyes did see 't , 
You held discourse with him in th' open street . 


Dorothea .  I ? — 


Erastes .  Whom I followed after your adieu's , 
Believe — 


Dorothea .  Your eyes . — 


Erastes .  These eyes never bring false news ▪ 
But clearly to evince , and tell your shame , 
It will suffice , when I Orontus name . 


Dorothea .  Orontus ! 


Erastes .  Yes , — that Gallant was there , to , 
Whom you gave audience while he courted you . 
Can you deny it still ? 


Dorothea ,  ( aside . In troth 't is fine , 
I serve my Rival , — was ere Fate like mine ? 


Erastes .  Your silence is confession . — All desire's 
I henceforth banish , quenching all my Fires . 
A most Unfaithful She , I did adore ; 
But Heavens' discovery bids my heart give o'er . 


Dorothea .  This is too rash , — yet still my goodness see ? 
( For sure you neither know , nor speak to me . ) 
I pardon your blind rage , though gone so far 
As to mistake both me , and who you are ▪ 
Think on me , whilst your tongue you fiercely whet , 
And think how much you do yourself forget . 


Erastes .  i  thought too long , and Justly have accused — 


Dorothea .  What you proceed ? — This makes me more confused , 
Your words so discomposed at random fly . 
— But , pray , let 's know , what makes you speak thus high ? 
Orontus , say you , hath my heart obtained . 
Is it a Crime that Man my love hath gained ? 
What had I promised you , should hinder me ? 
I broke no Oaths , nor Vows , my soul was free , 
If from one Letter , you this inference make , 
Your easiness that favour did mistake . 
I love to jest , if that will do the deed , 
I 'd write a hundred more such for a need . 
That Paper showed in Mirth I much delight , 
And you will find so , if you spell it right . 


Erastes .  What , mock me thus ? — Is this the fruit at last 
Of all my hopes , and all my service past ? 
After two years , spent in devoirs and love ? 


Dorothea .  Such devoirs sometimes do but trouble prove . 


Erastes .  Now your proud mind does cast off all disguise . 
This shows my error , and unseals my eyes ; 
Go , take your swinge in your unconstant william 
Leave me , — and live for your Orontus still . 
Those fetters once so soft and dear , I break , 
And to keep nothing that of you does speak . 
That Letter , whose allurements made me burn , 
Thomas once my treasure I will back return . 


Dorothea .  You will oblige me , do , kind Sir , 't is fit ▪ 


Erastes .  Yes , I 'll restore it , make no doubt of it . 
I 'll haste home for it , Madam , stay that while . Exit . 


ACT. v. SCEN. v.  

DOROTHEA , LYSET . Lyset .  IN fine ; heaven now begins on you to smile , 
The Rival Lady , — she to whom I said 
The false Orontus new addresses made 
Is in your power , what more could fortune do ? 


Dorothea .  I know , yet have maintained her quarrel too . 


Lyset .  I suffered hitherto , but now she must , 


Dorothea .  Speak softly , else she hears , and may distrust . 


Lyset .  I 'll warrant her from being now so near , 
She fled into the Garden out of fear . 
And to return you thanks there waits thus long . 
I came now thence . 


Dorothea .  TO avenge my love and wrong , 
And blast his base design , this remedy 
I quickly ; — stay — what 's that appears to me ? 


ACT. v. SCEN. VI  

DOROTHEA , LYSET , CLITON . Cliton .  L yset . 


Lyset .  ( to Dorothea ▪ 't is Cliton . — Is your Master there ? ( to Cliton . 


Cliton .  May he come in ? 


Lyset .  Yes . 


Cliton .  But — 


Lyset .  Let him not fear , 
The good man 's forth , tell him . ( Cliton goes out . 


Dorothea .  See now Lyset . 
How both of them do fall into my net . 
If from disdain of me their love take root , 
One stroke may lordship them both , and I will do 't . 


Lyset .  Let not fierce jealousy bear so great a sway , 
But seek — 


Dorothea .  Go back , and find out Lucia . 
And when you guests Orontus may be here 
Led her this way , till she approach so near , 
That having stopped her , on some other score 
She may hear all we say , from yonder door , 
His tongue must prate of Love when he comes in , 
And I 'll return as good as he can bring . 


Lyset .  The bait's so tempting — he will bite anon . 
I think I hear him . ( Exit . 


Dorothea .  Quickly then , be gone ▪ 
he 's here . 


ACT. v. SCEN. VII . 

ORONTUS . DOROTHEA , CLITON ▪ Cliton .  How Sir ? 


Orontus .  I tell thee , I , in fine 
Have quit her , and Lyset's henceforth thine . 


Cliton .  In earnest ? 


Orontus .  And in earnest shall be still . 


Cliton .  thank 's Sir — Now push your fortunes where you william  


Orontus .  ( to Dorothea . How dear soever I this favour prize , 
Yet , from your goodness this regret does rise . 
That here expected by you , it may chance 
Breed doubt which brings me , love — or complaisance 
For your commands may seem to make it prove 
more my obedience then an act of love . 


Lyset .  appearing at the door with Lucia , whom she obliges to retire a step or two . Madam , a Gentleman is there you see . 
Stay.  


Lucia .  ( aside . 't is Orontus , Ah! false man , 't is he ! 


Dorothea .  ( to Orontus . While you surprise me by your Compliment 
With art enough , you my complaints prevent . 
But , say yourself , what shall I now believe ? 


Orontus .  My Joys so great , you may the truth perceive . 


Dorothea .  I doubt 't is art . 


Orontus .  Small reason in this case . 


Dorothea .  A treacherous soul oft hath a smiling face . 


Orontus .  To be secure , this a safe way will prove , 
Ask your own heart , that knows how I do love . 


Dorothea .  It owns no secrets . 


Orontus .  more than you confess , 
Vouchsafe to hear it , it will speak no lesle . 
Besides which , my Devoirs my love sets forth . 


Dorothea .  Which being forced , are but of little worth . 


Orontus .  The Homage paid those Eyes , which rule my heart , 
Are they esteemed a force then , on your part ? 
That love which no self-interests defile , 
That has no dross , no mixture , naught that 's vile . 


Dorothea .  You set it highly forth . 


Orontus ,  Have I not cause , 
Since 't is your Virtue only gives it laws ? 
Your worth , the only motive comprehends , 
Of my true love , — And such love 's without ends . 


Dorothea .  I may presume it then , to be long lived ; 
This rare , this noble birth from me derived ; 
For though , the power of time most powerful be , 
Can that ever make me cease from being me ? 


Orontus .  It were great wrong both to my Faith and Will , 
To doubt my Love were not immortal still . 


Dorothea .  You speak so lavishly , I justly fear , 
Lest some surprisal you intended here . 


Orontus .  Does my Sincerity suspicion give ? 


Dorothea .  They hazard much , that lightly do believe ▪ 


Orontus .  Hopes founded on great Merits , may be said 
By being limited to be betrayed . 
Such aught from so firm rules not to depart , 
Which lays a claim to every noble heart . 


Dorothea .  From thence it comes , soon as your Eyes give fire 
You conquer every object you desire . 


Orontus .  From hence it is with little fear I do 
See others underhand , attempting you . 
I serve you out of love , — Erastes out 
Of gain , — your Eye-sight's good , what need I doubt ? 


Dorothea .  Your merits do presage you cannot fail , 
Set against him , you must o'reweigh the scale . 


Orontus .  Go as it will , myself I 'll satisfy . 
Those shall deserve my care , that will comply : 
Or if another choice they shall pursue , 
Th'rough their own folly . — My Faith bids adieu . 


Dorothea .  Such weakness in my choice shall never be ; 
This fly reproach is it addressed to me ? 


Orontus .  Your love 's too scrupulous , I 'll tell ye true . 
Such general terms , do not reflect on you . 
— But , I hear noise ! 


Dorothea ,  counterfeiting astonishment . Where is 't ? 


Orontus .  You seem to fear , 
And look — 


Dorothea ▪   I looked about for Lyset here . 
I thought I saw her . 


Orontus .  So you might . I say — 


Dorothea .  What is become of her ? 


Orontus .  she 's gone this way ; 
I 'll go and call her . 


Dorothea ,  feigning to withhold him . Gods ! what would you do ? 


Orontus .  Show a small proof , of my great Zeal for you . 


Dorothea .  Still with your Love suspicion does appear . 
But , know , if any person were hid there 
Without my leave , perhaps my woman may — 


Orontus .  That you are guilty , Madam , who dares say ? 
This time you speak against yourself , I see . 


Dorothea .  i  cause to fear your prying jealousy 
Since yesterday you stuck the same reproach . 


Orontus .  Pray do but cause your woman to approach . 


Dorothea ,  ( still holds him . And under that pretence your doubts begin 
To — 


Orontus .  then permit — 


Cliton .  Erastes is within . 
Put on Sir , make the naked truth appear ; 
Perhaps 't is Lysets tother husband 's there ! 


Dorothea .  Well , do your pleasure , Sir , but after this . 


Orontus .  y' are much alarmed . — Lyset ! 


ACT. v. SCEN. VIII . 

ORONTUS , DOROTHEA , LUCIA , LYSET , CLITON . Lucia ,  discovering herself suddenly to Orontus . AH ! here she is ! 
Take courage man , Fate cannot be withstood . 


Cliton ,  ( aside . Cheapeners enough , — this Market must be good . 


Orontus ,  ( to Cliton . What unexpected Lab'rinth am I in ! 


Cliton .  Your wit 's a Clue , will guide you out again . 


Lucia ,  ( to Orontus . Well , Faithless Lover ? 


Dorothea . ,  Lover so untrue ! 


Lucia .  What turn by turn your heart thus shared betwixt two ? 


Dorothea .  Inconstant ! 


Lucia .  Perjured ! 


Dorothea .  Scornful ! 


Lucia .  Flat'●ing ! — Nay — 


Dorothea .  Ungrateful ! 


Lucia .  Traitor ! 


Orontus .  Have ye more to say ? 


Lucia .  After so many Vows , without pretence — 


Cliton .  Master , for fear o' th' worst , let 's e'en pack hence : 
Should these fly on 's , as some she Dragons do ; 
Adieu , Gallants , to Man and Mounsir too . 


Dorothea .  In fine , the truth , in spite of all your skill — 


Orontus .  Pray , let me hear th' Indictment , if you will ? 


Dorothea .  Can you demand , yet , what your Crime should be ? 


Orontus .  Yes , having not the gift of Prophecy . 


Lucia .  Deny these Treasons , are so Evident , 
Shows you not falser now , then impudent . 


Orontus .  Do not pass sentence , ever you name the Crime . 


Dorothea .  You never told me , that your heart was mine ? 
That you those Oaths and Vows would never forget ? 


Orontus .  I 'll swear all this again , I love ye yet , 


Lucia .  Can you love her , false Man , so oft did say , 
Nay swear , your heart did yield to Lucia ? 
And that — 


Orontus .  All this I 'll still make good , and more . 


Lucia .  Love me ? 
Yes , you 


Dorothea .  And me ? 


Orontus .  I still adore . 


Lucia .  Mark but his confidence , though both are by ? 


Orontus .  In vain my love for you , I should deny , 
Too well you know me not to claim a part . 


Dorothea .  Why Court you me then , if she have your heart ? 


Orontus .  For love . 


Dorothea .  — What love ? 


Orontus .  — True love 


Dorothea .  True love , — how so ? 


Orontus .  Why , true love , Madam , does from Reason flow . 
And Reason tells me wheresoever I see 
Beauty ( like power ) it must adored be . 
Thus whilst in each of you such Charms I meet , 
I equally am drawn to baits so sweet . 
Nor can you blame me for 't , since whilst I do 
Her beauty prize , I pay yours worship too . 


Dorothea .  But , since you first , or last , must choose , let 's see 
Who you 'll prefer ? 


Orontus .  That still must secret be . 


Dorothea .  Come , come , you must declare . 


Orontus .  no , — for in brief 
I fear the she I leave would die for grief . 


Lucia .  Sir , you may choose elsewhere , as you like best ▪ 
Truly , you well deserve all this contest . 


Orontus .  Nay , if you 're thus indifferent . Here I 'll vow 
My constant Love. I 'm Dorothea's now . 


Lucia .  The mighty prize I yield with willing mind . 


Orontus .  Had I declared for you , you 'd speak more kind . 


Lucia .  Her Fortune's great , it cannot be denied . 


Orontus .  Disgrace is still attended with false Pride . 
And yet the loss perhaps breeds trouble too . 
( to Dorothea . You to whom henceforth , all my love is due , 
Believe — 


Dorothea .  This sudden change admits of doubt . 


Orontus .  Your Wit , on second thoughts will make it out . 
Since your more great deserts do you prefer . 


Dorothea .  Your various humour makes me fear you err . 
You swear to every one . 


Orontus ,  The Mode , — you see : 
But as I am , — try how you like of me ? 


ACT. v. SCEN. IX . 

ARGANTE , ORONTUS , FLORAME , ERASTES , DOROTHEA , LUCIA , LYSET , CLITON . Erastes ,  coming in before Argante , speaking to Dorothea . Here is your Letter , which I would allege , 
— But — how — my Sister here ? 


Argante ,  coming in with Florame . Her faith I 'll pledge , 
I 'm Father . 


Florame .  O! but rather than constrain — 
Your coldness gives me just cause to complain . 
If false repotts alone disturb your mind ; 
Or cause Orontus , you in presence find : 
Know , that which brings him 's Lucia's love , for I — 


Lucia .  Sir , what you speak of me , I must deny . 
My love 's beyond Orontus hope's so far — 


Elorame ,  ( to Argante . then suffer me , at this time to declare , 
That having dared at Lucia's Bed to aim , 
The honour of your Sonship would be vain . 
Nor can I , Sir , accept of it at last . 
But here 's Erastes — 


Erastes .  no the Dice is cast ; 
To love that false One , I shall never accord . 
But , Sir , to you , that I may keep my word , 
Led home my Sister — You th' effect shall see . 


Florame ,  ( to Argante . Adieu , — Don't envy my prosperity . 


ACT. v. SCEN. X.  

ARGANTE , ORONTUS , DOROTHEA , LYSET , CLITON . Argante ,  ( to Orontus . What means all this ; Does Lucia Florame love ? 
And is not she the object you approve ; 
With whom this night caught in your Love design , 
You leaped their Garden wall , and came to mine ? 


Orontus .  Sir , — 't is high time , I should you disabuse ; 
Know therefore , only Love shaped that Excuse . 


Argante .  What meet my Girl by night ▪ and both to dare — 


Orontus .  Pray make no trouble . 


Argante .  You shall Mary her . 


Orontus .  I must consent to Wed at last , for I 
Have no way else to End this Comedy ? 


Dorothea .  Bring you to Marriage ! Who could this fore-show ? 


Orontus .  This ends my Part , and it must needs be so . 


Cliton .  Yet the Conclusion will imperfect be ; 
To wind up all , Lyset should Mary me . 


Dorothea .  Dost love her ? 


Cliton .  I die for her . 


Dorothea .  then she 's thine . 


Cliton ,  ( to Lyset . My pretty One — 


Lyset .  Not yet , — the choice is mine ; 
Canst thou maintain me , like a Dam'sel fair ? 


Cliton .  Yes , sure . 


Lyset .  Hast thou wherewith ? 


Cliton .  — Take you no care ▪ 


Lyset .  Who will secure me ? 


Cliton ,  ( pointing to Orontus . He , 


Orontus .  I 'll do 't , — give o'er . 


Lyset .  First let's the Money Count , — then I 'll say more . 


End of the Fifth ACT.  

FINIS . 

