Bristol Drollery . 

POEMS AND SONGS . 

By M r. C.  

LONDON , Printed for Charles Allen , Bookseller in Bristol , 1674.  

Bristol Drollery . 

't is a strange Title this , stay , let us see , 
Poems and Songs , and Bristol Drollery : 
Why then does any there pretend to Wit ? 
It must be like their Diamonds , Counterfeit : 
Does not the Author tell us flat and plain , 
Such a dull foggy Air does clog the brain ? 
That there we strive at Poetry in vain . 
That to the Wits 't is fatal , this does show 
Our Heads ache here , when but we would be so . 
This may be true , for aught I gather hence , 
The Author by this Book has no pretence 
To make us think he has more than common sense . 
Nor needed he to put his brains to 'th wrack , 
For by the help of one poor pint of Sack 
One might outdo him , ( if one had the knack ) 
For what is there that can more easy prove , 
then to tell Phillis plain , he dies for love . 
Thus much for 's Sense , and then as to his Rhymes 
they 're not so pleasant as your Christchurch Chymes ; 
( When on your Tolsey up and down you go ) 
Or noise of Guns , from Ships arrived below : 
Since 't is a Maxim   held all your lives , 
Dam ' Poetry , 't is he has Wit that thrives . 
To the young Gallants , etc.  

here 's a fresh Country Muse come up to Town , 
Which you on easy terms may make your own ; 
Receive her kindly then , and hear her tale , 
She may divert you now your own are stale . 
For at first view it plainly will appear 
't is the first Balladry of the New year ; 
Should a fresh Girl come up , could scarce speak sense , 
So she could do in figure , mood , and tense , 
I 'll warrant her , she never would be refused , 
Her two leaves would be opened , and perused ; 
Well , Sin will leave you when y' are old and grey , 
You must divert you then some other way , 
then will you sit and look as grave as they 
Who censure your behaviours , and the Play : 
Come , my dear hearts , be virtuous then betimes , 
Delight you in sweet Prose , and sweeter Rhymes : 
Your penance comes of drinking and high feeding , 
Head never aches so vilely after reading : 
It will Improve these ●ine white Periwigs , 
So full of crotchets and fantastic Jigs ; 
I will take you off your window-breaking tricks , 
Nor let all mirth lie ( buttoned ) in your bricks . 
If Bristol Muse has ever a good jest , 
Pary let it be roared out amongst the rest : 
And though she has not learned yet the way , 
She may be next of kin to an ill Play. 
But if she finds — 
no favour ' amongst you slighting , jeering men , 
( Betwixt her and I ) I have advised her then , 
I humbly to cast herself on Madam Behn . 
Jan. 1673 / 4.  N. C.  

To my Lord — at his Arrival in Bristol . 

Welcome to Town ( my Lord ) but yet I pray , 
For your own safety , that you would not stay , 
Wit , in this Country life's , it is well known , 
no longer than a Serpent in your own . 
That to the Wits 't is fatal , this doth show , 
Our heads ache here , when but , we would be so , 
Such a dull foggy air does clog the brain , 
That here we strive at Poetry in vain : 
then we have reason to implore your stay , 
Wits brightest Sun can clear these Mists away ; 
For you   taught the World to love and fight , 
By whose great pattern our best Poets write , 
And wisest Statesmen learn to steer aright ; 
Can shine to us with a perpetual light . 
Solon's Laws of Love.  

I  

Who would a perfect Lover's Title gain , 
Must bind his Love in a mysterious chain , 
His flames under a cloud must wear 
Jealous , lest any trembling Air 
Should to the Vulgar ears his passion bear , 
This is Love's seasoning ; for he 
Who would a curious Lover be , 
Fears lesle a Rival , than Discovery . 
II  

The nicest Lover oft does find 
A happiness in his extreme ; 
For Doubt and Caution make the mind 
Value what else had been a dream , 
The greatest goods have their esteem 
Not from themselves , but what we pay : 
We to our passions guide the way ; 
And the great Deity of Love does live , 
Not by the wounds he makes , but by the leave we give . 
III  

When all we wish crowns our desires , 
If Jealousy but gently move , 
't is like a Fan to blow those fires , 
And seems a kind Transport of Love. 
But let that Frenzy never gain the field , 
Nor by continuance grow so high 
That reason cannot force it yield , 
Or the least Oath make the Usurper fly . 
iv.  

th' unfledged Gallant at his first sight does swear 
His love eternal course shall hold , 
Though tried Experience tells those Vows are Air , 
And that no hope can be more rash or bold . 
Happy the Lover whose kind star 
Thinks worthy of a gift so rare ; 
But if its influence prove retrograde , 
Let not a sullen grief your breast invade : 
For Stars you will like Women find , 
Who are by humour false or kind , 
Without consulting the fond Lover's mind . 
v.  

That Lover whose desires unjustly tend , 
That only to his pleasures bend , 
't is fit should miss of his main end . 
But they are Stages in our way , 
And though they oft a heart betray , 
Are pretty Baits our Travels to allay . 
VI  

Sincerity in Love I much esteem 
As of all Laws the most supreme ; 
Yet for their Interest oft the wise 
Must cloth the Truth in a disguise . 
I like a dainty Lover would know all , 
Yet like a man of Human frailty , sure 
Would not my own disease procure ; 
Nor headlong on disquiet fall , 
But rather Ignorance , then despair endure . 
On a Lady passing by in a Coach , etc.  

SO sits the Mother of the God of Love , 
In her bright Chariot drawn by her white Dove ; 
As you , fair Nymph , if any such there be , 
For you were passed so soon I scarce could see ; 
Yet at a venture , I have paid my duty , 
To ( Madam , ) your imaginary beauty . 
May you drive on , whilst I devoutly pray 
You meet no tumbling accidents i' th' way : 
May you ne'er fall but in a softer place , 
To be made pleasant by a sweet embrace ; 
Whilst you partake part of those closer joys , 
Though not so private and so free from noise . 
A SONG . 

How pleasant it is to discover 
In the Mistress you love and adore , 
The coming regards of a Lover , 
She made you despair of before . 
At first with coy looks and disdain , 
She paid all your sighs and addresses ; 
But now that she pity's your pain , 
Her altered demeanour confesses . 
then o ! what a Joy 't is to find , 
At length that her pity improves , 
To a passion so true and so kind , 
As is next consummation of Loves . 
Whilst you ply her with warmer caresses , 
And close , as a Lover does use 
To fetter a Miss . in Embraces , 
Till she cannot tell how to refuse . 
SONG . 

Against Marriage . 

I  

A Fig for the state they call Holy , 
Let Hymen now be degraded ; 
For is't not a desperate folly , 
In a Journey for life to be jaded . 
II  

For the lust of a night or two 
To be plagued with the cares for ever ; 
Is like him that would hastily go 
hang himself to be rid of a Fever . 
III  

no more than I Roger take thee 
Pretty Susan , for better for worse . 
Nor shall the Priest ever tie me , 
That I cannot myself unloose . 
iv.  

Let some men , to people the world , 
With Children of doubtful begetting , 
Themselves into slavery hurl , 
And be Cuckolds without any letting . 
v.  

While for the convenience of life , 
amongst all the pretty kind she 's , 
Each Maid that I like , and each Wife , 
Shall be mine for as long as I please . 
SONG . 

Amyntas had Phillis fast locked in his arms , 
But Night from Amyntas hid Phillis' charms : 
He clipped , and he kissed , and he kissed her again , 
While she lay twinkling betwixt pleasure and pain : 
But still between kissing Amyntas did say , 
Fair Philis , look up , and you 'll turn Night to Day . 
But Phillis cried , o ! no , I cannot look on thee ; 
Day will too soon appear , now fie upon thee , 
For Phillis her blushes was loath to discover , 
But for each kiss he gave her , she gave him another : 
Yet still between kissing Amyntas did say , 
Fair Phillis , look up , and you 'll turn Night to Day . 
To Sylvia . 

Surely the Moon is down from Heaven fled , 
And Circles her bright self about your head , 
Leaving Endymion , and her Sphere , to move 
About your Face , that Brighter Heaven of Love : 
Though you , Madam , would have it understood 
( In modesty ) it is but your thin Hood , 
Full of black patches , and of yellow hue , 
So has dame Cynthia her black patches too . 
But , pardon me , if it deceive my sight , 
When such fair eyes , Madam , shall lend it light . 
SONG . 

How many are fond betrayed 
By Hymen's seeming glorious light , 
Until that they are Captives made , 
Like silly wand'ring Birds , by night . 
They take it for a splendid Sun , 
That cherishes with heat and light , 
Until at length they are undone , 
And so does every doting wight . 
Who with a Mistresses fair eyes , 
As with Sunbeams they dazzled are , 
Until the Priest in wedlock ties , 
And leads them to the shades of care . 
Thus the two treacherous Gods , 
Cupid and Hymen , deceive 'em , 
But 't is on a Wager great odds , 
they 'll have cause to repent that believe ' 'em . 
To Melissa , Concealing her Face , etc.  

Madam , It was unkindly done to hide 
What was our wonder , and , may be , your pride ; 
While we with veneration did look , 
You , from our eyes the glorious vision took : 
Fearing to share , such was your piety , 
In our Devotions to the Deity : 
Thus you prevented our Idolatry . 
Of else you conscious were , that our weak sight 
Might be struck blind , or hurt with too much light : 
And knowing well the power of your charms , 
Concealed your beauty , to prevent our harms : 
It must be so , alas ! no man was there , 
On whom ( for Love ) to look , you might not dare . 
Securely you may look on whom you will , 
Love lurks no where but in your eyes , to kill . 
Not to our Sex , nor yours , one dart doth fall ; 
You , and fair Amarillis have 'em all , etc.  
To Celia . 

That I 'm loved , bright Celia , by you , 
Is a bliss that I ne'er can believe ; 
Since naught to my merit is due , 
That my Torment you ever should relieve . 
My passion I dare not make known , 
For fear your disdain I should move , 
And rather than hazard your frown , 
I 'm content to suspect that you love . 
Yet afford me still smiles and kind glances , 
Till boldly the courage I take , 
In love , to make further advances , 
And say , Celia , I die for your sake . 
To Phillis and Cloris . 

What shall I say of you , whom all admire ? 
And that once spoke , I cannot raise you higher : 
By your Sex envied , and adored by men , 
Speaks your praise louder than a private pen : 
then I 'll accuse you , and that 's easier far , 
Of Crimes great Beauties often guilty are : 
And this by consequence bespeaks you fair , 
You then Heart-robbers , and Heart-breakers are . 
You rob , and death ensues against your will , 
For not restoring , those you rob , you kill : 
Yet howsoe'er , this privilege you have , 
It is your virtue that you do not save : 
Thus do your beauteous Sex , Physician like , 
Destroy unquestioned , as they do the sick . 
Next , Lovely Tyrants , you in fetters tie 
A many prisoners , that for you sigh , 
And yet themselves excuse your cruelty . 
Wretches , who their own freedom disallow , 
They are your Captives ' cause they will be so . 
Bondage so sweet they feel , such pleasing pains , 
They loathe their liberty , and love their chains . 
Thus much is laid unto your beauty 's fault , 
But in my Charge I now must make a halt ; 
For whatsoever harms to men you do , 
Still you are virtuous , and guiltless too . 
then since I needs must fall into your praise , 
Next , to your Wit , we do resign the Bays : 
Your Wit is such , who dare converse with you , 
Must , with their own , have all the Poets too : 
For though we yield to them at writing Plays , 
Some are as sharp , perhaps , at Repertees ; 
And these advantages to you belong , 
Your Voice is Music , and your Prose is Song . 
Virtue , Wit , Beauty joined , there needs no more . 
To make you Deities , and we adore . 
Thus ' 'gainst your charms there can be no defence , 
You are prepared to ravish every sense : 
But there is one , with which , besides the rest , 
Only the Happy ' enjoyers shall be blessed . 
SONG . 

I  

Unhappy is he , who love's her that 's above him , 
Whose Fortune is great , and perhaps she may love him : 
But his being mean , whilst his love runs so high , 
He sighs , and pines for that he never can enjoy . 
II  

If her friends are severe , and refuse to consent , 
They may make a close match on 't , and after repent ; 
For the pleasure being over that made 'em so willing , 
Small comfort 's in Love , where there 's never a shilling . 
III  

Yet , Beauty inviting , we straight fall in love , 
Though a bitter-sweet Passion it ever does prove ; 
With fits of fond hope we are often amused , 
But a juster despair tells us straight we are abused . 
iv.  

Yet still I 'll love on , though it difficult prove , 
Since there is more Life , and more Glory in Love : 
For in meaner Intriqus , where with ease we enjoy , 
Our Love soon grows faint , and the pleasure does cloy . 
Overtaking a Stranger in the Street . 

Madam , I saw you but behind , yet I 
could not forbear to follow you and sigh . 
The wound you gave was sudden , and yet sweet , 
You ( like the Parthians ) slew in your retreat . 
Your shape and mien so charming did appear , 
Made me suspect you greater charms did wear . 
Your face was veiled , whilst yet within your hood , 
I fancied those too strong to be withstood : 
And that in pity of our weaker sight , 
You shadowed o'er your eyes too dazzling light . 
I was about to have myself addressed , 
And your new conquest unto you confessed : 
But being too mean a one for you to own , 
I , for my boldness , had deserved your frown . 
Thus I gave o'er , but to prevent a smart , 
Past cure of Herbs , and the physician 's art ; 
Yet , Madam , I confess , you for an hour , 
Usurped the thoughts due to her I adore . 
Love , pardon my Inconstancy , and then , 
May my Saint hate me , if I err again . 
SONG . 

I  

Hung her that has no Intrigue in her , 
To Kirk , or a Conventicle 
She trips like a pitiful sinner , 
And sighs , whilst her tears down trickle . 
II  

A Playhouse she will not come near , 
For fear of a naughty man , 
Should whisper his love in her ear , 
And play with her mask , or fan . 
III  

With the wicked , nor yet with his seed , 
With none but a Brother she 'll do ; 
Oh! this is a pure one indeed , 
With her I 'll have nothing to do . 
iv.  

Give me her that is frolic and free , 
At a Play , or a Treat , well behaved ; 
Can honest and confident be , 
no question but she shall be saved . 
To Phillis . 

MY Dearest , since my heart is thine , 
And thou didst thy own resign , 
Let no Jealous Eye , nor Ear , 
Keep us longer slaves to fear . 
We , not like common Lovers wooed , 
But at distance understood 
How our Passions first did rise , 
By the language of our Eyes . 
With amorous eager looks and sighs , 
And what else Lovers can device ; 
Long we did each other prove ; 
But , Oh! the pains of silent Love.  
Others may meet , and talk , and kiss , 
The common happy road to bliss ; 
While we afraid , lest some should spy , 
And take us in Love-felony . 
then , Sweet , let us be bold and free , 
Our sufferings cannot greater be ; 
And what if Friends do not consent ? 
Despair's a greater punishment . 
True Lovers seldom are undone , 
But by their Cowardice alone . 
And did thy flame , as mine , burn bright , 
Those of Hell could not affright . 
Ah , Phillis , think how great a Joy 
' Twoud , in each others Arms to lie , 
And talk of all our past devices , 
Breathing out our Souls in kisses . 
This , and a thousand Joys do move , 
then , Phillis , let 's complete our Love ; 
But if thou wilt not venture , I 
Will make a sad retreat , and die . 
SONG . 

I  

Love and Desire provoke 'em to 't , 
But Parents won't give way ; 
Alas , poor Girls , they fain would do 't , 
Nor can for Husbands stay . 
II  

Nor for Conveniency nor Wealth 
Would they delay their time ; 
't is better Mary then by stealth , 
Whilst beauty 's in its prime . 
III  

then let some wealth Fop enjoy 
Your bed , whom Parents choose ; 
To such you only should be coy , 
And only them refuse . 
iv.  

But unto him whom you love well , 
Though he no Jointure has ; 
Give yourselves freely , let none sell , 
't is clear ' 'gainst Nature's Laws . 
v.  

And what if Friends do huff a while , 
Love covers all your failing , 
The storm once past , Fortune will smile , 
And they give o'er their rail . 
SONG . 

Then make good use of whilst you may , 
The little time you have to play : 
When eyes have lost their sparkling grace , 
And 't shall be said you had a face ; 
It is not patch , nor paint , nor dress , 
That can retrieve your prettiness . 
Youth and Native Beauty charms , 
〈…〉 lls with Joy a Lovers Arms.  
〈◊〉 a slip you then , 
〈…〉 are fair , be kind to men ; 
〈◊〉 your Lovers kiss and court , 
〈◊〉 refuse the other sport : 
〈◊〉 you are old , there 's none will do 't , 
〈◊〉 you these favours prostitute . 
On some Ladies , enviously said to decay in Beauty . 

Whoe're shall say , that now their Beauty sades , 
And that they look like Mother of the Maids ; 
To such we will be bold to give the lie , 
And yet allow their looks some gravity ; 
The Rose full blown , though nearest to its fall , 
then the young bud , lesle fair nor sweet , we call . 
Of Landlord Time , that Beauty let's , and set , 
They have a Lease of six or seven yet . 
Alas ! too few , but yet I grieve to speak , 
How many hearts ( ever it expires ) they 'll break . 
  Charms to lengthen yet a bloody reign , 
Fatal to such shall suffer their disdain . 
Long have we felt the fury of their Eyes , 
At every glance they make a sacrifice ; 
Who dares to look , and love , despairs and dies . 
Ah! may their darts never with lesle vigour fly , 
The deaths which such eyes give , who would not die ? 
SONG . 

I  

For fair Amaryllis I often do sigh , 
And to see her I take delight ; 
But when Phillis appears , o ! for her I could die ; 
She alone fixes my wand'ring sight . 
II  

A General Beauty Adorer I am , 
And ever it makes me to pine ; 
But 't is Phillis alone has kindled a flame , 
I cannot tell how to define . 
III  

Whatever has been said by a Lover in pain , 
His passionate fits to discover ; 
And more for her sake I endure , but in vain , 
For I dare not tell her I love her . 
iv.  

And yet the same Passion her tender heart warms , 
If I by her looks can divine ; 
〈◊〉 that we are not happy in each others arms , 
〈◊〉 as little her fault as mine . 
Against Cupid , etc.  

AH ! Sacrilegious boy , to murder where 
We offer up our Sacrifice and Prayer . 
I stood not there as at Diana's shrine , 
Blaspheming ' 'gainst thy Mother's power and thine : 
Nor yet so full of zeal , as to defy 
Thy darts , when such a fair as She was nigh : 
Had I been there petitioning great Jove , 
Thence to exclude the wanton God of Love : 
then , with just rage , thou mightst have punished me , 
And I had not impeached thy Cruelty . 
Men for their Crimes unto the Church do fly , 
And there betimes make it their Sanctu'ary ; 
thou more profane , dost even there the fact , 
And in the Sacred place committest the Act. 
thou tak'st thy stand in some fair lady 's eye , 
And when thou 'st slain , mak'st that thy Sanctu'ary . 
But 't is thy crime that thou hast struck but one , 
A double Murder shall thy guilt atone . 
Reverse thy Arrows then , and pierce her heart , 
That she may feel her suffering Lover's smart . 
Do this , dear Love , and from a Foe I 'll be 
The greatest Adorer of thy Deity . 
SONG . 

't is better be Miss . and Gallant , then be tied 
In Marriage , the dull way of Bridegroom and Bride . 
And , saith , my dear Miss , if you knew but your Lover , 
you 'd resolve to enjoy him before any other . 
I swear by that dearest adoreable face , 
By each Heart-winning charm , and ravishing grace ; 
If he pleased you not better , then hate him , dear Phillis , 
then Amintas did Celia , or fair Amarillis . 
't is better , by stealth , to your pleasures make haste , 
then slay year after year , for a Coxcomb at last . 
Thus Ladies ( by fear , and their Fathers ) are fooled , 
more than ( had they but Wit , Love , and Courage ) they would . 
On the death of Mistress Sarah Friar . 

TO the fair Female Readers , this I write , 
A Beauty late , but now eclipsed in night . 
Sweet , young , and virtuous , as it may be you , 
Death sure , ( like men ) Covets such Misses too . 
A Horrid Ravisher , who ever did ' scape , 
On whom he lusted to commit a Rape : 
When he does Court , the young and chaste must fall , 
In vain for aid , in vain for help they call . 
In shades of death , and silent grave she lies , 
Methinks your Tears drop now , I hear your sighs ; 
Offerings that would enrich her shrine far more 
Than any Saints , whom the devout adore . 
Go pay 'em there , see how the willing air , 
Would said commix its breath with yours more rare ; 
The greedy Earth would those rich showers receive 
With as great Joy , as you with sorrow give : 
From thence would spring , a wonder for to see , 
Myrtles for Lovers , and sad Cypress tree : 
There rest her body , whilst her soul 's fled higher , 
And thus your beauteous Convent lost a Friar . 
SONG . 

Come , let 's drink the night away , 
Let the married sleep it out , 
( After a short minutes play 
At the Sport ) we 'll drink about . 
Fill the Glass up , when 't is out , 
Those are pleasures are but vain , 
Whilst they empty at a bout 
What they cant recruit again ▪ 
Every minute we will sport us , 
And in no fond Amours burn , 
Let the Lasses woe and court us , 
Ever we do them a good turn . 
Yet to make up our delight , 
we 'll have Wine and Wenches too , 
At the one to pass a night , 
And sometimes give these their due . 
SONG . 

I  

Clarinda's graces ' scape the sight 
Of th'unapprehensive Sot , 
Whose dulness hinders his delight , 
Whilst I extremely dote . 
II  

But yet the Torments I endure , 
Do make me wish to be 
( Because she 'll not afford the cure ) 
As unconcerned as he 
III  

then to o'ercome her cold neglect , 
My Passion I 'll remit ; 
And what in others is defect , 
I 'll strive to sergeant . 
iv.  

I will not sigh , nor shed a tear , 
My heart I will retrieve ; 
Yet though my flame does not appear , 
I 'll keep it still alive . 
v.  

Thus will I seem indifferent , 
Uncaptived by her eyes ; 
Until Clarinda shall relent , 
Like them , I will seem wise . 
March 5. 73.  To Phillis . 

Give o'er , my dear Phillis , to whisper and smile , 
You betray my poor heart , and undo me the while : 
Yet whilst I look on you , so sweet and so nice , 
For the pleasures I feel , I 'd refuse Paradise . 
I die when I see you the length of a street , 
But o ! how you murder when nearer we meet . 
't is then that my heart to your bosom straight fly's , 
To be safe from the darts shot so thick from your eyes : 
But then when I think on , and do but compare , 
Amyntas unhappy , and Phillis so fair ; 
Oh! than my heart breaks , and I die with despair . 
Whilst thus I choose rather alone to complain , 
then tell her I love , and am killed with disdain . 
The Shepherd's Complaint . 

When Cleon rested in the shade , 
His Crook and Scrip down by him laid , 
And all his Flock about him played ; 
He knew no heat but of the day , 
But now he feels a fiercer ray . 
When Cleon folded up his sheep , 
then on a grassy Turf could sleep , 
He had nor grief , nor cause to weep : 
He knew no dew but Heavens' store , 
But now his watery eyes make more . 
When Cleon tu●ed his Oaten reed , 
And had no care but 's Lambs to feed , 
He was a happy Swain indeed . 
But since he has heard so sweet a noise , 
Which now poor Cleon's mirth destroys . 
〈◊〉 would you know the cause of 's pain , 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 eyes , and voices strain ; 
Accompanied with her high disdain . 
SONG . 

Philida had had lost her Swain , 
Phil●●a had lost her Swain ; 
● not find him ' amongst the train 
Of all the jolly Shepherds : 
To the Wood she fled amain , 
Enquired him of the Blackbirds . 
〈…〉 then , yond . lies thy dear , 
On● sung then , yond . lies thy dear , 
And has got fair Sylvia there , 
Circled within his arms ; 
Phillida then tore her hair , 
And vowed by all her charms : 
Once did gain Amintas love , 
Once did g●●… Amintas love ; 
She a truer Swain would prove , 
And never more come near him : 
Still she swore by Gods above , 
That she would ever forsake him . 
then a bill of purest Gold , 
then a bill of purest Gold , 
' Cause he Aminta's falsehood told , 
She give the little Blackbird ; 
But at Amintas she did scold , 
The faithless , wanton shepherd . 
To Cloria . 

Cloria shut those murdering eyes , 
Where the blind God in ambush lies : 
They are the Suns do give him light , 
Direct the Boy to shoot aright . 
Rather than thus be made his prey , 
I , for a time , will know no day ; 
But if thy Eyelids are not proof , 
I must then keep me far aloof . 
Already he has sent a dart , 
Has made me feel a grievous smart ; 
Another shot may mortal prove , 
Without the balsam of thy Love.  
then keep him close , and let him know 
no use of Quiver or of Bow ; 
But if he will no Prisoner lie , 
Though ' amongst the glories of thy Eye ; 
Perhaps he 'll strive to come at me , 
And in revenge , he may wound thee : 
then Cloria , if thou shed a tear , 
I●le bring my wound , and bathe it there . 
To Melissa . 

AH ! how much power in beauty lies to kill , 
I saw , was wounded , and am bleeding still ; 
Thus you 're a murderer against your william 
Let this your pity then , nor wonder move , 
't is no presumption to die for Love : 
Upon these terms no man can love too high , 
't is frce for any to despair , and die . 
He lesle endures that does conceal his pain , 
't is lesle to die than suffer your disdain . 
Thus what I would pretend to hide , I show , 
I name the thing , yet say you shall not know . 
But , sweet Melissa , pardon me , I rave , 
Love fits for Bedlam first , and then a Grave . 
Aminta's Complaint ▪ 

A Heart as mine in love so torn , 
Was ne'er by wretched Lover worn ; 
When Fate decrees , Love must be dumb , 
life 's a continual Martyrdom ; 
For all that yet lies in my pow'er , 
Is in her sight to fit an hour ; 
There to languish , pine , and sigh , 
Receive fresh wounds , and bleed , and die . 
Whilst all I have to ease my pain , 
Is but to think she love's again ; 
If Phillis smile , and kindly glance , 
The pleasure puts me in a trance ; 
But when again she seems to slight 
My sufferings , equal my delight ; 
And this is poor Aminta's fare , 
A fit of Joy , and then Despair ; 
Doubting still lest he should prove 
Her true Disdain , but seeming Love.  
SONG . 

IF Amintas and Phillis love well one another , 
What needs as much money of one side as tother . 
What difference betwixt low and high , 
When Love can make equality ? 
Let Parents than esteem their wealth , 
Whilst we enjoy our Amorous stealth ; 
't is pity true Love should be lost , 
Since we can love upon free cost : 
And carry still about us treasure , 
Can furnish out a feast of pleasure . 
Let 's meet in an Entry , or underground Cellar , 
Each place is a Palace , where love 's an Indweller , 
then Phillis , let me you advice , 
Whom you shall choose with your own eyes , 
Though he at lowest Fortune lies : 
Let him not die your sacrifice . 
SONG . 

How blessed was I , when in the throng 
Of Mourners , I stood there among , 
So near to her whom I adore ; 
And gently pressed her dearest arm , 
Whilst pleasure did my sense alarm . 
Eclypsed in grief , the Nymph there stood , 
Hiding her glories in her hood ; 
For if she had her beams displayed , 
I should not then endured the sight , 
But had been blinded with the light . 
Yet I so many Charms saw , 
As to my Senses straight gave Law , 
While she her dearest eyes concealed , 
And Coward Love advantage took , 
For fear of kill with a look . 
Something she held in her dear hand , 
Love's dart I needs would understand , 
Which she in mourning ribbons trimmed ; 
As 't were for sorrow of the pain , 
Or death of him whom Love had slain . 
So cold I 'm sure she felt my touch , 
Death could not give another such , 
Whilst bleeding there I stood , 
Almost as dead with wounds she gave , 
As he , that then was laid in grave . 
But straight the Funeral rites were done , 
My happiness as soon was gone , 
Another lead my Saint away , 
And left me there in vain to sigh , 
For such another touch I 'd die . 
SONG . 

I  

Phillis , since you can never be mine , 
( Not that lesle kind I 'll prove ) 
I wish in him that shall be thine , 
All my extremes of Love.  
II  

In what a rapture then of bliss 
Entranced , he then will lie , 
Breathing his Soul in every kiss , 
And every amorous Sigh . 
III  

When on that sacred night of Love , 
Your Bodies shall unite ; 
And every ravished sense shall prove 
The excesses of delight . 
iv.  

Think , Dearest , then on me forlorn , 
Waking , and thoughtful lying ; 
Thus cruelly from Phillis torn , 
For Love and Sorrow dying . 
To Aminda and Melissa , A Fairing . 

Just such a Fairing 't is , as when they say , 
You are the Fairest I have seen to day ; 
That I present , but not without much pain , 
The idle issue of a damned dull brain ; 
So dull , it scarce can tell what to say next , 
Like some dull Parson when h' has named his Text : 
But to your Censure , Ladies , I submit , 
Besides , I fear the scand'alous name of Wit , 
Here , in a sober , serious , trading Town , 
Where nought's esteemed but Wealth , and a Furred Gown : 
All o'er i  been , yet nor at shop nor standing , 
Have I beheld one Face , as yours , commanding . 
no charms so powerful as those you wear , 
Are to be seen at every Country Fair ; 
Rich Points there were , rich Gowns , and Coats with Lace , 
Here an Ill-featured , there , a Nut brown face : 
You I saw not , perhaps , you feared to be 
The death of every stranger that you see : 
The Town have felt the fury of your Eyes , 
And they would make the Country too their prize . 
What if no Husband yet falls to your lot ? 
You as the Angels are , and marry not . 
It is your glory thus to lead your lives , 
While 't is for vulgar Women to make Wives : 
For should I go about your Fame to raise , 
And speak of Virtue , Wit , and Eyes bright rays , 
Youth , Beauty , Wealth , ( at the old rate of Praise ; 
And whatsoever else makes fit Wives for Kings , 
You have , and are ( sweet Ladies ) all these things . 
To the same . 

no wonder , Ladies , you for Husbands tarry , 
You are Divine , and Angels do not marry . 
Presuming nor to Love , nor Love implore , 
Instead of courting you , men fall t' adore ; 
They dare not tempt you to the Joys of sense , 
Since your Divinity is your defence . 
The Goddess was not by the Youth enjoyed ; 
Only for seeing her naked , was destroyed . 
Unsaint yourselves , and be but Flesh and Blood , 
And Men may venture on your Womanhood ; 
For whilst in Glory ( Goddess-like ) you shine , 
You are not fit for sheets , but for a shrine . 
On Mr. F. Knight , Deceased . 

Virtue's thou hadst enough to boast , 
Pity , that they so soon were lost : 
no Vice , but what might well agree 
With one so gallant ( Fitz ) as thee : 
Great in thy air and address , 
Nor was thy Wit and Spirit lesle : 
Temper so generous and free , 
It were too mean a thing for thee 
To be enrolled i' th' List of Fame , 
A Knight by Title , as by Name . 
A Mock-poem on the Waters of the Hot Well , and other things thereabouts . 

I  

ALL you that rise early to walk to the Well , 
Perhaps you ne'er heard what the Keeper can tell ; 
then since your kind Poet has made you a Song on 't , 
Pray Ladies , take here the short and the long on 't . 
II  

When Coridon calls Amaryllis to rise , 
She stretches , and yawns , and she rubs her fair eyes , 
then to mend her Complexion , as white as is Chalk , 
He takes her fair hand , and then hither they walk . 
III  

He tells her his Love as along they do go , 
While she listens and smiles , as her Lover does woo ; 
But there 's nothing can cure her , her Love being ripe , 
Like that , that comes from a full running pipe . 
iv.  

Let Amyntas and Phillis as hotly pursue 
The Sport , to their Loves , and her Beauty is due ; 
Yet let 'em be never so mad on delight , 
A Gallon will make 'em hold out until night . 
v.  

Young Thyrsis the Shepherd comes over the Ferry , 
To meet his Aminda , to Quaff and be merry , 
To kiss , and to court ; but to make up the matter , 
there 's more to be said than a cup of cold Water . 
VI  

He swears that her heart is as hard as the Rocks , 
To refuse the rich heir to so many flocks ; 
then drinks a full Glass to her health on his knee , 
And throws up his Cap ; what a fellow is he ? 
VII . 

If fair Amoretta and Sylvia come here , 
The Nymphs of the Wood and the Waters appear ; 
They throng to pay homage unto their fair eyes , 
And give good morrows to their bright Deities . 
VIII . 

The Cit's that come here with their Wives e'ery morn , 
( 't is a hint close enough ) let 'em drink in a horn : 
Though ne'er so horn mad , it will keep 'em as sober , 
And their Wives chaste and cool , as a Morn in October . 
IX . 

A Wench that has lain with her Lover all night , 
To prevent any harm may ensue their delight ; 
May get her up early , and hither but come , 
then drink till she spews , and the business is done . 
Thou our Waters can cool all your warm Inclinations , 
And cure the mad Zealot that talks Revelations , 
Can give the green Girl in her cheeks a fine red , 
And help to keep longer her loathed Maidenhead . 
XI . 

The Ancient and grave , the young , and the frolic , 
Are troubled with Diseases , the Stone and the Colic , 
The Pox , or the Gout , may instead of more Physic , 
Come drink of our Well , and be cured , or still be sick . 
XII . 

It ne'er yet had enemy that I can tell , 
But your Poets and Doctors , who damn it to Hell ; 
And swear that he never was yet a good thinker , 
Or healthy , or wise , that is a water-drinker . 
XIII . 

Here Cupid the Archer does oft shoot at Rovers , 
here 's Stones for the Ladies , and Break-necks for Lovers ; 
There Boats down below on the River do move , 
And herbs can make Medicines to cure or cause Love.  
FOURTEEN . 

The place not far distant , they call Giant's hole , 
Was Charon's , that ferries the poor Lover's soul ; 
But since in these parts there 's so few die for Love , 
( The fare he likes best ) h' has since made his remove . 
xv.  

And for Virtues , you see , our Hot well does not lack , 
If to the well you come well , may be well you go back , 
〈…〉 after cup , till your bellies do crack , 
〈…〉 high bloods ; but there 's naught 〈…〉 
On a handsome Woman sitting in the Bar of a Tavern . 

Sure 't is Love's Bar , that youth stands there , 
Is Bailiff errand to the Fair ; 
And all the rest about her move , 
Attendants on the Queen of Love : 
Willing for a while to sport 
In jolly Bacchus' drunken Court : 
But who comes here , will surely prove 
Not half so drunk with Wine , as Love.  
The Beggars . 

Now rattling comes my Lady's Coach , 
And all the Beggars they approach , 
To crave her Honour's Charity , 
Which is so great a rarity ; 
But away drives she as swift as the wind , 
And leaves many a Pox and Plague take her behind . 
To a young Lady in a Garden , The Roses speech . 

Fairest , if you Roses seek , 
Take the nearest like your Cheek : 
ay , the Damask , would presume 
To tender you my sweet perfume : 
I am young , like you , a Bud , 
Peeping through my green hood ; 
Blushing only ' cause I see 
Fresher Roses grow on thee . 
Crop me then , and let me lie 
In the Sunshine of thine eye , 
Till full blown , then let me grow 
In thy bosom , next thy Snow ; 
That I may find , when my leaves fall , 
In that sweet place , a Funeral . 
then Celia , be you like the Rose , 
Who its season wisely chose : 
Do not keep your Maiden Flower 
Beyond its time , its full ripe hour : 
Like the Rose , you need not offer , 
But when a worthy hand doth proffer , 
Refuse not , Celia , on my life , 
you 'll wear as fresh when you 're a Wife . 
Let not your Beauties untouched die , 
Or withered , and neglected lie ; 
Rather let them thrive i' th' light 
Of his Amorous eager sight : 
That when at last they fall , and spread , 
It may be sweetly on his bed . 
On her Absence . 

She left the place , and sooner there 
Approached dull Winter than elsewhere . 
She but withdrew her influence , 
And chilling cold , did straight dispense 
O'er all the Earth , and every plant , 
Of her sad absence felt the want ; 
When she returned , then as before , 
Their freshest Summer liv'ry wore ; 
Thus absence , presence of her ray , 
Makes Summer Winter in a day . 
On Chloris . 

The widowed Chloris to the Grove , 
would go to spy the Turtle Dove : 
How she constant mourning sat , 
For loss of her beloved mate . 
Behind a Willow stood the Fair , 
And did its loss with hers compare : 
All her Passions she renewed , 
And her fair cheeks with tears bedewed : 
then all about the Bird would flee , 
Seeking her Mate on every tree : 
And as the Turtle grieved and loved , 
So with like Passions Chloris moved : 
When straight another Turtle flew , 
And the widowed Dove did woo ; 
She soon agreed , they billed and kissed , 
And did the other seats , you wist . 
Her constancy did fab'lous prove , 
Or Nature broke her Laws for Love : 
Chloris , same Fortune wished herself , 
Although it was a Love by stealth . 
then forthwith from my Covert I , 
From whence all this I did espy , 
Came , and surprised the beauteous Dame , 
And offered her as pure a flame . 
Hereat she blushed , and blushing fled , 
But quickly after her I sped ; 
Yet not so soon as Love got in , 
And her sweet consent did win . 
She dried her tears , she sweetly smiled , 
And all her sorrows were exiled ; 
then under that same happy tree , 
As did the Turtles , so did we . 
SONG . 

I  

Caelia , in vain thou strivest by art , 
Thus to take in my invincible hea●● 
I ne'er was in Love , yet I love to do . 
And give dull Platonics leave for 〈…〉 
no Caelia , be sure I 'll conquer thy 〈◊〉 
then take me , and fold me 
Within thy soft arms . 
II  

I ne'er will be caught by thy sparkling eye , 
Nor for thy dimples , in love will I fry ; 
For any beauty , or singular grace , 
That can be found in thy Body or Face : 
no Caelia , be sure I 'll vanquish those Charms , 
then take me , and fold me 
Within thy soft arms . 
III  

Slave-like , I will not be chained to an Oar , 
Still tossed on Love's Seas , and ne'er come to Shoar , 
Nor will I win pleasure by Love's cruel pain , 
Be but once free , and thine will be the gain . 
then Celia , do not depend on thy Charms , 
But clip me , embrace me 
Within thy soft arms . 
Love's Stagg . 

I  

IN Love I have been now a tedious hour , 
I would not be one more under his power ; 
I harmless did gaze on her beauteous eyes , 
The God shot a dart , and made me his prize : 
OH quickly draw it , I run , and I bleed , 
And on my poor heart the Vulture doth feed . 
II  

See the fair Huntress pursues me apace , 
And her swift cruelties after me trace : 
But rather then longer endure her storms , 
I could trun head , and defend with my horns : 
then quickly draw the dart , running I bleed , 
And on my poor heart the Vulture doth feed . 
III  

My force it is spent , from thee , cruel Fair , 
To make my escape , I am in despair ; 
Oh! now I faint , I faint , I fall , I die , 
And all are on me now with a full cry : 
Dearest , then pity me , salve up my wound , 
Thy bleeding Victim I lie on the ground . 
SONG . 

I  

The Sports on the green we 'll leave to the Swains , 
The rise of their loves , and reward of their pains ; 
At the Tavern we 'll dine , then close up the day , 
At night , at a Mask , a Ball , or a Play. 
And when this is done , we 'll laugh and lie down , 
And our Evening delights sweet slumbers shall crown . 
II  

At the Pell we will play , or a race we will run , 
we 'll sport with the racket , and when that is done , 
At Cribbage , at In , or at Hazard amain , 
From Tick or Baggamon we will not refrain : 
And when we have done , we 'll laugh and lie down , 
And our passed delights sweet slumber shall crown . 
III  

then we 'll away to the Gardens or Park , 
With Lures for the Ladies , instead of the Lark , 
With graces attractive , are fetched from Love's Mine , 
And his darts shall secure us the prey we design . 
And when we have done , we 'll laugh and lie down , 
And dream of our Loves , enjoyment shall crown . 
iv.  

With the delicate Nymphs we 'll toy and we 'll kiss , 
So long till we find they will yield tother bliss ; 
we 'll tempt pretty Susan , and Margaret , and Jenny , 
For midnight access , with the bribe of a Guiney ; 
And when we have done , we 'll strip and lie down , 
And then with enjoyment our Loves we will crown . 
SONG . 

I  

AT first sight of Beauty I passionate prove , 
And never can keep a mean in my Love , 
Cupid stands bend , and a dart he let's fly , 
That pierces my heart , soon as ever I come nigh : 
then o , the pangs , o , the pains I endure , 
If she prove not so kind as to cure . 
II  

If when I address without coyness or state , 
She hears my Complaint , than I thank my kind Fate ; 
But if I discover her love by a glance , 
A sigh , or a smile , than I boldly advance . 
But o , the pangs , o , the pains I endure , 
lest she prove not so kind as to cure . 
III  

Sometimes I fear lest she should not prove true , 
Or that she 'll deny me the bliss I pursue . 
But if she dispells all my fears with a kiss , 
I am almost arrived at the height of my bliss , 
But o , the pangs , o , the pains I endure , 
Until she proves so kind as to cure . 
iv.  

Unhappy's the Lover that 's plunged in despair , 
And wretched is he , and as great is his care ; 
With the love of a Beauty that 's cruel , diseased , 
But nothings so sweet as a flame that 's appeased . 
Nor any Joys , any Blisses so pure , 
As when she applies the right cure . 
A Dialogue . 

W.   Hold , hold , Sir , you strike me so sore , 
Will you murder the vanquished , and never give o'er ? 


M.   no ( Cannibal-like ) on the flesh I will feed , 
't is not mercy to pity , though thou dost bleed . 


W.   Help , help , now it comes , it comes down , 
  tickled me so that I 'm ready to swoon . 


M.   Fear not , there needs no recovering skill , 
't is a pleasant encounter that never does kill . 


W.   O , why then do you rub me , d' ye shake me so , fie , 
Can't you let a poor woman die ? 


Phillis the fairest of the train 
Of Lasses , loved by every Swain 
Of the Wood , and neighbouring Plain . 
The very name of Phillis is , 
Assoon as spoken , the Shepherd's bliss , 
And they all court her , hit or miss . 
When the Amorous Shepherds will is , 
To dance a round , then , hey for Phillis , 
And each one strives to dance with Phillis . 
When ever they sing , or when they play , 
On Oaten pipe , a roundelay ; 
't is to charm Phillis' cares away . 
When they are met at Colon's house , 
They toss the brimful Bowl and bowze : 
And healths to Phillis all carouse . 
If Phillis sheep are gone astray , 
Each willing shepherd runs his way , 
And does his utmost service pay . 
But Thyrsis is the happy Swain , 
't is said , will Phillis Love obtain , 
And all the rest but sue in vain . 
Bring us Wine , and Venice Glasses , 
Here are three of Venus' Lasses , 
Plump and tender as the Grapes are , 
And as Juicy , when they pressed are : 
Come fill 'em up , and let them pass , 
Healthing brimmers to each Lass : 
Such , whose faces far outshine 
The flowery top o' th' sparkling Wine . 
Now , thirsty , drink until we prove 
more thirsty for the sports of Love. 
Phoebus , no sooner set's in th' Sea , 
But we 'll to bed as fast as he ; 
And if ( for aught we know ) his Flame , 
He quenches with some watery Dame. 
Not that great Celestial Light , 
then we , shall reap more free delight . 
SONG . 

One Evening to kiss , 
I walked with my Miss . 
And straight to a Grove we came ; 
Where in the cool shade 
We sported and played , 
And eased us of our flame , 
But o , then how her eyes did discover , 
The delight she received from her Lover . 
The Dew began to fall , 
And the Night-birds to call , 
So homewards went Chloris and I , 
To speak of our Joys , 
And such other toys , 
Would make your Love Passions run high : 
But o , how her eyes her delight did discover , 
While I played the part of a hot-metled Lover . 
SONG . 

I  

Said Phillida , 
Said Phillida 
To Coridon , Let us be merry ; 
then Coridon , 
then Coridon 
Said , Come let us over the Ferry . 
On th' other side 
I 'll make thee my Bride , 
And then with the Bottle of Leather , 
With the Neigh'bring Swains 
we 'll dance on the Plains , 
And fuddle , and frolic together . 
II  

There I 'll kiss thee , 
And then caper , 
While my blood does grow warmer and warmer : 
then the Lasses shall sing us to Town a , 
we 'll do tother feat 
When thee and I meet , 
On a bed that 's as soft as the down a.  
Solemnising shines not through all the year so bright , 
As my dear Julia did the other night . 
Cynthia came masked in an Eclipse to see 
What gave the world a greater light than she : 
But angry , soon she disappeared and fled , 
Into her Inner Rooms , and so to bed . 
I envied not Endymion's Joys that night , 
Far greater had I with her lustre-light . 
Venus and Bacchus . 

A Mock-dialogue . 

Ven.   Fie on thee Bacchus , thou art drunk . 


Bach.   thou liest , thou Celestial Punk , 
I am not so . 


Ven.   thou wouldst not else have so abused my Deity . 


Bach.   What if I did Attempt thy tail , 
Disguised in Mars his Coat of mail ? 


Ven.   A Mocking-sport for all the Gods , 


Bach.   Lesle than Vulcan's by much odds . 
Bowls of Nectar flow for thee , 
If thou wilt be but sweet on me . 


Ven.   But what if Vulcan know ? 


Bach.   I 'll drench his sooty , chimney soul in Wine . 


Ven.   If Mars discover , he 'll not fail , 


Bach.   To lash thee with the Dragons Tayl.  


Ven.   Ah , ha , thou knowest it well . 


Bach.   As well as thou : My Juice can charm him fast asleep . 


Ven.   thou art too strong by odds . 


Bach.   If so , let Wine and Love then conquer Gods.  


Ven.   then whirl we both our Spheres together , 
And I will be , and I will be light as a feather ; 
I 'll kiss , embrace my loving Bunch , 
Ever be thy Hony-com-punch . 


SONG . 

The Fairies . 

Come my Jenny , pretty one , 
Thee and I will all alone , 
High to yonder Fairy ground , 
Where last night they tripped around : 
And ( free from Mortal eyes ) by stealth , 
There skiped and danced each little Elf. 
There , on the grass we 'll sport and play , 
And thou shalt prove as light as they . 
If Corydon and Phillis spy , 
Or any bold intruding eye ; 
we 'll pray transforming Gods above , 
That we ( like those ) may Fairies prove . 
And when   changed shapes and hue , 
we 'll haunt , and fright , and pinch them too . 
August 5. 1673.  Phillis and Amintas . SONG . 

I  

Fair Phillis in a Grove alone , 
Securely sat , and made her moan , 
Whilst her Amintas lay concealed , 
And heard the secret she revealed . 
And as she cried , o ! how I love ; 
Echo replied still , I love . 
II  

It was the love of her dear Swain 
Amintas , caused her thus complain : 
He who no sign of Love before 
Ever saw in her he did adore , 
But as she cried , I pine and die , 
Echo replied still , and I  
III  

〈◊〉 said she , would I might hear 
Amintas speak , like Echo there : 
could I but hear that kind reply , 
From the sweet Youth , for whom I die : 
And then she cried , o ! how I love , 
Whilst Echo still replied , I love . 
iv.  

Amintas could no longer hold 
Himself obscured ; in Love grew bold : 
And took such heart from what he heard , 
Unkindness nor repulse he feared : 
But unto Phillis ran amain , 
And swore he was her faithful Swain ; 
And such kind words did Phillis move , 
She there took earnest of his Love.  
The Lover's Agony . 

I  

Come blow keen blasts , and cool my Love , 
Beg ye that power of great Jove : 
And if you needs will know for why , 
Oh! 't is for Amorett I die . 
II  

My sighs make storms , I hear of late , 
  shipwrecked Vessels of the State ▪ 
I cannot help 't , o ! how I fry : 
For cruel Amoretta I die . 
III  

Come , gentle South , send thy kind showers 
Down quickly from thy water bowers ; 
May soaken through my parched soul , 
And may its scorching heat control . 
iv.  

My warmer sighs send so much rain , 
Does trickle down my cheeks amain ; 
That very tears drop from my eyes , 
Raise high the Country's floods , and cries . 
v.  

I 'd be no Enemy to th' State , 
Nor would procure the people's hate , 
then , Phoebus , thaw her Soul , else I 
For frozen Amorett must die . 
SONG . 

WE are born , then cry 
We know not for why ; 
And all our lives long 
Still but the same Song . 
Our lives are but short , 
we 're made Fortunes sport , 
We spend them in care , 
In hunting the hare . 
In tossing the pot , 
In venturing our Lot 
At dice , when we play 
To pass time away . 
We dress ourselves fine , 
At Noon we do dine , 
We walk then abroad , 
Or ride on the road : 
With women we dally , 
Retreat and rally , 
And then in the bed 
We lay down our head . 
And all this and more 
We do o'er and o'er , 
Till at last we all die , 
And in the cold grave lie . 
then let us be merry , 
send down to the Ferry 
A Bottle for him , 
Old Charon the grim , 
A Bribe for our stay , 
Till we must away . 
A Catch . 

Down below , down below , lies an old pipe , 
Filled with the Juice of the Grape so ripe , 
hang business , and care , and Love's cruel dart , 
we 'll lustily bang him before we do part : 
here 's my foot , set thine , and thine , my dear heart , 
Now , Drawer , here Boy , bring us each a Quart.  
Pipes , and Tobacco , the best of thy Spanish , 
we 'll health it about , and the Vapour shall vanish , 
Shall vanish , shall vanish , 
we 'll troll it about , and the vapour shall vanish . 
And when that is out , then bring us up more , 
Our thirst it is great , and Chink we have store , 
And when that is out , still bring us up more , 
When our money is spent , we 'll drink on the score . 
The Good Fellow . 

A Catch . 

HE that won't drink , is a verier Sot , 
then he that still tosseth , and emptieth the pot ; 
He that drinks small , and will not drink strong , 
Let him ne'er be accounted among 
The Valiant , or Wise , but a mere puny , 
Or , which is worse , a saver of money . 
then small Beer or Ale 
For the man that looks pale , 
But he 's a friend of mine 
That drinks off his Wine ; 
At his Cups will ne'er boggle , 
But drink till 's eyes goggle , 
And stare and roar , 
And call still for more . 
SONG . 

Come Phillis , let 's to yonder Grove , 
That I may tell thee how I love ; 
And how i  suffered every day , 
Since thou hast stolen my heart away : 
How many nights i  lain awake , 
And sighed away , for Phillis' sake . 
This , Phillis , this shall be our talk , 
Whilst hand in hand we gently walk : 
then down we 'll sit in yonder shade , 
A myrtle has for Lovers made : 
And when i  called thee Duck and Dear , 
And wooed thee with a sigh or tear ; 
If Love , or pity on thy Swain , 
Move Phillis heart to cure my pain ; 
then like two billing Turtles , we 
Will do what none but Love shall see . 
To Phillis . 

Wouldst thou know then why I woo thee , 
't is because I would undo thee ; 
Yet hope 't will not prevent my suit , 
When I have told thee how I 'll do 't : 
I mean not to impair thy ' state 
Nor will I e'er deserve thy hate ; 
I will not injure thy bright name , 
Nor slain thy white and spotless fame ; 
Nor will I raise in thee a flame , 
And leave thee burning in the same ; 
But join with thee in chaste desire , 
And mix with thine as pure a fire ; 
Till Hymen's sacred rites fast tie 
In one sure Gordian , Thee and I ; 
This naught but death shall ever untie , 
But there 's another I would try 
TO undo , when we are both in bed , 
And Night shall hide thy blushes red , 
then will I seek a certain knot 
( I will untie , I 'll name it not ; ) 
Virgins let loose with pleasant pain , 
Wish undone , o'er and o'er again . 
SONG . 

I  

With praise of my Beauty , and sighs he did woo , 
And hotly a while for my Love did pursue ; 
But proud of my Conquest , and sure of my game , 
I slighted his Courtship , and laughed at his flame ; 
Yet now I repent that I answered him no , 
Since from a kind Lover he 's turned a Foe ; 
But he 's a mere Fop , and a Coxcomb at best , 
When a woman says no , will not take it in Jest . 
II  

My eyes then were stars , and my cheeks he called Roses , 
But now they 're debased , and my Nose but a Nose is : 
He praised every part , and extolled them above 
Those of Helena , or the Goddess of Love ; 
But a pox on him now for a subtle false knave , 
To break the strong chains that held him my slave ; 
I thought him in love when I bid him go hang , 
But he drives away care with a Fiddle and Song . 
then each Lass I advice when her Lad would be kind , 
To let him all freedom and courtesy find : 
And i'faith the next that I catch in my gin , 
I 'll be sure to hold him fast by the right pin . 
Death . 

Then welcome pale and ghostly spirit , 
thou shalt us no more affright ; 
Thy Skeleton shall scare no more , 
then when 't was clothed with flesh before : 
Within thy dark and silent Cells , 
We know nor pain nor pleasure dwells ; 
no sorrow to be Prisoner there , 
Since we know not that we are ; 
Nor shall we envy those above , 
That our earthly ceilings move ; 
For lo , these lower rooms they must 
Descend at last , and sleep in Dust : 
These , till their utmost Course is run , 
May sing , then die , as we have done . 
And now to die , let 's grieve no more , 
then then cause we were not born before . 
A SONG . 

I  

How sweet is Love when Beauty's kind ! 
Beauty , that frees a Lover's mind 
From those tormenting cares and woe , 
The Cruel put their Lovers to . 
II  

A Miss . to whom if you complain , 
She frowns not to augment your pain ; 
But when you speak in Lover's stile , 
She comforts with kind look , or smile . 
III  

Yet with her favours does not cloy , 
As not by rigour hope destroy ; 
't is such a one I fain would have , 
Treats me as Subject , not as Slave . 
iv.  

Who knows her power to save or kill , 
And rules by Justice , not by will ; 
Rewards me not for all my pain 
With Cruelty , or cold disdain . 
SONG . 

I  

IS it Love that makes thee sad ? 
Still musing on 't will make thee mad : 
then drink care away , fond lad . 
Such force and virtue is in Sack , 
'T will free a Lover from the wrack 
And by oblivion will ease 
Him of that idle fond disease . 
II  

Cupid like a drowned fly , 
In a brimmer thou shalt spy ; 
But wet his wings , he 'll helpless lie . 
then let 'em merrily go round , 
Since no such remedy is found , 
To keep a Lover in his wits ; 
Let thy drunken , cure Love-fits . 
SONG . 

I  

O how I do love 
The Music and sports of the City , 
Where Wit we improve , 
With the Converse of those that are Witty.  
The Westminster braves , 
The Hectors and Bullies , 
The other end Knaves , 
And those they call Cullies , 
Do make up the harmony . 
But give me the kind lass from her that wears patches , 
Down ( if she be cleanly ) to her that cries matches ; 
That with her kind blade 
At the new Masquerade , 
At a Play or a Ball , 
She dares have at all ; 
That dares do in the dark 
With the best in the Park , 
This , this , is the Wench for me . 
While the plain Country Coxcomb does spend all his time 
In drudging and toiling , ' thou'lt Reason or Rhyme : 
That with his own hands 
Doth manure his Lands , 
And with his own Swains 
Who eat up his gains ; 
Or with the Parson o' th' Parish 
Sometimes he is mellow ; 
O'er a Cup of damned Ale , 
Like a true Country fellow 
That knows no other delight . 
But give me the Lad that let's all his own , 
And lays by the care of Corn and dattle , 
then comes up to Town , 
And about does rattle . 
Treats himself and his Friends with store of good dishes , 
And at his own charge , with Fowls and with fishes ; 
then Drenches him sound 
With lusty Burgundy , 
And nothing does own 
To speak on , or so , 
Nor at his own Lodging 
Does often hear Duns , 
As loud as great Guns , 
Till with the damned noise 
Loud Echoes do fright ye ; 
This , this is the man that is truly called mighty . 
A Prologue to a Tragedy , etc.  

Room for a Poet that ne'er written before , 
Aetatis , Twenty one , and somewhat more ; 
He humbly prays , since he is come to age , 
He may have free possession of the Stage : 
Let not this favour be denied by you , 
Perhaps 't is all that he is born to : 
And as Babes born into the World , do cry , 
His Infant-wit begins with Tragedy : 
Expect not from him then a full ripe wit , 
But hear his prattle , and be pleased with it . 
Crassus once more he has brought upon the Stage ; 
But he 's secure , if he but ' scape your rage . 
Once he stood fearless ' midst war's loud alarms , 
Now dreads your Wit more than the Parthians Arms ; 
That dreadful , dangerous , Judging , Damning Wit , 
That ne'er a Poet scarce could e'er scape yet ; 
Howe'er t' has been , As to our Author's Play , 
All pale and trembling , thus he bid me say , 
Ladies' , he hope's that you 'll be merciful , 
While he expects from you , Sirs , — Pox 't is dull : 
But if he please you , give his Parent's Joy , 
Clap him , and cry aloud , there 's a brave Boy . 
One Country Lass to the other , newly returned from London . 

Fie on this Country Town , 't is dull I vow , 
We have no Playhouse to divert us now ; 
Where , before the Play began , we used to fit , 
Hearing the Fiddles , and expecting Wit , 
And when 't was spoken , scarce understanding it . 
There were gay clothes , and Scenes , a Fool that 's merry , 
Dancing , and singing , with a Hey down derry : 
This is the truest , and the kindliest sport , 
For Country Ladies , t'other's for the Court. 
Nor could we sometimes scarce a sentence mind , 
We were so charged before , and then behind , 
With noise , and Fops that would be still addressing , 
Our Merits , and their impudence confessing : 
And ' troth , methinks the Stage does not so move , 
As when these press the hand , and whisper Love : 
Nor do the feigned Lovers there so please , 
And tickle Fancy , half so well as these . 
How oft to do , as they , with one another , 
I wished myself in private with my Lover , 
But i  confessed too much , these Joys are fled , 
And i  brought home again my Maidenhead . 
Fortune has to Chloris sent 
more than can be quickly spent ; 
Enough o conscience to maintain 
Herself , her Gallant , and their train : 
then let Chloris quite give o'er 
The thoughts of adding to her store , 
And like good natured Chloris then , 
Make , as they use to say , a man 
And ' cause one kindness asks another , 
he 'll shortly Chloris make a Mother . 
Some Gallants to Chloris have lately made Court , 
But still she denies 'em , and will not yet sport , 
Her Glass she consults , and perhaps it does tell her , 
They Court her but for the large fortune befell her : 
And that being gotten , they soon will despise her , 
no , no , I 'll warrant you , Chloris is wiser : 
And thinks herself handsome , in spite of her Glass , 
Since five thousand can mend the defects of her face : 
And thus she 's resolved to admit of no more , 
Till he comes that shall Chloris for Beauty adore . 
SONG . 

IN vain , Amaryllis , in vain do I strive , 
To be rid of the chains I must wear whilst I live ; 
I resolved I would try for to love thee no more , 
But the fit straight came on me as strong as before : 
Now nothing's so tedious each day I do prove , 
As the heats and the colds of the Ague of Love : 
' 'Gainst the force of thy charms I rally in vain , 
One sight of thy face overcomes me again . 
And thus by surprise my poor heart was beguiled , 
I stood your grave looks , but o , than you smiled , 
And such ravishing Beauties and graces did show , 
That killed poor Amintas almost at a blow : 
Now when you appear , a trembling strait takes me , 
Vanquished , I fall , and my courage forsakes me ; 
then since I lie bleeding your Victim and Martyr , 
Use your Victory mildly , and let me have quarter . 
SONG . 

I  

You delicate — 
How long will ye stand for a show ? 
Still tempting your Lovers to eat , 
Yet suffer not one to fall to . 
II  

To what purpose each day are you dressed , 
If it be meant only for looking ; 
And no man must taste of the Feast , 
Where such cost and such care is in cooking . 
III  

Though the substance you never so garnish , 
Yet Beauty at last growing stale , 
Delight , like a vapour will vanish , 
And each Lover's appetite fail . 
iv.  

Refuse not then what will delight ye , 
For Dad nor Damnation refrain ; 
Let not the fear of these fright ye , 
Nor the speech of the people , as vain . 
How dull a thing this world would prove , 
if 't were not for the Joys of Love : 
For what pleasure can it bring , 
To see returns of the Spring , 
And Summer , in its chiefest pride , 
If there were naught of Love beside ? 
To drink , to dance , to laugh and sing , 
If Love were not a Guest within : 
To walk , to ride , to feast , and sport 
The State and glories of a Court : 
How life-less do all these appear , 
If Love vouchsafe not to be there : 
Let others glory in these things , 
And think 'em happy as are Kings : 
then all their boasting , I say more , 
When I say , Celia , I adore . 
SONG . 

Modestly I wooed thee , Phillis , 
then how coy , how cold were't thee , 
That thy Lover nor those Lilies , 
Ne'er could tempt thee to be free . 
Since those banks of Pinks and Lilies 
Witness can what thou hast done , 
One could , but his modest will is 
To conceal , how soon , how soon thou were 't wone . 
Was it then my faint Addresses 
Chilled the ardour of thy heat ; 
I should with more close caresses , 
Tempted thee unto the feat . 
then those hours I vainly wasted , 
With enjoyment had been crowned : 
I should all those sweets have tasted 
thou didst yield , on that , on that flowery ground . 
Comely Swain , why sittest thou so ? 
Folded arms are signs of woe . 
My heart's grief , if thou wouldst know , 
Ah! 't is cause Love's turned a Foe . 
Let Phillis smile , I 'll be again 
The merriest of all the Plain . 
Sigh no more , ah ! Silly Swain , 
Phillis counterfeits disdain . 
SONG . 

When Flora had on her new Gown a , 
And each pretty flower was blown a , 
Ever the Scyth cut the grass , 
I met a pretty Lass , 
And I gave her a dainty green Gown a.  
She got up again , and did frown a , 
And called me both Coxcomb and Clown a , 
' Cause I kissed lip and cheek , 
Tother thing did not seek , 
When I had her so featly there down a.  
Betwixt anger and shame then a blush a , 
Came over my face with a flush a ; 
But what I lost on the grass , 
Like a good natured Lass , 
She afforded me under a Bush a.  
SONG . 

Betwixt I will , and I will not , 
Phillis , delay me not , 
I vow I am so hot 
Naught else can cool me : 
Come , I will unlace thee , 
Quickly uncase thee , 
And then embrace thee , 
Prithee don't fool me . 
He that can't make his way , 
When he would get a boy , 
Deserves not to enjoy 
So rich a treasure . 
Fear not it is a sin , 
To show so white a skin , 
And take a Lover in 
The seat of pleasure : 
Come , by that smile I see , 
That we shall straight agree , 
Take this kiss for a fee , 
we 'll love without measure . 
A SONG . 

I  

Come Phillis , let 's play , 
What though it be day , 
there 's something we have yet to do , 
Shall make thee confess 
there 's no end of our bliss , 
But ever our pleasures renew . 
II  

thou hast so much treasure 
Exceeding all measure , 
And here i  been so long a stranger , 
On this Snowy white hill 
I shall ne'er have my fill , 
But o'er it could still be a ranger . 
III  

O here 's such a Waste , 
A Smock that is laced , 
And a Bosom much whiter is seen ; 
Below which there lies 
Such delicate Thighs , 
And that shall be nameless between . 
iv.  

But above all , a Face , 
And a Head in a Lace , 
Over which such a glory does shine ; 
That in pleasure I swim 
On a bright Cherubin , 
For my Phillis is sure as divine . 
v.  

Ever all thy sweets be enjoyed , 
Or I shall be cloyed , 
An age will be past , and time shall away ; 
Whilst our Play does go on 
With the rise of each Sun , 
And Night shall begin but the sports of the Day . 
On a Bellman ( crying in the street , ) which brought some Ladies to their door . 

Thanks , honest Bellman , for hadst thou not been , 
I had not then so many Beauties seen ; 
thou mad'st Alarm , and out they tripped as fast , 
As they had said , the D. take the last : 
Hadst thou a Trumpet blown , I 'd been in fear , 
Doomsday was come , and they the Angels were ; 
I know not whether they were flesh or no , 
But , sure I am , they made a Saintlike show . 
Hadst thou a lost heart cried , there stood the Thief , 
Of all Heart-stealers , the notorious chief . 
Cryer , May'st thou ne'er meet with any evil 
Spirit , Hobgoblin , or midnight Devil . 
But when thou dost thy drowsy harangue make , 
In thy defence may every body wake . 
May others losses still thy gains increase , 
And when thou'dst bid good night , lie down in peace . 
But when we would make use of Spell or Charm , 
Come , honest Bell-wether , and make alarm . 
SONG . 

I  

IF that we still use , makes us soon to grow weary , 
Why should we then be so fond as to marry ? 
And loose with our freedom a various delight , 
To be cloyed with the same , and the same every night . 
II  

To spend a Revenue in Family charges , 
On Beef , and Blew-aprons , in Cloth and in Serges , 
For Wife , and for children , when all may be done , 
And more , a lafoy mode , for th' expense of a crown 
III  

Or two , on a Miss . that will sing ye a new Song , 
Can daintily dally , and charm with her tongue . 
With a Jantie fine air can make her addresses , 
And with something that 's new still court your caresses . 
iv.  

She oft to the Park and the Plays does resort , 
And can tell you besides all the news of the Court. 
And other fine fancies , then are you not mad , 
To be clogged with a wise , when such may be had ? 
v.  

For she at home pouts , and can nothing say more , 
But welcomes you home , with   been with your whore ; 
Whilst Bachelors freely may frolic and sing , 
Drink , wench , and ramble , and take their own swing . 
To a young Lady confined , etc.  

I  

What would they make a Nun of thee ? 
Vowing thou shalt recluded be , 
For safeguard of thy Chastity . 
II  

Kept to thy Needle , Book , and Prayer , 
And seldom suffered to take air , 
Come , 't is because thou art so fair . 
III  

then patiently thy thrall endure , 
Diana in her Golden Tower , 
From the God was not secure . 
iv.  

And if thou shalt so guarded be , 
no man can have Intrigue with thee , 
Jove shall himself descend for thee . 
Our Parents come together first , 
To satisfy each others Lust : 
Pleasure is the main procurer , 
And Matrimonies best insurer : 
Other ends they scarce have any , 
Though they do pretend to many . 
Thus we 're got , and as they before , 
We soon are ripe for getting more . 
Come , Phillis , then let 's try our skill , 
And Dame Nature's Laws fulfil . 
The world will quickly desert lie , 
If we each other should deny . 
Come , what afraid art to surrender , 
Because thou art yet young and tender . 
I 'll gently handle thee , my Joy , 
With ease we 'll try to get a boy , 
And pleasures that shall never cloy . 
SONG . 

I  

Never was Maiden with sorrows so fraught , 
For somewhat I long , but I know not for what ; 
I sigh all day long , I pine , and I die , 
But I fear 't is for that which made Phillis to sigh : 
She oft would complain , and cry , o ! for a man , 
My disease is the same ; o ! some kind Physician . 
II  

When a Maid does so kindly invite you to woe , 
You may venture to Try , and ne'er fear but she 'll do ; 
then pity the case of a languishing Maid , 
That blush's to think , and to speak is afraid : 
But Philis would sigh , and cry o ! for a man , 
My disease is the same ; o ! some kind Physician . 
SONG . 

O the pains , cruel Miss . I endure , 
If you felt but the smart 
Of my poor wounded heart , 
You would not deny me the cure . 
What pleasure is there in a smile , 
Whilst you coily deny 
What I beg for , and sigh , 
And languish to death for the while . 
It is not a kiss can relieve me , 
But your poor Lovers thrall 
You can ease with a fall , 
't is that alone can reprieve me . 
O , the pains , cruel Miss , I endure , 
If you felt but the fire 
Of my burning desire , 
You would not deny me the cure . 
SONG . 

Her charms so powerful were , 
That I adored her ; 
With many a Sigh and Tear , 
Long I implored her ; 
Love with enjoyment's crowned , 
O , what a Treasure 
Freely she now displays , 
O , what a pleasure ! 
When I entwined do lie 
In close embraces , 
Noting each blush and smile , 
And other graces ; 
Pleasure , than ecstasy , 
Cannot mount higher , 
O , 't is then , o , 't is then , 
I could expire . 
Thus freed from cruel Love , 
And his keen Arrows , 
At pleasure off , and on , 
Like wanton Sparrows ; 
Quench and renew my heat , 
Oft as desire 
Incites me to the feat 
Kindles new fire . 
Amyntas . 

After long service , and a thousand vows 
To her glad Lover , she more kindness shows : 
oft had Amyntas with her tresses played , 
When the Sun's vigour drove'em to a shade ; 
And many a time he had given her a green Gown ; 
And oft he kissed her when he had her down . 
With sighs and motions he to her made known 
What fain he would have done , then with a frown 
She would forbid him , till the minute came 
That she no longer could conceal her flame . 
The Amorous Shepherd forward to espy 
Love's yielding motions triumph in her eye . 
With eager transport , straight himself addressed , 
To taste the pleasures of so rich a feast , 
When with resistance , and a seeming flight , 
As 't were t' increase he Lover's appetite ; 
Unto a place where flowers thicker grew , 
Out of his arms , as swift as air she flew : 
Daphne ne'er run so light and fast as she , 
When from the Gods she fled , and turned t' a Tree . 
The youth pursued , nor needs he run amain , 
〈…〉 she intended to be overtaken . 
〈…〉 no Apple , nor no golden ball , 
〈…〉 her flight , for she herself did fall . 
〈…〉 ' amongst the Flowers , like Flora's self she lay , 
To gain more breath , that she might loosed in play : 
She plucked a Flower , and at Amyntas threw , 
When he addressed to crop a flower too . 
then a faint strife she seemed to renew , 
She smiled , she frowned , she would , and would not do . 
At length o'ercome , she suffers with a sigh , 
Her ravished Lover use his victory : 
And gave him leave to punish her delay , 
With double vigour in the Amorous fray . 
But then , alas ! soon ended the delight , 
For too much Love had had hastn'ed its flight : 
And every ravished sense too soon awake , 
Raped up in bliss it did but now partake : 
Which left the Lovers in a state to prove , 
Long were the pains , but short the joys of Love.  
On her writing some Verses . 

Phillis , since you such wit in Verse can show , 
That , and your Beauty needs must wonders do , 
Make Men adore , and Women envy you , 
Here in this Town , a Female wit 's as rare , 
As amongst ten of them to see one fair . 
And for the Men — 
send 'em brisk Trade , now there 's a Peace with th' Dutch , 
And no one's Wit or sense they 'll ever grutch . 
This I dare say , Madam , spite of that Jest , 
he 's an ill bird that does defile his nest ; 
If we give praise , it is where praise is due , 
That is , Madam , only to such as you , 
That are the Virtuous , Fair , Ingenious few . 
On the Death of a Black bird . 

Seeking his long lost Liberty , 
Out at the Cages door did fly , 
Where he in safety long abode , 
To meet his sadder Fate abroad : 
Thus by his Feeder's mere neglect , 
Puss seized him , and without respect 
To his black Coat , and golden Bill , 
With cruel gripe did almost kill . 
But from her freed , and Caged again , 
Pensive , dropping , and in pain ; 
He sat a while with silent throat , 
Uttering not one merry note ; 
But slighting Food and Life , thus dies , 
To cruel Puss a sacrifice . 
FINIS . 





MA. 73.  