Απογραφε ϛοργεσ . Or , a description of the passion of love . demonstrating its original , causes , effects , signs , and remedies . 

by will . Greenwood , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

Omne meum . Nil meum . 
Nihil dictum quod non dictum prius . 


London , printed for William place at Gray's inn-gate in Holborn , 1657.  

To the service and delight of all truly noble , generous and honest spirits of both sexes ; the author dedicateth these his exiguous devoyres . 

Noble hearts , 

Being invited with several pleasing considerations , and delightful motives to appear the second time upon the slippery stage of this world ; i here present to your view a description of a passion too much regent in this brittle age . The work is of no great substance , not much satirical nor critical ; only glances , like the dogs of Nilus , taking a touch here and there . It May happily appear at the first view , a mere congested chaos , and somewhat indigested and promiscuously handled ; i can assure you my meaning was methodical ; but i hope your favourable opinions will dissipate the foggy mists of erroneous misprision , and be really clarified in your considerate censure . i cannot conceive what more acceptable present May be offered unto you , then that which with an appar•nt brevity compriseth the original , •enerality , definition , causes , effects , signs , &c. of love . for which purpose , and your greater contentment , i have madly rambled in every one of them . If i have over roaved , gone wide , or fallen short , it 's not unlike you May impute it to my folly of precipitancy . in this ( To forge an excusive answer ) i shall not unfittingly resemble the painter , who being to figure forth the fury of a mad dog , the better to express it , stood long curiously piddling about the froth or foam issuing from his mouth ; but finding nothing frame fitly to his invention , rashly takes up his pencil ▪ dashes it against the picture , with an intent to spoil it ; howbeit this sudden accident prevailed to make his work more excellent . So May i in these sudden touches pencil out this passion with a more lively tincture , then if i had been tediously curious in contriving , or vaingloriously to embellish them with quaint ear-pleasing elocution . to speak the real truth , you must not expect any additional ornaments of rhetoric , nor neat flourishes of eloquence , or wyre-drawn phrases , mere ink-pot terms , or a hodgpodge of a laboured contexture : but a plain and smooth style which best becomes our subject . i am not passionately enamoured on petty courtships , like to those Helena's all of gold , where we can behold nothing but drapery ; but my sole aim is to speak to be understood : i have more laboured at the reality of the matter , than ornament of words ; for he that courts his pen , and neglects the matter , shall always have trouble enough to defend himself from moths , rats and oblivion . fine heads will pick a quarrel with me ; but this is my mind , let him that findeth a fault amend it , and he that liketh it use it . I submit myself to the judgement of the wise , and little esteem the frowns of a censorious brow . 

I dedicated this unto you , not because either by virtue of a long experience , or of an exact judgement , i make profession to be Master in this science , but to manifest that by the polestar of methodical observations , one May furrow the deepest seas of unknown discipline . and to vindicate myself with that of Mr. Burton , Vita verecunda est , musa jocosa mihi . 
However my lines err , my life is honest . 


but i presume , i need no such apologies , for no man compos mentis , will make me culpable of lightness , wantonness , and rashness in speaking of the causes , effects , signs , &c. of love ; i speak only to tax and deter others from it ; not to teach , but to demonstrate the vanities ▪ and errors of this heroical and Herculean passion , and to administer apt remedies . i cannot please all men ; for the same cause that made Democritus laugh , made Heraclitus weep : it is impossible for an angler to please all fish with one bait ; so if one write never so well , he cannot please all ; and write he never so badly , he shall please some . I know there are some counterfeit Cato's that will pish at me , cannot abide to hear of love toys , they hare the very name of love in detestation ; vultu , gestu , & oculis , in their outward actions averse , and yet in their cogitations they are all out as bad , if not worse than others . 

Whatsoever i speak in this treatise of the one sex , May be also said of the other , mutato nomine . i determine not to run with the hare and hold with the hound , to carry fire in one hand , and water in the other , neither to flatter men as altogether faultless , nor be critical with women as altogether guilty ; for as i am not desirous to intrude into the favour of the one , so am i resolved not to incur the disfavour of the other . 

Honoured Ladies , i commit myself to the candour of your courtesies , craving this only , that if you be pinched in the instep , you rather cut the shoe then burn the last . if i discover the legerdemain , and subtle trains women lay to inveigle their lovers , and unveil the furrows of woman's dispositions ; you ought no more to be vexed with what i have said , than the mintmaster is to see the coiner hanged ; or the true subject , the false traitor arraigned ; or the honest man the thief condemned . I grant it an act somewhat uncivil , to run inconsiderately into invectives against the sex ; so it is an unworthy servitude of mind to be obsequious to them : but i deal with them , as he who slew the serpent , not touching the body of his son twined ▪ up in folds ; so i strike the vice , without slandering the sex . i hope this book will insensibly increase under the favour and good opinion of virtuous Ladies , as plants sprout under the aspects of the most benign stars . 

What i here declare ( candid readers ) is not in the least to extinguish a pure and real love , or to detract from the honour of marriage ; for my stomach will not digest the unworthy practices of those who in their discourse and writings , plant all their arguments point blank to batter down love , and the married estate , using most bitter invectives against it , as the author of the advice to a son , and such like , whose behaviour speaks nothing but satyrs against this divine ordinance , and the whole sex of women . But such do it out of mere dissimulations , to divert suspicion , being defatigated in a vigorous pursuit of their desires are made incompetent judges of that which they undertake to condemn ; or else out of revenge , having themselves formerly light upon bad women ( Yet not worse than they deserved ) they curse all adventures because of their own shipwreck . 

Here my book and myself March both together and keep one pace ; one cannot condemn the work without the workman ; who toucheth the one , toucheth the other ; what i speak is truth , not so much as i could , but as much as with modesty i dare . let that which i borrow be surveyed , and then tell me whether i have made good choice of ornaments to beautify and set forth the work ; for i make others to relate ( Not after my own fancy , but as it best falleth out ) what i cannot so well express , either through unskill of language , or want of judgement . i have purposely concealed the authors of those i have transplanted into my soil , and digested them with my own , thereby to bridle the rashness of the hasty knit browned censurer . i will honour him that shall trace and unfeather me , by the only distinction of the force and beauty of my discourse . Look how my humours or conceits present themselves , so i shuffle them up ; for these are matters which juniors May not be ignorant of . But not to tire you with a tedious preamble , like the pulpit cuffers of this age ; and a long discourse argueth folly , and delicate words incur the suspicion of obsequiousness ; i am determined to use neither of them ; only entreating your mild and charitable censure , of this my rude and hirsute labour : until the next occasion , i conclude , 

Your friend , w. g.  

To his honoured and ingenious friend , Mr. w. g. on his description of the passion of love . 

When critics shall but view the title , they 
Will carp at this great enterprise , and say , 
It was too boldly done , thus to comprise 
In this small tract , loves passion , and true size 
To set upon it ; but the learned will 
Excuse thy little book , and praise thy quill ; 
Thy aim being only to instruct the youth : 
In male and female thou discoverest truth . 
Thy pencil in live colours hath limned out , 
erotick passion from its very root . 
causes , effects , and signs ( Thou here discovers ) 
The jealousies and fears of wanton lovers ; 
Physician-like thou here prescribest cures 
To ease poor lovers of their calentures . 
My worthy friend , in either hemisphere , 
Where e'er i go , thy praise I 'll echo there . 
W. b.  Errata . 

Page 8. line 19 deal . 1. p. 19 l. 9 r. osculis . p. 26. l. 19 r. conducted . p. 30. l. 2. r. froward . p 33. l. 30 r. magno sua . p. 38 l. 10. r. torment . p. 40. l. 4. r. canst . p. 42. l. 3.   . to l. 14. r. never . p. 44. l. 29. r. volleys . p. 48. l. 33. r. Mistress . p. 51. l. 11. r. fairest . p. 55. l. 15. r. sighs . p. 64. l 7. r. heart . p. 70. l. 26. r. spectre . p. 85. l. 20. r. prae se ferat cum pharetr• . 

A description of the passions of love . 

Of love , the original , the universality , and the definition of it . 

The nature of the whole universe ( According to the primogeniture ) tendeth to that which we are now determined to treat o f ; for it was love that moved God , not only to create the world , but also to create it beautiful in every part ; the name whereof in Greek yieldeth a testimony of loveliness and beauty , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , Mundus , signifying a beautiful and well decked ornament . Therefore seeing God hath create and framed it by love , then indubitably love is dispersed throughout the whole world , and invested into every creature , as well mineral and vegetable , as animal , all obeying the statute of the great lawgiver , instituted in primo adami . the which causeth a sympathy or love in all things . 

Now to demonstrate this in man . He having by nature imprinted in his soul an affected desire or earnest inclination to that which seemeth good , is drawn as it were by necessity to search it out in every thing which he esteemeth fair and good , finds nothing so apt to be the centre of his affections , and to correspond with his nature ( Her creation solely tending to that ) as woman . For after God had create man , and placed him in the garden to dress it , it is not good ( Saith he ) that man should be alone , i will make him an help meet for him : & to demonstrate how this help was not only meet , but also necessary for man ; Moses addeth , that amongst all those living creatures , he found no help meet for Adam : for although all the beasts , and the residue of creatures were given to man to assist him , so that being in the state of innocency , wherein he was then , he Might receive all service and ready obedience from them ; nevertheless he had not yet an help of his kind , for he could not have the familiarity and society with beasts , nor receive such help from them , as he could from a creature of his own nature . 

Now seeing man was create for this end , he could not continue without generation , which could not be unless he were joined to a woman ; which was before his fall a most pure and innocent love . but now because of his corruption , his affections are irregular , and are made extreme ; there is nothing so greatly exciteth and carrieth away his mind , nor cometh more near to his destruction , than this foolish passion endangereth his life . To prove which , many precedents Might be produced . galacea of Mantua declairing oftentimes to a maid of Pavia , whom he courted and made love to , that he would suffer a thousand deaths for her sake , which she imagining was but spoken coggingly and in jest , commanded him to cast himself into the river ; which he presently performed and was drowned . But we shall more fitly allege such testimonies of the effects of love , when we discourse more particularly of every vice that proceedeth from them . 

Yet , as well as man , this amity ( As i have said ) is ingraffed into every creature ; this love , appetite , or universal inclination , or complacency , given to them at the creation likewise , and inciteth them to desire and search out that which is consentaneous to , and agreeth and sympathizeth with their own nature ; so that there is nothing so insensible , which hath not in itself this amity innate , propending and moving to its proper object , as amber and straw , iron and adamant , and the palmtrees of both sexes , express not a sympathy only , but a love passion ; according to that of the poet ; 

Vivunt in venerem frondes , omnisque vicissim 
Foelix arbour amat , nutant ad mutua palmae 
Foedera , populeo suspirat populus ictu , 
Et platano Platanus , Alnoque assibilat alous . 
Which is thus paraphrazed ; 

Leaves sing their loves , each complemental tree 
In courtship bows , the amorous palms we see 
Confirm their leagues with nods , poplers enchain 
Their arms , the plane infettereth the plane . 
Now the better to illustrate this by example , Florentius tells us of a palm that loved most fervently , and would receive ( If properly it May be so said ) no consolation , until her love applied himself to her ; you Might see the two trees bend , and of their own accord stretch out their boughs to embrace and kiss each other . They ( Saith he ) marry one another , and when the wind brings their odour unto each other , they are marvellously affected ; they will be sick and pine away for love , which the husbandman perceiving , strokes his hand on those palms which grow together , and so stroking again the palm that is enamoured , they carry kisses from one to the other , or weaving their leaves into a love-net , they will prosper and flourish with a greater bravery . No creature is to be found quod non aliquid amat , which doth not love something , no stock nor stone , which hath not some feeling of its effects ; yet it is more eminent in vegetables . 

To prosecute our discourse , let us define what this amorous love is ; Theophrastus demonstrateth it to be a desire of the soul , that easily and very speedily gets entrance , but retireth back again very slowly . Another saith , it is an invisible fire kindled within the hidden forges of the breasts of lovers , scorching and consuming their miserable hearts , and burning in the flames of desire , yielding no other sign or testimony thereof , than an ardent desire of the thing beloved . Montag . lib. 3. cap. 5. saith , that love is nothing but an insatiate thirst of enjoying a greedily desired object . Socrates saith , it is an appetite of generation by the mediation of beauty . Others will have it to be a motion of the blood getting strength by little and little , through the hope of pleasure , almost a kind of fascination or enchantment . Tully thought it to be a wishing well to the party affected . Seneca , a great strength of the understanding , and a heat that moveth gently up and down the spirits . And others say , that this erotical passion is a kind of dotage , proceeding from an irregular desire of enjoying a lovely object , and is attended on by fear and sadness ( Common symptoms of love ) according to Ovid ; Res est solliciti plena timoris amor . 




Thus have we been carried away by the current of other men's judgements , and now have watched our advantage to swim back again , and show our private opinion ; and that is , that love is an expansion of the soul towards it object ; which is , what ever is attractive ; and that naturally man loves himself best and first , and all other things in subordination to himself ; and whatsoever hath most similitude of man in nature , is the proper object of his love ; then consequently ( In my opinion ) no object so proper as the Princess of the female sex , viz. woman , it being ordained and constituted for the propagation and preservation of every species . 

We will illustrate this with that pretty piece of policy of Paris , which prompted him to the disposal of the golden ball , he being made umpire between three deities , Juno , Pallas , and Venus , whereof he was to make one his friend , and two his enemies ; it was his wisdom to win favour with the most potent , for his own safety , which is Venus , if we May take an estimate of power from the extent of dominions , and largeness of command and conquest , all which are so clearly Cypria as they leave no place for opposition . It is true , Juno commands the world by riches , and Pallas by wisdom , but Venus monarchizeth in the most unlimited manner of sovereignty over million of worlds , if it will pass for sterling , that every man is a microcosm , or a little world , the epitome of the macrocosm , or the greater world : she is that powerful planet , that makes not only the rational , but irrational ; not only the animate , but inanimate creatures , and vegetables feel her influxious power . lucr. l. 1. 22.  

Tu dea , tu rerum naturam sola gubernas , 
Nec sine te quicquam dias in luminis oras 
Exoritur , neque fit laetum , nec amabile quicquam . 


Goddess , thou rulest the nature of all things , 
Without thee nothing into this light springs , 
Nothing is lovely , nothing pleasure brings . 


Therefore they that submit not to the sceptre of the Paphian Queen , are rebels against nature , and but the shadows of men ; but such stubborn ones are as rare as a horse in the streets of Venice , or a beggar in Holland . i know not ( Saith Montag . in his essays lih . 3. cap. 5. ) who could set Pallas and the muses at odds with Venus , and make them cold and slow in affecting of love ; as for me , i see no deities that better suit together , nor are more indebted one to another . Whoever shall go about to remove amorous imaginations from the Muses , shall deprive them of the best entertainment , and of the noblest subject of their work . And who shall debar Cupid the service and conversation of poesy ; shall weaken him of his best weapons . But for so much as i know of it , the power and might of this God , are found more quick and lively in the shadow of poesy , then in their own essence : it representing a kind of air as lovely as love itself . 

Thus ( Equally tendering all these opinions to the readers discretion , to reject or accept which of them he shall conclude most probable ) i proceed on to demonstrate the causes of this passion in the subsequent chapter . 

The causes of love . 

We will now express what special causes and motives tend most to the increase of this passion . the sages have sought the true causes which dispose the wills of men to love ; and have delivered many different opinions in this point . Some hold , it is a quality which God imprinted on nature : for it pleased him to create Adam on earth as his own image , and hath drawn Eve to be unto man a spirit of peace , and a love of a perpetual lasting ; this indubitably is the first ; for we must ingenuously confess , that there is no real love , no true delight , but proceeds from the supreme divinity , the pure and immaterial essence of the omnipotent protector , and sole ruler of all celestial and terrestrial creatures : it is a communicative delight , whose chief propriety is perpetually to stream into the hearts and souls of all that are capable thereof . Others imagine ( And 't is real ) it comes from the influence of the stars at their nativities , and these ( In my opinion ) are the second causes . 

Prima deus causa est ▪ causae sunt astra secundae . 


God is ( Of all create ) the prime cause : 
Th' second ( In spite of Holmes ) are starry laws . 


Others say , it proceeds from parents and education , and that 's very probable . Others from a certain harmony and consonance of hearts which meeting in accord upon the same tone , having a natural correspondency . The maxim of divines , and moral philosophers saith , that fair and good ( Otherwise that which seems to be so ) make all loves . and lastly , money . 

Now it is our intent and purpose to treat of every one of these causes distinctly ( The first excepted , being explained in the first chapter , and likewise in the beginning of this section ) therefore we will proceed to the second cause , which is the stars . 

The fairest and enticing objects that proceed from men and women , that most frequently captivate , allure , and make them dote beyond all measure one upon another , art by the force and power of the stars ( quod me tibi temperate astrum ) such a woman doth singularly dote upon such a man , and likewise such a man upon such a woman ; hate such again , and give no reason for it , it being too high for the vulgar capacity to attain to the knowledge of it . They by their influence act upon the humours and bodies , and by their secret qualities tie creatures with the knot of love ; for how many are there who love things which are neither lovely nor good ? I mean , not only in effect , but in their own opinion and judgement , yet are they fastened by some tie ( Unknown to any but the real sons of art , and those which are acquainted with the sublime sciences ) nor can they free themselves from it but by the absolute power of reason . Do we not daily find by experience , that a man who is , and who knoweth himself to be deformed and wicked , yet by nature falleth not in love with himself ? so through a love of concupiscence , he May love things which have neither beauty nor goodness , although he daily hath a blind feeling of something suitable to sensuality and an unperceptible attractive . For there May be a sympathy in nature , and an antipathy in complexion ; and a sympathy in complexion , and an antipathy in nature ; as in animals , there is amity betwixt the blackbird and the thrush , betwixt the crow and Hern , betwixt peacocks and pigeons , turtles and parrots . whence Sapph in Ovid's epist. writes to Phaon ; To birds unlike ofttimes joined are white doves ; 
Also the bird that 's green black turtle loves . 


for of what sort the amities and enmities of the superiors be , such are the inclinations of things subject to them in these inferiors . These dispositions therefore of love , are nothing else but certain inclinations of things , of one towards another , desiring such and such a thing if it be absent , and to move toward it , and to acquiesce in it when it is obtained , shunning the contrary and dreading the approach of it . He that knows the amities and enmities the superiors have one towards another , knows my meaning , and will quickly give you a reason , and that none of the worst , let the priests say what they please . 

The third cause is from parents and education . This cause is from our first parents , for the preservation and propagation of the species , and will so continue till nature shall be no more . It is according to the old adage , qualis pater , talis filius ; like father , like son . Cat to her kind ; if the dam trot , the foal will not amble . Experience and nature approves it , that the fruit will relish of the tree from whence it sprung . Consider how love proceeds from parents , and gradually descends ; that so soon as we are come to maturity , and that our blood begins to boil in our veins , we devote ourselves to a woman , forgetting our mother in a wise , and the womb that bare us in that which shall bear our image . This woman blessing us with children , our affection leaves the level it held before , and sinks from our bed unto our issue and picture of posterity , where affection holds no steady mansion : they applying themselves to a woman , take a lawful way to love another better than ourselves , and thus run to posterity . 

But education is more potent , for Themistocles in his youth ( As himself confesseth ) for want of discipline , was carried away by the lascivious and hot passion of love , like to a young unbridled colt , until that by Miltiades' example , who was then famous among the Grecians , he caused the heat of his courage to be cooled , and the lasciviousness which was naturally in him , to attend upon virtue : he fed delicately and highly , qualis cibus , talis sanguis & membrum ; such as the meat , such is the broth ; for luscious fare , is the only nurse and nourisher of sensual appetite , the sole maintenance of youthful affection , the fuel of this inordinate passion , nothing so much feeding it , nor insensates the understanding by delighting in it . He was very idly educated , which is one main branch that causeth love , and the first arrow that Cupid shooteth into the hot liver of a heedless lover . for the man being idle , the mind is apt to all uncleanness ; the mind being void of exercise , the man is void of honesty . Doth not rust corrode the hardest iron , if it be not used ? Doth not the moth eat the finest garment , if it be not worn ? Doth not impiety infect the clearest and most acute wit , if it be given to idleness ? Doth not common experience make this common unto us , that the fertilest ground bringeth forth nothing but weeds , if it be not tilled ? The particulars of idleness , as immoderate sleep , immodest play , unsatiable drinking , doth so weaken the senses and bewitch the soul , that before we feel the motion of love , we are resolved to lust . Cupid is ▪ a crafty gentleman , he follows those to a hair that study pleasure , and flies those that stoutly labour . Likewise though their natural inclination be to virtue , if they be educated , in dancing-schools , schools of music , lead a riotous life , they will be much subject to this passion , they will prefer fancy before friends , lay reason in the water , being too salt for their taste , and follow unbridled affection suitable to their education . 

But let their inclinations be never so strong , if they have been well brought up and instructed , they are in some sort forced to moderate themselves , not suffering love to have such pernicious effects in them , as naturally they are inclined to ; whereupon ( In my opinion ) that old proverb was not spoken without reason , that education goeth beyond nature : so that Quintilian would not have nurses to be of an immodest or uncomely speech ; adding this cause , lest ( Saith he ) such manners , precepts , and discourses as young children learn in their unriper years remain so deeply rooted , as they shall scarce ever be relinquished . Sure i am , that the first impressions , whether good or evil , are most continuate , and with least difficulty preserved . 

Quo semel est imbuta recens , servabit odorem 
Testa diu . — 


A pot well seasoned , holds the primitive taste 
A long time after . — 


Socrates confesseth in Plato , that by nature he was inclined to vices , and yet philosophy made him as perfect and excellent a man , as any was in the world . 

Besides education and custom have power not only to change the natural inclination of some particular men , but also of whole countries , as the histories of most nations declare unto us ; and namely that of the Germans , who in the time of Tacitus ( And Lycurgus amongst the Lacedæmonians ) had neither law nor religion , knowledge nor form of commonwealth ( But were led and carried on by the current of their own inclinations , and as their wills was inclined by the influence of the superiors ) whereas now they will give place to no nation for good institution in all things . To reform the Lacedæmonians , Lycurgus used this piece of policy ; he nourished two whelps both of one sire and one dam , but in different manner ; for the one he trained up to hunt , and the other to lie always in the chimney-corner at the porride-pot ; afterwards calling the Lacedæmonians into one assembly , he said , ye Lacedæmonians , to the attaining of virtue , education , industry and exercise is the most noble means ; the truth of which i shall make manifest to you by trial ; then bringing forth the whelps , and setting down a porride-pot and an hare , the one run at the hare , and the other at the pot : the Lacedæmonians not understanding the mystery , he said , both of these be of one sire and one dam , but you see how education altereth nature . 

Let us therefore ( That seeing our flexible nature is assaulted and provoked to the acting of any thing which is not good ) endeavour to accustom and exercise ourselves in virtue , which will be as it were unto us another nature ; let us use the means of good education and instruction in wisdom , whereby our souls shall be made conquerors over these hot passions , and our minds moderated and stayed in all our actions . 

We will now proceed on to the next , and fourth cause , which is a certain harmony and consonancy of hearts , which meeting accord upon the same tone , having a natural correspondency . For it is man's nature to affect all harmony , and sure it is ( Where Cupid strikes this silent note ( For love is the music , the harmony , complexion , the genus , and very soul of nature ) more sweet and melodious than the sound of any instrument ; for there is music wheresoever there is an harmony . And thus far we maintain the music of the spheres : for these well ordered motions , and regular paces , though they give no sound unto the ear , yet to the understanding of the parties affected , they strike a love-note most full of harmony . i desire leave to insist a little upon this . 

Every hath its projections and unperceivable influences , as we find in the power of amber and the adamant , which attract iron and straw , by the expiration they scatter in the air , to serve as instruments and hands to their attractions . This being common to other natures of plants , metals , and living creatures , we must not think but that the body of man participateth therein , by reason of its vivacity and multitude of pores which give a more easy passage to such emissions . There then cometh forth a spirituous substance , which is ( According to Marcilius Ficinus ) : vapour of blood , pure , subtle , hot and clear , more strong or weak according to the interior agitations of spirits ; which carrieth along with it some friendly , convenient , and temperate quality , which insinuateth itself into the heart and soul , doth ( If it there find a disposition of conformity ) abide , as a seed cast into the earth , and forms there an harmony , and this love of correspondency , with an admirable promptness and vigour ; so it happeneth that the spirits , being transpired from one body to another , and carrying on their wings qualities consonant , do infallibly excite and awaken the inclinations . The eye is principally interessed herein , breathing thence the most thin spirits and darting forth the visual rays , as the arrows of love which penetrate the heart , striking a most dulcisonant harmony , and are united one within another ; then heating the blood , they strike upon the imagination , and attract the will , which are linked one to another , that they are tied together with an unperceivable knot ; and so by this means love entereth into the heart . 

The fifth cause is that of the divines and moral philosophers , that beauty and goodness make us love . which two if they be found both in one woman ( she 's rara avis , a very rare thing indeed ) are most availeful advantages . love varies as its objects vary , which is always good , beautiful , amiable , gracious , and pleasant , or at least which seems to be so ; from goodness comes beauty , from beauty grace and comeliness , which result as so many rays from their good parts , makes us to love , and so covet and desire it : for were it not pleasing and gracious in our eyes , we should not seek it . omne pulchrum amabile , and what we love is fair and gracious in our eyes , or at least we do so apprehend or esteem it . suum cuique pulchrum . 

Th' perfections of his Mistress are most rare , 
In all men's eyes , yet in his own most fair . 


amiableness is the object of love , the scope and end is to obtain it , for whose sake we love , and with our minds covet to enjoy . Likewise grace and beauty are so wonderfully annexed , do so sweetly and gently win our souls , and strongly allure , that they confound our judgement , and cannot be distinguished . And this makes the poets still put the three graces in Venus' company , as attending on her and holding up her train . As the needle of a dial being touched with an adamant , doth always turn towards the polestar , because the philosophers hold that to be the element of the loadstone or Magnet , and by a natural sympathy doth attract every part of itself unto itself ; so a lo•ers' heart being touched with the beauty and goodness of his Mistress doth turn it , and all its thoughts towards her : poetically to explain this conception let us add , 

The needle of a dial northward turns , 
If touched by adamant : 
His heart touched by his Mistress burns , 
And after her doth pant . 


As this Magnet draweth the heavy iron , and the harp the swift dolphin ; so beauty allureth the chaste mind to love . in that exquisite romance of Clytiphon and Lucippe , where Clytiphon ( Being captivated with her beauty ) speaking of himself , ingenuously confesseth , that he no sooner came in Lucippe's presence , but saith he , statim ac eam contemplatus sum , occidi ; oculos à virgine avertere conatus sum , sed illi repugnabant . He was wounded at the first sight , his heart panted , he could not possibly turn his eyes from her . 

This beauty hath great power to procure love ; for where it appeareth in the exterior parts in any , it is as it were a witness and testimony of the beauty in the soul . For the creator create all things in such manner that he hath commonly joined beauty and goodness together ; in the beginning there was nothing made , but it was very good and beautiful in his kind , therefore there is an agreement between the body and the soul ; for bodily beauty is as it were an image of the beauty of the soul , and promiseth after a sort some good thing of the inward beauty ; for internal perfection breedeth the external ; whereupon the internal is called goodness , and the external , beauty . many would willingly die for the beauty of others , and are so tormented and tossed , that they become senseless and frenetic , being captivated with looking upon a beautiful face , which hath such a sting that it pierceth even unto the liveliest part of their heart and soul . whereupon it falleth out that poor silly lovers are so full of passions , that they stand altogether amazed ; making their souls so subject to their desires , that she must obey them , as if she were some poor chambermaid or drudge . It is the witch of nature , as gold is the god of the world ; for a woman without beauty hath as few followers , as a man without money hath friends . 

The reason why woman's beauty is of such force , that it overcomes men , is that the sense being too much fastened upon it , doth not only ( As if it gazed upon an object above its strength ) remain dazzled with the rays thereof , but reason itself is darkened , the heart is fettered , and the will by love made a prisoner . And i must needs tell you in plain terms , that beauty without the endowments of a virtuous mind is stark naught ▪ yet most commonly , the beauty of the mind is manifest in the face , as it were in a looking-glass ; for in it is seen a modest blush the vail of shame fac'dness , the true ornament of an honest mind , the treasure of chastitity , the splendour of clemency , the riches of silence , the majesty of virtue , the lodge of love , and the nest of grace ; because the face ( Amongst all the other corporal parts ) is the more noble , where the mind by those senses that are in it exerciseth its effects and operatious . 

Having discoursed thus much of beauty in general , we will now descend to the particulars of beauty , and demonstrate their force in causing love . for there is not any that loves , but there is some particular part , either in form or condition , which pleaseth most , and inflameth him above the rest . 

And first of the eyes , which Scaliger calls Cupid's arrows ; the black , round , quick sparkling eye , is the most fair , amorous and enticing , the speaking , courting , enchanting eye . Hesiod calls those that have fair lovely eyes , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; and Pindarus {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , by a metaphor borrowed from the Greek word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , signifying the young tender sprigs or branches of vines , for as these always embrace the neighbouring bough , twining about it with many various circles ; in like manner , the eyes of a beautiful woman apply their beams , and endeavour to entangle the hearts of those that earnestly behold her . The poet Propertius calls the eyes the conductors and guides in love . Si nescis , oculi sunt in amore deuces . 


it is the eyes that infect the spirits , by the gazing upon an object , and thence the spirits infect the blood . To this effect the Lady in Apuleius complained , thou art the cause of my grief , thine eyes piercing through mine eyes into mine inward parts , have set my bowels on fire , therefore commiserate me that am now ready to die for thy sake . 

The eye is the judge of beauty , and is as it were the lookingglass of the soul , in which are described all the affections of the soul , as love , passion , anger , disdain , &c.  The eye exceedingly lusteth after beauty ( And whilst it contemplateth the colours , forms , features , comeliness , grace , laughter , and whatsoever excellent quality appertains unto beauty ) is deemed fittest to be the principal judge thereof ; the eye being an organ by which a lover doth best discern the perfection of all those principal parts , which are required to the framing of a complete beauty ; for we often times see , by the bare report of virtue , in any honourable breast love imperfectly ; but if report be once confirmed by an interview , and the eye be made judge as well as the ear , it gathereth strength , and exceedingly increaseth ; which proceedeth from no other cause then from the great force that the eye hath in the true judgement of sensible things , besides the power thereof extending itself more than all the other senses to the multitude of objects , and more speedily apprehending them . Pardon me for stepping a little out of the way , but i shall quickly be in again . 

Secondly , fair hair , as the poets say , are the prisons of Cupid ; that is the cause ( As i suppose ) that Ladies make rings , and bracelets , and love-locks to send to their lovers . and that 's the cause too ( For i must handle both sexes ) that men curl and powder their hair , and prune their pickativants , making the East side correspond to the West . 

Thirdly , the tongue , is called by Scaliger , the lightning of love . but we will take all the actions and gestures of the mouth together with it ; what a bewitching force hath a gracious laughter , a pleasant and eloquent delivery , a modest courting , a Sirens song , or any other comely carriage or manifestation of the mind , a coral lip , a comely order and set of two ivory rails ? How great force and enticements lie in kissing ? Balthazer Castilio saith , jam pluribus oculis labra crepitabant , animarum quoque mixturam facientes , inter mutuos complexus animas anhelantes : they breathe out their souls and spirits together with their kisses , changing hearts and spirits , and mingle affections as they do kisses , and it is rather a connexion of the mind then of the body . what 's a kiss of that pure fair ? 
But loves lure , or Adonis' snare . 




Fourthly , some are enamoured of an handsome tall and slender body ; some again are taken with one of a middle size and plump ; but many are captivated with a handsome leg and foot . 

Fiftly , their breasts and paps are called the tents of love ; for which cause women do so much discover them , ( For women , saith Aristotle , are natures errata , continually studying temptations ) together with their naked necks , shoulders and arms , having all things necessary and in readiness , that May either allure the mind to love , or the heart to folly . what is the meaning of their affected carriages , those garments so pompous , those guizes so sought after , those colours so fantastic , the jewels and pendants so sumptuous , that painting so shameless , those curls and patches , their silk and bow-dy stockings , with their coats tucked up that their neat leg and foot May be seen , their laced shoes , those courtesies , salutations , cringings and mincing gates ; but to cut the throat of chastity , and are springes to catch woodcocks . A ship is not so long a rigging , as a young Lady is in trimming herself against the coming of her sweetheart . Eye but the dresses of women which are now in use , and thou shall not only see the carved vizard of a lewd woman , but the incarnate visage of a lascivious wanton ; not only the shadow of love , but the substance of lust . 

Sir Philip Sidney in his Arcadia , saith that apparel ( Though it be many degrees better than the wearer ) is a great motive and provocation to love , and nothing like unto it : Which doth even beauty beautify , 
And most bewitch a wretched eye . 


and as another poet saith ; — lovelocks and clothes which speak 
All countries , and no man . — 


he lays all that ever he hath upon his back , making the meridian of his estate stoop to his shoulders , judging that women are captivated with and married to bravery . 

Add hereunto the painting practised by harlots , adulterated complexions well agreeing with adulterous conditions . They especially use to paint their eyes ( Understand their eyebrows and eyelids ) with stibium , to make them look black , conceited by them an extraordinary comeliness . Hereupon was Solomon's caution , neither let her take thee with her eyelids , as one of her principal nets to catch wantoness therewith . When aged they use in vain to make themselves fair by renting their faces with painting , though more cause to rent them with their nails out of penitent indignation . Thus painting used to reconcile , in time widens the breaches in their faces ; and their flesh tainted , at least , with the poison thereof , like rotten vessels spring the more leaks the more they are repaired . And the truth is , i would have such as these to join themselves with soldiers , for so both May fight under their colours . 

Sixthly , pleasant and well composed looks , glances , smiles , counter-smiles , plausible gestures , pleasant carriage and behaviour , affable compliments , a comely gate and pace , dalliances , plays , revels , masks , dancing , time , place , opportunity , conference , and importunity , are materials of which loves torch is made ; also no stronger engines then to hear and read of love toys , fables and discourses , so that many by this means become distracted , for these exercises do as well open the pores of the heart as the body . And truly such heart-traps are laid by cunning beauties , in such pretty ambuscadoes , that he must be a crafty fox that can escape them ; for there is still some peculiar grace in a woman , as of beauty , good discourse , wit , eloquence , or honesty , which is the primum mobile , or first mover , and a most forcible loadstone , to attract the favours , and good will of men's eyes , ears and affections unto them . It is a plain ornament becomes a virgin or virtuous woman , and they get more credit in a wise man's eye and judgement , by their plainness , and are more comely and fair ▪ then they that are set out with their patches , babbles , puffed up , and adorned like jays in peacock's feathers . Ladies , let the example of Lucretia be set before you , who stamped a deeper impression of affection in the heart of the virtuous beholder , by addressing herself to housewifery , and purple spinning , than others could ever do with their rare banquets , and riotous spending . All are not of Aegisthus mind , who was taken with a compliment of lightness . This argued , that a youthful heat had rather surprised his amorous heart , than any discreet affection preferred him to his choice . This love is fading ; for where virtue is not directrice in our choice , our minds are ever prone to change ; we find not what we expected , nor digest well what we formerly affected ; all is out of square , because discretion contrived not the building . It is a decent and comely habit best becomes Ladies to be wooed in , and contents discreet suitors most to have them won in . Conform then your generous dispositions to a decency of fashion , that you May attract to yourselves , and beget in others motives of affection : whose private virtues render you to the imitation , and public to the admiration of all . 

Seventhly , a tender and hot heart , lucid spirits , vegetous and subtle blood , are causes of amorous fires , a small beauty makes a great impression in them . 

Eightly , obsequious love-letters , to insinuate themselves into their Mistress' favour , are great incitements , they are the life of love . 

The pen can furrow a fond females heart , 
And pierce it more , than Cupid's feigned dart . 
Letters a kind of magic virtue have , 
And like strong philters human souls enslave . 


Ninthly , words much corrupt the disposition ; they set an edge or gloss on depraved liberty ; making that member the vent and spout of their passion , and making the hearts of credulous women melt with their ear-charming oratory . 

The tenth , love is caused very often by the ear , as Achilles Tacitus saith , ea enim hominum intemperantium libido est , ut etiam fama ad amandum impellantur , & audientes aequè afficiantur ac videntes ; such is that intemperance and passion of some men , that they are as much enamoured by report , as if they see them . Ofttimes the species of love are received into the fantasy , as well by relation as by sight , for we see by the eyes of our understanding . No face yet seen ; but shafts that love lets fly , 
Kills in the ear as well as in the eye . 


also ; The pleader burns his books , disdains the law , 
And false in love , with whom his eyes ne'er saw . 


Lycidas declaring to Cleon his love towards Astrea , said , whether she was really fair or no , i know not , but so it was , that so soon as ever i heard the report of her , i loved her . Some report ( Saith he ) that love proceeds from the eyes of the party loved ; but this cannot be , for her eye never looked upon me , nor did mine see her so much as to know her again . For an illustrious name is a strange course 
To attract love , and good report hath force . 




We purpose now to treat of money causing love . that is the general humour of the world , and in this iron age of ours , and in that commodity stears our affections , the love of riches being most respected ; for now a maid must buy her husband with a great dowry if she will have him , making love mercenary ; and 't is the fashion altogether in use , to choose wives as chapmen sell their wares , with quantum dabitis ? what is the most you will give ? Witty was that young gentlewoman's answer to an inconsiderate suitor , who having solicited the father , and bargained with him for the affection of his daughter for so much , and covenants of marriage concluded : this undiscreet wooer unseasonably imparts his mind to the daughter ; who made strange with it , saying , she never heard of any such matter : yea but ( Replied he ) i have bargained with your father , and he hath already consented : and you May marry him too ( Quoth she ) for you must hold me excused . Covetousness and filthy lucre mars many a good match , or some such by-respect . veniunt a dote sagit•ae , 't is money that makes the mare to go ; 't is money and a good dowry , lights Hymen's torches . They care not for beauty , education , honesty , or birth ; if they hear that she is a rich heir , or hath ready cash , they are frantic & doting upon such a one , more than if she were nature's masterpiece in beauty . if she be never so ugly and stinking , 't is money makes her kiss sweetly . Has she money ? ( that 's the first question ) oh how they love her ! Is she mula auro onusta ? nay then , run dog , run bear , they 'll venture hanging to compass their desire . Auri sacra fames , quid non mortalia cogis 
Pectora ? — 


what will not this desire of money compel a man to attempt ? Is she as old as Saturn , deformed , vicious , blear-eyed , though they be like two powdering tubs either running over or full of standing brine , and her brows hang o'er her eyes like fly flaps , though her nose be like a hunter's horn , and so bending up , that a man May hang a hat upon it , and her cheeks May serve boys for cherry-pits , doth her teeth stand like an old park pale , if she have any ? has she a tongue would make a deaf man bless his imperfections , that frees him from the plague of so much noise ; and such a breath ( Heavens shield us ) as outvies the shambles for a sent ? Yet if she have cash , oh how amiable is she ! without doubt she hath no less than twenty suitors , never rack she 's good enough . est natura hominum , to love those that are fortunate and rich , that thrive , let them get it as they will , by hook or crook , all 's one so they have it . de moribus ultima fiet qnestio ; to inquire of her conditions and education is the last interrogatory . But let me assure you these being joined together , the seen is altered on a sudden , their love is converted into hate , their mirth into melancholy , having only fixed their affections upon this object of commodity ; the desire of which in excess is mere covetousness ; and on the otherside their hate is furiously bent upon the woman , she becomes an abject , and an odious object unto them . 

Now to turn the current of our discourse to the other sex ; for this desire of lucre is not adherent to men only , but that there are some of the female train of the same temper . Let the man be what he will , let him be cast in Esop's mould , with his back like a lute , and his face like Thersites , his eyes broad and tawny , his lips of the largest size in folio , able to furnish a cobbler's shop with clouting-leather ; if he have but a golden hand , Midas' touch , or loadened with golden pockets , immediately they salute him with an easement , ego te hoc fasce levabo : and it is reason you should do it , replies the woodcock ; yielding up the souls of his pockets for the hopes of a smile , embrace or a kiss : and having emptied them , stuff them up again with frowning looks , and serve him like a sheep in June , turned forth for a bare necked ewe , to seek a ruff for the piece next below his coxcomb . money hath a significant voice , semper ad placitum , always pleasing , always grateful . 

He that will learn to win by smooth persuasion , 
Must practise much the topic called donation , 
Strowing the path by which he means to pass , 
With the sweet flowers of yellow-faced Midas ; 
So shall he find all easy to his will ; 
Come in at 's pleasure and be welcome still . 


But the truly handsome , complete , and meritorious , that cannot show the face of a Jacobus , that hath not pocket angels for his guardians , shall live at a distance from gratia dei , the grace of her good liking ; he shall pass by for vas vacuum , and be embarked in the ship of scorn , to be conpucted to the haven of heaviness , and thrust upon the shore ( As an exile ) of never return again . yet , i would rather wish Ladies to let the picture of love be the emblem of their hearts , and not these inferior pictures , which we call money ; which are so far from satisfying the affection , as they are only for the mould or worldling ; whose grosser thoughts never yet aspired to the knowledge of loves definition . also it shows a servile nature , to cashier a faithful lover because he is poor , and to prefer another less desertful because he is rich . 

We will now declare what the poets say is the cause of love . they say that when Jupiter first form man , and all souls , he touched every one with several pieces of loadstone , and afterwards put all the pieces in a place by themselves ; likewise , the souls of women after he had touched them , he put them in a magazine by themselves : afterwards when he had sent the souls into bodies , he brought those of the women to the place where the loadstones were which touched the men , and made every one to take one piece ; if there were any thievish souls , they took several pieces and hide them . Now when that man meets with that woman that hath the piece which touched his soul , it is impossible but he must love her ; the loadstone which she hath doth attract his soul : and from hence doth proceed the several effects of love ; for those who are loved of many , are those thievish souls who took many pieces of the loadstone ; if any do love one who loves not him aagain , that was one who took his loadstone , but he not hers . And from hence ( Say they ) comes it to pass , that we do often see some persons love others , who in our eyes are nothing amiable . Also from hence proceed those strange loves which sometimes false out , as that a Gaul brought up amongst many beauties false in love with a barbarous stranger . 

Fonseca holds ( And i am of the same mind ) there is something in a woman beyond all human delight , a magnetic virtue , a charming quality , and a powerful motive . to illustrate this ; there is a story recorded in the lives of the fathers , of a child whose education was in a desert from his infancy , by an old hermit ; being come to man's estate , he accidentally spied two comely women wandering in the woods ; he enquired of the hermit ( Having never seen such before in his life ) what creatures they were , the hermit told him that they were fairies ; after some tract of time , being in discourse , the hermit demanded of him which was the pleasantest and most delectable sight that ever he saw in his life ? He readily replied ( Without any pause or further consideration ) the two fairies he espied in the desert . So that indubitably , there is in a fair and beautiful woman , a magnetic power , and a natural inbred affection , which moves our concupiscence . And this surely proceeds from the particular institutes of nature , and the perfections a man imagines in another creature of his likeness , which he thinks May become another self : for with the distinction of sexes which nature hath bestowed on man , as well as irrational creatures ; she hath put certain impressions in the brain ( As in this young man ) which makes a man at a certain age , and at a certain season , to look on himself as defective , and as if he were but the half of an whole , whereof a person of the other sex ought to be the other half ▪ so that the acquisition of this half is represented to us confusedly by nature , as the greatest of all imaginable goods ; and although he see many persons of the other sex , he doth not therefore desire many at the same time , by reason nature makes him conceive that he hath need of no more but one half ; but when he observes some thing in any one , that likes him better than any thing he hath marked at the same time in the rest ; that fixes the soul to feel all the inclination which nature hath given him to seek after that good , that she represents to him , as the greatest he can possibly possess , on that woman only ; and this is it which furnisheth the romancers and poets with stuff . 

To conclude this chapter ; it May be , that some will expect , that i should prescribe some things to cause love ; as to teach them how to temper and spice an amatorious cup , and what time May be elected for the administering of it ; or how love May be caused by natural magic : but not knowing into whose hands the book Might come , neither do i write it to be an instrument ready tuned for every wanton eye , tongue , and hand to play upon ; i forbear , lest more hurt then good come thereby : for Pliny reporteth that Lucullus a most brave general and captain of great execution , lost his life by a love-potion . — love hath used against frail hearts 
Unlawful weapons , shooting poisoned darts . 




That there is things that have power and virtue to cause love is not to be doubted ; for the soul of the world ( According to corn . Agrip. ) by its virtue doth make all things that are naturally generated , and artificially made fruitful , by infusing into them celestial properties , for the working of these effects ; then , those things themselves not only administered by potions , or any other such like way , but also when they being conveniently wrapped up , and bound to , or hanged about the neck , or any other way applied , although by never so small a contact , do impress their virtue upon us . For by those applications or contacts the accidents of the body and mind are changed , causing them to whom they are administered to love , and render them that carry them to be beloved . but if these be not done under a suitable and proper constellation , you May as well go about to pick straws , as effect any thing by them ; no more but verbum sat sapienti . also there are certain seasons ( Which i will conceal for modesty's sake ) when women ( Though never so forward at other times ) May be won , in the which moment they have neither will to deny , nor wit to mistrust ; such a time is recorded in history a young gentleman found to obtain the love of the Duchess of Milan ; such a time a poor yeoman elected , and in it purchased the love of the fairest Lady in Mantua . Sed vulgo prodere grande nefas . if i have displeased any fools in concealing such things as are to be concealed , i hope the wise will hold me excused , whilst i proceed to declare unto them in the next chapter , the power and effects of love . 

Of the power and effects of love . 

The reader shall pay nothing but his pains in following me , whilst i show him the great power and various effects of love ; and yet i think i May as well go about to number the leaves of trees , and sands of the sea , the grass piles upon the land , and the stars in the firmament , as enumerate the different effects and disorders that love produceth in mortals . What poison May be dissolved which love mingleth not ? What weapons can be forged and filled , to transfix the sides of innocent creatures which love hammereth and polisheth not in his shop ? or what precipices are there which love prepareth not ? All the mischiefs and crimes which have in former ages been perpetrated , love hath acted and daily invented them . Plato calls it magnus daemon , or the great devil , for its vehemency and soveraingty over all other passions . For saith one , i had rather contend with tigers , wolves , dragons , lions , bulls , bears , and giants , then with love , he is so powerful . Regnat , & in superos jus habet ille deus , 


saith Ovid ; he enforceth all to become tributary to him , he domineers over all , and can make mad and sober whom he list , and strikes with sickness , and cures whom he list ; he is of such power and majesty , that no creature can withstand him ; he is to be seen in creatures void of reason : for the pelican gores her breast to feed her young ones , and the stork is not unkind to feed her old one in her age . We are informed by common experience , how violently brute beasts are carried away with this passion , lions , bulls , dogs and cocks are so furious in this kind that they will kill one another ; but especially hearts are so fierce that they May be heard fight at a great distance . Pliny saith , fish pine away for love and wax lean ; for ( Saith he ) a dolphin so loved a boy , that when he died the fish came on land , and so perished . This love is the most fatal plague amongst all the passions , it hath the shiffering and heat of fevers , the ache and striking of the megrim , the rage of teeth , the stupefaction of the vertigo , the furies of frenzy , the black vapours of the hypochondry , the stupidities of the lethargy , the fits of the mother , and spleen , the faintness of the phthisic , the tremblings and palpitations of the heart . it is wills darling , the trial of patience , passions torture , the pleasure of melancholy , the sport of madness , the delight of varieties , and the deviser of vanities . after all this it is made a God called Cupid , to whom poems , eulogies ▪ hymns , songs , and victimes are offered . Empire over the heart is given to it . There are many million of men in the world , who would be most fortunate and flourishing , if they knew how to avoid the mischievous power of this passion . what a sweet poison is the beauty and comeliness of one sex to another ? which entereth in by the eye and maketh a strange havoc . I wonder not at all why the scriptures compare it to a panther ( A savage and cruel beast ) which with teeth , teareth those she hath amazed with the mirour-like spots of her skin , and drawn to her by the sweet exhalation of her body . love hath walked on sceptres , parched the laurels of victors , thrown trouble into states , schisms into churches , corruption among judges , and furies into arms . It assaulteth in company , in solitude , at windows , at prison gates , at theaters , and in cabinets , at sports , in a feast , at a comedy , and many times at church , ( Like the simple old woman belulled with a sleepy zeal , had a mind to go to church purposely to take a nap ; so many of our dainty ones , desire nothing more , then to go to the temple to present to the deluded eye a new dress , and captivating love-tainted hearts ) and who can assure us against it ? When it once gets the master-head of reason , and passion prevails , there is nothing left , but wandering of the soul , a fever , a perpetual frenzy , a neglect of operations , of affairs , of functions , sadness , languor and impatience , they think business is done when 't is but thought on . amor ordinem nescit ; love knows nor keeps no order . Oh the inexpressible variousness of this love ! in some it is sharp and violent ; in others , dull and impetuous ; in others , toyish and wanton ; in others , turbulent and cloudy ; in others , brutish and unnatural ; in others , mute and shamefaced ; in others , perplexed and captious ; in others , light and transitory ; in others , fast and retentive ; in others , fantastic and inconstant ; in others , weak and foppish ; in others stupid and astonished ; in others , distempered ; and in some furious and desperate . Magna suo ardent furore pectora . it inflameth the blood , it weakens the body , it wanneth the colour , it holloweth the eyes , it totally subverts the mind ; it hath somewhat of being possessed , something of idolatry ; for those that are thus love-stricken , make lust the idol of their souls , and the person loved the idol of their lust . 

You May behold in those that are far entered into this passion , floods and ebbs of thoughts , fits and countenances of persons possessed , and it is in all of them to deify the creature on whom they are so passionately enamoured , and would willingly place them among the stars , yea upon the altars . Chains and wounds are honourable if they come from a beloved hand , making their heads cushions for their Mistress' feet , showing that they find more force in their eyes , than in their own hearts . They would die a thousand deaths for them , so they throw but so much as a handful of flowers , or distil but a poor tear on their tombs . This love awakeneth ( Excludeth none ) all other passions , and garboils them , and makes them all Lacques to wait upon it : it makes lovers ( Through immoderate watching ) giddy brained , having their spirits troubled , and become very fools . fears and joys , hopes and desires , mixed with despairs and doubts , do make the sport in love ; they are the very dogs by which the hare is hunted ; and being fleshed in the chase , neither stop nor give o'er ( passion being in a hot sent ) till they have killed her . It is a natural distemper , a kind of smallpox ; every one hath had it , or is to expect it , and the sooner the better . It is of so great force and authority , that it subjugateth unto its will the greatest power of the mind ; that is will which ruleth and governeth all the other , both interior and exterior powers , and yet the will is constrained many times , for the better pleasing and content of love , to follow those things which it doth altogether abhor and detest : so that having so wonderful an empire and command over all the powers both inward and outward , of the body and of the mind , no wonder if love both will and can do what it will . 

It was love that betrayed Samson by Dalila ; it was love made Colomon brutish by his concubines and turn idolater ; 't was love caused Ahab to be rooted out through Jesabel ; marc. Anthony slew himself for the love of Cleopatra ; the destruction of Troy was caused by Helena , the Pandora of Hesiodus , the pitiful death of Hercules by Deianira , and many other miserable events procured through the love of women , and plentifully declared in histories . How was loves great-master Ovid , enamoured of bright Julia ( The jewel of his soul ) and celebrated her excellencies , and their love stealths under the mask of Corinna ? nay , Apollo himself , the inventor of poesy , music , and physic , elated for his victory over the ugly Python , found Cupid's shaft the most prevalent , when he pursued the too much loved , but overmuch hating Daphne , over the uncouth rocks , craggy cliffs , and untrod mazes of the woods . Cupid is more than quartermaster among the gods , ( capiumque jovem coelo traxit ) he made Jupiter metamorphose himself for Europa into a bull ( And put himself to graze , that he Might lick her hands who fed him with flowers ) for Danae into a shower of gold , for Astrea into an eagle , for Leda into a swan , for Antiope into a satyr , for Egina into a flame , for Mnemosyne into a shepherd , for dois into a serpent , for Calysto into a wood-nymph or nun ; so by this you May see that love made him esteem his pleasure above his state , so as Lucian Juno called him ludus amoris , Cupid's whirligig . Sen. in herc. oet. . 

Tu fulminantem saepe domuisti jovem . 


Likewise all feigned romances do continually chant forth the complaints of million of lovers , and the infidelity of their Mistresses ; on the other side women waging war with men cease not to accuse their inconstancy , which were able to tire spirits any thing serious . 

A lover's heart is Cupid's quiver , an inextinguishable fire ; more hot and vehement than any material fire , it is the quintessence of fire , no water can quench . sen. Hippol . — Quis meas miserae deus , 
Aut quis juvare Daedalus flammas queat ? 


— What God can ease ? 
What Daedalus can quench such flames as these ? 


or according to the eloquent poesy of another ; For love hath nets there laid to serve his turn , 
And in the water , will his wildfire burn . 


o! how many men do wander in this way ? how many persons in this age are corrupted too much with the extremity of this passion , lulling themselves asleep in the laps of such as seek to strangle them ? How many excellent spirits are recorded in history , which were in excellent state and in full vigour of the functions of an intellectual life ; who by approaching overneer to this sex , have entered into affections of fire and flames , which like little creeping serpents have stolen into their hearts . I cannot sufficiently admire at the sottishness and drowsiness of many noble spirits , who are so delighted and captivated with the vain dreams of their own fancies , that they employ all the gifts and graces of the mind , and incline to some beautiful object . what a ridiculous thing is it , to see men fall from their primitive goodness , as to lose their selves in dotage , and that dotage on one creature , and that creature a woman ? really , next to a miracle is my only admiration . Oh traitress Dalila , which seekest by thy enticings to deliver man's soul to an enemy far worse than the Philistines ! such pleasures are like gilded pills , which under their external beauty include bitterness . They are also like fresh rivers that end their course in the sea , losing their sweet relish in an ocean of saltness . Man cannot love and be wise both together , the very best of them is betwixt hawk and buzzard , if once they be overtaken with this passion : it being the first and chief Mistress of all the passions , the most furious and severest of all ; he that suffers himself to be seduced by it , he is no more himself ; his body endureth a thousand labours in the search of his pleasure ; his mind a thousand hells to satisfy his desire , and desire itself increasing grows into fury . as it is natural , so it is violent and common to all : it maketh all the wisdom , resolution , contemplation and the operation of the soul brutish . 

it is impossible to reckon up the many great dangers and hazards they undergo ; they undertake single combats , venture their lives , creep in at windows , gutters , go down chimneys in ropes , and climb over walls to come to their sweethearts ; anoint the doors and hinges with oil , lest they should make a noise , tread softly , whisper , &c. and if they be surprised , leap out at windows , and cast themselves down headlong . what a passionate speech was that of Callicratides in Lucian . Dial. amorum . Mihi o dii coelestes ultra sit vita haec perpetua exadverso amicae sedere , & suave loquentem audire , &c. si moriatur , vivere non sustinebo , & idem erit sepulchrum utrisquethe which we thus paraphrase ; oh ye God's celestial , grant me this life for ever to sit opposite to her i love , that i May continually be an auditor of her mellifluous speeches , to go in and out with her ; he that frowns upon her , shall frown upon me ; if she should die , i would not live , and one tomb should contain us both . when the King of Babylon would have punished one of his courtiers , for loving a young Lady of the royal blood , far transcending his fortunes , Apollonius being in his presence , by all means persuaded him to let him alone ; for to love and not enjoy , was most inexpressible tornent . 

loves force is shown in the continuation of a design , in spite of all impeachment and crosses ▪ how great was that of Psyche in the search of Cupid ? she saw three goddesses set against her pretensions , Juno , Ceres , and Venus , and yet her passion became victorious over their malevolence ▪ she did things that seemed impossible , she went down to hell and spoke to preserpina , passing without much difficulty many obstructions in the way . But where it cannot effect its designs , it causes revenge . for when Edward Courtney Earl of Devonshire , being released by Queen Mary , long detained prisoner in the tower , a gentleman of a beautiful body , sweet nature , and royal descent , intending him ( As it was generally conceived ) to be an husband for herself . For when the said Earl petitioned the Queen for leave to travel , she advised him rather to marry , assuring him , that no Lady in the land how high soever , would refuse him for an husband , and urging him to make his choice where he pleased ; she pointed out herself unto him as plainly , as Might stand with the modesty of a maid , and the majesty of a Queen . Hereupon the young Earl ( Whether because his long durance had some influence on his brain , or that naturally ( As i rather suppose ) his face was better than his head , or out of some private fancy and affection to the Lady Elizabeth , or out of loyal bashfulness , not presuming to climb higher , but expecting to be called up ) is said to have requested the Queen for leave to marry her sister the Lady Elizabeth ; unhappy was it , that his choice either went so high or no higher ; for who could have spoken worse treason against Mary ( Though not against the Queen ) then to prefer her sister before her ? and she innocent Lady did afterwards dearly pay the score of this Earls indiscretion ; for the Queen having no cause of revenge against the Earl , yet she under a colour imposed greater affliction , and closer imprisonment against Elizabeth . 

love causeth him that doth love , to engrave and imprint in his heart , that face and image which he loveth ; so that the heart of him that loveth is like unto a lookingglass , in which the image of the party beloved shineth and is represented ; and doth as it were deprive himself of himself , and giveth himself to whom he loveth ; for the delights of love are commonly more in the imagination , then in the thing itself ; and the soul doth cast her eye upon those images which remain in the fancy , and looks upon them as if they were present . 

When Venus commands , all things lose their antipathy , such is the power of love , that for the thing beloved , they neglect their own good , they fear not to expose their bodies to the edge of the sword , deny unto themselves whatsoever to them is profitable , as sleep to their eyes , quietness to their minds , rest to their members , ease to their bodies ; yea , more than all this , they glory in those vain glorious attempts , those labours , sweatings , watchings , wounds , burnings and freezings , all which they endure and undergo for their Mistresses ; as Sir jo. Suckling sings ; 

Ah cruel love , how great a power is thine ! 
Under the pole although we lie , 
Thou mak'st us fry : 
And thou cast make us freeze beneath the line . 


Yet this amorous passion is not more frequent with men and women , than it is with the airy chorists , the nimble birds , who are overtaken with Cupid's nimbler wings , annually electing their valentines . what a perfect harmony of affection is there betwixt the turtle and his dear mate ? whose continual billing shames Diana and her frigid train . What a zealous adorer of Venus is the wanton sparrow ( As Pliny reporteth in his natural history ) who empties himself of all his radical moisture in her rites , and at three years' end ( When the column of his life fails him ) offers up his dry bones a sacrifice to her . Aristotle will have birds sing ob futuram venerem , for joy and hope of their love stealth to come . Cupid is as familiar with lions , as children with cosset lambs , and oftentimes mounts on their backs , holding by their brisly mains , and riding them about like horses , whilst they fawn upon him with their tails . He blunts the horns of the bull , and muzzles the fierce tiger , and makes the sluggish bear nimbly dance a coranto . 

Omne adeo genus in terris hominumque ferarumque 
Et genus aequoreum , pecudes pictaeque volucres 
In furias ignemque ruunt , amor omnibus idem . 


All kind of creatures on the earth , beasts grim , 
And men , and fish with golden fins that swim , 
and painted birds alike to rage doth fly . 
Thus love bears equal sway in earth , sea , sky . 


It is love makes old men and women , that have more toes than teeth , dance and frisk like goats ; it makes old gouty fellows break their crutchs , i , and shins too , & dance after fiddlers hei go mad : and 't is no new thing , take the poet's reason , which seems to me to be as true as ever fiction was , and that is , Cupid and death met in an inn , and being merrily disposed , they did exchange some arrows out of either's quiver , which is the cause that young men die , and ofttimes old men dote . and who can withstand the force of it ? ( Saith Mr. Burton ) if once it pricks us at the heart , young or old , though our teeth shake in our heads like virginal jacks , or stand parallel asunder like arches in a bridge ; there 's no remedy , we must dance and caper candlestick height , leap over tables , chairs , and stools , though we be 60 years above waste , scarce 30 below . 

Maids when they get together ( Pardon me Ladies , for 't is my design to touch all ) are still either reading or telling of love-stories , singing lovesongs or sonnets , talking of this or that young man , such a man is proper , fair , and handsome , saith one ; and such a man is black and comely ; o! what a pearl is he in mine eye , saith another ; and thus they chat when they meet , never thinking or willingly discoursing upon any other subject . And forfoorh they must fast St. Agnes Eve , to see who must be their first husbands , and flock to the artist to know who they shall marry , and how many husbands they shall have ; nay , what would they not give if they Might but see him in a glass ? This is no court compliment or allegation , but a downright truth . 

We will now turn to the enamorate ; and suppose one should endeavour to reform him ( Than which , one had better strive and tame a panther ) immediately he will burst out in choler , saying , do you think that love that thinks the whole universe too narrow a compass to be confined unto , and who disposeth of all our wills according to his pleasure , be hemed up in such strait limits as you prescribe ? will love be ruled and governed by the will of any but himself ? he will confess his fault , yet will not insist upon any other argument or reason but his extreme affection , and will not argue with you anywhere but before the throne of love , and there he will prostrate himself upon his knees , and vow by all eternity , ndver to rise so long as he lives , unless he be ingratiated into his Mistress' favour . and such a one is this who sues for an office in fools paradise ; but let him take it , for my part I 'll never ride ( Like one for the county-clerk ship when a new sheriff is elected ) nor strive with him for it . What ( Saith he ) would you have me inconstant ? oh no , not for a world ! What , would you have me mad ? ( As he is no better ) no , i will be constant till death ; startling more at the word inconstancy , then at a devil : so that i have often smiled at those who condemn inconstancy , and are professed enemies against it ; considering that they themselves are not able to be as they say , nor more constant than those whom they brand with the vice of inconstancy . for when they fall in love , do they not fall in love with beauty , or something which seems pleasing unto them ? now when this beauty doth fade , as time doubtless will make all beauty do , are they not then inconstant , still loving those faces that are now grown ugly , and retain nothing of what they were , but only the very name of a face ? if to love that , which is contrary to that which was loved , be constancy ; and if ugliness be contrary unto beauty , than he that did love a fair face , and continues loving when it is ugly , must be concluded inconstant . this consideration makes me think , that the way to avoid inconstancy , is always to love beauty , and when it fades farewell love , find some other that is fair , and still love beauty ( If you will be loving and accounted constant ) and not its contrary , unless you be unconstant to your first love . i know this is point blank against the opinion of the vulgar , but if they gainsay it , i cannot help it . 

Likewise ( Saith this Love-simplician ) did you know what it is to be a fool in such occasions , you would confess that all the wisdom in the world is not comparable to this pleasing folly ; were you able to comprehend it , you would never ask what pleasure and contentment those faithful lovers ( Whom you phrase melancholy and pensive ) do receive ; for you then would know that they are so ravished in the contemplation of the party whom they love and adore , as scorning all that is in the whole universe ; they do not repent of any thing more , than the loss of that time , which they spend anywhere else ; and their souls not being well able to contain the grandeur of their contentment , they stand astonished at so much treasure , and so many felicities which transcends their knowledge . But i am so far from thinking them felicities , as my opinion of the contrary is much fortified . 

Had i a quill plucked from Cupid's wing , and dipped in the milk of Venus , i could not record all the delight lovers take in displaying the beauty of their Mistresses , with obsequious hyperboles , and things most excellent , comparing their eyes to those of night , to the sun , and call them spheres of light , flaming and strongly enkindling all others , they compare her to Aurora , or the morning , to the snow , lily , rose , to the whiteness of the swan , sometimes to the myrtle , sometimes to gold , rubies , diamonds , crystal , sometimes they parallel her with the heavens , the spring , and whatsoever is in any degree excellent ; and yet , they think those but beggarly similitudes , and would go higher if they could tell how . They suppose their cheek two fair gardens planted with the choicest flowers of paradise , making the lily and the rose as obscure types and shadows of those delicate tinctures laid on their blooming cheeks by nature's pencil . they imagine their necks towers of alabaster , their breasts hillocks of snow inlaid with saphires , their mouths music's temple decked with rails of pearl , their voices the harmony of the spheres . and these they Count as faint metaphors of them , to represent whom ( In their thoughts ) words are too narrow , and freshest colours too dim . 

Oh! how she-lovers fry under the torrid zone of love , hourly in that Elysium , quenching and renewing their heats , and letting themselves loose to the freedom of uncontrolled embraces . expressing themselves in these or such like raptures , viz. my dearest , unless thou be'st frosty spirited , unless Alecto's cold poison fills thy veins , I 'll melt thee into amorous thoughts , and speak charms to all thy senses , and make thee all flame . and thus they besiege and seek to storm loves-fort , with whole volley of obediential oaths , and the hollow granado's of compliment ; crying out to their obstinate sweethearts , to tell them ( For loves sake ) if it be not better and more lovely to lie intwined in their folding arms , freely enjoying their embraces , like lilies imprisoned in goals of snow , or ivory in bands of alabaster , then to sit muffled in furs like a bedrid miser ? They lie open to the touch , the warm snow and soft polished ivory of their breasts , which excels in softness the ranging clouds , the Indian cotton , and in sleekness the smoothest cut diamond , and these are lures to catch buzzards . Thus wounds they give , and wounds they take again , 
Nor doth it grieve them slaying to be slain . 




Now to return again to our loves weather-beaten widgeon , he hugs and embraces all his Mistress' friends and followers , her picture and what ever she wears he adores as a relic , her dog he makes his constant companion , feeding him at his table , verifying the proverb , love me love my dog . if he get a ring , a ribbon , a shoe-tie , her garter , a bracelet of hair of hers , he wears it ( ut pignus amoris ) for a favour about his arm , in his hat , finger or next his heart . How many of such like , would not let to hazard their very souls for their Mistress' sake ? forsake heaven with Venus for the love of an Adonis ? there is no man so pusillanimous , so very a dastard , whom love would not incense , making an heroical spirit ; for ( Saith Sir . phil. Sidney ) they imagine that valour towards men , is an emblem of ability towards women , a good quality signifying a better . Nothing draws a woman like to it . Nothing is more behooveful for that sex ; for with it they receive protection , and in a free way too without any danger . Nothing makes a shorter cut to obtaining ; for a man of arms is always void of ceremony , which is the wall betwixt Pyramus and Thisbe , that is , man and woman ; for there is no pride in women , but that which rebounds from our own baseness ( As cowards grow valiant upon those that are more cowards ) so that only by our pale asking we teach them to deny , and by our shamefacedness we put them in mind to be modest . This kind of bashfulness is far from men of valorous dispositions , and especially from soudiers ; for such are ever men ( Without doubt ) forward and confident , losing no time , lest they should lose opportunity , which is the best factor for a lover . and because they know women are given to dissemble , they will never believe them when they deny . they will defend their Mistresses even in a wrong and unjust cause ; for from the first moment that they fastened their affections upon that object , they prize it above their own proper essence , and therefore how justly soever an injury or violence May be offered unto it , they think no injustice in themselves to defend it ; or because winking at the wrong offered their sweet hearts , they make themselves unwortby of their grace . Plato is of opinion that it was the love of Venus , made Mars courageous and valorous : and ( Truly ) who would not be valorous to fight under such colours ? Before this cowardly age , there was no way known to win a Lady but by tilting and turning , and riding , to seek adventures through dangerous forests ; in which time these slender small boned striplings with little legs , were held but of strength enough to marry their widows . and even in our days there can be given no reason of the inundation of servingmen upon their Mistresses , but only that usually they carry their Master's weapons , and their valour . It is better to be admitted to the title of valiant acts ; at least that imports the venturing of mortality ; and all women delight to hold him fast in their arms , who hath escaped thither through many dangers . to speak at once , man hath a privilege in valour . In clothes and good face , we do but imitate women . So than these whiffling skips , these women in men's apparel , are too near a woman to be beloved of her . A scar in a man's face , is the same that a mole is in a woman's , and a mole in a woman's face , is a jewel set in white , to make it seem more white ; so a scar in a man is a mark of honour , and no blemish ; for 't is a scar and a blemish in a soldier to be without one . A good face availeth nothing , if it be on a coward that is bashful , the utmost of it is to be kissed , which rather increaseth , than quencheth the appetite . she cares not for a man that woos by letters , and through cowardliness dares not come into her company ; no woman takes advice of any in her loving , but of her own eyes , and her waiting maids ; and there is no clothes fits so well in a woman's eye as a suit of steel , though not of the fashion : and no man so soon surpriseth a woman's affections , as he that is the subject of whisperings , and hath always some twenty stories of his own achievements depending upon him . 

There is one Love-simplician who is so led by the nose into fool's paradise , that if he see an handsome maid smile and laugh upon him , or show a pleasant countenance , or look ( obliquis ocellis ) asquint upon him , or use some gracious words , or amorous gestures ( As many are too full of ) he applies it all to himself , as done in his favour , thinking that surely she loves him ; to the tavern he runs , looks big , erects his mouchatoes , stamps , stairs , and calls the drawer rogue , drinks to his Venus in a venice-glace , and thinks he sees the smile she gave him in it , and to moralize her sex , throws it over his head and breaks it . This fellow is like to Mullidor ( In Green's never too late ) who said to his mother , that he compared the church to a lookingglass , for as a man May see himself in the one , so in the other the wenches eyes are a certificate ; for upon whom you see all the girls look , he for foot and face carries away the bell , Phillida solus habet : and i am sure ( Says he ) for these two years i never came into the church , and was no sooner set , but the maids began to wink one upon another , to look on me and laugh . Oh! war mother , when a dog wags his tail he loves his Master , and when a wanton laughs , for my life , she is over head and ears in love . 

Another gull seeks to win his Mistress' affection with gallant and costly apparel , putting all he hath on his back , thinking women are married to fine clothes ; making his tailor his bawd , and hopes to inveigle her love with such a coloured suit ; surely the same man hazards the loss of her favour upon every change of his clothes . Another with an affected pace . another with music . another with rich gifts , and pleasant discourse . another with letters , vows , and promises , to be gracious in her eyes , struts like a peacock , with his train before her . 

But there are many other , who every moment declare their fervour , their torment , and martyrdom ; they serve , they soothe , they continually frequent , they spy out all occasions , they silently practise all the ways they can , to come to the end of their designs ; and often it happeneth , that as drops of water incessantly falling , do hollow rocks ; so ceaseless compliments soften the most inaccessible rigours . yet some are so sottishly overcome , as to waste ten years of service to kiss a woman's hand , and suffer for a shameful servitude , that , which ( I profess ) i would not endure one year for an empire . 

fond novices , you pule , and continually strive to please your Mistresses , which is the only way to make her fly you , nothing so tiring and tedious ; such as thus love , must needs perpetually be imprisoned , never at liberty , always present , continually talking with her , she cannot stir a foot , but you must do the like . If she chance to be at any time ill , or frown , and do not smile upon you , nor please you , then must you forsooth put the finger in the eye and cry , cry tears . Do you think this is the way ? no , no , it is in love as in all things else , the mean is the best measure ; so as to avoid all frivolous follies and troubles ( As they are no other when you have made the best of them ) the only way is but to love indifferently ; and if you will be silly fools , and must needs have Mistresses , your best way is never to tie yourself to one ; for to love one only , gives her an occasion to think that it is for want of courage , that you dare not attempt to love any else , and therefore she will scorn such a faint-hearted lover : whereas , did you love all you look upon ( Or at least a good many of them ) she will not think you came to her , because you know not whither to go else ; but she will then prize you the higher , and will be obliged to love you , especially if you particularize her above any other ; and once a week is often enough to tender your service to her , for oftener is a palpable doting . 

But because i say a mediocrity in love is the best , ( Methinks ) i see one of these melancholy lovers , setting a frowning , tart , Saturnine face upon me ; objecting , that he that loves not in the highest point of extremity , does not love one jot ; he that can be indifferent and love all alike , cannot love one as he ought to do ; or he that can measure , or think any greater than his own , is not a lover worth a rush ; for to enjoin a mediocrity in love , is to impose an impossibility . And then ( Poor soul ) he shakes his head at me , saying , ah , you little know what belongs to love ! and then having recovered his breath , for ( Through the vehemency of anger towards me ) he had almost lost it , he begins to object again , saying , those effects which belong to an extreme love , and one that knows , what sacrifice and duties belong unto the altars of love , is so far from calling those effects , troubles , or follies ( As you term them ) as they think them felicities and perfect contentments ; likewise he saith , that love is to die in ones self , that he May live in another ; never to love any thing but what is pleasing and agreeable to the party loved . the will must be transformed into a night toy he calls a Mistress . And can you think ( Saith he ) that one who loves thus , will ever be troubled with the presence of her whom he loves . if you did but know what it is to love , you would never think that he who loves , can do any thing to displease . If he chance to commit any fault , the fault itself pleaseth , considering with what intention it was committed . The very desire of being amiable has such a vigour in a right lover , as though he be rough to the world in general , yet will he be sure smooth and spruce up himself towards her he loves . nay , he thinks himself in the orchard of Adonis , or the Elysium fields , if he enjoy her company , he is so taken with delight . And these , and an hundred such like whimsical chym•raeses , hot brained lovers conceive , and do affect a vainglorious humour , which lovers use to attribute to themselves , and it is to be reputed constant . they suffer themselves wholly to be led by sense , and are so far from repressing these rebellious inclinations , that they give all encouragement unto them , leaving the reigns , and using all provocations to further them ; bad by nature , worse by art , education , and a perverse will of their own ; they follow on wheresoever their unbridled affections will transport them , doing all out of self-will , casting reason at their heels ; this stubborn-will of theirs perverts judgement , which sees and knows what should and aught to be done , and yet will not do it , slaves to their lusts and appetite , they precipitate and plunge themselves into a labyrinth of cares blinded with lust . 

For her they do depart even from their reason , 
Bids welcome unto manacles and prison : 
In sharpest torments think themselves at ease , 
So they thereby their fair saint shall please ; 
And all without expectance of reward ; 
To love her is the honour they regard . 


But if this be love , heaven shield us from it , and preserve our eyesight . 

This love gathereth its heat , and redoubleth its force by hope , which inflameth with the soft and gentle air thereof our foolish desires , kindleth in our minds a fire from whence ariseth a thick smoke , which blindeth our understanding , carrieth with it our thoughts , holds them hanging in the clouds , and makes us dream waking . 

Although she be all sovereignty , 
As high as heaven , and be a deity : 
Yet still my high-blown hopes will have the glory , 
To enterprise an act beyond all story . 


If you narrowly survey the palace of this amorous passion ( The plague and frenzy of the soul ) you shall find it to be built all upon hopes . the stairs are of ice , made in such wise , that he who most ascendeth , most descendeth ; the halls , chambers , and wardrobes , are all furnished and hanged with idleness , dreams , desires and inconstancies ; the seats and chairs are made of false contentment . it hath affliction , torment , and fraud for engineers ; uncertainty , fear , false opinion and distrust for guard . the court being all composed of heartless , soft , and effeminate men ; the counsellors are lying and deceit ; and the steward , suspicion . it is a play-game wherewith nature busieth our minds ; contrariwise when despair is once londged near us , it torments our souls in such a sort , with an opinion of never obtaining that we desire , that all business besides must yield unto it . And for the love of that which we think never to obtain , we lose even the rest of whatsoever we possess . This passion is like unto little children , who to be revenged of him who hath taken one of their play games from them , cast the rest into the fire . It is angry with itself , and requireth of its self the punishment of its own folly and ( Seeming ) felicity ; and hence it is , that many despairing of ever having them whom they affect , make themselves away either by strangling or drowning , or some such like miserable end , or continually deploring their dysasterous condition . 

Plant me where nothing grows but cruelty , 
 Amongst lions , bears , and other savage beasts ; 
To see if they that mercy will deny , 
Which i in vain implore from human breasts . 


How justly are those cruel Ladies to be condemned , who being rich in beauty ( Scorning art ) suffer their loyal amourists to die for love of them unpitied . They are so nice they scorn all suitors , crucify their poor enamoratoes , and think no good enough for them , as dainty to please , as Daphne herself ; they take a pride to prank up themselves , to make young men enamoured : but 't is a lamentable thing to see a silly soul so profuse of love , as to confer it upon such ingrate and disdainful women ▪ as if one took delight to feed and flatter owls . And on the other side ( To make neither barrel better herring ) some young men are so obstinate , and as curious in their choice , and tyrannically proud , insulting , deceitful and false hearted . Therefore let these go together , for love and hanging go by destiny . 

Yet there are some feminine humours so tractable , that they are won with a small entreaty , according to that of the comedian , such rape thou act'st upon my soul , and with such pleasing violence dost enforce it , that when it should resist , it tamely yields ; making a kind of haste to be undone , as if the victory were loss , and conquest came by overthrow . 

Wounded with love , they yield up nature's treasure , 
To be all ransacked at the victor's pleasure . 


There are others , who are more taken with a soothing observance , or handsome congee making , than all the fair qualities or good parts can be in a man , or the faithfullest service can be rendered them . There are others , who lay snares and keep always a kind of order in the receipt of such as they intend to in register in the number of their subjects . But at length , this Idalian fire kindles in them , and then are they unable to suffer the absence of their lover , yet modesty will not suffer them to intrrude into his presence , they desire with all impatience to see him , yet shun all occasions of seeing him , seeking and fearing in one and the same time to meet him , a troublesome passion , that brings them to will and not to will in the same time one and the same thing . She is peevish and sick till she see him , discontent , heavy , sad , and why comes he not ? where is he ? why bteaks he promise ? why tarries he so long ? sure he is not well ; he hath some mischance certainly , he forgets himself and me . And when he comes , than with a seeming coyness she looks upon him , with a cold look , though she be all flame within . 

Some are as Sapph , who was subtle to allure , and slippery to deceive , having their hearts made of wax , ready to receive every impression , not content till they have as many lovers as their hearts have entrances for love , their hearts being like pumice stones , light and full of holes . 

Some are as inconstant as Cressida , that , be Troilus never so true , yet out of sight out of mind ; and so soon as D•omede begins to court , she like Venetian traffic , is for his penny currant , à currendo , sterling coin ; passable from man to man in way of exchange . 

Others are as Lydia cruel , whose hearts are hammered in the forge of pride , thinking themselves too good for all , ( When as in truth they are too bad for any ) and none worthy of them , and ofttimes nestling all day with the beetle , are at night contented with a cowsherd for a shelter . These have eyes of basilisks that are prejudicial to every object , and hearts of adamant not any way to be pierced . 

Some are as if they were votaries unto Venus , and at their nativities had no other influence , take no pleasure but in amorous passions , no delight but in madrigals of love , wetting Cupid's wings with rose-water , and tricking up his quiver with sweet perfumes ; they set out their faces , as fowlers do their daring-glasses , that the larks that sore highest May stoop lowest ; as soon as the poor loving fools are wrapped within their nets , than they sue with signs and plead with sonnets , feign tears , and paint out passions to win her , that seeming to be coy comes at the first lure . 

There ate others taken as school boys catch squirrels , hunting them up and down till they be weary and fall down before them . 

All melted in pure love languidly sweet , 
She lets herself fall at the victor's feet . 


The coyest she that is May be won by fair opportunity , being the strongest plea in the court of Venus , able to overthrow her be she never so coy ; ( For it is more easy for some maids to suffer themselves to be martyred by tyrants in defence of their chastity , than ( If opportunity , pleasing courtship and importunity serve ) not to yield that to a lover , which they would have denied to an executioner ; and there are some so strongly inclined by nature , and assaulted with such violent temptations , that if they resist and become victors over passion , May well be recorded among noble and heroic women ) yet time May be so elected , that he that takes it wisely , shall be sure never to miss : he that can temper toys with art , she being in a merry vein , May bring that love which swimmeth in her eyes , to dive into her heart ; but other times they are so squeemish , so skittish , and demure , that one May better catch and tame a wild horse , then win their favour ; no not a look , not a smile , not a kiss for a kingdom : this being one of their subtle arts , as one wittily saith , quanquam natura & arte eram formosissima , isto tamen astu tanto speciosior videbar , quod enim oculis cupitum agrè praebetur , multo magis affectus humanos incendit . though i was by nature and art most beautiful , yet by those tricks , i seemed to be far more amiable than i was ; for that which men earnestly seek and cannot attain , draw on their affections with a most furious desire . And to gull their lovers the more , and fetch them over , they will show them rings , gloves , scarves , &c. saying , that such a gallant sent them , when there is no such matter , but merely to circumvent them . Oh the subtlety of women to whet their lover's appetite ! they will fall out and quarrel with them on set purpose , pick quarrels upon no occasion , because they would be reconciled unto them again , according to the old grammar rule , amantium irae amoris redintegratio est . the falling out of lovers is a renewing of love . 

The blunt country wench did as eloquently as she could express herself in these words ; there is something runs in my mind , i wish it were out ; but i wish somebody loved me , as well as i love somebody : poor girl , both at milking , walking , and working , still something troubles her : at last she cries out , hai-ho , for an husband , a bad husband , nay the worst that ever was is better than none . How earnestly do they seek marriage and are never well till they have effected it ! Oh how sweet is the contemplation of marriage to them ! And likewise we bachelors , when we see and behold those angelical faces , observe their pleasant gestures and graces , lend an ear to their siren-like songs , see them dance , &c. we think their conditions are as fine as their faces , we are taken with dumb signs , we rave , we burn , and how gladly would we be married ? but when we feel the cares and miseries of it , than we wish to be single again ; as the story goes of a goodfellow , which whilst he was a bachelor , was a boon companion , and would spend his money freely , and therefore with his hostess he was termed a goodfellow ; but so it happened , that at length he was married , and coming not so frequently to his hostess as formerly , nor spending his cash so freely when he came , was by one of them demanded the reason of this his unwonted strangeness and great change ; who replying said , i am now married ; why then quoth she , thou art now an honest man ; but he sighingly made answer in these words , ha , but if i were once a goodfellow again , i would never be an honest man whilst i lived . if this be true , as some out of disconsolate experience will inform us ; farewell wiving for my part . But to put a period to this section ; volumes would not be sufficient for him , who should write all the passions which daily arise as members from this passion , all pens would be weak , words would be dried up , and wits lost therein . 

The power and effects of love in widows . 

Reader , i pray thee smile , but do not jeer at my curiosity in describing the effects of love in widows ( Who , like herald's herse-clothes , serve to many funerals with a little altering the colour ) and the wily lures they lay to bring on their suitors . it would make a dog laugh to hear how they will belie their age , saying , they are little past 30 when they have scarce a tooth in their heads . As one reports , who loved a widow of 50 years of age , she swore she was but 32 the next December , and 't is a thing more familiar with stale bachelors ; but Venus haec perjuria ridet : Venus laughs at these perjuries . 

They will artificially discourse of their former husbands , saying , they have no memory of life , unless it be to think of , and to live in him ; thinking thereby to engage their lovers the more , and to let them see how much they do deserve to be beloved , in showing them how capable they are of love , and how much they can cherish the affections of a living man , since they so long retain those of dead ones ; imitating such decoys , as to gain another man's money , do willingly deposit some of their own . Oh heavens ! saith she , ( Relating her love to her former husband ) how do i resent his loss , and have ever since preserved so lively a memory of him in my soul ( For i did love him with most perfect affection ) that methinks i see him every hour before mine eyes , and methinks i hear him every minute bid me love him still ; making a dead man a ground bait to draw suitors ▪ on ; delighteth in the multitude of them ; for by them she gains : one serves to draw on another , and with one at last she shoots out another , as boys do pellets in elder-guns . 

She has a trick to commend to them a single life ; just as horse-coursers do their jades to put them away . While she is a widow ( Observe her ) she is no morning woman ; the evening and a good fire May make her listen to a husband ; but if ever she be made sure , 't is upon a full stomach to bedward . 

They ( All of them ) are full of suspicion of their lovers , extremely jealous , lest they be deceived by young wenches , exceeding hard to be won , and very easily lost , quickly offended , but abominably hard to be pleased . 

Really , i admire at those men , who take delight to court widows . What a fantastical stomach must he needs have , that cannot eat of a dish of meat , till another have cut of it ? Who would wash after another , when he Might have fresh water enough for asking ? or what a pitiful thing is it , for a man that is about to go a long journey , to be tied to ride on a beast that is half tired to his hand ? Men will say he is benighted , and is now glad of any inn . Therefore i wish you never to marry any advowson that has had other incumbents ; for he that takes her , has but a reversion in tail , and if she prove good , he May thank death for his aim ; if evil , upbraid him , and not unjustly for his occasion . But hold , a churchman she dares not venture upon , for she hath heard widows complain of dilapidations . Never ( With the philosopher ) drink of that fountain another hath died in . 

Wherefore it is a resolution of the Spaniard , of what mean quality soever he be , he will not marry a widow , although she be very young and wealthy , and it hath been a resolution of theirs from antiquity , and continueth to this day : and to this effect one of them made this answer , I will no widow wed , my reason's sound , 
I 'll drink no water wherein one was drowned . 




He that takes her half worn , makes account she hath that will pay for new dressing ; she seems to promise security in her peace , yet invites many times to a troublesome estate ; when the conquest achieved , scarce countervails the wars , the principal of her love is perished with the use . 

But ( Indeed ) rich widows were ordained for younger brothers ; for they being born to no lands , must plough in another man's soil . But i expect no thanks from them for this , having trespassed a little too much upon their patience . Wherefore i will proceed on to the next chapter ; and discover to you the signs of love . 

The signs of love . 

Having entered thus far within this melancholy devil's territories ; it is our purpose to set before thee ( Courteous reader ) in this section ( As in a glass ) a clear representation and image of a love-sick soul , and an account of those various gestures , and actions lovers have , as few books of this nature do so copiously demonstrate . love though it be never so close and kept private , May be discovered , if prudence and artifice be used . Yet i wish every one , who deposits his judgement in the discovering of an enamorato , not rashly to give credit to one testimony of contingent signs , but join many , and consider them together for the perfection of your judgement ; therefore Aristotle adviseth , vni signo non fidendum , sed pluribus inter se collatis . and first , how it May be discovered by physiognomy . 

We commonly call physiognomy the science , whereby men judge of the nature , complexion and manners of every one , by the contemplation of all the members of the body , and chiefly of the face and countenance : but there is no physiognomy so certain , as that we are about to touch , whereby men May be easily convinced of that which they think to hide in their hearts , which notwithstanding is quickly discovered in their countenances , as if we read it in a book ; according to Ovid ; Heu quam difficile est crimen non prodere vultu ! 


How hard is it a fault with face not to bewray ? 


and to the same effect , the wise man saith , ecclus. 13. 26.  cor hominis immutat faciem sive in bono sive in malo : the heat of man changeth his countenance , whether in good or evil ; for in anger and fear we see men , either extreme pale or high coloured ; in melancholy and sadness , the eyes are heavy ; in joy and pleasure , the motions of the eyes are lively and pleasant , according to the diverb , cor gaudens exhilarat animum ; a rejoicing heart maketh merry the face . and it is a received opinion , that vultus est index animi ; the countenance is the discoverer of the mind . so that one affirms that those that are in love , semper conniventes , have a continual motion or winking with their eyelids . Tears are signums of this passion , which May be observed by the poets so often representing unto us lovers weeping and lamenting ▪ because love is delighted in tears ; but this sign is not pathognomical , nor very certain , especially in women , who have the command of their tears , and can unsluce the floudgates of their eye when they please . 

But as this passion enters first into the internal parts by the eyes ; so they send forth the first assured and undoubted tokens of the same ( For there is no passion but some particular gesture of the eyes declare it ) : so soon as ever the malady hath seized upon the patient , it causeth a certain kind of modest cast of the eyes ; but if it begin to get strength upon the party , than the eyes begin to grow hollow and dry , and you May observe them to stand , as if they were in some deep contemplation , or else were fixed in beholding something that much delights them . Jonadab discovered by the languishing countenance of Amnon , David's son , that he was in love with some great Princess or personage . The hair of his eyebrows stand upright and grow hard , he rubs his eyes very much as though he were sleepy , he rolls his eyes much . His eyes are all white , either to wear the livery of his Mistress complexion , or to keep Cupid from hitting the black . 

Hair growing thick behind the ears , and besides the temples , is a sign of a vehement inclination to love . Valescus de Tarenta the most famous physician of his age , observes the chopping of lips in women to be a sign of their inclination to this malady ; for that it denotes the intemperate heat of the matrix . They cannot endure to look any in the face , because they think , that through their eyes they see their hearts . 

His arms are carelessly used , as if their best use were nothing but embracements . he is untrust , unbuttoned , ungartered , not out of carelessness , but care ; his farthest end being but going to bed . Her favours lift him up as the sun doth moisture ; when she disfavours , unable to hold that happiness , it false down in tears . If you ask him a question , he answers not , or not to the purpose ; and no wonder , for he is not at home , his thoughts being gone a woolgathering with his Mistress . Straggling thoughts are his content , they make him dream waking . Speak to him , he hears with his eyes , ears follow his mind , and that 's not at leisure . 

Ovid saith , that paleness is a constant colour with lovers . Pallidus omnis amans , colour hic est aptus amanti . 




One trembles at the sight of his Mistress , tremor cordis , palpitations of the heart ; another sweats , blows short , his heart is at his mouth , leaps , he burns , freezes , and sometimes through violent agitation of the spirits bleeds at nose . He denies nature her due in sleep , and pays her with watchfulness , he lies upon a bed of thorns , he has no order or equality at all in his gestures , motions or actions ; he thinks of business , but never does any ; he is all contemplation and no action ; nothing pleases him long , but that which pleaseth his own fancy . They are the consuming evils , and evil consumptions that consume him alive . He perpetually sighs to the hazard of his buttons , and complains without any evident cause . 

Poor soul , he is inflamed with fits of love , 
So violently hot , as they do move 
His pulse to beat a madmans' temper : he 
Does sigh , does langish , and half dead is he , 
And ever in such violences swell , 
As ask him what he ails , he cannot tell . 


As the old woman catechised her son Mullidor ; thy cheeks are lean , and now thou looks like Leuton pale and wan , i saw thy stomach to night , thou art not thine own man ; thou hadst of late ( God save thee ) a lovely plump pair of cheeks , and now thou looks like a shotten herring . Tell me Mullidor , and fear not to tell me , for thou tellest it to thy mother , what ailest thou ? is it a grief of body , or of mind , that keeps thee on the holidays from frisking at the football ? thou art not as thou wert wont , and therefore say what thou ailest , and thou shalt see old women have good counsel . At these speeches of his mother , Mullidor fetched a great sigh ; and with that , being after supper , he broke wind ; which his mother hearing , oh son ( Quoth she ) it is the colic that troubles thee , to bed man , to bed , and we will have a warm pot lid . The colic mother , no , 't is a disease that all the cunning women in the country cannot cure , and strangely it holds me ; for sometimes it holds me in my head , and sometimes in mine eyes ; my heart , my heart , oh there ( Mother ) it plays the devil in a mortar ; sometimes it is like a frost , cold ; sometimes like a fire , hot ; when i should sleep , than it makes me wake ; when i should eat , than it troubles my stomach ; when i am alone , it makes me cry right-out , i can wet one of my new lockeram napkins with weeping . It came to me by a great chance ; for as i looked on a fair flower , a thing i know not what , crept in at mine eyes , and run round about all my veins , and at last got into my heart , and there ever since hath remained , and there ( Mother ) so wrings me that Mullidor must die , and with that he fell on weeping . His mother seeing him shed tears , fell to her hempen apron , and wiped her bleared eyes , and at last demanded of him if it were not love . at that question , he hung down his head and sight . Ah my son ( Quoth she ) now i see 't is love , for he is such a sneaking fellow , that if he but leap in at the eyelid , he dives down into the heart , and there rests as cold as a stone , and yet touch him and he will screek . 

Erasistratus discovered the love of Antiochus to his stepmother , for so soon as ever she entered the chamber , his colour changed , his speech stopped , his looks were pleasant , his face burned , and he was all in a sweat , his pulse beat very disorderly , and lastly his heart failed him ; with other such like symptoms , which are wont to appear in melancholy lovers . Galen saith , that by these forementioned signs joined together , he discovered the miserable doting of the wife of Justus upon Pylades , because saith he , at the naming of Pylades , her colour changed from white to red , and from red to white , alternis vicibus , her pulse beat unequally and with divers motions . It is undeniable , but that a passionate lover May be known by the pulse , by reason of the stirrings of the spirits ; for which cause , saith Avicen , if one would know the name of such a ones Mistress , he must feel his pulse , and at the same instant name the party whom he suspects to be the cause of his malady , and take some occasion or other to commend her beauty , sweetness of behaviour , attire , or qualities of the mind ; for at the same time , pulsus diversicabitur in varietate magna , & fiet similis intersecto ; you shall perceive ( Saith he ) a strange alteration in the motion of the pulse , and it will be very unequal , swift and often interrupted . 

Mr. Burton in his anatomy of melancholy saith , the best conjectures are taken , from such symptoms as appear when the parties are both present , all their speeches , amorous glances , actions , and gestures will bewray them , they cannot contain themselves , but they will be still kissing , joining hands , treading on one another's toes , embracing , pinching , diving into their bosoms , &c.  Though it be so that they cannot come near and have the opportunity to dally , yet if they be in presence , their eyes will bewray them : ubi amor , ibi oculus , where i look i like , and where i like i love . they will be still gazing , staring , winking , nodding , stealing faces , smiling and glancing at her , with much eagerness and greediness , as if their eyes should never be satisfied with seeing her . 

It is affirmed by some , that those that are sick of love melancholy , are generally lean throughout the whole body , facit amor maciem , as well by reason of their little eating and drinking , as also for their bad digestion , by reason that the spirits , and natural heat are withdrawn from the stomach to the brain . Another will have leanness to be caused in a lover , by reason of too much intention of the mind , pensiveness and anxiety ; the lover loseth the fullness of flesh , and good liking of his body , that before he enjoyed . A third will have leanness caused in lovers , by a direction of vital heat from the circumference to the centre , thereby consuming the vital spirits , drying the body and causing leanness . 

They are troubled with immoderate watchings , wakings , and sighings , because in lovers are divers imaginations , and fancies , that steal into the brain , and never suffers them to take any quiet repose ; whence the brain becomes dry and cold ; and if by chance they be surprised by any light slumber , which is the provision nature hath made for the repairing of the animal spirits , which in them are wasted and much impaired , by the violence of their imagination and excessive wakings ; that slumber is attended on by a thousand phantasms and fearful dreams , so that they awake ofttimes more discontented , sad , pensive and melancholy then before ; and for the most part they find themselves more tormented sleeping then waking . They are vexed with immoderate sighings , by reason that they many times are oblivious of drawing their breath , being wholly taken up with the strong imagination , that they love either in beholding the beauty of their objects , or else in their absence contemplating on their rare perfections , and contriving the means how to come to their desires : so that recollecting themselves , nature is constrained to draw in as much air at once , as before it should have done at two or three times ▪ and such a respiration is called a sigh ; which indeed is nothing else but a double respiration . Observe one tranfixed with violent love ( Whose mind is bewitched , brain dislocated , and reason eclipsed ) and you shall find that all he holdeth , all he meditateth on , all he speaketh , all he dreameth , is of the creature he loveth . he hath her in his head and heart , painted , graved , carved in the most pleasing forms . For her he entereth sometimes into quakings , sometimes into faintings , another while into fits of fire , ice ; he soareth in the air , and instantly is drenched in the abyss ; he attendeth , he espieth , he fears , he hopes , he despairs , he sighs , he blushes , he waxeth pale , he doteth in the best company , he addresses his colloquiums to woods , groves and fountains ; he writeth , he blots out , he teareth , he lives like a spittler estranged from the conversation of men : repose which charmeth all the ears of the world , is not made for him , still this fair one , still this cruel one , tormenteth him . Plutarch saith , the heart of a lover was a city , in which upon one and the same day , were seen sports and banquets , battles and funerals . 

You shall see another of Cupid's slaves burden himself with news of no value ; he makes a secret of every thing , and gives out those for mysteries to his Mistress , which are proclaimed with a trumpet . 

Another is so extremely open breasted ( That you need look for no other sign ) he tells all his thoughts , and as if his heart were a sieve , it keeps nothing which it sends not out by the lips . he becomes an extreme babbler , which proceeds from the influence of the heart ; for Plutarch saith , that love is naturally a great babbler , chiefly when it chanceth to light upon the commendation of those things that are its objects . For that lovers have a strong desire to induce others to give credence to that whereof themselves are already persuaded ; which is , that they love nothing but what is absolutely perfect , both for goodness and beauty ; and they would willingly have these opinions of theirs confirmed also by all other judgements . He is importunate and unseasonable in compliments ; he pratles with his friends whilst he hath a fever ; he tells extravagant tales , wherein he makes himself very facetious , although at the latter end of the discourse , he asks where the conceit to be laughed at lies . He is very merry , and then within a moment he false to be very melancholy and extreme sad , pensive and dejected ; then by and by he entertains himself with some merry pleasant conceits , and then within a small tract of time the contrary ; by this weather cock you May perceive in what quarter the wind is . This passion makes him very simple , next door to sottishness , and makes him do many extravagancies ; so that through these fooleries , he brings to himself a turbulent life , a continual torment , a hasty death , and his salvation doubtful . 

All of them are restless , casting their weari•d members upon their loathed beds in their solitary chambers , filling the air with a thousand throbs and interrupted sighs , sometimes disturbed with the rivality of others , sometimes afflicted , and fear those manifold mischances that May befall the person beloved ; so that the many passions that multiply in the breast of a lover , do bring with them an extenuation and impairing of the complexion ; and sometimes a strange kind of alteration in the individual essence , from whence do arise those furies of love , and potent frenzies , and insensible astonishments , which happen many times to those that love , either because they make not reason the forerunner of their sense , or because they directed not their loves by the rules of wisdom , which teacheth the only means to the attaining of all other virtues . they are guided with the blind lantern of sense , whilst rambling in the streets , they leave reason sleeping with the constable . Never raged Alcides on mount Oeta , nor fierce Orlando for his Angelica more than these Utopian lovers , for their imaginary shadows . You May observe this passion drawn to the life by Virgil in his Dido Aeneid . 4.  Uritur infelix Dido , totaque vagatur 
Urbe furens , &c.  


she was so tormented with the heat of her love , that she run up and down the city as if she had been distracted . For lovers through despair of obtaining their desires , through the inflammation of the vitals become nelancholy , which is ( To speak truth ) a madness ; for all passions that produce strange and unusual behaviour , are called by the general term of madness . and of the several kinds of madness caused by love , he that would take the pains Might enroll a legion . 

By reason of these perturbations of the mind , the blood becomes adust , as in all other violent passions , excepting joy , according to Galen , by which means divers have fallen into strange and desperate diseases , growing foolish , mad , cynical and wolvish . the learned Avicen reporteth in his chapter de amore , that from this passion proceeds the green sickness in women , ( Which is sometimes accompanied with a gentle fever , called by our modern writers an amorous fever ) suffocations , headache , epilepsies , and divers other desperate symptoms , which ▪ for the most part ( Saith he ) admit neither cure nor mitigation . 

The poor inamorato loves to be in melancholy Saturnine places , where he May best contemplate the beauty of his ▪ Mistress , and not be obstructed by other objects , where he May best remember any one action of hers ; nay , the very place where he last saw her ; for love breedeth melancholy , and melancholy requires solitariness , and solitariness setteth the thoughts on work . do you think he would change his contentment , for any thing in the whole universe ? he is so jealous and so careful to entertain this very thought , that lest he should make any a sharer with him , he will retire unto the most solitary and unfrequented places that he can find ; he cares not for the society of men , or all the delight that men can device and use to court with such care , so he May enjoy his own thoughts . 

He May be styled an astronomer , for he fixes the eye of his meditation upon the wand'ring venerean planet . if you go into his study , you shall find ten amorous volumes , for one pamphlet of theology , and scarce that too . O! how the shelves are stuffed with romances , and his pockets with songs and sonnets ; he longs to be graduate in the university of Venus ; he accounts himself already Master in this art in actu designato , and thinks long till he be in actu exercito ; nothing now in his judgement is wanting to complete his degree but a pone manum in manum maritae . 

If you observe a lover in the presence of his Mistress , you shall see him either struck dumb , or when he speaks it is but stammeringly , not knowing how to speak . And this is , because the sense of a lover being too earnestly intent and settled in the contemplation of the beauty of his Mistress , he doth as it were altogether forget himself , and being lulled asleep in his beloved object ; the over vehement intention of the mind , taketh away the outward use of the tongue ; for experience the best schoolmistress , whilst a man attentively hearing any delightful music , all his other senses are out of joint and useless , the powers being hindered from their due operation , by the concourse of the vital spirits to that power only , which so attentively worketh , and therefore it is no great wonder , if men stand as mute as fish in the presence of their Mistresses , when they have most need to speak . Or because ( As an amourist saith ) that a lover fearing that he should not speak so as May please , and tickle the ears of his Mistress , chooseth rather to be silent ( Making his tongue more a stock than a lamb's tail ) then to utter his mind imperfectly ; and if he dare proceed so far as to open his mouth , still fearing that he cannot speak as he should , nor so eloquently as he would , utters his mind stammeringly and interceptedly . Also at that present he is of a flushing colour , and looks as though he were drunk , because the object from which his love taketh greatest force being present ; he by reason of the great joy that he feeleth in the presence thereof , sendeth forth those lively flames , which being plainly descried in the superficial parts of the face , do commonly give such a vermillion tincture , that the whole countenance seems to be covered with a flashing kind of ardour , and that by reason of the great store of spirits gathered into that place . 

An unfortunate lover speaks of nothing but his Mistress and his flames , he is always in the fire like the salamander , he has a perpetual mount Aetna in his breast ; nay , saith he , i will touch a forest with my finger , and it will totally burn and waste it . But contrarily , he that prospers and speeds in his love , or gets a pleasing answer from his Mistress , he always shows a merry cheerful countenance , jocund and laughing , full of spirit , quick eyed , eloquent , and in his whole carriage full of joy and consolation . 

This passion cannot be concealed , for amorous passions do prick and wound the hearts of inamoratoes , and therefore provoked by the sharpness of such a spur , they cannot but manifest their grief ; for it is some comfort to him that is assailed , to vent that which went in at the eye by the mouth , by the help of his tongue , by sighing , by making complaints to senseless creatures , many times to his bed-curtains . 

It requires much subtlety and craft to discover this passion in women , they conceal and smother it so closely , that they will seem to be in a great fury and hatred , when they most of all love , giving peevish answers , and refuse seemingly the affections presented unto them ; but — Licet ipsa neget , 
Vultus loquitur quodcunque teget . 


They are like those physicians and lawyers , that refuse a fee , yet put out their hand to take it . Or , 

she 'll fly away , and yet would fain 
With all her heart be overtain . 
She will deny , yet seem to daunt 
A lover when she fain would grant . 
She will resist , that you at length 
May seem to vanquish her by strength . 
For thus her honour does ordain , 
She should resist , and yet but feign . 


Yea , ( Ladies ) you shall see some of your own sex so surprised with affection , as it bursts out into violent extremes ; their discourse is semibreved with sighs , their talk with tears ; they walk desperately forlorn , making woods and groves their disconsolate consorts . Their eyes are estranged from sleep , their weakened appetite from repast , their wearied limbs from repose . melancholy is their sole melody ; they have made a contract with grief , till grief bring them to their graves . and truly those poor maids are to be pitied , because their own tender hearts brought them to this exigent ; have either set their affections where they thought verily they Might be requited , and were not ; or else where they received ▪ like seeming tender of affection , but afterwards rejected ; what they wished to effect , they could not . So as in time they fall in a poor Maudlin's distemper by giving reins to passion , till it estrange them from the sovereignty of reason . I could say more , but modesty will not permit me . 

Yet , some there are , who are not such kind souls , nor half so passionate , more discreet in their choice , and in the passages of love more temperate . These will not daigin to cast a loose look upon their beloved ; but stand so punctually upon their terms , as if they stood indifferent for their choice , albeit constantly ( Though privately ) resolved never to admit of any change . These scorn to paint out their passions in their colours , or utter their thoughts in sighs , or shed one dispassionate tear for an incompassionate lover . their experience hath taught them better notions ; they will seemingly fly ( As i have said ) to make them more eagerly follow , and to take them by whom they are most taken . They can play with the flame and never sing their wings , look love in their face , and preserve their eyes , converse where they take delight , and colour their affection with a feigned disdain . these are they who can walk in the clouds to their intimatest friends , making their eyes strangers to their hearts , and conclude nothing more foolish than love if discovered , and nothing more wise if artificially shadowed . 

Some artists will undertake to judge who are in love by chiromancy , by the lines of the hand . For say they , if a little cross be upon the line of life ( In the hand ) near the angle , it portends maladies of love . also , if the table line join itself with the middle natural line , so as both do make an angle , this doth demonstrate one to be variously troubled with love , rendering the party's life very displeasing . 

It seems to some ( How true it is i know not ) to be possible for a man to know whether one be in love or no , by their natural and animal dreams , if the party will but relate them at his awaking ; for the fancy in sleep is most taken up with those things that the mind hath been busied with in the day ; according to that in the poet ; 

Judicibus lites , aurigae somnia , currus : 
Vanaque nocturnis meta cavatur equis . 
Gaudet amans furto , &c.  


The lawyer pleads in 's sleep ; the careful swains 
Manage their prancing coursers o'er the plains . 
lover's dream of their stolen delights , &c.  


And indeed dreams do sometimes so far engage them , as they cannot dissemble nor deny them . 

They say , that those lovers who are very melancholy through the extremity of this passion , are accustomed to horrible and fearful dreams , by reason of the melancholy vapours that ascend up into the brain . and because this affection of all others doth most disturb and afflict the spirits , and from that disturbance and purturbation these monstrous and horrible dreams do arise ; so that many times by reason of their ( Little ) sleep , they bewray a strange kind of horror and astonishment in their countenances . 

Also , to dream of travelling through woods , sticking in bushes , and briers doth signify much trouble and crosses in love . 

To dream of angling and fishing signifies a difficulty , and the party despairs of obtaining the party beloved . but to dream of banquets and feasts , doth signify the hopes of the party loving , and that his proceeding in love shall be prosperous . 

To dream of winds , storms , and showers of rain , doth signify love passion . 

To dream of riding on a tired horse , or drawing water out of a well , or climbing upon a steep hill , is a sign of a vebement love passion . 

To dream of seeing ones Mistress in a glass , is an infallible token of love , and that there shall be reciprocal affection between the parties . 

To dream of being a husbandman or ploughman , to sow , plant , or dig , is a sign of being in love . 

But sanguine-complexioned lovers , use to dream of pleasant and delectable things , as fair gardens , orchards , flowers , green meadows , bedecked with the pride of Flora , pleasant rivers , dreaming that they sit culling and playing with their sweethearts upon their pleasant banks , often thinking they see many little Cupids flying in the air ; and all delightful dreams they say , proceed from an amorous and love pierced soul . as to dream of singing or playing on any instrument , doth signify that love hath seized upon the party . For if dreams and wishes had been all true , there had not been since popery one maid to make a nun of . But whether dreams are only the working of the fancy and imagination , upon such things as have been seen and thought upon , or presages of things future , it is not our present purpose to determine . 

We will now see what we can discover in a love-sick mind , by the sublime science of astrology , maugre all its antagonists . first diligently inquire whether the party hath had any crosses or troubles which Might cause a dejection of the soul in him , and whether they do not suspect the party to be in love ; these being considered than you May safely go on to judgement . 

Saturn generally signifies melancholy , and by consequence alienation of the mind , madness , &c. and therefore always when you find him to be significator of the malady , or in the ascendant , or in the sixth house , the sick is afflicted with care and grief , and be sure the love-sick mind suffers for it . 

Also if Venus be author of the disease , and she Lady of the ascendant sixth or twelfth houses , the distemper comes from love , or something else of this nature is the cause . 

If the ☉ or ☽ or Lord of the ascendant , or two of them at the least be afflicted , the disease is in the spirits , together with an indisposition of the mind ; the reason whereof is , because the Lord of the ascendant , and dispositor of the ☽ , are properly the significators of the animal faculties , which do cause infirmities in man , or which May chance unto him ; a deprivation of sense , madness , or frenzy through love melancholy . 

Venus' significatrix and afflicted , argues a great desire to women , wherewith both body and mind are disturbed . 

Wheresoever you find Mercury afflicted and significator , shows doting fancies . 

If the planet who rules the sign , wherein the Lord of the ascendant is , and he who is dispositor of the ☽ be infortunate and in their fall , detriment or otherways very much afflicted , the disease reigns and rageth in the mind . 

At what age we begin to be in love . what complexions do best sympathize . What complexions are most subject to this malady ; and at what time more than another . 

It is most certain , that there is nothing more impatient of delay then love , nor no wound more incurable whilst we live . There is no exemption , no age , no condition are more ignorant of it , then of their bread , all have a taste of this potion , though it have several degrees of operation , and at several seasons . 

Look all about you , who so young that loves not ? 
Or who so old , a comely feature moves not ? 


But the most received opinion is , that men and women are subject to this passion , as soon as they are entered into those years in which they come to their puberty ; which appeareth in men chiefly by their voice , which at that time grows great and harsh ; it May be known also in women by observing their breasts , which about this time begin to swell and grow bigger , and that for the most part about the age of 12 and 14 ; so likewise it is the justice of nature , that those creatures that soonest meet their period , do as suddenly arrive at their perfection and maturity ; as we May observe in women , who as they are ripe sooner than men , so they commonly fail before them . 

Some there are that would deprive men of this power , or love to have any power over them , so long as they are under the age of twenty years ; for Homer saith , love pricks not till such time as the chin begins to bud : which is altogether repugnant to truth and daily examples ; for we see many to rage furiously before they come to years of discretion ; especially women . Quartilia in Petronius never remembered that she was a maid . Rahab the harlot began to be a professed quean at ten years of age , and was but 15 when she hide the spies , as some report . Leo saith , that in Africa one shall scarce find a maid at 14 years of age ; for when the vehemency of adolescency ( Which is betwixt the age of 14 and 28 ) beginneth to tickle them , and when they have greatest need of a bridle , than they let loose the reins , committing themselves to the subjection of this passion . 

There are many forward virgins of our age are of opinion , that this commodity can never be taken up too soon , and howsoever they neglect in other things , they are sure to catch time by the forelock in this ; if you ask them this question , they will resolve you 14 is the best time of their age , if 13 be not better than that , and they have for the most part , their mother's example before them to confirm and prove their ability ; and this withal they hold for a certain ground , that be they never so little , they are sure thereby to become no less ; yet let me tell these forward girls , the effects that ( Most commonly ) ensue , are dangerous births , diminution of statute , brevity of life , and such like . 

This passion is more tolerable in youth , and such as are in their hot blood ; and shall i be bold to speak it without offence to the stale bachelors , that love is not properly nor naturally in season , but in that age next unto infancy . 

— Nunc grata juveni Venus . 


Venus to young men is a welcome guest . 


But for an amorous complexion to cover glowing fires beneath the embers of a graybeard ; to see an old man to dote upon women , what more odious ? what more absurd ? yet in some this Idalian fire flameth more in their old age then in their youth . Aristotle saith , that old men are not out of the reach of Cupid , nor bid defiance to Venus till they have passed the age of 70 years . And truly a gray-head and a wanton-heart are ill suited ; it is more ridiculous to see it in women than men . It rageth in all ages ; yet is it most common and evident among young and lusty persons , in the flower of their age , high fed , and living idly ; for such as are continually employed , it scarce touches them till they come to be 24 or 25 years of age , and then but very lightly , according to the speech of lyndamor to Pallemas , that he had arrived to the age of 25 years , before he ever felt any effects , as love useth to produce in hearts of his age . Not but that he was of his natural inclination as much devoted servant unto Ladies , but being continually exercised in business much different from idleness , he had no pleasure to let love sow any seeds in his soul ; for ever since he was able to bear arms , moved by a generous instinct , which invites noble spirits unto dangerous erterprises , he was perpetually in wars , where he did most heroically signalise himself . 

Some have given two reasons , why youth is more subject to this illimited passion , than any other age . 

The first is , that natural heat or vigour which is most predominant in youth , provoking him to attempt the greatest of difficulties , rather than suffer the repulse where he affects . 

The second is , want of employment , which begets this distemperature ; vacuo pectore regnat amor , love plays hey-day in an idle person . amor otiosae cura est solicitudinis , saith Theophrastus , it is an affection of an idle mind . Also it fosters itself by a writ of privilege in the hearts of young men , who abounding with much blood , and consequently with great store of vital spirits , are more fiery and ardent , making them full of wanton and youthful desires . 

I have many times observed a great sympathy and affection young boys and girls have one to another ; and ( Indeed ) there is a pretty pleasing kind of wooing , drawn from a conceived , but concealed fancy , which suits well with these amorous younglings ; they could wish with their hearts , ever to be in the presence of those they love , so they Might not be seen by them . Might they choose , they would converse with them freely , consort with them friendly , and impart their truest thoughts fully ; yet would they not have their bashful loves find discovery . They would be seen , yet seem obscured ; love , but not disclose it ; see whom they love , but not be eyed . Yea ( Which hath struck me into more admiration ) i have known divers , whose unripe years half assured me , that their green youth had never instructed them in the knowledge , nor brought them to conceit of such vanities ; excellently well read in love lectures , and prompt enough to show proofs of their reading in public places . The amorous toys of Venus and Adonis , with other poems of like nature , they peruse with such devotion , and retain with such delectation , as no subject can equally relish their unseasoned palates , like those lighter discourses . 

If this passion begin in infancy , and so continue , it is more affectionate and strong , because that custom which is taken in that age , doth by degrees become a nature , which growing up with years , grows solid and unalterable . 

Fronutus saith of love , juvenis pingitur , quod amore plerumque juvenes capiuntur ; sic & mollis , formosus , nudus , quod simplex & apertus hic affectus ; ridet , quod oblectamentum prae ace ferat , cum phiretra , &c.  The reason why love was painted young is because young men are most apt to love ; soft , fair and fat , because such folks are soon captivated ; naked , because all true affection is simple and open ; he smiles , because merry and given to delights ; hath a quiver , to show his power , and none can escape him , old nor young ; is blind , because he sees not where he shoots , nor whom he hits , &c.  

Let us now demonstrate what temperatures and complexions do sympathize together , and are most prone and apt to receive the impression of this passion . 

The diversity of complexions , breeds a diversity of desires : whereby they judge diversely of things present , and follow those which do best agree with their constitutions , whereby we see that in the election of any thing whatsoever , the appetite doth accommodate itself to the temperature of the body ; for we see men fit themselves in their customs and carriages to their corporeal temperature , ever desiring to converse with their like ; for nature would so have it , to this only end that every one should be esteemed , and be loved ; and they that are not absolutely fair in every part , should not be despised ▪ but being received into grace and favour with their lovers Might live honestly , in mutual society , and in good esteem with them . Every like desireth , and loveth his like ; whereby ever for the public good , there remaineth nothing despised , because there is nothing but hath its like . and therefore to the eyes of a moor , the black or tawny countenance of his moorish damosel pleaseth best ; and yet such a one would almost turn the stomach of a sanguine complexioned English man to look upon . 

Now to discover those who are most prone and apt to love . the fairest are inclined to love , because the cause of love is beauty ; and he or she that hath the cause in potentia , doth easily produce the effect : and therefore saith the divine Plato , that love reigneth most in the hearts of those young men ( The which , he that hath but half an eye May daily see ) that are honourably born , and tenderly brought up , who as apt receptacles receive into them that passion . or more probably , Venus being the giver of beauty , likewise inclineth those to love , upon whose nativity she cast her influence ; for it seldom falleth out that beauty is separated from the force of love , and for as much as custom in all things hath the force of love , they that are beautiful following custom cannot but love . Galen saith , that the manners of the mind do follow the temperature of the body . we see those that are of a sanguine complexion , are generally very amorous . hairiness , saith Aristotle , is a sign of abundance of excrements , and therefore much addicted to this passion , Venus tickling them with a delight of emptying of their seminal vessels ; for a woman cannot endure a man with a little beard , for that they are commonly cold and impotent . 

The air , climate , and place of ones birth , are of very great consideration in this particular . 

And now being in the bowels of love , some will ask , whether men or women be soonest alured , and whether be most constant , the male or the female ? 

I answer , that most women are to be won with every pleasing wind , in whose sex there is neither force to withstand the assaults of love ( As we shall hereafter more fully declare ) neither constancy to remain faithful ; therefore women are the soonest alured , and most inconstant . 

Likewise , a hot and dry temperature , or else such a one as is only hot , is much inclined to love ; for a man that is hot is hairy , high coloured , with a black thick curled head of hair , great veins and big voice ; ( And what a precious thing a black man is in a woman's eye , i will refer to the judgement of their own sex ) i dare boldly affirm , that that man hath a hot and dry liver , and his generative parts are also of the same temper , and so consequently very much inclined to this passion ; which is also confirmed by that of Galen , that a hot complexion , or such a one that is hot and dry , is much more prone and subject to a violent and irregular love , than any other temperature or complexion whatever : from whence we May infer , that men are oftener and more grievously tormented with this malady than women , whose temperature is less hot and less dry . but women are naturally of meaner spirits and less courage than men , having weaker reasons : and therefore are less able to make resistance against so strong a passion . and hereto accords that of hero in her epist. to Leander in Ovid . 

Vrimur igne pari : sed sum tibi viribus impar ; 
Fortius ingenium suspicor esse viris . 
Ut corpus , teneris sic mens infirma puellis . 


Our flames are equal : but your kinder fate 
Hath lent you strength , your hearts to temperate . 
But in our weaker sex , our passions find , 
A feeble body bears a feeble mind . 


Women often become frenetic , and mad for love , but rarely men ; unless it be some effeminate weak spirited fellows . Upon this , i took occasion one day to visit bedlam , and for one man that was there for love , i found five women ; and those men that were there , were such as had lived effeminately , idly , and dieted themselves riotously and delicately . 

Ficinus cap. 19  comment. in convivium platonis , saith , irretiuntur cito quibus nascentibus venus fuerit in Leone , vel luna venerem vehementer aspexerit , & quia eadem complexione sunt praediti . they are most prone to burning lust , or the vehement scorching of the Idalian flame , that have ♀ in ♌ in their horoscope , when the ☽ and ♀ be mutually aspected , or when ♄ is in a △ or ⚹ aspect , with the ☉ or ☿ , especially if it happen in the second or fifteenth day of the ☽ ; or such as be of the complextion of ♀ , and that is a white ruddy complexion , fair and lovely eyes , a little black , a round and fleshy face , fair hair and smooth , a rolling eye , and one desirous of trimming and making himself neat both in clothes and body . In whose geniture ♂ and ♀ are in ☌ , ⚹ or △ , plerumque amatores sunt , & si foemina , meritrices , they are undobtedly inclined to love and erorick melancholy , and if women , queans ; for Martialists and men of war are easily taken prisoners by Cupid . Cardan saith of himself in the judgement of his geniture , that a ☌ of ♀ and ☿ in the dignities of ☿ , perpetually troubled him with venereal thoughts , that he could never rest , so strong was their influence upon him . In whose genesis ♀ shall be in a masculine sign , and in the terms or ☍ of ♃ , signifies the parties to be very much inclined to the sports of ♀ . 

phlegmatic persons are rarely captivated , and those who are naturally melancholy less than they ; but if they once be catched in the snare ( Unless they hang themselves , which they will be much inclined to ) they will never be free . But ( As Mr. Burton saith ) the colt's evil is common to all complexions , whilst they are young and lusty . And some refer it adtesticulorum crisin , to the hot temperature of the resticles . 

Now to declare what time is most fit and delightful to lovers ; it is that time of the year , when the longest days make the evenings most delightful , and dispose lovers to accommodate their ears , to the chirping melody of the airy choir , which awakeneth a marvellous desire in their hearts . May is called loves month , either because the temperature of the season which is hot and moist , of the nature of Venus , doth incline all creatures to choose and select their mates ; or because Venus at that time doth usher in Aurora , and by her influence doth excite the hearts of lovers to rise early to view the richness of Flora , and the ear-pleasing harmony , and love-exciting melody of the nightingale . 

In what principal part of the microcosm or body of man is the seat of love . 

love having his first entrance in at the eyes , which are the faithful spies and intelligencers of the soul , stealing gently through those sluices , and so passing insensibly to the liver , it there presently imprinteth an ardent desire of the object , which is either really lovely , or at least appears to be so . but distrusting its own strength , and fearing it is not able to overthrow the reason , it presently layeth siege to the heart ; of which having once fully possessed itself , as being the strongest fort of all , it assaults so violently the reason , and all the noble parts of the brain , that they are suddenly forced to yield themselves up to its subjection . So that now the poor enamorato , or loves weather ▪ beaten widgeon thinks of nothing but his Mistress . so that through the eye it seizeth upon the liver , which is the first receptacle of love , than the heart , than the brain and blood , and then the spirits , and so consequently the imagination and reason . the liver to be the seat of love is grounded upon the saying of Solomon ( In prov. 7. ) That a young man void of understanding goeth after a strange woman till a dart strike through his liver . Cogit amare jecur , the which being affected and inflamed setteth all the other principal parts on fire ; according to senec. in Hippol . 

— Pectus insanum vapour 
Amorque torret , intimas saevus vorat 
Penitus medullas , atque per venas meat 
Visceribus ignis mersus & venis latens , 
Ut agilis altas flamma percurrit trabes . 


Now love within my raging bosom fumes , 
And with a cruel fire my reins consumes . 
The flame within my bowels hide remains , 
Thence shooteth up and down my melting veins , 
As agile fire over dry timber spreads . 


valesius lib. 3. contr. 13. saith , that that love which is in men , is defined to be an affection of both powers , appetite and reason . the rational resides in the brain , and the appetite in the liver , and the heart is diversely affected of both , and carried a thousand ways by consent , being variously inclined , sometimes merry and jocund , and sometimes sad and dejected . the sensitive faculty overruling reason , carries the soul hoodwinked , and hurries the understanding to dawfair to eat a woodcock pie . 

Of jealousy in lovers ; the defininition , the signs , and symptoms of it . 

It is described and defined to be a certain suspicion which the lover hath of the party he chiefly affecteth , lest he or she should be enamoured of another . Or an eager desire of enjoying some beauty alone , and to have it proper to himself only . It is a fear or doubt lest any foreigner should participate or share with him in his love ; still apt to suspect the worst in such doubtful cases . This passion of jealousy is more eminent among bachelors , than marryed-men . If it appear among bachelors , we commonly call them rivals or corrivals , a similitude having its original from a river , rivales a rivo ; for as a river divides a common ground betwixt two men , and both participate of it : so is a woman indifferent betwixt two suitors , both likely to enjoy her ; and thence cometh this emulation , which breaks out many times into tempestuous storms , and produceth lamentable effects , murders itself with much cruelty , many single combats . 

Ariosto calls it a fury , a continual fever , full of suspicion , fear and sorrow , a mirth-marring monster . ( Ecclus. 28. 6. ) the sorrow and grief of heart of one woman jealous of another is heavier than death . but true and pure love is without jealousy , for this affection springs from the love of concupiscency , for jealousy is a fear ( As i have said ) which a man hath , lest another should enjoy the thing he desireth : the reason thereof is , because we judge it hurtful either to ourselves , or to those whom we love , if others should enjoy it . And if they have any interest in the party beloved , they have a special care that no other have the fruition thereof but themselves , taking the matter heavily if it fall out otherwise ; being very much offended and full of indignation , against him that should attempt any such thing ; being very suspicious , and carrying within themselves matter of jealousy , and tormenting themselves and others without cause ; for love with jealousy and a madman are cozen ▪ germans in understanding ; for questionless immoderate love is a madness : and then had bedlam need be a great and spacious house ; for he that never was in that predicament is either blind or babish . 

When jealousy once seizeth on these silly , weak , and unresisting souls ; 't is pitiful to see , how cruelly it tormenteth them , insultingly it tyrannizeth over them . It insinuateth itself under colour of friendship : but after it once possesseth them , the same causes which served for a ground of goodwill , serves for the foundation of mortal hatred . Of all the minds diseases , that is it , whereto most things serve for sustenance , and fewest for remedy . This consuming fever blemisheth and corrupteth all that otherwise is good and goodly in them . But as the most firm in religion , May have doubts ; so the most confident in love , are capable of some suspicion . the strongest trees are shaken by the wind , though the root be fixed , whilst the leaves and branches be tossed . Why should we not rest ourselves , and abandon all suspicious ideas , after having had a trial of a person , and many effects for testimonies of the affection ? yet all these proofs and trials keep us not from vexing and tormenting ourselves ; because fear , which is not in our power to restrain , interprets ill the least appearance , and buries itself in false objections , where it finds no true ones . Oh weak jealousy , did ever thy prying and suspicious sight find thy Mistress' lip guilty of any smile ? or any lascivious glance from her eye ? dost not thou see the blushes of her cheeks are innocent ? her carriage , sober ? her discourse all chaste ? no toyish gesture ? no desire to see the public shows , or haunt the theatre ? she is no popular Mistress , all her kisses do speak her virgin ? such a bashful heat at several tides ebbs and flows ; flows and ebbs again , as it were afraid to meet our wilder flame ? what is it then that stirs up this hot passion in thee ? Some will object and say , all this is but cunningness , ( As who knows the sleights of Sirens ? ) it is these idiots that have these symptoms of jealousy , as fear , sorrow , suspicion , strange actions , gestures , outrages , lockings up , oaths , trials , with a thousand more devises than any pen is able to enumerate . 't is a vehement passion , a furious perturbation , a bitter pain , a scorching fire , a pernicious curiosity , it fills the mind with grief , half suspicion , accidental brawls , compassionate tears , throbbings of the heart , distracted cogitations , inconstant desires , and a thousand the like lancing razors , that cut and wound the hearts of men ( As gall corrupting the honey of our life ) more than ordinarily disquieted and discontented . 

Next time you see a jealous lover , do but mark him , and you shall see ( Without a pair of spectacles ) how he misinterprets every thing is either said or done , most apt to mistake or misconstrue , he peeps into every corner , follows close , observes to an hair all the postures and actions of his Mistress , he will sometimes sigh , weep , and sob for anger , swear , slander , and belie any man , sometimes he will use obsequious and flattering speeches , and ask forgiveness , condemning his rashness and folly , and then immediately again , he is as impatient and furious as ever he was ; therefore i wish ( Gentlewomen ) to beware of such infidels , who wax and wane an hundred times in an hour , as though they were got in the change of the moon : so strange is the inferences of this malicious jealousy , that it never makes a good logician . he pries on all sides , accurately observing on whom she looks , and who looks on her . Argus did not so keep his cow , the watchful dragon the golden fleece , or Cerberus , hell gates , as he does her , toiling and wasting away himself in pursuit of so concealed a mystery , and so obscure a verification . If he see her discourse familiarly with another , if by nod , wink , smile or message , he think she discloseth herself to another , he is instantly tormented , none so dejected as he is , he thinks himself utterly undone , a cast away , the scorn of fortune . 

There are some , ( Though their hearts be violently assaulted with jealousy and false suspicion , insomuch that they can never rest in quiet ) make show outwardly of a happy life , and a careless neglect of their best beloved ; yet in despite of themselves and their best endeavours , they cannot dissemble it . It is the natural course of this passion , for it is with those who are in the highest pitch of love , as those who are on the tops of great elevations , their heads grow dizzy , and though no touch them , they reel till they fall of themselves , merely by the fear of falling . And this is the passion that ruins loves reputation , and disorders ▪ the souls tranquillity . Therefore , 

If lovers needs must jealous be , 
And from this venom ne'er be free , 
Then fie upon 't ; my prayer shall be , 
From love ( Good Jove ) deliver me . 


Now as touching women , they have the symptoms of this passion more vehemently , their wills being stronger than their reason , there is no counsel to be given them against this evil of jealousy , their nature being wholly suspicion , vanity and curiosity . If you seek to persuade them , they will fly out against you like so many lionesses , objecting , how can they moderate their passions ? how can they but be jealous , when they see themselves manifestly neglected , contemned , loathed , unkindly used , and their unkind lovers court Ladies to their faces ? There is a tree in Mexicana which is so exceedingly tender , that a man cannot touch any of its branches , but it withers presently : so women are so subject to this passion , that ( Like tinder ) they will take fire at the least spark of suspicion , and a small touch will wound and kill their love . 

This passion is most predominant in old men ( As saith the author of the accomplished woman ) which very properly be compared to ivy , because that grows ordinarily upon old heaps or ruins ; so this passion wreaths itself most commonly about old tortured and dejected spirits , such as marry young wenches , and how can they be otherwise , all things considered ? We see ivy flourishing upon dry , withered , and sapless trees : so in old men this passion is very potent and youthful ; and becomes the stronger in such , as age , or craziness of wit infeebles or stupefies . It is no great miracle , if jealous ones be lean , their passions feeding on nothing but faintness ; and nothing like melancholy to entertain jealousy . therefore i exhort gentlewomen not to bestow themselves upon fools , or apparent melancholy persons , jealousy being a symptom of that disease , and fools have no moderation . 

It is an enemy with poisoned weapons , and his approach is enough to overthrow ; when the memory hath once received it , reason often comes too late for a resistance . I hope i shall not be thought a vagrant from my subject , if i tell married couples that suspicion of itself is able to make one fly out that was otherwise honest . If we consider that jealousy and cuckolds differ no otherwise then a city sheriff and alderman , a little time makes the one the other ; for it is as common as the moon gives horns twice a month to the world , for a jealous man to wear Actaeon's badge ; the miller sees not all the water that goes by his mill : sometimes sweetheart and cuckold are reciprocal terms : many a good gentleman hath worn a plume of bull's feathers in his crest , being set in by his arrant honest Mistress . 

There was a Roman named Cydippus , who took so great a delight to see bulls baited , that it set such an impression in his idea , as he thought so much of it over night , that he arose in the morning with a horned head . This spectacle pleased him , for that he had entertained his fancy with it , and in the end his imagination did him this ill office . There is no malice sufficiently black to blind this passions capacity ; it gives subtlety and craft to the dullest , and perverts the most virtuous to seek satisfaction for the injury : if has no bound to inventions , it brings ruin to its fosterer , as it did to Procris , jealous of her husband Shafalus , she imagined he had a Mistress besides herself ; which ( She thought ) he went to seek in the woods under pretence of hunting ; she hide herself behind a bush , thinking to hear the discourse of his solitary thought ; he hearing a stir and a noise in the thicket , and believing it was a deer , shot an arrow at it and struck her to the heart ; she dying cried Shafalus , which word made him know he had taken his wife for a beast ; and i think he was not very much mistaken . Also Mr. Brathwaith in his English gentlewoman records a matchless precedent of jealousy acted in England , with the like tragical conclusion ; he hath it in these words : 

it sometimes pleased a young gentlewoman , whose fortunes had swollen her high , to settle her affections on a gentleman of deserving parts , which he entertained with a generous requital : nothing was omitted that Might any way increase their respect , or second the height of their joys . Continual resort and frequent made them inseparably one ; no day so pleasing as when they were together , no hour so tedious as when they were asunder . But short is that moment of fading happiness , which hath in it a relish of lightness , and is not grounded on essential goodness . Long had they not thus lived , and sociably loved , but the gentlewoman conceived some private suspicion that herself was not the sole sovereigness of his heart ; but that another was become sharer in his love . neither was this competitrice , whom she suspected , any other than her own attendant , whose casket she secretly opened , where she found a ring of especial note , which she had formerly bestowed on him . This confirmed her conceit , changed her real love into mortal hate ; which she seconded with this tragic act . inviting him one day into a summer arbour , where in former times , they were wont to repose , amid of an amorous discourse , she casually fixed her eye upon three lennets , one whereof picking some privet leaves , purposely to build her nest , flew away , whilst the two which remained , lovingly billed one with another ; which she intentively observing , used these words , how tenderly and intimately do these poor fools mate it ? were it not pity they should be ever divided ? which words she had no sooner uttered , than the she jennet flew away , and left the male alone , till another returned ; with whom the he jennet billed , and amorously wooed , as he had done before ; which she more seriously eying , oh , quoth she , how light these males are in their affection ! This May seem to you an easy error , but were i judge of birds , it should receive due censure . Why Lady ( replied he ) these poor birds do but according to their kind . Yea but what do ye men then , who engage yourselves , interest yourselves , empawn your souls to be constant where you profess love , and perform nothing less than what you profess most . nor would her long intended revenge admit more liberty to her tongue ; for with a passionate enterbreath , she closed this speech with a fatal stab ; leaving so much time to her unfortunate and dysasterous lover , as to discover to one of that sorrowful family the ground of her hate ; the occasion of his fall , which hastened on the doleful scene of her tragedy . and these are the products of that hellborn fiend jealousy . 



An astrologer May give a probable conjecture , by every man's nativity ( If it May be had ) whether he will be jealous or no , and at what time , by the direction of the significators to their several promissors ; of which you May read many aphorisms in sconer , Junctine , Pontanus , Ptolemy , albubator , &c.  

The remedies of love . 

That we May use the method of art ; to cure the effects , is first to take away the cause . Cessante causa , cessat effectus , take away the cause , and the effect ceaseth . It was the scope of our discourse in the second section of this treatise , to discover the causes ( Those incendiaries and fomenters of this inordinate passion , or this intoxicating poison ) in the third section we demonstrated the effects arising from them ; now in this last section it is our purpose to treat of the cure and remedies of them . 

We will begin at the second cause , viz. the stars ( For the first cause instituted by the creator was moderate and good . ) As the mind hath its natural principles of knowledge , so the will hath her natural inclinations and affections from the influence of the stars ; for they do incline the will to love , but do not compel it ; agunt non cogunt ; of their own nature they are good , as they are taken from the first nature create of God ; neither would they be at any time hurtful , if there were not excess in us proceeding from nature corrupted ; which afterwards by the force of their influence , breed in us such inclinations and affections as are these passions . for God in the beginning made all things good ; neither doth he forbid and condemn this love and affection in his law , so far forth as it is ruled thereby , but approveth it being instituted in the creation . But when this love and affection is disordered in us , and is inflamed , giving way to the power of the superiors to work together with it , it is not only vicious , but is as it were the original and fountain of all vices , ( For what vice , would a man , whose reason is governed by will , and that will inclined by the stars , leave unperpetrated to effect them ? ) whereas if it were well ordered , and ruled according to the will and institutes of God , it would be the original and wellspring of all virtues . Sapiens dominabitur astris ; a wise man through grace , and the strength of reason can moderate and divert their evil influences , and convert them into good seeds of virtue ; but if they be not well ordered and ruled , they corrupt and degenerate . As if Venus be Lady of the nativity , she giveth to the native a sanguine complexion , whose nature is blood , and beareth greatest sway among the other humours and qualities ; or if she be in a ☌ , ⚹ , or △ of ♂ , inclineth the native naturally to love ; if this be not moderated and well guided by reason , but letteth the will receive their influence , and their work upon it without any obstruction , it easily passeth measure , and falleth into this foolish doting passion of love . therefore seek for grace of him that can give it , and that he will grant strength of reason to divert the influxious power of the superiors , and to moderate the vehement heat of this Idalian fire . 

Let us now remove the third cause , and that is , education . ( For to remove that which comes gradually from parents we cannot , unless we seek to subvert nature , and utterly extinguish the race of man ; but according to the old proverb , that which is bred in the bone , will never out of the flesh . ) if you find that your parents have been addicted to this folly , and that they brought you up delicately and idly , and that you feel in yourself an inlcination to the same passions ; corripite lora manu ; take up the slackened reins in time , before you run yourselves past recovery . Addict yourselves to the study of good letters , flying idleness as a mortal enemy , reading of love books , comedies , looking upon immodest pictures , feasts , private familiarities , loose company , and have in derision even the shadow of impurity . Love has no subject so apt to work upon as idleness , therefore handle the matter so , that he May always find you busied ; for vitia otii negotio discutienda sunt , the vices of idleness should be shaken off with business ; and to this effect speaks the poet ; Otia si tollas , frangis cupidinis arcum . 


— An idle life forsake . 
What made thee love , a lover makes thee still : 
The cause of nourishment of that sweet ill , 
Shun idleness , and Cupid's bow will break , 
His slighted flames fly out , disarmed and weak . 
As reeds in marshes affect their site ; 
As poplars in the running brooks delight ; 
So Venus' joys in sloth : let Cupid be 
By action tamed ; live busy , and live free . 
Faint ease , long sleeps , which no command controls , 
Time spent in sport , & drenched in flowing bowls , 
Without a wound th' enfeebled mind surprise : 
Then in unspied insidious Cupid flies . 
That sloth-affecting boy , doth toil detest : 
Do something to employ thy empty breast . 




Witty and proper was that elegant invention of Lucian , who feigned Cupid to invite the gods to an amorous feast , prevailed with all of them to give way to love , till he came to Pallas , but she was found conversing with the Muses , and would admit of no time to enter parley with Cupid . by this you May see that exercise draweth the mind from effeminacy ; and remissness feeds the desire , and adds fuel to loves fires . and no less occasion gives wanton discourse or lascivious books to the enraged affections of distempered youth . therefore as love is entertained with idleness and feasts , subdue him with austerity and exercise . he will fall upon some object , scatter and confound him . As he laboureth to find out a loose and unbridled spirit , hold yours extended upon the study of some good science . He requires liberty , private places , and night , let him have witnesses , and enlighten him on every side . He will be governed by fantasy , keep him obedient both by admonition and menaces ; so by this means you will banish the wanton Jack of apes out of house and harbour . 

The bed being a sensitive nourishment , renders many lascivious fancies , therefore no sooner wake but arise , and expel such cogitations with pious meditations . i could advise maids ( As the only remedy for this passion ) to walk early into the fields , and keep themselves continually both head and hand in motion in some good exercise ; and not always pricking a clout , for many times ( Their thought being gone a woolgathering with Cupid ) they chance to prick their fingers , and Cupid their hearts too if they be not aware . This sedentary life is the cause of the disease called the greensickness , and it having seized upon their sloth affecting bodies , makes them lazy , and as quick as snails in all their operations , and then it is more difficult to make them marry , then cure the disease . 

St. Cyptian found nothing more powerful to conquer the temptations of Venus , then to turn the otherside of the medal . But above all it behooveth us to use the example of an Arabian , who presented to himself perpetually over his head , an eye which enlightened him , an ear which heard him , a hand which measured out all his deportments , and demeanours , and guards of chastity , which daily blunt a thousand arrows shot against the impenetrable hearts of brave and undaunted champions : that you May not fall into the fire , it is good to avoid the smoke , not to trust ourselves too much to petty dalliances , which under pretext of innocency , steal in with the more liberty : for to court and dally with beauty ( As we shall hereafter declare ) is an enterprise of danger ; for some i have known , who upon their access to beauty have been free men , but at their return have become slaves . 

We now intend to extinguish the heat and vehemency of love in the fourth cause , which is mere beauty , and the particulars of it . Be not so sensual as to love only the body , and to dote upon an outside , but look higher , and see something in the person loved of an angelical nature ; that is , a free and virtuous mind , which to an understanding soul appears to be of a divine essence , and to which he mingles his soul in love , which is ( If really considered ) a far more excellent and permament love , then that of an external and fading beauty , and consequently much more pleasant . Do we not commonly see , that in painted pots of apothecaries are contained the deadliest poison ? that the cypress tree bears a fair leaf , but no fruit ? That the ostrich carrieth fair feathers , but rank flesh ? How frantic then are those lovers , who are hurried headlong with the gay glistering of a fine face ? the beauty whereof is parched with the sun's blaze , and chapped with a winter's blast : which is of so short continuance , that it fadeth before we see it flourish ; of so small profit , that it poisoneth those that possess it ; of so little value with the wise , that they account it a delicate bait with a mortal hook ; a sweet panther with a devowring paunch , a tart poison in a silver pot . 

But hark , one word with you , love Symplicians . let your human imaginations think and assemble into one subject whatsoever is most beautiful and delicious in nature . Do you imagine a choir of Sirens , and do you join in consort , both the harp of Orpheus , and the voice of Amphion . let Apollo and the muses be there to bear a part ; and do you search within the power of nature , rifle up her treasure , and all the extreme pleasures which it hath produced in the world hitherto , to charm our souls , and to ravish our spirits ; what permanency and felicity do you find in all these ? They are mere chimaeras , and as a vain idea ; a mere shadow of a body of pleasure in comparison of virtues , and those divine thoughts and pleasures which May be enjoyed in the contemplation of the almighty , and his infinite beauty , glory , and love , and of the felicity of felicities which he hath prepared for them that love him . So that happy are those ( But too few are they ) who with wise Ithacus hudwink themselves , and stop their ears to those soul-tainting , and sin-tempting Sirens . 

What a great example of continency and neglect of beauty was that of Mahomet the great , towards the fair Greek , Irene ; whom albeit he entirely loved ; yet to show to his peers , a princely command of himself , and his affections ; as he had incensed them before by loving her , so he regained their love by slighting her ; whence the poet , 

With that he drew his Turkish cymeter , 
Which he did brandish o'er the damsels head , 
Demanding of such janizers were there , 
If it were not pity she shed be slaughtered ? 
Pity indeed ; but i perforce must do 
That which displeaseth me , to pleasure you . 


Many such instances , ancient and modern histories afford , but i must not insist on each particular lest i should enlarge myself too much , and swell that into a volume , which i intend but a pamphlet . 

How many do we find , who having their spirits possessed with other passions , one of ambition , another of avarice , another of revenge , another of envy , another transported by the solitude of a law suit , and the turmoil of a family , who think very little upon love ? how many others are there , from whom study affairs , charges , ( Wherein they strive supereminently to transcend ) free their minds from all other thoughts , not suffering them to have any compliments with Cupid ? and how many Ladies do we see in the world , with countenances ever smiling , of humours cheerful , and conversation most pleasing , who make love to wits and spirits , as bees to flowers ; but have with the body no commerce at all ? The author of the theatre of nature , holdeth , that the basilisk alone among serpents cannot be enchanted : and i dare really affirm , that there are men who have the like privilege , and have their eyes love proof , and their hearts shut up and defended as with a palizado against the piercing darts of Cupid , and the fiery assaults of the Idalian flame . Democritus made himself blind voluntarily , by steadfastly beholding the sunbeams , to free himself from the charming beauties , and enticing opportunities of women : and ( Seriously ) i think he shut up two gates against love , to open a thousand to his imagination . For some affirm that this malady or love melancholy , is cherished by the presence of the party affected : and that the contrary , to wit , absence is the best remedy . and this they seem to prove by resembling our passions with echoes : ( But omne simile non est idem , every like is not the same thing ) for ( Say they ) do you not see the echoes , the further you go from them , the less repercussion there is , they diminishing and losing themselves in the air ; so the affection which is caused by the reflection of the countenance , which you daily behold with so much entertainment , will quickly vanish by a little absence . 

But May i be so bold as to whisper my opinion in your ear , craving leave to insist a little upon this ; to prove that absence doth more augment then decrease the heat of this passion . i will be brief . 

I confess eyes May conceive and produce a green infant affection , but there must be something more solid and substantial to make it grow unto perfection ; and that must be by the knowledge of the virtues , merits , ( As well as beauty ) and a reciprocal affection of the party loved . now this knowledge doth take indeed its original from the eyes , but it must be the soul which must afterwards bring it to the test of judgement , and by the testimonies both of the eyes and ears , and all other considerations concoct a verity , and so ground upon it . If this verity be to our advantage , than it produceth such thoughts , whose sweetness cannot be equalled by any other kind of contentment , than the effects of the same thoughts . If it be advantageous to the party affected , then doubtless it doth augment our affection ; but yet with violence and inquietude ; and therefore no question but absence doth augment love , so that it be not so long , as that the very image of the party loved be quite effaced ; whether it be that an absent lover never represents unto his fancy but only the perfections of the person loved ; or whether it be that the understanding being already wounded will not fancy any thing but what pleaseth it ; or whether it be that the very thought of such things does add much unto the perfections of the party loved : yet this is infallibly true , that he does not truly love , whose affection does not augment in absence from the party loved . for in absence nothing can content the real lover ; not sweet harmony , not beautiful gardens , or groves , not pleasant company , not eloquent tongues , not civil entertainment , but every sweetness is converted into sourness , all ear-pleasing harmony is turned into an obstreperous jangling , and nothing can content but the wished object , which being far distant from their inflamed desires , do engender a vehement grief in the heart , which cannot be expressed by them that prove it ; much less by my pen which is not acquainted with such miseries . Now it is objected , that absence is the greatest and most potent and dangerous enemy that love hath . But ( With their favour ) presence without comparison is much more , as we May daily see by experience ; for you May see a thousand loves change in presence for one in absence ; for in presence , some imperfections May be found , which May cause a detestation , which absence could never do ; and to illustrate and confirm this by example . The excellent philosopher Raymund Lullius , was passionately enamoured of a Lady , wise , prudent and honest ; she purposely to cure his frenzy , showed him one of her breasts eaten and gnawed through with a canker , and extremely hideous to behold , stay simple man ( Said she ) behold what you loved ; he at that instant coming to himself uttered ; alas ! was it for this i lost so many good hours , that i burned , became entranced , that i passed through fire and water ? all lovers would say the like if the scarf were taken from their eyes . Consider that if one absent cease from loving ( Which is very rare ) its cessation is without any violence or noise of struggling , and the change ( Through a long tract of time ) is only because the memory is by degrees smothered with oblivion , as a fire is with its own ashes . But when love breaks off in presence , it is never without a noise and extreme violence , and ( Which is a strange argument to prove my assertion ) converts that love into a greater hatred than if love had never been : which proceeds from this reason ; a lover is always either loved or hated , or held in a degree of indifferency ; if he be loved , as an abundance is apt to glut , so love being loadened in presence with too many favours , grows weary . If he be hated , than he meets with so many demonstrations of that hate every moment , as at length he is forced to ease himself . If he be in a degree of indifferency , and finds his love still slighted , he will at length , if he be a man of any courage , make a retreat and resist the continual affronts which are put upon him ; whereas in absence , all favours received , cannot by their abundance glut , since they do rather set an edge on desire , and the knowledge of hatred entering into our souls only by the ear , the blow smarts not so much as that which is received by sight ; and likewise disdain and slight be more tolerable in absence , than presence ; doubtless absence is then more fit to preserve affection , than presence ; for there is a vast difference betwixt the love that is nourished by the eyes , and a love that is nourished by the understanding . as much as the soul is superior to the body , so much is the understanding to be preferred before the eyes . and absence is so far from diminishing love , that it augments and begets fresh and violent desires to augment it ; and the contemplation of a beauty , doth imprint it deeper in the fancy , than any eye can . Therefore ( You love simplicians ) make a little resistance , cast away those idle toys that afflict you ; let not absence be so troublesome , that you must torture your bodies , vilify your spirits , and yield up your reputations as preys to slander . If you know what you desired , you would be ashamed of yourselves , you would be amazed that so noble spirits should suffer themselves to be transported with such follies . represent to yourselves that a thousand undaunted courages , have set themselves free , at liberty , and enjoyed tranquillity of spirit ; and you for want of a little resolution , tumble and involve yourselves faster and faster in these fetters . Will any man in his wits be thus deluded ? can he be so silly as to consume himself in seeking such a toy ? Do you call this love , forsooth ? May it not rather be called madness and folly ? what , languish in the lap of an ungrateful Mistress ? fie , fie , it is an error far unworthy of a man , that pretends unto any wisdom or courage . Put a stop to your passions , and courageously contend against them . You shall no sooner have put the wedge of courage into the block , but it shall be done ; you shall have your souls victoriously elevated over passion , which shall rejoice amid the trophies thereof . Never stay upon thoughts and imaginations of love ; but so soon as it presents itself , chase it away , and extinguish it in your hearts , no otherwise than you should extinguish a hot iron in a river . If it be in presenim restrain your eyes , for they are the windows , the allurements , the snares and the conducts of love . it buddeth in the eyes , that it May at leisure blossom in the heart ; therefore divert your sight from objects which dart a sting into the mind apt to receive , and sensible of such penetrations . Likewise lest it get entrance at the ear , stop them against the enchanting melody of Sirens songs , and charming music of their tongues , never open them to be auditors of any lascivious discourse . But if you be already tainted with these charms , unloose yourselves , stoutly take yourselves off , dispute not any longer with your passions ; fly from it , cut the cable , weigh anchor , spread sails , set forward , go , fly , look not for any more letters , regard not their pictures , no longer preserve favours , let all your endeavours be to preserve your reason . I add one advice ( Which i think very essential ) which is infinitely to fear a relapse after health , and to avoid all objects that May re-enkindle the flame . For love oftentimes resembleth a snake enchanted , cast asleep and smothered ; which upon the first occasion awaketh and becomes more strong , and more outrageous than ever . You must not only fortify your bodies against it , but also your souls . but my discourse like Nilus overflows , it shall return within its banks ; concluding with this , that terrestrial beauty is like a shadow , and therefore we are not to fix the eyes of our understanding upon it , but to turn them to that sovereign beauty which is permanent and free from all change and passion . 

We will now endeavour ourselves to remove the cause of money causing love , which is mere covetousness ( The root of all evil ) and to satisfy their own voluptuousness , having their only delights upon earth ; Who desire not the woman but her riches to make his houses the larger , to fill his chests fuller , being respectless of a virtuous woman , and the supreme good wherein all happiness consisteth . And this , he saith , is to raise a fortune for his ( I say seldom thriving ) posterity ; studying how he May become an eternal affliction to himself . His mind is so fixed on money ( Not on the woman ) as he finds no time to erect it to heaven . He employs so much time in getting and gathering of goods , as he reserves no time for doing good . He runs on still in desire ( Not of his Mistress ) labouring of a disease incurable till death cure him . He increaseth his cares with his substance , ( Not his love to his wife ) and the more he adds to his estate , the more he detracts from his content , and love towards her . But consider ( You money-lovers ) and seek for a remedy while it is to be had , lest you repent your delay when 't is too late ) how secure was the richman ( As he thought ) when he invited his wretched soul to take her rest , having much goods laid up for many years ! but this self-security , was the occasion of his succeeding misery ; for that night was his soul to be taken from him . Oh how terrible will the approach of death seem to you , being to be divided from the staff of your confidence , from thence to descend without the least hope of comfort to the land of forgetfulness ; for as the scorpion hath in her the remedy of her own poison , a receipt for her own infection ; so the evil and covetous carry always with them the punishment of their own wickedness , the which doth never leave ( So incessant is the torment of a guilty conscience ) to wound and afflict the mind , both sleeping and waking : so as to what place he betakes him , he cannot so privily retire , but fear and horror will awake him ; nor fly so fast , though he should take the wings of the morning , but fury and vengeance will overtake him . Consider this ( I speak to both sexes ) and let not money and riches be the sole object of your love ; but look at that which is far more noble , that which is more permanent , that summum bonum , that chief good , which will direct you the way to all felicity . 

Before we proceed any further , we will ( Hoping such variety will prove the more pleasant ) turn our discourse a little in particular to the female sex , such whose kind hearts , like wrought wax , are apt to receive any amorous impression . therefore to you ( Loving souls ) do i recommend these necessary cautions ; which if carefully observed , will preserve you from the causes and consequently the effects of love , and May make you wiser than you thought of ; and to have a tender care of that , which before you had never mind of . 

The best preservative and soveraignest receipt is , to fortify the weakness of your sex with strength of resolution , for the imagination of love is strong , and works admirable effects on a willing subject . Give not power to an insulting lover to triumph over your weakness , or which is worse , to work on the opportunity of your lightness . Ram up those portals which betray you to your enemy , and prevent his entry by your vigilancy . Keep at home , and let neither you nor your thoughts stray abroad , lest by gadding you incur Dinah's fate . Check your madding , and to love inclining fancy , and if it use resistance , curb it with restraint ; forbear to resort to places of public meeting , till you have drawn up and sealed a covenant with your eyes , to see nothing that they May lawfully covet . This will yield you more liberty than the whole world's freedom can afford you . Be not too liberal in bestowing your favours , nor too familiar in public converse . Presume not too much on the strength of a weak fort . Make a contract with your eyes , not to wander abroad , lest they be catched in coming home . Treat not of love too freely ; be not too bold to play with the blind boy ; he hath a dangerous aim , though he hath no eyes ; the cat plays with the mouse , but at last bites off her head ; the fly plays with the candle , till at last her light wings are singed . Sport not with him , that will hurt you ; play not with him , that would play on you ; your sports will turn to a bad jest , when you are wounded in earnest . If this wanton frenzy hath never surprised you ; prevent the means , and it will never invade you ; be not such foes to yourselves as to purchase your own disquiet . If love issue out in too violent a stream , it is to be cooled by a temperate expostulation with fancy , or else fix your eyes upon some more attractive object ; divert the course of that madding passion , as physicians do to their patients who having a violent efflux of blood in one place , cut a vein in another to turn the course of it another way . Expostulate with fancy ( As Brathwaite adviseth in his English gent. ) thus ; how is it with me ? methinks it fares with me otherwise then it hath done formerly . A strange distemper i find in my mind ; and Might seem to resemble love , if i knew the nature of it . Love ! can virgin modesty return that accent and not blush ? yes , why not ? If the object i affect he worth loving . ( If the party affected have more virtues than money , and not more money than virtues ) and if not , what then ? Is not the lover ever blind in affection towards his beloved ? He who May seem a Thersites to another , May be a Paris in mine eye . Yea , but a little advice would do well . Art thou persuaded that this non-parallel , thou thus affectest , hath dedicated his service only to thee ? that his affection is really towards thee ? that his protests , though delivered by his mouth , are engraven in his heart ? yea , his protests have confirmed him mine . That hour is tedious wherein he sees me not . His eye is ever fixed on me ; his sole discourse is to me . these i must confess are promising arguments of love ; yet these May deceive you , and consequently leave you in a miserable error . He May prove a false-hearted Jason , Demophoon , or Theseus , and leave you in the briers for all your confidence . You say his vows and protests have confirmed him yours ; and he hath attested heaven to bear record of his love . but take heed he play not the part of the ridiculous actor in Smyrna , who pronouncing , oh heavens , pointed with his finger to the ground . Therefore i wish you , ground your fancy with deliberation ; and do not affect , before you find ground of respect . entertain not a rhetorical lover , whose protests are formal compliments , and whose promises are gilded pills , which cover much bitterness . Many men are flattering Gnatho's , dissembling chameleons , mere outsides , hypocrites that make a show of great love , ( But 't is no more than from the teeth outwards ) pretend honesty , zeal , modesty , with affected looks , and counterfeit gestures , full of lip-love , feigned vows , stealing away the hearts and favours of poor silly souls , deceiving them , specie virtutis & umbra , when as ( In truth ) there is no worth of honesty at all in them , no reality , but mere hypocrisy , subtlety and knavery . Therefore ( Gentlewomen ) trials in affairs of this nature , have ever a truer touch than protestations . For i am confident there are some ( Yea , i really know many ) who make it their only study , how to tip their glozing tongues with rhetorical phrases , ear-charming oratory , vows , and protestations , purposely to gull credulous ▪ creatures , for the purchase of an unlawful pleasure ; which obtained , they leave them to bewail their lost honour . I exhort you to sift him narrowly to see what bran there is in him , before you choose him . Task him before you take him . As thus ; hath his fair carriage got him estimation where he lives ? Hath he never enured his tongue to play the hypocrite with his heart ? Hath he kept a fair quarter , and been ever tender of his untainted honour ? Hath he never boasted of young gentlewoman's favors , nor run descant on their kindness ? Hath he ever since he vowed himself your servant , solely devoted himself yours , and not mixed his affection with foreign beauties ? if so , then choose him , he well deserves your choice . Be like the juniper tree , whose coal is the hottest , and whose shadow is the coolest ; be hot in your affection , but cool in your passion . set before your eyes the difference betwixt a wise and a wild passion ; the one ever deliberates before it love , and the other loves before it deliberate : therefore let your fancy be grounded with deliberation . If you be a maid , ever fear to become a woman , and cast not the garland of your virginity under the feet of hogs . Give not a hair of your head to those who promise you golden mountains , for such will deceive you , and when they most desire you in the quest of marriage , than is the time you must least be for marriage : for all you grant to their importunities , will be the subject of your disgrace ; and when they shall have married you , though you should live as chaste as Susanna , they will be jealous , and continually imagine you will be liberal to others ▪ of that whereof you were prodigal to them . If you desire to marry by fancy , rather pursuing your own wanton humours , than the reasonable commands of those to whom you owe your being ; hold it as a crime the most capital you can undertake , and confidently believe if so you do , you will open a floodgate to a deluge of miseries and cares , which will flow upon you thorough all the parts of your life . Account the resolutions you make to this purpose , as treasons , and think whatsoever shall to you suggest the ex of them , will poison you by the ear to murder your chastity . But i fear ( Reader ) i have too much trespassed upon thy patience , in insisting so long upon this branch . And i know there are some enamoratoes will account my precepts too difficult to be followed , and set my persuasions at naught ; they will not desist from their melancholy thoughts , not want the least idea of their lovers , so much pleasure they take in it . Therefore i will instruct their friends , and see if they can withdraw their affection ; the which take as followeth . 

The Arabians do advise us to take occasion to discourse of the party affected , in the patients hearing , and to enumerate all her imperfections and vices , making-them more and more , and far greater than they really are ; and to set out her perfections and virtues in the colours and shape of vices ; and to labour by probable arguments to prove unto him , that that which he judgeth to be comely and handsome , is in the judgement of those that are more quick sighted , both ugly and deformed ; telling him that Cupid is blind , and makes all enamoratoes so too . Endeavour with what possibility you can , to convert his love either into hate of jealousy , by preswading him , that his Mistress doth not love him so well as she makes him believe she doth , and that all her entertainments , favours , kisses , dalliances , and embraces , are only baits and enticements to keep him from slavery : but if the party be of the other sex , then May be pleaded the obsequiousness and dissembling of m•n , ( Which is as frequently found in them , as inconstancy in women : ) the Parthians , to cause the youth to loath the alluring trains of woman's wiles , and deceitful enticements , had most tightly carved in their houses , a young man blind , besides whom was adjoined a woman so exquisite , that in some men's judgement , Pygmalion's image was not half so excellent , having one hand in his pocket as noting her theft , and holding a knife in the other hand to cut his throat . 

Injuries , slanders , contempts , and disgraces are very forcible means to withdraw men's affections ; for lovers reviled or neglected , contemned or abused , turn love into hate . Mr. Burton adviseth you to tell him she is a fool , an idiot , a slut , and many time so nasty that one cannot touch her with a pair of tongues , and that always against the time of his coming , she tricks and trimmes herself up to allure him , and will not be seen by him , but in an enticing dress ; that she is a scold , a devil incarnate ; that she is come of a light heeled kind ; or that he or she hath some loathsome incurable disease ; that she is bald , her breath stinks , that he or she is mad and frenetic hereditarily ; to tell her that he is an hermaphrodite , , an eunuch , imperfect , impotent , a spendthrift , a gamester , a gull , his mother was a witch , his father was hanged , that he will surely beat her , that he is a desperate fellow , and will stab his bedfellow , and that no will lie with him . If she be fair and wanton , tell him she will make him a cornuto , and to sing an April song . if she be virtuous , that it is but a cloak for her more secret vices , a mere outside , a whited sepulchre . If he be enamoured on a widow , that she will still hit him in the teeth with her first husband , that she hath cast her rider , and will endanger him too , and that a wife and children are a perpetual bill of charges . 

Endeavour to divert the patient's thoughts from his former Mistress , by making him fall in love with another ; upon whom when once his affection begins to take root , make him hate that , and fall in love with a third ; following this course with him still , till at length he begins of his own accord to be weary of loving : for ( I 'll assure you ) he that is in love with many women at once , will never run mad for any of them ; for the mind being thus disunited , the desires are less violent ; so one love takes away the force of another . love is of the nature of a burning-glass , which kept still in one place fireth ; but changed often it doth nothing , not so much as warm : or a kind of glowing coal , which shifted from hand to hand , a man easily endures . 

A young man ( Saith Lucian ) was pitifully in love , he came to the theatre by chance , and by seeing variety of objects there , was fully recovered , e theatro egressus hilaris , ac si pharmacum oblivionis bibisset ; and went merrily home , as if the had drunk a dram of oblivion . A mouse ( Saith the fabulist ) was brought up in a chest , and there fed with fragments of bread and cheese , thought there could be no better meat , till at last coming to feed on other varieties , loathed her former life : just so it is with a silly lover , none so fair as his Mistress at first , he cares for none but her ; yet after a while when he hath compared her to others , he abhors her name , sight , and memory . 

If all this will do no good , let us see what May be done by physical means ; yet , some there are , who exclaim and cry with open throats against the gods , for ordaining for every malady a medicine , for every sore a salve , for every pain a plaster ; leaving only love remediless , and then exclaiming with the inventor of physic Apollo . 

Hei mihi quod null is amor est medicalilis herbis ! 


did you ( Oye gods ! ) deem no man ( Say they ) so mad as to be entangled with desire ? or thought you them worthy to be tormented , that were so misled ? have ye dealt more favourably with brute beasts then with reasonable creatures ? No simple lovers you want not medicines to cure your maladies , but reason to use the means . 

Of physical means therefore we will treat as followeth . 

First , it is good to take away the superfluity of blood , ( If age and the strength of the patient will permit ) by opening the liver vein . i should have said , vena hepatica , ( But i speak as well to those that do not understand Latin , as them that do ) in the right arm , let the quantity taken be according to the constitution and strength of the patient ; and if you see cause , open the Saphaena or ankle vein ; for phlebotomy maketh those that are dejected merry , appeaseth those that are angry , and makes lovers come to themselves , and keep in their right minds , amantes ne sint amentes : for ( Saith one ) amantes & amentes iisdem remediis curentur ; lovers and madnen are cured by the selfsame remedy : affirming that love extended is mere madness ▪ Aelian Montaltus saith , love makes the blood hot , thick and black ( Being converted into black choler and melancholy ) and if the inflammation get into the brain , with continual meditation , it so dries it up , that a madness follows , or they make away themselves , as divers in that case have done . 

Let him have change and variety of place , for that doth awaken the spirits of melancholy lovers ; let him not be without company and frequent conversation , for many times that diverts the mind of a doting lover , and cheers him up , making him see his error ▪ 

It is good for the patient to be in a cold and moist air ; and not to use in his diet such things as do heat the blood and provoke lust . 

Let him use to fast often , and feed often on bread and water : sine cerere & baccho frig•t Venus ; love takes not up his lodging in an empty stomach ; but on the contrary Venus delights in dainties . 

Let him use these simples in his broth and salads ; Purslane . 
Sorrell . 
Endive . 
Woodbine . 
Ammi . 
Succory . 
and lettuce , which is so sovereign a remedy against this malady , that Venus desiring to forget all her unchaste desires , buried her dear Adonis under a bed of lettuce . 

Likewise the syrup or conserve of red-roses , or province-roses ; the same virtue is attributed to mints . 

Let him also use to eat , Grapes . 
Melons . 
Cherries . 
Plums . 
Apples . 
Pears . 
Cucumbers , &c.  


It is good to take sometimes , Hempeseed . 
Seed of water lilies . 
Hemlock . 
Tu•san . 
Camphire . 
Cuminseeds . 
Coriander seeds . 
agnus Costus , or the chaste tree , not only the seeds of it used and taken in what manner soever doth restrain the instigation to venery , which it doth by a specific property , seeing it is of the same temperature with pepper , which worketh contrary effects ▪ and therefore the Athenian matrons in their Thesmophoria did use the leaves as sheets to lie on , thereby to preserve their thoughts ( If it were possible ) from impurity . 

rue is an excellent remedy , but of different operation in men an women . One quality thereof commend i must , 
It makes men chaste , and women fills with lust . 




Let his sauces with his meat be , Vinegar , Oranges , Or verdejuyce . Lemons , Sorrell , 

Let him abstain from all aromatical things , and all fried or salted meats ; because that salt by reason of its heat and acrimony , provokes to lust , those that use to eat it in any great quantity . 

Let him abstain from meats that are nutritive , hot , flatulent , and melancholy : as , Soft eggs . 
Partridges . 
Pigeons . 
Sparrows . 
Testicles of creatures . 
Quails . 
Rabbits . 
Hares . 
greengeese especially . 


Let him not eat , Pine nuts . 
Pistachoes . 
Small nuts . 
Artichokes . 
Turnips . 
Greenginger . 
Eringoes . 
Mustard . 
Coleworts . 
Rapes . 
Carrots . 
Parsnips . 
Chestnuts . 
Pease . 
Sweet almonds . 
Satyrion . 
Onions . 
Water nuts . 
Rocket . 
Cich-pease . 
Beans . 
Syrups . 
Electuaries . 


Let him not lie upon a soft bed . 

Also from all manner of fish * , &c. and Oysters . 
Prawns . 
Lobsters . 
Crabs . 
Muscles . 
Cockles , &c.  


Let him exercise usque ad sudorem , till he sweat again ; provided that the disease be not already grown to madness . 

Often baths are good . 

Eye the heart , and be sure what ever you do , have a care to keep that on wheels , for all melancholy vapours afflict that especially . Therefore to fortify that , take conserve of Roses . 
Borrage flowers . 
Bugloss flowers . 
Rosemary flowers . 
Marigold flowers . 

Saffron . 
Green walnuts preserved . 
Iuniper berries . 
Betony . 
Citron pills candied , &c.  


Theban Crates saith , there is no other remedy for love then time , and that must wear it out ; if time will not , the last refuge ( Saith he ) is an halter . and that 's a speedy and sure remedy , very quick of operation . 

But when all fails , apply that cordial salve to your corroding sore made by loves wounding weapon , that excellent remedy , that sovereign balm , that universal medicine , which if seasonably administered , will give you comfort when you are most distempered . The recipe is , divine contemplation ; for certainly those spirits which are truly raised to the study and knowledge of divine things , and do well know the art of celestial contemplation , are elevated above all terrestrial pleasures , in as much as eternity is above time , and infinite felicities above vanities . and not finding any thing on earth worthy our desire , and to fix our affections upon , let the object of our love and felicities be in the empyreal heaven . and while we are in these divine ecstasies , let our spirits be so strong , as they May be conquerors of our bodies ; so heavenly , that they May esteem the chiefest pleasures of the body ( As this of heroic love ) but as dung and dross , nay worse if worse May be , in comparison of those sublime and celestial pleasures we enjoy in our souls . and in such comparison we May rejoice more in contemning these corporeal delights , and being above them , then in the fruition of them . Therefore in stead of placing our affections on terrene objects , let us seek after that fountain and wellspring of all love , loveliness , beauty , sweetness , and excellencies of the creator ; which is infinitely more permanent , and doth as much transcend all other beauties and excellencies in the world , if they were all united in one : so that when a soul is possessed with the beauty and love of God , it will have the eye of its imagination fixed on him , often soaring and mounting up to heaven as its centre , on the wings of contemplation ; and a sa vapour exhaled by the sun , often gliding after its love , being thereunto attracted by the allurements of his most amiable , fair and divine lustre and loveliness ; insomuch as it will be enlightened with glorious ideas , touring apprehensions , ardent affections , and celestial raptures . we will conclude with that poetical and divine strain of the nightingale of France . If wanton lovers so delight to gaze 
On mortal beauties brittle little blaze ; 
That not content with ( Almost ) daily sight 
Of those dear idols of their appetite ; 
Nor with th' ideas which the Idalian dart 
Hath deep imprinted in their yielding heart ; 
Much more should those , whose souls , in sacred love 
Are rapt with beauties ▪ proto-type above . 




Finis . 

The postscript . 

Reader , 

I know i shall come under the lash of a satirical dijudication , and be boyed out of countenance , for presuming to appear in this subject , which would have become the neat flourishes of a more elegant pen . therefore i will acknowledge that philomus as one of my most energetical palisadoes , who will defend this enchiridion against the malevolous aspersions of the venomous tongues of detractors , that will endeavour to derogate its worth by calumny . But i have Herculean hopes , that some will vindicate me ( Where i cannot answer for myself ) against the viperous brood of backbiters . And as i love not to come within the jaws of such black-mouthed Plutonian curs ; so i desire not to be bandied up and down in the tennis court of this world with the racket of praise ; for there is a herb called lingua pagana ( I translate it ) a double tongue ; the devil that crafty Gardner hath got a slip of it , and hath set it in the heart of the G•athonical reader ; for bilinguis was none of God's making ; no , it was of the devils marring , he loves to make that double which God made single : so there will be some cloven tongues that will disallow of that in the writers absence , which before did approve of and commend in his presence ; and if such distasteful critics shall misinterpret the innocency of my harmless meaning , i shall but reply , and play with their sporting censures , as doth ben. Johnson in his play works , Their praise or dispraise is to me alike , 
Th' one doth not struck me , nor the other strike . 




I will conclude with one word to Momus , who like a cowardly cur will fawn in a man's face , but bite him by the heels when his turned back hath given the farewell , or like the choleric horse-rider , who being cast from a young colt , not daring to kill the horse cut the saddle . 

Think ▪ ( Momus ) speak do what thou wilt , thou 'rt free ; 
Thy thoughts , thy words , thy deeds are naught to me . 


Finis . 

The contents . 

Of love , the original , the universality and the definition of it ▪ pag. 1.  

The whole universe tendeth to love ▪ and that it was love which caused God to create the world . pag. 1.  
Man's inclination to a seeming good , and the cause of woman's creation . 2.  
The sympathy that minerals and vegetables have one to another . 3.  
The definition of amorous love , and the several opinions of Theophrastus , 
Montagne , 
Socrates , 
Tully , 
Seneca , and others . pag. 4 , 5.  

The policy of Paris , in the disposal of the golden ball to Venus . 5.  
The power of the planet Venus . pag. 6.  
The concord betwixt Pallas , the Muses and Venus . ibid. 
The conclusion . 7.  
the causes of love . pag. 7.  

The first cause from God . ibid. 
The second from the influence of the stars . 8 , 9  
Parents and education . 9 , 10.  
The example of Themistocles . 10.  
idleness . ibid. 
Luscious fair . ibid. 
Dancing schools , and schools of music . 11.  
quintilians' opinion of nurses . ibid. 
The example of Socrates . 12.  
A harmony and consonancy of spirits , &c. 13.  
That beauty and goodness make us love . 14.  
The great power that beauty hath in procuring love . 16.  
The particulars of beauty causing love , 1.  the eyes . 17.  
2.  fair hair . 18.  
3.  the tongue , a gracious laughter , songs , kissing , &c.  19  
4.  a tall slender body , &c. ibid. 
5.  breasts and paps , affected carriages , garments , guises , colons , jewels , pendants , painting , &c. 19  apparel . 20.  
6.  pleasant looks , glances , &c.  21.  Good instruction to Ladies . 21.  

7.  a tender and hot heart . ibid. 
8.  love-letters . 23.  
9  words . ibid. 
10.  eare . ibid. 

Lysidas love to Astrea . ibid. 
Money causing love in men . 23.  
Money causing love in women . 25.  
What the poets say are the causes of love . 26.  
Fonsecas opinion of the cause of love . 27.  
The conclusion . 29.  
Of the power and effects of love . 31.  

What Plato calls love . ibid. 
The effects of love in animals . 31 , 32.  
Diseases caused by love . 32.  
Powers and assaults of love . 33.  The variousness of it . ibid. 

Divers examples of the effects of love . 35.  
The many dangers and hazards lovers undergo . 37.  
Loves force is shown in the continuation of a design . 39  
The effects of love in birds , &c.  40.  
The effects of love in old persons . 41.  In maids . ibid. 

Constancy in lover's inconstancy . 43.  
How lovers display the beauty of their Mistresses . 43.  
The effects of love in she-lovers , with their ear-charming notes . 44.  
A loves simplician described . 47.  
A description a great many gulls . 48.  
Instructions to lovers . 48 , 49.  
Love strengthened by hope , &c.  51.  
A description of the palace of love . 57  
The effects of love in women . 53 , 54 , 55 , 56 , 57  
The conclusion . 58.  
Of the power and effects of love in widows . 59 

Widow's compared to herald's hearse-clothes , and how they will belie their age , &c. ibid. 
The artificial discourse of widows . ibid. 
Widow courters , &c.  61.  
The cause why Spaniards will not marry widows . 61.  
Widows were ordained for younger brothers . 62.  
The signs of love . 63.  

Cautions before you judges of signs . ibid. 
what physiognomy is . ibid. 
Various signs of love are from pag. 64. to 69.  
Signs of love in women . 75 , 76 , 77.  
Signs of love by chiromancy . 77.  
Signs of love by dreams . 77 , 78.  
Signs of love by astrology . 79 , 80.  
At what age we begin to be in love . What complexions do best sympathize . What , &c. 81.  

When it beginneth in men . 81 , 82.  
when in women . ibid. 83 , 84 , 85.  
What temperatures and complexions do sympathize together , and are most prone to receive the impression of this passion . 86 , 87 , 88 , 89 , 90.  
In what principal part of the body of man is the seat of love . 91.  

Where love first entereth . 91 , 92.  
Of jealousy in lovers . 93.  

The definition of it . 93 , 94.  
The effects , signs and symptoms of it . 94. 95 , 96 , 97 , 98 , 99  
How it May be known who will be subject to jealousy by every man's nativity . 101.  
The remedies of love . 102.  

How to take away love caused by the stars . 102 , 103.  
How to remove it caused by parents and education . 103 , 104 , 105 , 106.  
How to extinguish it , caused by beauty . 106 , 107.  
That love is sooner extinguished in presence then absence . 109.  
How to take away the cause of money causing love . 113 , 114.  
A preservative and sovereign receipt for women to fortify themselves against the contagion of this pussion . 115 , 116 , 117 , 118 , 119.  
How to extinguish love according to the way of the Arabians . 119.  
and the Parthians . 120 , 121.  
Several other instructions to divert the patient's thoughts . 120.  
Physical cures , by letting of blood ▪ change and variety of places , and what air is best ; how to diet him , as what simples to use in his broths . What syrups and conserves he must take ▪ what fruit he May eat , &c.  What sauces to use with his meats . 122 , 123 , 124.  
What the patient must abstain from . 124.  
His exercise . 125.  
Fortify the heart . ibid. 
the remedy of Theban Crates . ibid. 
the conclusion . 126 , 127.  
Finis . 





* and that is the cause why women love fish better than flesh , for they will have plaice what ever they pay for it . 





















































