Love and fear the inseparable twins of a blessed matrimony . 

Characterised in a sermon occasioned by the late nuptials between mr William Christmas and Mrs Elizabeth Adams . 

Preached in St.  dionis back-church by Nathanael Hardy , mr of arts and preacher to that parish . 

Collos. 3. 18 , 19  

wives submit yourselves to your own husbands , as it is fit in the Lord . Husband's love your wives , and be not bitter unto them . 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Chrysost. hom. 20. in ephes.  

Quoniam una natura in viro & faeminâ est , idcirco vir quasi seipsum ita mulierem diligere commonetur ; mulier autem quia persona inferior est conditionis causâ non naturae viro subjecta , timere cum jubetur . ambros. in ephes.  

London , printed by t. c. for nathanae Webb and William Grantham , and are to be sold at the sign of the black bear in s. Paul's churchyard near the little North door . 1658.  

To the generous mr William Christmas merchant , and the virtuous Mrs Elizabeth Christmas his wife , many comfortable days and a blessed eternity . 

Worthy friends , 

pardon me that i join you together in one dedication , since God's ordination , and your mutual affection have made you one . it was your undeserved respect honoured me to be the instrument of accomplishing your nuptials . it was my cordial desire of testifying my gratitude , and promoting your welfare , made me so bold as to become your humble remembrancer of those duties , which i doubt not you both knew , and resolved to practice before . Finally it was your unexpected acceptance and approbation of my weak labours put you on requiring , and me by that means on effecting the publication of them . 

what hath caused my delay in fulfilling your desire , i suppose you already know : being now through God's wonderful mercy raised from my sick nay almost dying bed , i have made what haste i could to finish the work . 

this plain and homespun piece , such as it is , i present Sir , to your candid eye , madam to your fair hands , together with my humble thanks for your noble favours . as the hearing it did affect you , so i hope the reading it will profit you , and not you alone , but others who shall vouchsafe the perusal of it . 

and now courteous friends , my heart's desire and prayer to God for you is , that you May be ravished each with others love , that your quiver May be full of those harmless arrows , to wit , children ; that peace May be within your walls and plenteousness continue in your habitation : finally that you May live long together in earth , and for ever in heaven . i rest , 

Yours to be commanded in the Lord , nath. Hardy . 

To the right worshipful Thomas Adams , formerly alderman and Lord mayor of this anciently renowned city of London , saving health , sweet contentment , eternal felicity . 

Right worthy Sir , 

Did not speaking or writing truth of them that are alive incur a suspicion of flattery , had not the beams of your graces been abundantly resplendent to this whole city from those orbs of authority wherein you were justly placed ; finally , were it not that i know how repugnant the publication of your worth is to the humility of your mind , who desire laudanda facere non laudata audire , to do things praiseworthy , not to hear or read your own praises ; an encomium had been the proemium of this dedication . 

But though upon these considerations i shall forbear to characterise those eminent virtues , by which you oblige all that know you : yet give me leave ( Honoured Maecenas ) to make a public acknowledgement of those munificent favours by which you have engaged me , since i had the honour and happiness of enjoying you as a parishioner ; an ingenuous recognition being as the least so the utmost payment that i can return . 

In testimony of my gratitude , and observance of your desire , i here present to your judicious eye what not long ago was offered to your religious ear . what should render this unpolished discourse acceptable to you i cannot conceive , unless it be the special interest you have in the joyful occasion of it ; namely the happy marriage of your deservedly beloved daughter . indeed matrimoniò prospicere , to provide fit matches for their children , is the last but not the least care that lieth upon the parents : well May it be a just cause of singular joy , when a marriage is consummated with the parent's consent and to the child's content . May your joy be still multiplied in their mutual loves , prosperous estate , and an hopeful progeny descending from their loins . 

And now worthy Sir , give me leave in few words to tell you what great things the Lord hath done for me . it is not many weeks since by a violent fever i was brought low , very low , so that my soul drew nigh to the grave : but it hath pleased the powerful mercy , and merciful power of my gracious god to deliver me from going down to the pit , so that my life seeth the light ; and ( Praised be his goodness ) i am in some measure restored to health . God hath done his work of mercy , mine of duty remaineth , to be thankful and fruitful . it is no small piece of Christian skill , rightly to improve mercy when conferred ; this is my task , which that i May be enabled to perform , i earnestly desire both yours and the servant prayers of all god's persons . 

I have nothing further to add , but only my prayers for you , which shall never be wanting at the throne of grace , that your days on earth May be lengthened , external enjoyments sanctified , spiritual graces increased , inward comforts enlarged , and your good works at last rewarded with a crown of glory . 

So prayeth Your affectionate servant in Christ , nath. Hardy . 

eph. 5. 31.  

Nevertheless , let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself , and the wife ( See ) that she reverence her husband . 



Among the many commendable excellencies of holy writ , this is none of the least , that it is a treasury of all kind of learning both divine and human , supernatural and natural , theological and moral . In this regard it is not unfitly compared to the sea , since as all rivers come from the sea , so all sciences and arts from the scripture . indeed where shall we find more logical arguments and rhetorical strains then in these writings ? What deep secrets of natural philosophy , sublime notions concerning the heavens and the stars May we read in many of these pages ? Finally , no such characters of ethical virtues , sound rules of state-policy , choice precepts for oeconomical practice , as these holy lines afford . Astronomy the Queen of mathematics , logic and rhetoric the chief of arts , yea both natural and moral philosophy May by an intelligent reader be found graved upon the bible in their several characters : one of these , to wit , moral philosophy in the oeconomical part of it , is that which our apostle teacheth in the close of this epistle . There are three combinations which concur to keep up a complete family , husband and wife , parents and children , Master and servants ; all of which s. Paul though succinctly yet distinctly and fully here instructeth in their several duties : the two latter in the beginning of the following chapter , the former in the latter part of this , and that most compendiously in the last verse which i have now read unto you , nevertheless , &c.  

Before i enter upon the text it will be needful to take a little notice of the context , the connexion which these words have with the preceding , and that is implied in the particle which begins the verse , nevertheless . 

Indeed because the apostle in these words concludes his former argumentation , Beza renders it it aque , therefore , as if it had vim illativam , the force of an illative conjunction ; but this is a needless straining of the word contrary to its proper signification : the generality of interpreters retain the native sense of the word , whom our translators justly follow , reading it as an exceptive conjunction ; and so it hath vim , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a force of recalling the apostle from insisting any longer upon the great mystery before mentioned . 

If you cast your eyes on the foregoing verses , you May observe the example of Christ and his church , brought in as a pattern for men and wives to follow , whereupon s. Paul digresseth into an excellent discourse of that spiritual union which is between Christ and his church , making use of marriage as a representation of this sublime mystery ; and now in the close he recalleth himself to his first design , letting them know that though what Moses relateth concerning Adam and Eve was mystically applied by him to Christ and the church , yet the literal sense of it was in force to them , nor must his allegorical hinder them from a moral application of what he had said concerning marriage . 

A good item for us in reading the scriptures to take the sense of them in the fullest extent . Of many passages in holy writ , there is both a literal and a spiritual , a mystical and a moral use to be made ; and it is our duty both to search out the sweetness of the mystery , and observe the plainness of the letter ; and as we are taken with the comforts of the one , so not to neglect the duties of the other . 

Having briefly viewed the context , come we now to the text itself , wherein are three general parts worthy your serious consideration . 

The particular relations whom it concerneth specified , to wit , husband and wife . 

The several obligations laid upon each unfolded , on the man , that he so love his wife as himself , on the wife , that she reverence her husband . 

The punctual application to be made by every one of those duties to himself , let every one of you in particular . 

These are the three precious fruits we are to gather from this branch of the tree of life , and though in hearing they May not be sweet to your taste , yet i am sure if well eaten and digested by meditation and practice they will yield wholesome nutriment to your souls . 

Begin we then with the relations concerned in this scripture , to wit , husband and wife . almighty God though he is a lover of unity , yet not of singularity ; himself is but one , and yet he is not alone from all eternity , there is a trinity of persons in the unity of essence . And if we look into the creation we shall find though an harmony yet a plurality , or rather a duality ; the world consists of an heaven and earth ; in the celestial part there is a sun and a moon , in the terrestria• part land and sea : and yet further if you look upon the little world of man , you May take notice of a soul and a body ; in the soul , of a rational and a sensitive part ; in the rational of an understanding and a will ; in the sensitive of an irascible and concupiscible appetite : and in the body most of its parts are made in pairs , two eyes , two ears , two nostrils , two lips , two arms , two thighs , two legs , two feet . Finally , man being thus made , God said of him , it is not good he should be alone , and therefore as he had made other living creatures male and female , so he provided a woman for man , makes her out of him , joins her to him , whence sprang this relation in the text of husband and wife , the man ( So soon as the woman was made ) becoming an husband , and the woman a wife . 

This pair is primum par & fundamentum omnium parium , the first pair and the original of all others ; those various relations of parents and children , Master and servants , King and subjects do all spring out of this . prima naturalis humanae societati• copula vir & uxor , man and wife are the first link of human society , to which all the rest are joined , families , cities , countries , nations , the whole world , yea , the church militant , nay , a good part of the triumphant depend upon this pair of husband and wife . 

Multitudes flow from this relation , but the relation itself is only between two ; it is not {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} and {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} nor {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} and {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} and {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , man and wives , wife and men , but man and wife , unus , unam , uni . the one God hath appointed one woman for one man . It was so in the institution , and the prophet Malachy's ratiocination from it , is both plain and strong , did not he make one ? yet had he the residue of the spirit . he could have made more than one Eve for Adam , yea if at any time , than it Might seem most necessary for the speedier peopling of the world to have multiplied his wives , but wherefore one ? because he sought a godly seed , that is , a seed arising from godly means : nor is that argumentation invalid which upon this subject Theodorus urgeth to the Saracen in point both of pleasure and peace . Adam in paradise no doubt wanted nothing that Might be for the fullness of his content and comfort ; and yet he had but one , whereby it appeareth {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the pleasure of having one wife surpasseth that of many . Again , where there are many wives there cannot but arise violent and deadly contentions , which the man having but one wife prevents , and therefore is most conducible to that most desirable good in all relations , namely peace ; from which with other arguments he justly concludeth , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , monogamy is more comfortable and honourable than polygamy . indeed he qui unam costam primus in duas divisit , to use s. Hierom's phrase , who first ( As we read of ) divided the one rib into two parts , was Lamech a wicked tyrant ; and it is observable that the name of his second wife Zillah signifieth a shadow , such an one being only the shadow of a wife . The truth is polygamy even in the patriarchs was at the best but an infirmity , which though connived at was not allowed of by God , and therefore not to be imitated by us . That marriage is nearest to the primitive institution , surest of divine benediction , which is only between two persons , who thus united are here called husband and wife : and so much be spoken of the relations . Pass we on to the . 

obligations laid upon them , these are summed up by the apostle in two words , and those May very well be expressed in two monosyllables love and fear ; that , the sugar to sweeten all the duties of authority belonging to the man ; this , the salt to season all the duties of subjection belonging to the wife . both , the marks which they must severally shoot at in all their carriages and behaviours one towards another . 

The man's duty is set down first , and indeed fit it is the man should be first in the practice of his duty : precedency calls for presidency , priority of place priority of duty ; the inferiors are best encouraged to do their part when they that are above them become exemplary to them in performing theirs : the man would be accounted , nay indeed is , superior to the wife ; but than he must go before her in a good example ; that by the doing of his she May be animated in performance of her duty . 

In the duty of the man there are three things worthy our observation . 

1.  The quality of the act , love . 
2.  The propriety of the object , his wife . 
3.  The energy of the rule upon which it 's grounded , by which it 's measured , so as himself . 
First , the act required is love , in the handling whereof i shall endeavour to resolve a double query , namely , 

1.  why this duty is particularly mentioned . 
2.  wherein the practice of it consists . 
1.  it 's a question not unfitly moved , why the apostle makes choice of love , to express the man's duty by , since there are many duties which the man oweth to the wife as well as love ? To which i answer , that it is not without special reason both in regard of the present fitness and the comprehensive fullness of this duty of love . 

1.  The fitness of expressing the man's duty here by love will appear , whether you look backward or forward . 

1.  The apostle a little before calls upon the wives to submit . now indeed that which belongs to the man in most direct opposition to submitting , is governing , but men are apt enough to exercise their authority without bidding , and besides , this was already employed in the woman's duty of submitting ; letting that go therefore he rather chooseth to call upon the man for love , both because that men are most apt to be defective in this , and likewise that this will teach them how to use their authority . For though it is not love but fondness which makes a man forget himself , and that power God hath given him over the wife , yet true love will learn him to exercise this power sparingly , mildly , and affectionately . It is too often seen that men because of their superiority insult over their wives , and why this ? but for want of love ; no marvel if authority degenerate into tyranny where this moderator is absent ; for this cause it is that the apostle supposeth the power of governing , and requires love as potestatis temperatum , that which should temper and moderate the use of that power . 

2.  In the following clause s. Paul minds the wife of reverence , and therefore the man of love , to intimate that his expression of love is the best way to gain reverence from the wife , in which respect the scholiast saith excellently , if thou wouldst have thy wife to reverence thee , do thou love her . to force a fear from the wife by an austere , churlish , and surly carriage , is that which neither befits the husband's place to exact , nor the wives to yield : the woman must be not drawn but led , not forced but wooed unto her duty by love . 

2.  As this duty of love was the most fit to be here mentioned , so is it the most comprehensive of all other duties ; so that in naming this he implies all the rest . What the Greek orator answered when asked what was the chief thing : in an orator , first action , secondly action , thirdly action , the like May be returned to any that shall inquire what is the prime duty of an husband , first affection , secondly affection , thirdly affection ; and as love in general is said by the apostle to be the fulfilling of the law , in which respect it is fitly resembled to David's instrument of ten strings , and wittily called a good Catholic , so love in particular is the fulfilling of that law wherein the duty of the man to the wife is required , which that it May the better appear pass we on to the 

2.  quest . namely , wherein the exercise of this love consists ; to resolve which we must consider it in its antecedent , concomitants and consequents . 

1.  The antecedent of this love is a due estimation of the wife . Judgement is the source and spring of affection from which it proceeds , and according to which it is proportioned ; what the mind esteems not the heart affects not , whereas what we highly prize we dearly love . The love then of a man to his wife supposeth in him a singular account and an high valuation of her . Thus every man ought to esteem of his wife as donum dei , God's gift , and that choice and precious , such a present as the whole world cannot afford him the like . And yet more particularly the man ought to look upon his wife under that notion which was the special end of God's giving her , namely , as an help meet for and suitable to him . 

The wife since the fall is appointed for three ends , ad remedium , ad sobolem , in adjutorium , for a remedy against fornication , for the procreation of children , and for helpful communion ; this last was no doubt the first in divine intention , and so ought to be in the man's apprehension . He that taketh a wife only as a remedy will love her but as men do physic , for use , yea , for mere necessity . He that marrieth only for posterity will love her as a mother not as a wife . He only can rightly love a wife who looketh upon her , and accordingly taketh her for a oak-fellow and companion . The right estimation then of a wife is to account her as next to himself , and so above either children or servants . Thus the father willeth the man to consider , that by marriage he becomes not a Master but an husband , and taketh not an handmaid but a wife ; in this respect the psalmist comparing the wife to a vine , placeth her by the sides of his house , not in fastigio on the top of an house , nor in pavimento by the floor of an house , but in lateribus by the sides of the house , a middle place between both : lateribus sibi junguntur qut pariter ambulant , they that go by our sides are our companions , such is the wife to the man , and so ought to be in his esteem . Indeed the formation of woman out of man's rib clearly represents this truth . On the one hand she was not made of the head , and therefore not domina , she must not rule over the husband ; nor yet of any anterior part , and therefore not praelata , she must not be before the husband : on the other hand she was not made of the foot , and therefore not serva , to be kept under as a servant ; nor yet of any hinder part , and therefore not postposita to be put behind as a child ; but she was made of a rib in his side , and therefore socia , to be esteemed and used as a fellow-helper . 

2.  The concomitants or ingredients of this love are desire and delight . The moralists distinguish of a double love , to wit , amor benevolentiae and amor complacentiae , a love of benevolence , whereby we heartily wish and accordingly endeavour the good of another , a love of complacency whereby we are well pleased and satisfied in the enjoyment one of another . Both of these make up the man's love to his wife , namely a cordial desire of her welfare , and an affectionate delight in her society . The most proper act of matrimonial love is complacency , in which respect this loving is called elsewhere a rejoicing , and the wife is called the wife of the bosom , the desire of the eyes . the bosom is a place of repose , and the things we put in our bosoms are such as we take delight in ; for this cause Christ is said to be in the bosom of the father , to note that it is he in whom the father is well pleased ; and John is said to lean on Jesus bosom , because the disciple whom Jesus loved , and in whose converse he was singularly delighted . the desire of the eyes is that which in the absence we long for , and the presence of which we behold with joy ; so that both these expressions do plainly intimate what contentment and satisfaction the man ought to take in the converse and enjoyment of his wife . And therefore it is Solomon's counsel , let thy wife be to thee as the loving hind , and as the pleasant roe , or according to the Hebrew , an hind of loves , a roe of favours : the mates of those females are the hart and the roebuck , which as naturalists observe are of all other creatures the most enamoured with their mates , to instruct the man what an affectionate well-pleasedness he should have with his wife . 

3.  The consequents of this love are chiefly protection , provision , and toleration ; love is ever active , being like the fire , which where it is sends forth light and heat . Indeed exhibitio operis probatio amoris , action is the most real proof of affection , only that love being true which is not otiosus but officiosus , in word but in deed : thus the husband's love to his wife must manifest itself . 

1.  in protecting her to his power from injuries : it is the psalmists expression , thou Lord wilt bless the righteous , with favour wilt thou compass him as with a shield . love always improves what ability it hath in being a shield to what it affects ; so ought the husband's love to express itself in defending his wife from wrong . It is well observed that the rib of which woman was made , was taken from under the man's arm , to teach him , that as the use of the arm is to keep off blows from the body , so the office of an husband is to ward off dangers from his wife . It is the speech of Ruth to Boaz , spread thy skirt over thine handmaid : the Hebrew word which we render skirt , properly signifieth a wing ; and so the metaphor is borrowed from birds who spread their wings over their young ones , to preserve them from harm ; this was that Boaz owed to Ruth as a kinsman : but much more when an husband , it being the man's part to spread the skirts or wings of protection over his wife . That expression which Abimelech used to Sarah concerning Abraham , behold he is to thee a covering of the eyes , is very considerable to this purpose , since as Ainsworth hath well observed , it denoteth not only subjection on the woman's , but protection on the man's part . 

2.  by providing for her conveniencies : love is full of care , and care is diligent in providing : such a provident care the man oweth to his wife ; and that not only so far as is necessary , this being due to the meanest servant in the family , but as is convenient and suitable both to her relation as a wife , and to his place and condition ; this duty is that which the apostle expresseth a little before in two significant words of nourishing and cherishing , the former whereof as one hath well observed referreth to food , the latter to raiment , both which in a plentiful measure the man according to his degree and estate ought to afford his wife , and the latter word being a metaphor borrowed as another hath observed from the hens sitting upon her eggs to keep them warm , and thereby to hatch her brood , doth elegantly express what a tender cherishing care matrimonial love obligeth a man unto . Indeed when the man marrieth a wife , she leaveth her friends with whom she was educated , and her friends commit her to her husband's custody , good reason he should have a special care to provide for her ; and because this love must be Christian as well as conjugal , this care ought to be conversant not only about her bod• , but her soul : in which regard the apostle Peter willeth husbands to dwell with their wives as men of knowledge , instructing them in the things which concern their everlasting welfare . 

3.  by bearing with their infirmities : s. Paul speaking of charity , among other properties , telleth us she is not easily provoked , she beareth all things , and s. Peter that she coveerth a multitude of sins ; though love be not blind , yet ofttimes she winketh , as not willing to take notice of the wrongs that are done : thus ought the husband to express his affection to his wife . Indeed this is the trial of his love , not to be stirred up to wrath , when yet provocation is given , but silently to pass by and patiently bear with her failings : every one will love when he is pleased ; but that is love , to bear when provoked : this is that which the apostle intendeth when to this precept of love he addeth a prohibition of bitterness ; husbands love yove your wives and be not bitter against them , that is , ob leves causas exasperari , upon slight causes , small offences , to have their love abated , or wrath exasperated . This the heathen philosopher saw , who therefore willeth husbands to pass by {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} their wife's infirmities . And thus you have beheld the several lines of the man's duty meeting together in this one centre of love . 

What now remains but that all men learn to square their practice by this precept ? but alas how just cause is there given by a great part of men for a sad complaint , or rather a sharp reproof ! I would to God there were not some who in stead of affecting abhor , loving , loath their wives : and the most though not guilty of the contrary vice , yet are too defective in the exercise of the virtue ; they do not hate , and yet they do not love their wives , and in this the bare want of love is no small sin . 

Be pleased to consider a while in particular the contrarieties between the rule and men's practices ; how many husbands have base and unworthy esteems of their wives , as if they were their drudges , being more kind to their servants then them ? Little better are they who with that Emperor imagine wife to be a name dignitatis not voluptatis , as if it were enough for wives that their husbands vouchsafe to honour them in marrying them , and in the mean time they May indulge themselves the licentious liberty of voluptuous conversing with other women ; whence it is their wife's society is rather a burden than a pleasure to them . No less justly are they to be condemned who prodigally consume that estate in riot and luxury by which their wives and family should be maintained with needful conveniences : surely in such men nec amor viget mariti nec fides christiani , there is neither the faith of a Christian nor the love of an husband . Finally , how deservedly are they to be blamed who put a sinister construction upon all their wives actions ? if she be devout , she is an hypocrite ; if grave , she is melancholy ; if cheerful , she is wanton ; if she stay at home , she is a drone ; if she go abroad , a gadder ; so that , nothing their wives do can please them : whence it is that they are apt to quarrel with them de lanâ caprinâ , upon every trifle , and are often enraged without any just occasion . 

By these and several other ways do men discover a great defect of this duty which our apostle here calls for ; but i wish that such would sadly consider how repugnant these courses are to Christianity , since what s. John saith in another case , i May no less truly say in this , if a man say i love God , and hateth his brother , he is a liar ; for if he loves not his brother whom he hath seen , how can he love God whom he hath not seen . in like manner , if a man say he loves God and hateth his wife , he is a liar ; for if he loves not his wife whom he seeth , how can he love God whom he hath not seen ? Be we therefore all of us exhorted to a careful and cheerful performance of our duty ; and as the apostle elsewhere adviseth in the general , let all things be done in charity , so shall i in this particular , let all things a man doth to his wife , be done in love ; his looks , his speeches , his carriage , his actions , his familiarity , yea , his authority ; his admonitions , yea , his reprehensions , let all be sweetened with love : as the salt is first set on and last taken off from the table , and is eaten almost with every dish ; so let love accompany him in the whole course of his behaviour towards her . Thus ought conjugal love to be extended , but withal it must be limited to the right object , his wife ; which leadeth me to the 

propriety of the object , thy wife . to clear this , be pleased to distinguish of a threefold love , spiritual , natural , and matrimonial : spiritual love is that we bear to a woman as she is a Christian , and so where there are the greatest measures of grace , there ought to be greater degrees of love ; and in this respect another woman May deserve love when a man's own wife doth not , because she May want those impressions of grace which others have : natural love is to a woman as woman , and thus a man May love other women besides his wife , but still he must love his wife before other women : matrimonial love is of the wife as she is a wife ; and this is solely and wholly due from every man to his own wife . The Greek word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} here used signifieth as much as {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ( Which is by some therefore made the etymology of it ) such a love whereby a man rests satisfied in the object loved ; this is that which Solomon requireth where he saith , let her breasts satisfy thee at all times ; and the contrary to this the law forbiddeth , where we read , thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife . 

A fault too common though very heinous , as Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire in the censer ; so a great many harbour strange fire in their hearts , i mean love to strange women : yea , with such a spirit of lewdness are some possessed , that they therefore cannot love them because they are their wives . It is an expression which ( Though odious ) some mouths have not been ashamed to utter , i could love her were she not my wife ; as if a man should say , i could love these lands , these goods , but that they are mine , which how unreasonable a reason it is cannot but be obvious to every man . 

Oh far be this distemper from us : learn we therefore as to refine our love that it be not sensual , so to confine it that it be not extravagant . It was the praise of Constantine that he was juvenis uxorius , though young , devoted in his love only to his wife , let him be our pattern . The ring given in marriage is but one , to teach the man that his love must be singularly contracted to the person of the wife . The truth is , that love which is as it were cut into many rivulets must needs run weakly , nay , he that giveth not all his love to his wife indeed giveth none at all ; besides that is most true in this sense , deus amat cor extensum non divisum , the husband's love must be extended but not divided ; a heart and a heart is hateful in God's sight , nor can such expect his benediction . It is well observed that in the beginning whilst the waters were over the earth , there was nothing but barrenness ; but when they were gathered into one place , the earth brought forth fruits , and the sea fishes : that love will be most fruitful , which is only settled upon the wife , and therefore let this counsel be acceptable to all men ; cause the stream of thy affection to run in one channel , the lines of thy delight to meet in one centre : love as entirely as thou canst so it be thy own wife , and so much the rather because she is thyself : which leadeth me to 

The energy of the rule upon which this love is grounded , and by which it must be measured , as himself . 

It is a question here moved by some , why the apostle having proposed so excellent a pattern already as that of Christ's love to his church , should now add another of a far inferior nature , to wit , our love to ourselves ; to which this answer is fitly returned . 

This pattern of self-love is annexed , not as if the other were not abundantly sufficient both to persuade and direct to the duty , but because this , as s. Chrysostom saith excellently , is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} a more domestic and familiar example . The love we bear to ourselves is plainly felt and discerned by us ; not so Christ's love to his church , it being a love which passeth knowledge : every man knoweth how he loveth himself ; only the spiritual man knoweth , and that but in a scant measure , how Christ loveth his church : besides , our love to ourselves as it is better known , so more easily imitated ; whereas Christ's love to his church is both so transcendent in its own nature , and so far remote from our apprehension , that though we must follow after it , yet we May despair ever to come near it . 

But it May be further objected , is not self-love a vice ? are not those hypocrites branded for this among others , that they are lovers of their own selves ? how then comes it to pass that self-love is here set down as the rule of a man's love to his wife ? 

To which it is easily answered , that it is not self-love but the exorbitancy of it , which is elsewhere condemned as a vice , and it is not an inordinate but a regular self-love which is here commended as a rule . The first and primary object of our love is God himself , and as he is a superexcellent good , so our love to him must be a superlative love , such was David's when he cried out , whom have i in heaven but thee ? and there is none upon earth that i desire besides thee ; not goods , nor children , nor wife , no nor self May be loved as God . Next to , and under God comes in self , there being nothing except God which can or aught to be dearer to a man then himself , this is that love by which in general the love to our neighbour , and more particularly the love to the wife ought to be regulated ; for so our apostle here proposeth it , that a man should love his wife as himself . 

This as in the text May very well admit of a double construction , there is a sicut similitudinis and veritatis , an as of likeness and resemblance , and an as of verity and sameness ; both these May be here used , and accordingly it representeth two things in order to conjugal love , namely , modum and motivum , the manner how , and the reason why the man should love his wife . 

1.  The most proper and frequent acception of this conjunction as , is only to note likeness , and thus the meaning is , that a man's love to his wife should be like that he bears to himself , so that by tracing the similitude we shall learn much of the manner how this love is to be performed , and that in these following parallels . 

1.  A man's love to himself is cordial without dissimulation . Though a man May sign amity to others , yet no man ever in this kind dissembled with himself ; such should a man's love be to his wife ; not an outside but an inside , not a feigned but a hearty love . The poet calls love {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a fire that burns withinin ; and Plutarch saith of friendship , that as minerals are hide in the bowels of the earth , so this must be seated in the bottom of the heart . And surely much more true aught this to be of the love between man and wife , who as they are one flesh , so should their hearts be joined together in one , and as it was said of Jonathan that his soul was knit to David , so ought the soul of the husband to the wife . 

The ring in marriage is put upon the fourth finger of the left hand , concerning which Aulus Gellius acquaints us from Appion , that the Egyptians in anatomising men's bodies , observed nervum quidem tenuissimum ab eo uno digito ad cor hominis pergere ac provenire , that singer of all the rest to have a small nerve passing from it to the heart , the truth of this i leave to skilful anatomists to determine : the moral use which the man ought to make of it is good , that putting the ring on such a finger he be admonished of that near union there ought to be between , and dear affection in his heart to his wife . 

2.  A man's love to himself is constant . no man in his right mind was ever brought to hate himself ; such aught his love to be to his wife : not like Nero's quinquennium , for a short time , a few years ; but as long as the relation so long must the affection continue , even till death do part them . The ring given in marriage is of a circular figure , and a circle is the image of constancy , to teach the man how perpetual his love should be . This latter will follow upon the former , since quos verus amor tenuit tenebit , that affection which is unfeigned will not be fading . and yet more particularly , look as though a man see others stronger , healthier , handsomer than himself ; yet he doth not therefore fall in love with them to slight himself , or wish his head upon their shoulders : so though other women be more beautiful and lovely than his own wife , yet must he not dote on them and neglect her , or so much as wish an exchange . And yet further , as nothing can make a man to be out of love with himself though he be deformed or by some sad accident maimed and debilitated ; so neither aught any natural defect or accidental mischance cause a remission , much less a cessation of the man's love to his wife . 

3.  A man's love of himself is tender ; no man can handle one so tenderly as he doth himself . if thou hast a blear eye , a lame foot , or any other member afflicted , wilt thou presently pluck it out , or cut it off , or wilt thou not rather use it with the greater regard ? such must a man's affection be to his wife , expressing itself in gentle and tender dealing with her : how chary are men of their glasses , because as they are bright so brittle ? the woman is the weaker vessel , which must not be a cause of contempt but respect ; and the more weak she is by reason of any sickness or distemper whatsoever , so much the more tender care ought to be had of her . Indeed i read of some who in stead of tenderness have been cruel to themselves in cutting and lancing , but they were either idolatrous , as Baal's priests , or Daemoniaacks , as he in the gospel ; and surely we May account them either besotted in their minds , or possessed with a devil who lay violent hands upon their wives . The husband indeed is to govern the wife , but consiliis non plagis , with counsels not stripes ; neither divine nor human law entrusts the man with a power of castigation over his wife ; yea , the civil law alloweth her a bill of divorce , si probare possit maritum verberibus illam assecisse , if she have evidence that her husband striketh her ; and the reason is added quia verbera sunt ab ingenuis aliena , stripes are for flavish not ingenuous persons : yea , even among the heathen we find not any unless mad or drunk , practising this unnatural cruelty . 

4.  A man's love to himself is industrious , whilst his head is ever contriving and his hand acting what May do himself good ; nor doth he account the greatest study or pains too much for his own advantage ; nay , what is not a man willing to part with , lands , goods , all he hath for the preservation of himself ? such ought his love to be to his wife , parting with , going about any thing which May conduce to her comfort , and this not grudgingly but freely : right love is not in verbal compliment but real implement , ; nor need beneficence be squeezed as wine out of the grape , but it floweth naturally from love as water from the fountain ; thus doth the loving husband prevent his wives desire in seeking and endeavouring her good . 

5.  The love of a man to himself is pure , not for base and sinister ends , it is not himself as thus or thus accomplished , but purely himself that he loveth ; such aught a man's love to be to his wife , not because she is rich , or young , or fair , but because she is his wife . When Martia Cato's daughter was asked why she did not marry , she answered , non se invenire virum qui se magis veliet quam sua , she could not find a man that would love her more than hers . I wish it Might not be charged on too many men : they love only with their eyes and their fingers , because of the beauty they see in , or the money they receive with their wives ; not with their hearts , out of an ingenuous or rather pious respect , to that relation of a wife wherein they belong to them . 

6.  And lastly , a man's love to himself is superlative ; proximus quisque sibi , charity ever beginneth at home ; and self-love surpasseth a man's affection to any other whatsoever : thus ought his love to his wife transcend his love to all other relations , exigit vehementissimam dilectionem , quia non potest esse vehementior quam sui ipsius dilectio ; our apostle in this expression calls for vehemency of affection because self-love is of such a nature . The ring given in marriage is of gold the choicest among metals , to intimate that the dearest affections belong to the wife : for this cause ( Saith Moses ) a man shall leave father and mother and cleave to his wife , not as if marriage engaged men to put off natural affection to their parents , and when they begin to be husbands they must cease to be children , this is a gloss fit for none but a Pharisee to put upon that scripture ; but conditionally , if they shall seek to alienate his affection from his wife , and comparatively if a man be put to that sad strait that either his wife or his parents must perish , he ought first to relieve his wife ; and if you will know the reason of all this , it is because she is himself , which bringeth me to the 

2.  Consideration of this as under the notion of identity , as , that is , being himself : it is that acception in which this conjunction is sometimes taken , where it is said concerning Christ , we saw his glory as of the only begotten son of God , it noteth not a likeness but a reality , being the only begotten son of God ; and in the same construction is that commendation given of the Thessalonians for receiving the word as ( That is , being indeed ) the word not of man but of God ; the same sense is here to be given , as , that is , not only , non minus quam seipsum , not less than himself , but quia illa est altera ego , because she is a second self : to this purpose is that of s. Jerom , who maketh it to be a sicut non similitudinis , sed ponderis ; and thus where a little before it is said , he that loveth his wife loveth himself , the meaning is not only that he doth good to himself , but that she is himself . The truth of which will easily appear upon a double consideration , 

Of her original by creation , being made of a rib which was a part of the man ; so that when a man taketh a wife reparat latus suum , repetit costam suam , he repaireth his side , regaineth his rib , and layeth her in his bosom who was taken out of his side . In that expression in genesis of making an he'p meet for him , the last words for him are fitly rendered according to the original coram ipso , that is as a glass that reflecteth upon him his own image , ipse coram se himself before himself , that which he seeth being taken out of himself . 

Chiefly of her near conjunction by marriage with the man ; in which respect as they are one flesh , so the law maketh them one person . man and wife , what are they , but as two springs meeting and so joining their streams that they make but one current ; so that the water of the one and the other cannot be severed : or as those two branches in the prophet's hand enclosed in one bark ; and so closing together that they make but one piece and the same fruit cometh of either . Indeed so close and near is the communion , that as to use they have all things common , bodies , children , houses , conditions of prosperity and adversity . 

And now what improvement should all men make of this consideration but to enlarge and increase their affections towards their wives ? Indeed it is a most unnatural thing for a man not to love himself ; it is no less not to love his wife : even irrational creatures teach a man to love himself , and in that to love his wife : a man loveth his goods , because sua his own , parents love their children as suos being their own , much more should he love his wife as seipsum being himself : though a man's own goods be not so wealthy , children so comely as another's , yet the nearness of relation engageth to affection . nemo patriam amat quia magnam sed quia suam , every man's country is most acceptable to him , because though not so great or fertile as others , yet it is his own , his native soil . Be thy wife far inferior in riches , beauty , and such like ornaments to other women , yet this obligation lieth upon thee to love her , because she is thine ; yea , so much thine as that she is thyself . And thus i have given a dispatch to the man's duty ; i now proceed with less brevity , but no less fidelity to 

The woman's part , as it followeth in those words , and the wife ( see ) that she reverence her husband . 

We are not here to imagine that when the apostle calleth upon the woman for reverence he excludeth love ; love is no less the wife's duty than the man's : conjugal affection must be mutual and reciprocal : the husband must love his wife as himself , and the wife love her husband as herself ; so that whatsoever hath been said concerning the man in this respect , must and aught likewise to be observed and practised by the woman . Hence it is that elsewhere this is expressed concerning the younger women , that they love their husbands : the truth is , the apostle here requireth love and somewhat more from the wife , such a love as expresseth itself by fear , such an affection as yieldeth cheerful subjection : the wife see that she do not only love , but reverence her husband . to this purpose Theophylact saith aptly , the wife must love her husband as a member , and fear him as the head : the man indeed being the superior is only bound to love , but the woman being imperfect and inferior is obliged to fear . 

It is an observation not unfitly taken notice of by the golden mouthed father ; and therefore not to be passed by , that the apostle enlargeth about love , and only mentioneth fear {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , he setteth down the extent of love in leaving father and mother and cleaving to the wife , the manner , by Christ's love to his church , and a man's to himself ; not so of fear : and he giveth this reason , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , because he would have love especially to prevail both in man and woman , since whereas fear will not cause love , love will produce fear . Upon the same ground i have in imitation of the apostle , spent the greatest part of the time in handling love , allotting to it an elder brother's portion , though withal i must not neglect in some measure to prosecute this of fear , which particularly belongs to the wife . 

If we cast our eyes on the 5. verse of the following chapter , we shall find the apostle setting down fear as a chief ingredient in the servant's duty : and here a verb of that noun is used to express the wife's duty to the husband ; but though there be this agreement in the word , yet there is a great deal of difference in the thing ; and therefore the scholiast speaking of servile fear maketh this exception , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , this is not that fear which is enjoined the wife . The fear of a slave and a wife differ specifically ; the slaves fear is only of the rod not the person , the wives only of the person not any rod . The slaves fear is ofttimes accompanied with hatred of his Master , the wife's fear is always attended with a love of her husband . The fear of a servant and a wife differ gradually , since according to the measure of the distance so is the degree of the fear ; and thus the servant being in a far lower condition , and so at a greater distance from the Master then the wife from the husband ; his fear must be of a more awful and submissive temper : in which respect the apostle useth two words , the one expressing an high degree of the other , to wit , fear and trembling , such a fear as is joined with trembling ; whereas the wives fear is only so much as doth declare that the man is superior ; nor must it be of that nature as to cause a trembling at , but rather a delighting in her husband's presence ; not such as maketh her to quake when she seeth him , but only keepeth her from rising up against , contradicting of , and insulting over him . 

To unfold more particularly both the intent and extent of this reverence , which is the wife's debt to the husband , be pleased to know that there is an inward and outward reverence due from all inferiors , and in special the wife ; the intent of this fear wherein it consists , we shall find in the inward ; the extent of it how far it reacheth , we shall see by the outward acts . 

The inward reverence carrieth in it an act both of the judgement and the will ; of the judgement , dictating the husband's superiority ; of the will dreading to do any thing which May displease him . 

1.  This principle must be firmly asserted to and acknowledged by the wife , that the husband is her superior ; indeed there is a double priority belonging to the man , 

1.  In respect of sex he being the male , and the woman the female , upon which difference the man is called the image and glory of God , and the woman the glory of the man ; man God's image and glory , because in him a resemblance of God's dominion and majesty , as being Lord of the world ; and the woman the man's glory , it being an high honour to the man that so noble a creature as the woman should be inferior to him . 

2.  Nor is this all the ground of his superiority , since not only as man he is before the woman , but as an husband he is over the wife ; and therefore as in respect of sex , so much more of relation and office , is the man's authority to be asserted . In which regard those titles of head and guide are given to him : since what the guide is to the traveller , and the head to the members , that is the husband to the wife for direction and government . indeed this truth is so clear in sacred writ , that it cannot be ignorance but arrogancy , want of sufficient information but peremptoriness of pride that causeth in any a denial , or so much as a doubt concerning it . That pattern of women , Sarak , acknowledged this , when not out of a feigned flattery but a just humility she called her husband Lord ; and this is the first step of that reverence here commanded and commended to all the daughters of Sarah , that they cordially assent to the husband's primacy and authority over them . 

2.  From this naturally floweth in the will an aversation from what offendeth her husband , whereby out of an awful respect to his power and place she dareth not displease him ; yea , in consideration of which she abhorreth it as the greatest evil next to the breach of God's precepts , to contradict her husband's will . Hence it is that as the apostles expression is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} she taketh care , and that a serious thoughtful care which way she May please her husband , so as it is her joy when she can give him content , and her grief when any thing falleth out that crosseth his will , and proveth distasteful to him . Thus as the iron is drawn by the loadstone , the marigold openeth and shutteth with the sun , and the glass reflecteth the form and figure , the posture and motion of the body ; so doth her will conform itself next under God's to her husband's pleasure . 

2.  Upon both these followeth that outward reverence in her . 

First , gestures , when by her respectful carriage and observant demeanour towards him she testifieth her reverent regard of him : in token of this it was that Rebeccah when she saw Isaac , lighted of her camel , and covered herself with a veil : this is that fear which s. Peter mindeth the wives of in those words , whilst they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear , it being such a fear he there calleth for which is expressed in their conversation ; and that such as others May behold , to wit , in their reverent deportment towards their husbands . Thus as the moon though when the sun is absent she govern the world by her influence , yet when the sun appeareth she veileth her light : so the wife though she be ruler of the family in her husband's absence , yet when he is present she must declare her reverence by giving place to him . 

Secondly , speeches , and that both to and of him ; to him , when he is with her , fairly entreating , modestly answering , mildly persuading , humbly admonishing ; and when occasion is , wisely forbearing to retort upon his passionate expressions . of him , when he May be far from her , having the fear of him before her ; and therefore not mentioning his name without respect , and avoiding any expressions which ( Though out of his hearing ) May betray any contempt either of his person , or power , or place . 

Thirdly , actions , when her reverence of him causeth her willingly to do what he requireth , and abstain from what he forbiddeth . Indeed reverence is the rise of obedience , and obedience the best testimony of reverence : that subjection cannot be voluntary which is not the effect of reverence ; nor can that reverence be real which doth not put upon subjection . It is very observable in scripture that the fear of God and keeping his commandments are frequently joined together , to intimate the inseparable connexion between them , since whoso feareth god cannot but keep God's commandments ; and he cannot keep God's commandments that doth not fear him : it is no less true in this of the wife to the husband , who ought to manifest her fear of him by her obedience to his desires . 

And now beloved , i could wish there were not cause given by wives as well as men of a deserved accusation and a severe increpation . Indeed some kind of fear is too prevalent in many women ; nor are the men in this to be exempted , i mean a fear of suspicion and jealousy in regard of each others fidelity . A crime that for the most part is found in them that are guilty themselves : as charity prompts good men to think others are as faithful and just as themselves ; so lust maketh evil ones surmise others to be as vicious and licentious as they . A sin which cannot but be an enemy to the duties here enjoined , since jealousy must needs expel love out of the man's heart towards his wife , and hinder the woman from yielding that reverential fear she oweth to her husband . Finally , a fault which like envy carrieth with it its own punishments , guawing the bowels , distracting the thoughts , and tormenting the spirits of them who give entertainment to it : in which respect wise persons are unwilling to harbour it even when there May be too just ground and reason for it . 

But to return to the fear my text calls for , though there be too much ofttimes of that other , yet too little of this fear is to be found in most women : how true this charge is let the careless irreverent carriage of many wives testify . Solomon in the proverbs mentioneth , an eye that mocketh at his father and despiseth to obey his mother : indeed by the eye it is that the soul doth much express itself in mocking and despising , and there are too easily to be observed eyes that despise their husbands . women of proud and scornful behaviour not only towards their neighbours but husbands . Nor are only the eyes but the tongues of many in fault , by reason of sharp , passionate , presumptuous and impetuous speeches , whilst they speak either chidingly like Jezabel , railingly like Zipporah , scoffingly like Michol , or reproachfully like Job's wife ; nay , so little regard have they of their husbands , that they care not in discourse before others to divulge their faults , and ( It May be ) load them with calumnies : so that what Jacob saith to his sons Simeon , and Levi in regard of their cruel exploit , you have made we to stink amongst the inhabitants of the land , May many men say to their wives , you make me to stink amongst my neighbours and friends by your reviling words and opprobrious speeches ; yea , to carry it on a little further , i would to God there were not a generation of women in the world who tread antipodes to this duty , instead of fearing their husbands they would make their husbands stand in fear of them ; whose study is not to please but cross their husband's wills , who will either have the mastery , or wage a continual war with them ; aspiring shoulder that will not content themselves to have a room below their head ; monsters of their sex inverting the order in which nature or rather the god of nature hath set them , as if the woman were not made for the man's comfort , but the man to be at the woman's command . 

But i am persuaded better things of you , though i thus speak , only i beseech you accept a word of exhortation to the practice of this duty . Our English translation here supplieth a word see , which is not in the original ; but yet it is implied in the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} that she reverence , before which is supposed a verb that must signify as much as see , let the wife look to it that she fear her husband . It is then a strict charge that is here laid upon the woman by the apostle , give me leave from him to give it you . Have a care that this duty of fear be not omitted ; it is not an arbitrary thing which you May do or leave , but a necessary work to be performed by you ; i know you are ready to say with them in the gospel , this is an hard saying , who can bear it ? but be it never so hard in your apprehension , it is but just and right according to God's ordination , and to repine at it is no less than to murmur at God himself . 

Oh therefore see , beware that you grudge not at this precept ; and again see , look that you cheerfully perform it : and indeed were it seriously considered that it is not a servile but an ingenuous fear which is here commanded , and that this fear from the wife is allayed with a precept of honour from the husband , nay , that where this is practised , it doth regain a mutual respect from the man , whilst by obeying she commands , for so the mother told her daughter , do thou minister to thy husband , and he shall do the like to thee ; be thou his handmaid and he shall be thy servant ; and thus as Sarah called Abraham Lord , so he called her Sarai , as much as my Mistress : these meditations could not but sweeten the bitterness of this precept to them . In a word , let there be but a cordial love in the wife to her husband , and this command of fear will not be grievous to her : as fear is the spring of subjection , so love is the rise of fear ; in which respect the scholiast saith fitly , if love be present , fear will follow after it and attend upon it ; and as the man's love engageth him to honour and protect , so the wives will no less oblige her to fear and subjection . 

I shut up this , yea both the man and the woman's part with one admonition to them both : as the one desireth to love his wife , and the other to fear her husband , let both strive to have the love and fear of God rooted in their hearts . It is very considerable , that fear God and the King are put together by Solomon , and fear God and honour the King by s. Peter , to intimate , that the former always inclines to the latter : the like i May say here , fear God and thy husband , fear God and honour thy wife , since he that is faithful in his duty to God , cannot but be careful of his duty to man . The rabbins have observed , that if the word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} which signifieth God , be taken out of the word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} & {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} which signifieth man and woman , there remaineth nothing but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} which signifieth fire ; nothing but the fire of malice in the man's heart , the fire of pride in the woman's , and the fire of contention between them both is to be expected , when God is not loved , feared , served and honoured by them . And thus much be spoken of the second general , the obligation laid upon the man and the wife . I hasten in a word to 

The punctual application to be made of these duties , let every one of you in particular . and this is done two ways : by a word of generical comprehension , every one ; and words of individual specification , of you in particular : both which though expressed only in the man's part , yet are by a parity of reason to be supplied the wives , every one in particular , both man and woman being obliged to the practice of their duty . 

1.  The first word is of a generical comprehension , every one , of what degree , quality , condition soever is concerned in these precepts ; yea every one is bound to their several wife or husband , be their condition or qualification what it will . It is , though very sad , yet too common for both sexes to plead excuses for their nonobservance of these divine injunctions . On the one hand many a man is apt to say , i could love my wife were she a person of quality , but she was my servant ; were she wealthy , but she brought me nothing ; were she meek and quiet , but she is froward and perverse . it is true indeed wisdom teacheth thee beforehand to take care that there be virtuous qualities , and some proportionable equality of estate and degree in the person whom thou choosest for thy wife ; but having once entered into that relation , justice obligeth thee to give her the love due to a wife . On the other hand many a wife is ready to pretend , i could reverence my husband were he not a mean person , one whose fortune hath been raised by my estate ; not considering , that how superior soever she were before , yet by marriage she becometh his inferior : and again , i could reverence him were he not a man of a debauched , profane and vicious life . indeed i could wish that many men did not give too much occasion by their loose lives of that contempt they find in the eyes not only of wife , but servants ; but still be the husband never so faulty , and his practices licentious , yet in respect of his place and relation , the wife oweth him reverence : the truth is , nemo excipitur , none is excepted , let none of either sex dare to exempt themselves . 

2.  Because what is spoken to every one , is accounted as spoken to none , our apostle bringeth down the general to individuals , every one of you in particular ; or according to the Greek , one by one : take this as spoken to him and her , and so each apply their own duty to themselves . It is that which concerneth ministers in all their doctrines , not to shoot at random but aim at the mark ; like David's , thou art the man and s. Peter's , you have crucified ; and here s. Paul's , you in particular . it is that which all hearers are enjoined , to mix faith with what they hear , and that by a particular application of the word to their own hearts and lives ; and yet more closely to the text , it is that which man and wife , each one in regard of themselves ought to take notice of , and square their own practice by . 

And well were it if this were duly thought upon , and accordingly perfomed . But alas , we every one look to another's , not our own duty ; and to speak my thoughts freely , i fear this will be the use or rather abuse which too many will make of this sermon . it is very likely that when you come home , the husband will read his wife a lecture of her duty , and the wife ring a peal in the husband's ears concerning his , and so whilst each upbraid the other , both forget what belongeth to them in particular . oh how preposterous a course is this ! as if a scholar should only mind how his schoolfellow learneth his lesson , and not look on his own : or a man should take notice what is good for his neighbours , but not his own disease ; and therefore whereas the apostle in another case most justly adviseth , look not every man on his own things , but every man also on the things of others , my counsel in this case is , look not so much on the duties of others , as every man on his own . 

And so much the rather would this be considered in the present matter , because it is so frequent for both the man and the wife to excuse their own neglect by the others default . what apologies more usual than these ? the man saith , i could love my wife did she reverence me ; and the wife i would reverence my husband did he love me : both are ready to say , let him do his , or she her duty , and i will do mine . but oh how vain is this plea , since neither is the man only obliged in case the woman perform hers , nor the woman if the man perform his part , but both because God hath enjoined each particular to fulfil their own work whatsoever the other do . Excellent counsel to this purpose is that which a Greek father giveth , where he puts the question and answers it , what if the woman do not fear thee , yet do thou love her , and so perform thy part ; and likewise the woman though she be not beloved , yet let her reverence her husband : surely , as our blessed saviour was used to say , it is better to give then to receive , so in this case it is better to pay then to require ; if another fail in duty to thee it is thy cross , but if thou fail in duty to another it is thy curse : assure thyself oh man or woman , it is more acceptable to God and commendable amongst men , that thou shouldst do thy own part , then challenge that which is another's towards thee : and let me add one word more , that man or woman who seeth not more faults in themselves then in the other , is either arrogant , or ignorant , or both . 

to end all : though we must every one apply to ourselves , yet we May every one exhort each other ; the husband the wife , and the wife ( With a due regard ) the husband . though our application must be peculiar , yet our supplication ought to be mutual ; the husband for the wife , the wife for the husband , both together that they May know and practise their duties . Let us therefore pray one for another , and let it be my prayer for you all here present this day , who are knit together in the matrimonial bond , that every husband May love his wife as himself , and every wife reverence her husband as she ought : and yet more especially for that worthy pair , whose nuptials have been lately solemnised , that by the practice of their duties each to other , they May be happy each in other ; and the blessing of heaven May be upon them both , even a peaceable tranquillity , hopeful posterity , abundant competency , with length of days here , and a never fading glory , an eternal felicity hereafter . 

Amen . 

Finis . 





prov. 5. 19  Psal. 127. 5. 122. 7.  

sicut è mari omnia flumina , ita è divina , scriptura omnes humanae disciplinae oriuntur . Mend . T. 1. p. 17.  initio versiculi non converti {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} veruntamen sed igitur , quòd omnino videatur esse in his verbis conclusio superioris tractationis . Beza in loc. revocat apostolum haec particula a praedicti mysterii fusiori consideratione . bod. in loc. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . theoph. ibid. non impedit praeceptum expressum quod de typica adumbratione dixi . aret.  gen. 1.  gen. 2. 1• . aug. de bon• conjug. . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Hieroc . de nupt. conjugium principium urbis est & quasi seminarium . cic. de offic. l 1.  bern.  mal. 2. 15.  Nec artifex nec materia defecisset . tertul. exhor . ad castit . theod. opusc. in bibl. patr. t. 1. gr. lat.  hieron. numerus conjugii a maledicto viro incepit , primus Lamech duabus maritatus tres unam carnem fecit . Tartul . ibid. in ea soap deficimus licet domini satis studiosi . aret. in loc. rigorem virilis legis emollit , new potestate quae praevalet nimius quis sit in dominatu uxoris . amb. in col. 3. 19  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Oecum . ibid. demosth.  rom. 13. 10.  non es dominus sed maritus , non ancillam sed uxorem sortitus es , & gubernatorem te voluit esse deus muliebris sexus , non praepotentem . amb Hexam . lib 5. cap. 7.  psa. 128. 3. aug. de bon• conjug. . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Arist. rhet. l. 2. c. 8.  pro. 5. 18.  Deut. 13. 6.  Ezek. 24. 16.  John 1. 28.  Mat. 3. 17.  Joh. 13. 23.  Joh. 20. 2.  prov. 5. 19  diligendi vocabulum tum ad affectum sum ad effectum referre oportet . daven. in col. 3. 19  psal. 5. 20.  Ruth . 3. 9  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} propriè alum significat buxt. gen. 20. 16.  eph. 5. 29.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , primum ad alimenta alterum ad vestimenta referendum . zanch.  significat gallinarum more incubare , & calore foetum partut idoneum reddere . aret.  1 pet. 3. 7.  1 cor. 13. 5 , 7. 1 pet. 4. 8.  Charitas amat quos tolerat , tolerat quos amat . greg. meg. in ezek.  sialienos , multo magis uxorios debes tolerare & emendare mores . ambr. lib. 8. in loc. cap. 16.  col. 3. 19  Daven. aristot.  Aelius Verus . 1 joh. 4. 20.  1 cor. 16. 14.  2d . Part.  prov. 5. 19  exod. 20. 17.  exod. 20. 1.  gen. 1. 3. and 9 10 , 11.  3d. part.  quest . answ.  chrys. in loc. eph. 3. 19  obj.  2 tim. 3. 2.  sol.  psal. 73. 25.  1 sam. 18. 1.  aul. gell. l. 10. c. 10.  sen. tract. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Theoph. in loc. 1 pet. 3. 7.  1 king. 18. 28.  Mar. 5. 5.  God . l. 5. tit. 17.  hier. contra Jovinian . marlo• in loc. gen. 2. ult. John . 1. 4.  1 thes. 2. 13.  hier. idid . ver 28.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} chrysost. hom. 20. in ephes.  gen. 2. 18.  quos nec ipsos singulos condidit deus & tanquam alienigenas junaeit , sed alteram ex altero creavit signans etiam vim conjunctionis in latere unde illa detracta formata est . aug. de bon. conjug . ezek. 37. 17.  sen. ep. 67.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} theoph. in loc. tit. 2. 4.  eph. 6.  Uxorum timere est cum timore , diligere , virorum autem tantum diligere , quia dilectio perfectorum est . ambr. in cass.  Chrystost . hom. 20. in ephes.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . oecumen. in eph. 6. 1.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Theoph. ibid. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Theoph. in loc. congruit vi•• dilectio , mulieri timor : servo vero non solum metus sed & tremorjungitar . hier. in loc. 1 cor. 11. 7.  prov. 2. 17. 1 cor. 11. 3.  1 pet. 3. 6.  Non blandiendi consuetudinesed hujus subjectionis testificandae voluntate . daven. cor. 7. 34.  gen. 24. 64  : 65  1 pet. 3. 2.  nunquam erit voluntaria subjectio nisi precedat reverentia . Marlor . in loc. deut. 5. 29.  eccles. 12. 15.  sancti caeteros de suo affectu aestimant , & quia ipsis est amica veritas mentiri neminem putant , libenter credant quod ipsi sunt non possunt suspectum habere quod non sunt . ambros. l. 3. de offic. 10.  prov. 30. 17 , gen. 34. 30.  John 6. 60.  casta ad •irum inatrona parendo imperat . publ. ser. sapiens quaedam dicebat filiae suae eam cum duceret ad thalamum , mea filia , sta coram viro tuo & ministrae ei ; si fueris ei ancilla , ipse tibi servus erit , &c. in lib. Nus . c. 6.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Occum . ibid. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . chrysost hom. 20. in ephes.  3. gen.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . qud voles aptè nubere nube pari . Ovid . Epist. quam male inaquales veniunt ad aratra juvenci . Tam premitur magno conjuge nupta minor . id.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 2 sam. 12. 7.  Acts 2. 36.  Heb. 4. 2.  phil 2. 4.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Bas. hexam. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Theoph in lo• . Acts 20. 30.  



























































