AN EXPOSITION ON THE Church-catechism , OR THE PRACTICE OF Divine Love. COMPOSED For the Diocese of Bath & Wells . 

LONDON , Printed for Charles Brome , at the West-end of St. Paul's ; and William Clerk in Winchester . 1685 ▪ 

Imprimatur , 

Io. Battely RR mother . P. D no. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cantuar. à Sacris domesticis . Ex Aedibus Lamb.  Aug. 9 1685.  

To the Inhabitants within the Diocese of Bath and Wells , THOMAS their Unworthy Bishop , wishes the Knowledge , and the Love of God.  

Dear Beloved in our Lord , 

THE Church has provided this short Catechism , or Instruction to be learned of every person , before he be brought to be Confirmed by the Bishop , wherein she teaches all things that a Christian ought to know , and believe for his Soul's health ; and she has enjoined All Fathers and Mothers , Masters and Dames , to cause their Children , and Servants , and Prentices , to come to the Church at the time appointed , and obediently to hear , and be ordered by the Curate , until such time as they have learned all that is here appointed to be learned . 

How seasonable and necessary this Injunction is , in these days , our woeful experience does sufficiently convince us , when we reflect on the gross Ignorance and Irreligion of persons in those places , where Catechising is neglected , which all sober Christians do sadly deplore . 

Since then the Providence of God , who is wont to glorify his strength in the weakness of the Instruments he uses , has caught me up from among the meanest Herdsmen , into the Pastoral Throne , and has been pleased to commit you to my care ; The Love I ought to pay to the chief Shepherd , obliges me to feed all his Lambs and his Sheep that belong to my flock , and according to my poor abilities , to teach them the Knowledge , and the Love of God ▪ and how they may make them both their daily study and practice . 

One thing only I most earnestly beg of you all , whether old or young , that ye would help me to save your own Souls ; that ye would learn , and seriously consider , again and again , the terms on which your Salvation is to be had . 

As for you who have Families , I beseech you to instill into your Children and Servants their Duty , both by your Teaching , and your Example : In good earnest , it is lesle cruel and unnatural to deny them Bread for their mortal Bodies , than saving Knowledge for their immortal Souls . 

ye that are Fathers , or Masters , I exhort you to tread in the steps of Abraham , the Father of the faithful , and the friend of God , and like him , to command your Children and Households to keep the way of the Lord  

ye that are Mothers , or Mistresses , I exhort you to imitate that unfeigned Faith , which dwelled in young Timothy's Grandmother Lois , and his Mother Eunice , who taught him from a Child to know the Holy Scriptures , which were able to make him wise to Salvation ; and like them , to bring up your Children and Servants in the nurture and admonition of the Lord . 

I passionately exhort and beseech you all , of either Sex ▪ never to cease your conscientious zeal for their instruction , till you bring them to Confirmation ▪ To renew their Baptismal vow ; To make open profession of their Christianity ; To discharge their Godfathers and Godmothers ; To receive the solemn ▪ Benediction of the Bishop ; To share in the public Intercessions of the Church , and to partake of all the Graces of God's Holy Spirit , implored on their behalf ; that God who has begun a good work in them ; may perfect it till the day of Christ ; and that I myself at that dreadful day , may render an account of you with joy . 

How much the Catechism of our Church may conduce to so desirable an end , you will in some measure judge by the following Explication , as imperfect as it is , and which , by God's gracious assistence , I have so contrived , that at one and the same time , it may both inform your understanding , and raise your affections ; and that it might the better suit with every one's leisure and infirmities , it is Penned in short Forms of Devotion , to be used in whole , or in part ; in separate Collects or Ejaculations , or occasionally , as your Spiritual necessities shall require . 

God of his infinite mercy bless the whole , to his own Glory , and to your Edification , through jesus the Beloved . Amen , Amen . 

AN EXPOSITION ON THE Church-catechism , etc.  

Question . 

WHAT is your Name ? 

Answer . 

N. or M.  

Q. Why do you answer by that Name , rather than by your Surname ? 

A. Because it is my Christian Name , and was given me when I was made a Christian , and puts me in mind both of the Happiness , and duty of a Christian.  

Q. Where do you learn the Happiness , and the Duty of a Christian ? 

A. The very next answer teaches me the Happiness , and all the rest of the Catechism , the Duty of a Christian.  

Q. Who gave you this Name ? 

A. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism , wherein I was made a Member of Christ , the Child of God , and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven . 

Q. Show me from hence the Happiness of a Christian.  

A. The Happiness of a good Christian , is altogether unutterable , he is one who has Christ for his Head , God for his Father , and Heaven with all its joys and glories , which are all eternal , for his Inheritance . 

Q. Show me on the contrary the condition of a bad Christian.  

A. The misery of a bad Christian is altogether insupportable , He has Christ for his Enemy , the Devil for his Father , and Hell , with all its miseries , and torments , and despair , which are all eternal , for his Doom . 

Q. Which of these Conditions do you choose ? 

A. I adore the goodness of God , who has set before me life and death , blessing and cursing ; and in great compassion to my Soul , has bid me choose life , and with all my heart I choose life , even life eternal . 

Q. Are there not many in the World that choose death ? 

A. It is too too visible there are , such is the extreme madness and folly of obstinate Sinners , that they choose the Service of the Devil before the Service of God , and Hell before Heaven , the damnation of such men is wholly from themselves , and having chosen death , even death eternal , it is most just with God to give them their choice . 

Q. Blessed be God who has given you grace , to make a right choice ; Tell me what you must do to obtain that which you have chosen , life eternal ? 

A. All that I am to do is reduced to one word only , and that is Love ; This is the first and the great Command , which comprehends all others , the proper Evangelical Grace ; and eternal Truth has assured me , This do , and thou shalt live ; So that if I truly love God , I shall live beloved by God to all eternity . 

Q. Tell me wherein the love of God doth consist ? 

A. The love of God is a grace rather to be felt than defined , So that I can do no more than rudely describe it ; It is the general inclination and tendency of the whole man , of all his heart , and soul , and strength , of all his powers and affections , and of the utmost strength of them all to God , as his chief , and only , and perfect , and infinite Good.  

Q. Is this love of God taught in the Catechism ? 

A. The Catechism having in the entrance of it presented to our choice the happiness of a Christian , does throughout all the remaining parts of it instruct us in the duties of a Christian , by which that happiness is to be attained , which are all summed up in the love of God , which is here most methodically taught . 

Q. In what method does the Catechism teach the love of God ? 

A. In a method so excellent and natural , that if by God's help , I can but faithfully observe it , I shall not fail of the love of God.  

Q. Explain this method to me . 

A. It teaches me how the love of God is produced , how practised , and how preserved . 

Q. Show me more distinctly in what parts of the Catechism each of these particulars is couched . 

A. If I seriously desire the love God , I must first expel all contrary love's out of my heart , and then consider the motives and causes that excite it , the former is taught in the Vow of Baptism , the latter in the Creed . 

When divine love is once produced , my next care is to put it in practice , and that is , by bringing forth the fruits , or effects of Love , which are all contained in the Ten Commandments . 

When the love of God is produced in my heart , and is set on work , my last concern is to preserve , and ensure , and quicken it ; It is preserved by Prayer , the pattern of which is the Lord's Prayer ; It is insured to us by the Sacraments , which are the Pledges of Love ; and more particularly it is quickened by the Holy Eucharist , which is the feast of Love. So that the plain order of the Catechism teaches me the rise , the progress , and the perfection of Divine love , which God of his great mercy give me grace to follow . 

Q. I beseech God to give you the grace you pray for , that you may prosecute this method with your heart , as well as with your words . 

A. It is the full purpose of my Soul so to do , and I trust in God I shall do it . 

Q. You are to begin with the vow you made at your Baptism , Tell me , 

What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you ? 

A. They did promise and vow three things in my name . 

First , That I should renounce the Devil and all his works ; the pomps and vanities of this wicked World , and all the sinful lusts of the flesh . 

Secondly , That I should believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.  

And thirdly , That I should keep God's holy Will and Commandments , and walk in the same all the days of my life . 

Q. Dost thou not think thou art bound to believe , and to do as they have promised for thee ? 

A. Yes verily ; and by God's help so I will , and I heartily thank our Heavenly Father , that he hath called me to this state of Salvation , through jesus Christ our Saviour . And I pray unto God to give me his grace , that I may continue in the same unto my lives end . 

Q. The promises of faith and obedience , which you made in your baptism , will be mentioned in their proper places , when you come to the Creed , and to the Decalogue ; that which now lies before you is to show , how your Abrenunciation is preparatory to the love of God.  

A. As all particular graces are but the love of God , varied by different instances and relations , so all particular sins are nothing but concupiscence , or the love of one Creature or other , in competition with , or opposition to , the love of God ; Now all the Creatures on which we set our love , are reducible to these three , the Devil , the World , and the Flesh , and my heart must be emptied of these impure Loves , before it is capable of entertaining the pure love of God.  

Q. If you are conscious to yourself , that you have entertained these impure Loves , and have violated your baptismal Vow , and have in your heart renounced God , instead of renouncing his Enemies , what must you do to recover that favour of God you have lost , and to be delivered from the wrath to come ? 

A. I must thoroughly repent of all the breaches of my vow , and I must seriously renew it . 

Q. Express your repentance for breaking it . 

A. I express it thus . 

OH Lord God , with shame , and sorrow , and confusion of Face , I confess and acknowledge thy infinite mercy and goodness to me , my infinite vileness and ingratitude to thee ! 

thou Lord infinitely good and gracious waist pleased out of thy own free mercy , first to love me , to excite me to love again , glory be to thee . 

thou Lord didst vouchsafe , of a miserable Sinner , to make me a Member of my Saviour , thy own Child , and an Heir of Heaven , glory be to thee . 

I infinitely wicked and unworthy , have despised , and rejected , and forfeited all the inestimable Blessings , to which I was entitled by my Baptism ; Lord have mercy upon me . 

Woe is me , wretch that I am , I have cut myself off by my sins , from being a true Member of Christ's Mystical Body , and from all the gracious influences I might have derived from my union to him ; Lord have mercy upon me . 

Woe is me , wretch that I am , I have by my numerous provocations , lost that holy Spirit of Adoption , whereby I might become thy Child , OH God , and call thee Father , and am become a Child of wrath ; Lord have mercy upon me . 

Woe is me , wretch that I am , I have by my own wilful impiety , disclaimed my being an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven , and am become an Heir to the Kingdom of Darkness , Lord have mercy upon me . 

Woe is me , I have easily yielded to the temptations of Satan , and have wrought the works of my Father the Devil ; Lord have mercy upon me . 

Woe is me , I have greedily coveted and pursued the pomps and vanity of this wicked World ; Lord have mercy upon me . 

Woe is me , I have often indulged the sinful lusts of the Flesh ; Lord have mercy upon me . 

Woe is me , I have loved all things which thou Lord hatest , and am myself become odious in thy sight ; Lord have mercy upon me . 

Woe is me , I have neither believed in thee , OH my God , nor obeyed thee , nor loved thee , as I ought , and as I solemnly vowed I would ; Lord have mercy upon me . 

OH Lord God most gracious and reconcileable , Pity and pardon me . 

I lament , OH Lord God , my detestable impiety , for having so long , and so often , and so obstinately offended thee . 

In the bitterness of my Soul , OH Father of mercy , I bewail and abhor my unworthiness , and the hardness of my heart , that has despised the riches of thy goodness , and forbearance , and long-suffering , which should have lead me to repentance . 

OH Lord God , whatever thou deniest me , deny me not a broken and a contrite heart . 

OH that my head were waters , and my eyes fountains of tears , that I might weep much and love much , having much to be forgiven . 

Lord , hear me , help me , save me , for thy own gracious promise sake , for thy own tender mercy's sake , for the merits and sufferings of jesus thy beloved , in whom thou hast made Penitents accepted . Amen . Amen . 

Q. Having repent of the violations of your Baptismal Vow , show me how you will renew it . 

A. I shall do it after this manner . 

I have sinned , OH Lord God , I have sinned , and done evil in thy sight , but I repent , I turn to thee . 

I confess , and forsake my wickedness , and am sorry for my sins . 

It grieves me , OH most amiable Goodness , it grieves me that ever I offended thee . 

With all my heart , OH my God , do I now renew the Sacred vow , which , alas ! alas ! I have so often violated . 

OH Lord God , I do , for the future , Renounce the devil ▪ that Arch-rebel against thee , with all his Apostate-angels . 

I renounce all his worship , all his impious suggestions , delusions and temptations , for which he is called the tempter , and all the ways of consulting him , which ungodly men have taken . 

I renounce all his works , all those sins of the Spirit , all pride , and malice , and envy ; all treachery and lying , revenge and cruelty ; all tempting others to Sin , hatred to Holiness and Apostasy , which are his daily practice , and are truly diabolical . 

I utterly renounce , OH Lord God , the pomps and vanity of this wicked world ; all covetous desires of honour , riches and pleasure ; all sinful excesses in things lawful . 

I renounce , Lord ▪ all evil customs , all evil companions , all that is vain or wicked in the world , all that friendship with the world , which is enmity with thee ; all things that may alienate my heart from thee . 

I renounce , OH Lord God , all worldly comforts and possessions ; all my natural relations , and my own life , whenever they stand in competition with my duty to thee . 

I utterly renounce , OH Lord God , all the sinful lusts of the flesh , all the inordinate desires of my own corrupt nature , of my own carnal mind , which is enmity with thee . 

I Renounce , Lord , all fleshly lusts which war against thee , and against my own Soul , all sloth , and idleness , and intemperance , and lasciviousness ; all filthiness of flesh and spirit , which tender us unclean in thy sight . 

OH Lord God , I utterly Renounce all things that may any way displease thee ; from them all let it be thy good pleasure to deliver me . 

I know , Lord , that Sin is the utmost abomination to thy purity , the most audacious outrage to thy Adorable Majesty , the perfect contradiction to thy Deity , and therefore I utterly renounce and abhor it . 

I know , Lord , that Sin exposes us to all the Vials of thy wrath , and to vengeance eternal ; I know it sets the Sinner at the extremest distance , and opposition and defiance to thee , and therefore I utterly renounce and abhor it . 

I know , Lord , I cannot love thee , but I must hate evil , and therefore I renounce and detest it . 

Turn thou me , OH Lord God , and so shall I be turned . 

Turn , OH Lord , the whole stream of my affections , from sensual love , to the love of thee . 

OH my God , let thy heavenly love be the constant bias of my Soul ; OH may it be the natural spring and weight of my heart , that it may always move towards thee . 

Thy love , OH my God , shall hereafter be the sole rule and guide of my life ; I will love thee , and love whatever thou lovest , and hate whatever thou hatest , I will believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith , and I will keep thy Holy Will and Commandments , and wa●● in the same all the days of my life . 

All this , OH my God , I own myself bound to believe and do , and though of myself I am impotent to all good , yet by thy help I will perform it ; and I heartily thank thee , OH heavenly Father , who , out of mere compassion to my Soul , hast called me to this state of salvation , through jesus Christ our Lord  

Glory be to thee , OH Lord , who hast indulged me this opportunity of repentance ; Glory be to thee who hast wrought in me this Will , to renew my Baptismal vow . 

OH my God , I humbly , I earnestly pray unto thee to give me continual supplies of thy grace , that ▪ I may continue in thy love unto my lives end , that being faithful to death , I may receive the Crown of life . 

OH Lord God , I have sworn , and I will perform it , that I will keep thy righteous judgements . 

My heart is empty and disengaged , and longs for thee ; my heart is entirely devoted to thee : Enter , OH my God ; possess it with thy gracious presence , and fill it with thy love . 

Lord , for thy tender mercy's sake , restore me to thy favour ; to all the graces and privileges of my Baptism , of which I have been spoiled by my sins . 

Lord , make me a living member of thy Church , the mystical body of thy Son . 

OH my God , unite me inseparably to Christ my Head , and from thence let his gracious influences , be ever streaming into my soul . 

Father , I have sinned against Heaven , and in thy sight , and am no more worthy to be called thy Son : But I return with the Prodigal ; OH let thy paternal bowels yearn on me , and graciously receive me . 

Lord , send thy Spirit of Adoption into my heart , to instill true filial affections , that I may again be owned by thee for thy Child , and call thee Father , and share in the blessings of thy Children , and at last become an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven . 

OH heavenly Father , accept my imperfect repentance , compassionate my infirmities , forgive my wickedness , purify my uncleanness , strengthen my weakness , fix my unstableness , and let thy love ever rule in my heart , through the merits , and sufferings , and love of the Son of thy love , in whom thou art always infinitely pleased . Amen . 

This Office may be used in times of devout Retirement , or on the Lord's day , or in Affliction or Sickness , but especially before the Holy Eucharist . 

Q. Rehearse the Articles of your Belief . 

A. I I Believe in God the Father Almighty , maker of Heaven and Earth . 

II And in jesus Christ his only Son our Lord , 

III Who was Conceived by the Holy Ghost , Born of the Virgin Mary . 

iv. Suffered under Pontius Pilate , was Crucified , Dead and Buried , He descended into Hell.  

v. The third day He rose again from the Dead . 

VI He ascended into Heaven , and sitteth at the right hand of God the Father Almighty ; 

VII . From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead . 

VIII . I believe in the Holy Ghost . 

IX . The Holy Catholic Church , the Communion of Saints . 

X. The Forgiveness of Sins . 

XI . The resurrection of the body . 

XII . And the life everlasting . Amen . 

Q. What dost thou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy belief ? 

A. First , I learn to believe in God the Father , who hath made me and all the world . 

Secondly , in God the Son , who hath redeemed me , and all mankind . 

Thirdly , In God the Holy Ghost , who sanctifieth me , and all the Elect people of God.  

Q. What is the method of the Creed ? 

A. The Creed teaches me to believe in God , and to believe his Church . 

Q. How in God ? 

A. It teaches me to believe in God , with respect to his Unity , and then to the Trinity of persons in that Unity , Father , Son , and holy Ghost . 

Q. How does it teach you to believe the Church ? 

A. It teaches me to believe the Church , with regard to its two different states , either Militant below , or Triumphant above . 

Q. How are the Articles of the Creed Motives of Love ? 

A. Every Article includes a Blessing as well as a Mystery , and is as proper to excite our Love , as to engage our Faith.  

Q. Give me such a Paraphrase on the Creed , that throughout the whole , your Faith may work by Love . 

A. I shall do it to the best of my power , in such Instructive and Pathetical Aspirations , as follow . 

I Believe . 

My Lord and my God , with a full , free and firm assent , I believe all the Articles of my Creed , because thou hast revealed them ; I know thou art infallible Truth , and canst not , thou art infinite Love , and wilt not deceive me : Glory be to thee . 

With all my heart , OH my God , do I love and praise thee , who art so infinitely amiable in thyself , and so full of love to us , that all I can know , or believe of thee , excites me to love thee . 

Lord , daily increase my Faith ; make it active and fruitful , that I may believe and love thee as entirely , as becomes one entirely devoted to thee . 

In God.  

I believe , OH my God , that thou art One , and that there is no other God besides thee ; thou art that One infinite and independent Being , that One only true God , whom all Men , and all Angels are to Adore : All glory be to thee . 

OH Lord God , help me to love and to praise thee with Godlike affections , and a suitable Devotion . 

I believe , OH my God , that in the Unity of thy Godhead , there is a Trinity of persons , I believe in thee , OH Father , Son and Holy Ghost , in whose Name I was baptised , to whose Service I am religiously devoted : All glory be to thee . 

I believe , I admire , I love , I praise , I adore thee , OH most blessed and glorious Trinity , God the Father , God the Son , and God the Holy Ghost , for being the joint Authors of our Salvation : All glory be to thee . 

OH sacred , and dreadful , and mysterious Trinity , though I cannot conceive thee , yet let me daily experiment thy goodness ; Let thy Grace , OH Lord jesus ; let thy Love , OH God the Father ; let thy Communications , OH Holy Spirit , be ever with me . 

The Father . 

I believe , and love , and praise thee , OH my God , the first Person in the most Adorable Trinity ; the Fountain of the Godhead ; the Eternal Father of thy coeternal Son , Jesus my Saviour . 

Glory be to thee , OH God the Father , for so loving the world , as to give thy only begotten Son to redeem us . 

Glory be to thee , OH Heavenly Father , for first loving us , and giving the dearest thing thou hadst for us ; OH help me to love again , and to think nothing too dear for thee . 

Almighty . 

I believe , OH my God , that thou art a Spirit most pure , and holy , and infinite in all perfections , in Power , and Knowledge , and Goodness ; that thou art Eternal , Immutable , and Omnipresent ; all love , all glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH Lord , that thou art most wise and just , most happy and glorious , and all-sufficient , most gracious and merciful , and tender , and benign , and liberal , and beneficent ; all love , all glory be to thee . 

I believe thy Divine Nature , OH my God , to be in all respects amiable , to be Amiableness itself , to be Love itself ; and therefore I love , I admire , I praise , and fear , and adore thee . 

thou , Lord , art my Hope , my Trust , my Life , my Joy , my Glory , my God , my All , my Love.  

Maker of Heaven and Earth . 

I believe that thou , OH Father Almighty , didst create Heaven and Earth , the whole World , and all things in it , visible and invisible , out of nothing , and by thy Word only : All glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH thou great Creator , that thy Divine Love made thee communicate Being to thy Creatures ; that thou lovest all things , and hatest nothing thou hast made : Glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH God , that thou art the sole Lord , and Proprietour of all things thou hast made ; that all things do necessarily depend on thee ; that 't is in thee only we live , and move , and have our Being : All Love , all Glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH thou Communicative Goodness , that thou dost preserve , and sustain , and protect , and bless all things thou hast made , suitably to the Natures thou hast given them : All Love , all Glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH mighty Wisdom , that thou dost most sweetly order and govern , and dispose all things ; even the most minute ; even the very sins of men , to conspire in thy Glory ; OH do thou conduct my whole life , steer every motion of my soul , towards the great End of our Creation ; to love , and to glorify thee . 

I believe , OH Lord , that thy Love was more illustrious in the Creation of Man , than in all the rest of the visible World ; thou wert pleased to make him in thy own Image , and after thy own divine likeness : All Love , all Glory be to thee . 

thou , Lord , didst make Man for thyself , and all things visible for Man ; thou designedst all creatures for his use , and didst subject them to his Dominion ; the very Angels thou didst charge to keep him in all his ways : All Love , all Glory be to thee . 

Thy Works , OH Lord , are wonderful and amiable ; I love , and admire , and praise thy Universal Providence over the whole World ; the perpetual flux of thy Goodness on every Creature : All glory be to thee . 

I love and praise thee , OH my God , for all the particular vouchsafements of thy love to me , for all thy deliverances and blessings , either to my body or to my soul , known or unknown ; for all that I do not remember , or did not consider : All Love , all Glory be to thee . 

The longer I live , OH my God , the more reason I have to love thee , because every day supplies me with fresh experiments and new motives of thy manifold love to me ; and therefore all Love , all Glory be to thee . 

And in jesus . 

I believe in thee , OH Jesus , and I rejoice in that dear Name which is so full and expressive of thy Love.  

thou art jesus our Saviour , because thou camest into the World on purpose to save us from our sins : All Love , all Glory be to thee , 

OH be thou ever Jesus to me ; OH let me feel the kind force of that sweet name , in which I and all sinners do read our danger , and our deliverance , our guilt , and our salvation . 

OH most benign Jesus ! He well deserves to be accursed that does not love thee : Who , Lord , can ever hope to share in thy Salvation , who does not love thee his Saviour ? 

Christ.  

I believe , OH merciful Jesus , that thou art Christ the true messias , the Anointed of the Lord , the promised seed which was to bruise the Serpent's head , long expected by the Fathers , foretold by the Prophets , represented by Types , which were all fulfilled in thee , OH thou the desire of all Nations : All Love , all Glory be to thee . 

I believe that thou , OH Jesus , wert Anointed with the Holy Spirit , that all his Gifts and Graces were poured out , and diffused like a sweet ointment on thy soul , without measure ; thou art altogether lovely , OH Christ , and of thy fullness we all receive : All Love , all Glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH thou Anointed of God , that as Kings , and Priests , and Prophets , were heretofore anointed with Material oil ; so by thy Heavenly Anointing , thou wast Consecrated to be our Prophet , our King , and our Priest , and in all those three Offices , to manifest thy love to us ; and therefore all Love , all Glory be to thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH Christ , our Prophet , who didst teach , and reveal , and interpret thy Father's Will , and all sa●ing truth to the World.  

Glory be to thee , OH Christ , our King , who dost give Laws to thy People , dost govern and protect us , and hast subdued all our Ghostly Enemies . 

Glory be to thee , OH Christ , our Priest , who dost bless us , who didst offer thyself a sacrifice , and dost still make intercession for us . 

Our Redemption , our Illumination , our Support is wholly from thy Love , OH thou Anointed of God : All Love , all Glory be to thee . 

His only Son.  

I believe that thou , OH most Adorable Jesus , art the Son of God by ineffable generation ; thou didst from Eternity derive thy Godhead from the Father ; thou art the brightness of his Glory , and the express Image of his Person : All Love , all Glory be to thee . 

thou , OH blessed Jesus , art the only Son of God , the only begotten Son , full of Grace and Truth ; thou art the only beloved Son , in whom thy Father is well pleased ; 't is only in thee , and for thee , that Sinners have Hope ; and therefore all Love , all Glory be to thee . 

thou art equal to thy Father , OH Jesus , in amiableness and in love to us , and art equally to be loved by us ; and therefore all Love and Praise be to the Father that eternally begat , and to the Son eternally begotten . 

Our Lord  

I believe , OH thou eternal Son of the Father , that thou art the great and true God , jehovah our Righteousness , God above all blessed for ever , and mighty to save : All love , all Glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH Lord Jesus , that thou didst make , and dost sustain all things by thy Power , and that thou art to be honoured by Men , and by Angels , as thy Father is honoured : All Love , all Glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH thou King of Kings , and Lord of Lords , that thou art the Lord , and the Author of the new Creation , as well as of the old , that thou art more peculiarly Lord of us Sinners by purchase ; OH that I , and all that own thy Dominion , may for ever love , and revere , and obey so powerful and gracious a Lord ! 

Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost . 

I believe , OH most condescending Majesty , that when thou didst stoop so low as to assume our frail Nature , the Holy Ghost came on thy sacred Mother . and that the Power of the Highest did overshadow her , and that she did conceive , and lodge thee in her Womb , where thou , who fillest Heaven and Earth , wert about nine months for our sakes imprisoned ; and therefore all love , all glory be to thee . 

Born of the Virgin Mary . 

I believe , OH most adorable Humility , that thou wast at last born into the World , that thou having only God for thy Father , and Mary , a pure Virgin , for thy Mother , whom all Generations do call Blessed , both thy Conception and Birth were perfectly immaculate , that being without sin thyself , thou mightest be a fit sacrifice to atone for us Sinners , who being born of unclean Parents , were all by nature unclean ; and therefore all love , all glory be to thee , OH immaculate Lamb of God , who takest away the sins of the World . 

I believe , OH blessed Saviour , that the two Natures of God , and of Man , were in thee so mysteriously united , without either change , or confusion , that they made in thee but one Person , but one Mediator , one Lord : thou , OH Eternal Word , didst become flesh , and didst dwell among us , on purpose to save us ; and therefore all love , all glory be to thee . 

Suffered . 

I believe , OH adorable Love , that thy whole life was made up of sufferings , and that for sinful men , and in particular for me ; OH let me never cease to adore and love thee . 

It was for us Sinners , OH tenderest Love , that in thy very infancy thou wast circumcised , and designed by Herod for slaughter , and forced to fly into Egypt , and therefore I praise and love thee . 

It was for us Sinners that thou , OH afflicted Love , wert all thy life-long , a man of sorrows , and acquainted with grief ; that thou wast persecuted and reviled , despised and rejected , and hadst not where to lay thy head , and therefore I am bound to praise , and love thee . 

It was for us Sinners , that thou , OH compassionate Love , when thou tookest on thee our nature , wast touched with a feeling of our infirmities , and waste in all points tempted like as we are , yet without sin , that thou mightest the more affectionately pity the weak , and succour the tempted ; and therefore I praise and love thee . 

It was for us Sinners , that thou , OH beneficent Love , didst go about doing good , preaching repentance , publishing the glad tidings of salvation , sending thy Disciples , confirming thy heavenly Doctrine by many glorious Miracles , and illustrating it by a Godlike example ; all thy life is full of attractives of sweetest love and pity to us Sinners , which kindly and forcibly constrain us to praise and love thee . 

OH most exuberant Love , how amiable are all thy Graces , OH fill my heart with thy love , and transform me into thy likeness , that I may all my life-long imitate thy perfect obedience , unspotted Holiness , unchangeable Resolution , universal Charity , uninterrupted Devotion , contempt of the World , Heavenly-mindedness , gracious Condescension , ardent Zeal for thy Father's Glory , and unbounded Love , and that for the sake of that dearest Love , which inclined thee to become incarnate for me . 

Under Pontius Pilate . 

I believe , OH my Lord , and my God , that though thou didst suffer all thy life long , yet thy greatest sufferings were under the Roman Governor of judea , Pontius Pilate ; I believe all those mighty sufferings , but am as little able to express the greatness of them , as I am the greatness of thy love which moved thee to suffer : All I can do is to love , and to praise thee . 

How great were thy sufferings , OH Saviour of the World , when the very apprehension of them made thy Soul very heavy , exceeding sorrowful even to death , made thee offer up prayers , with strong crying and tears , that if it were thy Father's will the Cup might pass from thee , threw thee into an agony and bloody sweat , insomuch that there was an Angel sent from Heaven on purpose to strengthen thee ! OH thou agonising Love , impress on my heart so tender a sense of thy sufferings for me , that I may agonise with thee , that I may feel all thy sorrows , that though I cannot sweated blood like thee , I may dissolve into tears for thee , that I may love and suffer with thee throughout every part of thy Passion . 

OH suffering Jesus , when my Meditations follow thee from the Garden to Mount Calvary , I grieve and I love all the way . 

I grieve , and I love , when I see thee , OH Incarnate God , who couldst command more than twelve legions of Angels for thy rescue ; out of love to Sinners , and in particular to me , one of the vilest of all that number , humbling thyself to be apprehended , and bound by the rude Soldiers , as a Malefactor . 

I grieve , and I love , when I see thee , OH gracious Lord , for my sake , betrayed by the treacherous kiss of judas , denied by Peter , and forsaken of all thy Disciples . 

I grieve , and I love , when I see thee , OH spotless innocence , out of love to me , dragged to Annas and Caiaphas the Highpriest , when I see thee accused by ●alse Witnesses , arraigned and condemned . 

I grieve , and I love , when I see thee , OH divine Majesty , out of love to me , spit upon , and blindfolded , and buffeted , and mocked , sent to Pilate an Infidel Judge , then to wicked Herod , who with his men of war set thee at naught , arrayed thee in a white Robe of Mockery , and sent thee again to Pilate . 

I grieve , and I love , OH injured Goodness , when I see thee , though declared innocent by the very Traitor judas , who out of horror for his Crime , went and hanged himself , though declared innocent by Pilate himself , the Judge to whom thine Enemies appealed , yet worried to death by the clamours of the Rabble , that cried out Crucify , Crucify , when I see Barrabas a Traitor and a Murderer preferred before thee . 

I grieve , and I love , when I see thee , OH lover of Souls , for my sake most unjustly given up into the hands of infidel Soldiers , to be stripped naked , and tied to a Pillar , and scourged ; to see the Plowers ploughing on thy back , and making long furrows . 

I grieve , and I love , OH King of Heaven , when I see thee out of love to me , humbling thyself to be arrayed in Purple , with a Reed in thy hand , when I see thee crowned with Thorns , to multiply thy torments ; when I see thee mocked by barbarous Wretches , with their bent knee , and with hail King of the jews . 

I grieve , and I love , when I see thee , OH Lord God , whom the Angel's worship , spit upon again , and buffeted , and for my sake , made the extreme scorn , and contempt , and sport , of thy insolent and insulting Enemies ; and though still declared innocent by Pilate , yet surrendered to the unrelenting Cruelty of the multitude , to be crucified . 

My Lord , my God , my Saviour , with all my heart , I love and adore thy infinite love and benignity to Sinners ; with all my heart , I lament and detest the hatred , and outrage of Sinners to thee . 

Was crucified . 

I grieve , and I love , OH sorrowful Jesus , when I see thee for my sake oppressed with the weight of thy own Cross , till thy tender Body , quite spent with sufferings , sank under it . 

I grieve , and I love , OH thou great Martyr of Love , when for my sake I see thy virgin Body stripped naked , thy Hands and thy Feet nailed to the Cross ; when I see thee crucified between two Thiefs , and numbered with the Transgressors , when I see Gall given thee to eat , and Vinegar to drink . 

I grieve , and I love , when I see thee , OH incarnate Deity hanging on the Cross , and for my sake , by thy own People , in the height of thy anguish , derided , reproached and blasphemed , with wagging of their heads , mocked by the Soldiers , and by the impenitent Thief . 

I grieve , and I love , when I see thee , OH God blessed for evermore , OH Fountain of all blessing , hang bleeding on the Cross , and made a curse for me ; How does my indignation swell against the injustice , and ingratitude , and inhumanity of the jews , who could thus cruelly treat so unreproachable an Innocence , so amiable a Charity , so compassionate a Saviour ! 

Alas , alas , it was the Sinner , OH Love incarnate , rather than the Jew , that betrayed , and derided , and blasphemed and tortured and crucified thee ; the sins of lapsed mankind , and particularly my sins , they were thy Tormentors ; and therefore from my heart I bewail , detest and abjure them . 

My Lord , and my God , instill penitential love into my Soul , that I may grieve for my sins , which grieved thee , that I may love thee for suffering for us Sinners , who occasioned all thy griefs ; OH may I always love thee , OH may I never grieve thee more ! 

Dead . 

I grieve , and I love , OH bleeding Love , when I see thee on the Cross , quite spent with pain and anguish , when I see thee in thy dying pangs commending thy Spirit into the hands of thy heavenly Father , bowing thy head , and giving up the Ghost . thou , OH Lord of life , didst for us Sinners humble thyself to death , even to the death of the Cross , a death of utmost shame and ignominy , and of torment insupportable ; all love , all glory be to thee . 

Was ever any sorrow , OH crucified Lord , like that sorrow my sins created thee ? 

Was ever any love , OH outraged Mercy , like that love thou didst show , in dying for Sinners ! 

All the frame of Nature , OH dying Saviour , fell into convulsions at the crucifixion of their great Creator ; The Sun was darkened , the veil of the Temple was rend from the top to the bottom , the Earth quaked , the Rocks clavae asunder , the Bodies of dead Saints rose out of their Graves , insomuch that the Centurion and infidel Soldiers acknowledged thee to be the Son of God ; thou wast lovely , and glorious , and adorable in thy lowest humiliation ; all love , all praise be to thee . 

Thy bodily Sufferings , OH almighty Love , were intolerable , but yet thy inward were far greater . 

I grieve , I love , I melt all over , when I hear thee on the Cross crying out , My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me . Ah sinful Wretch that I am , how infinite and unconceivable were the inward Dolours and Agonies thou didst undergo for us Sinners , when thou didst tread the Winepress of thy Father's wrath alone , when it pleased thy own most beloved Father to bruise thee , and to put thee to grief , when the iniquities of the whole World were laid on thee , and my numerous sins increased thy load , and heightened thy torment , when thy own Deity withdrew all consolation from thee , when God , offended by our sins , did afflict thee in the day of his fierce anger ; no sufferings , no love was ever like unto thine for me ; no grief , no love but thy own should exceed mine for thee . 

For whom , OH unutterable goodness , didst thou suffer the extreme bitterness o● sorrow , but for the vilest of all thy Creatures , sinful man , and for me one of the worst of Sinners ? and therefore I praise and love thee . 

For what end didst thou suffer , OH most ardent Charity , but to save Sinners from all things that were destructive , the Curse of the Law , the Terrors of Death , the Tyranny of Sin , the Powers of Darkness , and Torment's Eternal , to purchase for us all things conducible to our Happiness , Pardon and Grace , Consolation and Acceptance , and the everlasting Joys and Glories of the Kingdom of Heaven ; and therefore I praise and love thee . 

Out of what motive didst thou suffer , OH boundless Benignity , but out of thy own preventing love , free mercy , and pure compassion , and therefore I praise and love thee . 

When no other Sacrifice could atone thy Father's Anger , OH thou the beloved Son of God , and reconcile Divine Justice and Mercy together , but the Sacrifice of God incarnate , who as man was to die , and to suffer in our stead , as God was to merit and make satisfaction for our sins ; 't was then that thou , OH God the Son , didst become Man , the very meanest of Men , didst take upon thee the form of a Servant , and didst on the Cross show us the mystery and the Miracle of Love , God crucified for Sinners , and Sinners redeemed by the blood of God . 

OH thou propitious Wonder , God incarnate on the Cross , by what Names shall I adore thee , all are too short , too scanty to express thee , Love only , nothing but Love will reach thee , thou art Love , OH Jesus , thou art all love , OH tenderest , OH sweetest , OH purest , OH dearest Love , soften , sweeten , refine , love me into all Love like thee ! 

By the love of thy Cross , OH Jesus , I live , in that I will only glory , that above all things will I study , that before all things will I value ; by the love of thy Cross I will take up my Cross daily , and follow thee , I will persecute and torment , and crucify my sinful Affections and Lusts , which persecuted , tormented and crucified thee ; and if thy love calls me to it , I will suffer on the Cross for thee , as thou hast done for me . 

How illustrious and amiable were thy Graces amid all thy Sufferings , OH thou afflicted Jesus ; I admire , and I love thy profound Humility , unwearied Patience , Lamblike Meekness , immaculate Innocence , invincible Courage , absolute Resignation , compassionate love of Souls , and perfect Charity to thy Enemies . OH my Love , I cannot love thee , but I must desire above all things to be like my Beloved ; OH give me grace to tread in thy steps , and conform me to thy Divine Image , that the more I grow like thee , the more I may love thee , and the more I may be loved by thee . 

And Buried , He descended into Hell.  

I believe , OH crucified Lord , that thou wast really dead , and that there was a separation of thy Body and Soul : That thy side was mortally wounded , and pierced with a Spear on the Cross , and thy sacred Body was buried , to assure us of thy death : All love , all glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH pierced , OH wounded Love , that thy Soul in the state of separation did descend into Hell , to vanquish Death and all the Spirits of darkness in their own Dominions , and therefore I adore and love thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH thou great Champion of Love , who didst for our sakes singly encounter all our ghostly Enemies , who didst thyself taste of death , that thou mightst take away the sting of death , who didst wrestle with principalities and powers , and all the force of Hell that we might share in thy Victory ; for which wonderful Salvation I will always praise and love thee . 

The third day he rose again from the dead . 

I believe , OH Almighty Love , that , according to the Types and Prophecies which went before of thee , and according to thy own infallible predictions , thou didst by thy own power rise from the dead the third day : All love , all glory be to thee . 

Glory be to thee , who didst lie so long in the Grave to undergo the full condition of the dead , and to convince all the world thou wert dead ; and didst rise so soon that thou mightst not see corruption or retard our joy ; All love , all glory be to thee . 

He ascended into Heaven . 

I believe , OH Victorious Love , that thou , after thy conquest over Death and Hell , didst ascend in triumph to Heaven , that thou mightst prepare Mansions for us , and from thence as Conqueror bestow the gifts of thy conquest on us , and above all the gift of thy Holy Spirit ; that thou mightst enter into the Holy of Holies , as our great Highpriest , to present to thy Father the sweet-smelling Sacrifice of his crucified Son , the sole propitiation for Sinners ; and therefore all Love , all glory be to thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH Jesus , who didst leave the world and ascend to Heaven about the 33 d year of thy age , to teach us in the prime of our years to despise this world , when we are best able to enjoy it , and to reserve our full vigour for Heaven and for thy Love.  

OH thou whom my Soul loveth , since thou hast left the world , what was there ever in it worthy of our Love ! OH let all my affections ascend after thee , and never return to the earth more ; for whom have I in heaven but thee ? and there is none ●pon earth that I desire in comparison of thee . 

And sitteth at the right hand of God the Father Almighty . 

I believe , OH Triumphant Love , that thou now sittest in full and peaceful possession of bliss , and at the right hand of God , that thy human Nature is exalted to the most honourable place in Heaven , where thou sittest on thy throne of glory , adored by Angels , and interceding for Sinners ; and therefore all love , all glory be to thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH Love enthroned , thy Resurrection , Ascension and Session , are all signal instances of thy love , and earnests of our future felicity , the entire purchase of thy love : All our hopes of Heaven , our Resurrection , Ascension and Glorification depend on , and are derived from thine , and are all the trophies of thy love to us ; and therefore I will ever praise and love thee . 

From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead . 

I believe , OH Glorified Love , that from thy Throne at God's right hand , where thou now sittest , thou wilt come again to judge the world , attended with thy holy Angels . All glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH thou adorable Judge , that all mankind shall be summoned before thy awful Tribunal . All the D●ad , who shall be waked out of their Graves when the Angel shall blow the last Trump , and all that are then Quick , and alive , shall then appear before thee . All glory be to thee . 

I believe , Lord , that I and all the world shall give a strict account of all our thoughts , and words , and actions ; that the Books will be then opened , that out of those dreadful Registers we shall be judged ; that Satan and our own Consciences will be our accusers . OH let the last Trump be ever sounding in my ears , that I may ever be mindful of my great accounts , and that I may neither speak , nor do , nor think any thing that may wound my own Conscience , or provoke thy Anger , or make me tremble at the awful day . 

I know , OH thou adorable Judge , that Love only shall then endure that terrible Test , that Love only shall be acquitted , that love only shall be eternally blessed ; and therefore I will ever praise and love thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH thou beloved Son of God , to whom the Father has committed all judgement . 

How can they that love thee , OH Jesus , ever despond , though their love in this life is always imperfect , when at last they shall have love for their Judge , Love that hath felt and will compassionate all their infirmities ; and therefore all love , all glory be to thee . 

I believe in the Holy Ghost . 

I believe in thee , OH thou Spirit of God , the third Person in the most adorable Trinity ; I believe , OH blessed Spirit , that thou art the Lord , that thou art God eternal and omniscient , a Person distinct from both the Father and the Son , eternally proceeding from both , and equally sent by both , and joint-authour with both of our Salvation ; and therefore all love , all glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH blessed Spirit , that thou art Holy , essentially Holy , in respect of thy own Divine Nature , and being essentially Holy , art infinitely Amiable ; and therefore all love , all glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH blessed Spirit , that thou art personally Holy , that thou art the Author of all internal Holiness , and all internal and sanctifying Grace , that thou art the principle of all spiritual life in us ; and therefore all love , all glory be to thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH Love Incarnate , for sending the Spirit in thy stead , and for promising it to our Prayers ; all love , all glory be to thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH Spirit of Love , for shedding the love of God abroad in our hearts , for filling all that love thee with exuberance of joy and consolation ; all love , all glory be to thee . 

OH thou blessed Spirit the Comforter , purify my Soul , and infuse thy love into it , and consecreate it to be thy Temple , and fix thy Throne immovably there , and set all my affections on fire , that my heart may be a continual Sacrifice of Love offered up to thee , and the flame may be ever aspiring towards thee . 

The Holy Catholic Church . 

I believe , OH blessed and adorable Mediator , that the Church is a Society of persons , founded by thy love to Sinners , united into one Body of which thou art the Head , initiated by Baptism , nourished by the Eucharist , governed by Pastors commissioned by thee , and endowed with the power of the Keys , professing the Doctrine taught by thee , and delivered to the Saints , and devoted to praise and to love thee . 

I believe , OH holy Jesus , that thy Church is holy like thee its author ; holy by the original design of its Institution , holy by baptismal dedication , holy in all its administrations which tend to produce holiness ; and though there will be always a mixture of good and bad in it in this world , yet that it has always many real Saints in it ; and therefore all love , all glory be to thee . 

I believe , Lord , this Church to be Catholic , or Universal , made up of the collection of all particular Churches ; I believe it to be Catholic in respect of time , comprehending all ages to the world's end , to which it is to endure ; Catholic in respect of all places , out of which Believers are to be gathered ; Catholic in respect of all saving Faith , of which this Creed contains the substance , which shall in it always be taught ; Catholic in respect of all Graces , which shall in it be practised , and Catholic in respect of that Catholic War it is to wage against all its ghostly enemies , for which it is called Militant : OH preserve me always a true Member of thy Catholic Church , that I may always inseparably adhere to thee , that I may always devoutly praise and love thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH Lord my God , who hast made me a member of the particular Church of England , whose Faith , and Government , and Worship are Holy , and Catholic , and Apostolic , and free from the extremes of Irreverence or Superstition , and which I firmly believe to be a sound part of thy Church Universal , and which teaches me Charity to those who descent from me ; and therefore all love , all glory be to thee . 

OH my God , give me grace to continue steadfast in her bosom , to improve all those helps to true Piety , all those means of Grace , all those incentives of thy Love , thou hast mercifully indulged me in her Communion , that I may with primitive affections and fervour praise and love thee . 

The Communion of Saints . 

I believe , OH King of Saints , that among the Saints on Earth , whether real or in outward profession only , there ought to be a mutual catholic participation ▪ of all good things , which is the immediate effect of catholic Love. thou , OH God of Love restore it to thy Church . 

I believe , OH thou God of Love , that all the Saints on Earth by profession ought to communicate one with another , in evangelical Worship , and the same holy Sacraments , in the same Divine and Apostolical Faith , in all Offices of corporal and spiritual Charity , in reciprocal delight in each others Salvation , and in tender sympathy as members of one and the same Body : OH God of Peace , restore in thy good time this catholic Communion , that with one heart and one mouth we may all praise and love thee . 

OH my God , amid the deplorable divisions of thy Church , OH let me never widen its breaches , but give me catholic Charity to all that are baptised in thy Name , and catholic Communion with all Christians in desire . OH deliver me from the Sins and Errors , from the Schisms and Heresies of the Age. OH give me grace to pray daily for the peace of thy Church , and earnestly to seek it , and to excite all I can to praise and to love thee . 

I believe , OH most holy Jesus , that thy Saints here below have communion with thy Saints above , that they pray for us , while we celebrate their memories , congratulate their bliss , give thanks for their labours of love , and imitate their examples , for which all love , all glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH gracious Redeemer , that thy Saints here on Earth have Communion with the holy Angels above ; that they are ministering Spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of Salvation , and watch over us , and we give thanks to thee for their protection , and emulate their incessant praises and ready obedience ; for which all love , all glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH my Lord and my God , that the Saints in this life have Communion with the three persons of the most adorable Trinity , in the same most benign influences of love in which all three conspire ; for which all love , all glory be to thee , OH Father , Son and Holy Ghost , world without end . 

Glory be to thee OH Goodness infinitely diffusive , for all the Graces , and blessings in which the Saints communicate , for breathing thy love , as the very Soul into thy mystical Body , that all that believe in thee may love one another , and all join in loving thee . 

The Forgiveness of Sins . 

I believe , OH my God , that none can forgive Sins but thou alone , and that in thy Church forgiveness is always to be had ; and for so inestimable a blessing all love , all glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH thou lover of Souls , that without true repentance we cannot hope for pardon , that our repentance is at the best imperfect , that it is out of thy mere mercy , OH heavenly Father , and for the merits and passion of thy crucified Son that thou dost accept our imperfect repentance , and art pleased to forgive us ; and therefore all love , all glory be to thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH most adorable Trinity , for thy infinite love in our forgiveness ; Glory be to thee , OH Father forgiving , OH Son propitiating , OH Holy Ghost purifying , I miserable sinner , who sigh , and pant , and languish for thy forgiveness , and to be at peace with thee , praise , and adore , and love that most sweet , and liberal , and tender , and amiable mercy , that delights in forgiving sinners . 

The Resurrection of the Body . 

I believe , OH victorious Jesus , that by the virtue of thy Resurrection all the dead shall rise , bad as well as good ; all love , all glory be to thee , by whom death is swallowed up in victory . 

I believe , OH Almighty Jesus , that by thy power all shall rise with the same bodies they had on earth ; that thou wilt recollect their scattered dust into the same form again , that our Souls shall be reunited to our Bodies , that we shall be judged both in Body and Soul , for the sins committed by both , that the Bodies of the wicked shall be fitted for torment , and the Bodies of the Saints changed in quality , and made glorified Bodies , immortal and incorruptible , fitted for heaven and eternally to love and enjoy thee ; for which glorious vouchsafement I will always praise and love thee . 

And the Life everlasting . 

I believe , OH great Judge of Heaven and Earth , that after all the Quick and Dead have appeared before thy Judgment-seat , than the most just and unrepealable Sentence shall pass , and be executed to all eternity , joyful only to those that love thee ; and therefore all love , all glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH righteous Jesus , that the wicked shall be set on thy left hand , and be damned to Hell , to be tormented with everlasting and unconceivable anguish and despair , by the Devil and his Angels and their own Conscience , both in Soul and Body , in the lake of fire and brimstone , from which there never can be any redemption ; OH just reward of those that do not love thee . 

OH merciful Jesus , how desirous art thou that we should be happy in loving thee , when thou hast created Hell on purpose to deter us from hating thee , and Heaven to compel us to love thee ; and therefore all love , all glory be to thee . 

I believe , OH my Lord and my God , that the righteous shall be rewarded with joys unspeakable and full of glory , with the beatific Vision and love of thyself in Heaven , with a happiness of Body and Soul , which shall be in all respects most perfect , eternal and unchangeable , that they shall never sorrow nor sin more , which is all the free gift of thy infinite love , OH heavenly Father , and the purchase of thy blood , OH God incarnate ; for which I will ever , to the utmost of my power , adore and love thee . 

OH boundless love , when shall I love thee in heaven without either coldness or interruption , which alas too often seize me here below . 

When , OH my God , OH when shall I have the transporting vision of thy most amiable goodness , that I may unalterably love thee , that I may never more offend thee . 

OH thou whom my Soul loveth , I would not desire heaven but because thou art there , for thou makest heaven wherever thou art . 

I would not , OH Jesus , desire life everlasting , but that I may there everlastingly love thee . 

OH inexhaustible love , do thou eternally breathe love into me , that my love to thee may be eternally increasing , and tending towards infinity , since a love lesle than infinite is not worthy of thee . 

Amen . 

OH thou great author and finisher of our Faith , do thou daily increase my Faith and heighten my love ; OH grant that in holy ardours of love , to love crucified , my love may at last ascend to the region of love , that I may have nothing to do , to all eternity , but to praise and to love thee . Amen . OH infinite Love , Amen , Amen . 

This Office may be divided into several parts , and used on the Lord's days , or on Holy-days , especially on the great Festivals of Christmas , Easter , Pentecost , in Lent also , and particularly on Good-friday , and before the reception of the blessed Sacrament , as is most suitable to the occasion , or to the state , temper and disposition of every devout Soul.  

Q. You said your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you , that you should keep God's Commandments . 

Tell me how many there be . 

A. Ten.  

Q. Which be they ? 

A. The same which God spoke in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus , saying , I am the Lord thy God , who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt , out of the House of Bondage . 

I thou shalt have none other Gods but me . 

II thou shalt not make to thyself any graved Image , nor the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above , or in the Earth beneath , or in the water under the Earth . thou shalt not bow down to them , nor worship them . For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God , and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children , unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me , and show mercy unto thousands in them that love me , and keep my Commandments . 

III thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain : For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his Name in vain . 

iv. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day . Six day shalt thou labour , and do all that thou hast to do ; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shalt do no manner of work , thou and thy Son , and thy Daughter , thy Manservant , and thy Maidservant , thy Cattles and the stranger that is within thy Gates . For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth , the Sea and all that in them is , and rested the seventh day : wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day , and hallowed it . 

v. Honour thy Father and thy Mother , that thy days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God giveth thee . 

VI thou shalt do no Murder . 

VII . thou shalt not commit Adultery . 

VIII . thou shalt not Steal . 

IX . thou shalt not bear false Witness against thy Neighbour . 

X. thou shalt not covet thy Neighbour's House , thou shalt not covet thy Neighbour's Wife , nor his Servant , nor his Maid , nor his Ox , nor his Ass , nor any thing that is his . 

Q. What dost thou chiefly learn by these Commandments ? 

A. I learn two things : my duty towards God , and my duty towards my Neighbour . 

Q. What is thy duty towards God ? 

A. My duty towards God is , 

I II To believe in him , to fear him , and to love him , with all my heart , with all my mind , with all my Soul , and with all my strength : to worship him , to give him thanks , to put my whole trust in him , to call upon him . 

III To honour his holy Name and his Word ; 

IU. And to serve him truly all the days of my life . 

Q. What is thy duty towards thy Neighbour ? 

A. My duty towards my Neighbour is , 

To love him as myself , and to do to all men as I would they should do to me . 

v. To love , honour , and succour my Father and Mother . To honour and obey the King , and all that are put in Authority under him . To submit myself to all my Governors , Teachers , spiritual Pastors and Masters , To order myself lowly and reverently to all my betters . 

VI To hurt no body by word or deed . 

VII . To be true and just in all my dealings . 

VIII . To bear no malice nor hatred in my heart . 

IX . To keep my hands from picking and stealing . 

X. And my tongue from evil-speaking , lying and slandering . 

XI . To keep my body in temperance , soberness and chastity . 

XII . Not to covet and desire other men's goods , but to learn and labour truly to get mine own living , and to do my duty in that state of life unto which it shall please God to call me . 

Q. You have showed me how the Creed presents to us the Motives ; show me next how the Ten Commandments contain the Fruits , or Effects of Divine love . 

A. Jesus our Love , the great Prophet of Love , has given us this trial of our love , If ye love me , keep my Commandments 

Q. Are there not some general Rules , very useful to be observed , in expounding the Commandments ? 

A. Divine Love does suggest to us the best Rules , and is the best Expositour to teach us the full importance of every Command . 

Q. Show me how . 

A. The Love of God does necessarily include these two things , a tenderness to please , and a fearfulness to offend our Beloved , and this Love will be a sure guide to us , in both the affirmative , and the negative part of each Command . 

Q. Express this more distinctly . 

A. I shall do it in these following Particulars . 

1.  OH my God , when in any of thy Commands a duty is enjoined , Love tells me the contrary evil is forbidden ; when any evil is forbidden , Love tells me the contrary duty is enjoined ; OH do thou daily increase my love to good , and my antipathy to evil . 
2.  Though thy Commands and Prohibitions , OH Lord , are in general terms , yet let thy love direct my particular practice , and teach me , that in one general are employed all the kinds , and degrees , and occasions , and incitements , and approaches , and allowances relating to that good or evil , which are also commanded or forbidden , and give me grace to pursue , or to fly them . 
3.  OH my God , keep my love always watchful , and on its guard , that in thy negative Precepts I may continually resist evil ; keep my love warm with an habitual zeal , that in all thy affirmative Precepts I may lay hold on all seasons and opportunities of doing good . 
4.  Let thy love , OH thou that only art worthy to be beloved , make me careful to persuade , and engage others to love thee , and to keep thy Commands , as well as myself . 
5.  None can love thee , OH Lord , and endeavour to keep thy holy Commands , but his daily failing in his duty , his frequent involuntary and unavoidable slips and surreptions , and wander afflict and humble him , the infirmities of lapsed nature create him a kind of perpetual martyrdom , because he can love thee no more , because he can so little serve thee . 

But thou , OH most compassionate Father , in thy Covenant of Grace dost require sincerity , not perfection ; and therefore I praise and love thee . 

OH my God , though I cannot love and obey thee as much as I desire , I will do it as much as I am able , I will to the utmost of my power keep all thy Commandments , with my whole heart , and to the end ; OH accept of my imperfect duty , and supply all the defects of it by the merits , and love , and obedience of Jesus thy Beloved . 


6.  Glory be to thee , OH thou supreme Lawgiver , for delivering these Commands to sinful men ; they are the words which thou thyself , OH great jehovah didst speak , OH let me ever have an awful regard for every word thou hast spoken ; OH let me ever love thee for speaking them , and for giving us the Laws of Love.  
7.  Glory be to thee , OH Lord God , who to make every one of us sensible of our obligation , hast given all thy Commands in the second Person , and by saying thou , hast spoken in particular to every Soul , that every Soul might love and obey thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH my God , who in this short abstract , in these Ten Commandments hast comprised the full extent of our Duty , all the effects of Divine Love.  

Teach me , OH Lord , to examine my Love by thy Commands , that I may know how to please thee , that I may know wherein I have offended thee , and grieve for my offences , that I may bewail all my commissions of sin , all my omissions of duty . 

Teach me , OH Lord , by this thy Law , which is the rule of Love , and of all my Actions , to examine not only my several sins , but also all their several aggravations , whether they have been wilful , or known , or frequent , or obstinate , or habitual , or ensnaring to others , that Love may shed the more tears , and in some measure proportion my contrition to my guilt . 


8.  Glory be to thee , OH Lord God , who givest us Christians higher obligations to keep thy Commands than thou didst to the Jews , they had only the memory of their temporal deliverance out of the Land of Egypt , and the House of Bondage set before them , we are delivered out of spiritual Egypt , from the bondage of Sin , the power of Satan , and the torments of Hell ; OH give us grace to exceed them as much in our love , and thanksgiving , and obedience , as we do in our blessings . 
9  Glory be to thee , OH great jehovah , who to constrain us to love and obey thee , art pleased to honour every faithful Soul with a near and intimate propriety in thyself , and graciously to declare , I am the Lord thy God.  
OH merciful Lord , what is it possible for me to desire more than to have thee for my God ? If thou be my God , the relation ought to be mutual , and I must be thy Servant ; Lord be thou mine , and I will be for ever thine . 

My Beloved is mine , and I am his . 

My God , my Father , my Friend , my Love , whatever is thine I will love , and particularly thy Law will I love for teaching me to love thee , thy Law I will highly esteem , and diligently read and study , thy Law shall be daily my delight , my counsellor , and my meditation . 

OH my good God keep me always thine , and let nothing ever divorce me from thy love . 

Q. You have laid down proper rules for interpreting the Commandments , show me now how they are divided . 

A. Into two sorts , or Tables , suitable to the two respects they have to God , and to our Neighbour . 

Q. Begin with the first Table , and show me the number and order of the Commands which it contains . 

A. It contains the four first Commands which relate to God , and teach us the Worship of God , even that reverential Love we are to pay to God , which naturally arises from a true sense of his infinite both goodness and greatness . 

This Worship of God is either inward or outward . 

The inward Worship , being that of the Heart , is the nobler of the two , and this , together with the right object of our worship , is taught in the First Commandment , as the foundation of all the rest . 

The outward is comprised in the three following , which teach us the regulation of God's Worship in reference to our Gestures in the Second , to our Tongues in the Third , to our Time in the Fourth . 

Q. Which are the duties of the Second Table ? 

A. They are the six remaining Commands , which do all relate to our Neighbour , of which I shall speak in their due place . 

Q. What have you farther to observe of the Commandments in general ? 

A. 't is observable that those which refer to God are put first , to teach us that the love of God is the chief and original Command , and ought chiefly to be studied , and to teach us also , that all the duties of the Second Table must yield to the First , whenever they stand in any competition . 

Q. Go over all the Ten Commandments in particular , and show me how they are all the genuine fruits and effects of Divine Love , exercised either in doing good , or eschewing evil . 

A. I shall gladly do it , and as distinctly as possibly I can , taking every Commandment apart . 

The First Commandment . 

OH thou who only art jehovah , if thou be my God , and if I truly love thee , I can never suffer any creature to be thy Rival , or to share my heart with thee ; I can have no other God , no other Love but only thee . 

OH infinite Goodness , thou only art amiable , whatever is amiable besides thee , is no farther amiable , than it bears some impressions on it of thy amiableness ; and therefore all Love , all Glory be to thee alone . 

OH my God , OH my Love , instill into my Soul so entire reverential a Love of thee , that I may love nothing but for thy sake , or in subordination to thy Love.  

OH Love , give me grace to study thy Knowledge , that the more I know thee , the more I may love thee . 

OH my God , OH my Love , do thou create in me a steadfast Faith in the veracity , a lively Hope in the Promises , a firm trust in the Power , a confident reliance on the Goodness , and a satisfactory acquiescence in the All-sufficiency of thee my Beloved . 

OH my God , OH my Love , do thou create in me an ardent desire of the presence an heavenly delight in the fruition of thee my Beloved . 

OH my God , OH my Love , fill my heart with Thanksgiving for the Blessings , Praise of the Excellence , Adoration of the Majesty , Zeal for the Glory of thee my Beloved . 

OH my God , OH my Love , fill my heart with a true Repentance for offending , with a constant fear of provoking thee my Beloved . 

OH my God , OH my Love , fill my heart with an affective Devotion in Prayer , and with a profound Humility , in ascribing all Honour to thee my Beloved . 

OH my God , OH my Love , create in me a sincere Obedience to all the commands , a submissive Patience under all the chastisements , an absolute Resignation to all the disposals of thee my Beloved . 

OH my God , OH my Love , let thy All-powerfull Love abound in my heart , and in the hearts of all that profess thy name , that in all these , and in all other possible instances of thy Love , our Souls may be continually employed to praise and to love thee . 

OH my God , OH my Love , let me ever be seeking occasions to excite all I can to adore and love thee . 

OH my God , OH my Love , I renounce , and detest , and bewail , as odious and offensive to thee , as directly opposite to thy Love , and to thy Glory , 

All self-love , and inordinate love of things below . 

All wilful and affected ignorance . 

All Atheism , or having no God , and Polytheism , or having more Gods than one . 

All Heresy , Apostasy , and Infidelity . 

All presumption and despair , distrust and carnal security . 

All voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels ; Reliance on the creature , or recourse to evil spirits . 

All unthankfulness and irreligion , lukewarmness and indifference . 

All impenitence and disregard of divine wrath . 

All indevotion and pride , disobedience , impatience and murmuring . 

All the least tendencies to any of these Impieties . 

From all these and the like hateful violations of thy love , and from that vengeance they justly deserve ; OH my God , OH my Love , deliver me , and deliver all faithful people . 

OH my God , OH my Love , I earnestly pray , that thy love may so prevail over our hearts , that we may sadly lament and abhor all these abominations , and may never more provoke thee . 

The Second Commandment . 

OH my God , OH my Love , I know the true Love of thee is incommunicable to any but thee ; and therefore I renounce , and detest , and bewail , as odious and offensive to thee , as directly opposite to thy love , and to thy glory , 

All making of Idols or false Gods , or of graved Images , with intent of worshipping and bowing down before them . 

All representations and picturing of thee , OH my God , by visible likenesses of things in Heaven or in Earth . 

All corporeal shapes , which are infinitely unsuitable to thy invisible and spiritual nature , and derogatory from thy adorableness . 

All Idolatry and Religious invocation of Creatures . 

All sacrilege and profanations of thy House , and of things sacred . 

All abuse or disesteem , or carelessness of thy Word , and contempt of thy Ministers . 

All superstitious or unlawful rites , superfluities or mutilations , irreverence or indecencies in thy public worship , by which thou art any way dishonoured . 

All resting in mere outward observances , or refusing to give thee bodily worship , and to fall down before thee . 

All the least tendencies to any of these impieties . 

From all these and the like violations of thy incommunicable Love , and from that vengeance they justly deserve ; OH my God , OH my Love , deliver me , and deliver all faithful people , etc. as p. 39  

OH my God , OH my Love , imprint on my soul an Awful Love of thy Majesty , that I may worship thee in spirit and in truth , and in a manner worthy of thee . 

OH my God , OH my Love , make me so tender of the Honour of thee my Beloved , that I may show a due regard to all the parts of thy worship . 

That with lowest humiliation of soul and body , whenever I appear in the presence of infinite-love , I may fall down and adore thee . 

OH my God , OH my Love , OH may I always enter thy house , the habitation of unbounded Love , with recollected thoughts , composed behaviour , becoming reverence , and sincere intentions of Love . 

OH my God , OH my Love , OH may I ever frequent the public Prayers , and approach thine Altar with fervent and heavenly affections , with holy impatience for the blessings of thy Love . 

OH my God , OH my Love , OH may I always read and hear thy Word , the heavenly register of thy Love , with a serious attention , an inflammable heart , and a particular application , and ever learn from it some lesson of thy Love . 

OH my God , OH my Love , for thy dearest sake , give me grace to pay a religious veneration to all sacred persons , or places , or things , which are thine by solemn dedication , and separated for the uses of Divine Love , and the communications of thy grace , or which may promote the decency and order of thy worship , or the edification of faithful people . 

OH my God , OH my Love , let thy All-powerfull Love abound in my heart , and in the hearts of all that profess thy Name , that in all these , and in all other possible instances of thy love , our souls may be continually employed to praise and to love thee , etc. as p. 39  

thou , OH my God , OH my Love , art a jealous God , jealous of thy own Honour , and of the chasteness of my Love ; OH let me never run after other Loves , or commit spiritual Adultery against thee , to provoke thee to anger . 

thou , OH my God , OH my Love , dost visit the iniquities of the Fathers upon the children ; thou when thy jealousy burns like fire against Idolaters , and those that rob thee of thy worship , art wont to punish them in their very posterity , with temporal evils , and with spiritual too , when their children tread in their steps ; for than thou makest their Father's sins occasions of hastening , or of increasing thy judgements , though thou always sparest the children that repent ; OH let thy just indignation against violating thy Worship , deter me , and all that profess thy Name , from such violations . 

Thy jealousy , OH my God , OH my Love , falls heavy upon them that hate thee ; but how is it possible for any one to hate thee , who art infinite love ? and yet , alas ! all that are enemies to thy Divine Worship ; all that exalt any lust , any creature into thy Throne , to ascribe their happiness , to sacrifice their esteem , and zeal , and affections , and to offer up Sovereign Honours to it ; what do they do but love false Gods , and hate thee , and are therefore hated by thee . 

OH Lord God , to hate thee is the proper character of Devils , and Lucifer himself cannot sin beyond that utmost extremity of evil , the hatred of thee ; and my heart is full of horror and grief , to think , that ever those that bear thy Image , and daily subsist by thy love , should turn themselves into Devils , and this World into a Hell , by hating thee : OH boundless Love , turn them , OH turn them into men again , and then they cannot choose but love thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH my God , who showest mercy to them that love thee , and keep thy Commandments : Love and Obedience always go together , and entail a blessing on the posterity of thy Lovers ; OH keep me always one of that happy number ; OH let me ever love and obey thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH Lord God , whose Love is more diffusive than thy Anger ; they vengeance extends but to the third , or , at most , the fourth generation , thy mercy unto thousands ; and the more diffused thy Love is , the more powerfully it moves us , to praise and to love thee . 

The Third Commandment . 

OH my God , OH my Love , thy Name is thy own glorious and amiable self , thy Divine Nature , and Perfections , and Works , most worthy to be adored , most worthy to be loved , and therefore I will always adore and love thy Name . 

OH my God , OH my Love , may I ever have awful thoughts of thee , may I never mention thy venerable Name , unless on solemn , and just , and devout occasions ; may I never mention it on those occasions without acts of love and adoration . 

OH my God , OH my Love , to love , and to glorify thy Name is the great end of our Creation , which is still more enforced by our Redemption ; OH let it be the greatest business of my whole life to love , and to glorify it all the possible ways I can , by my mouth , by my conversation , by my public confession of thee before men , even to death , whenever thou art pleased to call me to it , by engaging all I can to glorify and love thee ; OH happy life , OH blessed death , which is spent , and expires in glorifying , in loving thee ! 

OH my God , OH my Love , my heart shall ever be jealous of thy Name , I can have no true love , no real concern for thee if I do not , to the utmost of my power , assert and vindicate the Name of my Beloved whenever I hear it dishonoured . 

OH my God , OH my Love , fix in my Soul an habitual pure intention of thy glory in all my actions , that whether I eat or drink , or whatever I do , I may do all to the glory of my Beloved . 

Oaths . 

OH my God , OH my Love , fill me with a religious awe of Oaths , in which the honour of thy beloved Name is so highly concerned . 

I know , OH great jehovah , that in an Oath I solemnly invoke thee , as a Witness to attest the truth of what I swear , as a Judge to punish me if I swear falsely . 

Far be it from me , OH Lord God , ever to swear , and in swearing , to invoke thee , unless upon inducements lawful and important , when thy Glory , the Command of my Superiors , the visible good of my Neighbour , the ending of strife , or my own Innocence obliges me to it . 

OH Lord God , whenever I am duly called to an Assertory Oath , grant I may swear in truth , in righteousness , and in judgement . 

Whatever lawford Promissory Oaths I ●●ke , Lord give me grace 〈◊〉 iously to perform them , though to my own hindrance . 

Uows . 

The glory of thy most beloved Name , OH great jehovah , next to the truth of our Oaths we invoke thee to attest , is concerned in the sincerity of those Vows we o●●er thee ●o accept ; OH do thou therefore create in me a serious sense of the religiousness of Vows , that my Vows may not dishonour thee . 

OH my God , OH my Love , whenever I voluntarily vow a Vow to thee , give me grace to vow with all the due caution I can , that I may vow those things only which are lawful and acceptable to thee , and which thou hast put in my power , that I may vow with deliberation and ghostly advice , and on weighty and considerable occasions only , and with a design of glory , and thankfulness , and love to thee . 

OH my God , OH my Love , give me grace faithfully to perform all the Vows I make to thee , especially my Baptismal Vow , and all my repeated Vows of amendment , in which I have so often vowed , to glorify and love thy Name . 

OH my God , OH my Love , let thy All-powerfull Love abound in my heart , and in the hearts of all that profess thy name , that in all these , and in all other possible instances of thy Love , our Souls may be continually employed to praise , and to love thee . 

OH my God , OH my Love , who is there that knows thy great , thy beloved Name , can ever in the least dishonour it ? 

OH my God , OH my Love , I renounce , and detest , and bewail , as odious and offensive to thee , as directly opposite to thy love , and to thy glory , 

All taking of th● Name in vain . 

All use of it on trivial occasions , and without holy awe . 

All abuse of it in impious Jests , in Charms , or Curses , or Imprecations , or telling Fortunes , or exploratory Lots ; all irreverent thoughts of thy Name , profaneness and blasphemy . 

All denying thee by my works , or refusing publicly to confess thee , when called to it , or tamely enduring to hear thee dishonoured . 

All heathenish , or customary , or rash Oaths , or swearing in ordinary communication , or by any Creature . 

All breaking of lawful Oaths , Perjury , false-swearing , and invoking thee , OH God of truth , to attest a lie , sins most destructive to public Faith and Society , and to our own Souls , and most dishonourable and hateful to thee . 

All hasty , or unlawful , or superstitious , or impossible Vows , all breaking those that are regularly made . 

All the least tendencies to any of these impieties . 

From all these , and the like hateful violations of thy Love , and from that vengeance they justly deserve , OH my God , OH my Love , deliver me , and deliver all faithful People . 

OH great jehovah , thou art jealous for thy glorious and beloved Name , and without a particular and serious repentance thou wilt not hold him guiltless , that taketh it in vain ; thou wilt pour on him the vials of thy wrath , thy wrath eternal , and yet thy ever blessed Name , is , alas ! alas ! daily , hourly blasphemed . 

OH Apostate , Infamous World , wherein Infinite Goodness is so oft blasphemed ; were not thy Name Love , OH Lord , as well as jehovah , thou hadst long ago avenged thyself of the blasphemous World , with a vengeance worthy of God.  

Glory be to thee , OH Long-suffering Love for thy forbearance , efficacious of its self to convert the whole World , did the World but seriously consider it . 

OH Almighty Love , thou canst as easily diffuse thy Love over the World , as thou didst at first diffuse Light ; OH let thy Fear , and thy Love so universally affect the Age , that thy great and beloved Name may be universally adored and loved ! 

The Fourth Commandment . 

Glory be to thee , OH my God , OH my Love , who in compassion to human weakness , which is not capable of an uninterrupted contemplation of thee , such as the Saints have above , hast appointed a solemn day on purpose for thy remembrance . 

Glory be to thee , OH my God , my Love , for proportioning a seventh part of our time to thyself , and liberally indulging the remainder to our own use . 

OH my God , OH my Love , let me ever esteem it my privilege , and my happiness to have a day of rest set apart for thy service , and the concerns of my own Soul , to have a day free from distractions , disengaged from the World , wherein I have nothing to do , but to praise , and to love thee . 

Lord , grant that I may not only on thy day give thee due worship myself , but may give rest and leisure also to my Family , to all under my charge , to serve thee also , to indulge ease to my very Beasts , since good men are merciful even to them . 

Glory be to thee , OH blessed Spirit , who on the first day of the week didst descend in miraculous gifts and graces on the Apostles ; OH descend upon me , that I may be always in the spirit on the Lord's day . 

OH my God , OH my Love , give me grace on thy day to worship thee in my Closet , and in the Congregation , to spend it in doing good , in works of necessity , devotion and charity , in prayer , and praise , and meditation ; OH let it ever be to me a day sacred to Divine Love , a day of heavenly rest and refreshment . 

thou , OH my God , OH my Love , didst ordain the Jewdaical Sabbath as a shadow of the true Gospel-sabbath ; OH may I every day keep an Evangelical Sabbath , and rest from my sins , which are my own works , while I live here , and may I celebrate an eternal Sabbath with thee in Heaven hereafter . 

OH my God , OH my Love , for the like purposes of Piety , and of thy Glory , give me grace to sanctify the Feasts and Fasts of thy Church , as in the number of those happy days set apart for the remembrance of thy love . 

Glory be to thee , OH Lord God , who didst command the Sabbath or seventh day to be kept holy , and strictly observed by the Jews as thy Sabbath , in memory of the Creation ; of thy making Heaven and Earth , the Sea , and all that in them is , and of thy resting the seventh day ; of thy blessing the seventh day , and hallowing it . 

We Christians , OH Lord God , following the moral equity of thy Command , and authorised by Apostolical Practice , celebrate the Lord's day , the first day of the week , in memory of our Redemption , in memory of thy Resurrection from the dead , OH most beloved Jesus , when thou didst rest from the labours and sorrows of the New Creation , OH may I ever remember thy day , and thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH my God , my Love , who hast under the Gospel delivered us from the Rigours , but not from the Piety of the Jewish Sabbath . 

Lord , since the blessing of everlasting Salvation , which we Christians on thy day commemorate , does wonderfully exceed the Creation commemorated by the Jews ; OH let our love , and praise , and devotion , and zeal , proportionably exceed theirs also . 

OH my God , OH my Love , let thy All-powerfull Love abound in my heart , and in the hearts of all that profess thy Name , that in all these , and all other possible instances of thy love , our Souls may be continually employed to praise , and to love thee . 

OH my God , OH my Love , I renounce and detest , etc. as p. 39  

All profanations of thy hallowed Day , and of all other holy Times dedicated to thy praise , and thy love . 

All Jewdaizing Severities , all Worldly-mindedness , and unnecessary business , or not allowing those under my care liberty and leisure for thy service on thy day . 

All unmercifulness to my very Beasts . 

All indevotion , or forgetfulness of thee . 

All the least tendencies — 

From all these and the like , etc. as p. 39  

Next to thy glorious self , OH my God , OH my Love , and for the sake of thy supreme , independent Love , thou hast commanded me to love my Neighbour , allied to me by nature , or by grace , all Strangers and Enemies as well as Friends . To honour all men , as being made after thy likeness , and the greater likeness they retain to thee , to honour them the more ; Glory be to thee . 

thou , OH my God , OH my Love , hast commanded me to love my Neighbour as myself , OH for the sake of thy love , give me love to relieve and assist him in all instances wherein he may need my help , as freely , as fully , as affectionately as I myself would desire to be treated , were I in his condition . 

OH my God , OH my Love , for the sake of thy dearest Love , give me grace to love my Neighbour , not in word , and in tongue only , but in deed , and in truth ; to wish well to all men , and to contribute my hearty prayers and endeavours , and to give them for thy sake all lawful , and reasonable , and necessary succours . 

Glory be to thee , OH my God , OH my Love , who by commanding me to love my Neighbour as myself , dost imply the regular love of myself ; that I should do all I can to preserve myself free and vigorous to glorify thee in my station : 't is for thy sake only I can love myself , and he does not wish or endeavour his own happiness , he really hate's himself , that does not love thee . 

thou Lord by enjoining me to love my Neighbour as myself , hast intimated my duty of loving those best , which either in blood are nearest my natural self , or in grace nearest my Christian self ; OH let thy love teach me to observe the true order of Charity in loving others . 

OH thou eternal source of Goodness , give me grace to imitate that boundless Goodness , let thy love work in me an universal propension to love , and to do good to all men , to be merciful to others , as thou Lord art merciful . 

Q. Show me how the love of your Neighbour is in the Second Table divided . 

A. The love of my Neighbour , which is the fulfilling of the Law , of all the commands of the Second Table is divided according to those different conditions of our Neighbour , wherein we most exercise our love or hatred to him . 

Q. In how many ruling Instances may we exercise that love or hatred ? 

A. Either in outward acts , or inward disposition . 

Q. How in outward acts ? 

A. Five several ways , in respect of his superiority , in the Fifth Commandment . 

His Safety in the Sixth . 

His Bed in the Seventh . 

His Propriety in the Eighth ; or , 

His good Name in the Ninth . 

Q. How in our inward disposition ? 

A. By regulating our very Desires in relation to him , as the Tenth obliges us to do ? 

Q. Let me hear how Divine Love moves in each of these Commands . 

A. It moves in such acts as follow . 

The Fifth Commandment . 

Let thy reverential Love , OH my God , teach and incline me , to show respectful Love to all my superiors , in my inward esteem , in my outward speech and behaviour . 

Glory be to thee , OH Lord , who hast comprehended all that are above me , under the tender and venerable Names of Father and Mother , that I looking on them as Resemblances and Instruments of thy Sovereign Power and Paternal Providence to me , may be the more effectually engaged for thy sake to reverence and love them . 

OH my God , give me grace to imitate thy Paternal Goodness , and for the sake of thy Love ; to love and cherish , and provide for ; to educate and instruct , and pray for my Children ; to take conscientious care to give them medicinal correction and good example , and to make them thy children , that they may truly love thee . 

OH my God , give me grace for the sake of thy love , to Honour my Father and Mother , to render them all love , and reverence , and thankfulness ▪ and all that regard which is due from a Child , that I may pay obedience to their commands , submission to their corrections , attention to their instructions , and succour to their necessities , and may daily pray for their welfare . 

thou , OH Lord , hast set our most Gracious King over us , as our Political Parent , as thy Supreme Minister , to govern and protect us , and to be a terror to those that do ill : OH grant Him a long and happy Reign , that we may all live a peaceable and quiet life under Him , in all godliness and honesty . Defend Him from all His Enemies ; let Him be ever beloved by thee , and let Him ever love thee , and ever promote thy love . 

Multiply , OH Lord God , the blessings of thy love on our most Gracious Queen Mary , Catharine the Queen Dowager , their Royal Highnesses Marry Princess of Orange , and the Princess Anne of Denmark , and on all the Royal Family : Give them grace to exceed others , as much in Goodness as in Greatness , and make them signal instruments of thy Glory , and examples of thy Love.  

OH my God , give grace to me and all my fellow-subjects , next to thy own infinite self , to love and honour , to fear and obey our Sovereign Lord the King , thy own Vicegerent , for Conscience sake , and for thy own sake , who hast placed Him over us ; OH may we ever faithfully render Him his due tribute ; OH may we ever pray for His prosperity , sacrifice our fortunes and our lives in His defence , and be always ready rather to suffer than resist . 

Glory be to thee , OH Lord , who hast ordained Pastors , and hast given them the Power of the Keys ; to be our Ecclesiastical Parents ; to watch over our Souls ; to instruct us in saving Knowledge ; to guide us by their Examples ; to pray for , and to bless us ; to administer spiritual discipline in thy Church , and to manage all the conveyances of thy Divine Love.  

OH my God , for thy Love's sake , let me ever honour and love the Ministers of thy Love , the Ambassadors thou dost send in thy stead , to beseech us sinners to be reconciled to thee , to offer thy Enemy's conditions of Love , of love eternal ; OH may I ever hear them attentively , practise their heavenly doctrine , imitate their holy examples , pay them their deuce , and revere their censures . 

OH my God , for the sake of thy love , grant I may ever love , and provide for my Servant's [ servant , ] and may treat them like brethren ; let me never exact from them immoderate work ; OH may I always give them just wages , and equitable commands , and good example , and merciful correction : Grant , Lord , I may daily allow them time for their prayers , indulge them due refreshments , and may take care of their souls , and persuade them to love thee ; remembering , that I also have a Master in Heaven . 

Give me grace , OH my God , for the sake of thy Love , to honour , and love , and obey my Master [ an Mistress ] and to serve him [ her ] with diligence and faithfulness , and readiness to please , and to pray for him [ her ] them ; and whatever I do , to do heartily as to thee , OH Lord , and not to him , [ her ] them ▪ ] 

OH my God , let thy love incline me to love , and to honour all whom thou hast any way made my superiors , suitably to their quality , or age , or gifts , or learning , or wisdom , or gravity , or goodness . 

OH my God , grant that for thy sake , I may ever love and honour all that are , or have been , instruments of thy love to me , in doing me good ; OH may I reverence my teachers , be grateful to my benefactors , and may I have always a peculiar respect to my particular Pastor . 

OH my God , let thy love engage me to love those whom thou hast obliged to love me ; to show constancy , and fidelity , and sympathy , and love , and communicativeness to my Friend ; to be affectionate to my brethren and Sisters ; to be kind and affable to my Equals ; condescending to my Inferiors ; to be all the possible ways I can , universally helpful and obliging , and loving to all 

OH my God , OH my Love , let thy All-powerfull Love abound in my heart , and in the hearts of all that profess thy Name , that in all these , and in all other possible instances of duty , our lives may be continually employed to love thee , and for thy sake to love our Neighbour , and to excite our Neighbour to love thee . 

The several Forms which contain the Duties of Parent and Child , of Master and Servant , etc. are to be used by every one , according as may suit with his Circumstances , or as he stands in any of those Relations . 

OH my God , OH my Love , I renounce , and dearest , and bewa●l , as odious and offensive to thee , as directly opposite to thy love , and the love of my neighbour , for thy sake , 

All dishonour to our Superiors , in either despising them , speaking evil of them , or in irreverent behaviour . 

All unnaturalness to Children . 

All undutifulness , or stubbornness , or disobedience , or disrespect to Parents . 

All rebelling , or reviling , or murmuring against the King , or against his Ministers . 

All defrauding , undervaluing or rejecting lawful Pastors . 

All Schism , and contempt of their regular censures . 

All falseness or negligence , or refractariness to Masters or Mistresses . 

All rudeness , ingratitude , treachery , want of brotherly love and unfaithfulness . 

All the least tendencies to any of these impieties . 

From all these and the like hateful violatious of thy love , and of the love of my neighbour , and from the vengeance they justly deserve , OH my God , OH my Love , deliver me and all faithful people . 

OH my God , OH my Love , I earnestly pray , that thy love , and the love of our neighbour may so prevail over our hearts , that we may sadly lament and abhor all these abominations , and may never more provoke thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH Lord , who to teach us the importance of this duty of subjection , hast placed it the first of all the second Table , of all that relate to our neighbour , and hast made it the first Commandment with a promise to every soul that conscientiously keeps it , that thy days shall be ●●ng in the ●and which the Lord thy God giveth thee . 

Who would not love and obey thee , OH my God , and for thy sake his Superiors , when thou hast promised to reward our Duty with a long happy life here , or if thou seest it best for us , and to take us away from the evil to come by living a long tract of Holiness in a little time , and at last by prolonging our bliss to all eternity in Heaven ; for which gracious promise , all love , all glory be to thee . 

The Sixth Commandment . 

OH my God , OH my Love , I renounce , and detest , and bewail , as odious and offensive to thee , as directly opposite to thy love , and to the love of my neighbour ▪ for thy sake , 

All duels and unlawful War . 

All doing hurt to the body and life of my neighbour , directly by wounding or murdering him . 

Indirectly by contriving or employing others to harm him . 

All the ways of procuring Abortion . 

All malice and envy , hatred and revenge , contention and cruelty . 

All injury and violence , all rash , causeless , immoderate or implacable anger , or contumelious speaking and reviling . 

All wilful vexing , grieving or disquieting him . 

All threatening , ill-wishes or curses . 

All needless endangering ourselves , and self-murder . 

All murdering of Souls , by encouraging , ensuaring , tempting , commanding them to sin . 

All the least tendencies to any of these impieties . 

From all these and the like , etc.  

OH my God , OH my Love , let thy unwearied and tender love to me , make my love unwearied and tender to my neighbour , and zealous to procure , promote , and preserve his health , and safety , and happiness , and life , that he may be the better able to serve and to love thee . 

OH my God , OH my Love , make me like thy own self , all meekness and benignity , all goodness and sweetness , all gentleness and long-suffering . 

Fill me full of good wishes and compassion , of liberality in Almsgiving according to my abilities , and of readiness to succour , and relieve , and comfort , and rescue , and pray for all , whom thy love or their own necessities , or miseries , or dangers , recommend to my charity . 

OH let thy love , thou God of Love , make me peaceful and reconcilable , always ready to return good for evil , to repay injuries with kindness , and easy to forgive , unless in those instances , where the impunity of the criminal would be injustice or cruelty to the public . 

OH thou lover of Souls , let thy love raise in me a compassionate zeal to save the life , the eternal life of Souls , and by fraternal , and affectionate , and seasonable advice , or exhortation , or correptions , to reclaim the wicked , and to win them to love thee . 

OH my God , OH my Love , let thy All-powerfull love , etc. as p. 51.  

The Seventh Commandment . 

OH my God , OH my Love , I renounce , etc. as p. 52.  

All adultery and violations of my neighbour's bed , in the gross act , robbing him of that he love's best . 

All adultery and unchastity of the eye or the hand . 

All the kinds and degrees of lust , fornication , pollution of our own bodies , and works of darkness , which it is a shame to mention . 

All things that provoke , or feed lust , impure company , discourse , songs , books or pictures . 

All lascivious dresses , or dances , or plays ; all idleness or luxurious diet . 

All the excesses or abuses of lawful Marriage , all unreasonable jealousies , and all things that lessen the mutual kindness , or alienate the affections of those that are married . 

All the least tendencies to any of these impurities . 

From all these , etc. as p. 52.  

OH my God , my Love , let thy purest love , who art Purity itself , create in me a perfect abhorrence of all impurity , that I may purify myself as thou Lord art pure . 

I know , OH Lord , that I can never be partaker of the Divine Nature , unless I escape the pollution that is in the world through lust , OH do thou therefore cleanse me from all filthiness of flesh and spirit , that I may perfect holiness in thy fear : Give me grace to possess my vessel in sanctification and honour and to keep thy Temple holy , that thy Spirit of Love may always there inhabit . 

OH my God , let my love be chaste to thee , chaste to myself , chaste to my neighbour . 

OH my God , may thy Love set a strict guard on my Senses ; turn away mine eyes , stop mine ears , bridle my tongue , and restrain my hand from all uncleanness . 

Lord , give me grace to fly all incitements , or opportunities , or instruments of defiling , either my neighbour or myself , To beaten down my body , and to bring it into subjection . 

OH my Love , let me live ever watching or praying , or profitably employed or busied in thy love , that I may leave no room if possible for any unclean Spirit to enter into my Soul and tempt me . 

OH my God , OH my Love , let thy all-powerfull love abound in my heart and in the hearts of all that profess thy Name , that in all these and in all other possible instances of duty , our lives may be continually employed to love thee , and for thy sake to love our neighbour , and to excite our neighbour to love thee . 

OH thou God of Love , who hast ordained the marriage state for the cure of our passion , and the comfort of our life , and hast made it the emblem of that Divine Love and Union thou art pleased to bear towards thy Church : Let the force of thy mystical love teach us to love each other , and both of us to love thee . 

OH thou who hast made us one flesh , make us but one Soul also ; let our love be mutual , constant and inviolate , full of compliance , and condescensions , and Sympathy , and forbearance towards each other . 

Fill us , OH God of Love , with reciprocal care and zeal , and charity for each others happiness temporal and eternal , and with a delight in each other exclusive of all loves but thine . 

Lord give us grace to keep our marriage always honourable , and our bed undefiled ; let the affectionate authority of the one , and the submissive sweetness of the other , produce an entire friendship and harmony of dispositions , and fervent intercessions for each other ; Give us , OH Lord , an unafflicting foresight of our parting here , and a passionate longing to be beatified near each other , in neighbouring mansions above , that from thenceforth our love to each other and to thee may be coeternal with thine . 

The Eighth Commandment . 

OH my God , OH my Love , I renounce , as p. 52.  

All kinds of stealing , by open Robbery , Violence , or Invasion . 

All Oppression , or Extortion , or Rapine , vexatious Lawsuits , or gripping Usury . 

All fraud in Trade and Contracts , false Weights , and Measures , and Coin . 

All concealing the defects of our own Goods , or depretiating those of our neighbour . 

All making haste to be rich , or taking advantage of the ignorance or necessity of the persons we deal with . 

All withholding our neighbour's deuce , or detaining the hire of the Labourer . 

All borrowing and not paying , injurious keeping the goods of others , and refusing to make restitution 

All b●each of Trust , or removing Landmarks , wasteful prodigality , avaricious gaming , or idle begging . 

All outrages to the Fatherless , the Widow and the Stranger . 

All the least tendencies to any of the these acts of injustice . 

From all these and the like hateful violations of thy Love , and of the Love of my neighbour , and from the vengeance they justly deserve , OH my God , OH my Love , deliver me and all faithful people . 

OH my God , OH my Love , let the love of thy eternal and amiable justice , teach me a steady justice in giving all men their due , since I cannot love my neighbour if I am unjust to him . 

Lord give me grace to use my neighbour as my friend , as myself , to buy and sell by just Weights and Measures , and to be content with moderate gain . . 

To pay debts and wages , and conscientiously to make restitution for injuries or wrongs , or for goods unlawfully gotten . 

Teach me , OH my God , to use this world so as not to abuse it ; to receive and manage all thy temporal blessings with thankfulness to thee , sobriety to myself , and charity to all besides . 

Make me ever , OH my God , upright and faithful in Trusts , and Trade , and Agreements , diligent and honest in my station and Calling , and according to my ability willing to lend , and remit to my poor neighbours . 

Whenever , OH my God , I am forced to go to Law , OH let me ever contend more for right than victory , and in all prosecutions preserve a charitable and an equitable disposition . 

OH my God , OH my Love , let thy all-powerfull love abound in my heart , and in the hearts of all that profess thy Name , that in all these and all other possible instances of duty , our lives may be continually employed to love thee , and for thy sake to love our neighbour , and to excite our neighbour to love thee . 

The Ninth Commandment . 

OH my God , OH my Love , I renounce , as p. 52.  

All manner of bearing false Witness against my Neighbour , All false accusations , or glosses , or plead , or testimonies , or sentences in Courts of Judicature , by concealing or overspeaking , or perverting right and truth . 

All things prejudicial or destructive to my neighbours good name . 

All censoriousness and slander , detraction and calumny , forced consequences , or invidious reflections . 

All scoffing , or exposing the infirmities of others . 

All whispering and tale-bearing , or raising of evil reports , suspicions or jealousies , and all evil-speaking . 

All equivocations and dissembling , flattery and lying . 

All the least tendencies to any of these injurious falsehoods . 

From all these and the like hateful violations of thy love , and of the love , etc. as page 52.  

OH my God , OH my Love , who dost love truth , and dost hate a lie , as perfectly Diabolical , instill into my Soul an unalterable love of truth , that nothing may tempt me to deviate from an entire veracity in my whole conversation , or become a liar , which thy Soul abhors . 

OH Lord give me grace ever to speak the truth , and let my heart and my tongue always go together . 

OH my God , give me grace to be tender of my neighbour's good name , since I cannot love him if I take that from him which I know to be most dear to him . 

Grant , OH my God , for the sake of thy own love , that I may be always ready to vindicate my neighbour's good name on all occasions , that I may judge the best , and speak well of him , and conceal or excuse his infirmities , that I may be impatient to hear , slow to believe , and unwilling to propagate evil reports ; that I may put candid interpretations on his actions , since the more he is defamed the lesle able he is to serve thee , the lesle credit he has to persuade others to love thee . 

OH my God , OH my love , let thy , etc. as page 51.  

The Tenth Commandment . 

OH my God , OH my Love , I renounce , as p. 51.  

All the inordinate desire of what is my neighbour's , All coveting his House , or Wife , or Servant , or Maid , or Ox , or Ass , or any thing that is his . 

All discontentedness with my worldly condition , and worldly solicitude . 

All covetousness , or repining at the happiness of others . 

All taking pleasure in sin , or complacence in past impurities . 

All the first motions , all the least tendencies to concupiscence . 

From all these and the like hateful , etc. as p. 52.  

OH my God , OH my Love , thou art the great searcher of hearts , and dost not only require outward acts of duty but the inward disposition of the heart , the heart is the chief sacrifice thou requirest , the heart is the proper seat of thy love , and my heart I wholly devote to thee . 

OH my God , create in me a clean heart , that the fountain of action being clean , the streams may run clean also . 

Give me a heart , OH thou who only canst change the heart , entirely turned to thee , that may suppress and resist all the first springing of Lust , before they shoot up into consent , approbation and desire , before lust conceiving brings forth sin . 

Lord , make me contented , and thankful and well-pleased with that portion thy providential love has allotted me , and to acquiesce in thy choice as best for me . 

OH great Lord of hearts , lodge my neighbour in my heart next to myself , let all my desires be for his good , and let it be the subject of my joy , and praise , and love , to see thy love liberal to him , to see him abounding in thy blessings . 

OH my God , my love , what can a Soul enamoured of thee ever desire but thee ; OH let the world never more have place in my heart , all my affections I withdraw from that to fix on thee . 

Forgive me , OH my God , if I am unmeasurably ambitious , it is only of thy favour ; forgive me if I am unsatiably covetous , it is only of thy fruition ; forgive me if I am perpetually discontented , it is only because I cannot love thee more 

OH unconceivable happiness of Heaven where my Ambition shall rest on a Throne , where my Covetousness shall be filled with the ●eartifick Vision , and where I shall be eternally satisfied with love . 

OH my God , OH my Love , let thy , etc. as page 51.  

Q. My good child , know this , that thou art not able to do these things of thyself , nor to walk in the Commandments of God , and to serve him without his special grace , which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent Prayer . Let me hear therefore if thou canst say the Lord's Prayer ? 

A. Our Father which art in Heaven , Hallowed be thy name . Thy kingdom come . Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven . Give us this day our daily bread . And forgive us our trespasses , as we forgive them that trespass against us . And lead us not into temptation . But deliver us from evil . Amen . 

Q. What desirest thou of God in this prayer ? 

A. I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father , who is the giver of all goodness , to send his grace unto me , and to all people , that we may worship him , serve him , and obey him as we ought to do . And I pray unto God , that he will send us all things that be needful both for our souls and bodies . And that he will be merciful unto us , and forgive us our sins , and that it will please him to save and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily , and that he will keep us from all sin and wickedness , and from our ghostly enemy , and from everlasting death . And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness , through our Lord jesus Christ. And therefore I say Amen . So be it . 

OH infinite Lord , it is my duty and my happiness to love thee ; but alas ! my own sad experience teaches me , how little able I am to love . 

Ah Lord , there is a dark cloud of Ignorance spread over my Soul , that intercepts thy beams , I cannot clearly see , I cannot fully know how lovely thou art . 

Ah Lord , when ever any gleams of thy loveliness break in upon my Spirit , and attract my will ; a crowd of strange Loves importune and tempt me to wander after them . 

Since OH my God , I can of myself neither know , nor love thee , since I cannot by my own strength do those things thou requirest , nor walk in thy Commandments , nor serve thee , nor think so much as one good thought : whither can I fly but only to thy free and unbounded love ? thou art my hope , my help , and my salvation ; thou only canst teach and enable me to know and to love thy own goodness . 

By thy special Grace , OH my God , by thy particular assistance , by the strength of thy Love I can do all things : OH let thy Grace ever enlighten and inflame me ; let it ever prevent , and accompany and follow me ; let it ever excite , and increase , and support thy love in my heart ; OH let it ever work in me both to will and to do of thy good pleasure . 

I know Lord , that thy Grace , and all other blessings I must learn at all times to call for by diligent Prayer , and I adore and love thy infinite Benignity to sinners , in indulging us the privilege , the honour , the happiness to pray to thee , to pour out our souls , to breathe out our desires , to present our wants , and to unbosom our griefs at thy Throne of love . 

I praise and I love thee , OH sovereign Love , for not only permitting us miserable Wretches to pray to thee , but also for giving us all imaginable encouragement to so important and divine a Duty . 

I adore and love thee , OH munificent goodness , for inviting , for commanding us to pray : I adore and love thee for pouring out thy holy spirit of grace and supplication on us , to help our Infirmities , to assist us in praying , to make intercessions for us with Sighs and Groans that cannot be uttered , with the utmost ardours of a penitential and indigent love . I adore and love thee for giving us so many glorious promises of hearing our Prayers , so many firm assurances of a gracious acceptance . 

OH thou great Prophet of Divine Love , who , as if thy invitation , and command , and assistance , and promise were not enough to move us to pray ; hast condescended to teach us this duty thyself ; and to give us a perfect pattern of Prayer , for which I adore and love thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH blessed Master of Devotion , who in dictating a form of Prayer , and enjoining us to use it , hast complied with our weakness , and warned us not to rely on rash and unpremeditated Effusions ; who in dictating a short form , hast taught us to avoid vain repetitions , or thinking we shall be heard for much speaking , and to measure our Prayers rather by their fervency than length . 

That Prayer which was composed by thy own self , OH God that hearest Prayer , we are sure is most divine and excellent , and perfect like its Author , and most agreeable and acceptable to thee , for which I adore and love thee . 

OH Blessed Jesus , the only beloved of God , thou best understandest the language of Love , and in that language thou hast taught us to pray , and whenever we pray in that language , we have an humble confidence thy heavenly Father will hear us , who with the words of his own beloved Son will ever be well pleased ; and therefore I adore and love thee . 

thou OH heavenly Guide of our Devotion and our Love , by teaching us to pray , hast showed us that Prayer is our treasury where all Blessings are kept , our Armoury where all our strength and weapons are stored , the only great preservative , and the very vital heat of Divine Love. Give me grace therefore to call on thee at all times by diligent Prayer . 

OH the unspeakable misery of those who either totally neglect the duty of Prayer , or else profane it by drawing near to God with their lips , when their hearts are far removed from him , whose Prayers being void of all Devotion and concern , are turned into fresh sins : How deservedly shall he have God for his Enemy ; who would not beg pardon of a most reconcileable Father ? How deservedly shall he suffer eternal wrath , who thought Heaven not worth the ask ? 

OH my God , let me daily offer up to thee my morning and evening Sacrifice in private , and in public too , if my circumstances permit , and as near as I can , let me omit no opportunities of praying , or of praising thee . 

OH my God , may I ever keep myself in thy Love , by praying in the holy Ghost , and by praying without ceasing , since I incessantly want the succours of thy Love.  

Ah Lord , I know my Devotion has daily many unavoidable and necessary interruptions , and I cannot always be actually praying , all I can do is to beg of thy Love , to keep my heart always in an habitual disposition to Devotion , and in mindfulness of thy divine presence , that I may perpetuate my Prayer by frequent Ejaculations . 

OH my God , as thy infinite Love is ever-streaming in Blessings on me ; OH set my Soul be ever breathing Love to thee . 

OH my God , to Prayer whereby I address to thee , give me grace to add the daily reading and meditation of thy word , whereby thou art pleased to converse with me . 

It is thy abundant Love to us , OH Lord , that thou indulgest us thy word in our own mother Tongue , that from those dear Volumes of thy Love , every devout Lover may daily and on all occasions supply proper fuel to his Love ; for which all Love , all Glory be to thee 

I adore and love thee , OH heavenly Oracle of Love , for contriving this Prayer in that admirable method ; that thou hast withal taught us all the requisites of an acceptable Prayer ; thou in the Preface hast taught us how to Pray : In the Petitions for what to Pray : and in the Conclusion , what ought to be the end of our Prayers , for which I adore and love thee . 

Father . 

Glory be to Thee OH Jesus , who hast taught us to whom to direct our Prayers , to God only , since he only is Omniscient to know , and all-sufficient to succour , all our necessities . 

Glory be to thee who hast taught us for whose sake only we can hope to be heard , even for thy own , OH blessed Jesus , for it is through thy alone Mediation , that we sinners can call God Father , or have access to his Throne . 

Glory be to thee , OH beloved Jesus , who in teaching us to call God Father , hast taught us to pray with the affections of a Child , with Reverential Love , and Reliance on the Paternal care , and benignity , and love of our Heavenly Father . 

Our Father . 

Glory be to thee , OH Lord , who in teaching me to call God , Our Father , has taught me not to confine my Charity to myself , but to pray also with the affections of a Brother , to all mankind , who are children by Creation , to all Christians , who are children by Adoption , of the same Heavenly Father . OH give me that Brotherly kindness , to them all , that I may beg the same blessings for them , as for myself , and earnestly pray that they may all share with me in thy Fatherly Love.  

Which art in Heaven . 

Glory be to thee , OH thou beloved of the Father , who in teaching us to pray to Our Father in Heaven , hast taught me the infinite distance between God and us , and to pray with the Humility of a supplicant . with that awe that becomes a frail Creature , a miserable Sinner , before his Creator , and his Judge . 

OH Father Almighty , though thou fillest all places , yet thy Glory is most manifested in Heaven , and there thy Majesty does most Illustriously dwell , and to thy Throne there , are we to lift up our hearts when we Pray , OH let my soul fly up to thee , when I pray , in Heavenly Thoughts , and Desires , and Love : OH let me savour nothing of the earth , whenever I treat with thee in Heaven ! 

Glory be to thee OH Gracious Lord , who in the Petitions of thy most Divine Prayer , hast taught us for what we are to Pray , for all blessings Temporal , and Eternal , for all things lawful , and according to thy william  

Glory be to thee , OH Jesus , who in ranking the Petitions for Spiritual blessings first , hast taught us to seek Heaven in the first place , grant Lord that I may always beg thy blessings in their due order , that I may pray for blessings Spiritual with holy violence , with importunity , and resolution not to be denied , as being the proper ingredients of thy Love and absolutely necessary to my eternal welfare , and for Temporal , with Indifference and Resignation to thy will , since I may Love thee , and be eternally happy without them . 

Hallowed be thy Name . 

OH Lord God , may Thy Name , thy own Glorious , and Amiable self have a Love and Honour separate , and incommunicable . May thy infinite Goodness and Greatness be for ever , by all Men and all Angels , Confessed , and Admired , and Adored , and Magnified both in Private and Public , in our Hearts , our Mouths and our Lives . 

All Creatures share in thy Goodness OH God , OH let all Creatures help us to Glorify thy Name . 

OH may every thing that hath breath , praise the Lord  

Thy Kingdom come . 

OH thou King of Kings , may Thy Kingdom of Grace , the Church Militant , the Catholic Seminary of Divine Love , come to its utmost Evangelical perfection in this life . 

OH may thy Gospel , Lord , be daily propagated , Unbelieving Nations Converted , and the number of thy Saints augmented . 

Grant , OH Lord God , that thy true Religion , thy Word , thy Conveyances of Grace , all the Holy Institutions , Laws and Governors ; fixed by thee in thy Spiritual Kingdom , may be Loved and Honoured , and Obeyed : and that thy faithful Subjects may be protected against all the malice of wicked men , or the powers of darkness . 

OH my God , let it be thy good Pleasure to put a period to sin and misery , to infirmity and death ; to complete the number of thine Elect , and to hasten thy Kingdom of Glory : that s , and all that wait for thy Salvation , may in the Church Triumphant eternally Love , and I Praise thee . 

Thy will be done in Earth , as it is in Heaven . 

OH my God , thy Will , and thy Commands , are most Holy , Just , and Good , and condescending to our weakness , and by no means grievous , OH give me Grace Conscientiously to observe them . 

Thy blessed Angels , OH Lord , always behold thy Face in Heaven , They have the Beatific Vision of thy incomparable Amiableness , they cannot but unalterably choose thee , they must needs to their utmost capacity Praise and Love thee . they cannot possibly offend thee , they ever perfectly obey thee , and are always upon the Wing at thy Command . 

Lord give me Grace , in imitation of the blessed spirits above , to set thee always before me , OH six my serious Contemplation on thee . Ravish my soul with a lively sense of thy infinite Amiableness , OH vouchsafe me one short glimpse of thy Goodness . OH may I once taste and see how Gracious thou art , that all things besides thee may be tasteless to me , that my desires may be always flying up towards thee , that I may render thee Love , and Praise , and Obedience , Pure and Cheerful , Constant and Zealous , Universal and Uniform , like that the Holy Angels tender thee in Heaven . 

Give us this day our daily Bread.  

Glory be to thee , OH Heavenly Benefactor , who openest thy hand , and fillest all things living with plenteousness . 

OH let it be thy good pleasure to give me , and all the wait on thy Beneficent Love , our food in due season , Give us Bread , and all that is comprehended by it , Health , Food , Raiment , and all the necessaries of Life . 

Give us , OH Heavenly Father , Daily Bread , nothing to gratify our Luxury , but such a competence as thy Divine wisdom sees fittest for us . 

Give us , OH bountiful Creator , Daily Bread this day , Teach us to live without covetous anxiety for to morrow , with a fiducial dependence on thy Fatherly Goodness , and to be content and thankful for the present portion , thy Love has indulged us . 

OH merciful Lord , give us Our Bread , that which is our own Bread , by honest Labour , or a lawful Title , and grant that we may never eat the Bread of Idleness , or of deceit . 

Do thou Lord , Give us our Bread , for unless thou givest it , we cannot have it , and together with our Bread give us thy blessing , otherwise our very Bread will not nourish us . 

Above all , OH Lord God , give us the Bread of Life , the Bread that came down from Heaven , the Body and Blood of thy most Blessed Son , to feed our Souls to Life eternal . 

Blessed Jesus , OH that it might be my meat , as it was thine , to do the will of thy Heavenly Father ! 

And forgive us our trespasses , as we forgive them that trespass against us . 

For thy own infinite mercy's sake , and for the Merits of the Son of thy Love , Forgive me , and all penitent sinners Our trespasses , our sins Known or Secret , of Omission or Commission , which are the vast debts we owe , to thy vindictive justice . 

Forgive us , OH Lord , as we forgive all them , even our greatest Enemies that t●●es●●ss against us , their trespasses , which are infinitely inconsiderable in comparison of our trespasses against thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH Lord , who to teach us Charity , hast made our forgiveness , the condition of obtaining thine . 

OH Easie , OH Gracious condition of Pardon , who would not forgive his Brother a few pence in this Life , to have ten Thousand Talents , forgiven in the next ! 

OH let my love , Lord , learn from thine , not only to forgive my Enemies , but to be Zealous also to do them good . 

And lead us not into temptation . 

OH Lord God , thou seest how our Ghostly Enemies , the World , the Flesh , and the Devil , are every moment soliciting , enticing , alluring , or tempting us to evil ; OH be merciful to us , save , and help , and deliver us . 

thou seest , OH my God , how infirm I am , and how ready my own deceitful heart is , to surrender itself to the Tempter ; and I know that Satan cannot tempt me without thy permission : OH lead me not if it be thy good pleasure , suffer me not to fall into violent or lasting Temptations , that may endanger my perseverance . 

I know OH heavenly Father , that to be tempted is no sin , for thy own beloved Son , God incarnate , was tempted to the most horrid of all Sins , to fall down and worship the very Devil , I know Lord , the Sin lies in yielding to the Temptation . 

OH my God , if thou for trial of my Love , lead me into any great Temptation , and let me continue under it , thy Will Lord be done , not mine : OH let thy paternal tenderness limit and control the Tempter : OH let thy All-sufficient Grace restrain my consent , and keep me always on my guard , watching and praying , and let me at last be more than Conqueror . 

I am content , Lord , to be tried and assaulted , so I be not wicked , though it be grievous for those that Love thee , to be tempted to offend thee . 

But deliver us from evil , 

OH Father of mercy , if thou thinkest fit to lead me into Temptation , deliver me from the Evil to which I am tempted : Deliver me from the Evil of Sin , and the Evil of Punishment , from the evil one , from the evil World , and from my own evil Heart , and from all suggestions to Evil , for all that is Evil is most hateful to thee , who art infinite goodness , and most destructive of thy Love. And therefore from all that is Evil , OH Almighty Lord defend me . 

For thine is the Kingdom , and the Power , and the Glory , for ever and ever . 

I adore , and Love thee , OH Jesus , who by concluding , this Prayer with a Doxology , hast taught us , that the right end of our Prayers should be the Glory of God , that we should be ever careful to mix Praise with our Prayers , and to be as zealous to give thanks for what we receive , as to Pray for what we want . 

To thee , OH Lord God , do we pray , on thee only we rely and depend for acceptance , to thee only we offer up our Praises , for thine is the Kingdom and Sovereign Right to dispose of all things , thine is the Power Almighty , to relieve and bless us , thine is the Glory . All , the Communications of thy Goodness , as they flow from thee , return to thee again in Sacrifices of Love , of Praise , and Adoration . 

Amen . 

For the sake OH Heavenly Father of thy beloved , in whom all thy Promises are Amen , and who is himself the Amen , the faithful and true Witness of thy Love to us . Hear me , and pardon my wander and coldness , and help me to sum up and enforce my whole Prayer ; all my own wants , and all the wants of those I pray for , in a hearty and fervent , and comprehensive , Amen . 

Q. How many Sacraments hath Christ ordained in his Church ? 

A. Two only , as generally necessary to Salvation , that is to say , Baptism and the Supper of the Lord  

Glory be to thee , OH Crucified Love , out of thy Wounded Side flowed Water and Blood , the two Sacraments which thou hast Ordained in thy Church , Baptism , and the Supper of the Lord , the one to initiate , the other to confirm us , in our Christianity . 

Glory be to thee , OH Lord , who having Ordained two Sacraments only , and made them Generally necessary to Salvation , art yet pleased to have Mercy rather than Sacrifice , in cases where they cannot be had , and where a surprise of Death may prevent their Administration , thou dost supply the want of them by thy merciful acceptation of those persons , who earnestly desire , and who are disposed to receive them . 

OH blessed Jesus , the greater thy Compassion is to those sincere persons who want thy Sacraments , by reason of their infelicity , not their choice , the greater will be thy indignation against those who wilfully neglect , or contemn what thy Adorable Love has ordained to be throughout thy whole Church used and revered , from which neglect and contempt of thy Love , good Lord deliver me . 

Q. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament ? 

A. I mean an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace , given unto us , ordained by Christ himself , as a means whereby we receive the same , and a pledge to assure us thereof . 

Q. How many parts are there in a Sacrament ? 

A. Two : the outward visible sign , and the inward spiritual grace . 

Glory be to thee , OH tenderest Love , who to stoop to our weak and gross apprehension , hast in the two Sacraments made an Outward and visible , and familiar thing , to be the sign , and memorial , and representation , of an Inward and invisible Mysterious and Spiritual Grace . 

Glory be to thee , OH bountiful Love , for Ordaining and Giving us the Holy Sacraments , thou thyself only art the Author , and Fountain of Grace , and thou only hast the right of instituting the conveyances of thy own Grace : all Love , all Glory , be to thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH mighty Love , who hast elevated these obvious and outward signs , to an efficacy far above their Natures , not only to signify , but to be happy Means , and instruments , to convey thy Grace to us , to be Seals , and Pledges , to confirm and 〈◊〉 to us the Communications of thy Love , that our sight may assist our Faith , that if with due preparation , we receive them , both parts of the Sacrament will go together , as certainly as we receive the Outward and Visible sign , so certainly shall we receive the Inward and invisible Grace , for which all Love , all Glory , be to thee . 

Q. What is the outward visible sign , or form in Baptism ? 

A. Water : wherein the person is baptised , In the name of the Father , and of the Son , and of the holy Ghost . 

Q. What is the inward and spiritual grace ? 

A. A death unto sin , and a new birth unto righteousness : for being by nature born in sin , and the children of wrath , we are hereby made the children of grace . 

Q. What is required of persons to be baptised ? 

A. Repentance , whereby they forsake sin ; and faith , whereby they steadfastly believe the promises of God , made to them in that Sacrament . 

Q. Why then are infants baptised , when by reason of their tender age , they cannot perform them ? 

A. Because they promise them both by their sureties : which promise , when they come to age , themselves are bound to perform . 

Glory be to thee , OH Lover of Souls ; it was by thy preventing Love , that I was Baptised with the outward sign , Water , in the name of the Father , and of the Son , and of the Holy Ghost . That I should believe in the most Holy Trinity ; that I should depend on the gracious assistances , and live wholly devoted to the three most adorable persons , that it should be my chief care to Love and Glorify that tri-une Love , the Author of my Salvation . 

Glory be to thee OH Jesus , who by Water , that washes away the filth of the Body , dost represent to my Faith thy invisible Grace in Baptism , which spiritually washes and cleanses the Soul.  

Glory be to thee , OH blessed Lord , who in Baptism savest us , not by the outward washing , but by the inward purifying Grace accompanied with a sincere Vow , and stipulation of a good Conscience towards God ; by which thy propitious Love brought me into thy Church , the spiritual Ark , to save me from perishing in the Deluge of Sin , which overwhelms the generality of the World ; and therefore all Love , all Glory be to thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH all-powerful Love , by whose invi●●ble Grace , we in Baptism die to sin to all carnal Affections , renouncing and detesting them all , and resolving to take no more pleasure in them than dead persons do in the comforts of life . OH may I ever thus die to Sin.  

Glory be to thee , OH Jesus , who from our death to Sin in our Baptism , dost raise us to a new Life , and dost breath into us the breath of Love ; 't is in this Laver of regeneration , we are born again by Water , and the Spirit , by a new Birth unto righteousness : that as the natural Birth propagated sin , our spiritual Birth should propagate Grace , for which all Love , all Glory be to thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH most indulgent Love , who in our Baptism dost give us the holy spirit of Love , to be the principle of new Life , and of Love in us , to infuse into our Souls a supernatural , habitual Grace , and ability to obey and love thee , for which all Love , all Glory be to thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH compassionate Love , who when we were conceived and Born in Sin , of sinful Parents , when we sprang from a root wholly corrupt , and were all Children of Wrath , hast in our Baptism made us Children of thy own Heavenly Father by Adoption and Grace : When we were Heirs of Hell , hast made us Heirs of Heaven , even joint Heirs with thy one self , of thy own Glory ; for which with all the powers of my Soul , I adore and love thee . 

I know , OH dearest Lord , that I am thine no longer than I Love thee ; I can no longer feel the saving efficacy of my Baptism , than I am faithful to my Vow I there made ; no longer than I am a Penitent , no longer am I Christian ; if I name the name of Christ , I am to depart from Iniquity . OH do thou give me the Grace of True Repentance for all my Sin , for my original Impurity , and for all my actual Transgressions , that I may abhor and forsake them all , wound my Soul with a most affectionate sorrow , for all the Injuries , and Affronts , and dishonours I have offered to infinite Love.  

Glory be to thee , OH most liberal Jesus , for all those exceeding great and precious Promises of Pardon , and Grace , and Glory which thou hast made to us Christians in the Sacrament of Baptism : OH may I ever steadfastly believe , OH may I ever passionately Love , may I ever firmly rely on thy superabundant Love in all these Promises , for which I will ever adore and love thee . 

Glory be to thee , OH sweetest Love , who in my infancy didst admit me to holy Baptism , who by thy preventing Grace when I was a little Child , didst receive me into the evangelical Covenant , didst take me up into the arms of thy Mercy , and bless me . Glory be to thee , who didst early dedicate me to thyself , to prepossess me by thy Love , before the World should seize and defise me . 

Ah Gracious Lord , how long , how often have I polluted myself by my Sins ? But I repent , and deplore all those Pollutions , and I consecrate myself to thee against ▪ : OH thou most reconcileable Love , pardon and accept me , and restore me to thy Love : OH let the intenseness of my future Love , not only Love ▪ for the time to come , but retrieve all the Love I have lost . 

Glory be to thee , OH tenderest Jesus , who when by reason of my Infancy I could not promise to repent and believe for myself , didst mercifully accept of the promise of my Sureties , who promis●● both for me , as thou didst accept for good to the Paralytic ; the charitable intentions of those that brought him to thee , and of the Faith of the ▪ Woman of Canaan ; for the Cure of her Daughter : for which merciful acceptance , all Love , all Glory be to thee . 

OH my God , my Lord , the promise which was made by my Sureties for me , I acknowledge that as soon as I came to a competent Age , I was b●●●d myself to perform , and I own and renew my Obligation : I promise , OH my Lord , with all the force of my Soul to Love thee , OH do thou ever keep me true to my own promise ▪ ●●ce thou art ever unalterably true to thine , for which I will ever adore and love thee . 

Q. Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained ? 

A. For the continual remembrance of the Sacrifice of the death of Christ , and of the benefits which we receive thereby . 

Q. What is the outward part or sign of the Lords Supper ? 

A. Bread and Wine , which the Lord hath commanded to be received . 

Q. What is the inward part , or thing signified ? 

A. The body and blood of Christ , which are verily and indeed taken , and received by the faithful in the Lord's Supper . 

Q. What are the benefits where-we are partakers thereby ? 

A. The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of Christ , as our bodies are by the bread and wine . 

Q. What is required of them who come to the Lords Supper ? 

A. To examine themselves whether they repent them truly of their former sins , steadfastly purposing to lead a new life ; have a lively faith in God's mercy through Christ , with a thankful remembrance of his death ; and be in charity with all men . 

Glory be to thee , OH crucified Love , who at thy last Supper didst ordain the Holy Eucharist , the Sacrament and Feast of Love.  

It was for the continual remembrance of the Sacrifice of thy death , OH blessed Jesus , and of the Benefits we receive thereby , that thou wast pleased to ordain this sacred and awful Rite ; all Love , all Glory be to thee . 

Ah dearest Lord , how little sensible is he of thy Love in dying for us , who can ever forget thee ? 

Ah woe is me , that ever a Sinner should forget his Saviour , and yet alas how prone are we to do it . 

Glory be to thee , OH Gracious Jesus , who to help our memories , and to impress thy Love deep on our Souls , hast instituted the blessed Sacrament ▪ and commanded us , Do this in remembrance of me . 

OH Jesus , let the Propitiatory Sacrifice of thy Death which thou didst offer upon the Cross for the Sins of the whole World , and particularly for my Sins , be ever fresh in my remembrance . 

OH blessed Saviour , let that mighty Salvation thy Love has wrought for us never slip out of my mind , but especially let my remmbrance of thee in the Holy Sacrament be always most lively and affecting . 

OH Jesus , if I love thee truly , I shall be sure to frequent thy Altar , that I may often remember all the wonderful Loves of my Crucified Redeemer . 

I know , OH my Lord and my God , that a bare remembrance of thee is not enough ; OH do thou therefore fix in me such a remembrance of thee , as is suitable to the infinite Love I am to remember : Work in me all the holy and heavenly affections , as become the remembrance of a Crucified Saviour . 

Glory be to thee , OH adorable Jesus , who under the outward and visible part , the Bre●d and Wine , things obvious and easily prepared , both which thou hast commanded to be received , dost communicate to our Souls , the Mystery of divine Love , the inward and invisible Grace , thy own most blessed Body and Blood which are verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in thy Sup●e● , for which all Love , all Glory be to thee . 

OH God incarnate , how thou canst give us thy Flesh to eat , and thy Blood to drink ; How thy Flesh is Meat indeed , and thy Blood is Drink indeed ; How he that eateth thy Flesh and drinketh thy Blood , dwelleth in thee , and thou in him ; How he shall live by thee , and shall be raised up by thee to Life Eternal ; How thou who art in Heaven , art present on the Altar , I can by no means explain , but I firmly believe it all , because thou hast said it , and I firmly rely on thy Love , and on thy Omnipotence to make good thy Word , though the manner of doing it I cannot comprehend . 

I believe , OH Crucified Lord , that the Bread which we break in the Celebration of the Holy Mysteries , is the Communication of thy Body , and the Cup of Blessing which we bless , is the Communication of thy Blood , and that thou dost as effectually and really convey thy Body and Blood to our Souls , by the Bread and Wine , as thou didst thy holy Spirit , by thy Breath to thy Disciples ; for which all Love , all Glory be to thee . 

Lord , what need I labour in vain , to search out the manner of thy mysterious presence in the Sacrament , when my Love assures me thou art there ? All the faithful who approach thee with prepared hearts , they well know thou art there , they feel the Virtue of Divine Love going out of thee , to heal their infirmities , and to inflame their affections , for which all Love , all Glory be to thee . 

OH Holy Jesus , when at thy Altar I see the Bread broken , and the Wine poured out , OH Teach me to discern thy Body there , OH let those Sacred and Significant actions , create in me a most lively Remembrance of thy Sufferings , how thy most blessed Body was scourged , and wounded , and bruised , and tormented ; how thy most precious Blood was shed , for my sins , and set all my powers on work to Love thee , and to celebrate thy Love in thus dying for me . 

Glory be to thee , OH Jesus , who didst institute the Holy Eucharist in both Kind's , and hast Commanded both to be received , both the Bread and the Wine , both thy Body broken , and thy Blood shed : thy Love , OH Lord , has given me both , and both are equally Significative and Productive of thy Love : I do as much Thirst after the one , as I Hunger after the other , I equally want both , and it would be grievous to my Love to be deprived of either . 

Ah Lord , who is there that truly Love's thee , when thou givest him two distinct Pledges of thy Love , can be content with one only , what Lover can endure to have one half of thy Love withheld from him ? And therefore all Love , all Glory be to thee for giving both . 

OH my Lord , and my God , do thou so dispose my heart , to be thy Guest at thy Holy Table , that I may feel all the sweet influences of Love Crucified , the Strengthening and Refreshing of my soul ▪ as our Bodies are by the Bread and Wine , for which I will ever Adore and Love thee . 

OH merciful Jesus , let that immortal food , which in the Holy Eucharist thou vouchsafest me , instil into my weak and languishing soul , new supplies of Grace , new Life , new Love , new Vigour , and new Resolution , that I may never more faint , or droop or tyre in my duty . 

OH Crucified Love , raise in me fresh ardours of Love and Consolation , that it may be henceforth the greatest torment I can endure , ever to offend thee , that it may be my greatest delight to please thee . 

OH amiable Jesus , when I devoutly receive the outward Elements , as sure as I receive them , I receive thee , I receive the Pledges of thy Love , to quicken mine ; OH Indulge me , though but for a moment , one Beatisick foretaste of the deliciousness of thy Love , that in the strength of that deliciousness I may perseveringly love thee . 

Glory be to thee , my Lord and my God , who hast now given me an invitation to thy Heavenly Feast . All Love , all Glory , be to thee . 

Lord , give me Grace , that I may approach thy awful Mystery , with Penitential preparation , and with a heart sully disposed to love thee . 

OH my God , my Judge , give me Grace I most humbly beseech thee to E●amine my whole life past , by the Rule of thy Commandments , before I presume to Eat of that Bread , and Drink of that Cup , give me Grace sadly to reflect on , and deplore all my provocations , lest coming to the Holy Eucharist impenitent , and unprepared , I receive Unworthily , and Eat and drink my own damnation . 

OH thou Great Searcher of Hearts , thou knowest all the Load of Impiety and Gild under which I lie , OH Help me so Impartially to Judge , and Condemn myself , so humbly to Repent , and beg Pardon , that I may not be Condemned at thy Tribunal , when I shall appear there at the last day , that I may be set at thy Right Hand , amongst thy Lovers . 

Lord , give me Grace to search every secret of my Heart , to leave no sin , if possible , unrepented of ; ●ill my Eyes full of Tears of Love , that with those Tears I may lament , all the Indignities I have offered thy Love.  

But alas alas , after the most strict examinatinon we can make , who can number his impieties , who can tell how oft he offendeth , Lord therefore cleanse me from my secret faults , which in general I renounce and bewail . 

OH my God , thou who alone changest the Heart , OH be thou pleased to change 〈◊〉 change my aversion to thee , into an entire L●ve of thee . OH give me a filial Repentance , that with a Broken and Contrite Heart I may Grieve , and Mourn , and Repent for all my ●orm●r sins , and may for ever forsake them , and return to my Obedience . 

Let thy Love , OH my God , so perfectly exhausted my soul , that I may for the future , steadfastly purpose to le●d a new life , that I may renew my Baptismal Vow , that I may hereafter live , as a sworn Votary to thy Love.  

OH Heavenly Father , settle in my soul , a Lively Faith in thy Mercy through Christ , a steady belief of all thy Love to sinners , and an affectionate Reliance on the Merits and Mediation of thy Crucified Son , of my being Accepted in the Beloved , for whom I will ever Adore and Love thee . 

OH my Crucified God ▪ thou Sovereign Inflammative of Love , let the Remembrance of thy Death , set all the powers of my Soul on work , that I may desire , and pant after thee , that I may Admire , and Adore thee , that I may take Heavenly delight in thy Gracious Presence , that with Praise and Thansgiving , with Jubilation and Triumph I may receive thee into my Heart , there I will have Love , only Love , always Love , to entertain thee . 

Lord , when I present myself , and my Love , as all the Gift I have to offer at thy Altar , next to my Love to thee , and for the sake of thy infinite Love to me which I there remember , give me Grace to love my Neighbour , and to be in Charity wi●h all men , and to walk in Love , as thou hast loved us , and hast given thyself for us , an Offering , and a Sacrifice to God , for a sweet smelling savour , for which all Love , all Glory be to thee . 

OH most Reconcileable Jesus , in this Memorial of thy Sufferings , I see how thou didst forgive me , and didst love me when I was thy Enemy , OH for thy dearest Love to me , give me Love to forgive all my Enemies , and to be at peace with the world , as I desire to be Loved and Forgiven , and to be at peace with thee . 

All that have any way injured me , OH my God , I freely forgive , for thy sake , OH do thou also forgive them : incline them to Brotherly Charity , and let them at last feel the comfort of that Reconciliation thou didst make upon the Cross , for which I will ever Adore and Love thee . 

OH my God , if I have wronged , or injured my Neighbour , OH give me Grace to beg his pardon , and as I have opportunity , to make him satisfaction , and restitution according to my power . 

OH crucified Love , whenever I see thee in any of thy poor Members , Hungry , or Naked , or in Distress , OH let the Remembrance of thy Love , in Dying for me , engage me to contribute all I can to thy relief , OH may I ever be liberal in my Alms to thee , who wert so liberal of thy inestimable Blood for me . 

It is very adviseable , that persons before they Communicate , should read over the whole Communion-office , or at least , the exhortations there , which they will find to contain very proper , and plain , and excellent Instructions . 

It were much to be wished , that people would make more use of their Common Prayer Books than they do , and apply the Prayers they meet with there to their own particular conditions , for the Book is always at hand , and the Prayers are most safe and familiar , and devout , and the more they affect us in our Closet , the more they will affect us in the Congregation , and well meaning souls will reap great spiritual advantage from this practice . 

For example , an humble poor Christian , who it may be has no other Book but his Common Prayer Book , and who intends to come to the Holy Communion , may learn to turn the Communion-office to his own private use , after this manner . 

Almighty God , unto whom all hearts be open , all desire's known , and from whom no secrets are hid , cleanse the thoughts of my heart by the inspiration of thy Holy Spirit , that I may perfectly love thee , and worthily magnify thy Holy Name , through Christ our Lord Amen . 

I give most humble and hearty thanks to thee , OH God the Father , the Son , and the Holy Ghost , for the Redemption of the World by the Death and Passion of our Saviour Christ , both God and man , who did humble himself even to the death upon the Cross for us miserable sinners , who lay in darkness and the shadow of death , that he might make us the Children of God , and exalt us to everlasting Life . 

Glory be to thee OH Jesus , our master and only Saviour , who to the end that we should always remember thy exceeding great Love in thus dying for us , and the innumerable benefits which by thy precious Bloodsheding thou hast obtained to us ; hast Instituted and Ordained Holy Mysteries as Pledges of thy Love , and for a continual remembrance of thy Death , to our great endless Comfort . 

To thee therefore , OH blessed Saviour , with the Father and the Holy Ghost , I will give ( as I am most bounden ) continual thanks , I submit myself wholly to thy Holy Will and Pleasure , and will study to serve thee in true Holiness , and Righteousness , all the days of my Life . 

Almighty God , Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , Maker of all things , Judge of all men , I acknowledge and bewail my manifold sins , etc.  

I lift up my heart unto thee , OH Lord , I give thanks unto thee , OH Lord our God , it is meet and right so to do : it is very meet , right , and my bounden duty , that I should at all times , and in all places give thanks unto thee OH Lord , Holy Father Almighty , everlasting God.  

But chiefly am I bound to praise thee for giving thy only Son Jesus to die for my Sins , and to rise a-again for my Justification . 

Therefore with Angels and Archangels , and with all the Company of Heaven I laud and magnify , etc.  

I do not presume to come to thy Table , OH merciful Lord , trusting in my own righteousness , etc.  

Glory be to God on high , and on earth Peace , good will towards men : I praise thee , etc.  

To these , as you see occasion , you may add many very good Prayers , short and plain , and pertinent to your purpose , which you may collect out of the Common Prayer , and which will much further your Devotion ; such as these . 

OH Lord , who never ●ailest to help and govern them whom thou dost bring up in thy steadfast Fear and Love ; keep me I beseech thee , under the protection of thy good Providence , and make me to have a perpetual Fear and Love of thy Holy Name , through Jesus Christ our Lord , Amen . 

OH God , who hast prepared for them that love thee , such good things as pass Man's understanding ; pour into my heart such Love toward thee , that I loving thee above all things , may obtain thy promises , which exceed all that I can desire , through Jesus Christ our Lord , Amen . 

Lord of all power and might , who art the Author and Giver of all goo● things , grafted in my Heart the Love of thy Name , increase in me true Religion , nourish me with all goodness , and of thy great mercy keep me in the same , through Jesus Christ our Lord , Amen . 

OH Lord , who hast taught me that all my doings without Charity are nothing worth , send thy Holy Ghost , and pour into my Heart that most excellent gift of Charity , the very bond of Peace and of all Virtues , without which whosoever liveth is counted dead before thee . Grant this for thy only Son Jesus Christ's sake , Amen . 

Almighty God , who hast given thy only Son to be unto us both a Sacrifice for Sin , and also an example of Godly life ▪ give me grace that I may always most thankfully receive that his inestimable Benefit , and also daily endeavour myself to follow the blessed steps of his most holy Life , through the same Jesus Christ our Lord , Amen . 

They that are ignorant , or that cannot read should go to their Parish Priest , or to some other discreet and learned Minister of God's Word , and desire him to teach them their Duty in private , and they that thus sincerely seek the Law at the Priest's mouth , shall find that the Priests Lips do preserve Knowledge , and shall not go away without a Blessing . 

To God the Father who first loved us , and made us accepted in the Beloved , to God the Son who loved us and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood : To God the Holy Ghost , who sheds the Love of God abroad in our Hearts , be all Love and all Glory , for time , and for eternity . Amen . 

FINIS . 

To the poor Inhabitants within the Diocese of Bath and Wells , THOMAS , their unworthy Bishop , wishes the knowledge and the love of God.  

Dear beloved in our Lord , 

The Catechism truly teaches all Christians , that they are not able of themselves to do those things they have vowed in their Baptism to do , namely , To walk in the Commandments of God , and to serve him , without his special Grace , o● favourable Assistance , and this they are to learn at all times to call upon God for , by diligent Prayer . 

How good and seasonable this advice is , you will all see , if you consider what helpless and needy Creatures the very best of Men are . Alas ! our weakness is very great , our wants are very many , our dependence on God for all things , all our lives long , is entire , and absolute , and necessary , and there is no way in the World to gain help and supplies from God , but by Prayer ; so that it is as easy , and as possible to preserve a natural Life without daily Bread , as a Christian Life without daily Prayer . 

It was for this reason , that our Saviour himself took a particular care , to teach his Disciples to pray , [ Luck 11.1 . ] and it is for the same reason , and in imitation of our Heavenly Master , that I have joined these directions for Prayer to the Catechism . 

Sure I am , the Zeal I ought to have for your Salvation , can suggest to me nothing more conducing to the good of your Souls , than to exhort and beseech you all , of either Sex , to learn how to Pray . 

This is the first general Request I shall make to you , and I am the more earnest in it , because my own sad experience has taught me , how strangely ignorant common People usually are of this duty ; insomuch , that some never Pray at all , pretending they were never taught , or that their memories are bad , or that they are not Book-learned , or that they want money to buy a Book ; and by this means they live , and die rather like Beasts than Men ; nay , their condition is much worse than that of Beasts , for the misery of a Beast doth end at death , but the misery of a wicked man does then begin , and will endure to all Eternity . 

To prevent then as much as lies in me , the damnation of those Souls which God has committed to my care , and to cure that lamentable ignorance and forgetfulness of God , which is the cause of the damnation of so very many , I do not only incessantly pray for you myself , but I beg of you all to pray for yourselves , and I beseech you to read the following Instructions ; or if you cannot read yourselves , to get some honest charitable Neighbours to read them often to you , that you may remember them , and God of his great mercy reward the Charity of such Neighbours . 

If any of you , either by your own negligence , or by the negligence of your Parents , or for want of Catechising in your Parish , are wholly ignorant of your duty ; though it be a most shameful and dangerous thing , for one who calls himself a Christian , to know nothing of Christ or Christianity , yet if you are willing to learn , and beg pardon of God for your wilful ignorance hitherto , and will sincerely do your endeavour to get saving Knowledge , and heartily pray to God to assist you , you shall find , that the very entrance of God's word giveth light , that it giveth understanding unto the simple . [ Psal. 119.130 . ] 

I must warn you beforehand , that corrupt Nature will be very busy in hindering the learning of your duty , and thoughts will arise in your mind that the task will be too hard and too tedious for you to undertake ; but I faithfully promise you , to impose no hard or tedious task on you , but such as you yourselves shall confess , to be very complying with your Infirmities ; for our most compassionate Saviour teaches me to say no more to you , than you can bear . [ john 16.11 . ] 

All I shall exhort you to , is to learn your Catechism , which you may do by degrees : If you learn but a line or two in a day , you will , by God's blessing , in a very short time learn it all over , and you will rejoice , and thank God , for the sudden and happy progress you have made . 

God forbid you should ever think yourselves too old to learn to serve God , and to be saved , both which are taught in the Catechism , and therefore the Catechism is of necessity to be learned : For how can you go to Heaven , if you never learned the way thither ? How can you be saved , if you do not know your Saviour ? 

't is a great Error , to think that the Catechism was made for Children only , for all Christians are equally concerned in those saving Truths which are there taught ; and the Doctrine delivered in the Catechism , is as proper for the study and as necessary for the salvation of a great Doctor , as of a weak Christian , or a young Child . 

But you will be the more encouraged to learn your Catechism , when you see how excellent a help it will be to Prayer , for it will at the same time further your Knowledge , and your Devotion both together ; and the Prayers I intent to commend to you , are chiefly the very Answers in the Catechism , which being daily repeated , will be the better fixed in your memory , and you cannot imagine any advice for Prayer can be more easy and familiar , than that which directs you to turn your very Catechism into Prayers . 

You are by this time I hope satisfied , that the Duty to which I exhort you , is no hard task ; and yet I will endeavour , by God's assistance , to make it more easy , by putting you into an easy method to attain it . 

If you are wholly ignorant of your Catochism , let it be your first care to learn such Ejaculations , such short Prayers as these , and say them often , and heartily . 

Lord have mercy upon me . 

Christ have mercy upon me . 

Lord have mercy upon me . 



Lord pardon all my wilful ignorance , and gross carelessness of my duty , for the sake of jesus my Saviour . Amen . 



OH my God assist me in the learning of my Duty . 

Lord help me to know , and to love thee . 

Lord pity me , Lord save me , Father forgive me . 

Glory be to thee , OH Lord , who hast hitherto spared me . 

OH that I might at last learn to glorify , and love , and serve thee ! 



Such short Prayers as these , you may easily get by heart , and the method in which I advice you to proceed , is , that in which Children are commonly taught , in regard I am now to look on you as a Child : For there are two sorts of Children ; there are Children in age , and Children in understanding , [ 1 Cor. 14.20 . ] and in this latter respect you are Children , and the same method for the most part is proper for you , which is proper for those that are Children in Age.  

I must therefore feed you with Milk , before you can be capable of strong Meat , [ Heb. 5.13 . ] and I must look on you as Lambs of my ●lock , which I am to use tenderly , and these following Directions which I give to Parents ▪ for the training up their Children in Piety , I do equally design for the training up of you . God of his Infinite Goodness , bless them to you both . 

I exhort all you who are Parents , to instil good things into your Children as soon as ever they begin to speak● let the first words they utter , if it be possible , be these , Glory be to God : Accustom them to repeat these words on their knees , as soon as they rise , and when they go to bed , and oft times in the day , and let them not eat or drink , without saying , Glory be to God.  

As their speech grows more plain and easy to them , teach them who Made , and Redeemed and Sanctified them , and for what end , namely to glorify and to love God ; and withal , teach them some of the shortest Ejaculations you can , such as these ; Lord help me . Lord save me . 
Lord have mercy upon me . 
All love , all glory be to God who first loved me . 
Lord keep me in thy love . 


Within a little time you may teach them the Lords Prayer , and hear them say it every day , morning & evening on their knees , with some one or more of the foregoing Ejaculations ; and by degrees as they grow up , they will learn the Creed , and the whole Catechism . 

Be sure to teach your Children with all the sweetness and gentleness you can , lest if you should be severe , or should over-task them , Religion should seem to them rather a burden than a Blessing . 

As their Knowledge increases , so let their Prayers increase also , and teach them as they go to turn their Catechism into Prayers , after the manner which I shall show you , and to confirm and improve their knowledge , bring them duly to the Church to be Catechised by the Parish Priest , that by his familiar and devout Explications of the Catechism , they may learn to understand it , and may be capable of reading the Exposition on it , and other Books of Piety . 

Take conscientious care to season your Children as early as you can , with the love of God , which is the first and great Commandment , [ Matth. 22.38 . ] and with the fear of God , which is the beginning of Wisdom , [ Psal. 111.10 . ] for the awful love , and the filial fear of God , must always go together . 

The same method you observe in teaching your Children , the same you may observe in teaching your Servants , according as you see they want teaching , and you yourselves will reap the benefit of it , as well as your Servants ; for the more devout servants they are of God , the more faithful Servants will they be to you . 

Remember , you must teach both your Children and Servants by your Example , as well as by your Instruction , for they learn best by Example ; and if they see you give an example of fraud or lying , of revenge or calumny , of uncleanness or drunkenness , of cursing and swearing , and irreligion ; instead of teaching them to obey God , you teach them to provoke him ; instead of teaching them to honour God you teach them to blaspheme him ; instead of leading them the way to Heaven , you lead them the way to Hell ; and you will increase your own damnation , by furthering theirs , which God forbid you should ever do . 

Now that you may the better give a good Example to your Family , I will by Gods help give you a method of daily Devotion , taken for the most part out of the Catechism , which will be suitable to all Christians , be they never so well instructed , and which you may by little and little teach your Children ; and which those who have been bred up in ignorance , and are Children in understanding , and are yet willing to be taught , may learn to say also , as the capacities of either do increase ; for a Christian must never stand at a stay , but must be always growing in Grace , and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour jesus Christ , [ 2 Pet. 3.18 . ] 

A method of daily Prayer . 

As soon as ever you awake , offer your first thoughts and words to God , saying , Glory be to the Father , and to the Son , and to the Holy Ghost : Three persons and one God blessed for evermore : All love , all praise be to thee . 



As you are rising , say , I laid me down and slept , and rose up again , for the Lord sustained me : All love , all glory be to God. [ Psal. 3.5 . ] 



As soon as you are dressed , kneel down , as our Saviour himself kneeled , [ Luck 22.41 . ] at his Prayers , and remember you are in God's presence , and say your Prayers with Reverenc e and Devotion . 

Morning Prayer . 

Glory be to thee , OH Lord God , for ▪ my preservation and refreshment , and for all the Blessings of the night past , for which , All love , All praise be to thee . 

Father , forgive me all the evil of the night past , for the merits of jesus my Saviour . Amen . 

OH merciful God , keep and protect , and bless me this day , and prospero me in my Calling , and preserve me from sin and danger , for the merit of jesus my Saviour . Amen . 

I believe in God the Father Almighty , etc.  

All love , all glory be to thee , OH God the Father , who hast made me and all the World.  

All love , all glory be to thee , OH God the Son , who hast redeemed me and all Mankind . 

All love , all glory be to thee , OH God the Holy-ghost , who dost sanctify me , and all the elect people of God.  

All love , all glory be to thee , OH Father of mercy , who in my Baptism didst make me a member of Christ , thy own Child , and an inheritor of the kingdom of Heaven . 

OH my God , I do this day dedicate myself to thy service , and do renew the promise and vow of my Baptism . 

I do from my heart renounce the Devil and all his works , the pomps and vanity of this wicked world , and all the sinful lusts of the flesh ; from all which , Good Lord deliver me . 

I believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith , and I will keep thy holy Will and Commandments , and walk in the same all the days of my life . 

All this , OH Lord , I am bound to believe and do , and by thy help so I will ; and I heartily thank thee , OH Heavenly Father , who hast called me to this state of salvation , through jesus Christ my Saviour ; and I pray unto thee to give me thy Grace , that I may continue in the same to my lives end . 

Lord , hear me , help me , pardon my failing , supply all my wants , and the wants of all faithful People , which I 〈◊〉 up in the words of thy own beloved Son , Our Father which art in Heaven , etc.  

After the like manner you may pray at night . 

Evening Prayer . 

Glory be to thee , OH Lord , for my preservation , and for all the Blessings of the day past ; for which , all love , all praise be to thee . 

Father , forgive me all the sins I have this day committed , either in thought , or word , or deed , either against thee , or against my neighbour , for the sake of jesus my Saviour . Amen , Amen . 

It grieves me , OH merciful God , that I should daily offend thee : But I repent , OH pity and pardon me , for the sake of jesus thy Beloved , Amen , Amen . 

OH my God , keep and protect , and bless me this night , and preserve me from sin and danger , for the sake of jesus . Amen , Amen . 

Lord , refresh me this night with seasonable sleep , that I may rise the next morning more fit and able to serve thee in my Calling , for the sake of jesus , thy Beloved . Amen , Amen . 

I believe in God the Father , etc.  

All love , all glory be to thee , our God the Father , who , etc. as in the Morning . 

I desire thee , OH Lord God , OH Heavenly Father , who art the Giver of all goodness , to send thy Grace unto me , and to my Wife and Children , to my Husband and Children , Father and Mother , brethren and Sisters , Kindred and Friends , Master and Mistress , [ you must name these Relations , according as you stand related ] and too all people , that we may worship thee , serve thee , and obey thee , as we ought to do : And I pray unto thee , that thou wouldst send us all things that be needful , both for our souls and bodies , and that thou wilt be merciful unto us , and forgive us our sins ; and that it will please thee , to save and defend us , in all dangers , ghostly and bodily , and that thou wilt keep us from all sin and wickedness , and from our ghostly enemy , and from everlasting death : And this I trust thou wilt do of thy meecy and goodness , through our Lord jesus Christ. Amen . Lord , so be it . 

Lord , hear me , help me , pardon my failing , supply all my wants , and the wants of all for whom I pray , which I sum up in the words of thy own beloved Son , 

Our Father which art in Heaven , etc.  

As you are going to bed , say , I will lay me down in peace , and take my rest , for it is thou , Lord , only that makest me dwell in safety , 

[ Psal. 4.9 . ] 





As you began the day , so end it with glorifying God , and when you are in bed , say , Glory be to the Father , and to the Son , and to the Holy Ghost , three persons and one God , blessed for evermore . All praise , all love be to thee . 



I earnestly beg of God , to make you sensible yourselves , and to give you grace to make your Children and Servants sensible also , how Necessary , and Happy , and Heavenly a Duty Prayer is , and how many exceeding great precious Promises God has made to those that devoutly pray to him ; and if you are thus sensible , you will not content yourselves with Morning and Evening Prayer only , but you will be desirous , if you have Opportunity , to retire about Midday , for a few Minutes , that you may imitate the Devotion of Holy David , and of Daniel , and pray three times a day , Dan. 6.10 . and that you may not want a help for Noon tide Prayer , the Catechism shall supply you . 

Prayer at Noon . 

At evening , and at morning , and at noonday will I pray , and that instantly , Lord , hear my voice , [ Psal. 55.19 . ] 

Glory be to the Father , and to the Son , and to the Holy Ghost : As it was in the beginning , is now and ever shall be , world without end . Amen . 

All love , all glory be to thee , OH God the Father , who haste first loved us , and hast given thy beloved Son to die for our Sins , and to rise again for our justification . 

Have mercy upon me , OH God , after thy great goodness , according to the multitude of thy mercies do away mine offences . 

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness : and cleanse me from my sin . 

Make me a clean heart , OH God , and renew a right Spirit within me , for the sake of jesus thy Beloved . Amen . 

OH Lord God , who seest I am not able of myself to walk in thy Commandments , and to serve thee ; be pleased to help and strengthen me by thy special Grace , that I may daily and sincerely perform my duty towards thee , and my duty towards my neighbour , for the sake of jesus my Saviour . Amen . 

OH my God , give me grace to believe in thee , and to love thee with all my heart , with all my mind , with all my soul , and with all my strength ; to worship thee , to give thee thanks , to put my whole trust in thee , to call upon thee , to honour thy holy Name and thy Word , and to serve thee truly all the days of my life , for the sake of jesus thy Beloved . Amen . 

OH my God , give me grace to love my neighbour as myself , to do to all men as I would they should do to me ; to love , honour and succour my Father and Mother [ this clause must be left out , if your Father and Mother be dead ] to honour and obey the King , and all that are put in Authority under him ; to submit myself to all my Governors , Teachers , Spiritual Pastors , and Masters ; to order my s●●f lowly and reverently to all my betters ; to hurt no body by word or deed ; to be true and just in all my dealing ; to bear no malice nor hatred in my heart ; to keep my hands from picking and stealing , and my tongue from evil speaking , lying and slandering ; to keep my body in temperance , soberness and chastity , not to covet or desire other men's goods , but to learn and labour truly to get mine own living , and to do my duty in that state of life , unto which it has pleased thee to call me , for the sake of jesus thy Beloved . Amen . 

Lord hear me , help me , pardon my failing , supply all my wants , which I sum up in the words of thy Beloved Son , Our Father which art in Heaven , etc.  



Instead of these two last Prayers , you may sometimes say the Ten Commandments , which you may turn into a very good Prayer , by saying after every one , 

Lord have mercy upon me , and incline my heart to keep this Law.  

Where you not only beg pardon for the sins you have committed against each Commandment , but you also beg Grace to keep it . 

At the end of them you may say , Lord have mercy upon me , and write all these thy Laws in my heart , I beseech thee . 

And so conclude with the Lords Prayer . 

Do not think that this Practice of Prayer will be too hard , or too long for young persons , or for labouring people ; for if you cannot say them all , say as much as you can ; or if you are at Day Labour , or have not time or convenience to say them , offer up to God two or three hearty Ejaculations in their place : But if you can get time and convenience , say them all , and I dare assure you , that all the three ▪ Forms of Prayer which I commend to you , will not in all take up a quarter of an hour ; and certainly that Person has very little sense of his Duty , very little concern for his immortal Soul , very little Honour for God , or value for Heaven , who will not spend one quarter of an hour in the space of four and twenty hours , in the Service of God , and the Salvation of his own Soul.  

I do by all means exhort you to give your Servants a few Minute's leisure at Noon , to Pray after your Example , and to use your Children to do the same , for they will soon be able to say the Lords Prayer , and two or three Ejaculations , and teach them to say these at Noon , as well as at Morning and at Night , and 't is incredible to think how much good this Practice will do them , and what great comfort you yourselves will reap from the early Devotion of your Children . 

To further this Devotion in your Children , instead of Idle Tales and Songs , which pollute their Souls , and when they come to be serious ▪ will cost them great pains to unlearn : You must teach them short Psalms by heart , which will exercise their Memories and Piety both together ; and as you teach the Psalms to your Children , I exhort you to learn them yourselves . 

You cannot imagine the great benefit of learning Psalms by heart ; for when you are under any Temptation , or are in any Affliction , or when you lie waking in the Night , or when you are Sick , these Psalms will come into your mind , and the Devout repeating them will yield you most seasonable Consolations . 

The very Common People , in the first and purest Ages of the Church , were so sensible of the Spiritual advantages of learning Psalms , that they learned the whole Psalter by heart , and sang or said the Psalms in their Shops , and at the Blow , insomuch that St. james makes it the proper expression of Christian mirth , [ jam● ▪ 5.13 . ] If any be merry , let him s●●g Psalms . 

This is the way to store your own and your children's minds with Ejaculations , or short Prayers for all Occasions , which I advice both Old and Young to accustom themselves to , because it is the true way of Praying without ceasing , and it is a kind of Prayer most easy , and may be used at any time of the day , or in any place , and is one of the most efficacious means in the World to keep us in God's favour 〈◊〉 is of all things most desirable . 

Ejaculations . 

At going out , or coming in . 

Lord , bless my going out and my coming in , from this time forth for evermore . [ Psal. 121.8 . ] 

At Meals . 

Lord grant , that whether I eat or drink , or whatever I do , I may do all to thy Glory . [ 1 Cor. 10.31 . ] 

At Work.  

prosper thou the work of my hands , OH Lord , OH prospero thou my handy work . [ Psal. 90.17 . ] 

In the Shop or Market . 

Lord , give me grace to use this World , so as not to abuse it . [ 1 Cor. 7.31 . ] 

Lord , grant that I may never go beyond , or defraud my brother in any matter , for thou art the Avenger of all such . 1 Thess. 4.6 . 

In temptation or danger . 

OH God , make speed to save me : OH Lord , make haste to help me . 

At any time of the day . 

Wherever I am , whatever I do , thou Lord seest me : OH keep me in thy fear all the day long . [ prov. 23.17 . ] 

Lord , give me grace to keep always a conscience void of offence towards thee , and towards men . [ Acts 24.16 . ] 

Lord , teach me so to number my days , that I may apply my heart to Wisdom . [ Psal. 90.12 . ] 

OH let my mouth be filled with thy Praise , that I may sing of thy Glory and Honour all the day long , [ Psal. 71.7 . ] 

All love , all glory be to thee , OH God , who didst first love me . 

Unto him that loved us , and washed us from our ●●nss in his own Blood , be glory and dominion for ever and ever . Amen . [ rev. 1.5 . ] 

OH blessed Spirit , shed abroad the love of God in my heart . 

Praise the Lord , OH my soul , and all that is within me , Praise his holy Name . [ Psal. 103.1 . ] 

Praise the Lord , OH my soul , while I live will I praise the Lord : yea as long as I have any being , I will sing Praises unto my God. [ Psal. 146.1 . ] 

You that have Families , I do further exhort , that besides your private Prayers , you would offer up to God a Morning and Evening Sacrifice in your Families , and that every one of you would take up the Holy Resolution of joshua , As for me , and my House , we will serve the Lord , [ josh. 24.15 . ] And the Prayers I advice you to use , are taken out of the Common Prayer , as being most familiar , and of greatest Authority withal . 

If any of your Family are gone abroad to their Work before the rest can be ready , call that little Congregation about you that is at home , and you that are present , pray for those that are absent , and by this means those that are absent upon necessary Employments , will share in the blessings for which you pray . 

Morning Prayer for a Family . 

Let the words of our mouths , and the meditations of our hearts , be always acceptable in thy sight : OH Lord , our Strength and our Redeemer . 

OH God the Father of Heaven , have mercy upon us miserable sinners . 

OH God the Son , Redeemer of the World , have mercy upon us miserable sinners . 

OH God the Holy Ghost , proceeding from the Father and the Son , have mercy upon us miserable sinners . 

OH Holy , Blessed and Glorious Trinity , three persons and one God , have mercy upon us miserable sinners . 

OH Lord we beseech thee , mercifully hear our Prayers , and spare all those who confess their sins unto thee , that they whose consciences by sin are accused , by thy merciful pardon may be absolved , through Christ our Lord Amen . 

Almighty God , who seest that we have no power of ourselves to help ourselves , we give thee humble thanks for thy preservation of us this day past [ or this night past ] and for all the blessings thou daily vouchsafest us ; and we beseech thee to keep us both outwardly in our bodies , and inwardly in our souls ; that we may be defended from all adversities which may happen to the body , and from all evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the soul , through jesus Christ our Lord Amen . 

Almighty God , whose Kingdom is everlasting , and power Infinite , have mercy upon the whole Church , and so rule the heart of thy chosen Servant James our King and Governor , that he ( knowing whose Minister he is ) may above all things seek thy Honour and Glory ; and that we and all his Subjects ( duly considering whose Authority he hath ) may faithfully serve , honour , and humbly obey him , in thee , and for thee , according to thy blessed Word and Ordinance , through jesus Christ our Lord , who liveth and reigneth ever one God , World without end . Amen . 

Unto thy gracious mercy and protection , OH Lord , do we commit ourselves this day [ or this night ] and all our relations and friends : Lord prospero us in our callings : Lord bless us and keep us : Lord make thy face to shine upon us , and be gracious unto us : Lord lift up thy countenance upon us , and give us Peace , both now and evermore , for the sake of jesus thy beloved , in whose own blessed Words , we sum up all our wants . 

Our Father which art in Heaven , etc.  

The same form , changing but one word , is proper for the Night as well as the Morning , to make Family Prayer the more easy to you . 

That Prayer which I have set down , wherein you pray for the King , and pray for yourselves also , that you may be good Subjects , I exhort you never to omit , because you know that the Country wherein you live , was the only seat of the late Rebellion , and the Tares of Sedition have been Industriously sown among you , and you have the greater reason to pray that you may continue firm in your Allegiance ; besides , St. Paul teaches you , that to Pray for Kings , is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour , [ 1 Tim. 2.2 , 3. ] 

To your Family Prayers , you may add , as you see occasion , one of these following . 

Almighty and everlasting God , give unto us the increase of Faith , Hope and Charity , and that we may obtain that which thou dost promise , make us to love that which thou dost command , through jesus Christ our Lord Amen . 

Lord we beseech thee , Grant thy people grace to withstand the temptations of the World , the Flesh and the Devil , and with pure hearts and minds to follow thee the only God , through jesus Christ our Lord Amen . 

Prevent us , OH Lord , in all our doings , with thy most gracious favour , and further us with thy continual help , that in all our works begun , continued , and ended in thee , we may glorify thy holy Name ; and finally , by thy mercy obtain everlasting life , through jesus Christ our Lord Amen . 

These and ●he like short Prayers , may be said alone in the Closet , as well as in the Family , by changing only the number , and for ( we ) saying all along ( ay ) and for ( us ) saying ( i . ) As for Example , when you read any part of the Holy Scripture , either alone by yourselves , or with your Families , both which you should do daily , if you have leisure , but if you have not , see that you do both on the Lord's days , and on Holy days , and before Reading , say this Prayer . 

Blessed Lord , who hast caused all Holy Scriptures to be written for our learning , Grant that we [ I ] may in such wise hear them , read , mark , learn , and inwardly digest them , that by patience and comfort of thy Holy Word , we [ I ] may embrace , and ever hold fast , the blessed hope of everlasting life , which thou hast given us in our Saviour jesus Christ. Amen . 

God of his infinite Mercy bless these Instructions to his Glory , and to the furtherance of your Devotions , through Jesus the Beloved . Amen . Amen . 

FINIS . 





See the Rubric after the Catechism .  Am. 1.1 . John 21.15 , 16.   James 2.23 .  Gen. 18.19 .  2 Tim. 1.5 .  3.15 .  Eph. 6.4 .  Phil. 1.6 .  Heb. 13.17 . 

The Happiness of a Christian.  The Christian's Choice .  Deut. 30.19 .  Ezek. 23.11 . Host 13.9 . His Duty is Love.   Luk. 10.27 , 28.  The nature of Love.  The method of Love.  Expulsion of contrary Loves in our Baptismal Vow . Repentance for our Vow broken .  Rom. 2.4 .  Psal. 51.17 .  jer. 9.1 .  Luke 7.47 . Our Vow renewed .  Psal. 38.18 . 1 Cor. 10.20 Eph. 2.2.12 .  john 13.2 .  2 Cor. 4.4 .  Mat. 4.3 .  Acts 19.19 .  1 Tim. 3.6 .  john 8.44 .  6.70 .  Acts 13.10 .  jude 6.   Tit. 2.12 .  1 Cor. 7.30 , 31.   Rom. 12.2 .  prov. 1.10 . 1 Cor. 15.33 .  john 17.15 . 1 john 5.19 .  james 4.4 .  Luke 14.26 .  Rom. 7.18.25.8.7 .  1 Pet. 2.11 . 1 john 2.15 . Gal. 5.19 .  2 Cor. 7.1   Pro. 15.9 .  Psal. 97.10 .  jer. 31.18 .  2 Cor. 3.4 . john 15.5 .  Phil. 4.13 .  1 Eph. 3. CITIZEN  Pet. 1.3 .  rev. 2.10 .  Ps. 119.106 .  1 Cor. 12.13 , 27.   Eph. 1.23 .  4.15 . 2 Col. 19   Luke 15.18 .  Gal. 3.26 , 27.   Rom. 8.16 , 17.   Mat. 3.17 . The Motives of Love.  Faith w●●king by lo●● it 's Object The Vnit● of God.  The Trim in Unity .  Gal. 5.6 . Faith working by love .  Deut. 32.4 . Heb. 6.18 .  Psal. 25.8 .  jam. 2.20 . It's Objects .  Deut. 4.35 . Isa. 44.6.45.5 , 6.  The Unity of God.  The Trinity in Unity .  Mat. 3.17.28.19 . joh. 1.5 , 7.   2 Cor. 13.14 . The first Person of the Trinity .  joh. 1.18.5.18 . His distinctive Property , Father .  joh. 3.16 . His Attributes .  joh. 4.23 , 24.   1 Pet. 1.16 .  Ps. 145.3 .  Ps. 115.3 .  Isai. 40.28 .  Mat. 19.17 .  Ps. 90.2 .  james 1.17 .  Psal. 139.1 , etc.   Ps. 147.5 .  Rom. 2.6 .  Psal. 16.11 .  1 Tim. 6.16 .  2 Cor. 12.9 .  Tit. 3.4 . Eph. 2.4 . Psal. 51.1 .  Cant. 5.16 . 1 joh. 4.8 , 16.  His Works .  Gen. 1.1 . Heb. 11.3 . Psal. 33.6 .  Deut. 10.14 . Psal. 89.11 .  Acts 17.28 .  Read the 145 Psalm .  Psal. 104.24 .  Mat. 6.26 , 28.10.30 .  Gen. 50.20 .  Gen. 1.26 .  Psal. 8.   Ps. 91.11 .  Psal. 111.2 , 3 , 4.   Ps. 68.19 .  Read the 103 Psalm . The second Person in the Trinity , God the Son. His Offices .  Mat. 1.21 .  1 Cor. 16.22 .  joh. 1.41 . Dan. 9.26 .  Gen. 3.15 .  Luk. 2.25 .  Acts 10.43 .  Col 2.17 .  Hag. 2.7 .  Acts 10.38 . Heb. 1.9 .  joh. 3.34 .  1.16 .  1 Sam. 15.1 .  Leu. 4.3.5.16 .  1 Kings 19.16 .  Mat. 3.16 .  joh. 4.25 . Acts 7.37 . Luk. 4.18 .  Luk. 1.33 .  Act. 3.26 .  Isa. 53.10 . Eph. 5.2 . Heb. 9.14 .  Rom. 8.34 . Heb. 7.25 . His two Natures . 1.  Of God. His Eternal generation .  Heb. 1.5 . Isa. 53.8 . john 1.1 .  Heb. 1.3 .  joh. 1.14.18.5.18 . Rom. 8.32 . Mat. 3.17 .  Phil. 2.6 .  1 Io. 5.1 . His Deity .  Tit. 2.13 .  1 Io. 5.20 .  jer. 23.6 .  Rom. 9.5 .  Isa. 63.1 .  john 1.3 .  Heb. 1.3 , 10.   Heb. 1.6 . Phil. 2.10 . joh. 5.23 .  rev. 19.16 .  Eph. 1.21 , 22.2.10 .  1 Cor. 6.20 .  Luk. 6.46 .  Of Man in his state of Humiliation . His Conception .  Luk. 1.31 , 34 , 35 , 42.  His Birth .  Luk. 2.6 , 7.   Luke 1.48 .  1 john 2.1 , 2.   job 14.4 .  joh. 1.29 .  1 Tim. 2.5 .  Eph. 4.5 .  joh. 1.14 . His Life of sorrow .  Luke 2.21 .  Mat. 2.13 , 16.   Isa. 53.3 .  Mat. 8.20 .  Heb. 4.15 .  Acts 10.38 .  Mat. 4.17 . Luke 4.18 .  Mat. 10.1 , 5.   11.5 .  2 Cor. 5.14 .  Rom. 8.29 . Phil. 2.5 . His Sufferings previous to his Crucifixion . Heb. 5.7 .  Mat. 26.38 . Luke 22.43 , 44.   Mat. 26.47.52.57 . john 18.4 .  Mat. 26.49 , 56 , 70.   john 18.12 .  Mat. 26.57 , 59  Luke 22.66 .  Mat. 26.67 . Luke 22.63 .  Mat. 27.2 .  Luke 23.6.11.12 .  Luke 23.14 , 18 , 19 , 21.  Mat. 27.3 , 4.5 .  john 19.1 . Psal. 129.3 .  Mat. 27.28 , 29.   Mar. 15.19 .  Mat. 27.24 , 26.  His Crucifixion .  john 19.17 .  Mat. 27.32 .  Mat. 27.38 .  Psal. 69.21 .  Mat. 27.39 . Luke 23.39 .  Gal. 3.13 .  Isa. 53.6 . His Death .  Luke 23.46 .  john 19.30 .  Mat. 27.51 . His unknown Sufferings .  Mat. 27.46 .  Isa. 63.3 .  Isa. 53.6 , 10.   Lam. 1.12 .  Gal. 3.13 .  Heb. 2.14 , 15.   Rom. 6.14 .  1 Thess. 1.10 .  Eph. 1.7 . Heb. 9.12 , 15.   1 john 4.19 .  Heb. 9.28 .  Phil. 2.7 .  Acts 20.28 .  1 john 4.8 .  Gal. 2.20.6.14 .  1 Cor. 2.2 .  Phil. 3.8 .  Luke 9.23 .  Rom. 6.6 . Gal. 5.24 .  Acts 21.13 .  1 Pet. 2.21 . His Burial and descent .  joh. 19.34 .  Mat. 27.57 , 60.   Eph. 4.9 .  Heb. 2.9 .  1 Cor. 15.55 , 56 , 57   Col. 2.15 . In his state of Exaltation . His Resurrection .  Luke 24.26 , 27.  Mat. 12.40 .  joh. 2.19 .  Acts 2.31 .  joh. 16.22 . His Ascension .  Luk. 24.51 . Acts 1.9 , 10.   joh. 14.2 .  Eph. 4.8 .  joh 10.7 .  Heb. 6.19 , 20.10.20 , 21.   Psal. 73.25 . His Session .  1 Pet. 3.22 .  rev. 5.8 , 9 , 12.   Rom. 8.34 . His coming to judgement .  Acts 1.11 . Phil. 3.20 ▪   2 Thess. 1.7 .  1 Cor. 15.52 .  Rom. 14.10 . Matt. 12.36 . rev. 20.12 .  Eccles. 12.13 , 14.   joh. 5.22 . The Third Person in the Trinity .  2 Cor. 3-17 , 18.   joh. 4.24 . Acts 5.3 .  Heb. 9.14 .  1 Cor. 2.10 .  Matt. 10.20 . Rom. 8.9 .  joh. 14.26.16.7 .  1 Pet. 1.15 .  Gal. 5.22 .  joh. 3.5 .  Luk. 11.13 .  Rom. 5.5 ▪   1 Cor. 6.19 . Our Belief of the Church 1.  Militant . it 's Nature .  Matt. 16.18 . Eph. 5.25 .  Col. 1.18 .  Matt. 28.19 .  26.26 .  Matt. 18.18 . joh. 20.22 , 23.   Acts 2.41 , 42 —  jude 3   2 Tim. 1.9 .  2 Tim. 2.19 .  Matt. 13.24 .  Matt. 16.18 . Matt. 28.20 .  Matt. 28.19 .  joh. 16.13 ▪  Communion .  1 joh. 1.7 .  Acts 2.42 , 46.   Gal. 6.10 .  Rom. 12 — 9 , etc. 1 Thess. 5.14 . Heb. 10.25 .  1 Cor. 12.13.26 .  Psal. 122.6 .  Heb. 12.22 .  Heb. 1.14 .  Psal. 34.7 .  1 joh. 1.3 . Phil. 2.1 . Reconciliation with God.   Mar. 2.7 .  1 joh. 1.9 .  3 Tit. 4.5 .  1 Pet. 1 — 18.   Rom. 5.8 , 10.   Rom. 5.  ● .  Triumphant . Resurrection .  1 Cor. 15.20 . john 5.28 , 29.   1 Cor. 15.54 .  job. 19.26 .  1 Cor. 15.53 . Phil. 3.21 . Happiness eternal .  Matt. 25.41 .  rev. 14.10 , 11 —  1 joh. 3.2 . 1 Cor. 13.12 .  1 Pet. 1.4 .  rev. 21.4 .  Mat. 29.34 . 

The Fruits of Love.   john 14.15 . Rules for expounding the Commandments  2 Cor. 6.14 .  Mat. 5.21 , 22 , 28. 1  Thess. 5.22 .  Heb. 10.24 . Mat. 5.16 .  prov. 24.16 .  2 Cor. 8.12 .  Psal. 119.2.6.112 .  Gen. 17.7 . Deut. 26.17 . Exod. 19.5 , 6.  Psal. 1●9 . 24.97 . The First Table .  Luke 14.26 . ●●●iess com●●nded .  Mat. 6.24   Deut. 1● . 12 .  joh. 17.3 ▪   Heb. 11.1.6 .  1 Pet. 1.4 .  Ps. 9.10 .  Psal. 34.8 .  Ps. 62.1.2 , 5.   Psal. 42.1 ▪   37.4 .  34.1 .  147.1 .  99.5 .  1 Cor. 10.31 .  Ezek. 18.20 .  Ps. 112.2 .  jam. 5.16 .  Ps. 115.1 ▪   Mat. 7 . 2● ▪   Ps. 39.9 .  Mat. 26.39 .  Phil. 1.9 .  Ps. 34.3.107.8 . Sins forbidden .  2 Tim. 3.2 .  1 john 2.15 .  2 Thes. 1.8 .  Ps. 14.1 .  jer. 16.11 .  2 Pet. 2.1 .  Heb. 10.39 .  2 Thess. 2.12 .  Ps. 50.21 .  Mat. 27.5 .  Ps. 78.22 .  Eccl. 8.11 .  Col. 2.18 .  Ps. 52.7 .  Leu. 20.6 .  2 Tim. 3.2 .  Ps. 10.4 .  rev. 3.15 , 16.   Zeph. 1.12 .  Luke 19.41 .  Isa. 5.12 .  Isa. 29.13 .  Pro. 8.13 .  Rom. 2.8 .  1 Cor. 10.10 .  Ps. 141.4 . Sins forbidden .  Deut. 7.25 , 26.27.15 .  Deut. 4.15 . Isa. 40.18 ▪ Act. 17.29 ▪   Isa. 2.8 , 9 ▪   rev. 19 ▪ 10.14.9 ▪ 10.   prov. 2● . 25 .  Mat. 21.13 .  Mat. 13 ▪ 15.  jam. 1.22 ▪   Luke 1● ▪ 16.   jer. 10.  ●●3 .  Deut. 4.  ● ▪ Ps. 106 . 3●●   Eccles. 5.  ●● Mal. 1.7 , ● ▪ 14.   Mat. 1● ▪ 9 , 11.   Isa. 45.23 . Duties commanded .  Isa. 8 . 1●   joh. 4 . 2● ▪   Ps. 95.  ● ▪ Mat. 26.3 ▪   Gen. 28.17 . john 2.17 .  Psal. 84.1 , etc. 48.9.36.8.63.1 , 2 , 5.   Luk. 8.15 . 1 Thess. 2.13 .  Mat. 10.40 .  Leu. 19.30 .  Ezek. 22.8 , 26.   1 Cor. 14.4.26.40 . The reason of the Commandment .  Deut. 4.24 . Isa. 42.8 . Exod. 34.14 , 15.   Ps. 79.5 .  Isa. 65.6 , 7.  Ezek. 18.17 , 20.  jer. 31.30 .  Deut. 7.10 .  1 john 3.8 . Rom. 1.30 . joh. 15.18 .  Deut. 4.40 . Duties commanded .  Psal. 83.18 .  Psal. 5.11 . Psal. 29.2.72 , 19  Ezek. 36.23 . Neh. 9.5 .  Psal. 111 ▪ 9   Isa. 12.4 . 28 . 1 ▪   Psal. 51.15 .  Mat. 5.16 .  Mat. 10.32 . 1 Pet. 3.15 .  1 Kings 19.10 .  1 Cor. 10.31 . The honour of God's Name is more particularly concerned in Oaths ,  Gen. 31.50.53 .  Deut. 6.13 .  Heb. 6.16 .  jer. 42.   Psal. 15.4 . 2 Sam. 21.7 . And in Vows .  Eccles. 5.4 , 5.   Gen. 28.20 , 21 , 22.   Num. 30.5 , 8.   Psal. 132.2 .  Psal. 61.8 . Sins forbidden .  Deut. 28.58 .  Psal. 139.20 .  Deut. 18.10 , 11 , 12.   Psal. 10.11 , 13.50.21 .  james 2.7 . Leu. 24.16 .  Tit. 1.16 .  john 12.42 .  Psal. 139.21 .  Matt. 5.34 , 35 , 36 , 37.   Zach. 8.17.5.4 . jer. 23.10 . Host 4.2 , 3.   Mal. 1.14 . jer. 44.25 .  Psal. 22.25 . The Threat annexed to the Commandment .  Psal. 74.10 , 18 , 22 , 23.   Isa. 52.5 .  1 john 4.8 . Duties commanded .  Isa. 58.13 .  josh. 24.15 .  prov. 12.10 .  2 Acts 1.   Mar. 3.4 .  Col. 2 ▪ 16.17 .  Heb. 4.9 .  Ps. 42.4 . Isa. 58.6 , 7.8.10 . Reason of the Commandment .  Gen. 2.2 .  Acts 20.7 . 1 Cor. 16.2 .  rev. 1.10 .  Luke 24.1 .  Mat. 5.20 .  Phil. 1.9 . Sins forbidden .  Ezek. 20.13 , 16 , 24.   Mark 2.24 . Luke 6.7 .  Neh. 13.15 .  Deut. 12.7 .  Luke 13.15 .  Deut. 6.12.8.14 . The Second Table .  Luke 10.29 , 30.   1 Pet. 2.17 .  Mat. 7.12 .  1 joh. 3.18 .  Col. 3.12 .  Eph. 5.29 .  Luke 6.36 . Duties commanded in general .  1 Pet. 2.17 . In particular , Of Natural Parents .  Deut. 6.6 , 7.  Ephes. 6.4 . Col. 3.21 . 2 Cor. 12.14 . Of Children .  Ephes. 6.1 ▪ 〈◊〉 , 3.  Col. 3.20 .  Matt. 16.4 , etc.  Of Political Parents . The King.   prov. 8.15 .  1 Tim. 2.1 , 2.  The Queen and Royal Family . Of Subjects .  Rom. 13.1 , etc. 1 Pet. 2.13 . Tit. 3.1 . Of Ecclesiastical Parents .  Mal. 2.7 . Of the People under their care .  2 Cor. 5.20 .  Heb. 13.7 , 17. 1  Tim. 5.17 . Of Oeconomical Parents , Master and Mistress .  Col. 4.1 . Ephes. 6.9 . Of Servants .  1 Tim. 6.1 , 2.  Col. 3.22 , 23 , 24.  Eph. 6.5 , 6 , 7 , 8.  Of other Superiors .  Leu. 19.32 . 1 Tim. 5.1 , 2 , 3. CITIZEN  Pet. 5.5 .  Gal. 6.6 . Of Equals and Inferiors .  Rom. 14.10 . 1 Pet. 3.8 . Sins forbidden .  2 Tim. 3.2 , 3 , 4.   1 Sam. 26.9 Eccl. 10.20 . Act. 23.5 .  Mat. 10.14 .  1 Cor. 1.10 . 3 Epist. john 9   2 Tit. 9.10 . Mal. 2.10 . promise annexed to the Commandment .  Ephes. 6.2 .  Isa. 57.1 . Sins forbidden .  jam. 4.1 , 2.  Gen. 4.10 , 11.   Gal. 5.21 .  Luk. 22.2 .  Exod. 21.22 , 23.   Tit. 3.3 .  Eph. 4.26 . Rom. 1.30 , 31.   Matth. 5.22 .  Ephes. 4.29 , 31.   1 Tim. 5.23 . Eph. 5.29 .  1 Tim. 5.22 . Duties commanded .  2 Cor. 10.1 . Gal. 5.22 .  1 john 3.17 .  1 Cor. 13.4 .  Mat. 5.44 . Rom. 12.20 .  Dan. 12.3 . jam. 5.20 . Sins forbidden .  Mat. 5.29 .  Ephes. 5.11 , 12.4.19 .  Eph. 4.29 .  5.3 , 4 , 5. 1  Tim. 2.9 . 1 Pet. 3.3 .  Rom. 13.13 , 14. 1  Pet. 4.3 .  1 Tim. 2.12 . Mat. 19.6 . Duties commanded .  1 joh. 3.3 .  2 Pet. 1.4 .  2 Con. 7.1 .  1 Thess. 4.4 .  job 31.1.7 .  2 Tim. 2.22 .  1 Cor. 9.27 . Duty of married persons .  1 Cor. 7.9 .  Gen. 2.20 .  Eph. 5.22 , 23 , 24 , etc.   Col. 3.18 , 19 1  Pet. 3.1.7 . 1 Cor. 7.3 , 4 , 5.   Heb. 13.4 . Sins forbidden .  E●h . 4.28 . 1 Pet. 4.15 .  1 Cor. 6.9 , 10.   1 Thess. 4.6 . Amos 8.5 .  prov. 20.14 .  james 5.4 .  Psal. 37.21 .  Luk. 19.8 .  prov. 22.22 , 23 , 28.   jer. 7.6 . Duties commanded .  prov. 11.1.20.10.17.21 .  Matt. 5.23 .  1 Cor. 7.31 .  Luk. 11.41 —  2 Thess. 3.10 , 12.   Psal. 37.26 .  Luk. 17.3 , 4.  Sins forbidden .  Psal. 82.2 . Matt. 26.60 . Tit. 2.3 . Micah 3.9 .  Matt. 7.1 . prov. 26.18 , etc. james 3.6 . 2.  Pet. 2.12 , 18.   Rom. 1.29 . 1 Tim. 5.13 . Exod. 23.1 .  Eph. 4.25 , 31.  Duties commanded .  prov. 23.23 . Psal. 119.163 . joh. 8.44 .  prov. 22.1 . Eccles. 7.1 .  1 Cor. 13.5 , 7.  Sins forbidden .  Matt. 5.28 .  Mat. 6.24 , 25 , etc. 13.22 .  1 King. 21.4 , 5.   1 Rom. 32.  jam. 5.5 . 2 Pet. 2.13 .  Matt. 15.19 . Duties commanded .  prov. 23.26 ▪ 4.23 . Matt. 15.19 .  Psal. 51.10 .  1 jam. 14.15 .  Heb. 13.5 . Phil. 4.11 , 12. 1  Tim. 6.6 .  Rom. 12.15 . 

Previous considerations . Our Impotence to good . God is our Refuge .  2 Cor. 3.5 .  Psal. 62.7 . john 15.4.5 . Our Assistance from God.   Eph. 3.16 . Phil. 4.13 .  2.13 . Gained by Prayer .  Rom. 1● . 13  Encouragements to Pray .  Psal. 50 15.   Phil. 4.6 .  Zach. 12.10 .  Rom. 8.26 .  Mat. 7.7 ▪  A Pattern of Prayer . A Form most condescending .  Mat. 6.7 , 8 , 9  Luk. 11 . 2●  Most Divine . Most Acceptable . Necessity of Prayer Misery of those who do not Pray .  Psal. 10 ▪ 4.   Psalm 109.7 . Prayer Aught to be daily .  Psalm 5.3.141.2 . Incessant .  jude 20.21 .  1 Thes. 5.17 . joined with reading and meditation .  Psal. 1.2 . The method of Prayer . The Preface teaches how to pray . 

To whom ? To God only . 

For jesus sake . 

With the affections of a Child . 

 Psal. 65.2 .  john 16.23 . Ephes. 1.6.2 ▪ 18.   Isa. 63.15 , 16.  Luke 11.13 . Mal. 1.6 . Of a Brother .  Eph. 4.6 . 1 Pet. 3.8 . With the humility of a Supplicant .  Eccl. 5.1 . Hebr. 12.28 , 29.   Psal. 11.4 . Isa 57.15  Petitions in general teach us for what to Pray . For things lawful . And in what order .  1 john 5.14 , 15.   Mat. 6.33 .  Mat. 11.12 .  Gen. 32.26 . In particular for Blessings Spiritual relating to God.   Psal. 8.1.9.111.9 .  Ps. 148.   Ps. 145.9 , 10.   Luke . 1.32 Mat. 3.2 . 1 Col. 13.   Isa. 2.2.3   joh. 18.36 .  1 Pet. 3.13 . Mal. 12.28 , 29 ,  2 Pet. 1.11 .  Rom. 7.12 .  1 joh. 5.   Mat. 18.10 .  Mat. 18.10 .  Ps. 103.20 .  Psal. 34.8 . Petitions relating to ourselves .  Ps. 145.16 .  prov. 30.8 , 9   1 Tim. 4.4 . 1 Tim. 6.6 . 1 Pet. 5.7 .  Gen. 3.19 . Deut. 21.17 .  Eccl. 5.19 . Mich. 6.14 .  joh. 4.34 .  Mat. 6.12 . Luk. 11.4 .  Mat. 18.22 , 24 , 28.   jer. 17.9 .  Mat. 8.31 .  Mat. 4.1.9 .  1 Cor. 10.13 . 1 Pet. 5.8 . 2 Cor. 12.7 , 9  jam. 4.7 .  1 joh. 2.14 .  Gal. 1.4 .  Heb. 3.12 . The Conclusion teaches to Pray for a right end , God's Glory .  Phil. 4.6 . Neh. 9.5 , 6.   Psal. 47.2.7 .  135.6 .  Ps. 96.7 , 8.   2 Cor. 1.  rev. 3.14 . 

The Pledges of Love.  The Sacraments . Their Number .  joh. 19.34 .  joh. 3.5 6.53 .  Luke 14.24 . Nature .  Mal. 26.26 , 27 , 28.  Baptism . The Outward sign .  Mal. 28.19 . The Invisible Grace .  Ezek. 36.25 .  1 Pet. 3.21 .  Rom. 6.3 , 4.   Tit. 3.5 .  john 3.5 .  Psalms , 51.5 .  Eph. 2.1 .  Rom. 8.15 . Conditions required , 1.  Repentance .  2 Tim. 2.19 . 2.  Faith.   2 Pet. 1.4 .  Marinell ▪ 10.16 . Sureties .  ● 5.   Mar. ● . 5 . The Supper of the Lord  Institution . Parts outward . Invisible .  john 6.54 , etc.  Real Presence .  1 Cor. 10.16 .  joh. 20.22 .  1 Cor. 11.29 . Both kinds .  Mat. 26.26 , 27.  joh. 6.53 . Benefits . Preparation .  Mat. 11.28 . Luke 14.17 . Examination .  1 Cor. 11.28 .  Psal. 19.12 . Repentance . Amendment . Faith.   Eph. 1.1 . Thanksgiving .  Ps. 42.1.2.63.1 . Charity .  Eph. 5.2 . In Forgiving .  Mat. 6.14 , 15.  Restoring . Giving .  Matt. 25 35.  Prayer for the Holy Spirit . Thanksgiving for our Redemption . Confession . Praise . Prayer for our Communicating worthily . Praise . For Fear and Love.  For Love.  For Charity . For Imitation of Christ.  