OR The Vocal Music IN PSYCHE , WITH THE INSTRUMENTAL Therein Intermixed . 

To which is Adjoined The INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC IN THE TEMPEST . 

BY MATTHEW LOCK , Composer in Ordinary to His MAJESTY , and Organist to the QUEEN . 

Licenced 1675.  ROGER L'ESTRANGE . 

LONDON , Printed by T. Ratcliff , and N. Thompson for the Author , and are to be Sold by John Carr at his shop at the Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet , MDCLXXV . 

To the Most Illustrious PRINCE JAMES Duke of MONMOUTH . 

May it Please Your Grace . 

The AUTHOR having made PSYCHE Yours by his Humble Dedication , these Compositions with the same Submission Prostrate Themselves to your Grace , who gave them Life by your often hearing them practised , and encouraged & heartened the almost heartless Undertakers & Performers . 

MY LORD , 

I humbly beg your Graces Pardon for this Presumption , and your Favour that I may Subscribe myself , 

Your Graces , Most Obliged Humble Servant , 

MATTHEW LOCK . 

PREFACE . 

That Poetry and Music , the chief manifesters of Harmonical Fancy , should produce such discordant effects in many , is more to be pitied than wondered at ; it being become a kind of fashionable wit , to Peck and Carp at other men's conceptions , how mean soever their own are . Expecting therefore to fall under the Lash of some soft headed , or hard hearted Composer ( for there are too many better at finding of faults then mending them ) I shall endeavour to remove those few blocks which perhaps they may take occasion to stumble at . 

The first may be the Title , OPERA . To this I must answer , That the word is borrowed of the Italian ; who by it , distinguish their Comedies from their Operas ; Those , a short Plot being laid , the Comedians according to their different Themes given , Speak , and Act Extempore ; but these after much consideration , industry and pains for splendid Scenes and Machine's to Illustrate the Grand Design , with Art are composed in such kinds of Music as the Subject requires : and accordingly performed . Proportionable to which are these Compositions ( the Reader being referred to the Book of the whole work for the particular Excellencies ) Their nature for the most part being soft , easy , and , as far as my ability could reach , agreeable to the design of the Author : for in them you have from Ballad to single Air , Counterpoint , Recitative , Fuge , Canon , and Chromatic Music ; which variety ( without vanity be it said ) was never in Court or Theatre till now presented in this Nation : though I must confess there has been something done , ( and more by me than any other ) of this kind . And therefore it may justly wear the Title , though all the Tragedy be not in Music : for the Author prudently considered , that though Italy was , and is the great Academy of the World for that Science and way of Entertainment , England is not : and therefore mixed it with interlocutions , as more proper to our Genius . 

Another may be , The extreme Compass of some of the parts . To which , the Idols of their own imagination may be pleased ( if possible ) to know , that he who Composes for Voices , not considering their extent , is like a Botching Stult , who being obliged to make Habits for men , cuts them out for Children . I suppose it needs no Explication . 

The next may be , The extravagancies in some parts of the Composition , wherein ( as among slender Grammarians ) they may think fixed rules are broken : but they may be satisfied , that whatever appears so , is only by way of Transition from Time or half-time Concord's , and covered by the extreme Parts : or to suspend the Ear and Judgement , for satisfying both in the Cadence . 

then , against the performance , They sing out of Tune . To which with modesty it may be answered , He or she that is without fault may cast the first Stone : and for those seldom defects , the mayor part of the Vocal performers being ignorant of Music , their Excellencies when they do well , which generally are so , rather ought to be admired , than their accidental mistakes upbraided . 

The next ( and I hope the last ) is , or may be , Why after so long exposed , is it now Printed ? 

First , to manifest my duty to several persons of Honour , who expected it . 

Secondly , to satisfy those Lovers and Understanders of Music , whose business or distance prevent their seeing and hearing it . 

Thirdly , that those for whom it was Composed ( though perchance ignorant of the Quality ) by the quantity may be convinced , the Composing and Teaching it was not in a Dream ; and consequently , that if the Expense they have been at , do not answer their big Expectation , the fault 's their own , not mine . 

Finally , ( by way of Caution ) to prevent what differences may happen between them , and whoever they may have occasion to employ for the future , that on either side there be no dependence on good Words or Generosity . 

The Instrumental Music before and between the Acts , and the Entries in the Acts of Psyche are omitted by the consent of their Author , Signior Gio. Baptista Draghi . The Tunes of the Entries and Dances in the Tempest ( the Dancers being changed ) are omitted for the same reason . 

The Erratas in this Impression , which are not many , the Printer desire's pardon for , it being his first attempt in this kind ; and hopes if it fall into ingenious hands they 'll Correct them : and is confident what he shall undertake for the future , shall be as free from Mistakes , as any thing that has hitherto been published . 

Sold by John Carr , Musical Instrument-seller , at his Shop in the Middle-temple Gate in Fleetstreet . 

ALL sorts of Books , and Ruled Paper , Songs , and Airs Vocal and Instrumental ready pricked , Lutes , Viols , Violins , Gittars , Flageletts , Castinets , Strings , and all sorts of Musical Instruments , 

And also Mr. Tho. Salmon's Essay to the advancement of Music , by casting away the perplexity of different Cliffs , price 2ss . 

Also Melothesia , or certain general Rules for Playing upon a continued Bass ; with a choice Collection of Lessons for the Harpsicord and Organ of all sorts , never before Published ; all carefully reviewed by Mr. Matthew Lock , Composer in Ordinary to His Majesty , and Organist to the Queen . 

ACT. I  

PSYCHE retiring from her Father's Court , is thus entertained by PAN , and his Followers . 

Great Psyche Goddess of each Field and Grove , whom every Prince and every God does Love. : To your all-commanding hand Pan yields his Sovereign command . For You the Satyrs and the Fawns shall nimbly trip it o'er the Lawns : For You the Shepherd's Pipe and sing , and with their Nymphs Dance in a Ring . Fruits shall they bring , and pretty Garlands wove , and shall the Meads of all their sweets bereave . 



PAN.   Vertumnus and Flora their Tributes shall pay , and to Psyche shall dedicate this happy day . The Sylvans and Dryads shall dance all a round , And PSYCHE dread Queen of this place shall be Ground . My loved Syrinx and Echo shall Sing and shall Play , and to Psyche shall dedicate this happy Day . Retornello . The Nymphs . And Pan who before all here did command , now resigns all his Empire to Psyche's fair Hand . 



Chorus and Violins .  Retornello . And Pan who before all here did com╌mand , now resigns all his Empire to Psyche's fair hand . The second time repeat this soft , Retor . and Chorus again . And Pan who before all here did com╌mand , now resigns all his Empire to Psyche's fair hand . And Pan who before all here did com╌mand , now resigns all his Empire to Psyche's fair hand . manned , now resigns all his Empire to Psyche's fair hand . 



After a Rustic Dance of Sylvans and Dryads , follows the Song of Echoes planted at Distances within the SCENES . 

Loud . Soft . Softer . Great Psyche shall find no such pleasure as here , no such pleasure as here , as here . Lowd . Soft . Softer . Lowd . Where her dutiful Subjects shall all stand in awe , shall all stand in awe , in awe . Her frowns and her Where her dutiful Subjects shall all stand in awe , shall all stand in awe , in awe . Her frowns and her Her frowns and her Soft . Softer . Lowd . Smiles shall give us all Law , shall give us all Law , all Law. And from us of Rebellion she Smiles shall give us all Law , shall give us all Law , all Law. And from us of Rebellion she Smiles shall give us all Law , shall give us all Law , all Law. And from us of Rebellion she need have no fear . She need have no fear , no fear . How happy are those that inhabit this need have no fear , She need have no fear , no fear . How happy are those that inhabit this need have no fear , She need have no fear , no fear . How happy are those that inhabit this need have no fear , She need have no fear , no fear . How happy are those that inhabit this place where a sigh is never heard , where no falsehood we meet , where each single heart a╌place , where a sigh is never heard , where no falsehood we meet , where each single heart a╌place , where a sigh is never heard , where no falsehood we meet , where each single heart a╌place , where a sigh is ne╌re heard , where no falsehood we meet , where each single heart a╌grees with the face : no Climate was ever so calm and so sweet , was ever so calm and so grease with the face : no Climate was ever so calm and so sweet , was ever so calm and so grease with the face : no Climate was ever so calm and so sweet , was ever so calm and so grease with the face : no Climate was ever so calm and so sweet , was ever so calm and so sweet . So calm and so sweet , so sweet . sweet . So calm and so sweet , so sweet . sweet , so calm and so sweet , so sweet . sweet , so calm and so sweet , so sweet . 

To beauteous Psyche all Devotion is due , all Devotion is due , is due , 
Our humble Offerings she will not despise she will not despise , despise . 
Since the Tribute is offered from hearts that are true from hearts that are due , are true . 
From hearts all devoted to Psyche's bright eyes , to Psyche's bright eyes , bright eyes . 
Chorus . 

How happy are are they , etc.  
Song of Envy and Furies . 

Envy .  Nvy against Psyche such black storms shall raise , as all her powerful beams shall never dispel beyond her strength , beyond her strength shall be her suffering ; 



First Fury .  Her to the greatest misery I 'll bring , and ever i  done I 'll send her down to Hell. In Hell too late you shall re╌lent ; and all your arrogance repent . 



Second Fury .  We Furies will torment your soul , 



First .  & you shall weep & howl , 



Second .  and at the sight of every snake tremble & quake . 



Envy .  There you shall weep eternally , and to the quick shall feel each lash we give . There you shall always wish to die , and yet in spite of you shall always live . 



Chorus .  There you shall always wish to die , and yet in spite of you shall always live . There you shall always wish to die , and yet in spite of you shall always live . There you shall always wish to die , and yet in spite of you shall always live . There you shall always wish to die , and yet in spite of you shall always live . 



Simphony at the descending of Venus in her Chariot drawn by Doves . 

Venus .  With kindness I your Prayers receive , and to your hopes success will give . I have with anger seen Mankind adore your Sister's beauty , and her scorn deplore , which they shall do no more , for their Idolatry I 'll so resent , as shall your wishes to the full content . Your Father is with Psyche now , & to Apollo's Oracle they 'll go , her Destiny to know . I by the God of wit shall be obeyed , for wit to beauty still is subject made . he 'll so resent your cause & mine , that you will not repine , but will opplaud the Oracles design . 



The end of the First ACT.  

ACT. II  

The Song of Procession in the Temple of APOLLO , accompanied with Wind and Strung Instruments . 

Let 's to Apollo's Altar now repair , and offer up our Vows and Prayer , Let 's to Apollo's Altar now repair , and offer up our Vows and Prayer , Let 's to Apollo's Altar now repair , and offer up our Vows & Prayer , Let 's to Apollo's Altar now repair , and offer up our Vows & Prayer , Let us in╌quire fair Psyche's Destiny . Let us in╌quire fair Psyche's Destiny . Let us inquire fair Psyche's Destiny . Let us inquire fair Psyche's Destiny . The Gods to her will sure propitious be , if Innocence & beauty The Gods to her will sure propitious he , if Innocence & beauty The Gods to her will sure propitious be , if Innocence and beauty The Gods to her will sure propitious be , if Innocence and beauty may go free . may go free . may go free . may go free . The Gods to her will sure propitious be , if Innocence and beauty may go free . The Gods to her will sure propitious be , if Innocence and beauty may go free . The Gods to har will sure propitious be , if Innocence and beauty may go free . The Gods will sure to her propitious be , if Innocence and beauty may go free . soft . Go on , and to the Altar lead , and to the Altar lead . Go on , and to the Altar lead , and to the Altar lead . Go on , and to the Altar lead , go on and to the Altar lead , and to the Altar lead . Go on , and to the Altar lead , and to the Altar lead . 



Chief Priest.   This halloued ground let no man tread , who is defiled with whordom or with blood , lest all our Prayers should be for them withstood . Let none be present at our Sacrifice , but of an humble uncorrupted mind ; The God for wicked men will all our Vows despise , and will to all our wishes be unkind . 



After a short Ceremony at the Altar , the Chief Priest goes on . Son of Latona & great Jove , in Delos born , which thou so much dost love . Great God of Physic and of Archery , of Wisdom , wit and Harmony , God of all Divinations too : To Thee our Vows and Prayers are due , To thee our Vows and Prayers are due . 



Chorus .  To thee our Vows and Prayers are due , to thee our Vows and Prayers are due . To thee our Vows and Prayers are due , to thee our Vows and Prayers are due . To thee our Vows and Prayers are due , to thee our Vows and Prayers are due . To thee our Vows and Prayers are due , to thee our Vows and Prayers are due . 



Chief Priest.   thou gav'st the cruel Serpent Python death , depivd'st the Giant Tyrion of his breath . thou didst the monstrous Cyclops too destroy , who formed the Thunder which did kill thy Son.  



Chorus .  thou light of all our Life , and all our Joy , our offering with our hearts are all thy own . thou light of all our Life , and all our Joy , our offerings with our hearts are all thy own . thou light of all our Life , and all our Joy , our offerings with our hearts are all thy own . thou light of all our Life , and all our Joy , our offerings with our hearts are all thy own . 



Chief Priest.   By Sacred Hyacinth thy much loved Flowers , By Daphne's memory we thee Implore thou wouldst be present at our Sacrifice , and not our humble Offerings despise . 



Chorus .  And we for ever will thy praise advance , thy praise advance . thou author of all light & heat , let Pipes & Timbrels And we for ever will thy praise advance , thy praise advance . thou author of all light & heat , let Pipes & Timbrels And we for ever will thy praise advance , thy praise advance . thou author of all light & heat , let Pipes & Timbrels And we for ever will thy praise advance , thy praise advance . thou author of all light & heat , let Pipes & Timbrels sound , & let them dance , each day our worship we 'll repeat , each day our worship we 'll repeat . sound , & let them dance , each day our worship we 'll repeat , each day our worship we 'll pepeat . sound , & let them dance , each day our worship we 'll repeat , each day our worship we 'll repeat . sound , & let them dance , each day our worship we 'll repeat . 



After a Dance of Priests with Cymbals , Bells , and Flambeaux , etc.  The Chief Priest with his Attendants mingle with the Dancers , Singers , and Instruments in the following Song . 

TO Apollo , to Apollo our Celestial King , we will Io Paean sing , Io Paean , Io Paean , To Apollo , to Apollo our Celestial King , we will Io Paean sing , Io Paean , Io Paean , To Apollo , to Apollo our Celestial King , we will Io Paean sing , Io Paean , Io Paean , To Apollo , to Apollo our Celestial King , we will Io Paean sing , Io Paean Io Paean , Soft . Io Paean will we sing , Io Paean , Io Paean , Io Paean , Io Paean , Io Paean will we sing , Io Paean will we sing Io Paean will we sing , Io Paean , Io Paean , Io Paean , Io Paean , Io Paean will we sing , Io Paean will we sing Io Paean will we sing , Io Paean , Io Paean , Io Paean , Io Paean , Io Paean will we sing , Io Paean will we sing Io Paean will we sing , Io Paean , Io Paean , Io Paean , Io Paean , Io Paean will we sing , Io Paean will we sing 

The Scene being changed to a Rocky Desert full of dreadful Caves and Cliffs ; Two despairing Men , and Two despairing Women enter , and Sing as follows . 

First Man   Break , break distracted heart , there is no cure for love , my minds too raging calenture . 



First Woman .  Sighs which in other Passion vent , and give them ease when they lament , are but the Bellowss to my hot desire . 



Second Woman . Second Man   And tears in me not quench , but nourish Fire . 



First Man   Nothing , nothing can mollify my grief , or give my Passion a relief . Love is not like our earthly Fire , You soon may smother out that flame , concealing does increase desire ; no opposition Love can tame . 



2d Woman .  Despair in Love transcends all pain ; lost hope will ne'er return again . 



First Woman   In Hell there 's no such misery as now oppresses me ; I this one pang alone would change for s syphus his stone . 



Second Man   I would the torments which I feel , change for Ixion's wheels . 



Second Woman .  The Vulture should on me for ever feed , rather than thus my heart for love should bleed . O Tantalus ! for thy eternal Thirst , I m more on Earth than thou in Hell accursed . 



First Woman . second Woman . 1st . Man 2d Man   Was ever grief like mine ? like mine ? like mine ? like mine ? 



First Man   Was ever grief like mine ? was ever ever grief like mine ? 



2d . Woman .  Was ever grief like mine ? was ever grief like mine ? 



2d . Man 1st . Man   Was ever grief like mine ? Was ever grief like mine ? Was ever grief like mine . 



2d . Woman . 1st . Woman . 1st . Man 2. Man   nothing , but death , but death can cure our misery . I 'll die , I 'll die , I 'll die . 



Chorus . 1st . Man   Nothing but death , but death can cure our misery . Nothing but death can cure our misery . 



2d . Woman .  Nothing but death , but death can cure our misery . Nothing but death can cure our misery . 



2d . Man   Nothing but death , but death can cure our misery , but death can cure our misery . 



1st Man   Nothing but death can cure our m╌se╌ry , but death can cure our misery . 



ACT. III  

The Scene is the Palace of Cupid , where ( after a Dance by Cyclops ) Vulcan enters , and sings the following Song . 

ye bold sons of Earth that attend upon Fire , make haste to the Palace lest Cupid should stay ; you must not be lazy when love does require ; for Love is impatient , & brooks no delay , when Cupid you serve you must toil & must sweated , redouble your blows , and your labour repeat . Retornello . 

The vig'rous young Cupid's not with laziness served 
He makes all his Vassals their diligence show , 
and nothing from him but with pains is deserved , 
The brisk youth that falls on , & still follows his blow 
is his favourite still . The considerate fool 
He as useless lay by for a pitiful Tool . 


Retornello again , and then go on . 1st . Cycl . 2d Cycl .  This Palace is finished , and the other shall be made fit for his small Deity . But Fire makes us Retornello . Choleric and apt to repine , unless you will give us some Wine . 



Chorus .  With swinging great Bowls let 's refresh our dry Souls , & then we 'll to work with a Clink clink With swinging great bowls let 's refresh our dry souls , & then we 'll to work with a Clink , clink , With swinging great bowls le 's refresh our dry souls , & then let 's to work with a Clink clink , With swinging great bowls let's refreh our dry souls , and then we 'll to work with a Clink clink , Clink , but first let us drink , but first let us drink . Clink , but first let us drink , but first let us drink . Vulcan Clink , but first let us drink , but first let us drink . Let each take his Clink , but first let us drink , but first let us drink . 



2d . Cyclops .  Bowl then , and hold to his nose , then let him redouble his blows ; Naystint us not so , but let each take his two , and twice as much then can we do . Retornello . Chorus and Retorn . as before . With swinging great Bowls , etc.  



Vulcan .  ye slaves will you never from Drunkeness refrain ? 
Ulysses will catch you again . 


4th . Cyclops .  Ulysses is a Dog , were he here he should find , 
we 'd scorn him , and drink ourselves blind . 


Retor . Cho. & Retor . as before . 1st . Cyclops . 2d . Cyclops 3d. Cyclops . 4th . Cyclops   Here Harps to you . Here Brontes to you , & so take each Cyclops his due . To thee Steropes . Pyraman to thee ▪ 



Omnes .  Retor . soft . And thus in our cups we 'll agree . And thus in our cups we 'll agree . And thus in our cups we 'll agree . And thus in our cups we 'll agree . 



Chor. and Retorn . as before , and then go on . Vulcan .  Be gone , or great Jove will for Thunderbolts stay , 
The World grows so wicked each day . 


2d . Cyclops .  He has lesle need of Thunder than we have of Wine , 
we 'll drink though great Jove should repine . 


Cho. and Retorn . again as before , and then go on . The Song at the Treat of Cupid and Psyche . 

ALL Joy to fair Psyche in this happy place , & to our great Mr. : who her shall embrace ; may never his love nor her beauty decay , but be warm as the spring , and still fresh as the day . 



Chorus . no Mortals on Earth ever wretched could prove , if still while they no Mortals on Earth ever wretched could prove , if still while they no Mortals on Earth ever wretched could prove , if still while they no Mortals on Earth ever wretched could prove , if still while they Soft . Lived they 'd be always in Love , if still while they lived they 'd be always in love , Lived they 'd be always in love , if still while they lived they 'd be always in love . Lived they 'd be always in love , if still while they lived they 'd be always in love , Lived they 'd be always in love , if still while they live they 'd be always in love . there 's none without love ever happy can be ; without it each brute were as happy as we . The knowledge men boast of does nothing but vex , & their wand'ring reason their minds does perplex . 



Chorus again as before , then go on . Love's sighs and his tears are mixed with delights ; But were he still pestered with Love's sighs and his tears are mixed with delights ; But were he still pestered with Cares and with frights : Should a thousand more trouble's a Lover invade , By Carer and with frights : Should a thousand more trouble's a Lover invade , By One happy moment they 'd fully be paid . One happy moment they 'd fully be paid . 



The Chorus again as before , then go on . then loose not a moment but in pleasure employ it , for a moment once lost will then lose not a moment but in pleasure employ it , for a moment once lost will then lose not a moment but in pleasure employ it , for a moment once lost will always be so ; Your Youth requires Love , let it fully enjoy it , and push on your always be so ; Your Youth requires Love , let it fully enjoy it , and push on yorr always be so ; Your Youth requires Love , let it fully enjoy it , and push on your Chorus . Nature as far as 't will go . no mortals on earth ever wretched could prove , if still while they Nature as far as 't wil go . no mortals on earth ever wretched conned prove , if still while they Nature as far as 't wil go . no mortals on earth ever wretched could prove , if still while they no mortals on earth ever wretched could prove , if still while they lived they 'd be always in love , If still while they lived they 'd be always in love . lived they 'd be always in love , if still while they lived they 'd be always in love . lived they 'd be always in love . If still while they lived ' they 'd be always in love . lived they 'd be always in love . If still while they lived they 'd bealways in love . 



Song and Dance of the Salij sung in the principal Street of the City , near a Triumphal Arch , and accompanied in the Chorus with Kettledrums , Wind Instruments , Violins , etc.  

1 st . S'nger   Let us loudly rejoice , with glad heart & with Voice , for the Monster is dead , and here is his head , for the Monster is dead , and here is his head , 



Chorus .  Let us loudly rejoice with glad heart & with voice , for the Monster is dead , he 's dead , & here is his head . Let us loudly rejoice with glad heart & with voice , for the Monster is Let us loudly rejoice with glad heart & with voice , for the Monster is Let us loudly rejoice with glad heart & with voice , for the Monster is is dead , & here is his head , for the Monster is dead , & here is his head , he 's dead , he 's dead , & here is his head is dead , & here is his head , for the monster is dead , & here is his head , he 's dead , he 's dead , & here is his head is dead & here is his head , for the monster is dead , & here is his head , he 's dead , he 's dead , & here is his head is dead & here is his head , for the monster is dead & here is his head , he 's dead , he 's dead , & here is his head 



2d . Sing'r .  no more shall our Wives be afraid of their lives , nor our Daughters by Serpents miscarry . 



1 st . Singer .  The Oracle then shall bestow them on Men , and they not with Monsters shall marry . 



Chorus again as before , then go on . Praesul   sings . Great God of Wars to thee we offer up our Thanks and Prayer : For by thy mighty Deity Triumphant Conquerors we are . 



Chorus .  thou 'rt Great a╌mong the Heavenly Race . thou 'rt Great a╌mong the Heavenly Race .   Great among the Heavenly race . thou 'rt Great a╌mong Instruments . Instruments . the Heavenly Race . thou 'rt great among the Heavenly Race . thou 'rt great among the Heavenly race . And Thoured great among the Heavenly Race . thou 'rt great among the Heavenly race . And Andrea And only to the Thunderer , the Thunderer giv'st place . And only to the Thunderer , the only to the Thunderer , the Thunderer giv'st place . And only to the Thunderer , the only to the Thunderer , the Thunderer giv'st place . The Thunderer , the Thunderer , the only to the Thunderer , the Thunderer giv'st place . The Thunnerer , the Thunderer , the Thunderer giv'st place . And only to the Thunderer , the Thunderer giv'st place . Thunderer giv'st place . And only to the Thunderer , the Thunderer giv'st place . Thunderer giv'st place . And only to the Thunderer , the Thunderer giv'st place . Thunderer giv'st place . And only to the Thunderer , the Thunderer giv'st place . 



Praesul .  Jove is thy Father , but does not exceed thy Deity on any sore . thou , when thou wilt canst make the whole world bleed ; And then canst heal their breaches by thy power . Verse . 



Chorus .  't is thou that must to Armies give success , thou that must Kingdoms 't is thou thou that must to Armies to Armies give success , thou that must Kingdoms 't is thou that must to Armies ▪ to Armies give success , thou that must Kingdoms too 't is thou that must to Armies give success , thou thot must Kingdoms too too with safety bless , thou , thou that must bring , and then must guard their Peace . too with safety bless ; thou that must bring , and then must guard their Peace . with safety bless ; thou thou that must bring , and then must guard their Peace . wiith safety bless ; thou , thou that must bring , and then must guard their Peace . thou , thou that must bring , & then must guard their Peace . thou that must bring , & then must guard their Peace . thou , thou that must bring , & then must guard their Peace . thou , thou that must bring , & then must guard their Peace . 



After a Warlike Dance , the Praesul goes on . While we to Mars his Praises sing , A Horse th' appointed Victim bring . 



While Mars and Venus are meeting in the Air , etc. the following Symphony is Played . Symphony . 

Song of VENUS and MARS . 

Venus .  Great God of War if thou dost not despise the power of my victorious eyes , reject this Sacrifice : My Deity they dis╌respect , my Altars they neglect , and Psyhce on╌ly they Adore , whom they shall see no more . Have I yet left such Influence on your heart , as to enjoin them , you would take my part ? by some known token punish their offence : and let them know their Insolence . 



Mars .  SO much your Influence on me remains , that still I glory in my Chains : whatever you com╌mand shall be a Sovereign law to me ; whatever you command shall be a Sovereign law to me . These saucy Mortals soon shall see , what 't is to disrespect your Deity ? To show how much for you I them despise ; Since they with Venus dare contend . ye powers of Hell your Furies send , and interrupt their Sacrifice , and interrupt their 



Venus .  ye Powers of Hell your Furies send , and interrupt , interrupt their Sacrifice . Sacrifice . ye Powers of Hell your Furies send , and interrupt their Sacrifice . and interrupt their Sacrifice . and interrupt their Sacrifice . 



ACT. IU.  

The Scene is a stately Garden , etc.  

1st . Voice   Let old age in its Envy & Malice take pleasure , 
in business that 's sour , and in hoarding up Treasure , 


2d . Voice .  by dulness seem wise , be still peevish and nice , 
and what they can't follow , let them rail at as Vice.  


3d Voice .  Wise youth will in Wine & in Beauty delight , 
will revel all day and will sport all the night . 


4th . Voice .  For never to love would be never to live ; 
and love must from Wine its new vigour receive . 


Chorus .  For never to love would be never to live , and love must from Wine its new vigour receive , & For never to love would be never to live , and love must from Wine its new vigour receive , & For never to love would be never to live , and love must from Wine its new vigour receive , & For never to love would be never to live , and love must from Wine its new vigour receive , & Soft . Love must from Wine its new vigour receive , & love must from Wine its new vigour receive Love must from Wine its new vigour receive , & love must from Wine its new vigour receive . Love must from Wine its new vigour receive , & love must from Wine its new vigour receive . Love must from Wine its new vigour receive , & love must from Wine its new vigour receive . 



1st . Voice .  How insipid were life without those delights , 
In which lusty hot youth spend their days and their nights , 


2d Voice .  Of our nauseous dull being we too soon should be cloyed , 
Without those blessed Joys which Fools only avoid . 


3d. Voice .  Unhappy Grave Wretches , who live by false measure , 
And for empty vain shadows refuse real pleasure ; 


4th . Voice .  To such fools while vast Joys on the witty are waiting , 
life 's a tedious long journey without ever baiting . 


Chorus .  To such Fools , etc.  


The same Song composed another way for Two Voices . 

1st .  Let old age in its envy and malice take pleasure ; 
in business that 's sour and in hoarding up Treasure , 


2d .  by dulness seem wise , be still peevish and nice , 
and what they can't follow let them rail at as vice ; 


1st .  Wise Youth will in Wine and in Beauty delight , 
will Revel all day , and will sport all the night : 


2d .  For never to love would be never to live , 
and Love must from Wine its new vigour receive . 


Chorus .  For never to love would be never to live , 
and love must from Wine its new vigour receive . 
For never to love would be never to live , 
and love must from Wine its new vigour receive . 
For never to love would be never to live , 
and love must from Wine its new vigour receive . 
For never to love would be never to live , 
and love must from Wine its new vigour receive . 


1st .  How insipid were life without those delights 
in which lusty hot youths spend their days and their nights ; 
Of our nauceous dull being we too soon shall be cloyed , 
without those blessed Joys which fools only avoid , 


2d .  Unhappy grave wretches who live by false measure , 
and for empty vain shadows refuse real pleasure , 
to such fools while vast Joys on the witty are waiting , 
life 's a tedious long journey without ever baiting . 


Chorus .  To such Fools , while vast Joys on the witty are waiting , 
life 's a tedious long journey without ever baiting 
To such fools , while vast joys on the witty are waiting , 
life 's a tedious long journey without ever baiting 
To such fools , while vast joys on the witty are waiting , 
life 's a tedious long journey without ever baiting . 
To such fools , while vast joys on the witty are waiting , 
life 's a tedious long journey without ever baiting . 


Song of the God of the River , and two Nymphs , to PSYCHE , when she 's going to cast herself into the River . 

Stay , stay , this act will much defile my streams ; 
with a short patience suffer these exteems : 
Heaven has for thee a milder Fate in store , 
the time shall be when thou shalt weep no more : 


1st . Nymph . 2d . Nymph .  And yet fair Psyche never shall die . She never shall die . She never shall die . Retornello . Cho. with Voices and Instruments . 



1st . Nymph .  And yet fair Psyche ne'er shall die , but shall be crowned with immortality . 



2d Nymph .  And yet fair Psyche ne'er shall die , but shall be crowned with immortality . And yet fair Psyche ne'er shall die , but shall be crowned with immortality . Soft . but shall be crowned , but shall be crowned with immortality , but shall be crowned but shall be crowned with Im╌mor╌ta╌li╌ty . But shall But shall be crowned with Im╌mor╌ta╌li╌ty . but shall Retornello . but shall be crowned with Im╌mor╌ta╌li╌ty . be crowned with Im╌mor╌ta╌li╌ty . be Crowned with Im╌mor╌ta╌li╌ty . Venus' approaches , from her anger ▪ fly , more troubles yet your constancy must try : But the happy minute will ever long arrive , that will to you eternal freedom give , 



1st . Nymph . 2d . Nymph .  and yet fair Psyche ne'er shall die , She ne'er shall die , She ne'er shall die . Retornello . Chorus as before . And yet fair Psyche , etc.  And yet fair Psyche , etc.  And yet fair Psyche , etc.  And yet fair Psyche , etc.  Omit the Retornello at the end of the Chorus the last time . 



ACT. v.  

Devils and Furies . 

1st . Devil , 1st . Fury .  To what great distresses proud Psyhce is brought . 
O the brave mischiefs our malice has wrought . 


2d . Deu.   Such actions become the black Subjects of Hell.  
Our Great Prince of Darkness who ever will serve well , 


3d Devil , 3d Fury ,  must to all Mortals , nay Gods show their spite , 
and in horror & torments of 


4th Devil , 4th . Fury ,  must to all Mortals , nay Gods show their spite , 
and in horror & torments of 


5th . Devil .  others delight , 
must to all Mortals , nay Gods show their Spite . 


6th . Devil .  others delight , 
must to all Mortals , nay Gods show their Spite . 


1st . Devil .  must to all Mortals , nay Gods show their Spite . 


Chorus .  And in horror and torments of others delight , 
and in horror and torments of others delight . 
And in horror and torments of others delight , 
and in horror and torments of others delight . 
And in horrors and torments of others delight , 
and in horrors and torments of others delight 
And in horrors and torments of others delight , 
and in horrors and torments of others delight 
And in horrors and torments of others delight , 
and in horrors and torments of others delight 
And in horrors and torments of others delight , 
and in horrors and torments of others delight 


2d . Stanza in Furies and Devils . 1st . Devil . 1st Fury .  How cool are our Flames , and how light are our Chains , 
if our craft or our cruelty Souls enough gains : 


2d . Devil , 2d . Fury ,  In perpetual Howl and Groans we take pleasure ; 
Our joys by the Torments of others we measure . 


3d. Devil . 3d. Fury .  To rob Heaven of the fair is our greatest delight , 
To darkness seducing the Subjects of light . 


4.  Fury .  To rob Heaven of the fair is our greatest delight : 
To rob Heaven of the fair is our greatest delight . 
To darkness seducing the Subjects of light . 


1st Devil ,  To rob Heaven of the fair is our greatest delight . 
To rob Heaven of the fair is our greatest delight . 


The Six part Chorus again with these words , ( viz. ) To Darkness seducing the Subjects of Light.  


1st . Devil . 1st . Fury .  How little did Heaven of its Empire take care , 
to let Pluto take the rich , witty , and fair ; 


2d Devil . 2d . Fury .  whilst it doth for itself Fools & Monsters preserve , 
the blind , ugly , and poor , and the Cripple reserve . 


3d. Devil , 3d. Fury .  Heaven all the worst subjects for itself does prepare , 
and leaves all the best for the Prince of the Air.  


4th . Deu.   Heaven all the worst Subjects for itself does prepare , 
and leaves all the best for the Prince of the Air.  


5th . Deu.   Heaven all the worst Subjects for itself does prepare . 


6th . Devil ,  Heaven all the worst Subjects for itself does prepare . 


1st Devil ,  Heaven all the worst Subjects for itself does prepare . 


Six part Chorus again as before with these words , ( viz. ) And leaves all the best for the Prince of the Air.  


Pluto and Proserpina . PLUTO .  Refrain your Tears , you shall no Prisoner be , Beauty and Innocence in Hell are free . they 're Treasons , Murders , Rapes , and Thefts , that bring Subjects to th' Infernal King. You are no Subjects of this place . A God must you embrace ; from Hell to Heaven you must translated be , where you shall live and love , where you shall live and love , and love , and love to all eternity . Psyche draw near , with thee this present take , which given to Venus soon thy peace will make ; of Beauty 't is a treasury Divine , and you 're the messenger she did design . Lost beauty this will soon restore , and all defects repair : Mortals will now afresh her beams adore , and ease her mind of Jealousy and care ; of jealousy & care ; no beauty that has this can ever despair , no beauty that has this can ever despair . Here are your Sisters who your life once sought , Their malice to this place has Psyche brought , And against her all these dire mischiefs wrought ; for ever , ever , ever , here they shall remain , and shall in hell suffer eternal pain ; But Psyche shall a Deity embrace ; but Psyche shall a Deity embrace . 



Proserpina ,  Be gone fair Psyche . Be gone fair Psyche from this place , from this place , 



PLUTO ,  Be gone fair Psyche , Be gone fair Psyche from this place , from this place , for Psyche must the God of love embrace , for Psyche must the God of love embrace . for Psyche must the God of love embrace , for Psyche must the God of love embrace . 



Chorus .  Be gone fair Psyche from this place , for Psyche must the God of Love embrace . Be gone fair Psyche from this place , For Psyche must the God of Love embrace . Be gone fair Psyche from this place , for Psyche must the God of Love embrace . Be gone fair Psyche from this place , for Psyche must the God of Love embrace . For Psyche must , Psyche must the God of Love embrace . fo Psyche must the God of Love embrace . for Psyche must the God of Love embrace . for Psyche must the God of Love embrace . 



Symphony at the Descending of Apollo and the Gods.  

APOLLO ,  Assemble all ye Heavenly Choir , 
& let the God of love inspire 
your heart with his celestial Fire ; 
the God of Love's a happy lover made , 
his ravishing delights shall never fade . 


Cho.   with his immortal Psyche , 
he now tastes those Joys which ought to be 
as lasting as eternity . 
with his immortal Psyche , 
he now tastes those joys which ought to be 
as lasting as eternity . 
with his immortal Psyche , 
he now tastes those joys which ought to be 
as lasting as eternity . 
with his immortal Psyche , 
he now tastes those joys which ought to be 
as lasting as eternity . 


APOLLO   Come Lovers from the Elysian Groves 
and ce╌le╌brate these Heavenly Loves . 


Simphonie . Apollo .  Begin this on the close note . Bacchus' with all your jolly Crew , 
come re╌vel at these Nuptials to . 


Play the Symphony again , and then go on . Apollo .  Come all ye winged Spirits of the Skies , 
and all your mighty Deities , 


Simphonie as before , making the close Note a Minum . Apollo .  You all his humble Vassals are , 
and in his Joys should have a share . 


Chorus again as before , and then go on . 1st . Eliz. Lover .  On Earth by unkindness are often destroyed , 
the delight in the Nymphs who are so much adored , 
or else the poor Lovers by kindness are cloyed ; 
so faint are the pleasures their love does afford . 


2d . Eliz. Lover .  With sighs & with tears , 
with jealousies , rie's & with fears , 
the wretched poor lover , poor lover is lost , 
for a few moment's pleasure his liberty 's lost . 


3d. Eliz Lov ,  How short are those moments yet how few they employ ! 
Ah! how short , ah how short is the Joy ? 


2l . 3d.   Ah how short , Ah how short is the Joy ? 
Ah how short ? Ah hw short is the Joy ? 


The Three Elysian Lovers .  Chorus . Thus wretched Mankind does suffer below , 
& in Heaven each Godhead to Cupid does bow : 
Thus wretched Mankind does suffer below , 
& in Heaven each Godhead to Cupid does bow : 
Thus wretched Mankind does suffer below , 
& in Heaven each Godhead to Cupid does bow : 
But Love , Love was never perfect till now . 
But Love , Love was never perfect till now . 
But Love , Love was never perfect till now . 
But Love , love was never perfect till now . 
But Loee , Love was never perfect till now . 
But Love , love was never perfect till now . 


Symphony at the descending of Jupiter , Cupid and Psyche . 

After a Dance of the Elysian Princes , MARS sings as follows . Behold the God of mighty power , 
we all have felt , and all adore . 
To him I all my Triumphs owe , 
To him my Trophies I must Yields ; 
He makes Victorious Monarches bow , 
and from the Conqueror gains the field . 


Chorus .  He turns all the horrors of war to delight , 
& were there no Love , no Heroes would fight , 
& He turns all the horrors of war to delight , 
& were there no love , no Heroes would fight , 
& He turns all the horrors of war to delight , 
& were there no love no Heroes would fight , 
& He turns all the horrors of wars to delight , 
& were there no love , no Heroes would fight , 
Play the. Chorus for a Retorn . then go on upon the Close Note . were there no Love no Heroes would fight . 


MARS .  Honour to Battle spurs them on , 
Honour brings Power when War is done . 
But who would venture Life for Power ? 
Only to govern dull Mankind ? 
't is Women , Women they adore ! 
For Beauty they those dangers find . 


CHORUS .  no Princes the toils of ambition would prove , 
or dominion would prise if it were not for love 
Or Dominion , etc.  


Play the Chorus again for a Retornel . then go on , on the close Note . Bacch's .  The delights of the Bottle , & the charms of good Wine 
to the power & the pleasures of Love must resign , 
though the night in the joys of good drinking be past , 
the debauches but till the next morning will last ; 
But Love's great debauch is more lasting and 
for that often lasts a man all his life long . 


Cho.   But love's great debauch is more lasting & strong , 
for that often lasts a man all his life long . 
But love's great debauth is more lasting & strong 
for that often lasts a man all his life long . 
But love's great debauch is more lasting & strong , 
for that often lasts a man all his life long . 
But love's great debauch is more lasting & strong , 
for that often lasts a man all his life long . 


Play the Chorus again for a Retornello , then go on to the Tune of the former Stanza . Bacchus .  Love and Wine are the Bonds that fasten us all , 
The World but for these to confusion would fall . 
Were it not for the pleasure of Love and good Wine , 
Mankind for each trifle their lives would resign . 
they 'd not value dull life , nor would live without thinking , 
Nor would Kings rule the world , but for Love and good drinking . 


Chorus .  they 'd not , etc. Nor would not , etc.  


Retornello . Apollo .  But to love , to love the great union they owe : 
All in earth and in Heaven to his sceptre must bow . 


Grand Chorus and Dance , with all the Instruments . All joy to this Celestial pair who thus in Heaven united are . 't is a great thing worth All Joy to this Celestial pair who thus in Heaven united are . 't is a great thing worth All Joy to this Celestial pair , who thus in Heaven united are . 't is a great thing worth All Joys to this Celestial pair , who thus in Heaven united are . 't is a great thing worth All Joy to this Celestial pair , who thus in Heaven united are . 't is a great thing worth All Joy to this Celestial pair , who thus in Heaven united are . 't is a great thing worth Heavens' design , to make Love's Power with Beauties join . Heavens' design , to make Loves' Power with Beauties join . Heauns' design , to make Love's Power with Beauties join . Heauns' design , to make Love's Power with beauty 's join . Heavn's design , to make Love's Power with Beauty join . Heavn's design , to make Love's Power with beauty 's join . 



FINIS . 

The Instrumental Music used in the TEMPEST . 

The First Music . 

soft . loud . Introduction . 

Galliard , 

Gavot , 

The end of the First Music . 

The Second Music , 

Sarabrand . 



LILK . 

The end of the second Music . 

Curtain Tune in the TEMPEST , 

soft . louder by degrees , Violent , 

soft . loud . soft and slow by degrees , 



The First Act Tune . 

Rustic Air.  

The Second Act Tune , 

MI noit . 

The Third Act Tune . 

Corant , 



The Fourth Act Tune , 

A Martial Jig . 



The Conclusion , 

A Canon 4 in 2.  



FINIS . 

