Φιλαλληλια . or , the grand characteristic whereby a man May be known to be Christ's disciple . 

Delivered in a sermon at St.  Paul's , before the gentlemen of vvilts. nov. 10. 1658.  It being the day of their yearly feast . 

By Thomas Pierce , rector of Brington . 

Philo Judaeus {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 557.  

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 



London , printed by i. g. for r. Royston , and are to be sold by John Courtney bookseller in Salisbury . 1658.  

To all my very much honoured friends and countrymen , the respective natives of the county of wilts. more especially , to those of the late solemn-meeting . And in particular , to the worthy stewards of the feast . 

My dear countrymen , 

I here present you with a discourse , which by a threefold title you May properly call yours . there having been nothing but your entreaty , ( Which with me shall ever obtain the force of a command ) in a just conformity to which , it was both penned , and preached , and is now committed to the press too . Next to the reverence which i bear to the work itself , ( I mean , the * labour of love , and the † beatific office of making peace , ) which cannot choose but carry with it its own reward , i was chiefly encouraged to the enterprise in which you were pleased to engage me , by your being so much at unity amongst yourselves , & so religiously intent on the good of others . for in how many things soever there May be a * seemingness of religion , i am sure its † purity consists in these two ; the relief of the needy in their afflictions , & the keeping of ones self unspotted from the world . for the taking of both into possession , i think i cannot direct to a better course , ( Either for brevity , or clearness , ) then that we measure and deal out our love to others , by that natural proportion we commonly bear unto ourselves . this being the scope of that * royal law , to which as many as are Christians must needs be subject . i say they must , so much the rather , because † whatsoever a man soweth , that shall he reap . and with what measure we * meet , it shall be measured to us again . as 't is the mercy of good men , which is said to † triumph over God's judgement , so there is judgement * without mercy for them that show little or none . 

This i desire May be considered by a peculiar sort of professors , who hate and persecute their neighbours under colour of devotion and zeal to God . as if it were not sufficient , simply to break God's commandments , unless they be broken against each other . for if the same God that saith , [ thou shalt not worship a graved image ] doth also say in the same instant , thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself , ] then sure to persecute a neighbour , in pretence of affection and love to God , is to take up the second table in anger , and to dash it in pieces against the first . and what is that ( In effect ) but to make the law its own transgressor ? such men are told by an apostle , that they * deceive their own hearts , and feed themselves with such hopes as will but nourish them to destruction , whilst they imagine that † such religion will ever stand them in any stead . And to show them the thickness of that fallacy , which ( By the sophistry of the flesh ) they are made to impose upon themselves , was not the least of those ends , at which i leveled my meditations . For no sooner was i invited to entertain my dear countrymen , with the first and chiefest course in a feast of love , but straight i reflected upon the character which Christ had given to his disciple , just in the close of his farewell * supper , ( Which was indeed a † love-feast ) by which they Might certainly be known to be truly his . i knew the character of a Christian was to be sought ▪ most fitly from Christ himself ; and that love was that character , which Christ had left upon record . not such a love of one another , as was the * ravenous love of the scribes and Pharisees , wherewith they loved the widow's houses , so far forth as to devour them , and † eat them up . nor such a * cruel kind of love , as was that of the * cannibals in Herodotus , who glutted themselves with the flesh of men , because they loved it as well as venison . for when professors are transported with such an unnatural kind of love , as gives them an appetite to † bite and † devour each other , ( As the apostle speaks to the Ephesians ) or to eat up God's persons as if they would eat bread , ( As the * royal prophet thought fit to phrase it , ) it hath a tendency to nothing , but mutual ruin . 

Whereas the note of distinction , whereby to know a sincere and a solid Christian , is such a divine kind of love as tends to unity and peace , and so ( By a consequence unavoidable ) to mutual safety and preservation . if we are † rooted and grounded in such a love to one another , as was the love of Christ unto us all , we shall be known by the * fruit web ear , to have been † grafted into him , who is indeed the * true vine . we shall not only do to † no man , what we would that no man should do to us , ( Which was the motto a heathen Prince would needs have carved in all his plate ) but † what we wish that all men would do to us , we shall earnestly endeavour to do to all men . we shall love them for God's sake , whom , for their own sakes , we cannot love . If we are merely weak brethren , we shall manifest ( By our meekness ) that we are not wilful . and if strong , we shall * bear the infirmities of the weak . we shall walk in † wisdom towards them that are without , ( I mean the enemies of Christ , both Jews and gentiles . ) That we May neither be in danger of being corrupted by their secular and sensual bairs , nor heighten their prejudice to the gospel , by any matter of scandal in our converse . 

I shall never forget what i was told ( About eight years ago ) by a * learned Jew , that godliness and honesty , or the love of God and the love of men , are a kind of twin-sisters , which every creature is to espouse , who is not so wedded to the world , as to admit of a * divorce from the celestial † bridegroom . it was never allowed unto the Jews , to * abhor an Edomite , or an Egyptian ; or to reckon any man as an enemy , ( Although he were † scaling the city-walls ) until he had absolutely refused their solemn offers of reconcilement . and i do now the rather take this occasion to recount the things which i have learned , both as an instructor of the ignorant , and as an humble * remembrancer to men of more knowledge , ( Not only to you of mine own countr•y , to whom i make this dedication , but to as many as shall not disdain to read me , let their place and their principles be what they will , ) if peradventure by any means , i May * provoke to emulation , them that are mine own flesh , ( As the apostle spoke in another case , which yet was of kin to the case in hand , ) and become instrumental to † save some of them . 

If in any thing i have spoken , i seem to have spoken somewhat austerely , i here declare myself free from all particular reflections , upon any man's person , alive or dead . My propositions are universal , as well as true ; and my severities to sin lie all in common . as many as find themselves guilty May make particular application of my reproofs , so as they have it in their remembrance , that i have made none at all . 

I have one thing to beg ( As from all my readers in general , so ) in particular from you , Sirs , for whose particular satisfaction my work is done ; even that you will labour to be the better for all that is offered to your acceptance . that , * when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven , with his mighty angels , in flaming fire ; taking vengeance on them that know not God , and that obey not the gospel of Jesus Christ , you May be able to † stand and to appear with great boldness ; as wearing his livery , which is love , and as owned thereby to be his disciple . to the sure protection of whose providence , and to the wise direction of whose grace , you all are heartily commended ( Without any ceremony or compliment ) by 

Your affectionate countryman in all the services of love and friendship , tho. Pierce . 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Or the grand characteristic , by which a man May be known to be Christ's disciple . 

John 13. 35.  

by this shall all men know that ye are my disciple , if ye have love one to another . 

As the text is part of our saviour's last words , his farewell sermon to his disciple ; so i May say it is a part of his last will and testament ; and shows the worth of that legacy , which he was pleased to bequeathe them at his departure . The ever blessed * testator ( As the author to the Hebrews doth fitly call him ) being now to take his last leave , and having prepared them with an assurance that the time of his leaving was at hand , ( That so they Might ponder what he was speaking , and lay it up as the speech of a * dying man , ) and being resolved not to leave them without some legacy , some special token of his solicitude , both for their present fortification , and future bliss , 

† peace ( Saith he ) i leave with you , my peace i give unto you , not as the world giveth , a few good words in civility , or at the most , a kind wish ; and therefore let not your heart be troubled at the sudden departure of my person ; for as a supplement of that , i leave you my cordial and solid peace . 

But knowing well , that his peace could never quietly rest with them , in case of war and division amongst themselves , and being not able to endear them with a greater expression of his love , then by obliging them strictly to the constant loving of one another , he therefore bequeathed this * royal precept ( As a previous part of their patrimony , whereby to fit them for all the rest , ) that their reciprocal kindness should be like his , that they should all be so affected , as they had him for an † example , that just as he had been to all , they should be all to one another ; for such are the words of the will , in the verse immediately before my text , 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} &c. a new commandment i give unto you , that ye love one another , even as i have loved you . 

But then to gain their acceptance of his bequeast , and their religious execution of what he commanded them to observe , he showed them the value of such a legacy , as did obligingly tie them to such a love . 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , &c. by this shall all men know that ye are my disciple , if ye love one another . 

In which words of our saviour , there are two things supposed , and a third is taught . 

First of all it is supposed , that all to whom the words are spoken , either are , or aught to be , Christ's disciple . And that not only in profession , but in singleness of heart ; not only verbally , and by name , but very really such . This is easily collected from three words in the text , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , ye are my disciple . 

In the second place it is supposed , that such as are really Christ's disciple , ( Not in show , but in substance , not in hypocrisy , but in deed ) ought to endeavour to make it known to all the world , that they are such . their light must shine before men , by their procope and growth in the school of Christ . This is apparent from two words more , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , all men shall know it . and were it not so in good earnest , their Master would never have directed them ( As here he doth ) to the infallible means of its attainment . for 

Mark attentively in the third place , the most important lesson which here is taught , ( And which is now of all lessons the most worth learning , especially if we reflect on the original occasion of this solemnity , ) by what certain {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , or way of proof , ye May make men know ye are Christ's disciple . This is delivered in the first and the last words of the text , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , they shall know it even by this , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , if ye bear love to one another . 

From these three parts there are just as many propositions , into which the text is very naturally dissolved . 

the first is this . That all who are auditors of Christ , or all to whom he is revealed , do stand obliged by that means , to be very really his disciple . 

the second this . That their discipleship , if it be real , will also be eminent and exemplary , so far forth as to be known , and taken notice of by all . 

the third is this . That the surest testimony and proof of sincere discipleship under Christ , and the principal instance or effect wherein its eminence doth consist , and that which by Christ is here pronounced as an unerrable mark or Criterion of it , is this divine qualification of mutual love . 

And this indeed is the proposition , upon which i have fastened my meditations , because it is that which suits best with the principal end of our present meeting , and that wherein is swallowed up the prime importance of the text . Not only the prime , but the whole rational . importance . And i verily think you will say as much , if you duly compare the proposition , with the fourfold emphasis which is to be put upon the words . 

For first our saviour doth not say , men shall guess or conjecture that ye are mine , but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , they shall know it . Nor 2ly doth he say , your discipleship shall be known as a special secret to very few , but as the sun in his meridian , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , all men shall know it . Nor thirdly doth he say , all men shall know that ye seem to be by a disguise , but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , that ye are my disciple without a fiction . Last of all , he doth not say , your discipleship shall be known by such deceivable tokens , as your assembling yourselves in the house of prayer , your crying out * Lord Lord , your doing † wonders in my name , your being orthodox in judgement , and jumping together in opinions ; but by this it shall be known , as by a token which never fails , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , if ye have love for one another . 

I must therefore begin with that proposition , which is last in order , but first in dignity . and which being as the heart of the whole body of Christianity , deserves to be ( Like the heart in the body of man ) {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the first thing that lives , and the last that dies in our consideration . For can there be any thing in the world of greater consequence than this , which gives us a token whereby to know we have an interest in Christ ? and such a sure token too , as cannot possibly deceive us ? yet even such is that love , with which i am now to entertain you , and which if you take into your hearts , as well as into your outward ears , will ( I doubt not ) carry with it that peace of conscience , which is to all that feed on it , a continual * feast . 

But because there is hardly any word that is more equivocal than this , i must needs anticipate an objection , by showing what love it is which our saviour meant , when he appointed it for the measure , by which his scholars are to be scanned . 

And to show you the better what it is , i must first show you what it is not . for all sorts of men pretend to love ; not only Christians , but the professed enemies of Christ ; and as well the nominal , as real Christians . Nay in one kind , or other , they all have love in their possession ; and many times the worst men in the greatest measure . For greater love than this ( Our * saviour tells us ) there is none , that a man lay down his life for his friend . and plentiful store of this love we commonly find ( In our reading ) amongst the heathen . their great † philosophers did prescribe it , and not a few of their persons obeyed the precept . 

To save a friend ready to perish , we find Episthenes ( In Xenophon ) a ready to lay down his life . and such was the love of Artapates to Cyrus junior , that he perfectly b hated his own life , as soon as Cyrus had lost his . nor c would Lucius Petronius outlive his friend . d Pomponius & Laetorius died a couple of martyrs for Caius Gracchus . and Titus' e Volumnius followed Lucullus into his grave . f Terentius preferred the life of Brutus by many degrees before his own . and g Valerius tells us of divers servants , who to preserve their Masters , destroyed themselves . what transcendent lovers of one another were h Menedemus and Hipsides , i Cleonymus and Archidamus , k Agasias and Xenophon , l Bagωas and mentωr , M Hippoclides and Polystratus , n Asclepiodotus and Soranus ? 't were easy to name as many o more , as would make you weary to hear them named . Nor do i speak only of couples , but of whole societies and sects ; whose astonishing love to one another hath raised them monuments in story , which will endure as long as the sun and moon . Such as the p Cimbri and Celtiberians in Valerius maximus ; the q friends of Cyrus in Xenophon ; the r Athenians in Thucydides ; the s Megal•politans in Polybius ; the men of t Saguntum and Petellia ; the many u societies reckoned up by Alexander ab Alexandro , who had all things in common of every kind , and as well their sufferings , as their enjoyments . insomuch that if one did lose a limb by any accident , all the rest were to cut off theirs , that in every circumstance of adversity , they Might all be equal and alike . 

Thus there were multitudes of men who loved each other unto the death ; and some beyond it , as far as * hell . yet very far were those pagans' from being known by such love , to have been either the disciple of Christ or Moses . 't was little better than the love of King Perus his elephant , and other generous beasts , which have exposed their own lives to save their riders . there is a † natural kindness and generosity , which is common to men with the meanest creatures ; and so hath nothing of affinity with what is intended in the text . 

Nay if we reflect upon ourselves , upon whom the name of Christ is called , we must not imagine we have attained unto that excellent love which is here required , because we find ( Upon inquiry ) that we are loving to our friends ; or because we have our † solemn meetings ; or stand * fast to one another as drivers on of a design . For as there are many sorts of love which are not rational , and pure , as not proceeding from a right principle ; so there are many things too which are but the counterfeit of love , and yet are called by that name , because they look extremely like it . the devils themselves have their combination , they are still at † agreement among themselves , so as Satan is never divided against Satan ; but 't is from a principle of policy , and not of love . even rebels and schismatics ( The greatest enemies of church and state ) are wont to * hold altogether and keep themselves close ; but from a principle of faction , and not of love . we read of † Pilate , and Herod , that they were solemnly made friends ; but from a principle of hatred to an innocent Christ , not of love to one another . 

The world is full of such merchants , as keep a good correspondence , and are punctual dealers with one another ; but from a principle of traffic , and not of true love . the friends of Ceres & Bacchus , have their times of feasting and good-fellowship , their times of enjoying the creature-comforts ; but from a principle of looseness , and not of love . many love the merry meeting , but not the men whom they meet . Or if they are lovers of the men , 't is far from being * thankworthy . for even the publicans and sinners do love those that love them ; but from a principle of nature , and not of grace . it being a mere self-love , which makes them so to love others . nay farther yet , a man May do the very things which are the principal offices and works of love , for which ( Not his love , but ) only his vanity is to be thanked . He May bestow his whole substance to feed the poor , and yet May perish for want of love . he May dare to die a pretended martyr by giving his body to be burned , and yet he May be frozen for want of love . so i collect from the apostle , 1 cor. 13. 3.  

It concerns us therefore to know , what love this is , ( Having seen what it is not , ) by which a man May be known to be Christ's disciple . and the shortest way to know this , is to reflect a while on the love of Christ . for such as was his love to us , such must ours be to him and to one another . we have his own word for it in the verse immediately before my text , and c. 15. v. 10 , 12.  If ye keep my commandments , ye shall abide in my love . ( v. 10. ) And this is my commandment , that ye love one another , even as i have loved you . ( v. 12. ) Now we know the love of Christ was both extrensively , and intensively great ; and proposed ( In both respects ) not more to our wonder , than imitation . first it was so extensively ▪ great , as that it reached to all in general , ( 1 tim. 4. 10.  ) to every man in particular , ( heb. 2. 9  ) not to a world of men only , as that May signify a part , but to all the whole world without exception , ( 1 ioh. 2. 2.  ) without exception of the ungodly , ( rom. 5. 6.  ) without exception of enemies , ( rom. 5. 10.  ) without exception of them that perish , ( 2 pet. 2. 1. ) And so intensively great was the love of Christ , that it made him empty himself of glory , and become of * no reputation ; † it made him a man of sorrows , and acquainted with grief ; indeed an intimate acquaintance of the most heart-breaking grief , that ever was suffered on this side hell . It put him upon the vassalage of * washing and wiping his servants feet ; it made him † obedient unto the death , and to seek the lives of his enemies , whilst his enemies sought his ; he in order to their safety , as they in order to his ruin . it made him once our priest after the order of Aaron , and our priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck . for us he descended into hell ; for us he ascended into heaven ; for us he maketh intercession at the right hand of God , rom. 8. 34.  

Thus Christ , as our Master , hath set us a copy of his love , to the end that we , as his disciple , Might do our utmost to take it out . our love must be so extensive , that it must reach even to all ; not only to all our fellow-disciples , but to all men living upon the earth ; it must reach unto our enemies , and of them to all sorts too ; not only to those without the pale of the church , ( Who do us little or no hurt ) even Jews , Turks , infidels , and heretics , for whom we pray once a year in our English liturgy ; but to our crueler enemies within the church , our particular persecutors and slanderers , for whom we pray in our liturgy three times a week . 

Indeed the hypocrites of the synagogue did constrain the word neighbour to signify nothing but a friend ; esteeming it godliness , and zeal , to hate an enemy . and some there are even in Christendom , who feigning God from all eternity to have hated more than he loved , think they acquit themselves fairly ( And look upon it in themselves as a godlike property ) if they are much less inclinable to love then hatred . they know they need not love more , than the saviour of the world was pleased to die for ; and easily taking it for granted , that he died only for some , they think they need not exhibit their love to all . 

Such men must be taught , that even our enemies are to be treated as one sort of friends , and that the scripture-word neighbour extends to both ; 't was so extended even by * Moses ; and so by † Solomon ; if by Moses and Solomon , much more by Christ ; who having first commanded us to love our enemies , to bless them that curse us , to oblige them that hate us , and to pray for them that are spiteful to us , gives us his reason in these words , because * God also is kind to the unthankful and to the evil . which is as much as to say , that in the extension of our kindness , we must be imitators of God . for so he tells us in the very next words , † be ye merciful as your father in heaven is merciful . and when a Jew asked the question , * who is my neighbour ? our saviour answered him by a parable of a Jew and a Samaritan , not of a Jew and a Jew . whereby we are given to understand , that all are our neighbours who stand in need.  let that need be what it will , a need of our pardon or our purse , we must not only forgive them in case they reduce us to want of bread , but we must give them our † bread too , in case they want it . we must pray for them , and pity them , and endeavour to melt them to reconcilement ; we must do them all the good offices within our power , excepting such as are apt to hurt them ; we must show them such favours as May help to raise them out of the pit , not such as May sink them the faster in ; we must not be so rudely civil , so discourteously complaisant , as to * suffer their sins to be upon them without disturbance , but must rather oblige them with our † rebukes ; lest for want of such favours they go down quietly to destruction . for so runs the precept , thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart , ( On the contrary ) thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy brother , and shalt not suffer sin upon him . although a man be so scandalous as to be shut out of our * company by the direction of the apostle , yet the same apostle tells us , we must not Count him as an enemy , but admonish him as a brother , 2 thes. 3. 15.  

And from hence we are to argue à minori ad majus . for if our love must thus extend to enemies , how much more to such as are friends ? friends to our persons , and to our God too ? The love of Ch•ist had degrees , & so must ours . as the apostle tells concerning Christ , he is the saviour of all , but especially of them that believe ( 1 tim. 4. 10.  ) so the same apostle doth also tell us of ourselves , we must do good unto all men , but especially to them who are of the household of faith ( gal. 6. 10. ) And even of those that are faithful , a primary care is to be taken for them that are of our own country . † it was not only for God's sake that David was kind unto Jerusalem , but for his brethren and companions sake he prayed to God for her , and did his utmost to do her good , ( Psal. 122. 8. ) Our saviour being himself an Israelite , did * prefer the lost sheep of the house of Israel . how kind was Moses to his countrymen , when he became for their sakes extremely cruel unto himself ? Lord ( Saith he ) if thou wilt , forgive their sin ; and if not , blot me i pray thee out of the book which thou hast written , exod. 32. 32.  As if salvation itself could hardly please him , unless his countrymen Might have it , as well as he.  Nor was the passion of St. Paul inferior to it , who for the love he bare unto his countrymen , whom he calls his brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh , was ready to wish himself accursed , and utterly cut off from the body of Christ . ( Rom. 9 2  ▪ ) as if he cared not what became of him , so that his countrymen Might be saved . 

But many times our nearest countrymen May become our worst neighbours ; and , in respect of their religion , dwell farthest off too . To a man that is born in Judea , a good Samaritan ought to be dearer , than a cruel Jew . * St. Paul , and the Christians † of Thessalonica , were never used with more rigour , then by the men of their own country . and our saviour's words are very remarkable , that except it be in ▪ his own country , a prophet is never without honour , ( Mat. 13. 57 ) But let him be in his own country and he hath no honour at all , ( John 4. 44  ▪ ) Christ himself had least there ; and there he did the fewest miracles ; but that he did not more there then in other places , the only cause was their unkindness . 

this is therefore the firmest bond whereby to hold us together in peace and love , not that we are of one country , but that we are of one * Christ ; and can say of ourselves , with better reason , than it was anciently said of the lomnini , that in all our bodies there is no more than one soul ; or ( To express it with St. Paul ) that we have all but one faith , one baptism , one spirit , one Lord , one God and father of all , who is above all , and through all , and in us all . ( Eph. 4. 4 , 5 , 6. ) If we will manifest to the world , and prove convincingly to ourselves , that we are really the followers and friends of Christ , it must be by a burning and shining love . a love of men , and not of God only . and a love of men it must be , in which the true love of God is not excluded , but presupposed . not a love of ourselves only , ( Condemned so much by the * apostle ) but a love of others as ourselves ; if not as much , yet as well ; if not in that measure , yet in the very same manner , in which we are obliged to love ourselves . And it must be dilectio Amoebaea , a mutual love ; a giving and taking of affections . Indeed rather than fail , we must pledge them in love , who do begin to us in hatred . but to make 〈◊〉 {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , or love-feast indeed , ( Such as •ith which the blessed apostles did once adorn both the doctrine and the discipleship of Christ , ) it must be {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , love interchanged with one another . 

The chiefest requisites of our love must be sincerity and fervour . as St. Paul speaks to the Romans , we must be kindly affectioned one towards another , so as our lov• May be brotherly , and without dissimulation . ( Rom. 12. 9 , 10. ) we must not be {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , double-sould men , ( Jam. 1. 8.  ) but must carry our meaning in our foreheads , and hold our hearts in our hands . not love in word , neither in tongue , but in deed and in truth . ( 1 John 3. 18.  ) we must not look every man at his own things only , but every man at the things of others , ( Phil. 2. 4. ) If we are owners of such a love , as is a testimony and proof of our real discipleship under Christ , the same mind will be in us which was in Christ Jesus ( Phil. 2. 5. ) And if so , we shall be ready to stoop ( As he * did ) to the meanest offices of love , even to wash , and to wipe the very feet of our inferiors , we shall willingly bear one another's burdens , ( Gal. 6. 2.  ) by love serving one another . ( Gal. 5. 13. ) And in honour preferring one another , ( Rom. 12. 10. ) Nay , if the same mind be in us which was in Christ Jesus , ( As the apostle tells us it ought to be ) our love will be so intensive , as to make us lay down our lives for the brethren . and so St. John tells us we ought to do , 1 John 3. 16.  

If no diviner love of one another were meant by our saviour in my text , than what was so frequently exacted under the pedagogy of Moses , our saviour would certainly have said , an old commandment i give unto you , it having been said to them of old , thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself , levit. 19 18.  But here he calls it a new commandment ; which we cannot imagine he would have done , had there been nothing in its subject but what was old . no , he Might very well call it a new commandment , not only for that reason , ( Which i find given by St. * Austin ) because it prescribes us such a love , as by which we cast off the old man , and put on the new ; but because it prescribes us such a love , as never was thought upon before , much less delivered under precept , to any sect or society of Jews , or gentiles . had his commandment been no more , then that we love one another , it had been old with a witness ; no doubt i May say , as old as Adam . but because he added [ a sicut ego ] that we must love one another , even as he hath loved us , ( Which was with such a new love , as till he came into the world , was never heard of , ) he had reason to call it a new commandment . for although St. John saith , brethren , i write * no new commandment , but an old commandment which ye had from the beginning , yet he means no more by that word , than the first beginning of Christianity , which was with the preaching of the gospel by Jesus Christ . remember therefore ( I beseech you ) what love this is , which is the badge and cognisance of our profession ; the mark of difference betwixt the sheep and the goats , and which is not exacted from men as men , but from Christians as they are Christians . we must not love as they do , who * corrupt one another ( As s ▪ Austin speaks ) with a merely seditious or schismatical love ; nor must we love as they do , who only love one another for filthy lucre ; much less as they do , who love one another for filthy lust ; nor must we love as they do , whose love consisteth only in this , that they agree in the hatred of some third party ; nor must we only love as they do , who love one another as they are men only , that is , as they are sociable and civil creatures . but we must love one anothher as benig lovers of God , and as being such whom God loves ; as being * children of the highest , and * younger brothers of our redeemer , as being all made consorts of the very same hope , and all coheirs of the very same kingdom . our love must imitate the manner and the degree of Christ's love . For we must venture our lives for the good of others , and even in spite of all dangers which May happen to the body , we must own , and propagate , and defend the doctrines of the gospel , which is the most we can do for the good of other men's souls ; and that which makes us most like a saviour . the gospel ( I May say ) is the Christian Scool , thither it is we go to learn , Christ is the Master of it in chief ; all Christians are schoolfellows , or condisciples . the love i have hitherto described is the highest lesson which there is taught . those titular Christians who do not attain to this love , are so many dunces and truants , fit to be turned out of the school . it is indeed a hard lesson , for us to love one another even as Christ hath loved us ; a lesson only to be found in the school of Christ . But yet how difficult soever , it is not impossible to be learned . for God is faithful , and expects not to reap , but after the measure that he hath sown ; he will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able . if there is in us a willing mind , he accepts according to what we have , and not according to what we have not . the grace of Christ is sufficient for us . And we can do all things through him that strengthens us . and therefore let us not despair of getting the mastery over our lesson ; for we are all * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , ( As St. Paul speaks to the Thessalonians ) immediately taught it by God himself . 

Now the more largely i have discovered , both what it is not , and what it is to love one another , as Christ requires , the fewer words will suffice to make it as clear as the sun at noon , that by this we must be known to be Christ's disciple . for such a love as this is , is the fulfilling of the law . so saith the lawgiver * himself , mat. 22. 40. and so his principal apostle , rom. 13. 8 , 9 , 10. where he speaks of love in a Christian , as Demosthenes did of pronunciation in an orator . as if it were not only the first thing , but also the second , and the third , and so indeed the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the all in all of a Christian . For mark the words of that apostle , whom we cannot accuse of vain , or needless repition . he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law ( V. 8. ) all the commandments of the law are comprehended even in this , thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself ( V. 9 ) love worketh no evil to his neighbour , therefore love is the fulfilling of the law ( V. 10. ) Three times in a breath , without so much as a parenthesis , love is reckoned to be the pandect of all things requisite to make a saint . 

Nor let any man say within himself , how can this be ? since God's word tells us , that so it is . and yet i think it is easy to show you how too ; for the whole body of the law moral doth consist of ten members , which are called the decalogue , or ten commandments of the law . the Lord Jesus hath reduced those ten to these two , thou shalt love thy god with all thy heart , and thy neighbour as thyself . on those two hinges the very door of salvation doth seem to turn . for on those two precepts hang all the law and the prophets , ( Mat. 22. 40. ) But St. Paul hath reduced them all to one . for thus he speaks to the Galatians , * all the law is fulfilled in one word , even in this , thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself . the reason is , because the love of our neighbour ( In the high degree i here speak of ) doth carry along with it , the love of God : either of them ( Saith * Austin ) is inferred by either ; for if we really love God , we shall obey him when he commands us to love our neighbour , and if we really love our neighbour , it is for the love which we bear to God . observe the logic , by which St. John argues both backward and forward . by this we know we love the children of God , when we love God , and keep his commandments , 1 jo. 5. 2.  There he argues from the first table to the second . now observe how he argues from the second to the first , and that two ways , both in the negative and the affirmative . In the negative thus ; he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen , how can he love God whom he hath not seen ? 1 Jo , 4. 10.  he that shutteth up his bowels of compassion from his brother , how dwelleth the love of God in him ? 1 jo. 3. 17.  Again he argues it in the affirmative . we know that we have passed from death unto life , if we love the brethren , 1 jo. 3. 14.  hereby we know wear of the truth , and have confidence towards God , if we keep his commandments : and this is his commandment , that we love one another ( V. 19 to v. 23. ) 

Hence you see it is evident , there is not a clearer demonstration of our loving god with all our hearts , than the loving our neighbour as ourselves . from whence it follows , that every sin must needs argue some want of love . for if against the first table , it is through a want of some love to God . and if against the second , it must needs be for want of some love to men . again , it follows on the contrary , that where love is perfect and entire , no commandment can be broken . For , loving God with all our hearts , we shall keep the first table ; and loving our neighbour as ourselves , we shall not fail to keep the second . 

What i have showed in the great , i can easily show in the retail too , to wit , that love is the fulfilling of the law . for if we love God as we ought to do , we shall certainly have no god but him . much less shall we worship a graved image . We shall not lift up his name in vain . nor shall we fail to keep holy his holy days . and if we love our neighbour as Christ requires , we shall be sure to render to every man his due . And so by consequence we shall honour all our parents and superiors , whether public , or private , ecclesiastical , or civil . then for the neighbour who is equal , or in any degree inferior to us , we shall be sure not to injure him in any kind . From whence it follows , we shall not kill ; ( For that were to injure him in his life . ) Nor commit adultery ; ( For that were to injure him in his wife . ) Nor steal or plunder ; ) for that were to injure him in his goods . ) Nor bear false witness ; ( For that were to injure him in his good name . ) And as we shall not thus injure him either in deed , or in word , so if we love him as ourselves , or as Christ loved us , we shall not do him any injury , no not so much as in our thoughts ; we shall not covet , or be desirous of any thing that is our neighbours . thus the four precepts of the first table , and the six precepts of the second ; or if there is any * other precept besides these ten , they all are briefly comprehended in this one word , thou shalt love , thy neighbour as thyself . 

And so i hope by this time , we are all of one mind , as touching this grand characteristic by which we are to be known to be Christ's disciple ; the peculiar note of distinction , by which we are taken from out the world , as it were severed and set apart , from all other societies and sorts of men , whether their ringleaders and Masters are Jews or gentiles . First for the gentiles , ye May know the disciple of Zoroastres , by their belief of two gods , and their incestuous wedlocks . ye May know the disciple of the Brahmins , by their unparalled self-denials in food and raiment . ye May know the disciple of Pythagoras , by their reverence to the numbers of four and seven . and the disciple of Plato , by their fanciful Idaea's in the concave of the moon . and the disciple of Zeno , by their dreams of apathy and fate . and the disciple of Mahomet , as well by the filthiness of their paradise , as by their desperate tenet of God's decrees . and then for the Jews , ye May know the disciple of the scribes , by their traditional corruptions and their expositions of the law . ye May know the disciple of the Pharisees , by their form of godliness , and their * appearing righteous unto men . ye May know the disciple of the Sadducees , by their denial of providence and their disbelief of the resurrection . ye May know the disciple of the esseni , by their overstrict sabbatizing . and the disciple of the Nazarites , by their abstinence from the flesh of all living creatures . and the disciple of the Hemerobaptists , by their every day washings from top to toe . Ye May know the disciple of John the Baptist , by their remarkable fastings , and other austerities of life . but by this shall all men know that ye are all the disciple of Jesus Christ , if ye love one another , even as Christ hath loved you . 

Whilst i am thinking what proper uses are to be made of this scripture , the words of St. Paul which he writ to Timothy do straight occur to my remembrance ; all scripture ( Saith he ) is by divine inspiration , and is profitable for reproof , for correction , for instruction in righteousness , that the man of God May be furn•shed unto all good works , 2 tim. 3. 16 , 17.  Were there no other scripture , then that with which i have entertained you , i should think it very profitable for each of those ends , and esteem the preacher well furnished for every good work . 

First , it is profitable for doctrine , because it teacheth such as are ignorant , the true importance of Christianity , which doth not consist ( As some would have it ) in our being born of godly parents , believing the history of the gospel , making profession of zeal to Christ , posting up and down from sermon to sermon , making many and long prayers , or whatsoever is comprehended under the form of godliness , that is , the image , the picture , the counterfeit of devotion , ( As the word in the * original doth very naturally import , 2 tim. 3. 5. ) For many profess to know God , who in their works deny him † . And let a man's profession be what it will , yet if he act in contradiction to the commandments of Christ , that very acting is nothing better , than a denial of the faith . and so 't is called by the apostle , 1 tim. 5. 8.  Christianity doth not consist then in such a sanguine presumption , as some call faith ; in such a carnal security , as some call hope ; in such a parcel of * fair words , as some call charity ; in such a † worldly sorrow , as some call repentance : but it consists in such a faith , as * worketh by love ; in such a hope , as doth * cleanse and purify ; in such a charity , as worketh no ill to his neighbour ; but is ( On the contrary ) the † fulfilling of the law ; and in such a repentance , as shows itself by amendment , and change of life , bringing forth * fruits meet for repentance . whatever some mockers are wont to say ; we find by the tenor of the gospel , that a material part of godliness is moral honesty . the chief ingredients in a Christians life , are acts of justice , and works of mercy ; than which there was nothing more conspicuous in the life of Christ . the second table is the touchstone of our obedience unto the first . our chiefest duty towards God , is our duty towards our neighbour . God will have justice and mercy to be performed to one another , before he accepts of any sacrifice which can be offered unto himself . for what saith our saviour ? if thou bring thy gift to the altar , and there remember'st that thy brother hath aught against thee , leave there thy gift before the altar , and go thy way , first be reconciled to thy brother , and then come and offer thy gift . as if he should have said , get thee gone , and be honest , before thou talk'st of being godly . now together with this , compare St.  John's way of reckoning * . in this the children of God are manifest , and the children of the devil , whosoever doth not righteousness is not of God , neither he that loveth not his brother * . and we know that we have passed from death unto life , because we love the brethren . nor doth our saviour say ( In my text ) by this shall all men know that ye are my disciple , if they see ye love God , but by this they shall know it , if ye love one another . because our love of one another doth presuppose we love God ; which 't is * impossible we should do , in case we love not one another . for he that hateth his brother is a murderer , and abideth in death , 1 joh. 3. 14 , 15.  

Thus ye see how this scripture is profitable for doctrine . 

And as for doctrine , so also for reproof . because it serves to convince us of the small proportion of Christianity , which is to be found amongst men who are commonly called Christians . how much there is of the word , and how little of the thing . When the son of man cometh shall he find faith on the earth ? yes , store of that faith , which will ever be common to men with * devils . but when the son of man cometh , shall he find justice , shall he find mercy , shall he find love upon the earth ? shall he find that faith which worketh by love ? and which worketh by such a love , as is the mother of obedience ? and the mother of such obedience , as is impartially due to the law of Christ ? alas ! how frequent a thing is it , for Christians to persecute their fellow-christians , and then to reckon it as the character of their discipleship under Christ ? As if they read the text backward , or understood it by an antiphrasis , supposing Christ had meant thus , by this shall all men know that ye are my disciple , if ye hate one another . will it not be a very sad , and a shameful thing , if Jews and gentiles shall rise in judgement against a great part of Christendom , whilst Christendom shall justify both Jews and gentiles ? first for the Jews , they are so much at unity amongst themselves , that however covetous in their particulars , and however cruel to us Christians ; yet , they are kind to one another , and full of good works too . They suffer not the needy to go without his relief , nor the captive without his ransom . nay the * esseni ( Amongst the Jews ) had all things in common ; and , living virgins themselves , bestowed their cost and their care in breeding other folk's children . Then , secondly , for the gentiles , a Homer describes the love of enemies ; the b Pythagoreans gave it in precept ; and c Antius Restio's brave servant reduced the doctrine into practice . Whilst some of the heathens do love their enemies , were it not well if some Christians would love their friends ? what a scandal is it ( At this day ) to the disciple of Mahomet ( That grand impostor ) that the spirit of division should seem to reign , more amongst Christians then amongst them ? nay are there not many great potentates , who profess to be the followers and friends of Christ , and yet are ready ( At any rate ) to buy peace of the Turk , to the end that they May break it with one another ? or ( Not to go so far from home ) how little is there of Christianity , except the syllables and the sound , even in that part of Christendom , where Christ is most talked of ? amongst the many who are followers of the name of Christ , how few are followers of his example ? how far are they from giving all to the poor , who * grind their faces as it were meal , and eat them up as it were * bread ? how unlikely are they to iudure the bearing of the cross , who lay it so heavily upon other men's shoulders ? how do they leave all and follow Christ , who take away all from them that follow him ? How do they wrestle against powers and principalities , who flatter and syncretize with every thing that is mightiest ? how do they abstain from all appearance of evil , who have nothing of good but in appearance ? where are those pieces of Christianity , which are the grand characteristics whereby a Christian should be distinguished from Jew and gentile ? i fear the places are very few ( Though God be thanked some there are ) where Christ May be known , by solid love , to have real disciple upon the earth . 

Thus you see how this scripture doth furnish matter for reproof . 

And as for reproof , so withal for correction and instruction in righteousness . because it serves to * reduce such as are wandering out of the way , and to build up such as have begun , or , as it were , set out in the way of righteousness . whereby it brings me nearer and nearer to the more special end of our present meeting ; which we are not only to celebrate , as a persons born in the very same county , but as a persons brought up too in the very same school ; and deservedly dear to one another , not so much by being countrymen as condisciples . not disciple under the law , which was a rigid * school Master to drive us on unto Christ ; but disciple under Christ , who was a gracious schoolmaster to lead us on unto God . 

You know when i entered upon my text , i told you it was a part of our saviour's last will . and i must tell you , before i leave it , that the will was made for the behoof , as well of us , and of our children ( upon whom the ends of the world are come ) as for that dozen of disciple to whom 't was given by parole , and with whom the depositum was left in trust . they were the witnesses , overseers , and executors in chief ; but we the remotest of the legataries have equal right with the most immediate . for this testament ( Like the sun ) is so communicated to all , that every Christian in particular hath a full right unto the whole . will ye know the reason ? 't is briefly this . The true intent of the testator was to make us * rich in good works , rich towards God , and to one another . But i May say of right in such a legacy , what Aristotle saith of the soul of man , that the whole is in the whole , and the whole in every part too . Nor is it left ( As other legacies ) to be accepted , or refused , without offence . For what is allowed to be our privilege , is also enjoined to be our duty . in such a legacy as this , we are not only permitted , but strictly obliged to claim our portions . for so run the words , a new commandment give i unto you . his command of our acceptance was one part of the gift ; and made his testament of force , not only * after but before his death . 

Thus we see our obligation to fulfil the intent of the testator . and to the end we Might see it , the will is registered by St. John in this indelible record . it lies upon us , this day , to give a proof unto the world of our discipleship under Christ . as much as in us lies , through the grace of our God which is working in us , we must make this an imitable and an exemplary meeting . Every man must endeavour ( As St. Paul exhorts his son Titus ) to show himself a pattern of good works , tit. 2. 7.  Our love , as well as our moderation , * must be know unto all men . our light of love ( Like the sun ) must cast a glory round about it , though not to this end , that men May see us , and glorify us , yet at least to this end , that men May see our * good works , and glorify our father which is in heaven . Or as 't is expressed in my text , that all men May know we are Christ's disciple . let us not walk after them , who open their meeting with a sermon , and shut it up with a surfeit . but as we have happily begun with some acts of sacrifice , so let us end more happily in works of mercy ; for we are not invited to a feast , like that of Herod , and the Israelites , who sat down ( Like brutes ) to eat and drink , and then ( Like wantoness ) rose up to play , ( Exod. 32. 6. ) This is not {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a Grecian feast of good fellowship ; but a Christian {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , or feast of love . 

If you will know what that means , you must consult the second chapter of the acts of the apostles ; where you will find , in the co•clusion , that they did not only continue daily in the temple , but they did also break bread from house to house . they did enjoy their merry meetings of love and charity ; for so it follows in the text , * they did eat their meat with gladness , as well as with singleness of heart . from whence i take out this lesson , that Christianity is not a sullen thing , making every man's life a continual Lent , as the heretic * Montanus would fain have had it . There is a difference very sufficient betwixt the church of a Christian , and a Stoick's porch . but withal let us ruminate on the two verses going before , where they had all things in common , the rich distributing to the poor , ( To every man his proportion ) just according as they had need . 

Neither was it upon a sudden , that charity grew to that coldness in which we find it . For * Tertullian tells us , that ( In his days ) they had all things in common , except their wives . 

I do not press you to an equality , ( For i think the age will not bear it ) i only plead for a similitude with what we find was the practice of better times . i do not urge you to be liberal beyond your pow•r ( Like the primitive Christians of Macedonia , 2 cor. 8. 3.  ) nor to part with your riches in exchange for deep poverty , that through your poverty the poor May grow rich , ( As St. Paul speaks of our saviour , v. 9 ) For when the age is iron , i cannot hope i am speaking to such a gold•n flock of hearers , as will endure to be preached into so much purity . 

All i exhort you to , is this , that ye will be but as ingenuous as the heathen Emperor Severus , that is , that ye will do as ye would be done by , and at least be liberal * to your power ; and that ye will so show mercy , as ye hope to find it . Ye cannot call it a feast of love , where some are drunk , whilst some are hungry , ( As it seems at * Corinth some such there were . ) A true feast of love must be for all comers , as well for the poor , as for the rich , or rather for the poor before the rich . For mark the words of our saviour to one who invited him to a feast , luk. 14. from v. 12. to v. 15. where first he adviseth in the negative ; when thou makest a dinner or a supper , call not thy friends , nor thy brethren , neither thy kinsmen , nor thy rich neighbours , least they also bid thee again , and so recompense be made thee . from whence we learn this lesson , that 't is true * courtesy indeed , to be afraid of a requital . he is a mercenary feaster , whose guests are all entertainers as apt and able as himself . for one rich man to invite another , is no more in effect , than to make an exchange of good cheer ; to commute a dinner for a supper ; and what is that to be esteemed , but a more gentlemanly barter ? a buying and and selling of entertainments ? Our saviour therefore goes on to the positive part of his advise . when thou makest a feast , call the poor , the maimed , the lame , and the blind , adding this for a reason , because they cannot recompense thee again . which is as much as to say , that the noblest motive to our beneficence should be the poverty of the object on which 't is fastened , and the greatest impossibility of the least requital upon earth . It is always * more blessed to give than to receive , ( As our saviour's words are recorded in the Nazarene gospel ) but then especially , when we give with an assurance , that ( On this side heaven ) we shall not receive . Yet even in this case also , the merciful man is a projector , and driving on his own interest ; bestowing a little here on earth , for a large recompense in heaven . for so saith our saviour in the next words of that verse , ( Giving the reason of that reason he gave before ) * thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the dead . 

Say then , my brethren . When God professeth to be our * debtor for all we give unto the poor , and gives us his word for a * repayment , and when Christ becomes our security , that all we lend shall be returned a hundred fold into our bosoms ; * what kind of reason can be imagined why one rich man will lend his money unto another , for six pounds in the hundred , or lay it out in some trade ( At most ) for twenty in the hundred , rather than * lend it unto the Lord ( By having pity upon the poor ) or * lay it out upon life eternal , whereby he shall not only receive six or twenty in the hundred , but exceedingly more , than a hundred-fold the very principal ? if you inquire into the reason , i am afraid you will find it to be but this , that they cannot easily trust God , or believe the scripture , or accept of Christ for their security . let me therefore say to as many of you as are superlatively rich , that if ever you do expect to be * carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom , you must think yourselves obliged to take Lazarus into your own . and let me say to as many of you as are comparatively poor , that rather than fail of being merciful , ye must * work with your hands the thing that is good , that ye May have to give to him that needeth . St. Paul's own hands did administer to his necessities ; and not only to his , but to theirs also that were with him , act. 20. 43.  The strong aught by their labour to * support the weak , ( V. 35. ) Rather than any man should want , who is not able to earn his bread , he hath a right to eat it in the sweat of our brows . for there is one sort of poor , who are an honourable order and rank of men , as being jure divine , of God's immediate * institution . and our Lord himself , that * sun of righteousness , when he was here in his hypogae• , was pleased to make himself free of that company ; he became the head of that order . for whilst he lived , he lived upon alms , ( Luk. 8. 3.  ) the foxes were not so poor , for they had holes ; the fowls of the air were not so destitute , for they had nests ; but the son of man ( Said the son of man himself ) had not where to lay his head . ( Mat. 8. 20. ) And then when he was dead , he was fain to be buried upon other folk's charges . ( Luk. 23. 53. 56. ) Ye must not therefore neg•ect the poor , unless you dare * reproach your maker ; or , unless ye dare despise that , which Christ himself in his person was pleased to honour . the infidels provided as well for those of their own country , as for those of their own house . and St. Paul implies by the word [ * especially ] that Christians ought to provide for both , unless they dare be worse than infidels . from all which it is evident , that they who are of your country , yet not admitted to your feast , and that for no other * fault than their being poor , must have such provision made for them , that they May fare the better for being hungry . 

But yet i am not at an end of my exhortation . For in vain do rich men conspire , to refresh the bowels of the poor , whilst by envy , or animosity , or by vexatious suits at law , they do impoverish the rich too . It is not true charity they show to others , if they nourish contention amongst themselves . men May be liberal to their vanities , and bestow a great deal of riches in ostentation to the poor , and yet be still strangers to Christian charity , if they will not let fall a quarrel , or suit at law , until they are utterly disenabled to hold it up . the wise disciple of * Pythagoras would rather quit their own right in matter of riches , or honour , or worldly greatness , then run the hazard of breaking peace in any such carnal considerations . 

And therefore ( My brethren ) let me conjure you , not so much by that common , but civil interest , which you have in one country , as by that common , and sacred interest , which you have in one Christ , that all your contentions ( From this day forward ) May be swallowed up in this one , who shall show the greatest zeal , and who shall use the best endeavours , to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace . that however your feast is but once a jeer , yet your peace and your unity May be all the year long . remember the saying of St. James , that to love one another , as you love your own selves , is to fulfil the royal law , jam. 2. 8.  If Jesus Christ is a royal saviour , and if his law is a royal law , than all true Christians must needs be royalists ; that is , obedient to the precepts of Christ their King . remember the saying of * St. Paul , that by one spirit we are all baptised into one body ; whether Jew's , or gentiles , bound or free , of different countries , or of the same , we have been all made to drink into one spirit * ye are the body of Christ , and members in particular . * let there be no schism in the body . But whatsoever things are true , whatsoever things are honest , whatsoever things are just , whatsoever things are pure , whatsoever things are lovely , whatsoever things are of good report ; if there be any virtue , if there be any praise , if there be any consolation in Christ , if any comfort of love , if any fellowship of the spirit , if any bowels and mercies , think on these things . And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly ; that the * whole of you , both body , soul , and spirit , May be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ . 

now unto him who is able to keep us from falling , and to raise us when we are down , and to present us being risen , before the presence of his glory , with exceeding joy , to the only wise God our saviour , even to God the father , who hath create us in love by his mighty power , to God the son , who hath redeemed us in love by his precious blood , and to God the holy-ghost , who hath prepared us in love by his sanctifying grace , and thereby given us a pledge of our future glory , to the holy , individual , and glorious trinity , three persons and one God , be ascribed by us , and by all the world , 

Blessing , and glory , and honour , and power , and wisdom , and thanksgiving , from this day forward , and for evermore . 

The end . 

Books written by the same author , and lately published , viz.  

1 the sinner impleaded in his own court ; wherein are represented , the great discouragements from sinning , which the sinner receiveth from sin itself , &c.  8   

2.  The Christians rescue from the grand error of the heathen , touching the fatal necessity of all events , and the dismal consequences thereof which have slily crept into the church . 4   

Sold by Richard Royston at the angel in Ivy-lane . 





* 1 thes. 1. 3.  † mat. 5. 9  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , &c. iam. 1. 26.  † {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , iam. 1. 27.  * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Jam. 2. 8.  † gal. 6 , 7.  * mat. 7. 2.  † {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Jam. 2 ▪ 13.  * ibid. and mat. 6. 14 , 15.  * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , iam. 1. 26.  † {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Ibid.  * joh. 13. 1 , 2.  † verse 4 , 5. 14 , 15.  * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Luk. 11. 39  † {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Luk. 23. 14.  * prov. 12. 10.  * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . herodot. in melpom. cap. 26. p. 233.  Confer ejusdem . lib. 1. c. 73. p. 30. &c.  119. p. 51.  † {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , eph. 5. 15.  † {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , eph. 5. 15.  * psal. 53. 5.  † {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Eph. 3. 17.  * mat. 7. 16 , 17  † rom. 11. 19  * joh. 15. 1.  † quod tibi non vis fieri , alteri ne feceris . † {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Mat. 7. 12.  Luk. 6. 43.  * rom. 15. 1.  † {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Colos. 4 , 5.  * Philo {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 539.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . * isa 50. 1.  † luk. 5. 34 , 35.  * deut. 23. 7.  † Philo {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 548.  * 2 pet. 1. 12.  * rom. 11. 14.  † {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , &c. ibid. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Jam. 5. 20.  * 2 thes. 1. 7 , 8.  † wisd. 5. 1.  

* heb. 9 16.  * joh. 13. 33.  † chap. 14. v. 27.  * jam. 2. 8.  † joh. 13. 15.  * mat. 7. 22 , 23.  † Chrysostom . Hom. 71. in joh.  aristot.  * prov. 15. 15.  * joh. 15. 13.  † {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Arist. eth. l. 9 c. 8. p. 887.  a xenoph. in exp. cyri. l. 7. p. 319.  b idem ib. l. 1. p. 209.  c val. max. l. 4. c. 7. p. 128.  d id. ib. p. 127.  e id. b.  f ib. p. 129.  g lib. 7. c. 8.  h q. curt. l. 7. p. 211.  i xenoph. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} l. 5. p. 446.  k in exp. cyri. l. 5. p. 304. 305.  l diod. Sicul . l. 16. p. 448.  M val. max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 34.  n tacit. annal. l. 16. p. 331.  o ex polyb. l. 10. p. 582.  Tacit. hist. l. 4. p. 491.  Diodor. sic. l. 17. p. 518.  Q ▪ curt. l. 10. 316.  Val. max. l. 9 c. 9 p. 283.  Aristot. eth. l. 9 c. 11. p. 912.  Homer , il. l. 13. p. 250. & l. 6. p. 109.  Odyss. δ. p. 44.  p val. max. 1. 2. c. 6. p. 50.  q xen. exp. cy. l. 1. p. 212.  r thucyd. l. 2. p. 124. 125.  s polyb. l. 2. p. 147.  t val. max. l. 6. c. 6.  Liv. l 21 c. 14. l. 23. c. 20.  u solduni apud Aquitanoes . Societas hunnorum . Sodales Antonini . Tauri apud Scythas . Fratres Arwale : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} apud aegyptios . alex. ab Alex ▪ Dier . Genial ▪ l. 1. c. 26. p. 74. 75.  * diodor. sic. l. 4. p. 266.  Talis etiam roboaldus , occidentalis fris•ae rex ultimus , à Carolo magno profligatus . † Homer . Odyss. ρ. p. 251. 256.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Id. Iliad . Ρ . p. 322.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Vid. plin. l. 8. c. 42.  Solin . c. 47.  Virgil . l. 11.  Tranquillum in vitâ caesaris . Aelian . de animal . l. 10. c. 17.  † isa. 1. 13.  * sariaster adversus patrem cruenta conspiration faedus fecit . val. max. l. 9 c. 11. p. 287.  † luk. 11. 18.  * psal. 56. 6.  † luk. 23. 12.  vide philonem {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} p. 693.  * luk. 6. 33.  Mat. 5. 46.  * phil. 2. 7.  † isa. 53. 3.  * joh. 13. 5.  † phil. 2. 8.  mat. 5. 43.  * exod. 23. 4 , 5.  Lev. 19 17 , 18.  Deut. 23. 7.  † prov. 25. 21 , 22.  Vide philonem {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 550. 551.  * luk. 6. 35.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Hieroc . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 70.  † verse 36.  * luk. 10. 20.  † rom 12. 20  * lev. 19 17.  † ibid.  * 2 thes. 3. 14.  † {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} &c. ••em . Rom. in ep. ad . Cor. p. 70.  * m•t. 15. 24 , 26.  * 2 cor. 11. 26.  † thes. 2. 14.  * Quan•• dig•••fratres & dicuntur & habentur , qui unum patrem deum agnoverunt , qui de uno utero ignorantiae ejusdem ad unam lucem expiverint veritatis ? tert. apol. c. 39  * 2 tim. 3. 2.  * joh. 13. 5.  * novum mandatum appellatur , quia exuto vetere i•duit nos hominem novum . aug. tract. 64. in io. in •i . Tom. 9  & tract. 6. in io. in in•••o tom. 9  * 1 joh. 2. 7.  & 2 joh. 5.  * psal. 73 8.  Non sicut se diligunt qui corrumpunt ; nec sicut se diligunt homines , quia homines sunt ; sed sicut se diligunt qui dei sunt & filii altissimi , &c. August . loco sepra cit. * luk. 6. 35.  * sic mutuo fatres vocamus , ut unius dei parents omnes , ut consortes fidei , ut spei cohaeredes . minut. faelix . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Philo {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . P 554.  * 1 thes. 4. 9  * mat. 7. 12.  luk. 10. 27.  * gal. 5. 14.  * bene intelligentibus utrumque invenitur in singulis . Nam & qui diligit deum , non eum potest contemnere praecipientem ut diligat proximum ; & qui superne ac spiritualiter diligit proximum , quid in eo diligit nisi deum ? August . Tract. 65. in joh. à med. tom. 9  * rom. 13. 9  * matth. 23. 28.  * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , 2 tim. 3. 5.  † tit. 1. 16.  * jam. 2. 16.  † 2 cor. 7. 10.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . * gal. 5 , 6.  * 1 joh. 3. 3.  † rom. 13 10  * mat. 3. 8.  mat. 5. 23 , 24.  * 1 joh. 3. 10  * ve•ss . 14.  * 1 joh. 4. 20  luk 18. 8.  * Jim . 2. 19  joh. 16. 2.  * Joseph . Antiq. 18. 2.  Philo iud. in lib•o cui titulus , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , p. 678. 680.  a Iliad . p. 109.  b hierocl. in {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} p. 65 , 66 , 70.  c val. max. l. 7. c. 8. p. 193 , 194.  mar 10 21.  * isa. 3. 15.  & 47. 2.  * psal. 14. 4.  & 53. 4.  mar. 10. 20.  eph. 6. 12.  1 thess. 5. 22.  * consule virum consummatissimum , d. d. h. in 2 tim. 3. 16.  * gal. 3. 24.  1 cor. 10 , 11.  * 1 tim. 6. 18.  * heb. 9 17.  * phil. 4 , 5.  * mat. 5. 16.  act. 2. 46.  * ibid.  * illi tres in anno faciunt quadragesimas , quasi tres passi s•at salvato••s . hieron. in ep. •d ma cellam . •ol . 406.  verse 44 , 45.  * quia animo animáque miscemur , nihil derei communicatione dubitamus . Omnia indiscreta apud nos sunt , praeter uxores . tertull. in apol. cap 39  * 2 cor. 8 3.  * 1 cor. 11. 21.  luk. 14. 12.  * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , Aristot . Eth. l. 8. p. 816.  vers. 13.  vers. 14.  * Acts 20. 35.  * vers. 14.  * prov. 19 17.  * ibid.  mat. 19 29.  * luk. 6. 38.  * prov. 19 17.  * mat. 13. 45 , •6 . * luk. 16. 22.  * eph. 4. 28.  * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , Philo {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 557.  * deut. 15. 11. 1 sam. 2. 7.  * mal. 4. 2.  * prov. 14. 31.  * 1 tim. 5. 8.  * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Philo. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 544.  philem. 7.  * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Hierocl. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 61.  eph. 4. 3.  * 1 cor. 12. 13.  * vers. 27.  * vers. 25.  Phil. 4. 8  chap. 2. v. 1.  * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 1 thess. 5. 23.  Jude 24.  rev. 5. 12 , 13.  








































































