AGRIPPA KING of ALBA : OR , THE False Tiberinus . 

As it was several times Acted with great Applause before his Grace the Duke of Ormond then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland , at the Theatre Royal in Dublin . 

From the French of Monsieur QUINAULT . 

LONDON : Printed by J. C. for Nich. Cox , near Castle-yard in Holbourn . 1675.  

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER . 

This Play was Translated by a young Gentleman , who has a great esteem of all French Plays , and particularly of this ; and thinking it pity the Town should lose so excellent a Divertisement for want of a Translation , bestowed his pains upon it ; and it happening to be in my hands in the long Vacation , a time when the Playhouses are willing to catch at any Reed to save themselves from Sinking , to do the House a kindness , and serve 

I know Madam , that this Play in itself is not at all calculated to the humour of the present times , the Subject being too grave , and the Lines too modest ; nor is it ( to speak Modishly ) showish enough . Yet what makes it unfit for others , adapts it the more for your view , whose Virtues are so great , and whose Judgement so clear , that as the first sway you against the present humour which delights the World , so the last defends you from being carried away only with vanity and show . 

And the assurance I have of this , gives me the confidence to add , That the contrivance ( though it be but one single Plot ) is so neat and curious , and the contest between Love and Nature maintained every where to that height , that I cannot doubt but you will find some Divertisement in it , so far as Monsieur Quinault , whose it was in the Original , had a part in it : and as for the English it speaks , I must wholly leave to your Ladyship's Judgement : with the same submission that I subscribe myself 

Madam , Your Ladyship's most humble and most obedient Servant , J. D.  

PROLOGUE . 

AS young and spotless Virgins who appear 
Cloistered in modesty and clothed with fear : 
Who blush at hearing of a Man but named , 
And think they 're by one wanton word defamed , 
The more they kerb their blood and check desire , 
The more their Veins boil with a secret fire : 
Which with such heat does Honour's Fort assail , 
The Tyrint Nature must at length prevail . 
Love does alas ! their tender breasts invade , 
And by themselves they are themselves betrayed . 
Forgetful grewn at once of fear and shame , 
Their former coyness do sincrease their blame . 
So though our Poet all his powers opposed , 
And seemed unwilling to become exposed , 
Struggled with doubts , was fearful to be stung 
With the lewd touch of every Critic tongue ; 
Yet the fierce humour did so fast encroach , 
he 's fallen at last into a French debauch , 
Just in the nick of time , when you decry 
That Nation's Wit , and damn their Poetry . 
What may is there now left him to prevent 
The smart●st doom your Censures can invent ? 
He knows too well you can't with Plays dispense 
That have no Ornament but plot and Sense ; 
That every little Scene that is not full 
Of G 〈…〉 how looks impotent and dull : 
Theref●●● 〈◊〉 all the blame on Frailties score , 
Hoping you● pardon one ne'er sinned before . 
And 〈◊〉 consider , to oblige you to 't , 
'T was hopes to please made him turn prostitute . 
The Names of the ACTORS . 

Lavinia , A Princess of the blood Royal of Alba.  
Albina , Daughter of Tyrhenus , and Sister of Agrippa . 
Camilla , Confident to Lavinia . 
Julia , The same to Albina . 
Mezentius , Nephew to Tiberinus , and Heir to the Crown . 
Faustus , Friend to Mezentius . 
Tyrhenus , A Prince of Aeneas' blood , Father to Agrippa and Albina . 
Agrippa , Son of Tyrhenus , reigning under the resemblance , and assuming the Name of Tiberinus King of Alba.  
Lausus , Atis , Officers to Agrippa . 
Guards . Train . 
The Scene in the Palace of the Kings of Alba , in the Princess Lavinia's Apartment . 

AGRIPPA : OR , THE FALSE Tiberinus . 

ACT THE FIRST . 

SCENE I  

Lavinia , Albina , Camilla , Julia , Lavinia .  Your Griefs with mine such weak resemblance bear , 
That they , Albina , scarce deserve a Tear.  


Alb.   You to my sorrows the due sense deny , 
If you think yours can be more just or high . 


Lau.   For brave Agrippa , murdered , you may claim 
A Sister's grief ; I have a Lover's flame . 


Alb.   By my sole Brother's loss my sufferings are 
more cruel , that they are without repair . 
You to your Mournings justly may give end : 
The Prince for you a passion does pretend ; 
And those bright Eyes make you the Mistress known 
Of many Loves . My Brother was but one . 


Lau.   I many had , ever by the Tyrant crossed ; 
But loved but one Albina , and he 's lost . — 
— The King before that he your Brother slew , 
Studied to please , and talked of Love to you ; 
And now your duty does oblige your hate . 
A Brother's loss mayn't all your griefs create . 


Alb.   Suspect me not of crimes so poor and base , 
That murder , in my heart left him no place ; 
And sullied with our Blood , he does appear 
Too horrible to have Dominion there . 
Since now the Tyrant to these Courts returned , 
My heart with a renewing rage has burned : 
And though just anger may oppress your mind , 
Compared with mine , your Troubles are but kind . 
't is now a year since my dear Brother's dead : 
You may be comforted , and Custom pled . 


Lau.   Speak for yourself : I find a Lover's loss 
Is than a Brothers much the weightyer Cross. 
The Charms of Love more tender are than those 
Which Nature does within our Breasts dispose : 
Those Transports of Our blood their Limits have 
In grief , which seldom travels past the Grave . 
Who has no Brother , can no Sister be ; 
Nature is stopped , and Reason sets you free : 
But Love ! which from some heavenly fire takes birth , 
Preserves its flame still , though the Lover's Earth . 


Alb.   But to augment , and raise my passion higher , 
My Interest with my Nature does conspire . 
Alas ! My Brother did not only die , 
But all the hopes of Our poor Family : 
We from the ancient Alban Kings descend , 
Though too far off advantage to pretend ; 
You touch the Throne , and Fortune once may prove 
A Salve to all these Rigours of your Love.  


Lau.   Whilst Love not Fortune triumphs in my Breast , 
Crowns will not quiet , but disturb my Rest : 
For since all that on Earth I loved lies slain , 
Pomp must be grievous , and a Sceptre pain . 
After Mezentius , and this Tiberine , 
't is true , the Crown is by my Birthright mine . 
But he who now that high degree makes good , 
Sullies by Crimes his Sceptre , and our Blood ; 
His faults have all Aeneas actions stained , 
And lost those glories Alba once had gained . 
Agrippa's Murder , who by him did fall , 
As 't was his last , so 't was his greatest of all : 
A Prince of his own blood , in whom there shone 
That Loyal Zeal , that did support his Throne ; 
And yet before his wretched Father's eyes 
Stabbed by that Tyrant's hand , this Hero dies ; 
Guilty of no Offence , no other Sin , 
But that he did too much resemble him . 
A Crime so bloody , it has banished quite 
All that over me he could pretend of right . 
All due respects to him i  from me thrown , 
And neither Kindred nor Allegiance own ; 
And 't is but just that Murderer should prove 
The due resentments of incensed Love. 
But who comes there ? 


Alb.   Farewell , It is the Prince , 
Whose love to you I 'm sure will wish me hence . 


SCENE II  

Lavinia , Mezentius , Faustus , Camilla . Lau.   You see the Fruits of all your cares for me ; 
When you approach , those I delight in , flee . 


Mez.   If 't were for me Albina left the place , 
I did an object of your sorrows chase . 


Lau.   That Tyrant's Nephew cause's all my grief , 
Sure then can vainly hope to bring relief . 


Mez.   Princess , you too severely make him bear 
The punishment had in the crime no share . 
Had I with my own hands your Lover slain , 
could you have treated me with more disdain ? 


Lau.   And tell me , how I may be well assured , 
' was not your Jealousy , his death procured . 
The King against him had no cause at all ; 
His Arm might borrowed be to act his fall . 
But I must doubt , lest my Agrippa prove 
A Sacrifice to yours , his Rival's love . 


Mez.   The King at large too often has declared , 
That he the greatness of your Lover feared : 
That having raised him to so vast a height , 
Might make him crush the Sceptre with his weight , 
Before fit time should give him leave to do 
What their resemblance well might prompt him to . 
He by removing him , pulled out those stings 
Which fret and gall the breasts of jealous Kings , 
For Nature had their several forms contrived 
So exactly like , as cannot be believed : 
My near Alliance scarce could make me know 
To which of them I did Allegiance owe.  


Lau.   't is certain Nature did in them forget 
Those different stamps she on her works does set ; 
For she had formed their bodies so the same , 
As if they had been Moulded in one Frame . 
But that Distinction which we could not find 
IN th' outward man , was blazoned in the mind . 
And Nature though she had forgetful been 
To speak without , had written at large within . 
Agrippa had a Soul , as great and high 
As is the Tyrant's full of Treachery . 
And from that dissimilitude was found 
IN th' inward man , my Love received his Wound . 


Mez.   Your anger 's just , and your resentment brave 
The King himself appears a sense to have 
Of 's fault to you : For when we first did meet , 
Scarce did he me with due Embraces greet , 
But asked for you ; and I could scarcely breathe 
Your ceaseless Sorrows for Agrippa's death , 
But his Concern I by his paleness knew . 
At last he said , he 'd see and comfort you . 


Lau.   O Heavens' ! That is the worst that I could fear . 
Dares that Wild Tyrant in my sight appear , 
And to those Horrors I conceived before , 
Bring his hand purpled in that precious Gore ? 


Mez.   To gratify your hate in his first fight , 
A Fatal Dart upon that hand did light ; 
By which the Destinies did let him know 
What injured you , could not unpunished go . 


Lau.   The Gods , who still revenge the Innocent , 
Have That , an earnest of your Vengeance sent : 
They pierced his hand , but only made that Dart 
Fore-run the Thunder that must pierce his heart ; 
Even you , who in his barbarous thoughts delight , 
Whom Crimes do more to him , than blood unite , 
May fear the Gods , lest they in anger do 
Extend their Vengeance and their Darts to you . 
But faithless man , your glory in your Ill.  


Mez.   If I were faithless , I am not so still ; 
I am convinced ; Your beauties make me know , 
That to Divinities we Incense own : 
Your powerful Charms do with such lustre shine , 
They force belief there must be powers Divine . 
For had I doubted all our Gods were lies , 
I had become a Convert from those eyes : 
At least , if all the rest I should disown , 
Yet love in them , would make his power be known . 


Lau.   You pled in vain , Prince , for Agrippa's slain : 
All thoughts of Love will but increase my pain . 
Nature in his Composure took such care , 
She fixed all could allure or charm me there : 
Which Love improving , did create a flame , 
To which a constant Votaress I became . 
We once owe Love our hearts in Sacrifice , 
And 't would be Tyranny to ask them twice . 


Mez.   Ah Princess ! this is too much cruelty . 
I cannot doubt your Love to him , whilst I 
am that sad Object of your rigour made , 
That from your breast I 'm banished by his shade . 
Why with my Love , should you increase your hate ? 


Lau.   Cease then to Love.  


Mez.   't is not within my Fate . 
Rather your Indignation still proclaim , 
Than once command me to desist my flame . 
For though those eyes with death should wound my heart , 
They'd yet yield pleasure to exceed the smart . 
To different ends we were by Fate designed ; 
I born to Love , and you to be unkind . 
But see , Alas ! You from me turn your eyes , 
And weary of my sight , my Sighs despise . 


Lau.   Behold the wretched Father of my Love , 
Whose steps ( as winged with haste or wonder ) move ! 


SCENE III  

Tyrhenus , Lavinia , Mezentius , Faustus , Camilla . Tyrhenus .  I beg your pardon Sir , if I seem rude ; 
Business of weight does make me thus intrude : 
I to the Princess fatal Tidings bring , 
That instantly she must expect the King.  


Lavinia to Mezentius .  Now Prince , if of my griefs you have a sense , 
Be you against this Torment my defence : 
And by some Art endeavour to prevent 
That sight will prove so great a punishment . 


Mezentius .  I know so well what to my Love is due , 
That my desires are winged to pleasure you . 


SCENE IU.  

Tyrhenus , Lavinia , Camilla . Tyr.   The Prince in vain does his Obedience show ; 
I too well , Madam , do the Tyrant know . 
His perverse Soul in its desire persists , 
And will grow furious against what resists . 
You by retirement better may defend 
You from his sight ; unless he does intend 
A force ; which yet I think he dares not do : 
He fears the People , whom he knows love you . 


Lau.   But then for you . 


Tyr.   Alas ! what can I doubt ? 
The choicest of my blood he has let out . 
That which remains is scarcely worth my care : 
And I am too unhappy now to fear . 
I 'd let him know who 't was he did destroy : 
But — here he comes — pray Madam now withdraw . 


SCENE v.  

Agrippa , under the Name of Tiberinus King of Alba ; Mezentius , Faustus , Lausus , Atis , and Tyhrenus . Agrippa to Mezenzius .  Urge me no more , the Princess I will see . 
Mezentius retires . 

To Lausus .  Go you , take order all things fitted be , 
That we may render to the Gods due Grace 
For having by my Cares restored our Peace . 


To Atis.   All else depart — Let none come in before 
That I return . — How , have they shut the door ? 


Tyrh.   Yes Sir , and 't is by my Advice 't is done . 


Agrip.   Father ! 


Tyrh.   I scarcely know thee for my Son : 
But we 're alone , and may discourse at large ; 
Seekest thou Lavinia against my express Charge ? 
Received'st thou not the Sceptre from my hand , 
That thou so soon forgettest my strict Command ? 
Or dost thou not remember that by me 
't is thou enjoyest this Sovereign Dignity ? 
That I have thee to all this greatness brought ? 


Agrip.   I have forgot nothing of what I ought ; 
How ( to preserve the Frontier Towns from Waste , ) 
When Tiberinus to his Camp made haste , 
Having but Us , and three more in his Train , 
Passing the Albula , then swollen with Rain , 
It's Streams did with such fury him invade , 
That there he perished , maugre all our aid . 
There you that Sceptre gave , which now I hold , 
And from our near resemblance , made me bold 
To personate the King ; and did entice 
His Followers to join in our device . 
And whilst I under his assumed Name , 
With their Aids , Master of the Camp became . 
You hither Tidings of my Death did bring , 
And with my Murder did accuse the King.  


Tyrh.   But when to keep this our Contrivance close , 
I things in such good order did dispose , 
To sum up all , this strict Command I gave , 
( Your Empire , your Life , and mine to save ) 
That you your power should against your passion prove , 
And study to forget Lavinia's Love. 
And yet no sooner do you here return , 
But I behold you with fresh Passions burn ; 
And for your Love , that desperate hazard run , 
It must the ruin of your power become . 
For whilst you think to act a Lover's part , 
In the King's face , you 'll show Agrippa's Heart . 
You on the Throne should strive to quench this Flame , 
And in your Soul , should now begin to reign . 
Be King indeed , and know how to suppress — 


Agrip.   To be a King Sir , must one love the lesle ? 
Swaying a Sceptre , must I sense disown ? 
Or can you think Love mounts not to the Throne ? 
That Kings unto this God do nothing own , 
Or that all Empires unto him don't bow ? 


Tyrh.   That fondling Love , and its Chimaeras are 
Toys fit for breasts exempt from Nobler care . 
To supreme power it too much weakness brings ; 
For greatness should be the sole love of Kings . 
Disclaim your Error then , and do , my Son , 
What Tiberinus would himself have done . 


Agrip.   He loved my Sister ; should I do so too , 
And an incestuous Marriagebed pursue ? 


Tyrh.   no ; Other Crimes I should in thee detest , 
Only admit Ambition in your breast : 
For Sceptres good , should be by Great o'erswayed ; 
A Crown alone , could make me thus persuade . 


Agrip.   Can't this Ambition with my Flame dispense ? 
Lavinia , Sir , has charmed all my Sense . 
Let then my Sceptre to her Love appeal . 
What if I should the whole to her reveal ? 


Tyrh.   she 's young , a Woman , and her talk may harm . 
Trust you to me , all else does me alarm . 
And just cause of Suspicion I find , 
Both from the Princess Love , and your own Mind . 
Lovers are bold , and Love is indiscreet ; 
Nature's more close , and for these cares more meet . 
For though Lavinia silence knew , she may 
When she knows you , her Love to you betray . 
And then to all the world it would appear , 
That you her Lover , not the Tyrant were : 
Keep you your Crown then ; and let this suffice , 
She sells her hatred at so vast a Price . 


Agrip.   Alas ! the Price in my esteem runs low . 
You of a Sceptre don't the troubles know . 
For since in these Ambitious ways you lead , 
And an unwilling Crown fixed on this head , 
I have not found that true Felicity , 
Nor those vain sweets wherewith you flattered me . 
The Heavens daily threaten , Those that were 
Witnesses of his death whose name I bear , 
And did assist me in this glorious rise ; 
In the first Fight did fall before my eyes . 
Whose Tragedy whilst pitying , yet I viewed 
A Dart in its own blood this hand imbrued . 
As if to it Heaven justly sent that pain , 
For the stolen Sceptre , which it durst sustain . 


Tyrh.   Fear not the Gods , they in your Favour strike : 
For whilst to Tiberinus you 're so like , 
The Gods propitious were in slaying those , 
Who only could your borrowed Name disclose . 
That wounded hand too , has a kindness done ; 
For by your writing else you had been known . 
Those strokes of Heaven therefore favours were ; 
By them you hold a Kingdom without fear . 
And to your Glory Fate adds what remained ; 
You Victory on Victory have gained . 
The Warlike Rutuli , with your own hand 
You have o'ercome , and forced a peace demand . 
And if you think you do Mezentius wrong , 
To whom by Birth the Sceptre does belong ; 
The same just Heaven , that seats you in the place , 
Him from the Throne does for his Vice's chase : 
Who blackened with a thousand Crimes does dare 
Even Heaven itself ; nor would his own blood spare , 
But had the sum of all Attempts contrived , 
And Tiberinus of his Realm deprived , 
Had not Lavinia's Beauty gained the Field , 
And to his Love made his Ambition yield . 
Reign you then so , as to deserve that Crown 
From which by Heaven Mezentius is thrown down . 
And since that Kings of Gods the Image bear , 
Let the resemblance in your Acts appear . 


Agrip.   Mezentius may change Manners in the Throne ; 
Why should we with his Crimes his right disown , 
Sullied with Murder , Blood , and Treachery ? 
he 's of Aeneas Race . 


Tyrh.   And are not We ? 
That blood o' th' Gods Aeneas to his Race 
Transmits' , Mezentius does by Crimes efface : 
Whilst in our Veins ( though not allied so near , ) 
That heavenly Blood flows in a Stream more clear . 
He makes a Mock of Laws and Sacred right , 
And Titan-like , against the Gods does fight , 
Who thus incensed , have made choice of you , 
To snatch from him that Sceptre was his due . 
then since those Powers their Vengeance to extend , 
Have thought it fit , that you your Arm should lend : 
When they will give , refuse not you a Throne ; 
But from their Justice your Advancement own . 


Agrip.   Accommodate the Sceptre to my Flame ; 
Let me but love , and I consent to reign . 


Tyrh.   Loving Lavinia , you your Crown may lose : 
If you must love , you may some other choose . 


Agrip.   Than her I cannot one more worthy find . 


Tyrh.   A Crown would be so to a gallant mind . 


Agrip.   Whilst I my Love , you your Ambition prize ; 
We cannot both , Sir , see with the same eyes . 
The Sceptre never did me farther please , 
Than whilst it to my Jealousy gave ease . 
Mezentius Rivals me , and were he King , 
I fear his power might his contentment bring . 


Tyrh.   Let him his Love , do you preserve his Throne . 


Agrip.   With the King's name let me my passion own . 


Tyrh.   Under that odious Name you 'll be despised . 


Agrip.   Ah! how such cruelty is to be prized ! 
Lavinia's Love will best to me appear , 
Under that false name of my Murderer . 
Her greatest rigour will allay my pain ; 
And I shall prove his faith by her disdain . 
Whilst I my Rival and my Murderer seem , 
I all her scorns for favours must esteem : 
And whilst this way her kindness I improve , 
Her hate will be the touchstone of her Love.  


Tyrh.   Flatter yourself then with so strange a Fate ; 
Mourning her Love , rejoice to have her Hate . 
Try thus how far for you her heart is moved , 
And by her anger prove how you 're beloved . 
— I have some Secrets of more weight , but here 
Too long discourse betwixt us suspicious were . 
When the King's Body I drew from the flood , 
Alone I laid it on the pile of wood ; 
And knew so well to weep for you my Son , 
That by my misplaced passion overcome , 
The Factions of the Kingdom were betrayed , 
And me a partner in their plots have made . 
That we may meet , feign you will have my head , 
And let me prisoner to the Fort be lead ; 
By which you all suspicions may prevent , 
Yet learn the Name of every discontent . 
Now let your Anger against me grow high ; 
Pronounce it me that made the Princess fly ; 
And in fierce fury charge me that I do 
no more approach Lavinia nor you . 


Agrip.   Must I this forfeit of my duty make ? 


Tyrh.   I well can brook it when a crown 's at stake ; 
Nay rather beg so useful a disdain : 
't is my sole glory , that I see you reign . 


The End of the First ACT.  

ACT THE SECOND . 

SCENE I  

Albina , Julia.  Julia.   This Palace , Madam , should methinks renew 
Those griefs are to your brother's murder due . 
Why visit you this object of your woe ? 


Albina .  It is to see the Princess that I go . 
Julia , We long have been by friendship tied : 
But since my brother and her lover died , 
Griefs do unite us , and our Mutual care 
Finds some refreshments in each others share . 
Mezentius presence driven me hence this day ; 
But chase me , chased not my griefs away ; 
Which thousand Accidents now swell so high , 
That sinking under them I run to try 
If our condoling can some ease procure . 
But see , against Custom , they have shut the door . 


Jul.   The King it may be hearing how she mourned , 
Is gone to visit her , and not returned . 


Alb.   If so , I 'll stay , and with a fury armed 
Too strong to be by past endearments charmed . 
I will reproach him with my brother's blood , 
And in a passion not to be withstood . 
I will — but OH Gods ! May I tell thee so ? 


Jul.   What should you fear ? doubt you to let me know 
That your just hatred for your brother's fate 
Makes you — 


Alb.   I tremble but to think I hate , 


Jul.   And can Agrippa's murderer still find 
A calm reception , Madam , in your mind ? 


Alb.   I fear it , Julia , and would fain to thee 
Disclose my doubts , that thou mayst counsel me . 
— Oh! — How that Tyrant once to me was dear ! 


Jul.   Consider , now he is a Murderer ; 
That of a brother he has you deprived . 


Alb.   ay , and of more than is by thee believed . 
His Tyranny , to act a double part , 
Ravished at once my brother and his heart . 
For since the date of that foul Cruelty , 
He has not made the least address to me : 
But through our race his rigour to improve , 
He with my brother Massacred his Love.  


Jul.   Me thinks all grief 's to that brave brother due . 


Alb.   That I esteemed him dear , Heaven knows 't is true . 
Never in any Sister's soul did move 
A Purer kindness , or sincerer love ; 
And that to perfect , Nature's self assayed , 
When him so like to what I loved she made . 
I truly prized him , Julia , and my eyes 
Pay to his fall a daily Sacrifice . 
But when in his , my Lover's face appears , 
I must confess he robs him of some tears . 
That Tyrant in my heart bears yet such sway , 
Though he exacts not , I am forced to pay ; 
And with some sighs I to my duty own , 
Let drop some tears I from my passion flow : 
Or would I from my soul that false one chase , 
For tears of sorrow , tears of spite take place . 
Thus Love crept in my heart , like a bold thy f , 
With Nature and my Duty shares my grief . 


Jul.   Remember , Madam , to engage your hate ; 
Those Cruelties your Father does relate . 


Alb.   In vain my Father now my hate would move , 
Since 't was by his Command I first did love : 
It takes from it all blemish of a Crime , 
Since 't was his orders did my Love enjoin ; 
And we more readily ourselves dispose 
To Love's commands , than those that Love oppose . 
Duty and Custom blew in me that fire 
Which when it once flames up to a desire , 
Julia , we that soft sweetness in it find , 
't is hardly banished the severest mind . 


Jul.   You shall not from me that complacence win , 
To make me flatter you into a sin . 
I should betray you , should I soothe your flame . 


Alb.   I asked you counsel , to oppose the same . 


Jul.   To make so Tyrannous a passion bow , 
You must — 


Alb.   My Father comes ; say no more now . 


SCENE II  

Tyrhenus , Albina , Julia.  Tyrh.   Gods ! 'gainst this Tyrant have I no relief ? 
Come , my Albina , share thy Father's grief . 


Alb.   Sir , from what cause does this fresh trouble spring ? 


Tyrh.   A new affront received from the King. 
But Julia , see there be no spies in place ; 
Anger won't let me whisper my disgrace : 
And when a Tyrant's minded to destroy , 
To make just reason death , he 'll find a Law. 
The Princess did his sight with scorn reject ; 
And having met me here , he does suspect 
That I incensed her to it , and has swore 
That I shall die , if ere I see here more . 
Thy Brother's blood cannot suffice his rage , 
But to his blooming youth he 'll add my age . 
For to his thirst no blood of ours will bring 
Alloy , unless he drink it from the Spring . 
There are , Alas ! in life no charms I prise ; 
Only in weeping I employ these eyes : 
But seeing thee so young , 't is for thy sake , 
If to preserve this life some care I take . 


Alb.   Since he the Princess sight does only bar , 
Vouchsafe Sir for your life to take this care : 
Or if you see her , you may yet engage 
Her to admit the King , to calm his rage : 
And lest his fury should on you reflect , 
Persuade her flatter him with false respect . 


Tyrh.   Shall I oblige her then to soothe his flame ? 


Alb.   His flame , Sir ! 


Tyrh.   Yes , he now declared the same , 
Hoping alone he might the Princess see . 
Finding a stop , and there perceiving me , 
In height of rage and passion he revealed 
He had for her a secret flame concealed ; 
And that my Son a sacrifice did prove 
Not to suspected likeness , but to Love : 
That jealousy in state was made the show , 
But jealousy in Love did reach the blow . 
And wouldst thou have me then with my own breath 
Go blow that fire that gave Agrippa death ? 
Or to preserve my Life so little dear , 
Procure his Mistress for his Murderer ? 


Alb.   That were an infamy too base for you , 
And what I 'd sooner have you die than do : 
no , rather , Sir , go and incense her more ; 
Add horror to the hate conceived before . 


Tyrh.   't is that which now I did consult to do . 


Alb.   Her sight , Sir , may prove dangerous to you : 
Secure of the King's threats I may her see . 
Leave , if you please , the care of it to me . 


Tyrh.   Albina go , act , urge , move every hinge 
To raise her Soul to hatred and revenge . 


Alb.   My Answer by obedience I return — 
O , Julia , how with rage my heart does burn ! 
Amid these griefs I yet have this delight , 
To gratify my Father and my spite , 
If now Lavinia will but credit me . 
See her door opens . — Some one comes forth — 't is she . 


SCENE III  

Lavinia , Albina , Camilla , Julia.  Lau.   I was , Albina , coming to see you , 
To tell you of a grief as bold as new : 
Fierce Tiberinus yet besmeared in blood , 
Would have seen me , and scarce would be withstood . 
Who all that I thought dear with 's own hand slew , 
Would expose me to th' horror of his view . 


Alb.   His barbarous fury , Madam , higher flies , 
Than to present himself before your eyes : 
That were but little , durst he do no more ? 


Lau.   What can he do ? 


Alb.   He does those eyes adore . 


Lau.   Heavens ! shall he dare this , and be Thunder-free ? 


Alb.   My Father just now , Madam , told it me ; 
From whom ( but that a strict Command has barred 
Him from your sight ) you might the same have heard . 
We to his flame my Brother's Murder owe.  


Lau.   Thy Brother's self did not my passion know : 
For whilst he lived , a humour too severe 
To let the least complacent thought appear , 
My Love to him from all the world concealed . 


Alb.   To such a Rival 't would be soon revealed : 
He through the perspective of passion pried , 
Surveyed each look , and so much Love espied , 
That if my Brother be a wand'ring shade , 
It was your kindness him to Fate betrayed . 
This fatal fire which now appears to blaze , 
Has stopped his breath , and smothered up his days ; 
And brave Agrippa in a flame did die , 
Which unperceived was kindled at your eye . 
Here does the Tyrant's cruelty appear ; 
Part in your Lover's death he 'll make you bear : 
For offering him unto his jealous rage , 
He does your Love with his own crime engage . 


Lau.   You such Impressions on my Soul have laid , 
Trembling and Horror every sense invade . 
But , bloody Tyrant , thou th' effects shalt find . 


Alb.   Anger well placed does grace a noble mind . 
For hate to him can never be severe ; 
And 't is but justice to incense you here . 
then since his crime did from his passion spring , 
What did the fault , let the chastisement bring . 
Whilst you disdain and scorn upon him throw , 
You make him wretched , who hath made you so . 
Your vengeance within your own power you have , 
And as you please may punish him your slave . 
For one as cruel as himself he 'll find , 
Whilst Love does play the Tyrant in his mind . 


Lau.   My just resentments yet must higher fly : 
These are too low , Albina ; he must die . 
The blood he shed requires all his own ; 
And I do only live to see it done . 
Too long since my dear love received his doom , 
Have I delayed to wait upon his Tomb : 
But I should blush to meet his happy Ghost , 
E'er I to it a full revenge could boast . 
Too long the Tyrant has his crime survived ; 
But 't was his absence me of means deprived . 
Now if the Gods will to my vows be good , 
His own shall expiate Agrippa's blood . 
This day shall terminate his wicked race — 
— What sudden paleness does invade your face ? 


Alb.   I fear the dangers into which you run . 


Lau.   think'st thou the Tyrant than his fate can eat ? 
To Love spurred by Despair there 's nothing hard : 
I 'll reach his heart i' th' midst of all his Guard. 
Besides , so many friends with me will join , 
As will remove all doubt of the design . 
Mezentius shall a party be : for Fate 
Will make his love the servant of my hate . 
thou to thy Father go , and bid with speed 
His friends be ready against the time of need . 
The Guards appear . But the King comes . 


Alb.   Let us his sight avoid . — 
Lavinia goes in . Albina stays . The false one merits well to be destroyed : 
And yet — 


Jul.   To eat him enter at this door . 


Alb.   If I do see him , 't is t' incense me more . 


SCENE IU.  

Agrippa , Train , Albina , Julia.  Agrip.   I must a Hecatomb to Fortune owe 
For this blessed interview she does bestow . 
Madam , I know I have incurred you hate , 
And therefore for this favour thank my Fate . 


Alb.   You may with pleasure , Sir , behold my tears ; 
In them your joy of seeing me appears : 
And in my Brother's blood may be discerned 
How much your heart hath been for me concerned . 


Agrip.   Justly this Anger you do on me throw ; 
't is what you to your Brother's ashes owe. 
But mayn't there , Madam , some excuse appear , 
That our resemblance was so strangely near ? 
lest he by error might advantage gain , 
Interest of State — 


Alb.   no , no , Sir , cease to feign . 
I know what interest was in you most strong ; 
It was his love , not likeness , did the wrong . 
You from his Loyalty had no offence : 
Love gave the blow , the State was the pretence . 
Your passion for Lavinia armed your hand . 


Agrip.   Since you think so , I 'll not your thoughts withstand : 
But knowing what to such a crime is due , 
Believe 't a new one to pretend to you . 
For all Love has of innocent delight , 
In us , would turn to horror , and affright . 


Alb.   I do not wonder your inhuman breast 
Disclaims with ease those vows to me addressed . 
You in the fatal change a Rival find 
To Murder , and 't is crimes best please your mind . 
My Love had been too quiet , and too free , 
Too void of Tyrannies and Treachery : 
no slaughters need its innocence annoy , 
Nor had you found a Rival to destroy . 
But to you nothing precious seems , or good , 
Save what you buy with Treason and with Blood. 
Your wretched Soul is so to mischiefs bend , 
You cannot let your Love be innocent . 


Agrip.   Do ! let my passion for Lavinia be 
Accused of Treasons , Blood and Tyranny ; 
Loaden with all you can invent of blame , 
I shall not fear to own it without shame . 
A fault so glorious will not charge my mind 
With those remorses which the guilty find : 
For howsoe'er with Treacheries defiled , 
My Love is to my Reason reconciled . 


Alb.   The Criminal that senseless of remorse , 
Does seem in ills to have achieved his course , 
For perfect marks he of a miscreant bears , 
Whose guilt exceeds his horror or his fears . 
Sure after all those crimes your Love has cost , 
Your heart should tremble at the peace you boast . 
Till from the Soul those inward stings are fled , 
All hopes of goodness are not banished : 
Even in the heart that 's blemished o'er with stains , 
Some little stock of Virtue still remains : 
But those extinct , farewel all innocence ; 
That ill 's past cure , that once is past all sense . 


Agrip.   if 't be your Brother's loss cause all this care , 
You having nothing lost , your griefs may spare . 
I 'll be to you what ere he could have been ; 
And for my Love , will pay you my esteem . 


Alb.   Me your Esteem ? How can I guilty be , 
That I should merit such an infamy ? 
Or since crimes are the pleasures of your breast , 
What have I done you might not me detest ? 
Shall I a villain for my Brother have ? 


Agrip.   Your fury heightens that esteem I gave : 
Whatever indignities from you are thrown , 
I shall not as reproach , but kindness own . 
Your generous duty does herein appear ; 
I did but now for you begin to fear : 
Methought some motion through your blood did fly , 
Which did betray a passion in your eye ; 
And I observed through all your anger move 
Something that spoke an old remain of Love.  


Alb.   Your scorn and your advice , Sir , comes too late : 
But if my eyes have made you doubt my hate , 
Or with your pride my blood durst take a part , 
I do declare them Traitors to my heart ; 
That heart , which once your Sacrifice became , 
But since Agrippa's death abhors that name . 
Your murderous hand no sooner cut his thread , 
But with his breath , all my desires were fled : 
Quenched in a brother's blood those fires did die , 
And wronged Nature did the knots untie . 
Perhaps surprised at your first sight I may 
By my dull eyes , my troubled Soul betray : 
But know , that Hatred in its turn does move , 
And is extravagant as well as Love. 
That Tyrant's presence who my brother slew , 
Might of his wounds the memory renew ; 
And blood offended will by Nature stir 
At the approaching of the Murderer . 


Agrip.   I beg not that this anger you assuage , 
Which blood commands , and duty does Engage ; 
And by whose Justice worthy you appear 
Of all that could love well , or be held dear . 
After the pity I conceive for you , 
Let me add something to your glory due . 
You ought to hate me , and in doing so , 
Pay but what to your brother's dust you owe : 
And 't would grieve me if she whom once I loved , 
Were not by duty and by nature moved . 
I 'll quit you , Madam , lest my presence do 
Drive from my heart that hatred is my due ; 
lest some alluring charm incite you to 
Those smiles for me , will be a shame for you . 
I know crimes do souls great like yours incense ; 
You can't forget so barbarous an offence . 
Yet since Love has those subtle secret ways , 
And often by the eye the heart betrays ; 
I by my absence will your fears abate , 
And so secure the honour of your hate . 


SCENE v.  

Albina , Julia.  Alb.   To make me hate thee , Tyrant , take no care ; 
Thy barbarous Crimes too strong incitements are . 
Fear not my Love , but at my Vengeance start : 
Believe that still I would possess thy heart ; 
But 't is , that I , by tearing it alive , 
Might some allay to my just anger give . 
Ah Julia ! how I feel my Flame expire ! 
Disdain does in me smother all desire : 
And my Resentment taking now its turn , 
Does with my Love in equal ardour burn . 
The Tyrant favoured me ; he did not find 
In me those Charms might grace me in his mind . 
For now no sighs of his , unless they be 
His last , will prove acceptable to me . 
Come , Julia , to his death let 's lend our Aid ; 
His punishment appears to me delayed . 
Where Love and Nature both receive a wrong , 
Revenge , though present , seems to stay too long . 


The End of the Second ACT.  

ACT THE THIRD . 

SCENE I  

Mezentius , Faustus . Faustus .  The Army , Sir , are now so discontent , 
They would almost your own desires prevent . 
Their hardened limbs unused to slothful ease , 
Would hazard any thing to hinder Peace . 
Besides those friends that Alba will afford , 
Who only wait when you will give the word . 
And having all these helps , are those thoughts gone , 
Which made you once aspire to the Throne ? 


Mez.   Faustus , since I to Love became a prize , 
Scarcely for it do all my thoughts suffice : 
That cruel passion , by prevailing art , 
Has banished all Ambition from my heart . 
Before this wound the Princess beauty gave , 
I to those viler passions was a slave ; 
Scorn to obey , and a desire to reign , 
Prompted to all attempts a Crown to gain : 
I endured nothing did my will control : 
And unto Crimes did dedicate my Soul. 
But since her eyes gave light unto this flame , 
Purged by those fires , my heart more pure became ; 
And now alone upon those Charms intent , 
Dares form no vows but what are innocent . 
There is no happiness but in her love : 
And could I ever hope her breast to move , 
I would not change so blessed an Estate 
For all the Crowns can be bestowed by Fate . 


Faust.   The King , Sir , is advancing towards this place . 


Mez.   He stops , and wears some trouble in his face . 


SCENE II  

Agrippa , Mezentius , Faustus , Atis.  Mez.   Sir , If I may not indiscreet appear , 
Why in your looks do you this sadness wear ? 
Things prosperous beyond your wishes are ; 
You return victor from a bloody war , 
And bring along all that the Great can please ; 
Honours and pleasures , victory and peace . 
Whilst Fate then to your Glory is so kind , 
What sad dull humour dares oppress your mind ? 
Or what disquiet thoughts within your breast , 
Whilst you give peace to all , disturbs your rest ? 


Agrip.   All things indeed appear to flatter me ; 
And I from war return with victory : 
By many happy Fights our peace is wrought , 
And all are pleased with this repose I brought : 
But I alone this rest cannot enjoy , 
Crowns are confined to so severe a law ; 
And that blessed Calm a happy victor brings , 
Is for the Subjects quiet , not the Kings . 


Mez.   Though happiest Kings are not exempt from care , 
Fortune so studies to abate your share , 
That waiting to prevent you wishes , she 
Strives to forget her old inconstancy . 


Agrip.   't is true , that Fortune so her kindness shows , 
As if that Goddess were at my dispose : 
But were she truly so , she never can 
Feed all the wishes and desires of man 
Under two powers is our life confined , 
Cruel alike , as they alike are blind . 
And seldom 't is , that both do kind appear : 
Secure of Fortune , yet we Love may fear . 


Mez.   If still you love Albina , I 'm surprised ; 
Her , Sir , whose Brother you have sacrificed ? 


Agrip.   no , 't is another Beauty I adore ; 
Which when you hear , will yet surprise you more . 
My passion for Albina's quite suppressed , 
And 't is Lavinia rules now in my breast . 


Mez.   Lavinia , Sir ! 


Agrip.   Nay start not at that name : 
I thought 't must grieve you when you knew my flame . 
For knowing yours , 't was easily discerned 
You must for such a Rival be concerned . 
I 'm troubled that I do your griefs create ; 
But Love will be obeyed , as sure as Fate . 


Mez.   Though , Sir , this sudden trouble may appear 
Too great for my perplexed Soul to bear , 
I 'm not so vain to beg my King to be 
Subject unto the least constraint for me : 
Nor whilst on my own passion I reflect , 
Will I a forfeit make of my respect . 
Though in this Realm I claim a high degree , 
there 's distance betwixt my Sovereign still and me : 
And I must pay , though of blood Royal born , 
Homage to him by whom the Crown is worn . 
For crowned heads , by a becoming pride , 
Are only unto Kings and Gods allied : 
That blood of theirs we carry in our veins , 
Does only bind us in the straighter chains . 
But Majesty does soar so vast a flight , 
Nature and Blood are subject to its height . 
't is not then on my own behalf I 'll move 
You would , great Sir , strive to renounce this love ; 
Nor is 't for mine , but for your quiet sake , 
For your repose , that I this boldness take : 
Spare to yourself the rigour of that Fate , 
To see your sighs paid with eternal hate . 
The Princess Lover whom your hands have slain , 
Makes you the object of her just disdain : 
She so much horror has conceived for you , 
That your pretensions will its force renew ; 
And it will be a misery without end , 
To excite hatred where you love pretend . 
I have of this a sad experience made ; 
My constancy with scorn she hath repaid : 
And you perhaps this fatal fire would fly , 
If you had proved this scorn as much as I  


Agrip.   That you from her can no advantage gain , 
Adds to my joy , and does relieve my pain . 
My bitter passion has this sweetness yet , 
I love a heart that won't to yours submit . 
For 't is enough to keep my hopes alive , 
That I am certain you in vain must strive . 
Whilst she scorns you , she does my flame increase ; 
And loved she you , my love to her would cease . 


Mez.   Horror and hate together do combine , 
To make her hate of you more sure than mine . 
And a great King that is by Glory swayed , 
Should never be by passion so betrayed , 
As to declare his Soul by beauty moved , 
Till he be sure to be again beloved . 
The honour of his Crown must needs grow lesle , 
When thus his love his greatness does oppress ; 
And that by sighs which must be spent in vain 
His majesty 's exposed to disdain . 


Agrip.   Instruct me not , Sir , what I have to do ; 
I know well what is to my glory due , 
And cannot think the honour of my State 
Runs so much hazard by Lavinia's hate . 
Few hatreds are so stubborn and severe , 
But they grow flexible where Thrones appear ; 
And a bright Crown upon her Temples set , 
May make her all her Lover's blood forgot . 


Mez.   Sir , flatter not yourself with hopes so vain ; 
The passions of her Soul too firm remain . 
Her love to him , though dead , to you her hate , 
Are both too constant , and too obstinate . 
You may as well the laws of Fate control , 
As think to snatch Agrippa from her Soul ; 
And you as vainly hope , if you believe 
She ought for you but hatred can conceive . 
Your Crown , whilst with a blood so precious stained , 
Will be with all its Charms by her disdained . 
Even at your name her eyes with anger armed 
In fury blaze — 


Agrip.   Oh! how with this I 'm charmed ! 
How sweet and pleasant 't is to me to find , 
In what I love , such constancy of mind ! 
Whilst such an object of my flame I have , 
The God brings Balsam to the wound he gave . 
Prince of a heart so faithful and so true , 
The Conquests only to a Sceptre due : 
A Soul that is with such endowments blessed 
May claim dominion in a lover's breast . 


Mez.   But know , this heart so faithful and so true , 
Will never be made subject , Sir , to you : 
For she 'll increase her hatred with your love . 


Agrip.   Sweet Prince ! your error does my pity move . 
The thoughts she will on me throw all her hate , 
Does to your flame some flattering hopes create . 
And you presume , if she in anger do 
Grow fierce to me , she must grow mild to you . 
But , Sir , this path I to my wishes know ; 
There wants no more , but when I 'll have it so . 
Such ways I have her favour to procure , 
The hate you dream of is not half so sure . 
That you may know how weak is your pretence , 
My pity hazards , Sir , this confidence . 
And for that kind advice g'in me by you , 
I thought there something in my turn was due . 


SCENE III  

Mezentius , Faustus . Mez.   Faustus , dost my misfortune comprehend , 
And whither the King's haughty threats may tend ? 


Faust.   He has but said too much , to let you know 
That with his love he will his power show : 
That where he cannot by addresses gain , 
His headstrong will does prompt him to constrain . 
Where prayers prevail not , he will use command , 
And force the Princess to give him her hand . 
Thus of your Mistress he will you bereave . 
But she comes forth , — 't is fit I take my leave . 


SCENE IU.  

Lavinia , Mezentius . Lau.   Sir , have you been of my new Torments told ? 
To sigh for me the Tyrant's now grown bold : 
These wretched eyes bear in my grief two parts , 
Yet shame to please the wickedest of all hearts . 


Mez.   Nay , Madam , he to be your spouse pretends ; 
And flattery failing , to use force intends . 


Lau.   Ah barbarous Traitor ! but , Sir , if 't be true 
That love has g'in me any part in you , 
Can you abandon me in this estate , 
And leave me to the power of him I hate ? 


Mez.   Though that pure flame which me your vassal made 
Hath ever been with hate and scorn repaid , 
My heart unto its passion is so true , 
I 'll fly through death itself to succour you . 
Try my obedience then by your command . 


Lau.   It is the Tyrant's head that I demand — 
Ha! — start not — If your help I cannot have , 
I shall find ways , Sir , his attempts to brave , 
To baffle all the worst of Tyranny . 
Know that I am experienced how to die : 
And against whatever Tyrants dare assail 
Death is a remedy can never fail . 


Mez.   no , rather live , to take from me and Fate 
That Tyrant's head exacted by your hate : 
At least , instead of his , you shall have mine : 
To be gainsaid , Love's power is too divine . 
If I did start , that life to sacrifice 
Which duty binds me to , and nature ties ; 
The lest I could to blood and duty pay , 
Was at the first some trouble to betray . 
But to that passion does my heart dispose , 
In vain the sacredst rights themselves oppose : 
You in my heart do bear the highest sway , 
And Love's laws are the first I should obey . 


Lau.   Sir , in this promise of his death I find 
Something allays the trouble of my mind : 
Though I all service have refused from you , 
This I receive with welcomes to it due . 
Not for my dangers it may disengage ; 
I neither fear the Tyrant's love nor rage : 
But all herein that precious seems or good , 
Is the revenging my Agrippa's blood . 
My vows were all accomplished , could I boast 
I had this Victim offered to his Ghost . 
For midst all ills , a double good 't would prove , 
To slay a Tyrant , and revenge my Love.  


Mez.   Ah , Madam ! I perceive by this I must 
Be still despised for my Rivals dust : 
Whilst to your aid I dedicate this Arm , 
You fear lest some weak hopes my Soul should charm . 
Well , Cruel , well , I 'll hazard your defence 
Without exacting any recompense . 
Since in my heart your love did get this sway , 
't is without hopes accustomed to obey . 
But you must give me leave to boast this pride , 
That your revenge you to my love confided , 
And that your heart once felt the tenderness 
To offer up some vows to my success : 
The worst of Chances cannot then deter , 
Whilst to your pleasure I my life prefer : 
And should ill fortune my attempts pursue , 
I shall be happy when I die for you . 
I 'll go , and of my friends implore the aid . 


Lau.   Take heed of trusting , lest you be betrayed . 
Above all , assurance in Tyrhenus have ; 
He has an interest in the death I crave . 
I see him yonder ; but I being here , 
His head he hazards if he should draw near . 
I 'll leave you therefore to consult the way 
How to make this to all a happy day . 


SCENE v.  

Tyrhenus , Mezentius . Mez.   Come , see how in your griefs a part I bear , 
And for their ease a remedy prepare . 


Tyrh.   How , Sir ? can you restore my son to breath ? 


Mez.   I cannot ; but we may revenge his death . 
there 's nothing should a greater trouble give 
To you , than that you see his murderer live . 
But now that mine do with your wishes meet , 
they 'll bring you all that in revenge is sweet . 


Tyrh.   Can you think this , Sir , 'gainst your Sovereign ? 


Mez.   To circumvent you , you may think I feign ; 
But you 'll recant your error when you hear 
he 'd snatch from me all that my Soul holds dear . 
And when Love in our hearts has gained command , 
We abhor all does its carrier withstand . 


Tyrh.   Your unjust Rival I with you condemn ; 
't is fit that flame should fatal prove to him : 
And yet his blood which through your veins does move , 
Might stifle this extravagance of love . 


Mez.   Those flames within our breasts must needs be cold , 
Where Nature does with Love proportion hold . 
Love does all fetters but its own disdain ; 
Kindred and blood against it strive in vain . 
When first the Princess me her Champion made , 
Some little tremble did my Soul invade ; 
But thinking he to her was sacrificed , 
They vanished , and all duties I despised : 
My heart , that knew it , did depend on her , 
Soon those did to all other chains prefer . 
When what we love craves to be understood , 
In vain we listen to the cries of blood . 
The object loved rules in the Lover's breast , 
And by its laws all others are suppressed . 


Tyrh.   The danger , Sir , of such an enterprise , 
The fear of a discovery or surprise ; 
The King's revenge , who never will forgive , 
May yet to your resolves some trouble give . 


Mez.   Think not my Soul can be betrayed by fear , 
Love having got such vast dominion there . 
In vain those Chills my flames strive to assuage ; 
I think what object does my Arm engage . 
And how should fear gain place within my Soul , 
When that God rules there , does all God's control ? 


Tyrh.   You , Sir , may judge in the assault you make , 
What thoughts I ought to have , what part to take : 
But since Kings do God's Image bear , and he 
Who them assails fights with the Deity ; 
Sure that strict awe which to the Heavens we owe , 
May stop your hand , ready to give the blow . 
Though earthly Terrors you as Bugbears prize , 
You can't the Thunder of the Gods despise , 
Which does the greatest of Criminals appall . 


Mez.   The guilty do not still by Lightning fall . 
When Gods with Thunder would the Earth affright , 
The Bolt , alas ! does on th' unhappy light : 
For when it rends the skies , and roars from thence , 
Chance oftener is its guide than Providence . 
But for the Crime , if a revenge to take , 
th' incensed heavens o'er my head should shake ; 
If all the Gods against me should conspire , 
And anger make them arm their hands with fire ; 
Yet whilst a beauty that has so much charm 
Inspires my blood , and does my courage warm , 
Even all those Gods themselves would Bugbears be , 
And shaking heaven itself should not shake me . 
Only do you the part due to you take , 
And show what you dare do for a son's sake . 


Tyrh.   O , Sir , this interest touches me most near : 
knew you but how — 
[ weeps . 

Mez.   It does too well appear . 
Knowing how tender your concernments were , 
I thought it just that you should have a share 
In this revenge ; and did resolve to own 
To your advice the guidance of my blow . 


Tyrh.   I to your trust do this assurance give , 
Your confidence has made my hopes revive ; 
And I had sure despaired , had you to me 
Denied a part in this conspiracy . 


Mez.   I 'll leave the choice of time and place to you : 
My friends are ready , powerful , and true ; 
Who on my orders would the world lay waste , 


Tyrh.   Above all , take heed of making too much haste . 
The King , Sir , hath his Army hither called ; 
The Fort is guarded , and the City walled ; 
So that on failor , or discovery , 
There can for us no hopes of safety be . 
These dangers amongst our friends may doubts create , 
And one man's fear expose us all to fate . 
This hindrance cannot last for many days , 
For more than ten the Army hardly stays : 
And our Conspirators , who then will know 
Themselves the stronger , will the bolder grow . 
In great designs fit choice of time must sway . 


Mez.   I do with you consent to the delay ; 
And always shall think your advice the best , 
Ruled by experience and by interest . 
In the mean time , let us our friends prepare : 
I 'll send you mine , and judge you what they are . 
It is your care that I rely upon . 


Tyrh.   What ever a Father can do for a son , 
You may be sure of ; and if Fate prove true , 
I shall do things not thought of yet by you . 


The End of the Third ACT.  

ACT THE FORTH . 

SCENE I  

Lavinia , Mezentius . Lau.   Sir , what unhappy News is this you tell ! 
Tyrhenus made a prisoner ? — 


Mez.   It may well 
Surprise you , Madam , as it has done me ; 
For with him all our hopes imprisoned be : 
In his restraint our chief reliance dies . 
He many friends experienced has , and wise ; 
He my close partners in the plot has seen , 
And by his Counsels so gained their esteem , 
That as if Courage from his breath distilled , 
He all their breasts hath with fresh boldness filled . 
But parting from us , Atis , as 't is said , 
Met him , and to the Fort him prisoner led . 


Lau.   How does one crime another still engage ! 
My Lover's blood whetted the Tyrant's rage ; 
Which from that time so sharp and keen remains , 
he 'll wreak the rest on 't in his father's veins . 
A swift assistance now our hopes must stead . 
Go — let the Tyrant's death secure that head : 
And by your blows preventing his design , 
Save him the horror of so foul a crime . 
He has lived but too long ; a Tyrant's fate 
As always wished for , always seems too late . 
Run then , and since your friends wait but your word , 
Do not to them a time of doubt afford . 
These great attempts do too much hazard run , 
When we allow space for reflection . 
Think but what fears Tyrhenus death may raise : 
Danger and doubt the greatest heart allays . 


Mez.   Madam , I 'll fly your pleasure to obey ; 
Nor will I now dispute for a delay , 
But slighting reasons might this haste withstand , 
Think it enough that it is your command . 
Whilst the King pays his vows to Victory , 
He shall himself to you a Victim be : 
And by your eyes , those sacred lights , I swear 
To bring his head here , or to leave mine there . 
But here he comes . 
[ The Guards appear . 

Lau.   I 'll fly . 


Mez.   Constrain your hate : 
Now he 's so nigh , your flight will be too late . 
And thus in your revenge you gain a share , 
To stop him here , whilst I his death prepare . 


SCENE II  

Agrippa , Lavinia , Atis , Train . Agrip.   Do I then , Princess , yet those beauties see ? 
Alas ! that my joy should your torment be ; 
That all my faithful love , and all my pain , 
Dare only hope for hatred and disdain ! 
And yet my flame is grown so bright and high , 
In vain I strive to keep it from your eye . 
Small ills we may dissemble and conceal ; 
But that love's weak , does not itself reveal . 
I know this rash attempt must draw on me 
Hatred , contempt , disdain , and cruelty ; 
That all your anger you will on me heap : 
Yet at that price my love will still be cheap . 
Summon your fury then . — But is it true , 
That I see charming Tears distil from you ? 
My Soul is at this tenderness aghast : 
May I believe 't ? 


Lau.   Yes , cruel one , thou may'st . 
My heart does with its firm resolves dispense : 
I thought thy presence would my Soul incense , 
And make my breast with horror overflow ; 
Yet seeing thee , my thoughts do tender grow , 
As though all hatred from my mind were fled . 


Agrip.   Can then Agrippa thence be banished ? 
And with your favour can you make me blessed ? 


Lau.   thinkst thou such crimes dare harbour in my breast ? 
Treason like thine , my love and faith must sway , 
When I that generous Hero so betray , 
That to his spotless ashes I prefer . 
The stained addresses of his Murderer . 
But lest thou think my Tears from thence did flow , 
I to my love this explanation own : 
My Lover did so much resemble thee , 
Thy presence does renew his memory ; 
Bringing those smiles were once to me so sweet , 
thou didst my Tears , instead of anger meet . 
That Image did this tenderness create , 
Stifled my rage , and did suspend my hate . 
My heart that to those Charms engaged would be 
In favour of him , almost favoured thee ; 
And in those features first surprised my mind , 
I that assault did from my passion find . 
Hatred nor Fury could not gain a part , 
But Love alone was ruler in my heart . 
But now that love which all my Soul possessed , 
Stirs up both hate and fury in my breast ; 
Which justly blushing to have stayed so long , 
Are by that short suspension grown more strong . 
thou soon shalt find an anger so severe , 
it 's great concernment shall in it appear ; 
And know that fury cannot be withstood , 
Which is inspired by a Lover's blood . 
My eyes shall dart such vengeance upon you . 


Agrip.   Madam , I know this to my crime is due . 
But though your eyes with all your hate you arm , 
In all their anger I shall find a Charm. 
Accuse me , scorn me , I will not complain , 
But love you without hopes of love again . 
Whilst you impute Agrippa's death to me , 
I cannot murmur at your cruelty ; 
Nor press your heart that passion to remove , 
Which as it heightens , does increase my love . 


Lau.   Did not my Tears then to my Griefs suffice , 
But thou must yet find Charms in these sad eyes ? 
Must they behold a Tyrant's Soul inclined 
To that bright flame once graced a Heroe's mind ? 
But ah ! how cruel does thy love appear , 
Cruel to him that was to me so dear ? 
Whilst his pure flame did by thy crime become 
A fatal Torch to light him to his Tomb. 
May yet revenging Heaven make thy love 
At least as fatal as Agrippa's prove : 
May all the Furies new inventions try 
To punish thee ; and may the aiding Sky 
Mischiefs like rain upon thy head distil , 
Till thou become the Quintessence of ill . 
I will implore those Gods thy Crimes abuse . 


Agrip.   Press not the Gods for what they will refuse . 
They know our good , and of us take such care , 
Believe me , Madam , you your vows may spare , 
Though I with you that generous Faith approve 
Appears in this remembrance of your love , 
Yet grief perhaps has to your heart denied 
The thoughts what glories do in Thrones reside . 
Come , you have mourned too much . Try to believe 
Those comforts which an offered Crown may give . 
Sceptres are Charms unto the greatest grief , 
And from the Throne all evils seek relief . 


Lau.   Disdained I not a Sceptre in thy hand , 
Agrippa's shade does so my Soul command , 
I should with more contentment choose to be 
His Spouse in death , than set on Thrones with thee . 


Agrip.   am I that object of your hatred made , 
That you slight so much glory for a shade ? 
Rare precedent ! which no Example hath : 
To that which is not , you extend your faith . 
What heart ever was to grief so given o'er , 
But it forgot a love that was no more ? 
Cease must the fiercest fire that ever burned , 
When that which feeds it is to ashes turned . 


Lau.   Learn then from me , what glory does inspire : 
Breasts once inflamed with a just desire , 
My Love's cold ashes in their frosty urn 
With its first ardour make my heart still burn , 
Forcing my sighs nights silence to invade , 
And amongst the Ghosts pay tribute to his shade . 
Nothing can a well-kindled flame remove : 
Who can desist , sure never well did love . 
But , Tyrant , know , my Soul the power hath 
To lose its Lover , yet preserve its Faith. 
In worthy minds , where death an Empire gains , 
In vain death strives to break its firmer chains . 
— Would Heaven Agrippa had but known what now 
I do with Tears and Sighs to thee avow . 
But ah ! the force of an imperious pride 
Made me this love too obstinately hide . 
Whilst my heart burned , I studied to disdain , 
And knew so well my passion to constrain , 
That at his death he did not understand 
He o'er my Soul had gained the least command . 
Why did you not , you Gods , this truth unfold ? 
Make him foresee these tears — 


Agrip.   Ah Princess hold ! — 
So sweet a Charm does set my Soul on fire . 
Bring here Tyrhenus , Atis , — you retire . 
Atis and the whole Train withdraw . no longer now can I myself constrain : 
For love will speak , that knows not how to feign . 
Charged with such loads , this secret does appear 
Too weighty for my feeble heart to bear . 
Cease then , of love and faith thou sole delight , 
To seek Agrippa in eternal night ; 
'T was Tiberinus who alone was drowned , 
And you in me that happy love have found . 


Lau.   In you ? o Heavens ! how can this be true ? 
Who can assure it me ? 


Agrip.   I see you do 
Suspect me of Imposture , and you may 
Have cause to do 't , from my too long delay . 
th' advice is justly too suspicious grown , 
To have you credit it from me alone . 
My Father shall the truth of all unfold : 
You may give faith to what by him is told . 
I will oblige him now to let you know , 
I this disguise to his injunctions owe. 
Justice will urge him to it , when he finds 
Fate cannot part two love-contracted minds . 
In the mean time , to know me well , you may 
Search your own heart . — 


Lau.   I fear 't will me betray . 
Too weakly does it this surprisal bear , 
To trust to it — 


Agrip.   My Father does appear . 
From whom what I am will be better known . 


Lau.   If you would please me , strive to be his Son.  


SCENE III  

Agrippa , Lavinia , Tyrhenus . Agrip.   The Princess , Sir , knows now of my disguise ; 
Having first made a sign to Atis to retire . This action I expect should you surprise . 
But you foretold my love would make me known : 
The secret for my heart too strong was grown . 
Her powerful Charms have on my duty wone ; 
I have told all — 


Tyrh.   What Sir ? 


Agrip.   That I 'm your Son.  


Tyrh.   You , Sir , my Son ? you 're to yourself unjust : 
My Son is dead ; do not disturb his dust . 
Alas ! 't was by your hand — 


Agrip.   Your cares are vain . 
A Secret told , can't be recalled again . 
Acknowledge then that in the rapid wave 
Unhappy Tiberinus found a grave : 
That favoured by our likeness , I grew bold 
TO assume the Regal power now I hold : 
That the King's body from the floods you drew , 
And paid the tears to a Sons ashes due . 
In fine , that to avoid suspect , and learn 
Such erterprises as might do me harm , 
You with my Murder did the King accuse . 


Tyrh.   I know the forfeit , Sir , if I refuse 
This base acknowledgement , and ready stand 
To offer up my head at your command . 
— Betray my Son's blood for his Murderer's sake ? 


Agrip.   How , Sir ? — 


Tyrh.   Your anger sha'not make me shake . 
You know me ill , in thinking I can be 
Guilty of such inhuman Infamy : 
The small remain of blood runs in these veins , 
Shall never be purchased with such barbarous stains . 


Agrip.   Why should you cruelly with cunning strive 
This good and faithful Princess to deceive ? 
Have not her eyes , of tears the current made , 
Yet to your Son sufficient tribute paid ? 


Tyrh.   Too well your sense herein to me appears ; 
You would not let him honour him with tears , 
Nor suffer that a heart so generous send 
Sighs to the Tomb of her unhappy friend . 
Is 't not enough   robbed him of his breath , 
But that you must pursue him after death ? 
Cannot his ashes from your hate be free ? 
Nor Urns protect him from your cruelty ? 
Forbear , great Sir , an envy so unjust ; 
And having had his blood , spare to his dust 
This honour , that a heart do it bemoan , 
Which Love has destined to those sighs alone . 


Agrip.   Let then that generous heart be disabused 
Which I possess , while 't is to me refused : 
That heart preserves for me so pure a flame , 
It disdains Sceptres for my only name : 
That heart in which does all my bliss consist , 
Love's gift ; but that my Father does resist 
My Father , for whose Son I can't be known . 


Tyrh.   Why should I for my Son his Murderer own ? 
His death , alas ! Heaven knows to be as true , 
As that he did receive that death from you . 
ay , Sir , a witness was , you know it well , 
When stabbed by you into these arms he fell : 
His bubbling blood upon his Father flew . 
But , Madam , hear a proof of 's love to you . 
Grieving to lose a Son so dear , I sued 
That but one spark of life might be renewed ; 
But I in vain unto the Fates had prayed , 
Till naming you , his wand'ring Spirits stayed . 
And though his eyes , closed for eternal night , 
Did seem to take their last adieu of light ; 
Yet at the sound of that adored name , 
Love broke deaths veil , and opened them again . 
His blood and life , already slipped away , 
Returned , and to his flame the Fates gave way : 
And now afresh for you his spirit burned , 
And 't was for you if his own death he mourned . 
Until the King , at these last gasps incensed , 
With all the laws of Piety dispensed , 
And amongst the waves his panting body threw . 
— Ah Princess ! pardon tears that are so due . 
I can no more — my heart with grief oppressed , 
Only with sighs and sobs must tell the rest . 
My moved blood passage to my voice denies , 
But silencing my tongue , speaks by my eyes . 


Lau.   Vouchsafe thou then , dear shade , to let me bear 
In this thy Father's grief a Lover's share : 
And if thou in those shady walks approve 
Of these last tributes both of blood and love , 
Pardon , dear Ghost , those troubles which my mind 
Did in th' addresses of thy Murderer find . 
Those sweet transports , those thoughts I did conceive , 
When likeness made me him for thee receive . 
For now that from thy Father's mouth I know 
To whom my love , to whom my hate I owe ; 
My revived rage such vengeance shall create , 
My error and thy blood to expiate , 
That hellish Furies shall amazed stand . 
For not the Gods alone shall lend their hand , 
But that my hatred may more full appear — 
Looking on Agrippa . Alas ! but , Sir , if still your Son he were . 


Tyrh.   Disclaim that Error which would you betray . 


Agrip.   Ah , Madam ! rather hear what Love would say . 
Why should the faith of such a Witness be 
Suspected only when he speaks for me ? 
Whilst yet his voice finds favour in your heart . 


Tyrh.   Doubt still a Witness that has so much art . 


Agrip.   Will you such cruel Maxims than pursue , 
And not believe ? 


Lau.   Alas ! what shall I do ? 


Tyrh.   Why can you yet be doubtful in your choice , 
When you have heard so much from Nature's voice ? 
Cannot my troubled Soul your Senses touch ? 
Have I too little said ? 


Lau.     said too much : 
Your passion does too certainly deprive 
Me of that sweetness hope and doubt would give . 
Your son 's too surely dead , in vain I raise 
These flattering doubts against what Nature says . 
Yet are these doubts so sweet , my Love would try , 
And , if it durst , to Nature give the lie . 


Tyrh.   Whatever the King says , be you well assured . 


Lau.   Alas ! his presence cannot be endured ; 
Looking on Agrippa . It so resembles that which charmed my Soul , 
It does my anger and my hate control . 
And though this you on my belief have wone , 
That he is an Impostor , not your Son ; 
Yet when I cast my eyes on his , and there 
The Charms of my Agrippa do appear , 
Spite of myself , you , and his treacherous wrong , 
That aspect is for all belief too strong . 


Tyrh.   Fly then ; and if your reason be too weak — 


Agrip.   Ah , Madam ! stay , and do but hear me speak . 


Lau.   Whoe're thou art , 't is cruel thus to strive 
To all my sorrows an increase to give . 


Agrip.   Will you not hear me then ? 


Lau.   I dare not stay , 
lest to my eyes my heart should yield the day . 


Agrip.   I will not leave you till I make you know . 


SCENE IU.  

Tyrhenus , Agrippa . Tyrh.   Stay , and remember the respect you owe. 
If you 're my Son , your duty pay to me . 


Agrip.   And yet you will not , Sir , my Father be . 


Tyrh.   There too much danger did in it appear : 
Not to be so , was to be Father here ; 
And since kind heavens took the care that none 
Can Witness your disguise but me alone , 
The Obligation they have on us laid 
Is , that we be not by ourselves betrayed . 
't is then much better I my Son disown , 
Than knowing him , hazard his Life and Throne , 
And I would wish ( to banish all our fear ) 
That as to all , changed to yourself you were . 
then for a Crown so fearlessly enjoyed , 
My heart could leap , and its device applaud . 
Think where your weakness did us now reduce , 
You to the Princess should more caution use , 
And not your life to so much hazard throw . 
You promised it . — 


Agrip.   In vain you tell me so . 
Who can the passion of his Soul conceal , 
When th' object loved does mutual love reveal ? 
Flattering myself , I thought I could abide , 
That she her love under her hate should hide . 
But I in that mistaken hate did find 
Charms yet concealed from the experienced mind ; 
There I that sweetness found so rare and new , 
To be assured of love from one so true ; 
So true , that death cannot her heart remove , 
But to the grave she does extend her love . 


Tyrh.   This was a bliss that might your thoughts content . 


Agrip.   Whilst she enjoyed no share , 't was punishment . 
For when a beauteous object charms a heart , 
Can that be bliss in which it bears no part ? 
could I behold my Princess troubled mind , 
And in her sufferings contentment find ? 
This were to brand my love with cruelty . 
no ; Lovers joys must ever mutual be . 


Tyrh.   I cannot but lament so fair a flame , 
Yet for some time you must constrain the same : 
For both your safety and my own require 
That you should put a check to your desire . 
Mezentius is conspiring to deprive 
You of your Crown , the Princess , and your life . 
To make then this constraint the easier seem , 
By it your Crown , Mistress , and life redeem . 
With him are joined Seranus , Corineus , 
Volcens , Antenor , and young Hioneus ; 
All discontents , among the people loved , 
By several motives to your mine moved . 
Thanks to the credit my feigned grief has got , 
Mezentius makes me Master of the plot : 
He without doubt will speak to you for me , 
Dispute not , but to his request agree . 
I for six days have the design deferred , 
In which let all defences be prepared ; 
To the Conspirators give such employs 
May send them hence with honour and no noise . 
Feign some advice to make the Army stay , 
And make them sure by giving them their pay ; 
But treat Mezentius with a high respect , 
That your esteem may banish his suspect : 
At last let him with silence be confined , 
And in some strong place — what disturbs your mind ? 


Agrip.   This practice , Sir , a kind of trouble brings . 


Tyrh.   Trouble should be below the thoughts of Kings . 
It is your death Mezentius does design ; 
Though he mistakes , it lessens not his crime . 
For if we judge by what he understands , 
In sacred blood he would imbrue his hands . 
The heavens do you his punisher ordain , 
And think it fit you in his stead should reign : 
Let no vain scruples than your Soul affright , 
Dive not into their secrets nor your right . 
If seated in this high degree you find 
Some doubtful crimes perplex your troubled mind , 
Sat steady in the Throne , and do not fear 
But that the best of Advocates is there . 
Howe'er we come to mount to this high place , 
The rise is just , to fall is the disgrace . 
no King is faulty but by base descent ; 
Who always reigns , is always innocent . 
Reign then , — ah Son ! — did you but understand 
The glorious State to be above Command . 


Agrip.   Ah Sir ! did you but know the sweets of love . 


Tyrh.   I hear the steps of some that this way move . 


SCENE v.  

Tyrhenus , Agrippa , Lausus , Atis , Train . Tyrh.   Well Sir — with all my blood content your hate . 


Lausus to Agrippa .  all 's ready in the Temple , the Priests wait 
Only your Highness presence . 


Agrippa to Atis.   Go then see 
Your Prisoner back , and in safe custody . 


Tyrh.   Out Barbarous Tyrant ! — 


Atis.   O Sir ! don 't you fear , ] 
Jest he should these reproaches overhear . 


Tyrh.   Fear cannot gain a place within that breast 
That is entirely by despair possessed . 


The End of the Fourth ACT.  

ACT THE FIFTH . 

SCENE I  

Faustus , Lavinia , Camilla . Faust.   What terror , Madam , does your heart surprise 
Just in the height of all our enterprise ! 
The Prince does with amazement understand 
he 's summoned here by your express command . 


Lau.   Faustus , I sent for him , and 't was to pray 
That he would yet the fatal stroke delay . 
I have weighed all the dangers that attend 
On rash attempts , and therefore now did send 
To scape the hazard in this haste appears . 


Faust.   Madam , the Prince was doubtful of your fears : 
But being in the Temple with the King , 
By his command I this assurance bring , 
That to advance , and make your vengeance sweet , 
The Heavens with your intentions seem to meet . 
Never had great design a nobler face : 
The Prince has brought his followers to the place ; 
With them Tyrhenus partisans are joined , 
And all those friends in your revenge combined , 
Who with an eagerness of zeal aspire 
By th' Tyrant's death to accomplish your desire . 
Nor can he against their force find a support : 
't is true , we both the Army and the Fort 
Might justly fear ; but Tiberinus dead , 
Mezentius is of both those powers the head : 
The Citizens are to our party sure , 
Which does confirm our enterprise secure : 
For ever the Camp or Fort advice can gain , 
The Tyrant overpowered will be slain ; 
And he once gone , the Prince assumes the sway , 
Whose right the Chieftains trembling will obey . 
All smiles on us ; and when the King has done , 
Our bloodier Sacrifice will be begun . 
The streets along are with our forces lined ; 
But at Tyrhenus Palace 't is designed 
To give the blow , that all may know he falls 
A Victim to Agrippa's Funerals . 
Who ever observe the freedom which he shows , 
Would say he gives himself up to our blows : 
Such high respect he shows the Prince , that he 
no sooner asked Tyrhenus liberty , 
But with a gracious smile the King replied , 
What he requested could not be denied . 


Lau.   Tyrhenus being free , we better may 
Till we consult him the Assault delay . 
All things affright me now , and I can find 
Nothing but death in my presaging mind — 
— Ah! if to satisfy my cruel rage — 
Go — let the Prince's love his stay engage . 
Make haste — 


Faust.   Madam , at your command I go ; 
But fear the greatest haste will be too slow : 
all 's ready now — and at the Temple-gate 
The Ministers of your revenge do wait , 
That death so justly merited to give . 


Lau.   Run yet , and for some time his life reprieve . 


Cam.   What strange disorder in your mind appears ? 
Whence come these troubled interrupted fears ? 
What can we think of them ? unless the King 
By some sweet charm — 


Lau.   You may think any thing . 
But go , and to your thoughts that trouble save : 
I with Tyrhenus must some conference have . 


SCENE II  

Lavinia , Tyrhenus . Lav   Come , Sir , and if you can , disperse that cloud 
Of grief and anguish does my senses shrowded : 
A secret voice within my breast I find , 
That strives to stifle my vindictive mind . 
My heart at once raging and calm appears , 
And all my thoughts are become Mutineers . 
When first 't was told me that the King did love , 
Hate and disdain in every vein did move ; 
And thus I armed myself — resolved to be 
[ Shows a Dagger . Mistress of his or my own destiny . 
But at his sight , an overpowering charm 
Suppressed my rage , and did withhold my arm : 
That very object did my hate control , 
And all my rage flew trembling from my soul. 
My heart respected in that Tyrant's face 
Those features did my loved Agrippa grace : 
A Father's grief had surely else prevailed , 
And checked that tenderness my breast assailed . 
But all that you could act or urge , in spite 
Of reason , vanished at that charming sight . 
Now let his absence that advantage give , 
If he be not your Son , my hate revive : 
And if he has no interest in you , 
Restore that anger to his crime is due . 
For so his presence did affect my mind , 
Your words were blown away with their own wind . 


Tyrh.   Madam , I all this trouble did foresee ; 
Therefore no sooner gained I liberty , 
But fearless of the Tyrant's threats , I came 
To disabuse , and rid you of this pain . 
Who sees what sorrow on my soul has done , 
Cannot misdoubt the murder of my Son : 
Such piercing anguish cannot be constrained , 
Nor such o'repressing grief be only feigned . 
Contented Nature , did he live and reign , 
could not from the discovery refrain . 
For blood , like love , will those transports obey , 
Which through all checks must sometime force their way , 
But to convince you there does yet remain 
An Argument than this more sure and plain , 
That ardour wherewith I his death pursue , 
Which before him I durst not urge to you , 
Mezentius may a witness be , who knows 
How I did the Conspirators dispose ; 
Their breasts with hate and enmity inspire , 
And made their thoughts take fuel from my fire . 
Yourself can tell what ways I did invent 
To gain the heart of every discontent ; 
Joined in their plots ; made myself chief of all , 
And offered vows he by this hand might fall . 
And can you , Madam , when all this is done , 
Fond sermise that he is still my Son , 
He whom I have designed a sacrifice ? 


Lau.   no , Sir , this to my quiet does suffice . 
TO assuage my passion , and release my pain , 
With joy I this assurance entertain ; 
And from my Soul , and from my sense I drive 
Whatever to it can opposition give . 
My heart no more shall listen to deceit , 
no more shall love its flattering charms repeat : 
For in a Father's word lesle cause I find 
Of fear or doubt , than in my Love that 's blind . 
Nature's consent does so my thoughts confirm , 
The Tyrant seems to live too long a term : 
And 't would my highest satisfaction be , 
To take his life , has taken all from me ; 
That bloody barbarous assassinate . 


Tyrh.   Would to God , Madam , 't were thought fit by fate 
Propitious to a Father's vows , that now 
We were prepared to have begin the blow : 
I by such active speed allay should find 
To all those torments that afflict my mind . 
But haste in such designs too dangerous were . 
The fort 's well guarded , and the Army near . 
We yet must languish , we must yet delay . 


Lau.   Be comforted , I have made this the day . 


Tyrh.   How ! without farther thoughts ? 


Lau.   In fear for you , 
I did command they should the plot pursue . 
And you unto this happy day will own 
All those delights that vengeance can bestow . 


Tyrh.   Let 's yet the danger of this haste prevent . 


Lau.   In vain to stay it , I already sent . 


SCENE III  

Faustus , Lavinia , Tyrhenus . Lavinia to Faustus .  Did you in time unto the Prince arrive ? 


Faust.   To your commands I did obedience give : 
But , Madam , you are so obliged to Fate , 
That 't was my happiness to come too late . 


Tyrh.   ye Gods ! what do I hear — 


— Lau.   O noble deed ! 
Relate each circumstance . — 


— Faust.   There was no need 
I should to th' Temple go ; that sacred ground 
They had already quit : and I found 
The Tyrant nigh unto the fatal place 
Which forth ' assault before designed was , 
Charged by the Prince , hopeless , and out of breath ; 
But though despairing , yet outfacing death : 
Till coming to Tyrhenus Palace near , 
Spite of our force he threw himself in there , 
And whilst we by his small but valiant train 
Were stopped , till o'er their Corpse we made a lane , 
Fearful what dangers popular rage might bring , 
The gates were strongly barred upon the King , 
And he alone — 


Tyrh.   How ! — scaped ? 


— Faust.   We all like you , 
At that sad instant pale and fearful grew , 
Doubtful both of the Army and the Fort : 
But speed we knew must be our sole support ; 
And therefore forcing now our entrance were , 
When on the top Albina did appear . 
Her countenance did some affright betray , 
But with her hand she seemed to bid us stay . 
We soon did to her kind request agree , 
Respectful of her Sex and her degree ; 
While to Mezentius she made this address : 
I hope this great revenge won't seem the lesle ; 
Nor can I think the Princess judge it so , 
'Cause she a part of it to me does owe. 
Her generous temper rather will approve 
Nature should have a share as well as Love. 
Whilst here the King thought to prevent his fate , 
He only did his fall precipitate : 
For by my orders he received his doom , 
And to my brother's Ghost is now become 
A sacrifice . 't is done — and he no more . 


Tyrh.   O Gods ! — 


— Faust.   At this an universal roar 
Of strangely-mixed and tumultuous cries 
Did with loud Echoes pierce the yielding Skies . 
All do admire Albina , and the Prince 
stay 's but to bring the Tyrant's head from thence : 
You asked it of him , and he thinks it meet 
That he alone should lay it at your feet . 
Mean while he thought convenient to employ 
Me to prepare your heart for so much joy . 


Lau.   So — now those Gods to whom so oft addressed 
Our vows have been , have granted our request . 
This day revenges all our former harms , 
And in the Tyrant's blood we taste those charms . — 
— But what strange trouble does your looks invade ? 
Where rather grief than joy does sit displayed . 


Tyrh.   Alas , my fainting spirits are quite gone . 


Lau.   For the King's death ? 


— Tyrh.   no , Madam — 't was my Son.  


Lau.   Your Son , Sir ? — 


— Tyrh.   Yes , too sure I find it here : 
The cries of blood make it too well appear . 
Nature forbids more fictions to create ; 
She speaks herself . 


Lau.   Why does she speak so late ? 
Is it then true i  lost the thing I love , 
And must myself th' unhappy agent prove ? 
Crimes which I would pursue , become my guilt ; 
And blood I would revenge , myself have spilt . 
So oft I urged , so oft his death implored , 
Till heaven did with my ardent vows accord , 
Until the wearied Gods in anger sent 
My own desires , for my own punishment . 
Ah! how are their denials useful oft ! 
And they too cruel when they are too soft ! 
Their dearest interest mortals thus ensnare , 
By tiring Heaven with too tedious prayer . 
But if my Lover thus hath murdered been , 
[ To Tyrhenus . To you alone I must impute the sin : 
'T was his imposed name did me deceive ; 
Loving him dead , I hated him alive , 
And did that life so dearly loved pursue : 
But treacherous Father , all proceeds from you . 
Of all these wrongs you me an Agent made , 
And on the faith of blood was love betrayed . 
By your assurance I thus blind became ; 
You poisoned all the ardour of my flame , 
And cruelly , for an unknown design , 
Turned purest love into a baneful crime . 
What have you , wretched Politician , wone 
By this ambition has destroyed your Son ? 
Did not my love to him my Soul command , 
I 'd carve on you my vengeance with this hand . 
But , cruel man , go render the thanks due 
To your Son's blood , which I respect in you . 


Tyrh.   When thus a Father has destroyed his Son , 
He has enough affliction of his own , 
And needs not your reproach — Agrippa slain ! 
There wants no torment to increase my pain . 
Alas ! poor Son ; whatever I did contrive 
With hopes to save , is turned against thy life ; 
And my paternal love by zeal betrayed , 
Is of thy murder the Abettor made , 
Forcing thy Sister and thy Love to be 
Partners at once in the same crime with me . 
But be it fault or fortune , thou art gone ; 
Offers to kill himself . Lavinia stops him . It only rests , I follow thee my Son.  


Lau.   Stay , let us yet this satisfaction have , 
To draw Mezentius with us to the grave . 
He will deserve his fate , for having been 
The instrument of my mistaken Sin.  


Tyrh.   Since cruel Fate spared not my hapless boy , 
I wish I could with him the world destroy . 
Above all , my daughter may my anger fear . 


SCENE IU.  

Albina , Tyrhenus , Lavinia , Camilla , Julia.  Tyrh.   Unhappy wretch ! how dar'st thou here appear ? 


Alb.   I come to throw myself , Sir , at your feet , 
To beg your anger and your fury meet . 
Remorse of Conscience will not let me fly . 


Tyrh.   Knowest thou th' effects then of thy cruelty , 
How that by thee we are all wretched made ? 


Lau.   Knowest thou that thou a brother hast betrayed ? 


Alb.   Brother and duty both I know have been 
Betrayed by th' too great fondness of my sin , 
His conquering Murderer . — but he comes here . 


Tyrh.   Against him let us all our fury bear . 


SCENE v.  

Agrippa , Tyrhenus , Lavinia , Albinia , Camilla , Julia , Train . Agrip.   I small advantage shall by conquest gain , 
If you , Sir , and the Princess still remain 
My enemies . — 


— Tyrh.   Does my Agrippa live ? 
From what blessed deity do we receive 
This happy grace ? — 


— Lau.   What God can be so good 
As to restore my love ? 


Agrip.   Instinct of blood 
The Guardian-angel was that did inspire 
My Sister's breast , and blue loves secret fire . 


Alb.   Are you my brother then , Sir ? — 


Tyrh.   Yes , blessed Child ; 
And whilst thou thought thou were 't by love beguiled , 
thou art by that which thou a crime dost call , 
Become the instrument to save us all . 


Lau.   But yet I cannot banish all my fear , 
Until I do the whole relation hear . 
His double death has such impressions made , 
That still I do believe my Love a shade . 


Tyrh.   He will himself that satisfaction give , 
Which may your hopes from their dark cell reprieve . 


Agrippa to Lavinia .  Since 't was your orders armed the Princess hand , 
And the assault was made by your command , 
I with some trouble , Madam , did dispose 
Myself at first those orders to oppose . 
Even in these broils of death my heart did still 
Prompt me to a submission to your william 
But when I thought upon your love , and knew 
That 't was mistake made you my life pursue , 
Respect to you determined soon the strife , 
And for my love I sought to save my life . 
And being to my Father's Palace near , 
I for a refuge cast myself in there ; 
When fearing dangers that on Tumults wait , 
To stop the flood the servants shut the gate , 
And made me theirs . My Sister who in me 
Believed she did her faithless lover see , 
Advanced , as first I thought , in rage . to do 
Whatever her error might incline her to . 
But Love appearing , spite of her mistake , 
Did sleeping Nature in my favour wake : 
She thought 't was Love , but Nature did not shame 
To act for me , under Loves bolder name : 
And after having a short Combat tried , 
Blushing , and with a trembling voice she cried , 
Go faithless man , go save thy ●●●f , and be 
Only so kind to own this 〈…〉 me . 


Tyrh.   Blessed be thy 〈…〉 Child , whether it did move 
By the impulse of 〈…〉 of 〈…〉 


Agrip.   Without 〈…〉 first words obey , 
And through the 〈…〉 effort made way , 
Where without opposition I arrived , 
And quick assistance from the Guards received . 
To these the Army their choice Cohorts led ; 
And now with numbers strengthened , I made head , 
Where the Conspirators still fearless stayed , 
Secured by th' promise which Albina made . — 
Whom my approach did so much terrify , 
That having neither power to fight nor fly , 
Their Chiefs I seized , and let the others know 
They did their lives to my compassion owe.  


Lau.   What in this conflict was Mezentius fate ? 


Agrip.   He , and he only , did prove obstinate . 
For having heard how I had begin command 
None should offend him , but disarm his hand ; 
Scorning to be where you ordained the strife , 
Indebted to a Rival for his life , 
That of his vow he might acquitted be , 
He gave himself those wounds designed for me . 
Princess , I die for you — was all he said . 
I ran to stay him , but I found him dead : 
Yet in that death expressed such love to you , 
In spite of joy I almost jealous grew . 


Lau.   I could lament him , if that grief could find 
Possessing you a place within my mind . 
Tyrhenus presenting the Crown to Lavinia . 

Tyrh.   This by Mezentius death becomes your due . 


Lau.   That I have right to it , I know 't is true : 
But all to it or to my right I owe , 
Is , that 't is in my power to bestow . 
Thus then let all the world my faith approve , 
And see your Son crowned here by Me and Love.  


FINIS . 

EPILOGUE To the Lord LIEUTENANT . 

Our Poet was e'en going the old way , 
And had contrived how to excuse the Play , 
Though well he knew the Critics were so keen 
That a submission would but wi●● their spleen . 
But in the Action , Sir , he chanced to spy 
Something of smile and favour in your eye . 
This changed him quite , and in a rage he tore 
That Epilogue which he had written before : 
Bidding me only say , he would not woe 
Others to like what had not displeased you . 
FINIS . 

