SHE VENTURES , AND HE WINS . A COMEDY , Acted at the New Theatre , IN Little Lincoln's-inn Fields , By His Majesty's Servants . 

Written by a Young Lady . 

LONDON . Printed for Hen. Rhodes , at the Corner of Bride-lane , in Fleetstreet ; J. Harris , at the Harrow in the Poultry ; and Sam. Briscoe , at the Corner of Charles-street , in Russel-street , near Covent-garden , 1696.  

☞ A New Comedy , called , The Mock-marriage . Written by Mr. Scot  

THE PREFACE . 

I Dare not venture to send this Play barefaced into the World , without saying something in its Defence : I am very sensible of the many nice Judgements I expose myself to , who may justly find an infinite Number of Faults in it ; which , I profess ingenuously , I am not able to mend ; for , indeed , I am altogether unacquainted with the Stage and those Dramatic Rules , which others have with so much Art and Success observed . It was the first I ever made Public by appearing on the Stage , which , ( with the Advantage it met with , of admirable Acting ) is all the Recommendations I have for exposing it , in its own naked Simplicity , without any Ornaments of Language or Wit ; therefore , I believe , the best Apology I can make for myself and Play , is , that 't is the Error of a weak Woman's Pen , one altogether unlearned , ignorant of any , but her Mother-tongue , and very far from being a perfect Mistress of that too ; and confess I have but just Wit enough to discern I want it infinitely ; yet these Reasons which should have dissuaded me , could not conquer the Inclinations I had for Scribbling from my Childhood . And when our Island enjoyed the Blessing of the Incomparable Mrs. Behn , even than I had much ado to keep my Muse from showing her Impertinence ; but , since her death , has claimed a kind of Privilege ; and , in spite of me , broke from her Confinement . 

The Plot was taken from a small Novel ; which , I must needs own , had Design and Scope enough to have made an excellent Play , had it met with the good Fortune to have fallen into better Hands ; but , as it is , I venture to send it abroad , where , if it finds but a favourable Reception from my own Sex , and some little Encouragement from the other , I will study in my next to deserve it : Which then , perhaps , may make me ambitious enough to be known ; but , in the mean time , I humbly beg the Favour to borrow the Name of 

ARIADNE . 

PROLOGUE . 

Spoken by Mistress BOWMAN , in Man's Clotheses . This is a Woman's Treat y' are like to find ; 
Ladies , for Pity ; Men , for Love be kind ; 
Else here I come , her Champion , to oppose 
The two broadsides of dreadful Wits and Beaux : 
't is odds indeed ; but if my Sword won't do , 
I can produce another Weapon too . — 
But to my Task , — Our Author hope's indeed , 
You will not think , though charming Aphra's dead , 
All Wit with her , and with Orinda's fled . 
We promised boldly we would do her Right , 
Not like the other House , who , out of spite , 
Trumped up a Play upon us in a Night . 
And it was scarcely thought on at the most , 
But Hey-boyss , Presto ! conjured on the Post. 
These Champions bragged they first appeared in Field , 
then bid us tamely article and yield ; 
So did the French , and thought themselves secure ; 
But , to their cost , have fairly lost Namur . 
And so much , Gentlemen , by way of Satyr , 
Now I am come to examine your good Nature : 
Since 't is a Lady hopes to please to Night , 
I 'm sure you Beau's will do the Ladies Right . 
Clap every Scene ; and do yourselves the honour , 
Loudly to boast the Favours you have done her . 
So may the Playhouse , Park , and Mall befriend you , 
And no more Temple-garden Broils attend you . 
EPILOGUE , Spoken by Mr. Dogget , dressed as a Beau.  

Written by Mr. Motteux . OUR Poetess is troubled in her Mind , 
Like some young Thing , not so discreet as kind , 
Who , Without Terms , has her dear Toy resigned . 
You all are wild to bring her to the touch ; 
You beg , you press , you swear , and promise much ; 
'T were well if your performances were such . 
Our Authress now is in , at your Devotion , 
Thou she , perhaps to please you , want the Notion , 
Be generous once , she 'll quickly mend her Motion . 
For , pray take notice , 't is her Maidenhead , 
( that of her Brain I mean ) and you that wed 
Feel seldom easy Joys , till that is fled . 
If you are kind , she 's willing to go on ; 
But if you turn her off , the Nymph turns Nun ; 
And what a scandal would be to the Nation , 
Showed some for want of Trade leave their Vocation ; 
And , among Friars pray for Occupation ? 
I 'm much afraid a woman 's like a Play , 
Yeued have 'em new and pretty every Day , 
Or , else , your Servant ; ' Gad I cannot stay . 
't is true , you wait a while in expectation 
( When up the Curtain fly's ) of Recreation ; 
But you all go , when ere the Play is done ; 
then down the Curtain drops , and whip you 're gone , 
And thence to tell ungrateful Truths you run . 
Be kinder ; let our unknown Fair appease ye , 
Thou you mislike her Play , her Face may please ye : 
She hides it now , yet she mislikes the Task , 
But knows how much you love a Wizard Mask . 
Yet sure she must be safe among You here ; 
We Beaux can never be Critics on the Fair : 
As for you , Judge's , if I rightly know ye , 
You should think that ungrateful Task below ye . 
ye Braves , that made your Campaign at the Wells , 
Storming the Breach of some Fair Citadels , 
If kind , may chance to find out where she dwells . 
Ladies , for your own sakes you must be kind ; 
lest , while we scarce one writing Beauty find , 
Vain Man deny your Sex the Graces of the Mind . 
Take you her part , the Men of course submit , 
And so your Beauty shall secure her Wit. 
Let all these Reasons kindly draw you in , 
And safely then She Ventures , and we Win.  
Dramatis Personae . 

MEN.  

Sir Charles Frankford , Brother to Charlot , in Love with Juliana . Mr. Boman . 
Sir Roger Marwood , Friend to Sir Charles . Mr. Scudamore . 
Lovewell , a younger Brother of small Fortune , married to Charlot . Mr. Hudson . 
Freeman , a Vinter , Husband to Urania . Mr. Freeman . 
Squire Wouldbe , a proud pragmatical Coxcomb of poor extraction , Husband to Dowdy . Mr. Doget . 
WOMEN . 

Charlot , a Rich Heiress . Mistress Bracegirdle . 
Juliana her Cousin , in Love with Sir Ch. Frankford . Mistress Boman . 
Bellasira , in Love with Sir Rog. Marwood . Mistress Martin . 
Urania , Wife to Freeman . Mistress Barry . 
Dowdy , wife to Squire Wouldbe , pretending to rule her Husband , yet always jealous and uneasy . Mistress Bowtel . 
Mistress Beldame ; her Mother , a Pawn-broker . Mistress Lee.  
Doll , Urania's Maid . Mistress Lawson . 
Servants . 
Waiters . 
Chairmen . 
Bailiffs . 
Turnkey , etc.  
She Venters , and He Wins , etc.  

ACT I  

SCENE I  

Enter Charlot and Juliana in men's Clotheses . JUL.   Faith , Charlot , the Breeches become you so well 't is almost pity you should ever part with ' 'em . 



Char.   Nor will I , till I can find one can make better use of them to bestow 'em on , and then I 'll resign my Title to 'em for ever . 



Jul.   't is well if you find it so easy , for a Woman once vested in Authority , though 't is by no other than her own making , does not willingly part with it : But , prithee Child , what is thy Design ? for I am yet to learn.  



Char.   Why , to ramble the Town till I can meet with the Man I can find in my heart to take for better for worse . These Clotheses will give us greater Liberty than the scandalous World will allow to our Petticoats , which we could not attempt this Undertaking in without hazard to our Modesty . Besides , should I meet with the Man whose outside please me , 't will be impossible by any other means to discover his Humour ; for they are so used to flatter and deceive our Sex , that there 's nothing but the Angel appears , though the Devil lies lurking within , and never so much as shows his Paw till he has got his Prey fast in his Clutches . 



Jul.   Methinks you that have so true a Notion of that treacherous Sex , should be afraid to venture for fear of being yourself deceived . 



Char.   no , my dear Julia , to avoid it is the scope of my Design ; for , though by Laziness and Ease the generality of Mankind is degenerated into a soft Effeminacy , unworthy of the noble Stamp was set upon their Soul , there still remains a Race retains the Image Heaven made them in , Virtuous , and Just , Sincere and Brave : And such a one I 'll find , if I search to the Antipodes for him , or else lead Apes in Hell.  



Jul.   But , Dear Child , will not every one think you stark mad for a Husband , to take this extravagant course for one ? 



Char.   no sure ; none can think one of my Youth and Fortune can want the Tenders of Hearts enough ; I 'm not obliged to follow the world 's dull Maxims , nor will I wait for the formal Address of some Ceremonious Coxcomb , with more Land than Brains , who would bargain for us as he would for his Horse , and talks of nothing but Taxes and hard Times , to make me a good Housewife ; or else some gay young fluttering Thing , who calls himself a Beau , and wants my Fortune to maintain him in that Character : Such an opinionated Animal , who believes there needs no more to reach a Lady's Heart than a boon mien , fine Dress , the Periwig well adjusted , the Hand well managed in taking Snuff , to show the fine Diamond-ring , if he 's worth one ; sometimes a conceited Laugh , with the Mouth stretched from one Ear to tother , to discover the white Teeth , with sneak and cringe in an affected Tone , cries Damn me , Madam , if you are not the prettiest Creature my Eyes ere saw ! 't is impossible for me to live if you are so cruel to deny me ; with a world of such foolish stuff , which they talk all by rote ; no , my Julia , I 'll have one who love ▪ my Person as well as Gold , and please myself , not the World , in my choice . 



Jul.   Is there 's any such thing as real Love in that false Sex , none sure is so capable to inspire it , as the charming Charlot , your Person is indeed infinitely taking , your Humour gay , and Wit refined , and Beauty enough to tempt a Hermit ; yet , after all , you 'll find it a difficult business to distinguish , which the most zealous Adorations are paid to , your Beauty , or Gold.  



Char.   I warrant thee , Child , I 'll take Care of that : But come , to our Affairs in hand . 



Jul.   where 's your Brother ? 



Char.   he 's safe enough , he dined to Day at Sir Roger Marwood's , where , 't is twenty to one , he 'll be engaged the Evening . 



Jul.   Suppose he should meet us in our Rambles , he 'd certainly know us . 



Char.   you 're so full of your Suppositions ; suppose he should , which there 's no great danger of , but at the Playhouse , where we 'll first steer our Course ; he 's too discreet to discover us , and too good humoured to be angry , but will think it one of my mad Frolicks , without other Design , but a little Diversion . But I know from whence your Fear proceeds ; which , if you put any more Scruples into my Head , I 'll discover ; therefore look to your good Behaviour . 



Jul.   sighs . I confess you have me at an Advantage , but that has now no part in my design , to serve you with that little Wit I have ; there 's a Coach waits us at the Garden-gate . 



Char.   Allons , my Dear , now Love be propitious . 



[ Ex. Char. and Jul ▪ SCENE II  

Enter Freeman , and Urania with a Letter in her Hand . Uran.   Nay , prithee Freeman , be not in such a Rage at a thing so contemptibly ugly , that is not worth raising the Passion of a Man ; you must trust to my Honesty after all you can do , and , if I designed you foul play , I would not acquaint you thus freely , as I do , with all the Coxcomb's proceedings : Pray leave him to my management , and for once trust a Woman's Revenge ; I 'll warrant you I 'll handle him so as shall give you more pleasant Satisfaction than any you can propose ; nothing so sharpens our Sexe's Invention , as Revenge , the darling Delight of our Nature ; and , if I do not pursue mine home , may the Curse of being thought dishonest , without knowing the pleasure of it , fall upon me . 



Freem .  Urania , I do not suspect you of any Design to abuse me , but , as I believe you honest , I would have the World do so too . Besides , there is no Fort so impregnable , that may not one time or other , with long Assaults or Stratagem , be taken : But I will have Patience , and see the result of your Designs ; and , if they do not satisfy me very well , will then take my own Measures with him . 



Uran.   Agreed , with all my Heart , here is the Letter I just now received from him , and likewise my Answer . 



[ Gives him two several Billets . Freem .  reads . Dear Mistress Honysuckle , 

I don't know what a Devil you have done to me , but I can neither eat , drink , or sleep , for thinking of those dear , damned Eyes that have set my Heart on fire ; let me know when that troublesome Property , your Husband , is out of the way , and I will fly to assure you , I am your devoted Slave , 

S. Wouldbe . 



Freem .  Familiar sawey Fool , I know his Impudence so well , I do not wonder at him : But now for yours . 

Reads . 't is impossible to gain any opportunity by my husband 's being abroad , because than I am confined to the Bar ; but , if you dare , for my sake , metamorphize your Breeches into Petticoats , but avoiding the seeing of my Husband , and you may pass with all the security possible : To night , in Playtime , will be very convenient , it being a new one , we shall in all likelihood be empty of Company ; so that you may have the opportunity , if you desire it , of being alone , with your obliged humble Servant . 



Freem .  What mean you by this , Urania ? Sure you mistake when you gave me this Letter ? What is your Design ? The Devil take me if I can imagine . 



[ Looks surly . Uran.   Why , first to draw the Woodcock into the Net , and then to use him as I think fit . Pray rely on me , and be not so suspicious , for , if you are , you unravel my whole Design . 



Freem .  I can scarce confine my Anger to a Jest ; but , for once , I trust you , but if you play me false , and make me thus the Property , as he calls me , of my own Disgrace , look to 't , by Heaven I 'll murder thee . 



Uran.   Your Threats no way terrify me , having no Designs that will give you any cause of Displeasure : I 'll dispatch away a Messenger to my Gallant , and , in the mean time , give you your Instructions , for you must be assistant to me . 



Freem .  Well , go in , I 'll follow you immediately . 

[ Ex. Urania . Freeman Solus . I never had the least reason to distrust her Honesty , though I 'm not perfectly satisfied with this Letter of hers ; but I 'll watch her narrowly , and it shall scape me hard if she deceive me . 



[ Exit . Freem . SCENE III  

St. James' Park . Enter Lovewell crossing the Stage ; Charlot and Juliana following him in men's Clotheses . Char.   Thus far we have kept sight of him , see we don't lose him now . 



Jul.   no , he 's turning again this way . 



Charl.   Well , if I like his Humour and Sense as well as his Person , my search is at an end ; for this is my Man , I believe he 'll make an excellent Frugal Husband , he has led us a sweet Jaunt ; I am very weary , but must not complain . OH , here he comes again , I 'll accost him , and try what Mettle he 's made of . 



Jul.   Why sure thou art not stark mad ; 'slife he 'll beaten us , do you see how surly he looks . 



Char.   no Parlying now ; Prepare to second me , whilst I give the Onset . 



Jul.   thou 'rt a Mad-wench , but I 'll not fly from my Colours . 



Char.   Well said Girl , now I like thee ; but here he is . 



Enter Lovewell , as crossing the Stage , Charlot stops him . Char.   Give a Stranger leave Sir , to disturb your Meditations , which seem to be as serious , as if you had just received the fatal Nay , and were now breathing Vengeance against Fortune , Love , and Womankind . 



[ All the while she speaks , he surveys her from Head to Foot.  Love.   Indeed , you mistake , young Sir , I was thinking of no such Trifles : those Fooleries belong to your Years , or at least are only then excusable , But I believe you 're disposed to be merry , Gentlemen , and at this time I am very unfit Company for you ; the serious Humour I am in , will not agree with yours . 



Jul.   Is it the effects of being crossed in some Design , makes you so , or your natural Temper ? 



Love.   Neither Sir , but why does it concern you to know . 



Char.   Because we would gladly divert it , Sir , would you accept of our Endeavours towards it , by admitting us into your Company . 



Jul.   there 's nothing so pernicious to Health , as the indulging of Melancholy , and we having a particular interest in yours , must by no means leave you with so dangerous a Companion . 



Love.   A particular Interest in my Health , for what end , Sir ? 



Char.   O , for several : My future Happiness and all my Joy on Earth depends upon it , had I as many Lives as Argus' Eyes , I 'd hazard 'em all for the preservation of yours . 



Love.   Hey day ! whence grows this mighty kindness ? I fear Sir , you are mistaken ; I do not remember I ever had the honour to see you before . 



Char.   I have evidences enough confirms me , you 're the Man that has cruelly robbed a near and dear Relation of mine of her Repose for ever , and except you restore it her by reciprocal Love , I fear the worst effects of this unhappy Passion . 



Love.   O Sir , I find you design to divert yourself instead of me . 



[ Love walking off . Char.   By Honour , Truth , and all that 's Sacred , I 'm serious . 



[ Char. catching hold off him . Love.   Well Sir , bring me to the Lady , I 'm not so cruelly inclined , to let a pretty Woman languish for any civil Kindness I can do her . 



Char.   OH Heavens ! Julia ! if he should be Married ! I dare not proceed , till I know , do you ask him the Question , for I have not Courage . 



[ Char. aside to Julia.  Jul.   Never fear it , he has not the Slovenly Air of a Married Man , but you shall soon be satisfied . 

Pray Sir , give me leave to ask you an impertinent Question . Are you Married ? 



[ To him . Love.   Heavens forbid , 't is the only happiness I can boast . 



Char.   Perhaps you may find it a greater than you are aware of , before we part , if you use it to your advantage . 



Jul.   What think you , Sir , of a young Beautiful Lady with a great Fortune , who love's you well enough to throw herself into your Arms ? could you find in your Heart think you to refuse her . 



Love.   Why Faith , my little Acquaintance , these would all very well agree with a Man under my circumstances ; but pray Gentlemen , unriddle , and let me know the good Fortune you tantalise me with . 



Char.   Well Sir , I will most faithfully discharge my Message , I have as I told you , a Relation that is infinitely dear to me , who is , if the World does not flatter her , not Unhandsome ; Young I 'm sure she is , and not Ill-humoured , but what supplies all Defects , is a Fortune not despicable , being by the Death of her Mother's Father , who was a Rich East-india Merchant , possessed of 1500 l. a Year , besides a considerable value in Money and Jewels ; but what renders her most worthy of your Affections , is that she passionately love's you , love's you to Madness , from the first Moment she saw you , and must be ever-miserable to live without you . 



Jul.   Alas , it is not possible she can live at all , without a suitable Return to her Affection , you cannot sure Sir , be cruel to a young Lady . 



Love.   Looks surly . Ah poor Lady , it may be so . 

[ To Julian . But you had best Sir , put your Friend upon some other Subject , for we shall not be Company for each other long , if he proceeds in this , one of you I presume have been dabbling with your Lady's Mother's Woman , and wants a convenient Tool to cover shame ; you were strangely ill-advised to pick me out , there be Cullies enough to serve your gross purpose , for whatever Opinion you may have of your moving Rhetoric , you 'll find it no easy matter to impose upon a Man , who has had more Experience of the Town than your Years will give you leave to know . 't is your Youth indeed that best excuses your Folly , in attempting a Man you have no reason either from his Character ( if you ever heard it ) or that Conversation you have had with him , to think a Fool fit for the use I find you design me . 



[ Is walking off . Char.   By Heaven , and all that 's good , you do me wrong : I 'm sensible how hard a matter it would be to impose on you , or did she think you so , I 'm sure would scorn you ; may all the Happiness I wish myself , prove endless Torments , if every Word I have said , be not sincerely true . 



[ Char. holds him and looks concerned . Love.   What , I warrant , 't is some good Pious Alderman's Wife , that finding her Husband defective , wants a Drudge to raise an Heir to the Family , 't is indeed the common Game we younger Brothers live by . 



Jul.   Sir , does our Habits or Addresses merit no better an Opinion , than so sordid a Thought of us : Besides , did we not tell you , she is a Rich Young Heiress , and consequently unmarried . 



Love ▪   Pardon me , Sir , I had forgot that , but there follows a greater mischief ; she 's , I suppose , for Honourable-love : no , I 'm for none of that . If she 'll accept of a Civil Kindness or so , I 'll do my best to pleaseher . 



Char.   When I have told you Sir , that this Lady whom you please to be so witty upon , is Sister to Sir Charles Frankford , think if you can hope for any thing from her , but what Marriage which you so much despise , entitles you to ; if you do not know him , give yourself the trouble to inquire after him , and his Sister Charlot , whom perhaps you may not find so contemptible , as you imagine ; or at least if she does not merit your Love , she may a little more respect . 



Love.   This looks very real , it may be true , and I like an unlucky Dog be too incredulous . 

[ Aside . Sir , I most earnestly entreat your Pardon , Sir Charles Frankford I know very well , and have often heard of his beautiful Sister , but yet you must give me leave to distrust my own merit , so much as to think she cannot cast away a Thought , much lesle her Love on so unworthy an Object of it , as the unhappy Lovewell . 



Char.   you 're as suspicious as an old Lady , that Marries a Young Man , is of a Handsome Chambermaid , ( but no more Doubts and Scruples dear Infidel , but if you resolve to Mary this kindhearted Lady , make me the Messenger . 



Love.   Well , conduct me to the Lady , we shall make the best Bargain , I hope you would not have me Mary without seeing her . 



Char.   no Sir , be to Morrow Morning exactly at Nine a Clock , at Rosamond's Pond , she 'll meet you there with one Lady more , both masked , she that gives you her Hand , accept with it her Heart and Person , but come not , if you do not fully resolve to Mary her ; consider of it till to Morrow Morning . Come Cousin , I believe by this time we have tired the Gentleman of our Company . 



Jul.   But first , let 's know your final Resolution . 



Love.   't is to meet the Lady however . 



Jul.   We may trust to her Charms for the rest . 



Char.   Well Sir , adieu , remember Nine . 



Love.   Fear not , I 'm too much pleased with the imagination of my approaching Happiness to forget it . 



Char.   we 'll set you down where you please . 



Love.   With all my Heart , I lodge in Leicester-fields . 



Char.   that 's in our way , come Sir.  



[ Exeunt Omnes . The End of the First Act.  

ACT II  

SCENE I  

Enter Squire Wouldbe , with a Letter in his Hand , Reading . I am the luckiest Fellow that ever was born , I was surely wrapped in my Mother's Smock , none of all the weak Sex can find in their Heart to deny me : I have most powerful Charms , that 's certain . But O , ye Gods ! that a Man of my Parts should be born of such mean Parents ! I must hasten , for 't is near Six . 



Enter Dowdy . Squire Wouldbe puts the Letter hastily up . Sq. Wouldbe .  Pox on her , now shall I be plagued with her Impertinence . 



[ Aside . Dow.   Nay , I will see that Paper , what is it you put up so hastily : Let me see you Rebel you , for I 'm resolved I will see it , that I william  



[ Running to him . Sq. Wouldbe .  See , what would you see ? ' tit nothing but a Libel ▪ There , take it , bid the Maid bring my Cloak and my Sword ; I 'm just sent for out , to a Client . 



[ Gives her a wrong Paper . Dow.   Is this all ? here take it again ; but you shan't go out to never a Client in England , that you shan't : Mary gap ! Go to a Client , and leave me to Sup alone , after I have got a Hot Supper for you too . You Don't care for my Company , that you don 't : I don't care , I 'll go and tell my Mother , that I will , I won't be used so . 



[ Gives him the Paper . [ Cries and Snivels as she speaks : Sq. Wouldbe .  I must wheedle the Fool ; not that I care for the Mother more than the Daughter , but I shall lose many a good forfeited Pawn in the Year ▪ if any Complaints are made . 



[ Aside . Dow.   what 's that you mutter to yourself ? I swear and protest I will go to my Mother , and make her fetch Home all the Plate and Linen in your House , you Rebel you , and see where you can get more : Was not I the making of you ? Now you 'd leave me , and a Hot Supper , for a Client . Mary come up . 



[ She going off , he catches hold of her . Sq. Wouldbe .  Nay , prithee Bunny , don't be nangry ; as true as I am God A'mighty's Child , I 'll come Home to Supper ; pay Bunny let I go . 



[ Makes a Courtesy and looks simply . Dow.   You shan't go , that you shan't , you Rebel you . 



[ She pouts and looks surly . Sq. Wouldbe .  If you won't let me go to my Clients , how shall I be able to maintain my Family . Let me go Bunny , and indeed and indeed I 'll give you a Fine New Petticoat , such a one as your Neighbour Mistress Whatyoucallun has . 



Dow.   But will you come Home to Supper then at Eight a Clock ? 



Sq. Wouldbe .  I will truly , Bunny , what have you got ? 



Dow.   A most lovely Buttock of Beef and Cabbage ; do Puggey , pray come Home . ha , but will you ? 



[ Fawns upon him , and Kisses him . Sq. Wouldbe .  Deed I will Mistress Honysuckle , tum dive I one , two te Busses , nay , one mother : B'y Bunny . 



Dow.   Your a Wicked Man , well go , but make haste Home . 



Sq. Wouldbe .  Heaven make thankful , I am at last rid of her nauseous fondness . 

[ Aside . B'y b'y , I 'll take my Cloak within . 



[ Exit . Sq. Wouldbe . Dow.   B'y dear Rogue , o 't is a sweet natured Man , he 's strangely fond of me . 

Enter Beldame . How now Daughter , where 's my Son ? 



Dow.   he 's just gone out Mother , but he 'll come Home again to Supper . 



Bel.   he 'd best , or he may look for the Point Cravat : I have here for him a Forfeited Pawn , of no lesle than one of the King's Officers , Mr. Constable of our Parish , 't is almost spick and span new , he never wore it but of Sundays . But are you sure Daughter , he 'll come back to Supper , or else I will not leave it . 



Dow.   OH , I am sure he will , for he promised me , and he 's never worse than his Word . Poor Rogue ! OH , he 's the kindest Wretch , Mother , that ever was , he grows fonder and fonder every day than other . Won't you sup with us Mother ? Poor Wretch , he longs to see you . 



Bel.   no , Daughter , I cannot stay , I have appointed a Customer to be at Home at Seven , to take in a Silver Tankard , which I will send to you , for that you have , is called Home , and I am to return it to Morrow ; this is one much of the same value , the change will hardly be perceived . 



Dow.   But you will bring it before you take the other Home I hope ; for my Puggey will drink out of nothing but Silver . 



Bel.   Ai , Ai , that I will , since you say my Son is so good , you shall have any thing . Here , take what I have brought for him ; remember my love to him , and so good Night , Daughter ; I must be gone . 



Dow.   Good Night , Forsooth , if you must . 

[ Exit . Bel.  't is a rare thing to have such a Mother ; she 's always giving my Puggy one good thing or other , which makes him take care to please me : she will one time or other disgrace me , by coming in her every Day Clotheses ; I am ashamed to call her Mother in them . 



Exit . Dow.  SCENE II  

Sir Charles' Garden . Enter Sir Charles Frankford and Sir Roger Marwood , with Music . Sir Char.   I think Sir Roger , we must give my Sister , and Cousin Julia , an Essay of our Serenade ; the Song is pretty , and may properly be applied to any of the fair Sex : But is it not very gallant to treat a Sister thus ? 



Sir Roger.   I believe , Sir Charles , if Madam Juliana had not a greater share in it than your Sister , she 'd lose her part in this Entertainment . 



Sir Char.   I must own my fair Cousin has charmed me ; but I have of late observed her grown so thoughtful , I fear her Heart already is engaged , which makes me fear to own any Pretensions to it . 



Sir Roger.   She cannot sure be insensible to the Brother of Charlot , whom she so tenderly love's ; advance your Addresses , you have a good Advocate . 



Sir Char.   no , I 'll see that Mad Sister of mine disposed of first : I 'd give Five Hundred Guineas to see her in love ; for I dare not own my being so , till she 's a little tamed . she 'll only make me her sport , as she does all Mankind besides . 



Sir Roger.   I think Sir Char. you should rather give it to secure her from it if possible ; for what Assurance have you she will not blind with that mad Passion , be betrayed to match herself to one unworthy of her Merit , and bring an Alliance to your Family , you 'd blush to own . 



Sir Char.   no , I dare swear for her ; however frollicksome she is in her Humour , she 'd scorn to look on any Thing was basely born : but I have often heard her declare she would , when ever she married , match herself where she found more Merit than Estate . I know so well her Pride in that Concern , I dare trust the Honour of our Family in the Hands . 



Sir Rog.   then if she should throw herself away upon some wellborn younger Brother , not worth a Groat , I find you would easily forgive her . 



Sir Char.   She has a plentiful Fortune , enough to make any Man happy ; she 's free and absolute , and has as much Right to dispose of herself and Fortune as I of mine . 



Sir Rog.   It argues but little Kindness , for your Sister to be so careless of her Advantage . 



Sir Char.   You need not instruct me in my Kindness for my Sister , she never found any want of it , nor shall she . But whence comes your Concern for her , Sir Roger ? 



Sir Rog.   As she 's the Sister of my dearest Friend : But come , let 's have that Song . Are you sure they 're together ? 



Sir Char.   They seldom part so soon , you know . Come , Gentlemen , let 's have the Song . 



[ To the Music . SONG . 

Young Celinda's youthful Charms , 
Fills the admiring Town with wonder ; 
The stubbornst Heart , her Eyes alarms , 
And makes them to her Power surrender . 
Face , and Shape , and Wit so rare ! 
Heaven's Masterpiece she was designed : 
A graceful Mien , and such an Air , 
Nothing excels it but her Mind . 
Thou Women envy , Men admire ; 
Her Eyes , in all , do Love inspire . 
Sir Rog.   I think the Door opens . 



Sir Char.   Pray , Gentlemen , retire a little , we 'll come to you immediately in the Street . 

[ Ex. Music . Enter Charlot and Juliana in their own Clotheses ; and Betty . 't is they , let 's get behind this Arbour , from whence we may discover what they say ; they certainly will go in there ; 't is the usual place of discoursing their Secrets in : Perhaps I may pay for my listening ; but I cannot resist so sweet a temptation . 

[ They go behind the Arbour ; Charlot and Juliana go into the Arbour . Julian's Maid stays without . Charlot speaks as she enters the Arbour . I told you 't was but your Fancy ; I was sure to Music , nor no one else , but my Brother , would enter here , and he is not at home . Now , my dear Julia , do not you applaud my happy Fortune ? Is it not better , thus to choose for One's self amongst a Multitude , than out of a few , whose Interest , more than Love , solicits me ? If all things prove but successful to my Wishes , in this Affair , I shall be perfectly happy ; if my dear Julia was but so , I could not wish myself another Joy.  



Jul.   Nothing would more alleviate my Grief , than constantly to see you so ; which is the hearty wish of your unhappy Friend . 



Char.   You heighten your own Trouble , by your obstinate refusal to let him know , what I am sure he 'd accept with Joy : For Heaven's sake let me tell him , I 'm confident he 'll bless me for 't , and so will you hereafter . 



Jul.   I 'll sooner yield my Body to the Stake , than own a Passion for a Man thinks me not worth his taking notice of : no , my dear Charlot , I beg you to conceal it , as you would do a fatal Secret , that would betray my Life ; for , the first Minute he discovers it , I 'll put it out of his Power ever to see me more . 



Char.   It grieves my Soul , to see you thus afflicted , and will not give me leave to ease your Pain ; but , be assured , I never will betray the least of all your Thoughts , without your free Consent . 



Jul.   no matter what becomes of wretched Juliana , so my dear Charlot's happy . 



Char.   Take but the same Method , and you may be so too ; for , should my Designs fail , the way i  laid them , I 'll openly own them , and then I do not fear being denied ; though 't would vex me heartily , to miss the Pleasure of knowing , whether I 'm beloved or not . 



Jul.   Alas ! your passion 's but in jest ; you do not yet know the Torments , to wake whole Nights with restless Thoughts . 



Char.   no , no , never will ; where ere I loved , I 'd tell him so , and break that useless piece of Modesty , imposed by Custom , and gives so many of us the Pip.  



Jul.   I wish I had your merry Heart ; but I am now so serious , that the least Jest is unsavoury to me . Prithee Betty sing the last new Song I gave you . 



Char.   Nay , if thou 'rt come to Rhyming , thou 'rt in Love indeed . 



SONG . 

Restless in Thoughts , disturbed in Mind , 
Short Sleeps deep Sighs : Ah much , I fear , 
The inevitable Time assigned , 
By Fate , to Love's approaching near . 
When the dear Object present is , 
My fluttering Soul is all on fire : 
His sight 's a Heaven of Happiness ; 
And , if he stays , I can't retire . 
Tell me , some one , in Love well read , 
If these be Symptoms of that Pain . 
Alas , I fear , my Heart is fled , 
Enslaved to Love , and Love in vain . 
Char.   that 's your own Fault : But come , let 's in , the Air grows cool . 



Jul.   I 'll wait on you to your Chamber , and there leave you to your Repose . 

[ Exit . Char. Jul. and Bet.  Sir Charles' comes forward and speaks . Well , what think you now , Sir Roger , had I not reason for my Suspicion ? I have paid for my Curiosity ; but I am only too well assured of what I feared before . 



Sir Rog.   Suppose , Sir Charles , you should prove the Man : I dare believe I guests not much amiss , who should your Sister take such Liberty with , as to offer to declare a business of that nature to , but to you ? 



Sir Char.   I wish no happy Fortune : But much I fear my Stars are not so kind . 



[ Sighs . Sir Rog.   We forget our Music ; or , at least , they 'll think so . 



Sir Char.   Come , let 's to ' 'em . 



[ Exit . Sir Charles and Sir Roger.  SCENE III  

A Tavern Kitchin.  

Enter Freeman , Urania and Cookmaid . Ura.   Doll , do you be sure to keep the Kitchen clear , we must be as quick as possible for fear of Interruption by Companies coming in . 



Freem .  Pl — on him , if he would but make haste , there is now but one Company in the House . 

Doll looking out . OH he 's here , Sir , just got out of a Chair . 



Ura.   Run you Doll , and bring him in here ; and get you gone , Freeman , you know your end . 



[ Ex. Doll . Freem .  I warrant I 'll remember it with a Vengeance . 



[ Ex. Freeman . Doll returns with Esq Wouldbe in Woman's clothes , and Exit . Esq Wouldbe  makes a Curtchy , goes up to her . ] Your Servant , sweet Mistress Strawberry , am not I a pretty Gentlewoman ? Now tum dive I a Buss.  



Ura.   Fie Sir , what do you mean , you know there 's always Capitulation before a Surrender ; you must promise Constancy , Secrecy , and a thousand other things beside , before we come to the main point . 



Esq Wouldbe ,  Hark you dear Child , is this a place to make Conditions in ? What a Devil made you bring me into the Kitchen , your Chamber had been a properer place for what we have to say and do ? 



Ura.   Ai , but to have sent you up alone , or carried you up directly , might have given cause of suspicion to my Servants , which now I avoid by taking you from hence . 



Esq W.   Let 's lose no time , dear Child , but go where Love and Beauty calls . 

Aside . I Gad , that was a high touch if it passes for my own . 

To her . Come , come , do not delay my Bliss , your House begins to fill ; and we may lose this blessed Opportunity . 



Ura.   Well , come then , but you must be sure to be very Civil . 



Esq W.   Aye , aye , as Civil as you desire . 



[ Leaves off amazedly , hearing Freeman's Voice Freeman within aloud . Freem .  A Man , say you , in Woman's clothes with my Wise ? D — him , give me my Sword , I 'll stick him to the Wall.  



Ura.   OH Heavens what will you do , your betrayed ! 



[ Esque W. shakes and shows great signs of fear . Sw — s   what shall I do ? here 's never a Hole to creep in , as I see , that will hide a Mouse . 



Freem .  within . Here , Sirrah , charge this Pistol for me whilst I charge the other , perhaps he 's armed for a Surprise ; but I 'll Maul the Dog , I 'll lay his Lechery for him I warrant him . 



Ura.   seeming in a great fright . you 're a dead Man if you do not do something presently . 

[ Looking about sees the Cystern . Here , here , get into the Cystern , there is as it happens but very little Water in it . 



Esq W.   Ah Lord , any where so I may but save my dear Life ; well this is a Judgement upon me for coveting my Neighbour's Wife , if I had been at home with my own , I need not have feared any body . 



[ Gets into the Cystern . Enter Freeman Armed looking about . Freem .  What have you done with your Metamorphosed Gallant , produce him you'd best , for if he escape my Fury you shall feel it , you Jezebel you . 



Ura.   What is 't you mean , are you mad to make me and yourself ridiculous ? I know of never a Gallant that I have , if you do you had best find him out ; Who is it puts these Crotchets in your Crown ? you never had reason to believe ill of me , and why should you harken to every fool 's Tale ? 



Freem .  Why , had not you a Man with you in Woman's clothes ? 



Ura.   I have had no body with me but my Midwife , and if you had come sooner you might have examined if you pleased . 



Freem .  Indeed Urania , I am too blame to suspect you upon every idle story ; but I was told that Esq Wouldbe was with you in Woman's clothes ; pray forgive my Passion . 



Ura.   Indeed you are unkind , but I can forgive you more than this . 



Freem .  Have an Eye to the Bar , for I am sent for out , but will not stay . 



[ Ex. Freeman . Esq Wouldbe peeps out . Esq Wouldbe .  Is he gone ? I 'm almost drowned , the water 's come in ever since i  been here . 



Ura.   He is , you may venture forth . 



Aside . Pray Heaven I hold from laughing . 

Esq Wouldbe comes out dropping wet . Esq Wouldbe .  What shall I do , I shall catch my death , with all these wet clothes about me ? 



Ura.   Here , take this Key , and go up to the Star , there 's a Bed provided for you , and as soon as I can secure my Husband I 'll come to you . 



Esq W.   Dear kind charming Creature , how you revive me ? but are you sure he 's gone now , and the coast clear , for 't is impossible I can take Sanctuary in the same place again , for by this time 't is full of Water . 



Ura.   you 'll have no more occasion , I hope , but if you should , I think you must hide there in the Feather-tub ; pointing to a Feather-tub . 



Esq W.   I wish I had seen that before , 't would have saved me a Ducking . 



Ura.   Alas , I forgot it in my fright , but you had best be gone for fear of a Surprise again . 

Just as he goes to the Door , he here 's trampling within , returns in a great Fright , and jumps into the Feather-tub , and says , Aye Lord he 's here again . 



Ura.   This was such an unexpected Jest , I shall burst with Lauging . 

She goes to him . ] 't is only your fear , here 's no body coming , my husband 's gone out , and will not return this hour . 



Esq W.   comes out all over Feathers . ] For the Lord's sake don't let me stay here I shall be frighted out of my wits . 



Ura.   Go as soon as you please , lock yourself in , and put the Key under the Door against I come . 



Esq W.   See , see , is there no body stirring ? 



Ura.   Not a Mouse , go make haste . 

[ Exit Esq Wouldbe . Enter Freeman Laughing . So I think I have had my Jest too to make him go into the Feather-tub . 



Ura.   You heard me mention it , did you ? 



Freem .  Yes , and I knew his fear would make him take to it upon the least noise ; are all things in readiness above ? 



Ura.   Aye , never fear , let me alone for Mischief . 



[ Ex. Freem . and Vra.  The end of the Second Act.  

ACT III SCENE I  

Scene draws , discovers Esq Wouldbe undressing himself to go to Bed.  Wouldbe .  MY fright 's amost over , but I 'm plaguy Wet and Coid , P — confound the Cuckold . 

[ Going towards the Bed with the Candle in his Hand falls in at a Trap-door up to his Neck , and puts his Candle out . ] Hey ! what the devil 's come to me now ; am I going quick to Hell ? 

Enter two Devils with Torches , and point at him . Help ! help ! will no body come to my rescue ? the devil 's come for me indeed . 



Dance . Enter two more Devils , who join in a Dance with other two frighting and seizing him , he cries out and shows great signs of fear after the Dance ; two more enters and sings . Devil .  Say Brother Devil say , what must be done , 
With this wicked Mortal , whose Glass is now run , 
we 'll dip him in Styx to abate his hot Lust , 
then headlong to Hell we the Lecher will thrust ; 
we 'll laugh at his Torments and jest at his Groans , 
The Horns he designed he shall feel in his Bones . 
Let 's away with him then to great Pluto our King , 
Who expects before this the lewd Victim we 'll bring . 


[ They take him up and carry him off , who roars out help , The Devil , the Devil . Enter Freeman and Urania Laughing . Freem .  So I think we have sufficiently frighted the Fool , but what hast ordered them to do with him now ? 



Ura.   To carry him home just in the pickle he 's in to his Wife . 



Freem .  Sure the Coxcomb will never venture hither again ? 



Ura.   If he do , my next Revenge shall be more home . 



Freem .  I would at any time loose a Night's sleep for so much sport : 't is time to raise the rest of the Family , and then try to get a little sleep . 



Ura.   With all my heart , my Head aches a Laughing . 



SCENE II  

Mr. Lovewell knocks at a Door , Enter Servant . Love.   Is Sir Roger Marwood within ? 



Servant .  Yes Sir , I 'll acquaint him you are here , if you please to walk in . 



[ Lovewell goes in , returns , and after him Sir Roger dressed to go out . Love.   Sir Roger , your Servant , you 're an early riser I see ; I thought I had been time enough to your levee ? 



Sir Roger.   That you might have been , had not Sir Charles Frankford sent in great haste to speak with me ; for early rising is not a fault I am often guilty of . 



Love.   You are very happy , Sir Roger , to have so free access where so much Beauty is your daily Entertainment ; how is it possible to defend your Heart from so many Charms the lovely Charlot , they say , is Mistress' of . But is she so beautiful as the Town reports ? for I never saw her . 



Sir Rog.   She is indeed beyond Imagination , but of so strange and fantastical a Humour no one can please her ; you have more right to pretend to her Favours than I , for she so much declares against a Man of an Estate , I dare not think of Addressing . 



Love.   That can be only an extravagant way of Talking , she cannot think an Estate , where 't is but Embellishment to both Qualifications , a Fault . 



Sir Rog.   Sir Charles indeed is of your opinion , but I am much mistaken if he does not quickly find it , the real Sentiments of her Heart ; for last Night we heard she and Madam Juliana , her Cousin , discoursing in the Garden ; she talked of Love and some design she had in hand to day , she feared being crossed in , but what that was Heaven knows . 



Love.   aside . Ha , this absolutely confirms me , 't is real , I am impatient till I see her ; well Sir Roger , I 'll take my leave of you , I hinder your intended visit . 



Sir Rog.   I must confess , I am very eager to see Sir Charles in hopes to hear more of his Sister's design . 



Love.   Shall I see you any where in the Evening , Sir Roger ? 



Sir Rog.   With all my heart . 



Love.   Where ? 



Sir Rog.   I shall be at Lockets from 8 to 10 or later . 



Love.   I will , if possible , wait on you there . 



[ Exeunt . SCENE III  

St. James' Park . Enter Charlot and Juliana Masked . Jul.   I see you 'll really meet him then ? 



Char.   Aye , and marry him too , if he has Courage enough to venture on me . 



Jul.   't is a strange Resolution , Heaven send you may never have reason to repent it ; think well , my Dear , what you do , consider it is irrevocable . 



Char.   Prithee forbear ; Thy serious ▪ Notions almost spoil my design ; but know my Juliana , I have given him my Heart , and will my Person , for I passionately love him . 



Jul.   I wish him worthy of his happy Fortune ; the time draws near ; does not your Heart go a pit a pat ? 



Char.   Yes , for fear he 'll not come . 



Jul.   looking out . That care is at an end , prepare for the Combat , for yonder comes your Antagonist . 



Char.   't is he indeed , my Courage almost fails me , but 't is too late to retreat ; I 'll stand the brunt let what will be the event . 



Enter Love , and gazes on them . Charlot . advances towards him , pulls off her Glove and gives him her Hand , which he kisses . Love.   If the whole Piece prove as beautiful as this Sample , I find I 'm undone already ; come unmask , dear Madam , and kill me quite . 



Jul.   Not to show a better Face , but better Nature ; I 'll give her my Sample . 



[ Pulls off her Mask . Love.   'T was kindly said and done . 



To Char.   But I gad Madam , if you mean to preserve the Conquest of my Heart entirely to yourself , you 'd best put by that cloud , for there are dangerous Eyes . 



[ Looking at Juliana . Jul.   she 'll soon reduce the Rebel to his Obedience , convince him of the Truth , by showing him a Prospect of that Heaven which is also 〈◊〉 him . 



Char.   no , I 'll leave it to his Imagination , which perhaps may be to my advantage ; and if you have Courage enough to venture on me as you see me , here 's my Hand and Heart , and all that 's mine to be entirely yours . 



Love.   't is a large Proffer ; but I 'm for none of Fortune's blind Bargains , come upon the square , dear Lady , and I am for you ; I ever had an aversion to a Vizir-ma●k , it shall be one of my Articles , that from this day forward you shall never wear one . 



Char.   With all my heart , conditionally that this day the only one in which I must reign , I may wear it at pleasure . 



Love.   After you have discovered that Face which is to charm me out of my Liberty , I 'll agree to all you desire . 



Char.   pulling off her Mask . As you 're a Man of Honour , stand to your word , for now I claim you as my own . 



Love.   eagerly kissing her Hand . By Heavens , an Angel ! dear charming Creature , dispose of your happy Slave for ever ; I am now no more the cautious ill-natured Fellow , I have been all this time ; I am all over Love and Rapture , come lovely Creature , le 's away to Church , where I may make you mine without danger of ever losing you . 



Char.   Laughing . Mercy on me ! what an alteration 's here ! from whence proceeds this mighty Change ? 



Love.   could you expect lesle from that bewitching Face , enough to tempt Diogenes from his Tub , and make that surly Stoic turn Epicure ; Heaven never made such dazzling Beauty but to do Miracles , I 'm now Love's Convert . 

Aside . So I find I 'm a Woman's Ass already , I am downright damnably in Love , and will through this Matrimonial Gulf , if I perish in the attempt . 



Char.   you 're very serious Sir , pray don't consider too much , I may chance to lose a Husband by it . 



Love.   I am thinking how very happy I shall be when the Divine Charlot's mine ; come dear Madam , I will delay my bliss no longer . 



Char.   Aye , for Heaven's sake , let 's away while this Passion lasts , this Violence will soon be over , and then the Tide will turn . 



Love.   It never , never shall , dear charming Angel.  



Char. to Jul.   Come Cousin , you must be our Witness . 



Jul.   I wish I may be ever so to all that makes you happy . 



[ Exeunt am SCENE IU.  

Enter Esq Wouldbe and Dowdy . Esq. W.   Nay , pray dear Bunny , don't be nangry indeed and indeed ; I was taken up by the Watch and carried to the Round house . 



Dow.   Yes , yes , a likely matter , and how came you out pray ? 



Esq W.   Why the Devil sent four of his Lifeguard , and took me out by main force . 



Dow.   Don't think to make a Fool of me , but tell me the truth , you 'd best , you Rebel you ; who was it brought you home , they looked like Devils indeed ; but how come you in this pickle to come home without your clothes ? 



Esq W.   Aside . What the Devil shall I say now ! 

[ Pauses a little . Why indeed Bunny I cannot tell , for I was damnable Drunk , and did not know I was in the Round-house till I waked this Morning and found myself there : Pray Bunny fordive I , as true as I am God Almighty's Child , I won't do so no more . 



[ Knelt and makes pitiful Faces . Dow.   Get you gone , you Fool , and don 't make yourself such an Ass ; you are like to wear your old clothes till Easter , for you shall have no new ones . 



Esq W.   Nay , pray Bunny now don't be so nangry ; indeed I do love Bunny . 



[ Rises , kisses and fawns on her . Dow.   You have such a way with you ; well , come then , but will you be good ? 



Esq W.   I will indeed Bunny , go and bid the Maid warm my Bed , for I am very weary with my last Night's Lodging ; if any body comes to speak with me , let me not be disturbed . 



Dow.   I will my Dear , poor Wretch , I 'll go and make you some Butter'd-ale too . 



[ Exeunt Dowdy . Esq W.   Aye do , so I have appeased one Fool ; I 'm damned Mad at this Disappointment , if I thought Urania had a hand in it , I 'd be revenged of her , by Publishing to the Town I had lain with her ; I did verily believe the Devil had run away with me , till I discovered one of them to be Ben the Drawer ; 't was certainly a Contrivance of Freeman's , I 'll return it to him with the honourable Badge of a pair of Horns . I 'll sleep three or four Hours , and then write to her for another Appointment , I doubt not but the kind Soul is willing . 



[ Exit . Esq W.  SCENE . v.  

Enter Lovewell , Charlot , and Juliana , at the Blue Posts in the Hay-market . Love.   Now , my dear Charlot , that I can call you mine ; how much I prise the Blessing you shall find by the great Value I shall set on you . 



Char.   You are wondrous Devout , but 't will never last long : The sawey Name of Husband will in short time claim its Lawful Authority . But pray Mr. Lovewell , hasten Dinner . 



Enter Servant's with Dinner . Jul.   't is here you are always happy ; you can but wish and ●ave . 



Love.   Come , Ladies' , fall to , if you have any Appetite ; I must restrain mine , though Grace is said . 



Char.   If you have any to what 's here let's sit — Remember this is my Day of Power ; and being the last that I must Reign , you must expect me to be very tyrannical . 



Jul.   All Happiness to you both , and may it ever continue . 



[ Drinks to 'em Char.   As much to dear Juliana in the Man she love's . 



Love.   Success and Happiness attend us all . What think you of a Song , Ladies' , 't will give us time to eat . 



Char.   With all my Heart . 



Love.   Call in the Music there ? 

[ Exit Waiter Enters with Music . To the Music . Come , pray oblige us with a Song . 



A Dialogue by a Man and Woman . Woman .  oft have you told me that you loved , 
And asked how I your Flame approved ; 
Of Love and Flames i  heard 't is true , 
Yet never till it came from you . 
But I would know what 't is so called , 
Before my Heart in 't be involved . 


Man   't is a desire in the Mind , 
A pleasing Pain , and Joy refined . 
Life is a dull insipid Thing , 
Where Love its Blessings does not bring . 
The Gods themselves , who Joys dispense , 
Have felt its mighty influence . 


Woman .  If Gods that Power have owned , alas ! I fear 
I strive in vain to keep my Freedom here . 


Man   Resign it then , and bless me with your love , 
A Glory I 'd not change to move 
The brightest Star in all the Orb above . 


Woman .  If you will promise ever to be true , 
My Heart and Freedom I 'll give up to you . 


Man   As well the Needle from his Pole may move , 
As I to Love and Thee unfaithful prove . 
Chorus together . In Love and in Pleasure we 'll pass all our Nights , 
And each day we 'll revel with some new Delights . 
Thus we 'll Live , and Love on , till together we Die ; 
And in each others Arms to Elysium will fly . 


[ Ex. Music . Char.   Now , Mr. Lovewell , you must give my Cousin and I permission to leave you for a little time , to go to the Exchange to provide some Necessaries ; and because I will not leave you idle , pray take Pains to tell that Purse of Gold.  



Love.   Since it must be so , what you please . But I hope you will not make it long before you return . 



Char.   You shall not stay for us half an Hour . 



Love.   Where will you go when you come back ? 



Char.   we 'll discourse of that when we meet again ; farewell . Come Cozen.  

[ Ex. Char. and Juliana . Lovewell waits on them to the Door , returns , siss down , and tells the Gold.  Five hundred Pieces ; a pretty Sum , and not unwelcome at this time . I Gad I was a very lucky Fellow to have a pretty rich young Lady thus thrown into my Arms , just in the Ebb of my Fortune . 



Enter Frank with a Note . Enter Waiter with a Letter . Wait .  here 's a Note , Sir , left for you at the Bar , as they went out . 



[ Ex. Waiter . Love.   Ha! What should be the meaning of this ! 

[ Opens , and reads . — Dispose of yourself as your Humour serves you , when you have done with the Employment I left you ; for you will meet at this time with no other Entertainment from your Bride . 

[ Drawer ready . Death , Hell , and Furies ! what can this mean ! am I thus Jilted at last by some lewd Woman ! OH Sot ! that I could think one of Charlot's Birth and Fortune would marry at that wild Rate . She only took up that Name to gull the easy Coxcomb , unthinkful Fool ; I could curse myself , her , the Sex , and all the World. What shall I do , OH dear damned Impostor ! By Heaven I love her so , I can scarce repent I have made her mine ; were she but Honest , which much I fear , I would not change her for the World's Empress . But why do I flatter thus a senseless Passion ? This Toad , for aught I know , a lewd Prostitute , who only has drawn me in to go to Goal for her . OH there it is ! Some false fair Devil , forsaken by her Keeper , that wanted only a Husband for that use , or else to Father some Body's Child : But however , she is no very poor Whore.  

[ Shows the Purse . But this is no Place to Expostulate in . Here Drawer . 



Drawer .  Did you call , Sir ? 



Enter Dubois . Love.   Aye , what 's to pay ? 



Drawer .  all 's paid , Sir , by the Ladies ? 



[ Exit Drawer . Love.   So that 's some Comfort still ; come cheer thy Heart , Lovewell ; all yet may be well : they 're Jilts of Quality however . I believe it is even some Lady errand that 's run mad reading of Don Quixot ; but hang 't , jesting is a little Unsavoury at this time . I 'll see if I can find out Sir Roger Marwood , who may tell me some Tidings of the true Charlot , though not of my fair damned Devil ; OH curse of my Credulity . 



Well ;  since this damned Jilt is gone , 

I am fairly rid of all the Sex in one . 



[ Exit Lovewell The end of the Third Act.  

ACT iv. SCENE I  

Enter Lovewell , and Drawer . Love.   IS Sir Roger Marwood here ? 



Draw.   Yes , Sir.  



Love.   who 's with him ? 



Draw.   Only Sir Charles Frankford . 



Love.   Tell them Lovewell desire's to know if he may have admittance to them . 



[ Enter Sir Roger.  Draw.   Yes , Sir , I william  



Love.   IS death , what shall I do ? Tell him I 'm married , he 'll only laugh at me , as all the World will do besides . he 's here ! Heavens what shall I say ? 



Sir Roger.   Why so ceremonious , Mr. Lovewell , to your Friends ? Come , come in , we are all alone , and shall be glad of a third Person to make us Company . 



Love.   Mine will be but very indifferent at this time ; for I 'm cursedly out of Humour . 



Sir Rog.   I 'm sorry for that , and much more so , if you have any just Occasion ; but come we 'll endeavour to divert you . 



Love.   'T will be ineffectual at this time . ( Aside . ) Call Drawer . I 'll follow you , Sir.  



[ Ex. Sir Rog. and Love.  Scene draws , discovers Sir Charles Frankford writing at a Table . Glasses and Bottles , Enter to him Sir Roger Marwood , and Lovewell . Sir Charles' rises .  Mr. Lovewell , your Servant : you 'll pardon me I did not wait on you . I was writing an Excuse to my Sister , whom I promised to fetch home from Kensington this Evenning , but an unexpected Business is fallen out which hinders me . you 'll give me leave to make an end . 



( Sit down . ) Love.   Aye , pray Sir Charles . 



To him . Has Madam Charlot been long out of Town , Sir Charles ? 

[ Aside . So I find I 'm indeed ruined , she 's out of Town . Oh! I could Curse ! Sir Char.   She went but this Morning to make a Visit to a Relation we have there , who she brings home with her ; I 'm sending my Coach for her , she would go this Morning into a Hackney . 



Love.   Ha! some Hopes still . 



[ Aside . To Sir Char.   If your Coach goes empty , pray , Sir Charles , give me leave to make use of it , for I am obliged to be at Kensington to Night to mount the Guard.  



Sir Char.   With all my Heart ; 't is at your Service . 



Love.   I 'll lose no time then , for fear the Ladies should stay for it . 



Sir Char.   I 'm sorry to lose your good Company so soon , but I 'm likewise engaged . Here , who waits ? 



Enter Drawer . Sir Char.   Bid one of my Servants come to me . 



Draw.   Yes , Sir.  



[ Ex. Drawer . Sir Char.  Enter Footman . Sir Char.   Here , give this Letter to the Coachman , and bid him carry it to my Sister at my Aunt Treaters , and wait on the Gentleman where he pleases . 



Love.   Sir Charles , your Servant . Sir Roger , yours . 

Aside . So now if I can but get this Letter from the Coachman , which I suppose will be no hard matter to effect , I shall certainly find whether it be my Charlot , or no.  



[ Ex. Lovewell . Sir Rog.   This Lovewells a pretty Gentleman . I have often thought he 's in all Circumstances the very Man I have heard your Sister wish for to meet in a Husband : But how goes the Business with your fair Cousin Juliana ? I dare believe she love's you . 



Sir Char.   I dare believe so too : But only as she is a Relation , I fear some happier Man is the Subject of her Sight . 



Sir Rog.   That you may soon resolve yourself , by discovering your Passion to your Sister , who knows the deepest Secrets of her Heart . 



Sir Char.   't is true , I may : But I so much fear the Discovery will not be to my Advantage , that I find some Pleasure in being unresolved , to hope the best . 



Sir Rog.   Take Courage , Sir , and try : My Life on 't 't is you , and only you that takes up all her Thoughts . 



Sir Char.   Well , I 'll venture , let the Event be what it will : But come , Sir , Roger , we shall out stay our time , 't is now near Six , the Hour which we appointed to be at Whitehall . 



[ Ex. Sir Char. and Sir Rog.  SCENE . II  

Enter Freeman and Urania at several Doors . Ura.   I find there is no getting rid of this opinionated Blockhead's saucy Importunities , but by exposing him to the whole Town , which I 'll venture bearing a Share in to be revenged of him : Hast the Letter Freeman ? 



Free.   Yes , here it is . I warrant old Madam Beldame catches at it as greedily as she would a Client for her Son.  



Urania takes it , and reads . Madam , 

I Cannot see so much Goodness as your virtuous Daughter is possed with , abused so grossly by the Lewdness of her Husband , without ( if it is possible ) making you sensible of it ; if you will be further informed , be this Evening at Seven a Clock in St. James' Park , where you may be convinced how great a Brutus he is to her , by finding him with a Wench . 

Your Friend unknown . 

Ura.   You have adapted it to her Capacity ; but I thought you would have written it to Madam Dowdee herself . 



Free.   OH no ; it might have lighted in the Husband's Hands , and that would spoil all : But have you answered his Letter ? 



Ura.   Yes ; and appointed him to be here at Nine , to come in Boldly , and call for a Room , and to let me alone with the rest , which I 'd contrive for him . I warrant him I 'll be as good as my Word ; be sure to get some Cherry Bounce for them , you know they are all Souls . 



Free.   I 'll warrant I 'll have that shall do their Business for 'em : I 'll put the Letter into the Penny Post myself . 



Ura.   And I 'll go and see the Chamber prepared for him . 



[ Exeunt . SCENE III  

Enter Charlot , Juliana , Bellasira , with a Servant . Char.   A Gentleman say you come in my Brother's Coach with a Letter for me ? 



Seru.   Yes , Madam . 



Char.   Do you know his Name ? 



Seru.   Yes , Madam , 't is I think Mr. Lovewell . 



Char.   Go tell him I 'll wait on him presently . 

[ Exit Seru.  Now , my dear Girl , you must assist me , or all my Designs are croft . 



Bell.   What is it you would have us do ? 



Char.   Come in , and I will tell you . 



[ Exeunt omnes . Enter Lovewell , and Servant . Seru.   ' Please , Sir , to stay one Moment here , my Lady will come to you presently . 



Love.   Thank you honest Friend . I have easily compassed the Letter ; but never was poor unfortunate Lover upon a Rack as I am this Minute , between Hope and Fear . 



Enter Bellasira . Love.   ( aside . ) By Heavens I am lost ! It is not my Charlot . I am so confounded I know not what to say . 

[ Goes to her , and salutes her . Madam , Sir Charles made me so happy to be the Messenger of this to his fair Sister , Madam Charlot , whom I presume you are . 



[ Gives her the Letter . Bell.   My Name is Charlot , and Sister to Sir Charles Frankford ; but I am amazed why he should give a Gentleman the trouble his meanest Servant could have performed . 



Love.   Ruined and lost ! Cursed , cursed , deluded Fool ! 

( Aside . ) Madam , 't was at my earnest Entreaty to have an Opportunity to make me Welcome where I could hope none , but from such an Introducer . 

I 'm so distracted I know not what I say , or do . 



( Aside . Bell.   You seem disordered . Sir , are you not well ? Please you to sit ? 



Love.   no , Madam ; I 'm taken on the sudden with a strange Diziness in my Head , nothing but the Air will do me good . Madam , your most humble Servant . 



[ Exit Lovewell . Bell.   So this is but one part over , the greatest yet remains behind : I 'll in and dispatch this Letter after him . 



[ Exit Bell.  Enter Mistress Belldam and Dowdy . Dow.   I don't care , I will tell him that I will ; and I 'll tear his Eyes out , a Rebel as he is . 



[ Blubbering and Crying . Beld.   Nay , pray Daughter be persuaded , that will make him be upon the march ; let us go into this St. James' Park , and catch him there , and then we 'll swinge him off both together . 



Dow.   But don 't go in that pickle , Mother ; 't will Disgrace me now I am a Gentlewoman . O , o , o ! that he should Cuckolded me that have been the making of him . 



Beld.   Have patience , Daughter ; perhaps it is a Story laid upon him . I 'll go home , and put on my best Clotheses , and come presently . 



[ Ex. Beld.  Dow.   Well , I will go and see whether he is there , or no ; but I 'll up for a Dram of Comfort , for my Spirits are cast quite down . 



Exit Dow.  SCENE v.  

Enter Lovewell reading . IF it may be permitted me to hope any thing from the Disorder I see in you at our last Conversation , I would gladly believe it to my Advantage ; the Sight of you has given me an infinite deal of Disquiet , but your Absence an insupportable Pain . I conjure you to return to me with all speed you can , that I may know what Reception my Heart may find with you , upon whom I have bestowed it unasked . I demand yours in return , upon which depends the Felicity of 

Charlot . 

Lovewell speaks , and sighs . I would it was in my Power to give . 

What has my cursed Fortune reserved me for ! Must I ever be her Sport ! I 'm Jilted by a false Charlot , when I might have had the true one . But that is not the worst of my Misery ; for to complete it , and make me truly wretched , I love this False , Unknown , beyond my Reason , and all Things . Here she comes , and I 'm more out of Countenance than she 'll pretend to be . 



Enter Bellasira . Love.   To answer your Commands , Madam , I am come ; not that I dare wish any thing from the Hope's you give me here . 

[ Shows the Letter . Such Blessings does not belong to the unhappy Lovewell , who serves only for the Sport of Fortune , and all the World besides . 



Bell.   I believe you found nothing in my Letter , Sir ; ( though I must Blush to own it ) but what looks too sincerely to give the least mistrust it was not real : Heaven is not truer than that Charlot Love's , Languishes , and without a grateful Sense of her unbounded Passion , dies for you . 



Love.   Heaven has not now another Curse in store to make me more unhappy . 



Bell.   Is then my Youth and Fortune so contemptible , that it would only heap up Miseries upon the Man I love ? The generous offer I make you of my Heart is not a common Prize ; no , my dear Lovewell , ( she sighs ) for I must call you so , 't is unacquainted in Love's wide Labyrinth , and there will lose its way . 



Love.   Forbear , dear Madam , to distract me with this Angel's Goodness , I am not worthy of the least of all this mighty Kindness , I wish 't were in my power to give my Heart to her that best deserves it , for none has so just a Claim as the Divine Charlot . You have treated me with that Sincerity , that 't would be a Baseness I never should forgive myself to betray you with such hopes , ( Pardon the Expression ) I cannot justly give ; in short Madam , to my Eternal Confusion I speak it , I am not Master of my Inclinations , I love with all the Ardour of prevailing Passion , a false ungrateful Woman , and what renders my Folly inexcusable , one I know not , nor ever perhaps may see again . 



Bell.   And can you be so unjust to yourself , and cruel to me , to scorn my real Love for a Chimaera ? 



Love.   Express my cursed Misfortune by some gentler term , I beg you that does not suit with the respect that I will always pay you . 



Bell.   If you will still prefer a base ungrateful Woman before the truest Love that ever possessed a tender virgin 's Breast , yet grant me this one Boon , that I may always know where to hear of you , I mean no wrong to your ingrate , or to trouble you with the Persecution of my unwelcome Love.  



Love.   Be assured , dear Madam , you always shall command me in that and all things else , that lies within my power . 



Bell.   Well Sir , I will not detain you longer in this uneasy Entertainment . 



Love.   kisses her Hand . Adieu , dear Madam , you shall very speedily hear of the unhappy Lovewell . 



[ Ex. Lovewell . Bell.   So I think I have done pretty well for a young beginner , but I must give an account of my success , that I believe they have heard it all . 



[ Exit Bell.  SCENE v.  

St. James' Park . Enter Beldame and Dowdy , Beldame dressed in an old fashion Point Coif , a laced Mazarene Hood over her Face , an Alamode Scarf laced round ruffled full behind , both Masked . Bell.   I wonder how the Misses , as they call 'em do , that were these Masks , I never wore one before ; I am all in a Sweat with it , how can you bear yours ? 



[ Pulls of her Mask and wipes her Face . Dow.   O , I have learned to wear one since I was a Gentlewoman . 



Enter several Men and Women crossing the Stage . Beld.   What a World of fine Folks here is , but I don't see my Son yet ? 



Dow.   He may be a tother side , let us go round . 



Enter Freeman . Freem .  So , there 's my Game , ( to them . ) You seem Ladies , to be in search of some body , can I assist you ? 



Dow.   You ? why , what are you ? 



Freem .  A Knight Adventurer , to serve all pretty Ladies . 



Beld.   What , I warrant you , you take us for Misses now , because we have got Masks ; but I 'd have you to know my Daughter and I are not for your turn , we are none of this end of the Town Foulkes . 



Freem .  Pray good angry old Gentlewoman , I mean no harm , nor do not take you for any of this end of the Town Ladies ; but would perhaps if you would accept the Service , help you to a sight of him you come to find . 



Dow.   Why , how do you know who we come to find ? 



Freem .  Know , why I know by the Stars , not only that , but all your most secret Thoughts , did you never hear of Partridge ? 



Beld.   Yes , he that makes Almanacs , I always buy his , because he Nosticates , as they call it , what will come to pass . 



Freem .  Why , I am he , I can tell you now what you come here for . 



Dow.   OH Mother ! he may tell me perhaps where we may find my Rebel . 



Freem .  Aye , that 's a small matter in my Art , to let you see I perfectly know your Concerns ; you come here expecting to find your Husband with his Miss , at Rosamonds Pond . 



Beld.   O Daughter , this is certainly Dr. Partridge , and he can tell this by Astrology ; may be he may tell us where to find him . 



Dow.   Pray Sir , be so kind if you can . 



Freem .  Can , that 's a good one , why , I 'll carry you to the very House ; nay , the very Room where he is , if you 'll go with me . 



Dow.   Your Servant good Sir , I 'll go with all my heart , shan't us Mother ? 



Beld.   Yes , if the Learned Doctor pleases ; but will you go with us , good Sir Doctor ? 



Freem .  Yes , that I will , ( to Dowdy ) le 's see your Hand Lady , ( looks in her Hand ) Ha , you were born under Vulcan , you must have a care of Horns ; I doubt you have been a little too near his Forge already by your Complexion , let me see , you 'll have seven Children , as beautiful and wise as the Mother , and as honest and modest as the Father ; you 'll be a Widow very speedily , that is , within these five or six Years , next Husband shall keep a Coach.  



Beld.   OH good Sir , tell me if I shall live to see that day . 



[ Shows her Hand to him . Freem .  Yes , you may , if you spare your Brandy-bottle a little more than you do . 



Beld.   Aside . OH Lord , I see he knows all I do , I wish he does not find out from whence I furnish my Daughter's House with fine Sugar , Spice , etc. and Candles , and make Mistress Lockup the Housekeeper be turned out of her place . 



Freem .  Well , come Ladies , shall I conduct you where I promised ? I have set a Spell upon him , that he cannot stir till I come . 



Dow.   Aye , come Mother , I long to be at him . 



Beld.   My Finger's itch too , I 'll pull off his Point Cravat again with a Vengeance . 



Freem .  Come Ladies , I 'll lead the way . 



[ Exeunt omnes . SCENE VI.  

Enter Charlot and Juliana at several Doors . Char.   O Coz. Juliana , I was just seeking ; I have a Secret to discover to you gives me a great deal of pleasure ; my Brother is passionately in Love , and just now confessed it to me , and has engaged me to be his Advocate , will not you assist me ? 



Jul.   Cruel Charlot , why this to me , do you triumph over my Misfortune ? 



Char.   Unkind Juliana , to think I would , 't is you yourself has charmed him . 



Jul.   I fear 't was Gratitude , and not his Choice , made him think on me unfaithful Creature , to betray to him the dearest Secret of my Life , and force an Inclination , perhaps he never had thought of . 



Char.   By all that 's good , my Dear , you wrong me , he owned it to me with all the signs of Fear your Heart was prepossessed ; he ever heard our late Conversation in the Garden , and charged me if I knew you would not receive his Addresses favourably , never to tell you the least tittle of it ; I gave him so much Encouragement as to revive his hopes . 



Jul.   And so your Discourse ended , did it ? 



Char.   no , I told him then of my Marriage , which he was far from being angry at , but blamed me a little for using of him so ; and promised to forgive me , upon Condition I would prevail with you to accept his Addresses . 



Jul.   You need not doubt succeeding , my Heart too much pleads for him , to need another Advocate . 



Char.   le 's go to my Cousin Bell. I left her with my Brother , and flew with all Impatience to bring these happy Tidings . 



[ Exeunt . The end of the Fourth Act.  

ACT v. SCENE I  

Enter Charlot and Sir Roger Marwood . Sir Rog.   YOU could not , Madam , have made a better Choice , for Lovewell wants not Virtues to make him in all things a complete Gentleman , but an Estate , which his Elder Brother was born to , and he best deserves ; but why will you use him thus , Madam ? 



Char.   Only to find which he has most Esteem for , my Person or Estate . 



Sir Rog.   That was a Trial to be made before , and not now ; when 't is not in your power to revoke what you have done . 



Char.   't is , Town , a foolish Curiosity ; but pray Sir Roger no more Objections , but if you will oblige me , do as I desire . 



Sir Rog.   Well , Madam , I will , upon two Conditions ; first , That you use your Interest with your pretty Cousin , you have brought to Town with you , to accept the Prize she has made of my Heart ; and secondly , To put poor Mr. Lovewell out of his pain to Night , by discovering his Happiness to him . 



Char.   I engage my Honour for both , do but as I desire for two or three Hours , and after I 'll be guided by you . 



Sir Rog.   I 'll obey you , Madam , but remember the Conditions . 



[ Exit . Sir Rog.  Enter Juliana , Bellasira . Char.   What have you done with my Brother ? 



Bell.   My Aunt is entertaining him with Politics , which we thought we had but little concern in ; so have left them to settle the Nation , whilst I come to settle my Heart ; but I find you have disposed of him whose hands I did design to put it in : Prithee what hast done with him , I shall grow monstrous jealous , if you do not give a very good account of him ? 



Char.   Hey day ! what are you in Love too ! Sure the little God will empty his Quiver in our Family , for never was such a Company of Loving Souls ? 



Jul.   You see 't is dangerous jesting with edge Tools ; You cannot , Charlot , but in honour assist her , for 't was you that screwed her up to a Love Key . 



Char.   I am glad to find her so inclined , for Sir Roger just now engaged me to be his Intercessor . 



Bell.   you 'll find it no hard task to persuade me to a good Opinion of him ; but have you engaged him in your Affair ? 



Char.   Yes , he is gone about it ; but I have yet another part for you , and then I 'll undeceive him . 



Bell.   I 'll do any thing you 'd have me promise , but that ; for I 'll swear I am in pain for him . 



Char.   I do sincerely promise you I will , I wait but for Sir Roger's return , and then you shall know my farther design ; come let 's now in and release my Brother . 



Enter Sir Roger Marwood . Love.   Sir Roger , your most humble Servant , you are the only Man that now is only welcome to me ; how can you have so much Goodness to throw away a Thought on one so wretched ? 



Sir Rog.   I never forsake my Friends in their distress , I wish I could being comfort to your trouble ; all I can say , is , still to hope the bell ; a day or two may perhaps unriddle the Mystery , and you may yet be happy . But come , Mr. Lovewell , you must go out with me , I will not leave you alone to your melancholy Thoughts . 



Love.   I am at your Service , dispose of me as you please . 



Sir Rog.   Are you ready ? 



Love.   Always to wait on you . 



[ Exeunt . Enter again as in the Street , Sir Roger and Lovewell . Sir Rog.   aside . It goes against my nature to betray this Man , though 't is but in a Jest ; here are the Rascals coming . 

Enter Four Bailiffs . They seize Lovewells Sword before he sees them . 



Sir Rog.   Ha ! what mean you Hellhounds ? 



First Bailiff .  no harm to you , Sir , Mr. Lovewell ? I Arrest you at the Suit of Alderman Saintly in an Action of 10000 l.  



Love.   I never heard of such a Name . 



Second Bailiff .  I suppose , Sir , your Lady does . 



Love.   O does she so , Hell confound her for it ; nay , Hands off , I 'll follow you upon my Honour , where ever you 'll carry me . 



First Bailiff .  Will you not send for Bail , Sir ? 



Love.   no Sir , I 'll directly to the Goal where I must lie . 



Sir Rog.   Will not my Bail be accepted ? I 'll willingly engage for one . 



Love.   By no means , Sir Roger , I will not involve my Friends in my Misfortunes ; they must e'en take my Body for the Debt ; for I am not worth it no way else . 



Sir Rog.   I 'll straight away to this Alderman Saintly , and see what 's to be done . 



[ Exit . Sir Rog.  Love.   Farewell Sir , you 'll find me at the Gatehouse ; come Sirs , conduct me where you will , I 'll tamely follow ; I think the Mystery is now disclosed with a Vengeance . 



[ Exeunt am . Enter Sir Charles Frankford , Charlot , Juliana and Bellisira . Sir Char.   Why should you delay my Happiness , dear Cousin , for the Punctilio of formal Courtship ; I have long loved you , let that atone for it ; and if my Sister does not flatter me , you do not hate me . 



Jul.   What would the World , and you yourself think of me , to catch at your first Proffer , as if I feared you would recant ? 



Smiling .  I dare trust your Constancy , and stay till 't is convenient . 



Sir Char.   To the World you may very well answer your Conduct ; for it is but confirming the Reports which have been often of it , being so designed for me , 't is what I beg of you ; and what time 's more convenient than now , at the consummating my Sister's Wedding ? 



Jul.   Upon this condition , that you can oblige Sir Roger and my Cousin Bell. to marry at the same time I 'll promise you . 



Sir Char.   Do you dispose her to it ? I 'll warrant him , for he is passionately in Love with her ; what say you Cousin , will you obstruct my Bliss ? for now it alone depends on you . 



Bell.   You know , Sir Charles , you may dispose of me , who are my Guardian . 



Enter Sir Roger Marwood . Char.   Now for some news from enchanted my Esquire . 



[ She takes Sir Rog aside . Sir Rog.   't is done as you commanded ; but 't is well if you do not repent it , for I left him in a desperate Humour . 



Char.   Good Heaven forbid ! Sir Roger , pray wait on my Cousin Bell. to him , but do not you appear ; by that time she has done , we 'll all be there , ( to Bell. ) you have my full Directions . 



[ Exit Sir Roger. leading Bellasira . Sir Char.   Indeed , Sister , you have gone too far , in thus imprisoning a Man who shortly must command you . What is it you Design now ? If you play him any further Pranks I 'll betray you to him . 



Char.   I will not ; I have only sent my Cousin Bell , to once more try him ; after which , I , and Sir Roger , will go to him . You , and my Cousins , shall be in hearing ; and when you find we come to any Agreement , then come in . 



Sir Char.   Suppose he takes Cousin Bell. at her Word , what think you then ? 



Char.   Think ! why , I shall think him a Man : But if he can resist the Temptation , an Angel.  



Sir Char.   Come , let us go . I 'm very impatient to see him disabused . 



[ Exeunt . Enter Turnkey . Turnkey .  Sir , here is a Gentlewoman desire's to speak with you ; Shall I let her in ? 



Love.   A Gentlewoman ! Aye , pray conduct her in ; this is a pretty Place to entertain Ladies in , but 't is her own seeking ; Who should it be ? my fair Devil of a Wife perhaps ! 



Enter Bellasira . Love.   This is indeed amazing Goodness ! How could you think of a lost Wretch , dear Madam , forsaken by all the World ? 



Bell.   Not all you see , no my dear Lovewell , I never will forsake you , but constantly attend your Fortunes ; mine cannot be favourable whilst yours are adverse ; would you but make mine yours , as I will always espouse your Concerns , there should not be a Joy possessed by Charlot , but what should be her Lovewells , and all his Griefs be hers . 



Love.   Your Generosity confounds me , I must not add so much to that vast heap of Favours I stand indebted to you for ; I 'm incapable any way to make the least return . 



Bell.   Is it so hard to Love ? I have Youth and Fortune , is that no Charm ? 



Love.   Your Person is infinitely charming , and that more than Angel's Goodness , not to be resisted ; but know , dear Madam , ( sighs ▪ ) since I must tell you , to justify myself from that Ingratitude , you justly might reproach me with ; I am to my Destruction Married , Married , dear Lady ; that 's the cursed cause of all my Misery . 



Bell.   then I am lost indeed , a fatal Moment that I saw you first ; why were we born to be both unhappy ? 



Love.   I could , dear Madam , for ever be blessed with you , but would not wrong your Goodness to involve you in my wretched ruin . 



Bell.   This is mere excuse : But for all your Cruelty to me , I 'll free you from this uncomfortable place , and if you 'll still persist in your Ingratitude , expect the Curse that follows that base Sin of never being happy . 



[ Exit . Love.   For Heaven's sake , dear Madam , stay and hear me speak . 

[ Following her to the Door . He returns . she 's gone , and much I fear , will keep her word ; had I but known her before I was bewitched by that damned Sorceress , how happy might we both have been ? But I 'll no longer cavil with my Fate , but by a tame Submission to it ba●●le its utmost Malice . 



[ Sits down and reads . Enter Sir Ro. Marwood and Charlot . Lovewell starts up and throws away his Book . Love.   Ha ! What do I see ! 'Sdeath 't is the dear Devil herself ; now shall I play the Fool and be again deluded , for I find I have not power to be heartily angry at her . But how came he with her ? 



Char.   You seem surprised , Sir , I fear my sight offends you . 



Love.   I wish it never had pleased me , ( sighs ) false Woman , of all the Coxcombs that this Town abounds with , Why was I culled out to be your Property ! but tell me if thou hast so much Grace left to once speak Truth , how came he with you ? 



Sir Rog.   As a kind Friend should do to release thee of thy pains , and take them on myself ; I love this Lady with all the Blindness which attends that Passion , marry her at any rate , and Sacrifice the World to give myself that Satisfaction . She has prudently considered your equal want of Fortunes will but make you both miserable . 



Char.   Therefore if you 'll consent to make void our Marriage , you shall this minute be released from this place , if not , stay till Necessity compels you . 



Love.   Treacherous Man , how could you call me Friend , and thus basely betray me ? 



Char.   Well , what say you , Sir ? 



Love.   Hell confound you both ; no , I 'll still keep thee to be revenged of thee , and plague thee for the Wrongs thou hast done me , ungrateful Creature , to torture thus a Man thou knowest loved thee from the first Moment he see that damned bewitching Face ; were 't but honest , I could love thee still ; but I will tear thee from my Heart and never think of thee again , ( sighs ) if possible ; ( she weeps ) an stop those Crocodiles Tears , for though I know them to be so , they pierce me to the Soul.  



Char.   Can you forgive me , Sir ? for all this usage I long have loved you , which made me resolve some way or other to Mary you ; how I effected it , I need not tell you , I had no sooner done it but I repented , believing justly you would be provoked to use me ill , when once you found I had only borrowed the name of Charlot , this made me fly your anger . 



Love.   And to secure yourself , secured me . Ha ! was it so ? I thank you kind Wife , indeed 't was wondrous Love.  



Char.   Pray hear me out . Sir Roger here , who has long solicited me to his unlawful Love , presuming on the Scantiness of my Fortune , when he found all other ways ineffectual to obtain me , proffered to marry me ; which I likewise refused , acquainting him withal of my Marriage with you , which made him clap this Action on you , to drive you to the Choice of either renouncing me , or else to keep you here . 



Love.   O Heavens ! that ever such a Piece of Villainy should harbour in that Heart I always thought was Noble : How could you call me Friend , and thus betray me ? 



Rog.   aside . She makes me appear a pretty Rogue , that 's the truth of it ; but I must let her run on . You know , Mr. Lovewell , Love and Friendship are not compatible , where the Object of it is adored by both . 



Love.   then art thou Honest ? Come swear and damn thyself , you know I am credulous , and shall believe you . 



Char.   By Heavens , and all that is Sacred , I am chaste ; and love thee at that extravagant Rate , I 'd quit a Throne to dwell with thee in Chains , O my dear Lovewell , could you meet mine with an equal Passion , how happy might we be ! 



Love.   Yes , in some Country , where we could live by Air and Love ; for I know not how we shall maintain a costlier Diet.  



Char.   Providence will not let us starve , we must trust to that ; I ask you nothing but your Love , I will maintain myself . 



Char.   Indeed you wrong my Virtue , I 'm truly honest , and would not injure you , though in a thought to gain the World ; Forgive what 's past , and take me to your bosom . 



Love.   holds her in his Arms.  Heaven knows how willingly I could , yes , I could love thee , dote on thee , and be thy Fool.  

Puts her from him . Stand off , vain easy Ass ; what am I doing , trapanning of myself again ? 



Char.   You shall not throw me from ye , I 'll follow thus , ( hangs on him ) and never will forsake you ; and here I swear I will not leave this place , till you conduct me hence . 



Love.   May I believe you serious ? 



Char.   You must , you shall ; I ever will be yours , with as much Truth as ever Turtle loved her dearest Mate . 



Love.   Well , I will live with thee , for Heaven knows I Love thee ; and though you have used me thus , will always use you well . 



Sir Rog.   Smiling . So , Madam , I see I 'm quite forsaken . 



Enter Sir Charles , Juliana , Bellasira . Sir Char.   Here are more Witnesses to your bargain , Mr. Lovewell , th●n you are aware of ; but methink , my new Brother , you might have asked me leave . 



Love.   OH , Sir , do not triumph over the Easiness of a deluded Man ; I humbly ask your Pardon for the Wrong I did design in marrying this fair Impostor , whom I did indeed believe your Sister ; my love for her transported me beyond all thoughts of what I owed you . 



Sir Charles takes Charlot , and gives her to Lovewell . Here , Lovewell , take her ; for my sake use her well : I 'll leave it to her to justify her Procedure to you . But upon my Honour she is my only Sister , the rich Heiress , Charlot , whom you first believed . 

Love.   The happy sequel does indeed make a large amends for all I have suffered : But are you sure we do not Dream ? for I am so accustomed to Misfortunes I cannot yet believe them real . 



Char.   But you were not so diffident , Mr. Lovewell , before my Estate was added by my Brother's Discovery . 



Love.   An Estate to one in my Circumstances is no unwelcome Addition : But be assured , dear Madam , from the Sincerity I ever used to you , 't is the least Part of my Joy ; but I have , by my knowledge who you are , an unquestioned proof of your Virtue , and Sir Roger's being still my Friend . 



Sir Rog.   And so you shall always find me . 

( To Bell. ) For here 's my Pretensions . 



Bell.   Do you think , Sir Roger , I can so soon disengage ( aside ) my Heart from cruel Mr. Lovewell ? 



Love.   Fair cruel Lady ! how could you torture so a wretched Man not then himself , with a pretended Love that gave me more disquiet than my own Troubles ? But I am now all Joy , and will , unasked , forgive the World and Fortune for all past Injuries ; now my dear Charlot's mine , Heaven has not another Blessing left that I think worth the ask . 



Char.   You are wondrous Zealous now , pray Heaven it lasts . 



Love.   It must , it ever shall . How can you distrust my love , who have given you such evident Proofs of it ? 



Sir Rog.   Since Heaven is in this bounteous Humour of dispencing Blessings , why should it be only a niggard to me , and make me only a dull Spectator of your Happiness ? Say ; will not you join with me in my Suit to your fair Cousin here ? 



[ Looking at Bellasira . Sir Char.   She is my Charge , which here I resign to you . I know she 'll be guided by my Advice ; ( Gives her to Sir Roger , ) and now Cousin Juliana I claim your Promise . 



Jul.   Methinks you might stay till to Morrow , 't is time enough , considering how long it is to last . 



Sir Char.   no , we 'll not trust the Treachery of another Day ; Fortune is fickle , and may Frown to Morrow . 



Jul.   Well then here 's my Hand , From this Day forward , for better for worse , etc.  



Bell.   What think you of those Words , Sir Roger , do they not make you tremble ? 



Sir Rog.   Yes , for fear of some fatal Interruption before they come to be pronounced . 



Sir Char.   Let 's lose no time then ; I have a Friend will quickly dispatch the Ceremony . 



[ Exeunt . Enter Freeman , Urania , and Doll . Ura.   Well , Doll , what have you done with the ' Squire ? 



Doll .  As you commanded , Madam , conducted him to your Chamber , with charge not to speak but in a Whisper ; and because I 'd be sure he should discover nothing by his Candle , I took it away with me , for fear I told him it might be seen at Windows , which might occasion a Suspicion ; not being a Room in use , he readily consented ; and said , he could find the way to Bed by dark , and slipped a Crown into my Hand to secure my Master not coming up . 



[ Exit Doll . Free.   So 't is well , there remains no more now ; the House fills a Pace , but the Company I design to entertain with this Jest is Sir Charles Frankford , and Sir Roger Marwood , who have just sent to bespeak a Supper here . I 'm sure they bring Company with 'em , they have ordered such a noble one ; we had best take Orders for it , and then we shall have time to entertain them . 



Enter Sir Charles , Sir Roger , Lovewell , Charlot , Juliana , Bellasira , Freeman and Urania . Ura.   i  used all Methods to restrain his Folly , by showing all the Scorn a virtuous Woman could to a dishonest Love ; that but increased his Persecutions till I was weary of being Angry . I thought , by counterfeiting to return his Kindness , which his Vanity easily induced him to believe , I might draw him into some Snare to betray his lewd Intentions to the World , without the hazard of my own Reputation , which is generally sacrificed to the Malice of a disappointed Coxcomb . And to perfect my Revenge , I have contrived to let his Wife be witness to 't , and so leave the Fool to her punishing , which he 'll find Plague enough . 



Free.   Call in Doll , and let 's begin the Farce . 

Enter Doll . Come , Doll , to your Post.  



Aloud .  where 's your Mistress , Doll ? 

[ Doll squeaks . Ha! what are you frighted at ? 



Doll .  Nothing , Sir , But I was almost Asleep , and you surprised me . 



Free.   That will not serve your turn , Mistress' . What do you guard this Door so close for , is any Body in that Chamber ? 



Doll .  In this Chamber , Sir , no ; who should be here ? 



Free.   Where is your Mistress , I say ? 



Doll .  My Mistress , Sir ; in her Chamber not well ; and gone to Bed.  



Free.   no , but she is not ; for , missing her , I have been to seek her , not only there , but in all the Rooms in the House , except this . Pray deliver the Key , without more Fooling ; for I will see what you keep Century for . 

So by this time I suppose the Fool is frighted enough . 



Aloud .  Deliver it me , I say , you had best . 



Doll .  Pray , Sir , don't fright me so , there it is . 



[ Gives the Key . [ Ex. Freem . as into the Room . Freeman   within . That shall not serve your Turn : I 'll fetch you out of the Chimney here . Doll , bring my Pistols presently . 



' Sq. W.   within . OH pray , Mr. Freeman , spare me this time , and you shall never catch me in your House again , nor with your Wife . 



Free.   Come down then , or I 'll fetch you , with a Pox to you . 



' Sq. W.   OH pray , Mr. Freeman , have a little Patience , and I william  



Enter Freeman pulling in ' Sq. W. wrapped in a Blanket . Free.   Nay , nay , no Struggling ; I must show the Company my wife 's Gallant . 



[ They all Laugh . ' Sq. W.   aside . Who the Devil have I been with all this time ? here 's Urania , now I find she fools me . 



To Ura.   How dare you thus expose me ; Do not you fear my Revenge ? 



Ura.   aloud . Not at all ; I have Witnesses enough to prove both your Intentions and mine : But I have one within you know not of , whom I 'll fetch to you . 



[ Ex. Ura.  Free.   Well , ' Squire Wouldbe , I hope hereafter you 'll leave my Wife to such a poor clownish Fellow as myself ; you see she does not understand your Merit , but thinks me good enough for her . 



Sq. W.   aside . I am ashamed of myself , that 's the truth of it , which makes me silent . 



Enter Urania , with Dowdy in a Nightgown . Sq. W.   My Wife ! nay then I 'm ruined past Redemption . 



Aside .  How the Devil came she here ? But that she has not Sense enough for an Intrigue , I should suspect she was as much mistaken in her Bedfellow as myself . 



Dow.   Have I caught you , you Rebel you ; I warrant you I 'll do your Errand to my Mother . 



' Sq. W.   Nay , good Bunny , not so fast ; pray let me know first how you came here a Bed with me . 



Dow.   Why , Dr. Partridge conjured me here on purpose to catch you . 



' Sq. W.   that 's likely ; you and I must come to a Reckoning about it . 



Dow.   Reckon me no reckonings ; there the Doctor can tell you as much . 



[ Pointing to Freeman . ' Sq. W.   This Dr. Partridge ! why , this is Freeman , the Master of this House . There is some Trick in this , ( to Freeman . ) I suppose you have been before hand with me , and given me the Horns I designed you . 



Dow.   What do you mean by Horns ? Do you think I 'd be a Whore ? 



Free.   I'faith , ' Squire , no : You may keep your dainty Bit to yourself ; when I have a Mistress it shall be one that will have Wit enough to conceal what we do ; for o my Conscience she 'd tell . 



Dow.   aside . I canted imagine how I came here , to say truth ; for I thought I had been a Bed at home , till that Gentlewoman came and waked me , and bid me say what I did . 



Ura.   You know , Esq Wouldbe , how many Disappointments I have given you just in the height of your Expectations , which would never persuade you was done in scorn of your lewd Design ; this was the only way I thought would rid me of your Saucy Importunity . I did believe it very necessary to let you Wife be an Eyewitness of your Faith to her , that she may hereafter take more than usual Care to keep her Coxcomb to herself ; I will not give you the Satisfaction to let you know how I effected it , but if she or her Mother remembers , they may , I 'll only add this ; There has been no wrong offered to her Honesty , which you may easily believe , if you consider the Charms of her Wit and Person . 



Char.   I think 't is great pity they should not be entirely each others , for they are the best matched Pair I ever saw . 



Jul.   Indeed , Urania , you are a Woman of a singular Virtue , that can resist the force of that tempting Mein and Air.  



Sir Rog.   Faith Sir , you 'd better march off , these Ladies will be too hard for you else . 



Sir Char.   Aye , prithee Freeman , we have e'en enough of their Companies , dispose of them as you please . 



Esq W.   aside . Gad I 'd be revenged of her if I live . 



Freem to Esq W.   Well , Sir , you may go if you please , and take your pretty Lady with you , your clothes are in the Bar-room where you may dress you , there you have your Dismission from this Company . 



Ura.   And what can you leave your dear Mistress Honeysuckle ? tum d'ive I a Buss , sure you cannot think but I Love you strangely after all this Proof of my Kindness . 



[ They all Laugh . Esq W.   aside . P — x C — d ye , I could cry for Madness . 



[ Ex.  Dow.   Ladies , your Servant ; I thank you for all your Compliments , and shall be very glad to see you at my House , ( going . ) 



[ They all Laugh . Ura.   Hark ye , pray take your Booby home with you , and see to keep him there . 



Dow.   I 'll have nothing to say to him , I 'll go home to my Mother and tell her . 



[ Exit Dow.  Sir Char :  Prithee put out the Coxcomb and bring some Music with you ; what think you Ladies of a Dance ? 



Char.   With all our Hearts . 



Bell.   You see what constant Things you Men are to your Vows , I war●●● this Fellow swore as much Faith and Constancy as any of you can . 



Char.   hang the Poor Animals , disgrace not so the Race of Men , to compare him to one ; such senseless Wretches are only lumps of Dirt , not fit for any nobler Form.  



Enter Freeman with Music . Love.   So , here 's the Music ; what shall we Dance ? the Brawls ? 



Char.   no , by no means , Mr. Lovewell , not on our Wedding-day , lest it prove an ill Omen . 



Sir Char.   Come , come ; I 'll lead up if you 'll follow , every one take his Bride : Freeman , you and your Wife must make a Couple . 



They Dance , after which this Song . Look down great Hymen from Above , 
These Pairs preserve in Peace and Love.  
May never Jars their Joys molest , 
But still a sweet and Halcyon rest 
Upon their mutual Bliss attend , 
And every Hour new Pleasures send . 
Freem .  All Happiness to you all . 



Enter Drawer . Drawer .  Supper waits you Gentlemen . 



Sir Char.   Come , Ladies' , let 's in and take a short Repast ; it grows late , and time to be at home , where indeed I ought to have given my Wife her Wedding Supper , but that the Warning was so short . 



Love.   At last the Storm is over blown , 
And on that happy Coast I 'm thrown 
Where all my Joys are laid in store , 
Heaven cannot give , nor could I ask one more . 


[ Exeunt omnes . FINIS . 

