The Presbyterians remonstrance & declaration to the persons of this nation : and their desires concerning the parliament , his excellency the Lord gen. Cromwell , and the rest of the officers of the army . 

With a wonderful prophecy , presented to m. Love in the tower of London , the same day that he was brought to the place of execution . 

By Mr. Smith the minister , who on Monday night last , being the 22. of this instant month , was buried in saint Giles Cripplegate church London . 

London , printed for g. Wharton . 1651.  

To the reader . 

It is given in charge by the blessed apostle Paul , that we mark them that cause divisions , contrary to the doctrine which we have learned , and avoid them ; sure then , we should observe them that have it in design , to promote union , according to the doctrine we have received and acknowledge and embrace them , and esteem them very highly in love for their works sake . Such is the worthy author of this ensuing subject , who ( With others of his brethren ) looks with a sad heart upon the heart-divisions of our times , and laments to see such as are happily divided from the world , unhappily divided among themselves . The work and labour of love , which he hath here performed , is a labour for love that 's the subject-matter of his discourse ; a lovely argument worthy the handling , a precious grace most worthy the possessing ; so much as we have of it , so much we have of God ; so much as we express of it , so much we express of God ; for God is love . High and honourable are the elegies and encomiums given of it in scripture , such as set forth the excellency , and usefulness of it ; to account them then here , would be to anticipate what the following subject will more fully and fruitfully perform : this only would i say , it is the spiritual cement , by which believers , as materials in a building ▪ are compaginated ; that spiritual ligament , by which ▪ as members in a body , they are united : and this is the happy agreement between faith and love , as touching union that love should y•eld it up to faith , to be the blessed instrument of our union with Christ our head in a mystical way ▪ and that saith should yeeld•i up to love , to be the grace , that unites us one to another in a moral way . 

The author holds out love in the ensuing discourse , according to the guidance of the text he handles , under the notion of a way wherein we are to walk ; a good way it is , the good old way , or if you must have a new way , the gospel new way . The old commandment is for it , the new commandment is for it also . It is a right way , a safe way , a plain way , a pleasant way , and in a good sense , a broad way , large enough : were we in it , we should not need to justle and shoulder one another as we do . Pity it is that such a way is not better known , more traveled . But so it is , we May justly compl•ine , as of old , many walk , but so as they wander from the right way . I say , as the prophet of old , this is the way , walk in it . Every step we take in this way , is a part of payment of a debt we owe , which though we are required to be still owing , and never in paying , we are too far in arrears one to another already ; let us take heed least our von payment bring us under an arrest , and cast us into prison . 

A wordmore , and the part•stall speak , we all profess to be for heaven , love must be our way to bring us thither , love must be our business , when we come there , the work in heaven to all eternity shall be to be reciprocally acting and expressing love . Let us do that now which we hope to do for ever , but i forbear to enlarge in this kind , referring you to the following discourse , which i heartily commend to the perusal and practice of t•e godly : apply to it , it will be found of precious use , to set us into the way wherein we are to walk , to hand us up into that chariot which is paved with love . 

Samuel Coleman . 

The Presbyterians remonstrance : 

The high court of justice having denounced sentence against m. Love , he was remanded back again to the tower of London , where m. Smith ( A pious and religious divine ) gave him a visit , saying ; ah , my dear brother , & precious saint of Jesus Christ , the Lord strengthen you in this your day of temptation and tribulation : and blessed be the name of the most high God , who hath ordered and disposed of all things , as seems most requisite and sitting in his divine power and wisdom ; for , indeed , you know that it is the usual way of the Lord to take away from off the earth his precious saints and servants , before the casting down of his judgments ; and to remove those bright stars ( Whom the world are not worthy of ) to a higher orb.  And truly thus much i dare divine , that when you are gone , i shall not stay long after . Which propheticks proved true ; for immediately after the execution of m. Love , he was exceedingly troubled in mind ; and being asked the reason , of so sudden a change , and melancholy disposition , he answered , it was the will of God so to translate him ; and that he never should be well , till he was translated from an earthly tabernacle to a heavenly paradise , to be singing Hallelujan with his brother in the presence of an innumerable guard of angels , &c.  Soon after it pleased God to afflict him with a great visitation , where he used these divine expressions in the presence of many friend , and others . 

Mercy and peace , and love be multiplied . 

For , saith he , the scripture tells us , that many waters will not quench love cant. 8. 7.  And experience tells us , that much fire will not kindly love ; especially such fire as we have among us , the sire of contention , ( I mean ) much augmented , inflamed , and blown up , by the bellowss of unnecessary and unprofitable disputes ; which are carried on with much heat , most men contesting rather for victory then verity ; few arguing for God , fewer according to God : hence is many different opinions , which beget so many difference in opinions amongst us ; that as in the primitive times the beloved disciple was banished ; so in our times , the love of disciple is banished ; sad times ! When so sweet a thing , so choice a grace , is so little set by : when men study more to gratify Satan by dividing , then to please Jesus Christ by uniting ; when instead of helping we are hurting ; instead of hearing with , we are binding of one another . But the Lord manifest his love to you all , and teach you to manifest your love to him , to the truth , to one another , and to all the saints ; and grant , that the parl. his excellency and officers , May be Jethro's justices , men of courage , fearing God , dealing truly , and hating covetousness . Alas ! We see that the axe is even laid to the root , and many thereby have undergone an untimely death : but happy are all those that suffer for the cause of Christ ; nay , thrice happy are they who suffer for him , that so willingly laid down his life for them . O! consider , i beseech you , the torments he endured : 

1.  Jesus Christ died a shameful death , he died as a malefactor , among malefactors , and yet innocent ; isa. 53. 12.  he was numbered with transgressors . crucified between two thieves , as if he had been the captain or chief over them , yet the apostle saith , 1 pet. 2. 22.  he did no sin , neither was guile found in his mouth , though he were slaughtered , yet he was a lamb without blemish , and without spot . 

2.  Jesus Christ died an accursed death , and that not only according to man's conceit , or opinion , but according to the decree of the divine law , deut. 20. 23. he that is hanged , is accursed of God : which the apostle brings in applying it to Christ , gal. 3. 13.  who was made a curse for us : for it is written , cursed is every one that hangeth on the tree . 

3.  Jesus Christ died a painful death , and this will appear in several particulars : 1.  He was scourged , mat. 27 : 26.  when he had scourged Jesus , he delivered him to be crucified . this scourging was painful ; for Christ was not scourged virgâ with a rod , but stagello with a whip or scourge , which pierced the more , & put him to more pain . 2.  His head was crowned with thorn , mat. 27. 29.  they plaited a crown of thorns , and put it upon his head : these thorns pierced his temples , & this must needs aggravate his pain and misery . 3.  His hands and feet were nailed , which was very grievous , for those members being full of nerves , and sinews , they feel torture so much the more . 4.  He died a lingering death , sudden death is not so painful as a lingering death ; to be dying , but not dead , is painful indeed ; when he was nailed to the cross he was not presently dead . Secondly , let us consider his inward soul-sufferings , and these we shall look upon under three heads . 

1.  Consider what temptations he lay under , as soon as he was baptised and set apart for his office , Satan tempted him , mat. 4.  But now he being ready to depart the world , and to complete his conquest , Satan set upon him with fresh force , this was in his agony , luk. 22. 44 : 

2.  Consider what sense of wrath he went under , he was wont always to have his father smiling on him , now he finds him frowning on him , discovering nothing but anger and wrath , on him was laid the iniquity of us all , and the wrath that was due to all the elect for all their sin ; yet all this Christ bears , even all the wrath that the father had to lay upon all the elect ; yea , and he cries out , joh. 19 28.  i thirst : that i• , i thirst after the salvation of poor sinners ; i thirst after more wrath , if there be any more to be charged upon them , i thirst to have it laid upon me ; and then when there was no more to be laid upon him , he cries out , •etel•stai . it is finished ; he would not off the cross till all were done , and then he gave up the ghost . 3.  Consider what desentions he lay under , all comfort was gone , God seemed to have forsaken him ; matth. 27. 46.  he cried with a loud voice saying , Eli , Eli , Lamasabachtheni , my God why hast thou forsaken me ? let misery be never so great , yet if we enjoy the presence of God , it will make amends for all : hell would be no hell , if we Might enjoy God's comfortable presence there : so let outward enjoyments be never so great , yet without the presence of God they are nothing : heaven would be no heaven , if the comfortable presence of God could not be enjoyed there : here was Christ's misery Judas betrays Pilate condemns , the Jews crucify , and to make up the measure , God forsakes him too . Oh what a sad thing was this ! 

Now , let us put all these together , and we must needs conclude , that Christ loves us dearly . Jesus Christ the son of God in whom was no iniquity ; looks upon us polluted creatures , that were his enemies ; and is contented to suffer a shameful , cursed , prinfnll death , and to be •empted of Satan , to feel the great wrath of his fathers and to be forsaken of him also , and all this to do us good , that we Might escape these things , oh inxpres-love . If Christ love us dearly , than 〈◊〉 love him entirely , we are not worthy of his love , but he is worthy of ours . Did he so love us , as to give himself for us , & shall we not so love him , as to give ourselves to him . I beseech you by the mercies of God , by the love of chest that ye present you•selveses a living sacrifice •y him : oh that this love of Christ to us Might constrain us to do , or suffer any thing for him ! Did Christ so great , so good : show such love to us , so weak , so unworthy ? and shall not we love one another ? Did he that is God so holy , show such great love to man so unholy , and shall not we love one another ? Did he that is so high above us , love us so low , so inferior to him , and shall not we that are equals love one another ? Did Christ give himself for us when he were enemies •nd shall not we love one another whom he calls friends ? Doth Christ love all that are godly , and shall not all that are godly love one another ? This is the apostles argument , 1 John 4. 11.  if God so loved us we ought also to love one another . oh that it Might be a prevailing argument with us , that it Might have such a power over us , as to persuade us to observe the text , to walk 〈◊〉 love , as Christ hath loved us . 

Finis . 



























