DIVINE POEMS . By EDMOND WALLER Esq 

LICENCED , Octob. 3. 1685.  Rob. Midgley . 

In the Savoy : Printed for Henry Herringman ; and are to be sold by Jos. Knight and Fran. Saunders , at the Sign of the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New-exchange in the Strand . 1685.  

OF Divine Love.  

6.  CANTO'S . 

1.  Asserting the authority of the Scripture , in which this Love is revealed . 
2.  The preference and Love of God to man in the Creation . 
3.  The same Love more amply declared in our redemption . 
4.  How necessary this Love is to reform Mankind , and how excellent in itself . 
5.  Showing how happy the World would be if this Love were universally embraced . 
6.  Of preserving this Love in our memory , and how useful the contemplation thereof is . 
CANTO I  

The Graecian Muse has all their Gods survived 
nor Jove at us , nor Phoebus is arrived ; 
Frail Deities , which first the Poets made , 
And then invoked , to give their Fancies aid ! 
Yet if they still divert us with their Rage , 
What may be hoped for in a better Age ? 
When not from Helicons Imagined Spring , 
But sacred Writ , we borrow what we Sing : 
This with the fabric of the World begun , 
Elder than Light , and shall outlast the Sun.  
Before this Oracle ( like Dagon ) all 
The false pretenders , Delphos , Hammon , fall ; 
Long since despised , and silent they afford 
Honour and Triumph , to th' Eternal Word . 
As late Philosophy our Globe has graced , 
And rolling Earth among the Planets placed , 
So has this Book entitled us to Heaven , 
And rules to guide us to that Mansion given : 
Tells the conditions , how our Peace was made , 
And is our Pledge for the great Author's aid ; 
His Power in nature's ampler Book we find , 
But the lesle Volume does express his mind ; 
This Light unknown , bold Epicurus taught , 
That his blessed Gods vouchsafe us not a thought , 
But unconcerned , let all below them slide , 
As fortune does , or human wisdom , guide . 
Religion thus removed , the sacred Yoke , 
And band of all Society is broke : 
What use of Oaths , of Promise , or of Test , 
Where men regard no God but Interest ? 
What endless War would Jealous Nations tear , 
If none above , did witness what they swear ? 
Sad fate of unbelievers , ( and yet just , ) 
Among themselves to find so little trust ! 
Were Scripture silent nature would proclaim , 
Without a God , our falsehood and our shame , 
To know our thoughts , the Object of his Eyes , 
Is the first step , towards being good , or wise ; 
For tho' with Judgement we on things reflect , 
Our Will determines , not our Intellect ; 
Slaves to their Passion , Reason men employ , 
Only to compass what they would enjoy ; 
His fear , to guard us from ourselves , we need , 
And sacred Writ , our Reason does exceed ; 
For tho' Heaven shows the Glory of the Lord , 
Yet something shines more Glorious in his Word , 
His mercy this ( which all his work excels ) 
His tender kindness , and compassion tells , 
While we informed by that Celestial Book , 
Into the Bowels of our Maker look . 
Love there revealed , which never shall have end , 
Nor had beginning , shall our Song commend , 
Describe itself and warm us with that flame , 
Which first from Heaven , to make us Happy , came . 
CANTO II  

The fear of Hell , or aiming to be Blessed , 
Savours too much of private Interest ; 
This moved not Moses , nor the Zealous Paul , 
Who for their Friends abandoned Soul and all ; 
A greater yet , from Heaven to Hell descends , 
To save and make his Enemies his Friends : 
What line of Praise can fathom such a Love , 
Which reached the lowest bottom from above ? 
The Royal Prophet , that extended Grace , 
From heaven to earth , measured but half that space ; 
The Law was regnant , and confined his thought , 
Hell was not conquered , when that Poet wrote ; 
Heaven was scarce heard of , until he came down 
To make the Region , where love triumphs , known ; 
That early Love of Creatures yet unmade , 
To frame the World th' almighty did persuade ; 
For Love it was , that first Created Light , 
Moved on the Waters , chased away the Night 
From the rude Chaos , and bestowed new Grace 
On things disposed of , to their proper place ; 
Some to rest here , and some to shine above , 
Earth , Sea , and Heaven , were all th' effects of Love. 
And Love would be returned ; but there was none 
That to themselves , or others yet were known ; 
The World a Palace was , without a Guest , 
Till one appears , that must excel the rest : 
One like the Author , whose Capacious mind , 
Might by the Glorious Work , the Maker find , 
Might measure Heaven , and give each Star a name , 
With Art and Courage the rough Ocean tame ; 
Over the Globe , with swelling Sails might go , 
And that 't is round , by his experience know , 
Make strongest Beasts obedient to his Will , 
And serve his use , the fertile Earth to Till . 
When by his Word , God had accomplished all , 
Man to create , he did a Council call ; 
Employed his Hand , to give the Dust he took 
A graceful Figure , and Majestic Look ; 
With his own breath , conveyed into his breast 
Life and a Soul , fit to command the rest , 
Worthy alone to celebrate his Name 
For such a gift , and tell from whence it came ; 
Birds sing his Praises , in a wilder note , 
But not with lasting numbers , and with thought : 
Man's great Prerogative ; but above all 
His grace abounds , in his new favourites fall . 
If he create , it is a World he makes ; 
If he be ang'ry , the Creation shakes ; 
From his just wrath our guilty Parents fled , 
He cursed the Earth , but bruised the Serpent's head . 
Amid the storm , his bounty did exceed , 
In the rich promise of the Virgin's seed ; 
Tho' Justice death , a satisfaction craves , 
Love finds a way to pluck us from our Graves . 
CANTO III  

Not willing Terror should his Image move , 
He gives a pattern of Eternal Love ; 
His Son descends , to treat a Peace with those , 
Which were , and must have ever been his foes ; 
Poor he became , and left his Glorious seat , 
To make us humble , and to make us great ; 
His business here was happiness to give 
To those , whose malice could not let him live ; 
Legions of Angels , which he might have used , 
For us resolved to perish , he refused ; 
While they stood ready to prevent his loss , 
Love took him up , and nailed him to the Cross. 
Immortal Love , which in his Bowels reigned , 
That we might be , by such a Love constrained 
To make return of Love ; upon this Pole 
Our Duty does , and our Religion roll . 
To Love is to believe , to hope , to know , 
't is an Essay , a taste of Heaven below . 
He to proud Potentates would not be known , 
Of those that loved him , he was hid from none ; 
Till love appear , we live in anxious doubt , 
But smoke will vanish , when that flame breaks out . 
This is the fire , that would consume our dross , 
Refine , and make us richer by the loss . 
could we forbear dispute , and practice Love , 
We should agree , as Angels do above ; 
Where Love presides ; not Vice alone does find 
no entrance there , but Virtues stay behind : 
Both Faith and Hope , and all the meaner train 
Of moral virtues , at the door remain ; 
Love only enters , as a native there , 
For born in Heaven , it does but sojourn here . 
He that alone , would wise and mighty be , 
commands that others Love , as well as he : 
Love as he Loved , how can we soar so high ? 
He can add wings , when he commands to fly : 
Nor should we be with this command dismayed , 
He that example gives , will give his aid ; 
For he took flesh , that where his Precepts fail , 
His practice as a pattern may prevail ; 
His love at once , and Dread instructs our thought , 
As man he suffered , and as God he taught ; 
Will for the deed he takes , we may with ease 
Obedient be , for if we Love , we please ; 
Weak tho' we are , to Love is no hard task , 
And Love for Love , is all that Heaven does ask : 
Love , that would all men just and temperate make , 
Kind to themselves , and others , for his sake , 
't is with our minds , as with a fertile ground ; 
Wanting this Love , they must with Weeds abound ; 
Unruly Passions , whose effects are worse , 
Than Thorns and Thistles springing from the curse . 
CANTO IU.  

TO Glory man , or misery is born , 
Of his proud foe the Envy or the scorn ; 
Wretched he is , or happy in extreme , 
Base in himself , but great in Heavens' esteem ; 
With Love , of all created things , the best , 
Without it more pernicious than the rest ; 
For greedy Wolves unguarded Sheep devour 
But while their hunger lasts , and then give o'er ; 
man 's boundless Avarice his want exceeds , 
And on his Neighbours , round about him , feeds ; 
His Pride , and vain Ambition are so vast , 
That Deluge-like , they lay whole Nations waste ; 
Debauches and Excess , tho' with lesle noise , 
As great a portion of Mankind destroys . 
The Beasts and Monsters , Hercules oppressed , 
Might in that Age , some Provinces infest ; 
These more destructive Monsters , are the bane 
Of every Age and in all Nations reign ; 
But soon would vanish , if the World were blessed 
With Sacred Love , by which they are repressed : 
Impendent death , and guilt that threatens Hell , 
Are dreadful guests , which here with mortals dwell , 
And a vexed Conscience mingling with their Joy 
Thoughts of despair , does their whole life annoy : 
But Love appearing , all those Terrors fly , 
We live contented , and contended die ; 
They in whose breast , this sacred Love has place , 
Death as a passage to their Joy embrace . 
Clouds and thick vapours which obscure the day 
The Sun's Victorious beams may chase away ; 
Those which our life corrupt , and darken , Love 
The Nobler Star , must from the Soul remove ; 
Spots are observed in that which bounds the year , 
This brighter Sun moves in a boundless Sphere ; 
Of Heaven the Joy , the Glory , and the Light , 
Shines among Angels , and admits no night : 
CANTO V.  

This Iron Age , so fraudulent and bold , 
Touched with this Love , would be an Age of Gold , 
Not as they feigned , that Oaks should honey drop , 
Or land neglected bear an unsown Crop : 
Love would make all things easy , safe , and cheap , 
None for himself , would either sow , or reap : 
Our ready help , and Mutual Love would yield 
A nobler Harvest , than the richest Field ; 
Famine and Dearth , confined to certain parts , 
Extended are , by barrenness of hearts ; 
Some pine for want , where others surfeit now , 
But then we should the use of plenty know ; 
Love would betwixt the rich and needy stand , 
And spread Heavens' bounty with an equal hand ; 
At once the givers , and receivers bless , 
Increase their Joy , and make their sufferings lesle . 
Who for himself no miracle would make , 
Dispensed with nature , for the people's sake ; 
He that long fasting would no wonder show , 
Made Loaves and fishes , as they eat them , grow ; 
Of all his Power , which boundless was above , 
Here he used none , but to express his Love ; 
And such a Love would make our Joy exceed , 
Not when our own , but other mouths , we feed . 
Laws would be useless which rude nature awe , 
Love changing nature , would prevent the Law ; 
Tigers , and Lions , into Dens we thrust , 
But milder Creatures with their freedom trust . 
Devil's are Chained , and tremble ; but the spouse 
no force but Love , nor bond , but bounty , knows : 
Men , whom we now , so fierce and daing'rous see , 
Would Guardian Angels to each other be : 
Such wonders can this mighty Love perform , 
Vultures to Doves , Wolves into Lambs transform . 
Love , what Isaiah prophesied , can do , 
Exalt the Valleys , lay the Mountains low ; 
Humble the Lofty , the dejected raise , 
Smooth , and make straight , our rough and crooked ways . 
Love , strong as death , and like it , levels all , 
With that possessed , the great in Title fall ; 
Themselves esteem , but equal to the least , 
Whom Heaven with that high Character has blessed . 
This Love , the Centre of our union , can 
Alone bestow complete repose on man ; 
Tame his wild Appetite , make inward peace , 
And foreign strife among the Nations , cease ; 
no Martial Trumpet should disturb our rest , 
Nor Princes arm , tho' to subdue the East ; 
Where for the Tomb , so many Heroes , taught 
By those that guided their Devotion , faught ; 
Thrice Happy we , could we like Ardour have 
To gain his Love , as they to win his Grave ! 
Love as he Loved , a Love so unconfined 
With arms extended would embrace Mankind , 
Self Love would cease , or be dilated , when 
We should behold , as many selves , as men , 
All of one family ; in blood allied , 
His precious blood , that for our ransom died : 
CANTO VI.  

Tho' the Creation , so divinely taught , 
Prints such a lively Image in our thought , 
That the first spark , of new Created light 
From Chaos struck , affects our present sight : 
Yet the first Christians did Esteem more blessed 
The day of rising , than the day of rest ; 
That every week , might new occasion give , 
To make his Triumph in their memory live . 
then let our Muse compose a Sacred Charm 
To keep his blood , among us , ever warm ; 
And Singing , as the Blessed do above , 
With our last breath , dilate this flame of Love.  
But on so vast a subject , who can find 
Words that may reach th' Ideas of his mind ? 
Our Language fails , or if it could supply , 
What Mortal Thought can raise itself so high ? 
Despairing here , we might abandon Art , 
And only hope to have it in our heart ; 
But though we find this Sacred Task too hard , 
Yet the Design , th' endeavour brings Reward ; 
The Contemplation does suspend our Woe , 
And makes a Truce with all the Ills we know . 
As Saul's afflicted Spirit , from the sound 
Of David's Harp , a present Solace found ; 
So on this Theme while we our Muse engage , 
〈◊〉 Wounds are felt , of Fortune , or of Age : 
〈◊〉 ●…e Love to Meditate is Peace , 
〈◊〉 makes all care of meaner things to cease . 
Amazed at once and comforted to find 
A boundless Power so infinitely kind ; 
The Soul contending to that light to fly 
From ●…er dark Cell , we practise how to die ; 
Employing thus the Poet's winged Art , 
To reach this Love , and grave it in our heart . 
Joy so complete , so solid and severe , 
Would leave no place for meaner Pleasures there ; 
Pale they would look , as Stars that must be gone , 
When from the East the Rising Sun comes on . 
Floriferis ut Apes in saltibus omnia libant , 
Sic nos Scripturae depascimur aurea dicta ; 
Aurea perpetuâ semper dignissima vitâ . 
Nam Divinus Amor , cum caepit vociferari , 
Diffugiunt Animi Terrores : — — Lucr.  
Exul eram , requiesque mihi , non Fama petita est , 
Mens intenta suis ne foret usque malis . 
Namque ubi mota calent Sacrâmea Pectora Musâ , 
Altior humano Spiritus ille malo est . 
De Trist.  

OF Divine Poesy . 

Two Cantos , Occasioned upon sight of the 53d Chapter of Isaiah turned into Verse by Mistress Wharton . 

CANTO I  

Poets we prise , when in their verse we find 
Some great employment of a worthy mind . 
Angels have been inquisitive to know 
The secret , which this Oracle does show . 
What was to come Isaiah did declare , 
Which she describes , as if she had been there ; 
Had seen the Wounds , which to the reader's view , 
She draws so lively , that they Bleed anew . 
As Ivy thrives , which on the Oak takes hold , 
So with the Prophets may her lines grow old , 
If they should die , who can the World forgive ? 
Such Pious Lines ! When wanton Sapho's live . 
Who with his Breath his Image did inspire , 
Expects it should foment a Nobler fire : 
Not Love which Brutes as well as Men may know , 
But Love like his , to whom that Breath we owe.  
Verse so designed , on that high Subject wrote , 
Is the Perfection of an ardent thought : 
The Smoke which we from burning Incense raise , 
When we complete the Sacrifice of Praise . 
In boundless verse the Fancy soars too high , 
For any Object , but the Deity . 
What Mortal can with Heaven pretend to share 
In the Superlatives of Wise and Fair ? 
A meaner Subject when with these we grace , 
A Giant's habit on a Dwarf , we place . 
Sacred should be the product of our Muse , 
Like that sweet Oil , above all private use : 
On pain of Death forbidden to be made , 
But when it should be on the Altar laid . 
Verse shows a rich inestimable Vein , 
When dropped from Heaven , 't is thither sent again . 
Of Bounty 't is that he admits our Praise , 
Which does not him , but us that yield it raise . 
For as that Angel up to Heaven did rise , 
Born on the Flame of Manoah's Sacrifice . 
So winged with Praise , we penetrate the Sky , 
Teach Clouds and Stars to praise him as we fly : 
The whole Creation , by our fall made groan , 
His Praise to Echo , and suspend their Moan . 
For that he reigns , all Creatures should rejoice , 
And we with Songs supply their want of voice , 
The Church Triumphant , and the Church below 
In Songs of Praise a present Union show : 
Their Joys are full , our expectation long ; 
In Life we differ , but we join in Song . 
Angels , and we , assisted by this Art , 
May Sing together , tho' we dwell apart . 
Thus we reach Heaven , while vainer Poems must 
no higher rise , than Winds may lift the Dust. 
From that they spring ; this from his breath that gave 
To the first Dust , th' immortal Soul we have , 
His Praise well sung , our great endeavour here , 
Shakes off the Dust , and makes that breath appear . 
CANTO II  

HE that did first this way of Writing grace , 
Conversed with the Almighty face to face . 
Wonders he did in sacred verse unfold , 
When he had more than Eighty Winters told : 
The Writer feels no dire effects of Age , 
Nor verse that flows from so Divine a rage . 
elder of Poets , he beheld the Light , 
When first it triumphed o'er eternal Night . 
Chaos he saw , and could distinctly tell 
How that confusion into Order fell . 
As if consulted with , he has expressed 
The Work of the Creator and his rest . 
How the flood drowned the first offending Race , 
Which might the figure of our Globe deface . 
For new made Earth , so even and so fair , 
Lesle equal now , uncertain makes the Air : 
Surprised with heat , and unexpected cold 
Early distempers make our Youth look old . 
Our Days so evil , and so few , may tell 
That on the ruins of that World we dwell . 
Strong as the Oaks that nourished them , and high , 
That long-lived Race did on their force rely , 
Neglecting Heaven : but we of shorter date , 
Should be more mindful of impendent fate . 
To Worms that crawl upon this Rubbish here , 
This Span of Life may yet too long appear . 
Enough to humble , and to make us great , 
If it prepare us for a Nobler seat . 
Which well observing , he in Numerous Lines , 
Taught wretched man , how fast his Life declines : 
In whom he dwelled , before the World was made , 
And may again retire , when that shall fade . 
The lasting Iliads have not liveed so long , 
As his and Deborah's triumphant Song . 
Delphos unknown , no Muse could them inspire , 
But that which governs the Celestial Quire. 
Heaven to the Pious did this art reveal ; 
And from their store succeeding Poets steal . 
Homer's Scamand●…r for the Trojans faught , 
And swelled so high , by her old Kishon taught : 
His River scarce could fierce Achilles' stay ; 
Hers more successful , swept her Foes away . 
The Host of Heaven , his Phoebus and his Mars , 
He Arms , instructed by her fight Stars . 
She led them all against the common foe : 
But he misled by what he saw below , 
The Powers above , like wretched men , divides , 
And breaks their Union into different sides . 
The Noblest parts which in his Heroes shine , 
May be but Copies of that Heroine . 
Homer himself , and Agam●…mnon , she 
The Writer could , and the Commander , be . 
Truth she relates , in a sublimer strain 
Than all the Tales the boldest Greek could feign . 
For what she sung , that Spirit did indite , 
Which gave her courage , and success in fight . 
A double Garland Crowns the Matchless Dame ; 
From Heaven her Poem , and her Conquest came . 
Tho' of the Jews she merit most esteem : 
Yet here the Christian has the greater Theme . 
Her martial song describes how Sisera fell , 
This sings our Triumph over Death and Hell.  
The rising Light employed the sacred breath 
Of the blessed Virgin and Elizabeth , 
In Songs of Joy , the Angels sung his Birth : 
Here , how he treated was upon the Earth 
Trembling we read ; th'affliction and the scorn , 
Which for our Gild , so patiently was born . 
Conception , Birth , and suffering , all belong 
Thomas various Parts , to one Celestial Song : 
And She , well using so divine an art , 
Has in this consort , Sung the Tragic part . 
As Hannah's seed was vowed to sacred use , 
So here this Lady consecrates her Muse. 
With like reward may Heaven her bed adorn , 
With fruit as fair as by her Muse is born . 
Of the Paraphrase on the Lord's Prayer , 

Written by Mistress Wharton . Silence , you Winds , listen Etherial Lights , 
While our Urania sings what Heaven indites ; 
The Numbers are the Nymphs , but from above 
Descends the Pledge of that Eternal Love.  
Here wretched Mortals have not leave alone , 
But are instructed to approach his Throne ; 
And how can he to miserable Men 
Deny Requests , which his own Hand did Pen ? 
In the Evangelists we find the Prose , 
Which Paraphrased by her a Poem grows ; 
A devout Rapture , so divine a Hymn , 
It may become the highest Seraphim ; 
For they like her in that Celestial Choir , 
Sing only what the Spirit does inspire . 
Taught by our Lord and theirs , with us they may 
For all , but pardon for Offences , pray . 
Some Reflections of his upon the several Petitions in the same Prayer . 

I  

HIS sacred Name , with reverence profound , 
Should mentioned be , and trembling at the sound , 
It was Jehovah , 't is our Father now , 
So low to us , does Heaven vouchsafe to bow , 
brethren to him that taught us how to pray , 
And did so dearly for our Ransom pay . 
II  

His Kingdom come : For this we pray in vain , 
Unless he does in our affections reign : 
Absurd it were to wish for such a King , 
And not Obedience to his Sceptre bring . 
III  

His Will be done ; In fact 't is always done , 
But as in Heaven , it must be made our own : 
His Will should all our Inclinations sway , 
Whom Nature and the Universe obey . 
iv.  

It is not what our Avarice hoards up , 
't is he that feeds us , and that fills our Cup , 
Like newborn Babes , depending on the Breast , 
From day to day we on his Bounty feast ; 
Nor should the Soul expect above a day 
To dwell in her frail Tenament of Clay : 
The setting Sun should seem to bond our Race , 
And the new day a gift of special Grace . 
v.  

That he should all our Trespasses forgive , 
While we in hatred with our Neighbours live ; 
Though so to pray , may seem an easy task , 
We curse ourselves when thus inclined we ask : 
This Prayer to use , we ought with equal care 
Our Souls as to the Sacrament prepare : 
The Noblest Worship of the Power above , 
Is to extol , and imitate his Love : 
Not to forgive our Enemies alone , 
But use our Bounty that they may be wone . 
VI  

Guard us from all Temptations of the Foe , 
And those we may in several stations know : 
The Rich and Poor in slippery places stand , 
Give us enough , but with a sparing Hand ; 
Not ill-perswading want , nor wanton Wealth , 
But what proportioned is to Life and Health : 
For not the Dead , but Living sing thy Praise , 
Exalt thy Kingdom , and thy Glory raise . 
— Favete Linguis — 
Virginibus Puerisque Canto , Horat.  
FINIS . 

