THE IDEA OF Christian Love. Being a Translation , at the Instance of Mr. WALLER , of a Latin Sermon Upon john xiii . 34 , 35.  Preached by Mr. EDWARD YOUNG , PREBEND of SALISBURY . With a Large PARAPHRASE on Mr. Waller's POEM of Divine Love. To which are added some Copies of VERSES from that Excellent Poetess Mistress Wharton , with others to her . 

— Hic ego rerum 
Fluctibus in mediis , & tempestatibus urbis , 
Verba Lyrae motura Sonum connectere dignor ? 
Hor.  



London , Printed for jonathan Robinson , at the Golden-lion in St. Paul's Churchyard , 1688.  

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE AUTHOR . 

Who Love , the Christian's Duty , and his Praise , 
In all the Beauties of your Pen surveys ; 
Seeing my Rythms , may the just censure pass , 
That here 's a Matchless Di'mond set in Brass : 
Yet Latin , the most elegant and pure ; 
The Ignorance of most renders obscure . 
This may excuse my creeping English Style : 
The Jewel is enhansed thus by its Foil . 
Who propagated what our Savi'our taught , 
no Ornament from any Art had brought : 
Barely to represent such Truths as these , 
May be enough unbiased Minds to please : 
But most these Golden Rules so much forsake , 
That who applies them , Satyr's seems to make . 
The Christian's Character is now reversed , 
And Hatred for the truest Mark is nursed . 
The fiercest Heats are varnished o'er with Zeal ; 
Each Party thinks God their Decrees will Seal . 
Were 't in the Power of Man Heavens' Gate to close , 
Many would be shut out whom God has chose : 
Of Means which he appointed they 'd deprive ; 
And to block up the narrow Way they strive . 
Some to himself God from each Church does call , 
Delights to break down Man's Partiti'on-wall ; 
And will at last unite●● in a Peace , 
Where every Term , not made by Christ , shall cease . 
A Church is often a Procrusti'an Bed ; 
Happy the Man ! who there can rest his Head , 
Without the pain of being stretched out to reach 
His Length , who would impose his Form of Speech : 
Or else contracted to that scanty Size , 
Which to a few confines the common prize : 
While most , to whom the Terms appear lesle hard , 
Cannot but grieve , that others are debarred 
Of Benefits , increasing as they 're shared . 
But Public Good a Sacrifice is made , 
To those , to whom Restraints become a Trade . 
Great is Diana , is the general Voice ; 
For few observe what Craftsmen raised the Noise . 
Who at his Neighbour's Liberty repines , 
That gets no Profit by the Silver Shrines ? 
Good God our Hearts so with thy Love inspire , 
That every Earthborn Ardour may expire : 
Let not a Flaming Sword forbid the Taste , 
Of the fair Fruit in thy new Eden placed . 
May we anticipate the State Above , 
Where all Things in an unforced Order move , 
Remote from all necessity but Love ! 
To Mistress WHARTON . 

When sergeant Astraea's lustful Rage 
Joyns to Debauch the too Effem'nate Age ; 
Draws an Embroidered Curtain over Sin , 
And jilts with Promises of Bliss within : 
't is time for you with all your Wealth of Thought , 
Forth from your loved Retirement to be brought : 
Those Thoughts which Pie'ty to yourself endear , 
Would strangely taking to the World appear . 
Who could be vicious , who had Virtue seen , 
By you dressed out , with its attractive Mien , 
thousands of Graces hovering round the Scene ? 
You best can tell the Charms of vertu'ous Joy ; 
Despising Venus with her Wanton Boy . 
Your Fancy , which so much of Heaven does view , 
could never descend low Pleasures to pursue . 
And when to us you the warm Rays impart , 
Of Love Divine dancing about your Heart ; 
You will convert faster than she seduce , 
Teaching the Epicure Life's noblest use . 
Far be that Scandal from Poetic Fires , 
As if best Poets had most loose Desires . 
If old Philosophy Purgati'ons taught , 
To fit the Mind for Loftiness of Thought : 
When 't was no higher than dull Prose to rise , 
Prose which must keep below the Starry Skies : 
( For Verse the only Language is Above , 
Where all Things in Harmonious Numbers move ) : 
How purged , how undefiled should be the Mind , 
Which imitates the way of the Angelic kind ! 
From Mistress WHARTON . 

Di'monds concealed , their Lustre may retain , 
But Sacred Wit can never , hid , remain : 
From what ever dark'ning Cloud it takes its Birth , 
It , like the Rising-sun , glads half the Earth . 
True Poesy appears with decent Pride , 
Not puffed with Praise , nor grieved when Fools deride . 
Free and Secure in its own proper Merit ; 
Scorns Envy ( yet spurns back the flattering Spirit . ) 
This makes me wonder you thus long concealed 
A Talon , which to all should be revealed : 
And bashfully decline the yielding Boughs , 
Which Daphne offers to adorn your Brows . 
Not but that Minds best taught are most afraid , 
To venture out when they for Glory trade . 
An humble Mind doth every Path surveyed , 
That leads to Fame , and sees how many stray : 
Observes the steep Ascent to th' Sacred Ground , 
Which Envy guards , and all newcomers wounds : 
sees many when they are arrived so high , 
They seem to grasp at Fame , and touch the Sky . 
Whilst swelled with Vanity they all deride ; 
Stumbling themselves upon the Rock of Pride : 
By some more silent Traveller are crossed , 
Thrown from the Top , and all their Hopes are lost . 
But let not this discourage , nor amaze 
That humble Mind , which frighted fly's for ease , 
Unto the Cordial of reviving Praise . 
Praise is the sprightly Wine of growing Fame , 
Adding most Life to the most fertile Brain ; 
( And like that always doth new Thought produce ; 
So when 't is bad the Wine is its Excuse . ) 
A truly humble Mind knows what is just , 
When he seeks Praise through Vanity , or Thirst. 
And as he scorns the Fame that Flattery gives , 
He values what from Merit he receives . 
This forces me with grateful Thanks to own , 
I 'm praised by one , whose Lines such Skill have shown , 
That I now ought to prize what he esteems , 
And think there is some worth in my dull Rhymes . 
To Mistress WHARTON . Who with Verses to him , sent her Answer to Mr. WALLER . 

When that soft Hand whence Waller has his Deuce , 
Strokes , and encourages my backward Muse ; 
Feeds it with Praise , and teaches it to fly : 
Not to attempt would be Stupidity . 
She does the Reverend Poet's Age renew , 
With nobler Art than ever Medea knew : 
'T were hard if she should not the Young inspire , 
Whom with such blooming Thoughts the Old admire . 
See! how the Sacred Bard himself excels , 
While on the Wonders of your Verse he dwells . 
But his exalted Head how will it raise , 
To be caught up to Heaven by your Praise ! 
To hear from Angel's Form an Angel's Voice 
Warble his Name , how much must he rejoice ! 
Those Ani'mal Spirits which so closely join 
Unto his Earthy part , a Guest Divine ; 
By this one Rapture strained and weakened more , 
Than by the shock of Time and Thought before ; 
Not able to resist this added Force , 
May leave the Soul , 't is likely , to its Course . 
Winged by your Praise 't will to it 's Rest retire , 
And , Phenix-like , in cheerful Flames expire . 
Forth from the kindling Spices you arise , 
And to give way to you the Elder dies : 
Your Rise Prophetic is of his Decay , 
Heaven has , to see your Birth , indulged his Stay. 
And , like Old Sime'on , now he 'll go in Peace , 
When such a Crown he to his Wishes sees . 
In Verse's Empire , as of lower Things , 
Successors named , take from the present Kings : 
And thus this Prince of Verse divides his Fame , 
When he your Worth , and Title , does proclaim . 
While I , Prometheus-like , steal Fire from you , 
To my bold Theft , what Punishment is due ? 
None can of you and Waller write in Prose ; 
Yet none should do 't but whom kind Nature choose . 
Like Icarus , with borrowed Wings I fly , 
And with his Fate I soon extended lie . 
i' th' Oce'an of your Praise I have been drowned , 
And am but floating on the Water found : 
no signs of true Poetic Life appear , 
But th' loss will not deserve a Lady's Tear ; 
A Lady's Tear's a Pearl of greater price , 
Than any on the Eastern Shores there lies : 
But her Esteem's a Jewel far above 
Even her own Beauty , next unto her Love. 
To slight what 's consecrated thus by you , 
Were both Injustice , and Profaneness too : 
Your Stamp , like Caesar's Head , does value give ; 
Each Line approved by you , shall through all Ages live . 
From Mistress WHARTON . 

Small are the poor Returns which you receive , 
For all the Pleasure which your Verses give ; 
Yet Gratitude obliges me to this ; 
Thomas for your Pearls , I but return you Glass . 
This Indi'an Traffic soon will tyre you quite , 
Unless you 're pleased that others you delight . 
And , if your Generous Thoughts I rightly guests , 
They aim at pleasing , and they have Success : 
It is the Business , and the Scope of Wit ; 
Poems are seldom for the Authors written , 
But for the Readers ; thus they labour still , 
Like harmless Bees , to serve another's William 
Whilst you I praise , Words flow methinks so fast , 
As if my working Thoughts were all in haste . 
Your Style I may commend , whilst your unknown : 
no breach of Modesty in this is shown . 
Your Worth will force this Tribute from my Heart , 
Nor can I backward be to praise Desert . 
Mistress WHARTON'S PARAPHRASE Upon the 103d PSALM . 

Advance my Soul , and all thy Powers incline , 
To praise the Lord , by whom those Grace's shine . 
Praise him by whom are all those Mercies given , 
Forget not him who rules both Earth and Heaven : 
He who forgives , and heals the wounded Mind ; 
He who to Mercy ever is inclined . 
Who saves thy Life , and blesseth it with Food : 
Who crowns thy Labours with abundant Good.  
Who makes thy Years renew , and keeps thee Young : 
Joyful as Health , and , as the Eagle , strong ; 
The Lord who judges between wrong and right : 
To favour the Oppressed is his Delight . 
He who to Moses showed his wondrous Ways : 
And Isr'el taught to magnify his Praise . 
The Lord who always is to Peace inclined , 
Who suffers long , & bears with th' humble Mind . 
Gentle and Mild , unwilling yet to chide ; 
Soon he forgives , long will his Anger hide . 
Thomas we offend he will not punish straight : 
Our Sins are great before we feel their weight . 
See how the Heaven is far removed from Earth , 
The Heaven from which his Mercy takes its birth ; 
So far is his Compassion raised above 
The feeble workings of a Mortal Love.  
Wide is the Space through which the labouring Sun , 
From East to West his daily course doth run ; 
Yet farther from us he our Sins hath placed , 
As willing to forget our Errors past . 
Paternal Kindness still in him remains , 
And his creating Favours he maintains . 
With those that fear him he 'll not angry grow ; 
For he considers whence our Nature's flow . 
Who made us , knows he took us from the Earth ; 
Nor much expects to find from such a Birth . 
The same Original hath every Flower ; 
And they , like us , have a short glori'ous Hour . 
But with the Winds their Glories fly away ; 
They are not Proof against a Stormy Day . 
Nor we , however high our Hopes advance , 
Are Proof against a Blast of adverse Chance . 
His mercy 's lasting , and our Life is frail ; 
Which makes the Lord his gracious Gifts entail 
On Child's Children , where his Laws are known , 
To them whose Works assent to Truths they own . 
From Age to Age his Goodness hath been shown , 
The mighty Lord , on High hath placed his Throne ; 
Where he surveys the World which is his own . 
Too weak am I , to sing th' Eternal's Praise : 
ye Angels , your Celestial Voices raise ! 
ye who excel in Strength , Wisdom , and Power , 
( Alas ! the Life of Man is as an Hour : ) 
ye that have privilege to see and hear 
His wondrous Works , should wondrous Works declare . 
But yet poor Mortals who are placed below , 
May forward Will's by faint Endeavours show . 
We who are still in Danger and Alarms , 
Who against Temptati'ons always are in Arms ; 
May yet endeavour to advance his Fame , 
And he 'll be pleased while we invoke his Name , 
Whilst all his Works his Greatness do proclaim . 
But thou , my Soul ! be never silent found : 
Above the Clouds let thy loud Music sound . 
Let all who come to thee , by thee be taught 
The mighty Works that by thy God are wrought . 
TO ORINDA Upon her PARAPHRASE on the 103d PSALMS , sent with Verses to Himself . 

I  

IF Orpheus charmed the Stones into a Dance ; 
He lesle the Power of Sacred Song did show , 
Than , fair Orinda , is felt from you ; 
Who to a Poet's Name , 
And to be Candidate for Fame , 
Even duller me advance . 
You , like my Genius , move unseen , 
Raise me , immersed in Business of the Bar , 
My Lyre untuned , the Strings at jar , 
( Suited unto that wrangling Scene ) 
Compose the Discords in my tuneless Mind ; 
A sudden Change I find : 
Earth I despise , and Earthly Things , 
And now , methinks , I mount before the King of Kings . 
II  

He David taught to sing his Praise , 
Warming his Heart with true Celestial Fire : 
And you does raise , 
The Prophet's Steps so nigh to trace ; 
That well we may , 
Without blaspheming say , 
You the same Spirit does delight to inspire . 
We cannot say that Prophecies are ceased : 
God fills the pious Poet's Breast , 
Assists the Faculties , and though 
He dictate not the Words they write , 
Yet gives the Sense from which they flow ; 
And when towards Heaven they rise , 
Still with new Force supplies , 
First raised them on the Wing , and guide's them in their Flight . 
III  

't is not in vain you bid the Angels sing , 
th' Eternal's Praise , they minister to you : 
Yours and David's Harp they string , 
Mingle themselves with every Song , 
Keep off the Demons hovering in the Air , 
Distil themselves like Dew 
Of peaceful Night upon your Dreams ; 
And to the Morning keep th' Impression strong , 
That Force , which makes the Powers of Hell despair 
Of a Diversion from your Heavenly Themes . 
What lesle than Angels can the Honour guard 
Of beauteous Ladies in the Flower of Youth ; 
Midst all the Flatteries of deluding Sense , 
Teach them to value Truth , 
And Truth's Reward ; 
Before the Pomp and Show , 
And every vain Pretence 
Of Pleasure here below . 
Blessed Souls in whom their Beauty thus does prove , 
The truest Image seen by Mortal Eye , 
Of the Perfections of our God most High , 
Feasting themselves and us with the Creator's Love ! 
iv.  

If by this help I thus can rise 
Unto those Beauty's only Thought can reach ; 
Thought , which but dully dictates to the Speech , 
( Yet Thought must here its Poverty confess ) 
You need not blush should my enlightened Eyes , 
Behold that charming Dress , 
Your Soul put on when it came clothed to view ; 
The Garment must its Innocence express ; 
And , like your Lines , inspire 
With Love , and Rev'rence too , 
A Love without a bold Desire ; 
A Lambent Flame , 
Such as gives Light , and Warmth , but never consumes : 
The Light of Heaven from whence it came . 
Here none t' approach presumes , 
With Fire lesle hallowed than he lays 
Upon the Altar when he prays : 
Incense more pure t' a sacred Poetess is due , 
Than from the Heathen-world their chaste Diana drew . 
v.  

Heaven seems to open , Angels to come down , 
In lovely Vehicles of thick'ned Air , 
And with a Glory , ' stead of Laurel , crown 
The Azure Temples of the teaching Fair : 
While Men with Ecstasy attend her Lays , 
Divinely set to the Almighty's Praise . 
As Grace on Earth of endless Bliss , 
Your happy Verse the Incoati'on is 
Of that , in which you shall with Angels join , 
When you above the Stars shall shine : 
Free from Pain , and free from Fear , 
With every Object of your Care ; 
Where only Love and Harmony appear , 
The Love and Harmony Immortal and Divine . 
VI  

Sense of your own , Pity of others Wrong , 
Shall give no Interrupti'on to your Song . 
The ways of Providence so dark , 
Not to be touched by Hand profane ; 
lest we with Uzza's Gild , have Uzza's Pain , 
Who fond thought to help the tottering Ark ; 
You there will see the Clouds away , 
In that bright everlasting Day ; 
Worthy of God , and of that Love , 
With which he cherishes frail Mortal Race ; 
Whom of the does with temp'ral Evils prove , 
Tries and Refines them in Afflicti'on's Fire ; 
Until they 're fitted for his Grace , 
And thrô'ly taught beyond this lower World t' aspire . 
ADVERTISEMENT . 

Through the Printer's Mistake , the Verses from pag. seven . are misplaced ; having been intended to come in at the end . 

THE IDEA OF Christian Love.  

PROEM TO Mr. WALLER . 

THE Taper shining with diminished Rays , 
While Noonday Sun swallows its feeble Blaze ; 
Not valued as considered for its Light , 
But what it shadows to th' internal Sight ; 
May be my Emblem , who the most obscure , 
Of all who follow you their Cynosure , 
Within your Province , and at your Command , 
As a dim Taper on the Altar stand : 
Thomas small 's my Portion of Poetic Fire , 
I show to others how they should aspire : 
Love lights my Lamp , and gives it all its Flame , 
't is Love I breath , and seek , Love I proclaim : 
To think to enlighten you when I have done , 
Would be to light a Candle to the Sun ; 
If your Affections I can but excite , 
I have my end , nor can you miss Delight . 
Christ his Disciples with effect to move , 
To draw in the soft Yoke of Mutual Love ; 
Did to his Precept and Example join 
The happy Fruit , By this 't is known ye 're mine , 
To love 't is certain a Command requires , 
The Ardour of its self quickly expires : 
As much it does a great Example need , 
It's glim'ring Light in others few will heed : 
Nor lesle Incitement wants the sluggish Mind , 
To climb to the Ascent of Love enjoined . 
Let 's see the charming nature of this Love , 
Which does the Character of Christians prove , 
What in its self , to what our Hearts 't would move . 
This his Command our Saviour marks for new , 
Not that its first Foundations there we view ; 
But as a Sanction it from him obtains , 
And in each Age from him new Vigour gains : 
Man's Tempers and their Manners this require . 
Thomas Love is the most natural Desire , 
Mixed with our Being's , and refreshing found 
In all the Exigencies Life surround , 
The gratefull'st Passion , and most friendly Power , 
The Minds serene , the Bodies verdant Flower , 
The Spirits poise , the Harmony o' th' whole ; 
And when its opposite , takes the control , 
Disturbance , Torment , and Decay succeed : 
Thomas mutual Aid common occasions need , 
And a Foundation of firm Union lay ; 
Whence for united Hearts and Souls we pray ; 
To this our public Vows and Reason tend , 
Nature to this seems with full course to bend ; 
Yet Sin , and Satan , Nature's dangerous Foes , 
With such Impediments its way oppose , 
That rare 's the Love which long continues fair , 
Time , and slight Accidents its force impair , 
Wear off the Paint , and drive the Smoke to Air. 
Self-flatt'ry keeps to narrow Banks , confined , 
What to enrich the neigh'bring Plain's designed ; 
The Mind's Propensions , sweetening in a Stream , 
Stagnate within , and send forth noxious steam . 
How oft on Love does gnawing Envy prey , 
Whose Arbitrary Laws while Men obey , 
Against their dear Self-love they blindly act , 
And waste those Bowels , which they thus contract ! 
How oft does he whom Benefits have bound , 
Think the mere owning them would Honour wound ! 
How oft Suspicion breeds ill-natured Leav'n ! 
How oft an Injury received or given ! 
To hurt one whom you hate , is thought lesle unjust , 
Than one who in your Friendship places trust : 
And thence , to colour o'er the wrong you do , 
Your injured Friend is held for constant Foe . 
But only vulgar Dregss thus meanly fail , 
These Blemishes can't o'er great Souls prevail : 
Yet these , alas ! incur too often blame , 
For crim'nal stifling love 's enobling Flame . 
Difference of Manners makes divided Minds , 
Of jerom and Ruffinus this one finds : 
Opin'ions disagreeing do the same . 
These tarnish Cyprian's and Stephen's Fame : 
Study of Parties , fatal oft to Love , 
Against Chrysostom did Epiphanius move . 
A Point of Ceremony unexprest 
To Greg'ry , driven his Basil from his Breast . 
Even Paul and Barn'bas striving for control , 
Parted in Body ; not to say , in Soul. 
Great Names , ye see , I on this Head produce , 
Specious Apologies for Love's abuse , 
Yet ought not they to serve for an Excuse : 
Thomas they 're great Instances that Love is frail ; 
Yet ought our Saviour's Precept to prevail : 
Who from his Brother does his Love withdraw , 
In that 's a Traitor to the Christian Law. 
The Lord commands , and wilt thou , Wretch ! dispute ? 
wilt thou resist Command so absolute ? 
Command , good Lord ! effectually command , 
And grant I be not able to withstand . 
Atthy Command from the rude formless heap , 
Beauty and pleasing Order forth did leap ; 
From void came Solids , and from Nothing All , 
The Winds and raging Seas obey thy call . 
thou dost the madness of the People quell ; 
So tame my Heart ! that there sweet Love may dwell : 
With his Example Christ this Precept binds , 
To imitate his Love would raise our Minds . 
Under the Jewish Institutes , we see 
Provision made for Love's Sincerity ; 
Yet much the Duty wanted of its weight , 
When Self-love only was to set the rate ; 
Who makes in loving others this his bound , 
To come far short of Duty will be found : 
Themselves indeed all Men sincerely love , 
Blind and imprudent , yet that Love does prove ; 
Fond indulging unrestrained Desires , 
Men think they answer what that Law requires , 
Flatter themselves , and blow up Nature's Fires ; 
And this they think is justice to their Friend , 
When nothing's more perfidious in the end : 
Nothing more dangerously insinuates Vice , 
To which that mask of Friendship does entice . 
Sin in Self-love thus propagates the Sin ; 
Hence was a nobler Rule justly brought in . 
How to love others , ask not Flesh and Blood , 
Too often leading you from what is good ; 
But let Christ's Love to you , your Pattern be , 
Contemplate that for Manner , and Degree : 
Let your Affections in that order lie , 
By that the Errors mend , Defects supply . 
See what Christ's Love to us does recommend , 
The Choice he made , the Measure , and the End. 
Choice did I say ? 't was rather without Choice ; 
In that both High and Low , All , may rejoice . 
Thomas weak and indigent , ungrateful too , 
He loved , nor doubt my Soul ! but he loved you . 
ye love , OH Men , but with a Love so nice , 
Unjust , or cunning , that your love 's a Vice. 
ye seek the Great , the Rich , the apt to lend , 
The cheerful , courteous , and facetious Friend : 
On these the Offices of Love ye spend . 
Advantages ye with each other shift , 
And that is made a Trade which should be Gift ; 
Pleasure or Profit at the bottom lie , 
Without that Sauce your Appetites soon die . 
Can this a Virtue be , or Duty thought , 
Or th' imitation of what Christ has taught ? 
Th'innate Propensions while they thus do flow , 
Mere Artifice , and Baits for Pleasure grow . 
Under Christ's Banner they that would be found , 
Him always for their Pattern must propound . 
He loved the poor , and destitute of Aid , 
Their want the only Obligation laid . 
Those who nor sought , nor merited , he loved , 
The motive to their Cure th●ir Sickness proved . 
Those who resisted the blessed Aid he brought , 
Thomas struggling , in his saving Arms he caught . 
no other Charms , or Shadows of Delight , 
Did his warm Love to Human Race invite . 
This , Christian ! should thy sole inducement be , 
That love 's thy Duty , as thy Head loved thee ; 
This Reason will to all Mankind extend : 
But if for grounds you cautiously suspend , 
For causes which Reason and Fancy weigh ; 
Faction to Sides , Lightness to new will sway : 
And thus for Love you take its mere disguise , 
You labour for the Shadow of a Prize . 
Our Lord loved with an equal , constant Mind , 
no Age shall see his Love from his disjoined : 
But what is yours which wavers with the wind ? 
Whom now into your greedy Arms you take , 
The subject of your Raill'ry soon you make : 
One for a Friend you out of Conscience choose , 
This in regard to Glory you refuse : 
You envy this Man's good , this Man's consult , 
Here at a loss you grieve , there you insult : 
To one you give , another's Fame you take ; 
That Man you free , a Snare for others make . 
What means this double Dealing , double Heart ? 
As much as may be Sir ! act the same part . 
Be but one Man , either be wholly wise , 
Or wholly Wisdom's sacred Lore despise , 
( If as delightful 't is to play the Fool , 
As glorious to improve in Wisdom's School ; ) 
If you 'd have praise , act always by one Rule . 
St. Peter , when he would an Abstract show 
o' th' Life of Love incarnate , while below , 
Says his whole business lay in doing good ; 
The bound , the end of Love's thus understood . 
  felt no spark of this Celestial Fire , 
Who in their Love but gratify desire : 
Who trafficks with Affections , sells good turns , 
Little the end of Sacred Love discerns . 
That doing good its sole reward obtains : 
And this endears to us our Saviour's pains ; 
Who gave himself to his , of his free Grace , 
no Caution , no Reserve with him had place . 
He loved through Midnight watchings , wasting Toil , 
Loss of Life's Comforts , and even Life's despoil . 
To thee , OH Christian , Death , Life , Damage , Gain , 
Leasure , Turmoils , Disgrace , Fame , Quiet , Pain , 
Are all to be passed by without regard , 
When you 're from doing good by either barred . 
Does this seem difficult ? 'T will lesle appear , 
If you consider what 's the Fruit 't will bear : 
Than Fame more fair , than Peace more void of Strife , 
Than Gain more gainful , Life has lesle of Life . 
And with this Thought support your sinking Mind , 
That he 'll in 's Trade sufficient profit find , 
Who has for Temporal Loss Eternal Goods consigned . 
But what in Love does so much pains require ? 
Does the ignoble part draw forth desire ? 
That which our Eyes discern , and Fingers feel ? 
Must this be cultivated with such Zeal ? 
This can't deserve all that is squandered thus , 
The Soul , 't is evident , is all of us . 
These Offices he woefully mispends , 
Who ought beyond the Soul in Love intends : 
Does it in meeting , talking , laughing , lie ? 
This they may do who ne'er its force did try . 
Is 't the same Studies , Counsels , Joys t' approve ? 
Ill Men do this , yet who can say they love ? 
Is 't liberally to give of fortune 's store ? 
Their love 's as rich who beg from door to door . 
what 's all Man's duty they at home may view , 
Souls are Love's Subjects , and its Objects too . 
To guide the Deiform immortal Souls , 
Whose sinful Wander Satan here controls ; 
This is a work which truly Love becomes , 
The best Account of our entrusted Sums . 
Christ who twice sent the Crowd well fed away , 
With Bread of Life feasted their Souls each day ; 
Showing by an Example disesteemed , 
That those should the least benefits be deemed , 
Which turn to Fat , to Wealth , or pompous Train , 
Vain in themselves , in their Effects as vain . 
Those are the noblest instances of Love , 
Which cure Affections , & Man's minds improve . 
They cannot love , I 'll own , who'r given to spare , 
For 't is attended with the Body's care : 
Nor can the Wicked , who neglect the Mind : 
Their cost on Bodies they will useless find ; 
The Gift is lost , which ha'nt good counsel joined . 
True Love and Probity are always Twins , 
Neither alone increases , or begins : 
Leave loving , and your Probity is gone ; 
Leave Probity , and what is Love alone ? 
In proper Offices how can it shoot , 
Which thus lies withered at the very Root ? 
The bad to each other Pleasures may endear , 
Cheerful and entertaining they appear ; 
But soon the Sky is clouded , now so clear . 
In Love ill-founded , and maintained with Sin , 
Soon Weariness , and then Contempt begin ; 
True love 's more permanent , a Ray Divine , 
Shot down from Heaven , moves thither , there shall shine : 
Thither delights to lead the happy Friend , 
Afraid of all things that to ill may tend : 
Each Day improves the Solace of this Love , 
An Incoation of the State Above . 
OH happy end of Love , worthy our pains ! 
When thus Inhabitants for Heaven it gains : 
But Art is needful here as well as Will , 
If we 'd the Laws of Christian Love fulfil . 
When Christ to draw Men to this Love did seek , 
Come learn of me he says , for I am meek . 
Meekness the gentlest Art , sweetest of Charms , 
All Power to oppose insensibly disarms . 
Ill Vessels make most generous Wines decay , 
And good turns lose their value by their way ; 
The manner of the doing gives the taste , 
A Gift given sourly , but runs out to waste : 
Who without Temper the best Counsel give , 
But irritate those they 'd from ill retrieve . 
If Pride or Sharpness thus the Office blend , 
Who can expect to see a better end ? 
If therefore well to act what 's good you heed , 
And would have the best Offices succeed ; 
Love mildly , nor believe Love can reside 
In Hearts stretcht-out with Anger , or with Pride . 
Oh! but you 'll say , Religion lies at stake . 
Their Faith with God , & then with Men they break ; 
Pity'ing the Men , you prosecute their Sin , 
And this does from a Christian Zeal begin , 


With this pretence a Liberty you 'd find , 
For th' ebullitions of a bitter Mind : 
Your secret whisper , and clam'rous noise , 
Produce effects at which your Foes rejoice . 
Is this your Zeal ? did Christ in this precede , 
Who as thro' Crystal all Man's Hearts did read ? 
Did he expose the Sins within his view ? 
To open Railers he did pity show ; 
Past by their Scoffs who would not him receive , 
The lapses too of them that did believe , 
Thomas they his Spired did every moment grieve : 
To his Betrayer Lenity did show , 
Which might all Malice lesle than his subdue . 
How mildly he reproved ! pardoned how soon ! 
The quick and winning manner crowned the Boon . 
He never Indulgence gave to the least Lust , 
Yet was a Judge as Merciful as Just : 
With ill , though not permitted , yet did bear , 
Waiting a time when they Love's call might hear : 
Well knowing human Pravity , like Fire 
Concealed , will often of itself expire : 
But when exposed to Air , and Wind , it lay , 
The rising Flame devoured all in'ts way . 
Thus in faint Shadows I Christ's Love describe : 
If you 'll be his Disciples him transcribe . 
What! Christ's Disciples ! 't is a Name so great , 
With Glory the Relation so replete ; 
Titles to Crowns , and all that glitters here , 
Compared with this , fall far below your care . 
Ambition here is honest , worthy praise ; 
Nothing but Love can to this Honour raise : 
When at the Heart Love takes a quickening Root , 
Discipleship will in fair Branches shoot : 
The Man in every Virtue will improve , 
Distinguished by Protection from Above : 
And Love , indeed , is of a wondrous force , 
To carry on the Soul in Virtue's course . 
Called by th'apostle , who its Nature saw , 
Perfections Bond , Falfiller of the Law : 
It of a sudden mounts us to the Skies , 
And without Prophets , Miracles supplies . 
This like Elisha's Salt tinging the Springs , 
A Sovereign sweetness to the Fountain brings : 
Rivers of Pleasures thence come streaming out , 
Grateful to Men , refreshing all about . 
About soft Love how many Grace's dance ! 
How patiently does it Requests advance ! 
With how great Fortitude bears each Event ! 
How liberally both spends it ! and is spent ! 
How piously , while it does God regard , 
It acts what human Reas'ning reckon hard ! 
Routs , Riots , Quarrels , causes of Offence , 
To be in Manners stiff , perverse in Sense , 
In Love's unnatural , as for flame to fall , 
Or Sunbeams mix with Filth from th' Earthly Ball. 
This in a word the Christian's form is known , 
By this distinction to the World they 're shown ; 
From this the nature Christ requires they take ; 
This makes them , what nothing but this can make . 
Knowledge may want of Duty , Zeal be blind , 
And warmest Hope a disappointment find : 
Not so with Love ; it knows , performs , obtains , 
And what 's equivalent to all , it gains , 
The blessed assurance o' th' Almighty's Smiles , 
Earnest of future Pay , Reward of present Toils . 
How great God's sacred Family appeared ! 
How strong its Constitution ! How revered ! 
To th' envy of its Foes , and Satan's shame , 
When Heathens did their fervent Love proclaim ! 
Without the force of Arms , flourish of Arts , 
Or sly Contrivances , they conquered Hearts . 
Religion guarded with the Heavenly Aid , 
And armed with Love , vast Acquisitions made . 
But when thro' Wealth , and Pride , Faith grew exiled , 
To see the Christians arm the Ethnics smiled . 
All things from that time Retrograde became , 
The Date of Antichrist we this may name . 
Nor better Chances should those Servants meet , 
Whose Master does in vain command , entreat : 
While they prefer their slavish vain Desires , 
Before the generous Freedom he requires : 
then did the Church of Ephesus decline ; 
That Church which in full Lustre once did shine , 
When its first Love maintained lesle vigorous heat , 
That Sign St. john marked of the Spi'rit's Retreat , 
This may to others om'nous Aspect bear , 
T' avert the Omen well deserves their care . 
Methinks I hear one whisper , Look at home , 
Guard well the Ark , the Philistines are come . 


If so it is , How think you to preserve 
Religion , and the Altars where you serve ? 
Let 's worship God with undivided Hearts , 
And love each other , free from soothing Arts ; 
no other Counsel , Skill , or Troops we need , 
Love unarrayed did always best succeed . 
This private Men , and Churches know , for true : 
Thus with God's Aid we shall our Foes subdue , 
( If by soft Methods we can't win them all ) 
Or with like Glory triumph , though we fall . 
thou , Lord most merciful ! whose pity'ing Eye , 
Seas with what Needs and Frailties pressed we lie ! 
Prepare our Hearts to fear with Filial Awe , 
And duly mourn the Breaches of thy Law ; 
Give us at last , what thou dost first command , 
To love , that in thy Love we ever blessed may stand 
OF Divine Love.  

Mr. WALLER . 

THE Graecian Muse has all their Gods survived , 
Nor jove at us , nor Phoebus is arrived , 
Frail Deities , which first the Poets made , 
And then invoked , to give their Fancies aid ! 
Yet if they still divert us with their Rage , 
What may be hoped for in a better Age ? 
When not from Helicon's imagined Spring , 
But Sacred Writ , we borrow what we sing . 
Paraphr . I  

The Graecian Gods are known mere Fables all , 
The Poets who invoked their Aid , 
And seemed from thence to fetch that Fire , 
Which warmed their Verse , or moved their Lyre , 
Themselves those Deities had made ; 
And did before their own Creation fall . 
Out of their Brains those Gods did spring , 
What ever of Pallas out of Jove's they sing : 
Thomas these their Figments now are gone , 
And all their Altars trampled on ; 
Yet still they please us with their lofty Vein , 
there 's something in their Verse which ever shall remain . 
If fancied Gods such Heats could raise , 
As even to us a warmth convey ; 
With what exalted Numbers should we praise 
The Father of Eternal Life and Day ! 
How great Advantages have we to rise ! 
Who have the Image of the Heavenly Mind 
In Sacred Writ to us consigned , 
Where th' length , and breadth , and depth of Love Divine , surprise ! 
Mr. Waller . 

This with the Fabric of the World begun , 
Elder than Light , and shall outlast the Sun : 
Before this Oracle , like Dagon , all 
The false Pretenders , Delphos , Hammon , fall ; 
Long since despised , and silent ; they afford 
Honour and Triumph to th' Eternal Word . 
Paraphr . II  

As soon as Nature's outward Vest was made , 
Before it was embroidered o'er with Light , 
A large Foundation for my Verse was laid : 
The Beams of Goodness then expressed , 
Made even the Morning Stars more blessed , 
And filled that glittering Host with new delight . 
The Sons of God in Consort sang , 
And Anthems through the Empyrean rang . 
But when the Lamp of Heaven expires , 
And the account of Time is gone , 
Matter of Praise to God shall still run on , 
And Man shall join with the immortal Quires . 
The Devil , in Delphic Oracles admired , 
While with Events their doubtful Sense complied , 
At God's bright Word embodied , soon retired , 
Forced in his own Abyss his Head to hide : 
Yet thither did its Influence descend , 
And in new Fetters bound the gnashing Fiend . 
The Progress of that Soul of Love , 
With all its Triumphs over Death and Hell , 
We have recorded from Above , 
In Transcripts which the Sibyls Leaves excel . 
Before these Oracles the thundering Baal , 
And all the Heathen Gods do fall ; 
For here the Spirit of our God does dwell : 
th' eternal Word , which spoke the Universe , 
Affords the hallowed Theme of my aspiring Verse . 
Mr. Waller . 

As late Philosophy our Globe has graced , 
And rolling Earth among the Planets placed : 
So has this Book Entitled us to Heaven , 
And Rules to guide us to that Mansion given ; 
Tells the Conditions how our Peace was made , 
And is our Pledge for the great Author's Aid . 
His Power in Nature's ampler Book we find : 
But the lesle Volume does express his Mind . 
Paraph. III  

Some late Philosophers raise Earth to Heaven , 
While it they amongst the wand'ring Planets place : 
But Heaven to Earth extended is by Grace , 
Not only in a fair description given , 
For Faith to feast upon 
( Such as our finite Sense can bear ) 
Of the unbounded Pleasures there , 
Which of itself is some Fruition : 
But th' emanations of the Light Divine , 
Which in the Gospel shine , 
Make out our Title to that bliss , 
Where God himself circled with Glory is . 
Invite and Led us to the promised Land , 
And are an earnest Penny given in Hand , 
Of that most gracious Aid , 
By which God love's to perfect what he made : 
For Human Breast he never would fire , 
With thoughts of Immortality , 
But with design to crown desire , 
Which he himself had raised so high . 
The Works of the Almighty's Hand , 
In Nature's massy Book recorded stand : 
But that great Mind , 
Which those stupendious Works designed , 
In the lesle Volume is expressed ; 
The Footsteps of our God are there confessed ; 
Where Mercy ruling over all his Works we find . 
Mr. Waller . 

This Light unknown , bold Epicurus taught 
That his blessed Gods vouchsafe us not a thought , 
But , unconcerned , let all below them slide , 
As Fortune does , or Human Wisdom guide . 
Religion thus removed , the Sacred Yoke , 
And Band of all Society is broke . 
What use of Oaths , of Promise , or of Test , 
When Men regard no God but Interest ? 
What endless Wars would jealous Nations tear , 
If none Above did Witness what they swear ? 
Sad Fate of Unbelievers , ( and yet just ; ) 
Among themselves to find so little trust ! 
Were Scripture silent , Nature would proclaim , 
Without a God , our Falsehood and our Shame . 
To know our Thoughts the Object of his Eyes , 
Is the first step towards being good , or wise . 
For though with Judgement we on things reflect , 
Our Will determines , not our Intellect . 
Slaves to their Passion , Reason Men employ 
Only to compass what they would enjoy . 
His Fear , to guard us from ourselves , we need ; 
And Sacred Writ our Reason does exceed . 
Paraph. IU.  

When Man came warm from his Creator's Hand , 
Before he yielded to his tempting Wife , 
And Clouds had dampt the Breath of Life , 
How fair an Emblem of his Maker did he stand ! 
Not Aaron's Breastplate , nor yet Moses' Face , 
When from the Holy Hill 
He brought the Transcript of the Laws Divine , 
Did with such Glory shine , 
As Man before he fell from Grace , 
When him , his always present God , did fill . 
The Laws which Moses brought 
Into his very Frame were wrought , 
His Duty was Divinely taught : 
Thomas then his Heart no Table were of Stone , 
It might have kept till now the bright Inscription : 
But sensual Love did more with Man prevail , 
Than all the Powers of Hell could do . 
Did not the Woman woe , 
The lively Stamp of Heaven sure could not fail . 
Against all other Ills Man might provide ; 
Who could suspect a Dart from his own Side ? 
Or a foul Asmodeus with a Bride ? 
From his own Rib , dressed by an Hand Divine , 
So very beautiful , so wondrous fine , 
How could he Ruin fear ? 
But such Divinity below , 
Man from his unseen God did bear , 
Who Ignorance of his Duty choose , for what he there did know . 
v.  

God's Spirit thence became estranged , 
The kind Familiar with Regret withdrew , 
Man's Heart & Countenance were so much changed , 
That his own handy work God hardly knew : 
Yet still the Beams of Light Divine 
God did not to his Heaven confine ; 
Where ever the Holy Patriarches went 
It's welcome Warmth was lent . 
That which to Israel's chosen Race 
A Pillar was of Fire , 
Leading them o'er the Scorching Plain ; 
Until the Son of God was slain , 
Far from their Tents did never retire ; 
But still in various ways God showed his stinted Grace ; 
But when the stubborn jews 
Did the last proffer of that Grace refuse , 
Whereby he did them his peculiar People choose ; 
Eternal Love broke from its narrow bound , 
And visited the cheerful World around ; 
It Lighted up in every Breast 
That Candle of the Lord , 
Reason , which soon those Truths confessed , 
Contained in the Divine Record , 
Which did the vain Disputers of the World confound . 
VI  

Had Epicurus once beheld 
So much of God below , 
As Holy Writ does show ; 
It had his dangerous Errors quelled : 
He could not then have thought that Chance , 
Had made the World through Atoms lucky dance : 
And that th' Eternal Power had left to Fate , 
What he did neither order nor create . 
Had this Philosophy prevailed , 
Mankind ever this had failed , 
Or turned to Brutes , had on each other preyed : 
In vain were any Compacts made , 
When there were naught but human Power to awe ; 
Each would his Neighbour's Right invade , 
When Art or Force could free him from the Law. 
Religion is the Bond of Peace ; 
The want of that dissolv's Societies . 
An humble Love , and awful Dread , 
Of th' unseen Power , secures us here . 
While 't is a Judgement , and the Consequence , 
Upon men's Unbelief , 
( Which they deserve , and whence they justly fear ) 
What ever they have lies without Fence ; 
And if it fail , their Hopes have no relief : 
But what hereafter must the faithless Wretches bear . 
VII . 

Take but the thoughts of Heaven away , 
And Earth would turn to an Akeldama . 
Yet while Men hurried on to Sin , 
Something would whisper them within , 
And bid them mind a sacred Guest ; 
Which sighs and griev's to turn a Slave , 
Where Nature it an Empire gave , 
And till it conquers Hyle cannot rest . 
The first assistance which it has to rise , 
In the Belief of th' Godhead lies . 
Philosophy a God may find , 
Before it can discern the Ill 
Of all things that oppose his Will ; 
Or read the Lines he wrote upon the Mind . 
Self-love arising from our Flesh and Blood , 
Darkens the Characters of good . 
When present Pleasure court's the easy Sense , 
't is hard to think it sinful to comply : 
But in the thought of God a Charm does lie ; 
The Contemplation of his Purity , 
Affords a strong Defence . 
Our Souls we thence as by a Mirror dress ; 
And this does many'a wandering Thought repress . 
Yet after all uncertain is th' Effect , 
Since Will determines , not the Intellect . 
And Men , enslaved to passion 's sway , 
Use Reason but to progg for Appetite ; 
And carried on with warm Delight , 
Make the poor Captive Sovereign obey : 
Till Scripture working on our Passions too , 
Prevailing on our Hope or Fear 
( Those Tyrants which so domineer ) 
Laying the Misery and Bliss in view , 
As we the broad or narrow Path pursue ; 
Charms us into an happy State , 
To which for all Mankind it opens wide the Gate . 
Mr. Waller . 

For though Heaven shows the Glory of the Lord , 
Yet something shines more glorious in his Word : 
His Mercy this , ( which all his Works excels , ) 
His tender Kindness and Compassion tells : 
While we informed by that Celestial Book , 
Into the Bowels of our Maker look ; 
Love there revealed , which never shall have End , 
Nor had Beginning , shall our Song commend ; 
Describe itself , and warm us with that Flame , 
Which first from Heaven , to make us happy , came . 
Paraph. VIII . 

God's Glory , Heaven , that does his Love declare ; 
Love , which is God , does open lie , 
Exhibited to Mortal Eye , 
Within th' instructing Pages there . 
That Attribute which was our God's Delight , 
Before he made the Sons of Light , 
While the Immense , Three One , 
Did entertain Himself alone , 
And shall for ever with him stay , 
When there 's no Change of Night and Day : 
That Essence of the Deity , 
Which in a Living Flame , 
From Heaven to bless us came , 
Shall be the Subject of my Poetry ; 
That shall itself describe , warming my Verse & Me.  
Mr. Waller . 

The fear of Hell , or aiming to be blessed , 
Savour's to much of private Interest . 
This moved not Moses , nor the Zealous Paul , 
Who for their Friends abandoned Soul and all . 
A greater yet , from Heaven to Earth descends , 
To save , and make his Enemies his Friends . 
What Line of Praise can fathom such a Love , 
Which reached the lowest Bottom from Above ? 
Paraph. IX . 

they 're narrow Souls who seek their private ends , 
Without regard to Relatives , or Friends . 
Not so did Moses , and the Zealous Paul , 
Who of th' Extent of human Kindness stand , 
Examples to us all . 
Meek Moses was content to see the Land , 
Towards which his murmuring Friends he led , 
And then laid down his Aged Head , 
Singing his Requiem ; for his Work was done , 
As soon as Israel's Rest begun . 
But , as'tis thought , this humble Soul 
Much farther yet did reach , 
While he by Love was carried on ; 
And though by Faith he knew 
Of an Immortal Roll , 
Where he stood Entered with the chosen few , 
Ordained to be transported o'er , 
From off this horrid Shore , 
Against which so many Tempests roar , 
Unto a Land of endless Life and Bliss ; 
Yet trembling on the naked Beach , 
Under a careless Preterition , 
Contented was to lie , 
Left destitute of more than common Aid , 
To struggle for that blessed Eternity , 
Which the Decree of Heaven to him had certain made . 
X.  

St. Paul a Man of warmer Temper was : 
Yet this degree of Love he could not pass : 
Finding his brethren shut without the Pail , 
Deprived of that peculiar Grace , 
Which never th' enclosed within the Church can fail ; 
In pious Rant he wished with them to change his Place . 
But how much greater was that Love , 
Which the Eternal Word did move , 
Quitting the full Possession 
Of all the Glories of his Father's Throne , 
To take our Flesh , and suffer Pain , 
That he his Enemies might gain , 
And all their Obstacles to Bliss remove ? 
Who can his Thoughts to height sufficient raise ? 
Or what Expressions can he find , 
To suit th' Ideas floating in his Mind , 
When he this unexampled Act of Love would praise ? 
Mr. Waller . 

The Royal Prophet , that extended Grace 
From Heaven to Earth , measured but half that space ; 
The Law was Regnant , and confined his Thought ; 
Hell was not Conquered when that Poet wrote : 
Heaven was scarce heard of until he came down , 
To make the Region where Love triumphs , known . 
Paraph. XI . 

The ancient Prophets , that Seraphic Tribe , 
Who did Divine Benignity describe , 
While the Dominion of the Law did last , 
And Clouds the Sun of Righteousness o'er cast ; 
Had more contracted Themes , 
To influence their Holy Dreams : 
Through Heaven and Earth God's Grace itself had shown ; 
But Heil its Power had never known , 
And Heaven itself was darkly drawn , 
Till the bright Day did down , 
Which showed on Earth God's only Son ; 
He a free Prospect of that Region brought , 
Where Light , and Joy , and Love , do far exceed all Thought . 
Mr. Waller . 

That early Love of Creatures yet unmade , 
To frame the World th' Almighty did persuade . 
For Love it was that first created Light , 
Moved on the Waters , chased away the Night 
From the rude Chaos , and bestowed new Grace 
On things disposed to their proper Place : 
Some to Rest here , and some to shine Above , 
Earth , Sea , and Heaven were all th' Effects of Love. 
And Love would be returned , but there was none 
That to themselves or others yet were known . 
The World a Palace was , without a Guest , 
Till one appears that must excel the rest : 
One like the Author , whose capacious Mind 
Might by the glorious Work , the Maker find : 
Might measure Heaven , and give each Star a Name , 
With Art and Courage the rough Ocean tame . 
Over the Globe with swelling Sails might go : 
And that 't is round by his Experience know . 
Make strongest Beasts obedient to his Will , 
And serve his Use the fertile Earth to Till . 
When by his Word God had accomplished all , 
Man to create he did a Council call : 
Employed his Hand to give the Dust he took 
A Graceful Figure and Majestic Look . 
With his own Breath conveyed into his Breast , 
Life , and a Soul , fit to command the rest : 
Worthy alone to celebrate his Name , 
For such a Gift , and tell from whence it came , 
Birds sing his Praises in a wilder Note , 
But not with lasting Numbers , and with Thought , 
Man's great Prerogative — 
Paraph. XII . 

Love in the Bosom of the Godhead lay , 
Before the Creatures into Being rose : 
Through this to frame the World he choose ; 
He spoke , and passive Matter did obey . 
That Spirit which did on the Waters move , 
And with its brooding Wings hatched Vital Heat , 
Which spreading o'er the formless Deep , 
Did the World's outward Lines complete ; 
Was nothing else but mighty Love , 
Whence charming Symmetry did smiling leap , 
And through the gloomy heap , 
Diffused a grateful Light , 
That Banished Chaos with its horrid Night 
When the Proportions finished were , 
Love then the Features and the Graces drew , 
About the rising World it flew , 
Distinguished and adorned , the Waters , Earth , and Air. 
A Stately Palace it did build , 
And furnished to amazement every Room ; 
Curious Plantations round about it made , 
With Grassy Walks , which ever Green's did shade ; 
And Fruit-trees interspersed were , 
Enriched with Fruit , or gay with Bloom , 
Each Herb , and Plant , and Flower was there ; 
With many an Avi'ary 't was filled , 
And Entertainments for the Eye , 
Of all the Beasts that move , or Birds that fly , 
And Creeping things in vast variety , 
As if to Court some great Inhabitant , were laid . 
XIII . 

This glorious Scene , with more than Verse can sing , 
Being prepared by the Eternal King ; 
Man newly cast i' th' Heavenly Mould , 
From off his flowery Bed does rise , 
He casts about his wondering Eyes , 
And does with springing Joy behold 
th' unsullied Beauties on Earth's Bosom spread : 
But as to Heaven h●●ised his Head , 
And saw that Orb of Light , 
Which shot itself into his sight ; 
Unpractised Reason rose above that Sphere : 
then wheresoever he looked he found 
The presence of a God appear , 
Who from his Holy Seat touched Adah's Heart , 
And did devotion 's warmth impart , 
As Phoebus' Beams from Heaven do strike the Ground . 
what 's for Man's Use or his Diversion here , 
From God's mere Word and careless Fiat came : 
But Man , his Image , his own Hand did frame , 
By the Idea he is Counsel wrought ; 
th' Effect of calm Debate , and deepest Thought : 
He filled his working Breast 
With an Etherial Flame , 
And with the Breath of Life he had himself impressed . 
FOURTEEN . 

Him his Vicegerent o'er the World did make : 
And Marks of Empire in his Face , 
And Countenance erect did place , 
Which also Monitors might prove , 
To mind him of his Debt to praise that Love , 
From whence he did , what ever he is , partake , 
Next to the Angels , Man alone 
Is fit to aim at Praises due 
To that blessed Power , who from his Starry Throne , 
Surveys , and blesses , what through him we do . 
The Birds do warble out his Praise 
In pretty tuneful Notes ; 
They to his Glory strain their Throats , 
And even in us an Emulation raise . 
Yet here 't is Man alone can Tribute bring , 
Of lasting Numbers , and of weighty Thought , 
Unto the Altars of the Heavenly King , 
Who will no Service pay but what sound Reason brought . 
Angels which struggle not with Flesh and Blood , 
To whom it is their Nature to be good , 
Can be but what they are ; 
While Man with Reason rises by Degrees , 
Feels with his Love his Happiness increase , 
And still comes nigher Heaven till he at last be there . 
xv.  

Man , in his better part , 
Little inferior to the Powers Above , 
In full Fruition of Eternal Love ; 
Upon the Wings of Thought aspires , 
To warm himself with the bright Heavenly Fires : 
And with a wondrous Art 
Derives from thence 
Some knowledge of their secret Influence ; 
By Numbers sacred Magic views , 
The Heights and Distances which each obtain ; 
And the Directions learns to use , 
Of Leda's Sons , and Charles his Wain , 
On the unbeaten Paths of the tempestu'ous Main . 
XVI . 

But when the Lamps of Heaven enclosed 
Within the Sable Curtains of the Night , 
Afford no friendly Light , 
But leave him to wide Seas exposed ; 
Through Natural Magic , then succeeding to Divine , 
The trembling Needle proves a steady Guide ; 
As that does to its Pole incline , 
He finds where 's shattered Ship does ride . 
Thus Love , the Loadstone of alluring Love , 
Touching the tender Heart , 
Glides with a gentle trembling thro' each part ; 
And a safe Guide to Happiness does prove : 
Where this Magnetic Force prevails , 
There needs no Cynosure , 
The Passage to secure , 
As through Life's troubled Seas one sails : 
Yet no true Harbour can be found , 
Where all the Labours of the wandering Soul , 
Can with Success be crowned , 
Until it ever rest fixed to its radiant Pole.  
Mr. Waller . 

— But above all 
His Grace abounds in his new Favourites fall . 
If he creates , it is a World he makes : 
If he be angry , the Creation shakes . 
From his just Wrath our guilty Parents fled : 
He cursed the Earth , but bruised the Serpent's Head. 
Amid the Storm his Bounty did exceed , 
In the rich Promise of the virgin 's Seed . 
Paraph. XVII . 

That Love which takes the whole Creation in , 
Strange Paradox ! chiefly abounds 
In the new Fav'rites shameful sin , 
When Satan first began his Rounds . 
Without a Fall Man never to Heaven could rise : 
't is from the Brink of Hell we reach the Skies . 
Had Man in Paradise continued still , 
He never had unhappy been ; 
His Mind had always been serene . 
Not taken up with care to live , 
Or any Accident to make him grieve : 
Yet this would not have given the Soul its fill . 
That which brought Love to dwell on Earth , 
And from a Virgin have its glorious Birth , 
Did justly raise our Hopes to such Degree , 
That we may say , Bliss came from Misery . 
The Serpent's Poison brought the Spirit of Life : 
Nor could we ever have received a Crown , 
Unless the fatal Strife . 
Had brought the Son of God , to Raise us when w'were down . 
Mr. Waller . 

Thomas Justice Death , as Satisfaction craves , 
Love finds a Way to pluck us from our Graves ; 
Not willing Terror should his Image move : 
He gives a Pattern of Eternal Love. 
His Son descends to Treat a Peace with those , 
Which were , and must have ever been his Foes . 
Poor he became , and left his Glorious Seat , 
To make us Humble , and to make us Great . 
His Business here , was Happiness to give , 
To those whose Malice would not let him live . 
Paraph. XVIII . 

God's Image planted in the Human Breast , 
Sin had defaced , and Misery oppress 't ; 
Nor could they look for lesle to come , 
Than an Eternity of Woes , 
Who of themselves were thus become , 
To the Almighty Power perpetual Foes ; 
Yet for their sake the Darling Son , 
Who in his Bosom equal lay ; 
Through Love prevailing on his Choice , was wone , 
Here to possess an House of Clay ; 
And bear all Incidents to Mortal State. 
To Pescue us from our deserved Fare . 
Man's Sin did interrupt his Bliss ; 
As by Earth's Vapours Heaven beclouded is . 
Nor could the Throne of Glory please , 
With all the Happiness Above , 
Whilst us in Sin he weltering sees , 
An Object which might well Divine Compassion move ! 
Himself he humbled , to exalt 
Those who lay low through their own Fault , 
When first they did from Heaven , and Him , revolt . 
His only Business , while he sojourned here , 
Was Happiness to give 
To those , who would not let him live , 
Nor the Reproach of his unspotted Life could bear . 
Mr. Waller . 

Legions of Angels which he might have used , 
For us resolved to perish , he refused : 
While they stood ready to prevent his loss , 
Love took him up and nailed him to the Cross. 
Immortal Love which in his Bowels reigned ! 
That we might be by such a Love constrained 
To make Return of Love. Upon this Pole 
Our Duty does , and our Religion roll . 
To Love is to believe , to hope , to know : 
't is an Essay , a Taste , of Heaven below . 
Paraph. XIX . 

In vain had all the Powers of Earth , and Hell , 
Against his Life conspired , 
Had he the Ministry required 
Of the bright Troop , made to Attend his Will : 
He suffered Men his Blood to spill ; 
And for their Sins a willing Sacrifice he fell . 
When from this Vale of Miseries , 
He might have gone directly to the Skies , 
And th' utmost Regions of Eternal Day ; 
Love nailed him to the Cross , & stopped him by the way . 
Shall not such Love as this constrain , 
To make Return of Love again ? 
Was Love for Love ever a Pain ? 
And shall our Saviour Love and die for us , in vain ? 
Hardhearted Man , who when his Duty lies 
In ans'ering Nature's most delightful Ties ; 
Cannot be soft enough to Love , and to be wise ! 
Love is the whole of Man ; 
't is Faith , 't is Hope , 't is Knowledge too ; 
't is an Essay of Heaven below : 
Who Love's most warmly is the truest Christian.  
Mr. Waller . 

He to proud Potentates would not be known : 
Of those that loved him he was hid from none . 
Till Love appear , we live in anxious Doubt ; 
But Smoke will vanish when that Flame breaks out . 
This is the Fire that would consume our Dross : 
Refine , and make us richer by the Loss . 
xx.  

The Great Man's Favour , or Applause , 
Christ sought not , but contemned their Noise : 
Did for Disciples take 
Men of low Fortunes , but exalted Minds 
( Where Love the heartiest welcome finds : ) 
Their Love in them the Object of his Love did make . 
Proud Potentates , with all their Train , 
Did unsuccessfully pursue , 
While Curiosity , or Hate 
Did their Inquiries animate ; 
Which better than themselves he knew : 
But th' humble Lover never sought in vain . 
Love gives assurance to the pious Mind , 
And does the Clouds of Doubts dispel 
From the glad Heart , which was a Smoky Cell . 
Our Dross is by this Fire refined ; 
And how much more of that we loose , 
The well-tried Soul the richer grows : 
How great 's the Price when naught but Love is left behind ! 
Mr. Waller . 

could we forbear Dispute , and practise Love , 
We should agree as Angels do Above . 
Where Love presides , not Vice alone does find 
no Entrance there , but Virtues stay behind ; 
Both Faith , and Hope , and all the meaner Train 
Of Moral Virtues , at the Door remain : 
Love only Enters as a Native there , 
For Born in Heaven , it does but sojourn here . 
Paraph. XXI . 

How blessed were our Earthly State ! 
How like to Angels should we be ! 
If we could lay aside Debate , 
And in Celestial Love agree ! 
Love which does even in Heaven preside , 
And there flow's in with Glory's constant Tide ! 
From whence not Vice alone must fly , 
But all the meaner Train 
Of Virtues must behind remain : 
Both Faith and Hope must die , 
While Love for ever life's in Ecstasy . 
It does but wander here from home , 
Not having where to rest its Head , 
' E'er since the Son of God was dead , 
When fair Astraea truly fled ; 
A Native 't is of Heaven , & mourns till there it come . 
Mr. Waller . 

He that alone , would wise and mighty be , 
commands that others Love as well as he : 
Love as he loved : How can we soar so high ? 
He can add Wings when he commands to fly . 
Nor should we be with this Command dismayed ; 
He that Example gives , will give his Aid . 
For he took Flesh , that where his Precepts fail , 
His Practice as a Pattern may prevail . 
His Love at once , and Dread , instructs our Thought ; 
A● Man he suffered , and as God he taught . 
Will for the Deed he takes ; we may with ease , 
Obedient be : For if we Love we please . 
Weak though we are , to Love is no hard task , 
And Love for Love is all that Heaven does ask . 
Paraph. XXII . 

Our God bears no Competitour , 
In Wisdom , or in Power ; 
But is so kind to make our Duty lie , 
In rivalling that Love , 
Which does from him its Fountain flow ; 
Whose Streams in us he will improve , 
Till we with him one Ocean grow . 
Perfection he would have in Love , 
And though our Mortal Powers can't mount so high , 
To reach the Nature of the Deity ; 
Yet he sufficient Strength inspires , 
Out of ourselves enabling us to move . 
Himself traced out the Paths he 'd have us take ; 
Suffered as Man , while yet as God he spoke : 
To show that Man may do what God requires . 
Where he commands he gives the Power t' obey ; 
And if to him he bids us rise , 
He readily with Wings supplies ; 
And guide's us on our way . 
Nothing is Man's but his Free Will , 
He of himself is impotent to Good : 
When our Good Will is understood , 
Assistnces Divine our Faculties will fill . 
We may obedient be with ease , 
For , if we love , we please . 
Love is the whole of us desired , 
we 're Objects which the Godhead move , 
When once our Hearts with that are fired : 
And sure 't is no hard Task to render Love for Love.  
Mr. Waller . 

Love that would all Men just and temperate make , 
Kind to themselves , and others for his sake . 
't is with our Minds as with a fertile Ground , 
Wanting this Love they must with Weeds abound ; 
Unruly Passions , whose Effects are worse 
Than Thorns and Thistles springing from the Curse . 
Paraph. XXIII . 

Love is a Deity in Mortal Breast , 
Working it up to full Perfection ; 
Nor can the Sacred Inmate rest , 
Till it the Man divest 
Of every surly Passion . 
It makes us temperate , makes us just ; 
Raises from grovelling in the Dust : 
Through that we are afraid , 
To violate what God has made : 
We hurt not others , not defile 
God's Image stamped on our own Souls ; 
But that , ( Alas ! too fertile Soil ) 
Unless sweet Love controls , 
The other Passions Earthy in allay , 
In their Effects much worse , 
Than Thorns & Thistles springing from the Curse ; 
Will run up too too fast , and bear a fatal Sway.  
Mr. Waller . 

To Glory , Man , or Misery , is born , 
Of his proud Foe , the Envy , or the Scorn : 
Wretched he is , or happy , in extreme , 
Base in himself , but Great in Heavens' esteem . 
With Love , of all created things , the best ; 
Without it , more pernicious than the rest . 
For greedy Wolves unguarded Sheep devour 
But while their Hunger lasts , and then give ' ore . 
Man's Boundless Avarice his Want exceeds , 
And on his Neighbours round about him , feeds . 
His Pride and vain Ambition are so vast , 
That , Deluge-like , they lay whole Nations waste . 
Paraph. XXIV . 

Man of a middle Nature is , 
And trembling stands betwixt two vast Extremes , 
Ready to fall to Hell , or rise to Bliss ; 
As Love withdraws , or yields its quick'ning Beams : 
That , to the envy of our Spiritual Foe , 
Array's us in pure Robes of Light , 
If that forsake us , we 're a dismal Sight , 
And into Scorn , and a mere Byword grow : 
The Devil can scarce vouchsafe a Look so low . 
But yet how vile soe'er we are ; 
If Love but shoot its generous Flame 
Through our complying Frame , 
We in the Eye of Heaven are Great , and Fair. 
Of all the Creatures here , 
The Human Nature's nighest the Divine , 
While love 's within the Shrine , 
Without it the remotest does appear . 
When Savage Beasts pursue , 
But while they 're hungry , or their Prey in view ; 
And never hunt about for more than Food : 
Man , boundless in his Appetite , 
Even in the Mischief does delight , 
And frames unto himself a Good , 
Which Nature never understood ; 
In laying Plots but to destroy , 
What he himself cannot enjoy . 
The ruin of the weeping Neighbours round , 
To Avarice , or the Ambitious Thought , 
Is a too narrow bound : 
A Deluge of Destruction brought , 
To take whole Nations in , 
And swallow up the public Peace , 
With  's a glorious Sin ; 
They hug themselves in such Contrivances as these . 
Mr. Waller . 

Debauches and Excess , though with lesle Noise , 
As great a portion of Mankind destroy's . 
The Beasts , and Monsters , Hercules oppressed , 
Might in that Age some Provinces infest . 
These more destructive Monsters are the Bane 
Of every Age , and in all Nations reign : 
But soon would vanish if the World were blessed 
With Sacred Love , by which they are repressed . 
Paraph. XXV . 

Love clears the Earthly Dregss away , 
Which would ferment within , 
Making us eager with tumult'ous Sin , 
Which brings our fretting Bodies to decay . 
Debauches , more destructive far , 
Than livid Plague , or bloody War ; 
In every Nation sway . 
Thomas Hercules might Monsters quell , 
And the Augoean Stables clean , 
From horrid Filth , and Beasts obscene : 
His Labours were much more confined 
Than Love's , whose Task is all Mankind ; 
The Place lesle foul , Monsters lesle fell , 
Than what Love cleanses , and subdues in Human Mind . 
Mr. Waller . 

Impendent Death , and Gild that threatens Hell , 
Are dreadful Guests , which here with Mortals dwell . 
And a vexed Conscience mingling with their Joy , 
Thoughts of Dispair does their whole Life annoy . 
But Love appearing , all those Terrors fly ; 
We live contented , and contented die . 
They in whose Breast this Sacred Love has place , 
Death , as a Passage to their Joy , embrace . 
Paraph. XXVI . 

When the first Clouds o'er Human Mind were spread , 
And Vapours from the Earth pressed Love Divine , 
Which kept , with Innocence , a constant shine ; 
Man's humble Confidence and Courage fled : 
Darkness and Terror seized his Soul ; 
He felt within a gnawing Pain ; 
An Omen , and an Earnest too , 
Of Death , and that ensuing Woe , 
In which he must for ever roll ; 
If Love resign him to a worse control , 
Leaving his ravenous Lusts to reign : 
Yet all the Anguish and Dispair , 
Which here the Wretch's Entrails tear , 
But a faint prospect show , 
Of what for him hereafter must remain . 
All other Comforts do with Love retire , 
't is that which keeps our Spirits up , 
And sweetens the most bitter Cup : 
And did not Grace renew its Fire 
After Man's Fall , all Travellers Below would tyre : 
Nor can they mount Above , 
But on the Wings of Love : 
That does with Comforts here supply , 
And carries us to Heaven when we die : 
whither we oft before in Flames of Love did fly . 
Mr. Waller . 

Clouds and thick Vapours which obscure the Day , 
The sun 's Victor'ous Beams may chase away : 
Those which our Life corrupt and darken , Love 
The Nobler Star , must from the Soul remove . 
Spots are observed in that which bounds the Year ; 
This brighter Sun moves in a boundless Sphere : 
Of Heaven the Joy , the Glory , and the Light , 
Shines among Angels and admits no Night . 
Paraph. XXVII . 

As the Sun Vapours , Love does us exhale , 
Does by Degrees refine , 
And make us all Divine ; 
Melting away what ever was frail . 
That which at first was cloud , 
And did the Lightsome Body shrowded , 
Will turn into that active Orb , 
Which never leaves its course till it the whole absorb . 
Whatever Spots may in that Sun appear ; 
Which guide's the Day , and bounds the Year , 
The Sun of Love , in Heaven its Sphere , 
Is with unblemished Lustre , bright : 
It here but a weak Twilight keeps , 
And Day through Cloudy Curtains peeps : 
What thought can reach those Raptures of Delight , 
Which do those blessed Souls await , 
Who freed from every Earthly weight , 
And all the Seeds of dull Mortality , 
In an Eternal Sunshine lie , 
Under great Love's transforming Eye ; 
Which works their Bodies to a Spirit'al Frame , 
And guilds them over with that Flame , 
Which does th' Angelique Host array ! 
That Joy , that Glory , that perpetual Day , 
Of which an adequate Ideae were 
Even Heaven itself Below , 
Does from the Beatific Vision flow , 
Of Everlasting Love , smiling from 's Starry Chair . 
Mr. Waller . 

This Iron Age so fradulent and bold , 
Touched with this Love would be an Age of Gold : 
Not as they feigned , that Oaks should Honey drop ; 
Or Land neglected bear an unsown Crop.  
Paraph. XXVIII . 

This Iron Age , the very Dross of Time , 
Love would with alterative touch sublime , 
And bring again the Golden Prime : 
Not such as lazy Poets idly feign 
In Phlegmatic Old Saturn's Reign ; 
While Nature , prodigal o' th' beauteous store , 
Required no Courtship to unlock her Heart , 
But like a Prostitute , and easy Whore , 
Did to each Comer all her Wealth impart . 
But though Dame Nature's more reserved and coy , 
And looks for Labour and the utmost Care , 
Of them who would her Favours share : 
And many after all cannot the least enjoy : 
Love , which diffused , is Charity , 
Would all Mankind supply ; 
While he who did successful prove ; 
( And here Success is all ) 
Being taught Humanity by Godlike Love , 
Would think himself bound to divide , 
To them whose Needs did call ; 
As much as to prevent his own Child's fall . 
A Plank cast out to sinking Men , 
bore down ill Fortune's unresisted Tide , 
With a rich Lading does return again . 
What solid Joy ! what sober Pride , 
From a good Act effective springs ! 
Nor Field , nor Traffic , such Improvement brings . 
A charitable man 's a God Below : 
And with his raised Head does touch the Sky : 
While others turned to Beasts of Prey , 
Upon the Ground in wait for Mischief lie ; 
Nor Pleasures more exalted know , 
Than what a Wolf enjoys tearing a bleating Stray . 
Mr. Waller . 

Love would make all things easy , safe , and cheap ; 
None for himself would either Sow of Reap : 
Our ready Help , and Mutual Love would yield , 
A nobler Harvest than the richest Field . 
Famine and Dearth confined to certain parts , 
Extended are by barrenness of Hearts . 
Some pine for Want , where others Surfeit now , 
But then we should the use of Plenty know , 
Love would betwixt the Rich and Needy stand , 
And spread Heavens' Bounty with an equal Hand ; 
At once the Givers and Receivers bless ; 
Increase their Joy , and make their Sufferings lesle . 
Paraph. XXIX . 

'T was want of Love which first gave price to Gold , 
When they to whom kind Heaven did lend , 
more than their Families could spend , 
And of the Overplus its steward 's made ; 
The Sacred Trust betrayed , 
And what they should distribute basely sold. 
This put the Sceptre into Fortune's Hand , 
And she who was despised before , 
By Man's consent a Crown Imperi'al wore ; 
With Life and Death put under her Command . 
Her Frown gave Ruin to whole Families , 
Without her Favour none could rise . 
While Men might takeout of the common Store , 
And no Man treasured for himself alone , 
Nor ought beyond his Needs esteemed his own ; 
None were unfortunate , or poor . 
Nature is bountiful , Man is not so : 
But when her flatt'ning Streams would flow , 
Enriching all the Plains below ; 
Men with their Damns divert her Course , 
And into narrow Bounds diffusive Nature force . 
XXX . 

All things would easy be and cheap , 
Did Love the Key of the great Storehouse keep : 
If here the Earth deceive the Lab'rers Toil , 
Another meets with more returning Soil . 
Famine and Dearth never from Nature came , 
She always gave enough for all : 
If to engrossing Hands it fall ; 
't is not the barren Land , but barren Heart , 
Which ought to bear the blame ; 
The Heart where Love did never shine , 
Or one compassio'nating Ray impart . 
Love would not suffer some for Want to pine , 
While others Surfeit with excess ; 
And turn into a Curse , what was ordained to bless . 
Love like a Favourite Minister of Heaven , 
That never to execute its Wrath was sent , 
But many he threatening Vial did prevent , 
With Power Divine of Blessing given ; 
Betwixt the Scramblers of the Earth would stand , 
And spread its riches with an equal Hand . 
He whose Endeavours did the best succeed , 
Would think his riches lay in helping others need . 
Mr. Waller . 

Who for himself no Miracle would make , 
Dispensed with Nature for the People's sake . 
Paraph. XXXI . 

The Lord of all things while he travelled here , 
Found the whole World was Cantoned out ; 
And nothing left for th' universal Heir , 
Besides a breathing Place i' th' open Air. 
Not having where to rest his Head , 
Or Table for his Hunger spread : 
With Pilgrim's Weed , and fare , wand'ring about . 
Yet Nature but his Handmaid was , 
Nor could have disobeyed his Voice ; 
If of her Stock he had but made his Choice , 
The Stewards must have let it pass . 
Nay Stony Hearts , or Doors of Brass , 
could not the winged Wealth have kept ; 
All things would to their Lord have gladly leapt . 
Were the Earth's Fruits not fit for taste ; 
Even at his Touch they 'd into Ripeness haste . 
A Miracle was nothing more , 
Than an exertion of his Natural Power . 
Yet freely did he rigid Chances bear , 
And , but for others wants , would not a God appear . 
Mr. Waller . 

He that long Fasting would no Wonder show , 
Made Loaves and fishes , as they eat them , grow . 
Of all his Power which boundless was Above , 
Here he used none , but to express his Love. 
And such a Love would make our Joy exceed , 
Not when our own , but other Mouths we feed . 
Paraph. XXXII . 

When th' utmost Stress on 's Human Nature lay , 
Through Fasting ready just to faint away ; 
While Satan o'er him did insulting stand , 
Hoping when spent he 'd fall his Prey ; 
He would not the least Miracle command . 
But when desire of Spirit'al Food 
drew to his Side the hungry Multitude ; 
Love soon engaged his Power Divine ; 
And then he was a God indeed , 
When he created Food unto their need ; 
And did by wonderful Production thousands dine . 
What ever he did while here Below , 
Came from the Principle of Love. 
Love was the Virtue which did from him flow . 
His Meat , and Drink , were to fulfil 
His Heavenly Father's Will , 
Of doing good to Men. 
If his Disciples we 'd ourselves approve , 
no Victory would yield us so much Joy , 
As taking from ill Fate Power to destroy 
Those , whom the Monster hurried to its Den : 
Bringing most comfortable Aid , 
To them were posting to th' Infernal Shade ; 
Worn out with wasting Woes , yet still of worse afraid . 
Mr. Waller . 

Laws would be useless which rude Nature awe , 
Love changing Nature would prevent the Law. 
Tigers and Lions into Dens we thrust , 
But milder Creatures with their Freedom trust . 
Devils are chained and tremble : But the Spouse 
no Force but Love , nor Bond but Bounty , knows . 
Men whom we now so fierce and dangerous see , 
Would Guardian Angels to each other be . 
Such Wonders can this mighty Love perform ; 
Vultures to Doves , Wolves into Lambs transform . 
Love , what Isaiah prophesied can do , 
Exalt the Valleys , lay the Mountains low . 
Humble the Lofty , the Dejected raise , 
Smooth and make straight our rough and crooked ways . 
Love , strong as Death , and , like it , levels all , 
With that possessed , the Great in Title fall ; 
Themselves esteemed but equal to the least , 
Whom Heaven with that high Character has blessed . 
This Love , the Centre of our Union , can 
Alone bestow complete Repose on Man ; 
Tame his wild Appetite , make inward Peace , 
And Foreign Strife among the Nations cease . 
Paraph. XXXIII . 

As Love decayed , Men sunk below their kind , 
Thence to Humanity they 're Strangers found , 
The Brutal part Superior to the Mind : 
Where generous Lions spare , they meanly wound , 
And their wild Lusts spread Death and Plagues around . 
The Hopes or Terrors of a Future State , 
Have with the most but little weight ; 
If they can solace here , they 'll leave the rest to Fate . 
wherefore 't was needful sudden Pain , 
And Punishment expected here , 
Should the bold Headstrong Bruits restrain . 
A Lion or a Bear i' th' way , 
Would stop a Passion in its full Carrier : 
And what Temptation could prevail , 
When all the Spirits sink and fail ; 
The Pleasure dissipated by the Fear ? 
This made the thinking part of Human kind , 
Who had observed each turning of the Mind ; 
And could the Wilder into Tameness stroke , 
Device , with Laws , the stubborn Necks to Yoke : 
With Spikes of Steel the Yokes were set ; 
Mars did not struggle more in vain , 
When caught in sooty Vulcan's Net , 
Than they to break what they themselves ordain : 
With Mulcts ill-habits , by degrees , are broke : 
But as poor Lunatic , that feels his fit 
From lucid Intervals , his Spirits alarm ; 
Does to those welcome Cords submit , 
Which may prevent his threatened Harm : 
Yet at full-tide of the Disease , 
Whatever keeps from Mischief does displease : 
So 't is with Man in yielding to the Law , 
Which does th' Impulses of depraved Nature awe . 
XXXIV . 

But Love all this would supersede , 
That is a gentle Law within , 
Which with sweet Force subdues the Law of Sin : 
Love's Votaries no Rigours need : 
All things are quiet where its Halcyons breed . 
A smiling Calm does smooth the Face , 
Where Love sits brooding at the Heart : 
Where ever it comes it scatters many'a Grace ; 
And does a melting Warmth impart , 
Which would dissolve the hardest Stone : 
But with what Radiancy it shines , 
When it has Female Wax to work upon ! 
Where it from little Coynesses refines , 
And in one Will the Wife and Husband joins . 
All Ties but Love are laid aside , 
duty 's a Word that would divide ; 
what 's asked in Love , was never by Love denied . 
A pleasing Symphony each other charms , 
As they go bound one in the others Arms , 
While Devils are chained , and Devil like Men , 
In loathsome Prisons lie confined ; 
And like fierce Tigers shut up in a Den ; 
With their vain Rave spent , sullenly grieve ; 
Where Love emancipates the Mind , 
The man 's as free as unpent Air , 
Yet can no more Love's Object leave ; 
When he has chose the good and fair , 
Than he to taste Joys unforbidden can forbear . 
XXXV . 

For working Wonders Love has mighty Power , 
Strange Transformations it can make ; 
They whose Delight was to devour , 
A different gentle Nature take : 
From Beasts to Men , from Men t'angellick kind , 
By that we Changes in an Instant find . 
Heavens' winged Ministers , sent out to guard 
The chosen few to Mansions there prepared ; 
Hardly more vigilant and tender prove , 
Than they who Metamorphosed are by Love. 
Love can Isaiah's Prophecy fulfil , 
Exalt the Vale , lay low the Hill ; 
Raise them that are Below , and humble those Above . 
no Man so high , but would rejoice to fall 
To a great Soul , who stands the Mark of Fate ; 
Yet , spite of envious Fortune , will be Great : 
And God himself to th' Spectacle does call , 
To see him , like an unmoved Rock , 
Stand the rude Billows empty shock , 
And dash them back into the Face of Heaven : 
Until , so well such brave Adventures please , 
God smooths the Surface of the raging Seas ; 
And let's him reach Love's Haven then with ease . 
Through Love alone our Happiness is given , 
Our Glory there , and here our Peace . 
And did this Rule , Wars would amongst the Nations cease . 
Mr. Waller . 

no Martial Trumpet should disturb our Rest , 
Nor Princes Arm , though to subdue the East ; 
Where for the Tomb so many Heros taught , 
By those that guided their Devotion , fought : 
Thrice happy we ! could we like Ardour have 
To gain his Love , as they to win his Grave : 
Love as he loved . A Love so unconfined , 
With Arms extended , would embrace Mankind : 
Self-love would cease , or be dilated , when 
We should behold as many Selves as Men ; 
All of one Family , in Blood Allied ; 
His precious Blood that for our Ransom died . 
Paraph. XXXVI . 

The Drums or Trumpets horrid sound 
Would not the boding Heart with Terror wound ; 
Nor would the Princes cloth themselves with Steel , 
( While they , than that , no more relent feel ) 
Thomas 't were to gain our Saviour's Monument : 
And , like the Ark from the cursed Philistines , 
To bring it unto Israel's happy Tent. 
Many brave Lives were lost in such Designs , 
Whilst subtle Men , wheadling the Heros in , 
Did unobserved to Empire rise ; 
These did some useless Laurels win : 
But they enjoyed the solid Prize . 
How might we pity such misguided Zeal ! 
How much these Heros would behind us come ! 
If we like Transports of Desire could feel 
To gain his Love , as they to win his Tomb. 
And if his Love could ours excite 
To labour at an equal height , 
With that which would embrace Mankind ; 
And grieves to see so many lag behind , 
For want of Love to Wing them to his Arms. 
Did we that Pattern emulate , 
Self-love would wholly cease ; 
Or else itself o'er Human Race dilate , 
While each another Self in 's Neighbour sees , 
Whose every Vein the same Blood warms ; 
That Blood which virt'ally was shed , 
An Antidote , as soon as sin 's first Poison spread . 
Mr. Waller . 

Thomas the Creation , so Divinely Taught , 
Prints such a lively Image in our Thought , 
That the first Spark of new created Light 
From Chaos struck , affects our present Sight : 
Yet the first Christians did esteem more blessed , 
The Day of Rising than the Day of Rest : 
That every Week might new occasion give , 
To make his Triumph in their Memory Live.  
Paraph. XXXVII . 

To make the World , and in it Man , 
th' Almighty Architect to Adore , 
Does lesle of Love Divine declare , 
Than his decayed Image to repair ; 
And when with Sins 't was sullied o'er , 
it 's former Luster to restore . 
Thomas the Description given us from Above , 
Of God's first Workmanship does strongly move ; 
And 't is so lively drawn , 
That even the first Days dawn , 
Seems to affect our present Sight , 
As if we saw the new created Light 
Just out of Chaos raise its beamy Head ; 
While , as the Hemisphere it smiling spread , 
In haste the frightful Shadows fled , 
And the approach of unknown Day , 
Dispersed the Doemons which here wall'wing lay : 
Yet the first Christians justly chose , 
To praise that Day when God from 's Grave arose ; 
Before his Rest , when the great Work was done : 
And thus each Week they celebrate the rising Sun.  
Mr. Waller . 

then let our Muse compose a Sacred Charm , 
To keep his Blood among us ever warm ; 
And singing , as the Blessed do Above , 
With our last Breath dilate this Flame of Love. 
But on so vast a Subject who can find , 
Words that may reach th' Ideas of his Mind ? 
Our Language fails , or if it could supply , 
What Mortal Thought can raise itself so high ? 
Despairing here we might abandon Art , 
And only hope to have it in our Heart . 
Paraph. XXXVIII . 

then let our Muse transported with his praise , 
Unto his Memory an Altar raise , 
And each Lord's Day offer devoted Lays . 
Singing and spreading out the Flame of Love , 
Until it touch the Flaming Seat Above ; 
Where in its Element the Soul shall rest , 
With the Reward of Love for ever blessed ; 
Love , the Ambrosia at the Heavenly Feast . 
Who can those thronging Images express , 
That fill the Mind intent on such a Theme ? 
We here must needs our Poverty confess , 
Where what we think is lesle than what we feel . 
An Angel's Hand with a Sun Beam , 
Might such a Subject trace : 
While we poor Earthborn Race , 
Despairing to describe its meanest Grace ; 
Contentedly may rest , 
Having this Deity within our Breast : 
Thomas meanly lodged , there it delights to dwell , 
If we cherish it with care ; 
th' Endearments passing there , 
no Tongue can tell , 
no Thought can reach ; 
The mind 's confounded when 't would dictate to the Speech . 
Mr. Waller . 

But though we find this Sacred Task too hard , 
Yet the Design , th'endeavour , brings Reward , 
The Contemplation does suspend our Woe , 
And makes a Truce with all the Ills we know . 
As Saul's afflicted Spirit from the sound 
Of David's Harp a present Solace found ; 
So on this Theme while we our Muse engage , 
no Wounds are felt of Fortune , or of Age. 
On Divine Love to meditate , is Peace , 
And makes all care of meaner things to cease . 
Paraph. THIRTY-NINE . 

Yet the Design , the bare Endeavour brings 
Reward , beyond the Crowns of Kings : 
The Swan can feel no Pain , that dying sings . 
And he who thinks of Sacred Love , 
Does with that Contemplation tune his Mind ; 
Nor can what from without does move , 
Disturb the Music he within does find . 
While that about the Soul does play , 
All Ills and Evil Spirits keep away . 
Not David's Harp with sweeter ease , 
Did charm the Furious Saul , 
And make his ravished Madness fall ; 
Than this suspends our raging Woes : 
We know not how we loose 
The Thoughts of what we were before . 
And , while that Harmony takes up the Soul , 
Nothing about us can displease : 
Love to itself converts the whole . 
We just are knocking at Heavens' Door , 
Being with all the World at Peace ; 
Just , just approaching to become mere Deities . 
Mr. Waller . 

Amazed at once , and comforted , to find 
A boundless Power so infinitely kind . 
The Soul contending to that Light to fly , 
From her dark Cell , we practise how to die : 
Emplying thus the Poet's winged Art , 
To reach this Love , and grave it in our Heart . 
Joy so complete , so solid , and severe , 
Would leave no Place for meaner Pleasures there : 
Pale they would look , as Stars that must be gone . 
When from the East the rising Sun comes on . 
Paraph. XL.  

With what surprise of Joy do we admire 
Infinite Love , mixed with unbounded Power ? 
The Flames all Lambent , which might well devour 
Us , who lay under the Almighty's Ire ; 
Till he the Image of his Love Divine , 
Scent down on Earth to shine ; 
And be a Leading Light , 
To them that groaped in gloomy Night ; 
Where Spectres of Eternal Death affright : 
And raise them to Love's Glorious Throne , 
whither the Soul may often fly 
Upon the Wings of Contemplation , 
Abstracted from its sordid Cell ; 
And that blessed Time anticipate , 
When free from every Weight , 
Nor subject more to Fate , 
We shall to live for ever die ; 
And leave our Inn Below , in Heaven to dwell , 
The noblest Rise , and boldest Flights 
That thitherward are made , 
Are by the Muse's Aid . 
Verse softens , and prepares for those Delights , 
Which Angels do in Numbers sing : 
Numbers , which raise the Soul upon the Wing , 
And to the Beatific view , 
Of Love's bright Face , do bring : 
Where Holy David singing to his Lyre , 
Sits with the highest of the Heavenly Choir ; 
Telling his Bliss in Verses ever new . 
The thoughts of Joys , so solid and severe , 
Aimed at in Verse by Mortal Poets here , 
Make meaner Pleasures shrink away ; 
As the lesle Lights , the Stars , when Phoebus brings the Day . 
FINIS . 





2 King. 2. 21.  

job. 38. 7.  