A Sermon , called GOD'S NEW-YEERES-GVIFT , sent unto England . Contained in these words . So God loved the World , that he hath given his only begotten Son , that whosoever believeth in him , should not perish , but should have life everlasting . joh. 3. 10.  





AT LONDON , Printed by W. White , and ▪ are to be sold by Y. james at his shop without Cripplegate . 1602.  

God's Newyears Gift , sent unto England . 

Contained in these words . 

So God loved the World , that he hath given his only begotten Son , that whosoever believeth in him , should not perish , but should have life everlasting . 

john . 3. 16.  



HE that writes himself 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the first and the last , signified thereby , that he is not only the eternal Word , but also the beginning , middle , and end of the written Word : yea , the scope of all the Scriptures . Search the Scriptures ( saith Christ ) for it is they that witness of me : Every line in them cries out like john Baptist , Behold the Lamb of God. The Scriptures are a Circle , and Christ the Centre , wherein all th●● prophecies mere . They are like y e Image of janus which looked forward and backward : So the old Testament behe●●● Christ to come , as Abraham saw his day , and rejoiced : the New , sees him already come , as saith good Father Simeon , For mine eyes have seen thy salvation . 

And as Christ is the contents of the Scripture , so the whole Scripture seems to be confined in this verse of my text . As all Joseph's brethren were frasted with variety , but Benjamins' mess exceeded them all : so all Scripture is profitable , but this most precious : All Scripture is tried Gold , but this is orient Pearl : So that here the Cuangelist seems to propound all the word in a word . If thy memory be short , here is a lesson as short as sweet : so that its doubtful whether the nuanticie of the words or their quality and worth be more admirable . 

These words are like precious jewels , containing great riches in a little room . Before we unlock the Casket wherein this treasure is contained . let us look back to the happy occasion that cast this wealth on our shores . 

The occaston of this comfortable Scripture was a conflict between Verity and Vanity . light and darkness , Christ and Nicodemus : for our Saviour being that summum bonins , that loves to communicate his goodness with his creature : that Light that would lighten every man that comes into the world , that Sun that makes all things increase and multiply , the Physician that seeks out them that are sick , the Shepherd sent to the lost sheep of Israel : his meat & drink was to infuse grace into men , & reduce souls unto God. When did he eat , but he broke the bread of Life ? When did he drink , but he opened the fountains of Grace ? When did he walk , but he taught the ways of God ? When did he rest , but he preached an everlasting Sabaoth , and happy jubilee to the penitent ? witness so many jour●●eses , so many Sermons , so many Miracles : and witness this present conference with Nicodemus . 

This Nicodemus being a better Lawyer than a Gospeller , one that with Paul was brought up at Gamaliels' feet , but never sa●e at Christ's feet with Marie : seeking for light in darkesse , comes unto Christ by night . 

What might induce this great Doctor to come unto Christ is as full of supposes , as far from certainty . Some think Nicodemus came to tempt Christ , and therefore cunningly extolles him , as the Wrestler lifts up his adversary , that he may cast him down : or as the Hyaena , who counterfeiting a Man's voice , seeks to destroy him . Some think it was a sinister influence of vainglory that drew this fantastic to Christ , as the Athenians into their exchange only to hear news . Some think Derision came to catch our Saviour in a trap , that so Rash-iudgment might condemn him . Others presume , that being affected with Christ's doctrine , he came to gratulate our Saviour , as the best sort of our bad hearers , turn their own profiting into the praise of the Teacher : But I think this lukewarm lover coming so by night , was more afraid of y e world , then affected with the Word , which he so praised : For Ver●● admirator virtutis , non horret Arist●ais exilium , non Socratis condemnationem . etc. Howsoever , this Spider coming to suck poison from Christ's wholesome doctrine , was at the length caught in his own net . For this plausible Doctor , as if he had the art of flattery , ●ippes his insinuating tongue with a triple praise ; whose Syren-voyce above all pernicious swee●eses in the world , tyckles the very heartstrings of man : Therefore Saint jerome cries out , Happy is that soul which is neither subject to flatteries nor flattering . And in Epist. ad Greg. he says : Nos ad patriam festinantes , m●r●●feros Syrenarum cantus sur●●●ure transire deb●mus . And Alanus saith , Quid ergo Adulationis unctio , nisi dom●●●● ▪ ●munctio ? quid commendationis allusionisi Praelatorum delusio ? What is the oil of Flattery , but the foil of Families ? What the poison of Praise , but the infection of Praelats ? But our Saviour being thus assaulted by this Siren , shows himself like the P●ylli in Africa , or the Mars●js in Italy ; who are not only themselves safe from all venomous Serpents , but have also power to suck the poison from others infected : So Christ , who knew that La●dar● a laudato , was vera l●us , would not applaud his vain praise : for our Saviour having got the substance , scorned the shadow : having in perfect action the possession of all Virtue's , refused the imperfect affection of Vain glory : Therefore Nicodemus was a fool to buckle the light Bladder of idle praise on his back , which was ordained to bear the Cross of humility : he that loves Virtue for praise , his mind is mercenary . We never read that Christ ever admitted in himself this poison of human praise , though she often offered him her painted Garland to adorn his Virtue's : whose perfection gave a tongue of Praises to his very foes ; and out of the mouth of Enure , have ●aled his commendations : But ●●nding in this blind Doctor fit matter for his mercy to work upon , like a wise Musician , he casts not away this ●arring instrument , but after the correction of his folly , gives him instruction in the faith , as the Physician first let's out the hurtful blood , and then ministereth wholesome food : For though the Bull be offended with red , and the best sometimes : are not mended with roughness : yet Christ knew a sharp rebuke was a sovereign remedy for Nicodemus . A child will easily grow with cherishing : but an old tree transplanted ▪ will hardly prospero without pruning ▪ Honey is sweet , yet it is sharp where it finds a sore . Though the bud●ing Rose perish with a man's breath , yet the Camomile must be ●rod on , to make it grow . He that is stung of the Asp , must have the infected member cut off . The Ape killeth her young ones with too much cherishing , and the jui● choketh her supporter with too much embracing . If Apelles should see his Venus blemished , or Protogenes his H●aly●us broken , surely the one would turn away his eyes , and the other throw away his Pencil : then shall we not allow Christ to be sorry , seeing his own Image so defaced through ignorance , and so spotted with error ? Yet Christ in his correction is like a kind Nurse , that whips her crying Babe on the coat , not on the carcase : and though he knits his brow , he knits in it a blessing : as the father holds an Apple in one hand and a Rod in the other . But let us first hear how Christ shakes his Rod at Nicodemus , roundly rebuking him for his blindness in a chief point of Religion , the mystery of Regeneration . 

OH Nicodemus , art thou a Doctor in Israel , and knowest not these things ? Art thou a Teacher is Christ his school , and hast not yet learned Christs-crosse ? How art thou accounted a wise man in Israel , being a fool in Religion ? There is no Wisdom but the Truth , in qua ●e●et●● et cernitur summum bonum . Solomon my servant , in stead of riches desired of God the Spirit of Rule . If this was his prayer , much more should it be thy wish , since he was but King of their bodies , but thou art a Corrector of souls . How canst thou teach men to eat the second death , which art so ignorant of the seconde Birth ? A Teacher should be Organon veritatis , the right hand of Truth , to minister to every one their food in due season . thou art an overseer in Israel , and art shamefully overseen thyself . Now Age hath snowne down Winter on thy head , those hairs which should be Heralds of Wisdom , show thee to be twice a Child . I would have thee as a newborn Babe : and thou art a Babe not knowing New-birth . I would have my Disciples to shine as lights : but thou art a counterfeit Diamond , made precious by y ● foil of Moses Chair , where thou art falsely set . OH Nicodemus , he must needs be the Devil's Doctor , that was never yet Gods Disciple . I appeal to thyself , Is not a small blemish in the face , more ugly than a great blot in the rest of the body ? He that com●●es himself , where should he look but in a Glass ? And he that corrects himself , on whom should he look , but on his Elders ? Though the Moon be dark , it shows no great danger : but when the Sun is Eclipsed , it signifieth death . If the blind lead the blind , how can they but fall ? Where the Ship-maister sleepeth , who fears not sinking ? And where the Shepherd watcheth not the Sheep go round to the shambles . thou being a Doctor in Israel , thy lips should preserve knowledge , and thy life should be the Laymane Books . If thy ●alt be unsavoury , how wilt thou season the simple : If thy Rule be crooked , how canst thou either direct the weak , or correct the wicked ? Finally , if thy light be darkness , how great is that darkness itself ? thou resemblest the hair be Empetron , which the nearer it grows to the Sea , the less salt it is : so thou , being a teacher in Israel , are a stranger in Israel . But why do I reprove thy folly , and not rehearse thy fault ? Dost thou not know , Ad veram sapientiam peru●nire non possunt , qui falsae suae sapientiae fiducia desipiunt , They shall never attain heavenly Wisdom , which hunt after it with human wit . The Hart brags in vain of his branched horns , because he wants courage : and in vain dost thou vaunt of Templum Domini . because thou want'st knowledge . They which would see perfectly , wink on one eye : so if thou wilt see the mysteries of God , thou must shut the eye of natural Reason . But no marvel thou art so dull : for as Cyclops exoculatus , manus quoque versum 〈◊〉 nullo certo scopo , so thy eye of Faith being out , thy blind Reason gropes in the dark , being too shallow a Pilot to guide thee into the mystery of Regeneration . I commend thee for thy skill in the Law , but condemn thee for thy blindness in the Gospel . The Seaman that escapes all ●yr●ess and shelves ▪ yet in sight of the Haven suffers Shipwreck , is counted no less foolish than unfortunate : and thou passing all the Labyrinths of human Learning , yet coming short of the knowledge of New-birth , art to be pitt●ed for thy fortune , and derided for thy folly . thou knowest I never allowed him that had all manner of knowledge , yet had not the mean of knowing . He that seeks knowledge , must note three things , Quo ordine ▪ quo study ▪ quo fine quaequ● n●sse opor●eat . The Order of knowledge is to know that first , which brings soon to the way of salvation : the Desire in knowledge , must be to love that knowledge chiefly , which most enforceth us to love : and the End of our knowledge , is not to win the praise of thyself , but to work the profit of others . But alas , that which should be the first in thy Conscience , is the farthest from thy Care ▪ that which should have possessed thy Love , is divorced from thy Liking : and that which should have been the end of thy knowledge , is the beginning of thy shame . Qui Epi●cop●tum desiderat , bonum opus desiderat : It seems thou desirest bonum , not opus ▪ the worship , not the work : the goods of the fleece , not the good of the flock : else wouldst thou not be ignorant in the very rudiments of Religion , and foolishly build without a foundation . Thy coming to me shows in part thy love , yet thy coming in the night , says thy love is but little : but I know the flame when it kindleth is mixed with smoke , and so is thy little knowledge with the smoke of ignorance : yet I will not quench this smoking Flake , nor break this bruised Reed : Though thou camest to me without business , thou shalt not depart without a blessing . As Abraham sent his servant with Gifts in his hand , so I will send thee hence with Grace in thy hart : and for thy three idle praises , I will repay thee three endless profits : hear therefore the nature of Faith . the depth of God's Love , and the mystery of Regeneration . 

Thus did our Saviour shake up this foolish shadow of a Prophet , this idle echo of his praises , this empty u●ssell containing nothing but y ● bare name of a Doctor in I●●ael : whose example if we moralise ▪ it teacheth us , That ( in God's matters ) the greatest Clerks are not the wisest men . Philosophers have great wits , but they are enemies to Grace : and the world hath her Wisdom , but it is enmity with God. Learning is a Lodestar , and the knowledge of ●onguess , is the key of Crueth : but if profane Learning turn Lucife● , and think to usurp Moses Chair . she must be thrust ( with the Parrot ) out of ●upiterss Parliament . If Ishmael mock Isaac , though he be the son of Abraham , he must be vanished : And if Learning ma●re Religion , though it be the gift of God , it must be abandoned . The Stars give some light , but the Moon must be Mistress of the night . As the poor Israelites●orrowed ●orrowed of the Egyptians all their jewels but to adorn themselves : so we must borrow from profane Arts all their ornaments , and with their spoils adorn the Temple of God : So doing , Learning and Religion , like two Twins , will live and love together . And thus much touching the occasion of these words . 

Having found out the ●ive , let us search for the Honey conteayned in this heavenly verse . 

GOD so loved the World , that he hath given his only begotten Son , that whosoever believeth in him should not perish , but should have life everlasting . 

john . 3. 16.  



These words contain a Deed of gift : which , for our better light , I branch into these six parts . First the giver , GOD. Second , the cause moving him to this exceeding bounty , which is here said to be Love. Third , the gift : his only begotten Son . Fourth , the party to whom this Legacy or gift is bequeathed : the World. Fifth , the fruit following this Gift , which is two fold : first a Ransom , in these words , should not perish : Secondly a reward , in these words , should have life everlasting . Sixth , the hand wherewith we receive this Gift , ( namely Faith ) whosoever believeth in him . 

CAPUT . 1.  Of GOD , the giver . 

First , The giver , GOD. The wealth of a Gift appears in the worth of the giver : and if the giver be ●●ce , the Gift is contemned : but if the giver be gracious in our hart , the Gift is as precious in our eye . While our Ships ride in ou● harbours , we regard them not : but when they return from the farthest Ocean , we look for great riches . If a Messenger come to us from a mean person , we give him mean entertainment : but if a Prince send his worst Servant unto us , we give him princely regard . Well , God is richer than the Ocean , his bosom is full of blessings : God is greater than a Prince , his kingdom is everlasting : And as his thoughts are not as man's thoughts , so his Gifts are not as man's Gifts : for as he gives without merit , so he gives without measure : he is excellent in all his works . If he love it 's without repentance : if he hate , his anger endures for ever : if he give , he powers down his blessings : if he take , non hab●n●●●●●●m quod habet , a●●eretur , he takes away all : He loves a cheerful giver , and shall we think him a fearful give● ? A poor man on a time begging a Groat of a King , the King snipt him with this answer , Non est Regium . If an ●●rthly Prince thus stood on his Gift , shall not the heavenly King regard what he giveth ▪ Christ telleeth us , that Bea●●us est da●e q●àm accipere ▪ it's a part of his Father's blessedness to give . And saint Augustine says , Benefic●um est benevola actio tribuens , 〈◊〉 ●audiun●ri●uendo ▪ A benefit or gift is a work of good will , that pleasures as much in the giving , as the receiver doth in the Gift . So then , if God's Gift be a work of goodwill towards man , we may measure out his beneficence by his benevolence : his work by his will , and his Gift by y ● joy that he taketh in giving . When Goods Love intends a Largesse , the gift must needs be great . The lower the Uale , the more rain it receiveth : and the unworthier man is , the greater Gods love is , and the richer his Gift . In a word , the excellency of this Gift appears in the excellency of the giver , whose perfection is such , as only silence must show it , while conce●t and reason ●ie in a trance through endless admiration . A Philosopher being commanded to tell the King what God was , he asked a day's respite : and when the day was done , and the King expected his promise , he asked two days : which being ended , he asked four days , and after , eight : the King admiring his slackness , demanded why he so abiourned his promise ? Because ( quoth he ) the more I think of him , the less I know of him . S. B●●nard saith , Quid est Deus ? Longitudo , Latitudo , sublimitas , profundum : longitudo propter aeternitat●m , latitudo propter ●h●ritatem , sublimitas propter ma●est atem , 〈◊〉 propter sapientiam : and therefore as God is wonderful , so are his gifts . 

amongst men in deed , the giver may be wicked , and the gift too . In the 22. of Numb . Baala●e was a wicked giver , and so was his gift which he offered to curse the ●●racl●tess . So in Acts 8.  Simor M●gus is a giver , but a cursed giver : for he thought with Gifts to buy the gifts of God's spirit . And such givers were the Pha●isieses , for they gave thirty pence to betray the Lord of life : But as judas received the earnest penny of his perdition , so they betrayed their own posterity to endless misery . In a word , the Devil himself is a giver , but a wicked giver : for he offered Christ all the World for an hour's worship : as the Pope gave all the Newfound World to the Spaniards , because they should worship him . But David tells us , D●m●● est terra , How shall the Devil give the World to Christ , that can not give himself an hour's respite from torment : his Thorn yields no such Grapes , his Thistle bears no such Figs , howsoever like a bragging suitor he boasts of his riches : Though he promise an Angel of light , he pays with light Angels . and shall have his portion with lewd Angels in hell fire . 

But God as he made all things good , so doth he give all things that are good . james saith , Omne bonum est De● donum , Every good gift , is God's gift . In ●eremic God says , There is not an Evil in the City , which I have not created : If God create Evil for a correction , much more doth he create Good for our comfort . He is like the good Father , that spends himself in providing for his son : or the kind Mother , which no sooner hath a sweet thing , but she gives it her child : or the cunning Artificer , who cares not what cost he bestows on his work , to make it more beautiful . So God is affected towards his creature : as he made all exceeding good , so he desire's the good of all , especially Man , whom he made for the Glass of his glory , and the Image of himself , to be his Son on earth , and his Heir in heaven : and though here Man is but Tenant at will , yet he sits at an easy rent , the bare debt of Thankfulness . 

The sum of this discourse is , seeing God is the giver of all Good , we must look for all good things at his hands : and desire nothing that is good , farther than it is God's Gift : For that which is Snatched from others , is the Devil's bait , not God's blessing . The world is full of such snatching Nimrods' , mighty hunters : for some hunt after Honour , some after Pleasure ▪ and some after Profit : And these three Hunters have almost hunted all Religion and Virtue out of our borders . But let them know that , Quaedam dat Deus misericorditer , quaedam sinit habere iratus : Whatsoever comes by Oppression , Tyranny , Bryberie , Simmonie , Usury , is not God's gift , and therefore no good gift , but a pledge of his anger . Therefore whatsoever thou possessest or desirest , let Conscience be thy Cater , and the Word thy Warrant : so shall the Transitorities of this life , be unto thee a Handsel of Heaven and an earnest penny of that Bliss , which the World never dreams of . 

CAPUT . 2.  Of GOD'S Love.  

Thus having brought thee to the Waters of Life , namely , GOD the giver , I will show thee the Wellspring of all Blessings , his Love to the World. etc.  

The persuading cause of this Gift , it 's here laid to be Love : God so loved . Quid est A●or ( saith Aug. ) nisi quaedam vita Du● aliqua copulans , vel copulare appetens , Amantem et amatum ? What is Love , but as it were one life in two hearts , one soul in two bodies ▪ the Fire which blesseth where it burneth , the Soa●her which no art can sunder , the Knot which no time can untie , the Hand which deskantes sweet music on the hart strings , the Cause which made God become Man , and the Virtue which makes Man like unto God : ( I speak not of that hellish Fire which makes men slaves , but of that heavenly Flame which makes them Saints . ) As Christ was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows , so this Virtue is adorned with the crown of Eternity about all her fellows : for Paul saith , that Faith brings us but to the Coffin , and Hope watcheth the Corse till the Resurrection : These two Virtue's are confined with our life , but our Love is refined by our death , and dwells with us after our glorification . 

But this our Love is but a shadow of God's Love , an Arm of his Sea , a Drop of his Fountain , a little Flame of his lyving Fire : neither in quality so precious , nor in quantity so spacious by infinite degrees . God loves without cause , our love is our duty : God loves us his enemies , we love him our friend : God loves without reward , our love inherits heaven : God loves us first , our love pays him back his own : God's love is fervent , our love is lukewarm : God's love is infinite , our love is little , like our knowledge , and low of stature like Zacheus : Christ must dine in our house , his love must shine in our hearts before we can reflect our borrowed beams , and love him again . The excellency of this God's love can neither be expressed by our tongue , nor impressed in our hearts : as it made the World of nothing , so the World is nothing to it : for it comprehendeth all & is not comprehended of any . Our Saviour here thought best to express this Love with a sic dilexit , to show us that his Father is even sick of love : his description is indefinite , because his love is infinite . Either Gods love is so deep that Christ could not sound it , or our reason so shallow that we cannot se● it . As the Painter that drew A game●non , sorrowing for the death of his daughter , ●●ew not how to figure his grief in his ●●●● , and therefore drew a ●layl● over it , thinking it impossible the gazer's idle eye ●●●●ld behold what the father's grieved hart could not hold : so Christ leaves that to our admiration , which understanding cannot attain . A holy Father would feign ●ym● at the dimensions of this Love , saying , Dilexit tantus tantillos , He a God of infinite majesty , loved us men of infinite mis●ri● : but this is obscurum per obscurius , for we know neither quantus Deus , the greatness of his Majesty , nor yet quantu●i nos , our grievous misery . In a word , as we cannot see the Sun but by his own light , so we cannot learn this Love , but by Gods own words . The Star alone must lead the Wisemen to Christ , and Christ alone must lead us to his Love. Now whereas he expresseth it with a Sic. So God loved the World. etc. a Father saith : This Aduerbe Sic , contains in it all Aduerbes of Love : as if Christ had said , My Father loved the world so dear , so vehemently , so fatherly , so fervently . etc. And Ber. on the Cant. saith , Deus ex se miserandi sumit mater●em , Gods own nature is the motive of his mercy ▪ then he that can explain God's Nature , may express his Love : whereof to affirm the one is impious , and to perform the ot●●● , impossible . 

This is that Love ( Christian Reader ) which in the zeal of God I commend i● thine endless admiration : this is the riches of his Grace , the chief of his Works , the sum of his Word , the shadow of Himself , the perfection of his Glory . This teacheth our Faith to stand , and our Hope to climb , and our love to burn : This cheereth our labours , & beareth our losses , and teacheth our sorrow to smile . In a word , to this exceeding Love , alone we owe our salvation : Therefore damnable is the Doctrine of the Church of Room , that teacheth us to err both in the manner and matter of our Faith : First , in the manner they teach us to doubt of our salvation . OH injury intolerable , to doubt of the Promise , where such a Love is our warrant : what more free than gift , or who more faithful than God the giver ▪ shall his Love give Christ unto me , and my unbelief thrust him from me ▪ Is the Truth like unto man , that he should lie ▪ or is his Arm shortened , that he can not save ▪ God forbid . This Gift is sealed with the blood of his Son , registered in the sight of heaven , witnessed by the holy Angels , passed with an oath to the World. OH Incredulity , the wit of fools , how many Blessings dost thou bar us from ▪ Christ could not work his Miracles , God can not show his mercy , where this monster ●urketh . Again , in the matter of our faith they foist in most dangerously a ●●●pe of their own Leaven : for God requires a Wedding garment to cover sin , they bring in a Menstruous cloth : he will have us build on his Love , they would have us justified by our own Labour : he will have us trust to his Mercy , they would have ●s trust in our Merits . Paul's whole Epistle to the Romans shoots only at this mark , to beat down the pride of Man , who would fain be his own saviour , to depress Nature , and extol Grace : therefore in the end he adds this upshot , So then we are saved not of Works , but by Grace . And Augustine saith , Gratia est nullo modo , quae non est gratuita omni modo , Grace is all Grace , or no Grace at all . Again he saith , Quisqui● tibi emunerat M●n●t● sua , quid tibi emunerat , nisi Munera tua ? Again , Uis excidere gratia ? ●acta merotatia . Our very Faith as it 's a grace in us , is beholding to Grace ▪ it s●ues a● it 's a hand ●o lay hold on Christ , not as it 's a virtue and a work : For all works must humbly be cast at Christ's feet with Marry , and there meditate on his mercy : they must not be busy with Martha in the matter of our justification . As God said to Paul , My Grace is sufficient for thee ▪ so I say to all , God's Love is sufficient for you : this Love made you , when you were nothing : and this Love must save you , now you are worse than nothing . Let the Papists cloth themselves in the rags of their own Righteousness , and the lews trust to the●● Templum Domini , and the Heathen drag of their painted Virtue's ; ( which Augustine calls splendida peccata ) but let us only triumph in this Love of God , and esteem it the strength of our ▪ salvation . 

Thus having discovered the rech treasure of God's Love , let us know our duty , that we may be accounted worthy to win and to wear it . S. Aug. Lib. de Anima et Spiritu , seems to study for this duty , saying : Miser ego , quantum deberem diligere Deum meum qui me fecit cúm non er●m , redemit , cum per●eram , etc.  OH sinful wretch , how shall I requite the rare love of God , who created me of nothing , and redeemed me being worse than nothing . etc. And after , having found this duty out , he teacheth it to the World , Si non impendere , at rependere deb●mus , If we will bestow no Love upon God , yet let us repay his Love , which he hath showed first . The World cries shame upon an ungratfull person . If thou shouldst travail into a strange Country , and there fall into the hands of the ●heevess , and in mere compassion of thy misery , the King of that Country should set th●e free again , giving thee life and liberty , what would the World think ? yea , what then wouldst thou esteem of thyself , if thou shouldst prove unthankful to so good a Prince ? We are all Strangers in the world , and Passengers from earth to heaven : now in our journey we meet with the World and the Devil , and these rob us of all grace , these wound us & leave us for dead : now God of his exceeding mercy finds us out , and sends his Son that good Sama●itane , to pour the oil of Grace into our Wounds , and to mount us on the back of his Merit , and so carry us to the Inn of our rest , the joys of Heaven . OH Love , beyond all love , how much thou art ? OH blessed God , teach us the depth of thy Love , that we may know the debt of our thankfulness . thine endless Blessing hath made us bankruptes , for we are not able to repay the interest of thy Love. If we proffer our goods , alas we received them of thee : if we offer our lyves , they are redeemed by thee : Surely this shall be our thanks , the Remembrance of thy Mercy : And since thy blessed Son hath taught us , That the loving of thee , is the keeping of thy Commandments , we will labour to be all keepers : as we have spent our time in the service of the World , the Flesh , and the Devil , so will we spend the remnant of our days in the rebuke of sin , and the recording of thy Love. And since the Love of so worthy a creature as man , is too costly a climent to join earth to earth , we abandon all earthly desires , and freely give the● our hearts , and betrothe our Love to thine . 

Dear GOD , by the fire of thy spirit , draw up our affections to thee , divorce us from the liking of the World , and marry us to the love of thy Son : Let us light our Candle at thy Love , and learn by thy endless mercy , never to end our thankfulness , till death translate us from this ●ale of tears to mount-sion , where our love shall join us to thee eternally . 

CAPUT . 3.  Of the Gift , CHRIST . 

Now are we come to the Gift itself , the greatest that ever was , whether we respect the bounty of God , or the blessing of Man : for what could God give greater than himself ? or what could Man receive better than his salvation ▪ He ●●●● given his only begotten Son . This blesse● Gift is it that made Abraham rejoice , and the Angels sing , and john Baptist dance in his mother's belly : this is able to make the World wax young again , if Grace would open her eyes , and Wisdom teach her to see her own nakedness , and the riches of this Garment sent unto her . As the Saints in heaven follow the Lamb where so ever he goeth , so all the Blessings of the Earth follow Christ th●● Gift , where so ever he goeth : for , Habenti dabitur , He that hath this gift , shall have all other gifts , yea , he shall have the giver to : for Christ saith , He that receiveth me , receiveth him that sent me . And Ambrose saith , Omnia habemu● in Christo , sia volu●r●●urari desider as Medicu● est : si f●bribus aestuas , sons est : si gravaris Iniquita●e , justitia est : si indiges a●xilio , virtus est : si mortem times , vita est : si tenebra● sugis , lux est : si Caelum desideras , via est : si Cibum quaeris , alimentum est . etc.  

( He hath given . ) God did not lend his Son , nor sell him , but he gave him to us : Herein appears the riches of his Mercy , and the greatness of our poverty : he did not sell him , we were not able to buy him , but he gave him : which shows us to be Beggars & Bankrupts , and that God must for pity give us a Saviour frank and free , when we had neither means to deserve him , nor grace to desire him . ( His only begotten Son . ) He gave us not an Angel , nor a Servant , nor a Creature , but his Son . The name of a Son is music in the ear of a Father : and the life of a Child is more precious in y t Parents eye , than their own safety : Many Parents to save their Son's life , have willingly spilt their own : examples hereof we have in profane , & sacred Scriptures , we will take a handful from a heap . In Gene. 37. when good father jacob heard of the supposed death of his son , ( his wicked children giving a false fire to his fear ) he was smitten with sorrow , rivers of tears gushed out , and his hart bled at his eyes , for the supposed slaughter of joseph : his affection to his son was too hot to admit the cold comfort of his other children : he that had wrestled with an Angel , could not wrestle with this affection , and therefore in the grief of a father , he sets down this resolution : joseph my son , is surely to●●e in pe●●eses , and in my son myself was torn : the claw of that Beast hath r●ut my bleeding hart , and his cruelty hath killed two in one . OH my son , my life was shut in thy looks , which now is shaken in thy loss : I made thee a Ceate of many colours , to show that thou wast y ● Rainbow pledge of my peace : but lo the beauty of my Rainbow is rend , and in stead thereof this bloody Meteor appears , showing the death of my joy , the devowring of my son . The earth is made to cove● the root , not to contain the branch : I am the withered root my Son , and thou the branch , whom untimely death ●ath dropped . Why should the ●r●ue b● d●●k● with gr●●ne boughs , that was made for grey hairs : If Children prede●case their Parents , we are their offspring , and t●●r none of ou●ss . Well since Comfort ●ill not be my guest , ●ri●f● shall ●●● Companion ▪ and seeing ●● son forsake●●●● in my life , I will mistaking in my death , for nothing but So●●●● shall bring my gray-head to the ●rau● . T●●s a good Father mourned for a gracious Son : But will you hear a loving Parents mo●ne for a lewd Child ? In the 2 Sam. 18. when God purposed to chastise David , he made the Son to whip the father ▪ for Abshalom , that by name should have been his father's joy , by nature proved a pa●ricide , and sought to depose his own sire : but God having sufficiently humbled David his child , threw the rod in the fire , and brought a judgement upon Abshalom , which cost him his life : Notwithstanding , David being moved with the good affection of a father , more than the bad condition of his son , was so far from rejoicing in Abshalom● death , that it almost cost him his own life . OH Abshalom my son ( quoth he ) would God I had died for thee ; oh Abshalom my son , my son : But God here is neither like jacob lamenting a good son , nor David bewailing a wicked child : he resembles good Abraham , who willingly sacrificed his son ●●aake . 

This was much to give a Son yet as if this were not enough to express God love , the holy Ghost addeth his only begotten Son , he gave not an adopted Son , as Abraham offered a Ram in stead of Isaac . But his own Son : And herein appears his perfect justice , a blessed precedent to all justiciaries . In all God's actions this virtue sways : though his mercy be about all his works , yet Mercy and justice must kiss together . The dearest drop of Christ's blood must be shed , before God's justice be left unsatisfied . 

Nay this was not enough to satisfy God's Mercy , his Love mounts a degree higher , and further it cannot ascend . He gave his only begotten Son . When the world could not yield the price of our Redemption , he searched his own bosom for a Saviour , and gave us his only Son . If God had many Sons his mercy had been meaner , and his Love had seemed less , but he gave us not one Son of many , but one and all , his only Son : for whose sake he spared not his Angels , his delight , his bosom friend , the Image of himself , for the ransom of the world . 

OH love beyond all love , how much thou art ! A holy Father in admiration of this Love cries out , quam Dives ●s in mis●r●cordia , quam magnificus in iusticia , quam munificus in gratia , Domine Deus noster ! Again , Passiotua Domine , jesu , ultimum est refugium , singular remedium : deficiente sapientia , justitia non sufficient , sanct●tatis succumbentibus meruis illa succu●r●● , cum enim defecerit Virtus mea , non Conturbor , scio quid faciam , Poculum salutaris accipiam . etc.  

The instruction that we must learn from the consideration of this unspeakable Gift Christ , is two fold : First , we are taught to return our Love again , as Aug. says , Sinon amare , saltem redamare debemus : As God hath given us his only Son , so we must show our reciprocal Love to God , and for his Son , give him ourselves : as he hath given us wealth , we must bestow our wealth on him again : as he hath given us liberty , honour , children , long life , knowledge , wisdom , courage , etc. these must all weight on him , and do him honour and service : Thus we must give him Love for Love , again . 

Second use of God's unspeakabe Bounty , is to teach us to love our brethren . Christ teacheth us this lesson for his Love , saying : I have given you an example how to love one an other . brethren must be united in the bond of mutual Love , like S●●us the 〈◊〉 Faggot : for the unity of Brothers is , ●●ce qua● 〈◊〉 , exceeding joy to all the Saints . But alas , let us see what Lovers and what Giver , our wicked age doth afford ? When I study upon this Dueve , I find four sorts of Givers : the first , and the worst sort , have the Hand to give , but not the Hart to grant : of whom I may say as Christ said , better this Hand were cut off and they were as poor as Irus , then with their rusting riches to be cast into Hell. These are the Mammonistes of our age , whose Soul lies creasured with their rusting Peuce : who are more unuiercitull than the Devil , for he would have Christ turn Stones into Bread , but these men ●urde Bread into Stones , ●●en the Bread of the poor into Stone-walles , or else spend it on their accursed Lusts , forgetting Mercy : therefore damnation attends them . The second sort have the Hart , but not the Hand : whose Mite God acceptes above all the Ours of the Wealthy , and takes their Love for their largesse . The third sort are such as have neither Hart nor Hand in this duty : and these are poor men every way : for he that can bring forth neither good Work nor good Will , is a dead member in Christ's body , and shall be cut off . The fourth sort , have both Hand and Hart ; and these are they that walk in ●●oth●●ly Love , these walk worthy of th●s 〈…〉 Christ and shall have their deeds of mercy 〈…〉 that sweet ●●●uest So●● ▪ 〈…〉 : for I was hungry and you gave me meat etc.  

FINIS . 

