THE Condemned Man's REPRIEVE , OR God's Love-tokens , flowing in upon the Heart of WILLIAM BLAKE , a penitent Sinner , giving him Assurance of the pardon of his Sins , and the Enjoyment of Eternal Happiness , through the Merits of Christ his Saviour . Recommended by him ( being a condemned Prisoner for Manslaughter within the Statute ) unto his Sister , and bequeathed unto her as a Legacy . 

Galathians 6. 14. 17.  

God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord jesus Christ , by whom the world is crucified unto me , and I unto the world . 

LONDON , Printed by Richard Bishop , Anno Dom. 1653.  

The condemned Man's Reprieve . 

God's tokens of Love , sealed and locked up in the heart of a Saint , by the Spirit of God , with the key of Love : The riches of God's grace flowing in upon the soul of a Saint , expressed with joy and thankfulness to his ability , finding himself unable to speak what sweet taste , what infinite consolation , he finds in Christ jesus . 

What tempests ! what fiery darts of Satan have been thrown at me ! what wounding of conscience ! what flames of Hell fire flashing in my face upon remembrance of my sins , which I have acknowledged to my God , in prayers and tears ! how long did I pray and desire others to pray for me , before I could find comfort ! how long did the Devil lead me away captive in sins which I knew not to be sin , when I thought I had comfort , and it was no true comfort ! till thou OH my most lust and Loving God didst by the convincing power of thy Spirit , discover to thy poor creature his own emptiness , and vild condition by nature , I had both self love and spiritual pride within me ; how willingly would the Devil have posted me to Hell with those sins , hadst not thou , OH my God , humbled me , and made me see myself in the looking glass of thy Word , with thy Spirit , I was mere vanity , as the dust that fleeth away ! I confess to thee ( my most just God ) my repentance was not true , my sorrow and tears thou regardest not , because I was self , till thou threwest me down in myself , and madest me humble ; I perceive thou delightedst not in me , nor had I such delight as now , ( I bless thy Name ) I do find ; and do here set down in writing to the praise of thy Name , to the exalting the eternal infinite mercies of thee my Eternal Loving God in Jesus Christ ; living in me to the sole praise of thy Name : how long was I under the spirit of bondage ! how long did I fear the grand enemy of mankind the Devil ! but Lord thou hadst compassion upon me when I was afar off , and how sweetly at last in the midst of tears , and groans , didst thou come and refresh my fainting soul with a still , low , but sweet voice , Son be of good choar , thy sins are forgiven thee : how often Lord hast thou turned my tears of sorrow into tears of joy ! what comfort hast thou given me in my prayers , when I found by faith in thee , comfort from thee ! how hast thou strangely , and powerfully , with faith in the Lord Jesus taught me to pray unto thee , with thine own Spirit ! how hath my soul often melted into tears from the apprehensions of thy Love , and many manifest tokens of thy Love ! thou hast put my tears into thy bottle , my heart makes an ekko , as thou emptiest they , so thou fillest it again , and every heart-tear sounds a heart-filling joy , Blessed are they that mourn , for they shall be comforted : o what a calm do I feel in my soul in my meditation of thee ! and yet Lord , when I look back upon the World , and my own natural thoughts and consultations with flesh and blood , what rough & tempestuous waves , do arise in my mind ! but Lord I trust in thee , and did I not constantly servently call aloud to thee in my prayers , ( Lord help me or I perish ) it were impossible I should be saved : and how could I find such joy in tribulation , didst not thou keep up my heart by true saving Faith in thee my God , in and through Jesus Christ the true consolation of my poor soul , in this weak creature ? 

OH my God , I cannot express thy Love to my poor soul , it is infinite ! I am but finite , I can but wonder , and not enough , thou breathest into me full streams of thy Love : how doth my soul earnestly desire to empty itself in thee ! the more I express to thee , the more thou fillest me , how lovingly dost thou refresh my soul with thy blessed Spirit ! and how blessedly my soul yieldeth to the love of thee my Love , by thy Love in me : my Love , my Joy what melody do I hear ! what sweet low music , doth thy Spirit sound in my heart ! OH that thou wouldst make it an Instrument , that it live yet till it breathe forth its sound , and praises to thy Name : name me for one of thy faithful servants to whom thou intendest to say , well done my good and faithful servant : Lord not my will , but thy Will be done by me thy poor , and unworthy servant , on Earth , as it is in Heaven , Lord I am thine , do with me what thou wilt , Lord let me hear thy voice , let me know it , that I may run willingly if thou call , presently let me be ready with my wedding garment , to meet thee sweet Jesus , if thou bid me stay , give me patience , let thy Will be done by me , in me , with me , do what thou wilt Lord I am thine , command willingness in me to obey thee in all thy Commands , command what thou wilt my faith is such in thee , thou wilt enable me ; thou wilt not forsake them that trust in thee , Lord my trust is wholly in thee , Lord thou knowest I am feeble , and weak , but thou art strong and powerful , o my God uphold me with thine Almighty power , that I fall not from thee : I am vild and impure , mutable , but o my God thou art holy , and just , pure , unchangeable immutably good , my chiefest good ; my God I am uncertain , but thou art certainly my most mercyful God : my ways are not like thy ways : OH that thou wouldst direct my feet according to the revealed Will of thee my God , but ( OH my God ) I have not kept thy Statutes , I have walked out of the way in the Wilderness of sin , but ( sweet Jesus ) thou sweetly tellest me thou art the way , the truth , and the Life , I will therefore lay hold on thee , thou hast promised me thy Love ; I am thine , stay me , I am sick : thou art my life , comfort me , or I shall die , warm my soul that it cool not , cherish me my Love , my heart will else fail me , OH God make me constant , faithful , as thou art faithful , give me more golden apples of thy Love ; give , that I may give thee the praise of thy Love , give me yet more of the riches of thy grace , that I may be liberal to others , as thou art liberal to me , express more of thy Love to me , that I may extol thee in my expressions to others , who are thy Saints and Servants , who are part of my life , thou hast made us one in thee and thou art one in us , thou art the Vine , we but branches , OH make us fruitful , water our hearts , bathe our souls in the Ocean of thy Love , open the Fountain of thy Love , that we may swim pleasantly in the streams of thy Love , till we come to thee the water of Life , the head Spring of all our joy , with thee for evermore . 

OH my God , what joy do I already see by the eye of my Faith ! I know not where I am ; I see but dim light , but my comfort is , I shall come to more glorious light , I shall one day see thee perfectly , enjoy thee more fully ; I feel the reflexes and the glittering Sunbeams of thy Love sweetly warming my soul ; my eyes are watery with looking up to thee , the very apprehension of thy Beauty , the Sunbeams of thy Love force tears from my eyes , thou art the cause I weep , and joy of my weeping , thou makest me weep with thy Love , I am sick with thy Love , and thou healest me with it , thou emptiest and fillest me , thou throwest me down , and liftest me up , how doth thy Love play with my soul ! and how doth my soul play and delight itself with thy Love ! my Love , my Joy , hide not thyself from me , but hide me in thee , let me find thee always in me , that I may always find myself in thee ; let me hear thy voice pronouncing me fair , then shall I enjoy all thy hidden treasures , all thy vast possessions , all thy sparkling Beauty , glorious Holiness , divine Wisdom ! make sure to me thy promises , thy all-in-all in me , that I may be all in thee , who am thine : What need I fear , that have thee for my Defence , that hast made me more than a Conqueror through thee , therefore I shall want nothing ; who shall lay any thing to my charge , being thou hast freed me from my sins ? what should daunt me , or discourage me , that do enjoy thy Love ? thou possessest my soul , and defendest me from my enemies with thy power : What shall separate me from thee , who art my God , and I am thy creature ? the Law cannot pronounce me cursed , for my Saviour hath kept it for me , and so pronounceth me blessed ; I am no more my own , I am Christ's , and he is mine , he died for me , he hath mortified sin in me , he hath subdued my sins in me , I find no more proneness to sin , my desires are made conformable to thine , I desire no longer to live in myself , but in thee my Christ ; I regard not iniquity in my heart , the love of my Christ makes me loathe myself and my base corruptions , I have a base esteem of myself , I have a perfect hatred of sin , that I see lives in me , I live not in it ; the death of my Beloved that once died for me , hath mortified my sins , they have no rule over me , my Love , my Christ is my Ruler by his Spirit , I can accept of no other Guide ; though sin be in me , yet I am out of my sins in my Christ . 

OH World , OH Flesh , OH Devil , let me alone , you have nothing to do with me , let me serve the Lord my God , for I am his , I was yours too long , get you gone , I command you in the name of my beloved Christ ; though it be true that I did often transgress the Law , yet my Saviour he hath pleaded for me , he hath procured a pardon for all my sins , and sealed it , he hath set his hand to it , and hath put it safe locked up with the key of his Love , in my heart by his Spirit , all the Devils in Hell can never get it from me ; I fear not , you can but kill my body , you can do no more ; the Lord will raise me up again at his coming , and then my corruptible body will be made incorruptible , and this body which is mortal shall be made immortal , and glorious ; then will this his Spirit which bids me write , here come again and own me , by the virtue of my Beloved shall I be raised up again to meet the Lord my God , with joy and rejoicing , to the praise and glory of his great and holy Name ; this is true , for Christ himself ( in whom only I trust for Salvation ) hath told me so , whatever you pled against me it is to no purpose , for I have a righteous Advocate at God's right hand ; nay further , I have Gods discharge within mine own heart , which is my acquittance , you have nothing to require ( OH Law ) but death the wages of sin , that pray take whensoever it pleaseth God you shall have it , as for my soul my God by his free Grace hath clasped it in his arms of mercy , I am his darling his jewel , I see plainly that he delighteth in me , he life's in me by his Spirit , and I in him by my Faith : although I have ( I confess ) broken the Law , yet Jesus Christ kept it , and he hath satisfied the justice of God it makes as much to my discharge , as if I had kept it myself ; as my Saviour was beloved of God the Father , so am I through faith in him : you 'll say I transgress the Law daily in thought , word , or deed , I say no , it is not I but sin that dwelleth in me : I have a bad neighbour , but Christ will give me patience and courage to war against my enemy , it shall have no power , it may take the best Saint cowardly and unawares , but I bless God I have strength from Christ by his Spirit that beats him out of doors , he lodgeth not in my heart , I have no room but for my Love , my Christ , I am wholly his , and he is mine ; for should I regard iniquity in my heart , the Lord would not hear my prayers , I see by the eye of my faith that I am freed from sin , though not free from sinning , I will rejoice though sin dwell in my flesh , OH my beloved Christ , I see there is more good in thee for me , than there is evil in sin against me : OH my eternal God , thou art more pleased with me thy poor creature for my Christ thy Son's sake , than ever thou were displeased with me for my sins sake , OH my God I lay them all open before thee , I confess and forsake them , to come to thee my God for mercy ; thou hast promised me forgiveness , forsake me not my God , for I am resolved ( by the assistance of thy Spirit ) never more to forsake thee ; do not thou leave me comfortless , but support me by the Almighty power of thy Spirit within me : how odious doth sin appear to my soul ! how fain would the enemy of my soul undermine it , and weaken my faith in thee ! what strive , and subtle temptations , hath the Devil to ensnare the soul of thy Servant if he could ! how fearful am I when I think of any thing but thee ! be thou therefore the continual meditation of my heart ; how fearful am I to look on , orcommune with the World , or the vanities of the World , lest they should draw away my mind and affections ! but Lord I bless thy holy name I see thy Love and mercy in this , thou lettest me see all things besides thee to be vanity and vexation of Spirit , OH let me see thee and delight in nothing but thee : instead of thinking of vain transitories , let thy Servant meditate , as now , so always , of glorious eternities : and OH sweet God , let me think upon my sins , and the vildness of my base heart , to humble me in the sight of my own nothingnesse , lay me low , to raise me high in faith , to rely wholly on thee , OH that I might never act but as thy faithful servant , as becoming thy Son , that I may be able to cry unto thee Father ; though my actions seem to me ( as they are ) unfaithful , yet Lord thou art faithful , a Father to me in Jesus Christ ; o sweet God that thou wouldst cause the sight of my sins to be as a means to kill sin in me , let it make much to my sorrow , that my heart is false , but let it make much more to my joy , that thou ( my joy my God ) art true ; let it sad thy Servant , that I am so sinful , but let it much more rejoice my soul that thou my Lord Christ art holy , o let the Love of thee be my love , that thy holiness may be made mine , when wilt thou o my God ? thou art my comfort , thou wilt shortly set me free , that by thy strength I may triumph over this body of death : o my God though sin break off sometimes my communion , yet let i● never separate my union with thee : how dost thou make me rejoice even while I mourn over sins because I see through Faith in thee sweet Jesus they can be no prejudice to my everlasting safety in thee , so much I perceive thou lovest me , for thou wouldst not have given me so much Faith in thee , didst not thou love me : my Love I am thine , and thou art mire , I have vowed to thee , and thou wilt make me faithful as thou art faithful , because I trust in thee . OH my God let me have more encouragement from thee , than discouragement from sin ; for though my sins reach the clouds , yet I see by the eye of my faith the mercies of thee my God are above the Heavens ; though my sins do overflow me , yet the free graces of my God overflow my sins : O sweet Jesus let thy Love and Righteousness so cover my sins and imperfections , that the Lord may see no iniquity , which thou hast not satisfied for , and pleaded for , and procured pardon for me that am thy servant . 

O my God thou knowest my wants , and troubles , suffer me at no time to be troubled at them , let me bid all welcome , thy will be done , though thou cause sorrow , yet wilt thou have compassion according to the multitude of thy Mercies ; when my outward comforts ebb let me feel the high Springs of my inward joy , and consolation in thee , flowing in upon my soul : drown thou all my sorrows in the Ocean of thy Love : OH my God though I am not the subject of comfort , yet is my comfort sure in thee the object of my faith , Lord I perceive thou laidst it for me , when thou laidst it from me , thou lettest me see by the Sunshine of thy Love , what this imprisonment , malice of men , persecuting me meaneth , as liberty , or the best contentment : I will not therefore be discontented , I could not be content , did I not see it is thy Will , it is thy Will that I desire to conform myself unto , so come what will 't is welcome : O my God let me have any thing or nothing , let me abound with friends or have none , let me rejoice or be sorrowful , let me be in prison or at liberty , let me live or die , it is all one to thy servant ; for Lord thou knowest , I accounted nothing my joy but thee my God , and to be in all things as thou wilt have me ; OH my God I desire not to be at my own dispose or choice ▪ my choice is thee , to rest quiet in thy determination ; though thou send me comforts , yet will I not accounted them my comfort , but thee my comfort , though I have no outward comfort , yet thou hast not left me comfortless , though I pass through many sorrows and tribulations , yet by the light of thy grace thou dispercest the clouds of my sins , and lettest me see my way , its Heaven-ward to thee . 

Dear sister , wouldst thou have such enjoyments ? seek then , and thou shalt find , but thou must seek diligently , remove all let's and impediments , that may hinder thy sweet union a●d comunion with my Christ , he is worth seeking , worth finding , trifle not away your precious time with the things of the World , know that God allows Dogs under the table such bones to pick.  

But let Jesus Christ be thy daily bread , let it be thy meat and drink , to do the Will of our Heavenly Father : by this you may perceive ( if Christ incline your heart ) and see by the eye of your faith in Christ & find the way to Heaven is by Christ , by him only : saith he to you , I am the Way , the Truth , and the Life ; one of the fathers ( I remember ) saith ; the Way , without which we wander : the Truth , without which we shall run into error : the Light , without which we shall sit in darkness : there is no other reason I can give to any that are out of Christ why they are out , but it is because of their unbeleif , they do not believe on him ; every one is apt to sail do , let me ask that man or woman then , did you willingly and readily obey his voice ? how do you love him ? do you testify your love by your actual obedience , to the utmost of your abilities to keep his commandments ? are you out of yourselves ? do you live above the World ? have you left off feeding upon the vanities thereof ? are you fed with the bread and waters of life ? are you delighted with the riches of God's Grace , accounting no want like to the want of grace ? do you not more mind the riches of the World , the devices and desires of your own base treacherous hearts deceitful carnal hearts , more than the Will and Mind of my God ? in brief , wound'st know whether thou art in Christ then have regard to him ; where the treasure is , there the heart will be also . 

My dear sister , let not the World ( which leads away captive so many ) draw thee away : let all thy senses be locked up in thy soul , and let that be full of Christ , let thine eyes be delighted in the reading of the Word of God : let your ears be stopped from hearing those things which savour not of graces which edify not , but hear readily diligently the true & sound speakings of God , listen to the sweet low voices , and secret whispers of his Spirit : taste how sweet jesus Christ is to hungry and thirsty souls ; smell how sweet his garments are : feel the smooth , fine , wrought , and silken linen of the Saints ; see you mind what I have taken pains to write you ; hear , taste , smell , see , feel , in your soul that you have in your body , the marks of my sweet Jesus ; Gall : 6 and 17 verse , and then you will not account , or call gold and silver , riches ; nor advancement , honour ; nor learning , wisdom ; you will be rich , honourable , and wise without them , within yourself all in Christ , Christ in you ; and you will see all the glory of the World , but skindeep ; a Sun blast defaceth it , like Time , not abiding , passing away ; a mear nothing but vanity and vexation of Spirit : pomp is but fancy , gold but dust , fame but breath , praise but a blast , the world's sweet is bittrernes : have you not found it so ? its love , lovelesse ; its splendour , darkness ; its fullness , emptiness ; it 's all , nothing , but vanity , and pray what 's that ? a Saint may as well live and feed on the wind , as on the things of the World , it may fill the fancy and starve the soul , it may starve and leave the soul empty of grace ; therefore have I bid the World farewell welcome Heaven upon Earth , I have no comfort no happiness nothing without thee sweet jesus , I am thine , and thou art mine . 

O my dear Sister , believe me for my Christ's sake , there is no consolation but in my Christ ; love nothing , look upon nothing , enjoy nothing , have no contentment in any thing but what is of him , from him , and by him , all to his praise : let God have all the glory in Christ , let him be glorified for all , john 1. 16. beware of spiritual pride , thy selfe-flattering heart , rest not upon what you have received : read Rom. 11. 6.  Ephes . 2. 8. 9 build not your Tabernakle here , let not that be your light , but let God be your light ; eye not your comforts so much as the God of comfort ; look not so much on your graces as on the God of grace , repose yourself in nothing , quiet yourself in nothing but in God himself : our graces are but wedding attire , oil in lamps ; joy and consolation but wedding cheer , we are not satisfied with it , the soul is infinite : Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling , until you come to enjoy God fully , in the very bosum of Christ , coheirs with him : the seeds of his word sown in our hearts here , are but glean to what we expect ; our best summer days here are but as nipping winters , in comparison of that everlasting summer : we look to enjoy an eternity of the Sunny-shinings of God's face , love , and glory , to shine upon us in glory with and to him for ever . 

Those rivers of joy we swim in here towards him , are but as a few drops in comparison of that height and depth , length and breadth , that bottomless Ocean of his Love laid up in Christ for us ; our greatest light here below , is but as a dark Vault to God and the Lamb : He is the light of that City unto which thy Brother is going , endeavour to get in at the straight gate , remember it is not every one that calleth Lord , Lord , shall enter , but he that doth the will of our Heavenly Father which is in Heaven : be pressing forward to the mark of our high Calling , to arrive to the knowledge of that Love which passeth knowledge , to apprehend our God as we are apprehended of God : Rest not ( dear Sister ) till you come to Heaven , where our faith shall be seeing , and our hope possession . Observe , let your love be pure for God , seek not God for heaven , but heaven for God , that heaven which is God who is the heaven of heavens : God only in all , above all , and beyond all : let him be our all-in-all in our Lord Jesus Christ , by whom we are more than conquerors ; to whom only ( as is most due ) be ascribed by thee and me , the sole glory and praise of this my writing to thee : I beseech the Lord , to give us heavenly wisdom , to understand spiritually the will and mind of God revealed in his Word : so I pray daily , fervently , and sincerely , for thee and all the Saints and Servants of God , with faith in the Lord Jesus , whose servant I am , and in him , 

Thy assured loving Brother WILLIAM BLAKE . Exon jail June 25. 1653.  

