POEMS , Written by the RIGHT HONOURABLE WILLIAM EARL OF PEMBROKE , Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household . 

WHEREOF Many of which are answered by way of Repartee , BY s r BENJAMIN RUDDIER , KNIGHT . 

With several Distinct POEMS , Written by them Occasionally , and Apart . 

LONDON , Printed by Matthew Inman , and are to be sold by James Magnes , in Russel-street , near the Piazza , in Covent-garden , 1660.  

To the Right Honourable CRISTIANA , COUNTESS of DEVONSHIRE , DOWAGER . 

MADAM , 

IT will be no small addition to all your great Titles and other Excellencies , that you have been so careful to preserve , & now command to be published , these elegant Poems ; Neither could your Ladyship have employed one that would bave more willingly obeyed your Commands , I having been obliged to that Honourable Family , not only by descent , but am by many favours now bound to that Person , who is Heir to all their Virtues as well as Fortunes . The Church that covers his sacred ashes , must submit to time , and at last lie buried with him ; But this Monument that your Ladyship hath erected to his memory , will outlast the Calculation of all Astrologers ; who though they could foretell the time that he should leave us , could set no Date to the Fame that he should leave behind him ; which , though it have lain aslecp in all this noise of Drums and Trumpets , when all the Muses seemed to be fled , and to have left nothing behind them , but a few lame iambics , canting at the corners of our desolate streets ; yet they are now content to be awakened by your Ladyship's command , & under your Patronage to come abroad , and meet , and salute that peace that gave them their first being , and to tell the World , that whatever was excellently said to any Lady in all these Poems , was meant of you ; and that the Poet himself being inspired by your Ladyship , you only that are extracted from an ancient and Royal Family , have the Right and power to give life and perpetuity to so noble a person . 

MADAM , Your most humble and obedient Servant , JOHN DONNE . 

TO THE READER . 

IN the collecting of these Poems ( which were chiefly preserved by the greatest Masters of Music , all the Sonnets being set by them ) I was fain first to send to Mr. Henry Laws , who furnishing me with some , directed me for the rest , to send into Germany to Mr. Laneere , who by his great skill gave a life and harmony to all that he set ; so that if by their wandering some be surreptitiously got into their company ; or , if ( the Author leaving no other issue but these of his brain ) some of these Nymphs seem a little more wanton than the rest , of which there are but two or three Copies can be suspected , they desire that they may not make their retreat , until the next Impression ; and than you will find many more ready to supply their room , which were not come unto my hands when I published these . 

EARL OF PEMBROKE , Lord Steward : SONNET . 

Can you suspect a change in me , 
And value your own constancy ? 
O! no ; you found that doubt in your own heart : 
Where Love his images but kissed , 
Not graved ; fearing that dainty flesh would smart , 
And so his painful Sculpture would refist ; 
But wrought in mine without remorse , 
Till he of it thy perfect Statue made 
As full of sweetness as of force . 
Only unkindness may the work invade , 
And so it may defaced remain 
But never can another form retain . 
While we dispute our liberty 
I have lost mine ; 
And which is worse , incline 
To love that slavery : 
Not the great Charter , nor King's-bench can free 
Me from the Chain , wherein my thoughts she tied : 
For our dull Earth what care is had we see , 
Yet easily let our mind 
Into more thraldom slide . 
OH that she were but kind ! 
To give for that a pledge ; 
There were my Law , and there my Privilege . 
Dear , can you take my soul from me , 
And yet have no belief 
That I have grief ? 
O did your fair eyes ever see 
( Without a painful force ) 
That sad divorce ! 
The Soul and Body love like me , 
Not you ; the Evening kind , 
The morning of another mind , 
And every several hour 
Slack , and increase that power . 
They are by Love made perfect One : 
no lesle than Death makes them become Alone . 
When the resistless flames of my desire 
Make Aetna of my heart , 
And I enraged , impart 
The torments unto you , and press 
For pity in this violent distress ; 
You sing , & think I feign this fire . 
Because one frown of yours can all control , 
Wrong not my pains ; you are the true 
Higher part of my soul , 
The lower tyrant is to me , and slave to you . 
Why do you give me leave to sip , 
And pull the cup from my so thirsty lip 
Before I drink ? 
Desire hath left my heart to think , 
And is dispersed in every outward part ; 
My hands , lips , eyes , 
That all restraint despise . 
While it was in my heart 
It did your will , in chains of slavish fears , 
But these have all no ears . 
P.  

IF her disdain least change in you can move , 
you do not love ; 
For while your hopes give fuel to your fire , 
you sell desire . 
Love is not love , but given free ; 
And so is mine , so should yours be , 
Her heart that melts to hear of others moan , 
to mine is stone ; 
And eyes that weep a stranger's hurt to see , 
joy to wound me . 
Yet I so much affect each part 
As caused by them , I love my smart . 
Think her unkindness justly must be graced 
with Name of chaste ; 
And that the frowns least longing should exceed , 
and raging preed . 
So can her rigour never offend 
Except self-love seek private end . 
't is Love breeds Love in me , and cold disdain 
kills it again : 
As water maketh fire to fret and fume , 
till all consume : 
None can of Love more free gift make , 
then to Love's self for Loves own sake . 
I 'll never dig in Quarry of an heart 
to have , nor part , 
Nor roast in those fierce eyes which always are 
Canicular . 
Who this way would a Lover prove , 
Doth show his patience , not his love . 
A frown may be sometimes for Physic good , 
but not for food : 
And for that raging humour there is sure 
a gentler cure . 
Why bar you Love of private end , 
Which never should to public tend . 
P.  

I  

Disdain me still , that I may ever love , 
For who his love enjoys , can love no more 
The War once past , with Peace men Cowards prove , 
And ships returned , do rot upon the shore . 
then though thou frown , I 'll say thou art most fair , 
And still I 'll love , though still I must despair . 
II  

As heats to life , so is desire to love , 
For these once quenched , both life & love are done ; 
Let not my sighs , nor tears , thy Virtue move , 
Like basest Mettle , do not melt too soon : 
Laughed at my woes , although I ever mourn ; 
Love surfeits with reward , his Nurse is scorn . 
Shall Love that gave Latona's heir the foil , 
( Proud of his Archery , and Python's spoil ) 
And so enthralled him to a Nymphs disdain , 
As when his hopes were dead , he full of pain , 
Made him above all trees the Laurel grace , 
An Emblem of Love's glory ; his disgrace . 
Shall he , I say , be termed a Footboy now , 
That made all powers in heaven and earth to bow : 
Or is 't a fancy which themselves do frame , 
And therefore dare baptise by any name , 
A flaming straw , which one spark kindles bright , 
And first hard breath out of itself doth fright ; 
Whose father was a smile , and death a frown , 
Soon proud of little , and for lesle cast down ; 
't is so , and this a Lackey term you may , 
For it runs oft , and makes but shortest stay . 
But thou , OH Love , free from times eating rust 
That settest a limit unto boundless Lust , 
Making desire grow infinitely strong , 
And yet to one chaste subject doth belong ; 
Bridling self-love , that flatters us in ease , 
Quickening our wits to strive that they may please . 
Fixing the wand'ring thoughts of straying youth ; 
The firmest band of Faith , the knot of Truth : 
thou that didst never lodge in worthless heart , 
thou art a Master wheresoever thou art . 
thou mak'st food loathsome , sleep to be unrest ; 
Lost labour easeful , scornful looks a feast . 
And when thou wilt thy joys as far excel 
All else , as when thou punishest thy Hell : 
OH make that Rebel feel thy matchless power , 
thou that mad'st Jove a Bull , a Swan , a Shower ; 
Give him a love as tyrannous as fair , 
That his desire go yoked with despair . 
Live in her eyes , but in her frozen heart 
Let no thaw come , that may have sense of smart . 
Let her a constant silence never break , 
Till he do wish repulse to hear her speak . 
And last , such sense of error let him have , 
As he may never dare for mercy crave . 
then none will more capitulate with thee , 
But of their hearts will yield the Empire free . 
R.  

no praise it is that him who Python slew , 
Love at his own tried weapon did subdue ; 
To all clear minds it doth most clearly prove , 
The greatest Monster of the two was Love. 
OH What a wretched power is tha● and strange 
To be invoked , which hath such power to change 
Our heavenly part into a Beast , a Tree , 
Things which sensual still , or senseless be , 
He that so well is read in Love's brave story , 
And is so jealous of his waning glory ; 
How could he omit ( like a young beginner ) 
Hercule the strong , Love's valiant Spinner . 
But what boots it his famous acts to name , 
When in them lies concealed , his greater shame : 
For this declares that ( at his cheapest rate ) 
He always makes a man effeminate . 
And whosoever Love's , he down doth bring 
From that he was , into some meaner thing , 
Shows him ridiculous to standers by , 
And quite bereaves him of perceiving why . 
N●w why should Love a Footboys place despise , 
When higher than the Earth he doth not rise ? 
And I have often seen his Greatness trudge 
In little Errands , like a worthless Drudge : 
I will send him at any time a mile , 
To fetch me thence the meaning of a smile , 
A look , a notlook , a silence , a frown , 
For Privatives he 'll lackey up and down ; 
Yet let no man believe what he doth say , 
Fa●se answers still he coyneth by the way : 
't is well if he this title high can keep ; 
For where love cannot go , 't is known he 'll creep : 
And fit it is the Rule which he hath got 
From Reason , by a base usurping P●ot , 
By under-means ; should likewise be maintained , 
Power evermore is held as it is gained . 
Base Love , the stain of Youth , the scorn of Age , 
The folly of a Man , a Woman's rage , 
Order Consounder , Secrets light discloser , 
Disturber of all sorts , a King's deposer ; 
The canker of a froward Wit , thou art , 
The business of an idle empty heart ; 
The rack of jealousy and sad Mistrust , 
The smooth and justified Excuse of Lust ; 
The thief which wastes the taper of our life , 
The quiet Name of restless jars and strife ; 
The F●ye which doth corrupt and quite distaste 
All happiness , if thou therein becast ; 
The greatest and the most concealed Imposter 
That ever vain Credulity did foster : 
A Mountebank , extolling trifles small ; 
A juggler , playing loose ( not fast ) with all . 
An Alchemist whose Promises are Gold , 
Payment but Dross , and Hope at highest sold . 
This , this is Love , and worse than I can say , 
Where he a Master is , and bears the sway , 
He guide's like Phaeton , burns and destroys , 
Parches and stifles what else would be joys . 
But when clear Reason sitteth in the throne , 
Governs his beams ( which otherwise are none 
But darts and mischief ) than sun like he 
Doth actnate produce , ripen and free 
From grossness those good seeds which in us lie , 
Till then ( as in a grave ) and there would die . 
All high Perfections in a perfect Lover , 
His warmth doth cherish , and his light discover : 
He gives an even temper of delight 
Without a minute's loss ; no fears affright , 
Nor interrupt the joys such love doth bring , 
Nor no enjoying can dry up the spring . 
Unto another he lends out our pleasure , 
That ( with the use ) it may come home a treasure . 
Pure lynk of bodies , where no lust controls 
The fatness and security of souls ; 
Sweetest path of life , Virtue in full sail , 
Fresh budding hope , whose fruit doth never fail . 
To this , dear Love , I do not Rebel stand , 
Though not employed , yet ready at command . 
But as for him who in his fit did curse 
And rave at me , I cannot wish him worse 
Than he already doth appear to be , 
Full of distemper in extreme degree : 
In this hard state he rather needeth prayer , 
His strong deluded fancy to repair . 
wherefore OH Reason high , thou who art King 
Of the world's King , and dost in order bring 
The wild affections which so often swerve 
From thy just Rule , and Rebel Passion serve . 
thou , without whose light Love's fire is smoke , 
Puts out eyes and mind , all true sense doth choke ; 
Restore this man unto himself again , 
send him a lively feeling of his pain ; 
Give him a healthy and discerning taste 
Of food , and rest , that he may rise at last 
By strength of thee , from this strange strong Disease , 
Wherein the danger is , that it doth please . 
What help for him who takes his sickness part ? 
It must be only thy great work , and art . 
Provide him also of thy sober hand , 
A thrifty course of breath , which long may stand : 
Lest he in sighs do prodigally spend , 
Before one loving Moon do change and end , 
more than would find him life for many years , 
If he were rid of these false-seeming fears . 
Grant this , OH Reason , at his deep request , 
Who never loved to see thy power suppressed . 
And now to you , Sir Love , your love I crave ; 
Of you no Mast'ry I desire to have : 
But that we may like honest friends agree , 
Let us to Reason fellow-servants be . 
P.  

IT is enough , a Master you grant Love 
At one weapon , 't was all I sought to prove : 
For worth , not weakness , makes him use but one ; 
While that subdues all strength , all Are alone . 
I studied not examples in this kind , 
They were far harder to avoid , then find : 
And that to worthless forms Love changes us , 
Makes not him blush , not his ridiculous . 
For in his Wars Love diversely proceeds , 
Sometime by force , sometime by sleight he speeds . 
When he will force , than arms he his to fight 
In strength of merit , riches of delight . 
But when by stratagems he means surprise , 
His men in forms more mean he will disguise : 
Not bearing to the forms themselves respect , 
But careful to avoid his foes suspect : 
And when as this with jests their wits are worn , 
Do Lovers or the Laughers bear the scorn ? 
But O! how finely with yourself you play , 
When with this quick conceit you run away ; 
That you make love to Lackey up and down , 
To fetch the meaning of a smile , or frown : 
Alas , in these slight Errand ; he sends you , 
Wherein your Powers trudge as if they flew , 
Making the least which to his pleasure tends , 
A thing wherein your weal or woe depends . 
Nor Plots he to dissolve by feigned delight , 
Over the Senses Reasons Sovereign right ; 
But Reason finding Love to rule more fit , 
She doth that Government to him commit ; 
And so betwixt these there is no factious strife , 
Love here the husband is , Reason the wife ; 
Not grudging at her husband's active sway , 
But thinks she rules so just laws to obey : 
And Love this title high thus got may keep , 
A threadbare Proverb cannot make him creep . 
And for that rabble of confused Names , 
Which to Love's charge you lay , as bitter blames , 
They touch not him , he in himself divine , 
To falsehood nor to weakness can incline ; 
If not disfigured by our fleshly mask , 
As Wine corrupted by a faulty eask . 
He is no Mountebank , his wares do reach 
Beyond the setting forth of any speech , 
Nor Alchemist , but that Elixir old , 
Which turns Lust's Mercury to friendship's Gold. 
And so the rest wherewith you slain his Name , 
Will turn considered rightly to his fame . 
I do not sever Love from Reason's law , 
But say that they in one sweet yoke do draw ; 
Nor let your wit dissension strive to make , 
When they in joint command such pleasure take . 
As for the joys which from these joined do flow , 
To be beyond expression I do know ; 
So may they fall on you from Love's large hand , 
If to this Love you do not Rebel stand , 
And we in one Opinion shall agree , 
If both , to both , may fellow-servants be . 
For me if Skeptick like you will dispute , 
And what I feel in heart , with words refute , 
Go on , and laugh at Love's commanding fire , 
Till you cannot your scorched self retire . 
My Curse a Blessing was , your Prayer a Curse , 
For not to love , then scorn in love is worse . 
OH let sighs prodigally spend my breath , 
My sufferings doubled be , until my death ; 
So but in one kind look they her engage , 
One hour so lived , is longer than an age . 
R.  

Not like a Skeptick equally distracted , 
Nor like a Sophister of sleights compact , 
Nor to vie Wit ( a vanity of youth ) 
Nor for the love of Victory , but Truth , 
The lists again I enter , bold assured , 
Within my Causes right , strongly immured . 
Man unto man both Text and Comment is , 
They that best read this Character of his , 
His body , and they that most understand 
The sense thereof ( his soul ) do both command . 
This as a firm rule infallibly true , 
Not to be changed for one more weak , more new ; 
That Reason holds the head , and highest part ; 
The Affections lower are placed in the heart , 
To show that they must serve and still obey ; 
Reason must Ruler be , and bear the sway . 
From this pure fountain see how pure the streams 
Do run , from this bright Sun how fair the beams . 
Anger whilst he a servant true persisteth , 
Whetteth mild justice sword , Valour assisteth : 
But when his power to himself he taketh , 
He naught but brawls & wars & slaughters maketh ; 
Furthereth revenge , injustice , wrong , and hate ; 
Nothing but blood his sury can abate : 
And that but for a while , for hot and dry , 
He thirsteth oft , as oft for blood doth cry . 
And so of all the affections of the mind , 
When them we do in due obedience find , 
Great helps they are , and ministers of good , 
But else to vice a fierce and headlong brood . 
What privilege beyond the rest hath Love ; 
Show his exemption , and his freedom prove : 
Is he no Affection ? then is he worse : 
A Passion , the body's waster , minds curse . 
As long as he to Reason yields subjection , 
He is the best and principal affection ; 
Effects most good , the cement , band and tie 
Of human fellowship , wherein doth lie 
All the dear comforts which makes life a life : 
Without whose influence , nothing but strife 
Would bring us together , or we should live 
Straggling alone , and no account could give 
That ever we had been here ; with us would die 
( Summed in our deaths ) life of posterity . 
When best things are corrupt , they most are so ; 
Love once defected doth most Traitor grow , 
And works ' 'gainst Reason with more violence 
Than all the rest , and with more smooth pretence : 
I need not here repeat , will not enlarge 
His faults , I loathly take ' 'gainst Love that charge ; 
I only say , that Reason is his King. 
And Love at highest , is his underling . 
You do confess , or truth doth it extort , 
That Reason sovereign is , in dearest sort ; 
Committing unto Love the senses state , 
Which shows Love's Power is but subordinate : 
But then again , where you would end the strife , 
Making Love the Husband , Reason the Wife , 
You begin anew ; Error hath no stay , 
Runs infinitely on , but not one way ; 
Crosseth itself , findeth no resting place ; 
appeareth always with another face ; 
Increaseth faster , and doth multiply 
Beyond the breed of any spawned fry . 
Truth is still one , it 's one centre and end 
Still like itself , and to itself a friend . 
Who gave the soul's Abstract , Intelligences , 
Bodies and Sex ( nearer to bring the senses 
Acquainted with them , and their high enjoy ) 
Made love a lasting and perpetual Boy ; 
Still in minority , never of age , 
Because to govern he is most unfit , 
By Nonage fair excuse they him acquit . 
Nature's best observers , the wise Egyptians 
In their abstruse and mystical descriptions , 
Did of each Element two Sexes frame , 
Which yet ( for Marriage sake ) had but one name : 
Of Fire the Mast'ring heat , they made the Male ; 
The Female , what was flaming , weak and pale : 
Of Air , the Man was active , bustling wind , 
The rainy weeping Clouds of Womankind ; 
The deep and boundless Sea was Masculine , 
The shallow slender Rivers Feminine ; 
Of Earth the constant Rocky part was he , 
The gentle yielding tilled vein a she . 
So in the Soul , Understanding , and Will , 
Betwixt themselves hold such proportion still , 
As Male and Female : He strongly imprints 
Upon her easiness , she never stints , 
But straight pursues with ready inclination , 
Or quickly shuns with shrinking aversation , 
As is the object he begets on her , 
So her desires do duly move and stir . 
What else is reason ( to be more exact ) 
But the redoubled and reflected act 
Of Understanding ? what th' affections ? 
But the agitations and ejections 
Of Will where love is one ; as all may see 
To Reason born a servant by degree . 
If you in aught conformity had held 
With Nature's course , and not ' 'gainst all rebelled , 
But Reason Husband , Love for Wife had meant , 
I straight to be at peace had given consent ; 
Not thought it strange , but should been well paid , 
That Reason now had married her Handmaid , 
In hope that she in duty for that honour 
Which he in grace had thus bestowed upon her , 
Would strive by all obedience to appear 
more lovely in his eyes , and still more clear . 
Thus having made it safe , That every way 
Love must as a servant , or as a wife obey , 
I here might rest against truth 's brazen wall , 
And not regard the drops which on it fall . 
Yet will I wipe away , as they do lie , 
Some spots , which you have dashed in passing by ; 
And first , That Love doth hurt and overthrow , 
Doth him no Master make , but Monster show ; 
A Master's strength preserves , a Monsters spoils , 
It is the use that Force from Vice assoyles : 
Strange things of wars and stratagems you tell , 
And little business with great words doth swell : 
What helps betwixt truth and me this grave formality , 
Love is a sneaking corner-seeking quality , 
Which hate's the light , chooseth false times & shapes , 
To make his drifts to cover his escapes ; 
And when he is descried , his vizard torn , 
He proves a lucky jest , a fertile scorn . 
Love sends rot me , nor need I vainly go 
To fetch the meanings which I always know , 
Her single heart is one , and one to me 
Dares show itself , it is so clean , so free ; 
From thence such warrant have I of her smiles , 
That I mistrust them not for glittering wiles ; 
But know when the deep channel of her heart 
With joy is overfilled , it doth impart 
Some to the banks , and flows into her face , 
Which leaus thereon a fresh and springing grace . 
Her frowns I know not what , nor that they are , 
When Reason rules , Love feasts on no such fare ; 
Tastes naught but what is pure , and truly sweer , 
then bodies do but bring the souls to meet . 
Who light shines through , and all within discovers , 
no thought lies hid betwixt such beloved Lovers ; 
Sly reservations , shuffling excuses , 
Minced favours , made frowns , welcome abuses 
Loose then their use , and have at all no place , 
When Love is Master , they have only grace . 
A Proverbs proof is not so soon put off 
By slight neglect , or by a mighty scoff ; 
Whose truth his life hath hitherto maintained , 
And through so many ages credit gained ; 
They are the Quintessence of Truths , extract 
From vulgar use , and of such strength compact , 
That they have lived ( indeed ) in living men , 
Since many volumes written by mortal pen 
Are dead and gone , and more to ruin tend , 
Whilst these from Sire to Son do still descend , 
Nor needs it as a fault be here excused , 
That I expressed a Nature most confused , 
In terms so like itself , for Love once gone 
From Reason , hath no hold to rest upon . 
But our unseas'ned flesh you rather blame , 
Which unto me doth just appear the same , 
As if you should condemn the Mice , not Swine , 
Who love to wallow there , and think it fine . 
Likewise the friendship which such love doth breed , 
Doth end in hate both of themselves , and deed : 
When ever you can Love to Reason marry , 
I will not from that happy wedding tarry ; 
So that you sex them right by nature's law , 
But yield them all the service , fear , and awe , 
Which unto such a King and Queen belong , 
Whose force will so united grow more strong . 
I mean not to deny , had rather cure 
The pangs your heart infected doth endure ; 
And for Love's scorching fits I fear them nor , 
Reason or Love shall be my antidote , 
But not to love , then scorn in love is worse : 
This baseness is to man , the greatest curse , 
A scorn no being hath , cannot proceed 
From an inferior in word or deed : 
How can we so unman ourselves , and fall 
Beneath that creature which was made of all 
Next under us , to be more evident , 
Who stands as he was born , cannot consent . 
Bad usage soon would force my heart to turn , 
And made the fire of Love to anger burr ; 
But you do all so willingly abide , 
As that your ease would be the sicker side . 
A small reward will you contentment give , 
When but a Phoenix death you wish to live , 
Where may you burn in flames both short & sweet , 
Thus since our wills will not our Prayers meet . 
P.  

Men sad and settled , love not to contend , 
Dispute my wounds may vex , but never mend ; 
If Love had pleased I might have tasted joy 
In as full measure as I prove annoy : 
But Princes show on some their Power , their Grace 
On some , and both without control do place . 
Me for the first , OH me Love kept in store , 
When to that cruel Fair he gave me o'er , 
In whom all worth so eminent appears , 
As her disdain the style of justice bears ; 
And thus with me Love played a Master-part , 
When with one choice he hurt & pleased my heart . 
For than I am , let me more wretched prove , 
If her ( howe'er unkind ) I leave to love ; 
Thus to be fond of scorn , you sickness call , 
In truth 't is I , to love my Lord am thrall ; 
't is he that makes me find these wonders true , 
And he may work the same as well in you ; 
For even in your sound health I find this strife , 
Love late was Reason's Lackey , now his wife : 
But to conclude debate , whilst you are free , 
You may make Love even what you list to be , 
As those that will describe an unknown Land , 
Place Cities , Rivers , Hills where none do stand ; 
Even so you deal with Love , and straight will know 
How far he shoots , that never felt his bow ; 
One day you may , and then confess with me , 
You love his Fetrers more than to be free . 
R.  

Nor will I now your wound exulcerate , 
But rather grieve at your deplored estate ; 
Yet must I not myself so much forsake , 
As not to show wherein you me mistake . 
For Peace and you I was content to find , 
How Love and Reason might be near combined , 
But not their natures alter or confound , 
Nor I remove at all from my first ground 
Of due obedience which just Love doth own 
To Reason , thought it should to highest grow . 
'T was not well done of you thus to object , 
That which I did for you in your respect ; 
Beside , your argument is drawn amiss , 
From that which may be , unto that which is . 
I did not Love for Reason's wife avow , 
But only gave it possible , and how 
That I am disengaged , untouched , and free , 
Makes me of Love the fitter judge to be ; 
Self-interest doth so corrupt and blind 
The clearness quite , and sadness of the mind , 
That Justice still to it hath born a grudge , 
Nor Law allows a party to be Judge ; 
In what we earnest are , ourselves we lose , 
A loo●er on more than a gamester sees . 
To say my heart was maimed in Cupid's Wars , 
And pity beg by showing of my scars , 
Or tell what losses I have had by fire , 
Doth sure a weaker heart than mine require ▪ 
Yet have I loved , and may do so again , 
A strong lynk I have been in that fair chain 
Which you a fetter call , and rightly too , 
But that a breaking lynk did me undo ; 
You pierce me deep to say I never loved , 
When it by so much truth hath been approved ; 
Yet for all this we will not disagree , 
Each lover thinks none ever loved but he . 
Sonnet . P.  

I  

Canst thou love me , and yet doubt 
So much falsehood in my heart , 
That a way I should find out 
To impart 
Fragments of a broken love to you , 
more than all , being lesle than due : 
OH no! Love must clear distrust , 
Or be eaten with that rust : 
Short love liking may find jars , 
The love that 's lasting knows no wars . 
II  

This belief begets delight , 
And so satisfies desire , 
And in them it shines a light , 
no more fire ; 
All the burning Qualities appeased 
Each in others joining pleased ; 
Not a whisper , not a thought , 
But betwixt both in common's brought ; 
Even to seem two they are loath , 
Love being but one soul in both . 
Song . P.  

I  

Soul's joy when I am gone , 
and you alone , 
which cannot be , 
Since I must leave myself with thee , 
and carry thee with me ; 
o give no way to grief , 
but let belief 
of mutual love , 
This wonder to the vulgar prove , 
Our bodies not we move . 
II  

Yet when unto our eyes 
absence denies 
each others sight , 
And makes to us a constant night ; 
when oaths change to delight , 
Fools have no way to meet 
but by their feet ; 
Why should our Day 
Over our spirits so much sway , 
To tie us to that way . 
P. I left you , and now the gain of you is to me a double Gain . 

Dear , when I think upon my first sad fall 
From thy fair eyes , I needs must feel withal 
The many widowed hours I since have numbered , 
Which in wished shades I might have safely slumbered , 
Rocked into endless heavenly Trances , by 
Thy soul inchanting-graces harmony , 
Whilst I enjoyed not what I did possess , 
But like an unthrift of my happiness , 
Did not my loss ( till 't was too late ) espy 
As Children kill their birds , and after cry ? 
But since those Clouds that so eclip'st thy Light 
( And gave my every day so many a night , 
As my life had but a dead Winter been , 
Had I no better after sunshine seen ) 
Are fled , let us ( thou best of me ) redeem 
Those hours we fond did so disesteem : 
And since past joys are but bewailed in vain , 
Come and we 'll prove them over all again , 
That small division so will come the meeter , 
To make the Music of our bliss the sweeter . 
R. On the Countess of Pembroke's Picture . 

Here ( though the lustre of her youth be spent ) 
Are curious steps to see where beauty went ; 
And for the wonders in her mind that dwell , 
It lies not in the power of Pens to tell . 
But could she but bequeath them when she dies , 
She might enrich her Sex by Legacies . 
P. That she is only Fair.  

DO not reject those titles of your due , 
Which Nature's Art hath styled on your face ; 
The Name of Fair only belongs to you , 
None else that title justly can embrace : 
You Beauties heir , her Coat sole spotless wear , 
Where others all , some mark abatement bear . 
't is not their Cheeks touched with Vermilion Ord , 
Stained with the tincture of enchanting skill , 
Nor yet the curled devices of their head , 
Their breasts displayed , their looks framed to their will ; 
Their quick-turn'd-eye , nor all their proud attire , 
Can make me their Perfections to admire . 
All this done without Nature's consent , 
Thy beauty needs not Art's enticing aid ; 
thine nature gave , there 's nature only lent ; 
thine shall endure , when theirs are quite decayed : 
Thy beauty others doth as much excel , 
As Heaven base Earth , or Earth accursed Hell.  
Others are fair if not compared to thee , 
Compared to them , thy beauty doth exceed : 
So lesser Stars give light , and shine we see 
Till glorious Phoebus lifts up his head ; 
And then as things ashamed of their might , 
They hide themselves , & with themselves their light 
Since Nature's skill hath given you your right , 
Do not kind Nature and yourself such wrong , 
You are as fair as any earthly wight , 
You wrong yourself if you correct my tongue : 
Though you deny ( her and ) yourself your due , 
Yet duty bids me Fair entitle you . 
P.  

Muse get thee to a Cell ; and wont to sing , 
Now mourn , nay now thy hands , thy heart now wring ; 
And if perhaps thine eyes did ever weep , 
Now bleed , and in eternal sorrow sleep ; 
OH , she that was , and only was , is gone , 
And I that was but one , am left alone . 
Who says that I for things never mine am sad ? 
That was all mine which others never had : 
no sighs , no tears , no blood but mine was shed 
For her that now must bless another's bed : 
As fate bound me , had Fortune made me free , 
None had had her but I , she none but me . 
OH had not I been swallowed up with night , 
Before I saw your sun , that glorious light , 
Whose beams alone do only comfort bring , 
Where I still weep , had ever made me sing ; 
Now on a strange Horizon it doth rise 
Where all do live , or else where each thing dies . 
P. A Sonnet . 

HE that his mirth hath lost 
When comfort is dismayed , 
Whose hopes in vain , whose faith is scorned , 
Whose trust is all betrayed . 
If he hath held them dear , 
And cannot cease to moan ; 
Come let him take his place by me , 
He shall not grieve alone . 
But if his smallest sweet 
Be mixed with all his sower ; 
If in the day , the month , the year 
He feel one happy hour : 
then rest he with himself , 
He is no Mate for me : 
Whose cheer is fallen , whose succour void , 
Whose hurt his death must be ; 
Yet not the wished death 
That hath ne plaint , ne lack , 
Which making free the better part , 
Is only Nature's wrack : 
O no! that were too well , 
My death is of that kind , 
That always yields extremest pains , 
And keeps the worst behind , 
As one that life's in show , 
But inwardly doth die , 
Whose knowledge is a bloody field 
Where all helps slain do lie : 
Whose heart the altar is , 
Whose spirit the sacrifice 
Unto the Powers whom to appease , 
no sorrows can suffice . 
My fancies are like thorns , 
On which I go by night ; 
My arguments are like an Host 
That force hath put to flight . 
My sense like passions spy , 
My thoughts like ruins old 
Of famous Carthage , and of Troy , 
That Sinon bought and sold . 
My Corn to Nettles , now 
My field is turned to flint , 
Where sitting in the Cypress shade , 
I read this Hyacinth . 
The peace , the rest , the life 
Which I enjoyed of yore , 
Came to that lot that by the loss 
They might me sting the more . 
So to unhappy men 
The best frames to the worst ; 
OH time , OH place , OH words , OH looks 
Deer then , but now accursed . 
In Was , stands my delight , 
In Is ( and Shall ) my woe , 
My sorrows fastened in the Yeas , 
My hopes hang in the No. 
I look for no relief , 
Relief would come too late ; 
Too late I find , I find too well , 
Too well stood my estate . 
then Love where is thy favour , 
That makes thy tyrements sweet ? 
Where is the Cause that men have thought 
Their death through thee , but meet ? 
The stately chaste disdain , 
The secret thankfulness , 
The Grace reserved , the common light 
That shines through worthiness . 
OH that it were not so , 
Or I it could excuse ! 
O that the wrath of jealousy 
My judgement might abuse ! 
OH frail unconstant Sex ! 
OH Faith and trust in none ! 
no women Angels are , but lo , 
My Mistress is a woman . 
Yet hate I but the fault , 
And not the faulty one , 
Ne can I rid me of the bands 
I which I lie alone . 
I love , I like , whose like 
By love was never yet , 
The Prince , the Poor , the old , the young , 
The fond , or full of wit. 
Here still remain , must I , 
By wrong , by death , by shame ; 
I cannot blot out of my breast , 
That Love wrought in her name : 
I cannot set at naught 
That I have held so dear ; 
I cannot make it seem so far , 
That is indeed so near . 
I do not mean henceforth 
Such strange will to profess , 
As one that could betray such troth 
To build on sickleness : 
But it shall never fail 
That my Faith bare in hand ; 
I gave my word , my word gave me , 
Both word and gift shall stand : 
Since than it must be thus , 
And this is all too ill , 
I yield me Captive to my course 
My hard fate to fulfil . 
The solitary woods 
My City shall become ; 
The darkest Dens shall be my lodge , 
In which I rest or run . 
Of Hebon black , my board , 
The worm my feast shall be , 
Wherewith my body shall be fed , 
Till they do feed on me : 
Of N●●be my wine , 
My bed of craggy Rock , 
The Serpents hiss my harmony , 
The screeching Owl my Clock . 
My exercise naught else 
But raging agonies , 
My Books of spiteful Fortune's foils 
And doleful tragedies . 
My walks the Parks of Plaints , 
My prospect into hell , 
Where Sisyphus and all his Peers 
In endless pains do dwell . 
My Muse if any ask , 
Whose wrathful state is such , 
Die ere thou let his Name be known , 
His folly shows so much . 
P. That Lust is not his Aim . 

O do not tax me with a brutish Love , 
Impute not Lust alone to my desire , 
no such profane aspersions ought to me 
From you the sacred Author of my fire . 
I seek your love , and if you that deny . 
All joys that you and all the world can give , 
My lovesick soul would little satisfy ; 
Which wants your Grace , not food to make it live , 
It is your better part I would enjoy , 
Your fair affections I would call mine own ; 
't is but a prostitute , and bestial joy 
Which seeks the gross material use alone : 
The towns not ours , the market place unwon , 
Nor do I her enjoy , whose heart 's not mine , 
Heart's Conquest is the worthy ambition : 
Seal of our worth , as ravishment Divine , 
Invincible to strength of human hand , 
Union Divine of mutual burning hearts , 
Which both subdued , triumphing , both command 
Sovereign delights , which God to man imparts . 
O let me in this true joy happy be , 
Or never may you be enjoyed by me . 
Verses made by Sir B. R , 

O faithless world , and thy most faithless part , 
A woman's heart : 
The true shop of variety , where sits 
Nothing but fits 
And fevers of desire , and pangs of Love , 
Which toys remove : 
Why was she born to please , or I to trust 
Words written in dust . 
Suffering her looks to govern my despair , 
My pain for air ; 
And fruit of time rewarded with untruth , 
the food of youth . 
Untrue she was , yet I believed her eyes , 
instructed spies : 
Till I was taught that Love is but a school 
to breed a fool : 
Or was it absence that did make her strange , 
base flower of change ? 
Or sought she more than triumphs of denial , 
to see a trial , 
How far her smiles commanded on my weakness , 
yield and confess : 
Excuse not now thy folly , nor her nature , 
blush and endure 
As well thy shame , as passions that were vain ; 
and think thy gain , 
To know that love lodged in a woman's breast , 
is but a guest : 
Sonnet . P.  

Wrong not dear Empress of my heart , 
The merits of true passion , 
With thinking that he feels no smart 
That sues for no compassion ; 
Since if my plaints seem not to prove 
The Conquest of thy Beauty , 
It comes not from defect of Love , 
But from excess of duty . 
For knowing that I sue to serve , 
A Saint of such perfection , 
As all Divine , but none deserve 
A place in her affection . 
I rather choose to want relief 
then venture the revealing , 
Where glory recommends the grief , 
Despair destroys the healing . 
Thus those desires that climb too high 
For any mortal Lover , 
When Reason cannot make them die , 
Discretion doth them cover : 
Yet when Discretion doth bereave 
the plaints which I should utter , 
then thy Discretion may perceive 
that silence is a suitor . 
Silence in Love bewrays more woe 
than words though never so witty ; 
The beggar that is dumb you know 
may challenge double pity . 
then wrong not dear heart of my heart , 
my true , though secret passion , 
He smarteth most that hides his smart , 
and sues for no compassion . 
P. That he will still persevere in his Love.  

Nay , I must love thee still ; 
Be it for those good deeds thou hast done , 
That thou hast loved me once , hath wone , 
And made me ever thine ; 
Though I am tempted and provoked with scorn , 
My Love cannot decline . 
Though I with hopes , doubts , and despairs an torn , 
Nay should I fret , think , grieve and die 
For thee , and know not why ; 
Yet I must love thee still . 
Nothing removes my heart , 
Ages that changes , and ( slow things ) move , 
May wear my body , not my Love , 
So fixed I am on thee , 
That all thy spite cannot device 
A wrong to trouble me . 
Alas I dote in all thy injuries , 
Though all thy looks were feigned , & thy sighs wind , 
Though thy free vows thou shouldst unbind , 
Nothing could move my heart . 
Nay I must ●ove thee , still 
Love that wears , and into ashes goeth , in thee 
Raiseth new bodies up in me : 
I am Love's wildfire right , 
Whose powerful tempered flames being rightly bred , 
Burns by his opposite . 
Hopes kill , and violent despairs have fed 
My passions , I have power to live and die ; 
Nay , should it opposed destiny , 
Yet I must love thee still : 
P. A Sonnet . 

Dear leave thy home and come with me , 
That scorn the world for love of thee : 
Here we will live within this Park , 
A Court of joy and pleasures Ark.  
Here we will hunt , here we will range , 
Constant in Love , our sports we 'll change : 
Of hearts if any change we make , 
I will have thine , thou mine shalt take . 
Here we will walk upon the Lawns , 
And see the tripping of the Fawns ; 
And all the Deer shall wait on thee , 
thou shalt command both them and me . 
The Leaves a whispering noise shall make , 
Their Mufick-notes the birds shall take , 
And while thou art in quiet sleep , 
And the green wood shall silence keep . 
And while my herds about thee feed , 
Love's lessons in thy face I 'll read , 
And feed upon thy lovely look , 
For beauty hath no fairer book . 
it 's not the weather , nor the air , 
It is thyself that is so fair ; 
Nor doth it rain when heaven lours , 
But when you frown , then fall the showers . 
One Sun alone moves in the sky , 
Two Suns thou hast , one in each eye ; 
Only by day that sun gives light , 
Where thine doth rise , there is no night . 
Fair starry twins , scorn not to shine 
Upon my Lambs , upon my kine ; 
My grass doth grow , my Corn and wheat , 
My fruit , my vines thrive by their heat . 
thou shalt have wool , thou shalt have silk , 
thou shalt have honey , wine and milk ; 
thou shalt have all , for all is due , 
Where thoughts are free , and love is true . 
P. A Sonnet , 

DORON the sad Shepherd's swain , 
Who abroad had long time been , 
Coming to those Fields again , 
Where he Cloris oft had seen . 
With love and sorrow waxes faint , 
None but his poor Cur and he , 
As he on his sheep-hooked leaned , 
It was his chance that bank to see . 
Near a little pearling Brook , 
Where the Mistress of his heart , 
Leave of faithful Doron took , 
From her presence to depart . 
He quickly found the ancient flame 
Which had oft bereaved his rest ; 
When back now to that place he came , 
Where her eyes first pierced his breast . 
Looking on the Mead and Grove 
Where her Herds are wont to browse , 
Faithful witness of his Love , 
Which so oft had heard his vows . 
Where he had seen his Cloris merry , 
Walking in the pleasant spring , 
Tended by the Frisking Fairy , 
Dancing many a wanton Ring . 
Woods ( quoth he ) I saw you woo her , 
And as through your shades she passed , 
Humbly bowed your lops unto her , 
With each little trembling blast . 
I have seen this wandring-will 
oft the silent murmur break , 
And from the natural course stand still , 
Ravished to hear her speak . 
In these Meadows richly dight , 
Gathering strowing for her bowers , 
The bees are dazzled in her sight , 
Taking her blue veins for Flowers . 
Stingless on her temples stuck , 
Famine could not threaten death , 
But their labour quite forsaken , 
For the sweetness of her breath . 
I have seen the gentle wind 
His most speedy course forbear , 
And it wondr'ous sport to find , 
In dallying with her braided hair . 
Never did the morn awake her 
If herself but once she showed , 
But the birds would Music make her , 
Still to welcome her abroad . 
then poor shepherd Swain quoth he , 
Let thy thoughts of her suffice , 
It is to high a task for thee 
To tell the wonders of her eyes . 
OH dear Cloris then come to us , 
Bless the Summer with thy sight ; 
Or thy absence will undo us , 
For the world will half be night . 
P. On one heart made of two . 

IF that you must needs go , 
What shall our one heart do ? 
This one made of our two . 
Madam , two hearts we broke , 
And from them both did take 
The best , one heart to make . 
It told me in your breast , 
Where it might hope to rest ; 
For if it were my guest , 
For certainly it knew , 
That I would still anew 
Be sending it to you . 
Half this is of your heart , 
Mine in th' other part , 
Joined by our equal art . 
Were it cemented , or sown 
By shreds or pieces known , 
We each might find our own . 
Never I think had two 
Such work , so much to do 
An Unity to woe ; 
Yours was so cold and chaste , 
Whilst mine with Zeal did waste , 
Like fire with water placed . 
But 't is dissolved , and fixed 
So curiously , and mixed , 
no difference is betwixt ; 
But shall we agree 
By whom it kept shall be , 
Whether by you or me ? 
How my heart did entreat , 
How pant , how it did beaten , 
Till it could give yours heat ; 
Till to that temper brought , 
With either's mixture wrought , 
That blessing either's thought . 
It cannot two breasts fill , 
One must be heartless still 
Until the other william 
It was with me to day , 
When I willed it to say 
With whether it would stay . 
In such a height it lies 
From this base world's dull eyes , 
That heaven it not envies . 
All that this Earth can show , 
Our hearts shall not once know , 
For it too vile and low . 
P. That he would not be beloved . 

Disdain me still , that I may ever love , 
For who his Love enjoys , can love no more , 
The war once past , with peace men Cowards prove , 
And Ships returned , do rot upon the shore : 
then though thou frown , I 'll say thou art most fair , 
And still I 'll love , though still I must despair . 
As heats to life , so is desire to love , 
For these once quenched , both life and love are done ; 
Let not my sighs nor tears thy virtue move , 
Like basest mettles , do not melt too soon . 
Laugh at my woes , although I ever mourn , 
Love surfeits with rewards , his Nurse is scorn . 
Benj. Rudier of Tears . 

Who would have thought there could have been 
Such joy in Tears wept for our sin ! 
Mine eye hath seen , my heart hath proved 
The most and best of earthly joys , 
The sweet of love , and being loved , 
Masks , Feasts , and Plays , and such like toys . 
Yet this one tear which now doth fall , 
In true delight exceeds them all . 
Indeed mine eyes at first let in 
Those guests that did these woes begin : 
Therefore mine eyes in tears and grief 
Are justly drowned , but that these tears 
Should comfort bring , 't is past belief . 
OH God , in this thy Grace appears ; 
thou that mak'st light from darkness spring , 
mak'st joys to weep , and sadness sing . 
OH where am I ! what may I think ! 
Help , help , alas my heart doth sink : 
Thus tossed in seas of woe , 
Thus laden with my sin , 
Waves of despair dash in , 
And threat mine overthrow . 
What heart oppressed with such a weight , 
Can choose but sink and perish straight . 
Yet as at sea in storms , men choose 
The ship to save , their goods to lose . 
So in this fearful storm , 
This danger to prevent , 
Before all hopes be spent , 
I 'll choose the lesser harm . 
My tears to seas I will convert , 
And drown mine eyes to save my heart . 
R.  

OH God my God what shall I give 
To thee in thanks ? I am and live 
In thee ; and thou dost safe preserve 
My health , my fame , my goods , my rent : 
thou mak'st me eat , whilst others starve , 
And sing , whilst others do lament . 
Such unto me thy blessings are , 
As though I were thine only care . 
But o my God , thou art more kind , 
When I look inward on my mind , 
thou fill'st my heart with humble joy , 
With patience , meek , and fervent love , 
( All other loves which doth destroy ) 
With Faith which nothing can remove , 
And hope assured of Heaven's bliss : 
This is my state , thy Grace is this . 
Of Friendship . 

Friendship on earth we may as easily find , 
As he the North-east Passage , that is blind ; 
't is not unlike th' imaginary stone , 
That tattered Chemists long have doted on : 
Sophisticate affection is the best 
This age affords , no friend abides the test ; 
They make a glorious show , a little space , 
But tarnish in the rain , like Copper-lace . 
Or nealled in affliction but one day , 
They smoke , and stink , and vapour quite away . 
We miss the true materials , choosing Friends , 
On virtue we project not , but our ends . 
So by degrees when we embrace so many , 
We courted are like whores , not loved of any : 
Good turns ill placed , that we on all men heap , 
Are seeds of that ingratitude we reap . 
And he that is so sweet , he none denies , 
Was made of honey for the nimble flies . 
Choose one of two Companions of thy life , 
then be as true as thou wouldst have thy wife . 
Though he live joyless that enjoys no friend , 
He that hath many , pays for 't in the end . 
P. A Sonnet . 

Saint did never yet object 
Former knowledges defect 
Against those whose zealous vows , 
True devotion avows : 
If my merit yet be small 
To procure your love withal , 
Time alone to you must prove , 
How well I will deserve your love . 
Grace in Saints ought to abound , 
Grace never grows on merit's ground . 
Be then gracious , as I true , 
Constant and faithful unto you ; 
And my Fortunes that have crowned 
Me happy on that Relics ground , 
Shall be all ascribed to serve 
You that do all praise deserve . 
P. To his Mistress , of his Friend's Opinion of her , and his answer to his Friend's Objections , with his constancy towards her . 

One with admiration told me , 
He did wonder much & marvel , 
( As by chance he did behold ye ) 
How I could become so servile 
To thy beauty , which he swears 
Every Ale house Lettuce wears . 
then he frames a second notion 
From thy revoluting eyes , 
Saying , such a wanton motion 
From their lustre did arise , 
That of force thou couldst not be 
From the shame of women free . 
then he blames the work of Nature , 
' Cause she framed thy body tall , 
Alleging that so high a stature 
Was most subject to a fall : 
Still detracting from thy worth , 
That which most doth set thee forth . 
So the Buzzard Phoebus fly's , 
When the Eagles' piercing eye 
See those noble mysteries 
Which adorn the azured sky ; 
Bravest objects so we find , 
Strike the weaker judgements blind . 
For I know thy native beauty , 
Teaching Art her imitation ; 
Owes no mortal Power a duty , 
But as free from alteration 
( If not whiter ) as the skin 
Of the spotless Ermylin . 
And those Love-alluring Darts 
Shot from thy tralucent eye , 
To the knowing man imparts 
Such an awful Majesty , 
That each man may read the mirror 
Of thy mind , and he his error . 
If thy curious body's frame , 
To thy making add no splendour , 
Why adore we Cynthia's Name , 
And our Poets most commend her 
When amongst her Nymphs she crushes , 
Cedar-like ' amongst lower bushes . 
But my Julia I am sure , 
Be thou low or high of stature , 
thou from blemish art , and as pure 
As the yester-night-born creature ; 
And though blind men talk of light , 
None can judge that wants his sight . 
P. To his Mistress on his Death . 

O let me groan one word into thine ear , 
And with that groan break all my vital strings ; 
thou that wouldst never , now vouchsafe to hear 
How Leda's bird on sweet Meander sings : 
So dying tapers lend their fiery flashes , 
And deadest Cinders have some burning ashes . 
Those were the looks that once maintained my strength , 
Those were the words that all my parts did cherish ; 
And what ( Unkindest ) wilt thou gain at length , 
If by the same , I miserably perish : 
This , that a frown did in a minute starve , 
That which a smile did many years preserve . 
B. R. his Ballet . 

Since every man I come among , 
Sings praises of his choice , 
I 'll make my Love some pretty song , 
she 'll fit it for a voice . 
As for descent and birth in her , 
You see before you seek ; 
The house of York and Lancaster 
United in her Cheek . 
I have a Bracelet of her hair . 
I have a ribon too ; 
The Fleece and Garter never were 
Such Orders as these two . 
My mind unto her once I broke , 
And whispered in her ear 
A tale of Love , an easy yoke , 
Which far her betters bear . 
And told her , if she lost that hour ; 
Her blossom would be dead ; 
She said she meant to keep that flower 
To deck her wedding-bed . 
I gave her homely Country Gloves , 
She took 'em as th' were meant ; 
For those as well can show men's Loves , 
As can a Spanish scent . 
I told her that poor modesty 
Was out of fashion quite ; 
She said that proof looked like a lie , 
And did my Reason slight . 
I said the thing for which I woe , 
Is pain and not desire ; 
She said 't was work each man would do , 
And take it for his hite . 
So when those ways I hoped would wean 
Her from her fond intent , 
The fool replied , she did not mean 
To sin by precedent . 
When mine eyes , first admiring your rare beauty , 
Secretly stole the Picture of your face ; 
They , fearing they might err , with humble duty , 
Through unknown paths , conveyed it to that place , 
Where Reason and true Judgement hand in hand 
Sat , and each workmanship of senses stand . 
Reason could find no Reason but to love it , 
So rich of beauty was it , full of Grace : 
True Judgement scanned each part , and did approve it 
To be the model of some heavenly face ; 
And both agreed to place it in my heart , 
Whence they decreed it never should depart . 
then , since I was not born to be so blessed , 
Your real self fair Mistress to obtain , 
Yet must your image dwell within my breast , 
And in that secret Closet still remain : 
Where all alone retired , I 'll sit and view 
Your Picture , Mistress , since I may not you . 
R.  

Why do we love these things which we call Women , 
Which are like Feathers blown with every wind , 
Regarding lest those which do most esteem them , 
And most deceitful when they seem most kind ; 
And all the virtue that their beauty graces , 
It is but painted like unto their faces . 
Their greatest glory is in rich attire , 
Which is extracted from some hopeful livers , 
Whose wits and wealth are bend to their desire , 
When they regard the gift more than the givers . 
And to increase their hopes of future bliss , 
they 'll sometimes stretch their conscience for a kiss . 
Some love the winds that bring in golden flowers , 
And some are merely wone with commendation ; 
Some love and hate , and all within two hours , 
And that 's a fault amongst them most in fashion : 
But put them all within a scale together , 
Their worth in weight will scarce pull down a feather . 
And yet I would not discommend them all , 
If I did know some worth to be in any : 
't is strange , that since the time of Adam's fall , 
That God did make none good , and made so many ; 
And if he did , for those I truly mourn , 
Because they died before that I was born . 
Why with unkindest swiftness dost thou turn 
From me , whose absence thou didst truly mourn ; 
Of which thou mad'st me such a seeming view , 
As Unbelievers would have thought it true . 
We have been private , and thou know'st of mine , 
( Which is even all ) as much as I of thine : 
Dost thou remember ? Let me call 't ' accounted 
Thy pleasant Garden , and that levy Mount , 
Whose top is with an open Arbour crowned . 
Dost thou remember ( OH securest beauty ) 
Where of thy own free motion ( more than duty ) 
And unrequired , thou solemnly didst swear , 
( Of which avenging heaven can witness bear ) 
That from the time thou gav'st thy spoils to me , 
thou wouldst maintain a spotless chastity , 
And unprofaned by any second hand , 
From sport and Love's delight removed stand , 
Till I ( whose absence seemingly was mourned ) 
Should from a foreign Kingdom be returned : 
Of this thou mad'st Religion , and an oath . 
But see the frailty of a woman's troth ; 
Scarce had the sun ( to many rooms assigned ) . 
Been thrice within the changeful waves confined , 
And I scarce three day's journey from thine eyes , 
When thou new love in thy heart didst device , 
And gav'st the Relics of thy Virgin-head , 
Upon the easiest prayer that could be said . 
't is true , I left thee to a dangerous age , 
Where vice in Angel's shape does title wage 
With ancient virtue , both disguising so , 
That hardly weaker eyes can either know : 
Besides , I left thee in the hour of fears , 
And in the covetous spring of all thy years , 
what time a beauty that hath well begun , 
Asks other than the solace of a Nun. 
But since thy wanton soul so deer did prise 
The game , that thou for it didst underprize 
Thy faith , and all that to good fame belongs ; 
Couldst thou not cover it from common tongues . 
But cheapest eyes must see thee do amiss ? 
My Rhimes that won thee , never taught thee this : 
thou mightst have wandered in the paths of love , 
And neither leaf-less hill , nor shady grove 
Have been unpressed by thy wanton weight , 
Yet thou thought honest , hadst thou used slight . 
Much care and business hath the chastest Dame 
To guard herself from undeserved blame ; 
What artifice and cunning then must serve 
To colour them that just reproof deserve ? 
't is not a work for every woman's wit , 
And the lesle marvel thou neglectedst it . 
That which amazes me the most , is this , 
That having never trodden but amiss , 
And done me wrongs , that do as much deny 
To suffer measure , as infinity : 
When I approach , thou turnest thy head awry , 
As if sore eyes and scorn could satisfy , 
Can second wrongs the former expiate , 
And work them out of memory and date ; 
Or teach me ill in human Precepts durst , 
That second wrongs can expiate the first ? 
thou art malicious , as incontinent , 
And mightst have met with such a Patient , 
Whose wronged virtue to just rage invited , 
Would have revenged , and in thy dust delighted . 
But I that have no gall , when once I love , 
And whom no great thing under heaven can move , 
am well secured from Fortune's weak alarms , 
And free from apprehension , as from harms . 
Thus do I leave thee to the multitude , 
That on my leaving hastily intrude . 
Enjoy thou many , or rejoice in one , 
I was before them , and before me none . 
A DIALOGUE . 

MAN P.   BE not proud , ' cause fair and trim , 
But let those lips be basted , 
Those eyes will hollow prove , and dim , 
That lip and brow be wasted . 
And to love , who 'll be persuaded , 
Sullied Flowers , or beauty faded ? 


WOMAN . R.   could Rose or Lily purer be , 
' Cause they smelled , or looked like me ? 
Yet pride should never reach my mind , 
But beauty though it useless lie , 
Is kept from stains by being laid by : 
So'ts better to be chaste then kind . 


MAN P.   O thou art soft as is the air , 
Or the words that court thee fair . 
then let those flames by Lovers felt , 
That scorched my heart , make thine to melt . 


WOMAN . R.   Thy words are sweet as is deceit , 
Sugared as the Lover's bait , 
And do whisper in mine ear , 
Love makes bargains sweet , but dear . 


MAN P.   thou knowest not then that all the fair , 
Give youth to Love , and age to Prayer ▪ 


WOMAN . R.   't is a Doctrine cannot be 
Sound in you , or safe in me . 


R. On black Hair and Eyes . 

IF shadows be the Pictures Excellence , 
And make them seem more lively to the sense ; 
If stars in the bright day are lost from sight , 
And seem most glorious in the mask of Night ; 
Why would you think ( rare Creature ) that you lack 
Perfection , cause your hair and eyes are black ; 
Or that your heavenly beauty that exceeds 
The new-sprung Lilies in their Maidenheads . 
The damask colour of your cheeks and lips , 
Should suffer by their darkness an Eclipse : 
Rich Diamonds shine brightest being set , 
And compassed within a Foil of Jet : 
Nor was it fit that Nature should have made 
So bright a sun to shine without some shade : 
It seems that Nature when she first did fancy 
Your rare Composure , studied Negromancy , 
That when to you this gift she did impart , 
She used altogether the black Art ; 
By which infused Power from Magic took , 
You do command all spirits with a look ; 
She drew those Magic Circles in your eyes , 
And made your hair the Chain wherewith she ties 
Rebelling hearts ; those blue veins which appear , 
Winding Meanders about either Sphere 
Mysterious Figures are ; and when you list 
Your voice commands as the Exorcist . 
O if in Magic you have power so far , 
Vouchsafe me to be your Familiar . 
Nor hath Dame Nature her black Art revealed 
To outward parts alone , some lie concealed : 
For as by heads of Springs men often know 
The nature of the streams that run below ; 
So your black hair and eyes do give direction , 
To think the rest to be of that complexion ; 
That rest where all rest lies that blesseth man , 
That Indian Mine , that Straight of Magilon ; 
That world-dividing Gulf , where he that venter's 
With swelling sails , and ravished senses , enters 
To a new world of bliss . Pardon I pray , 
If my rude Muse presumeth to display 
Secrets unknown , or hath her bounds o'erpast 
In praising sweetness , which I never did taste : 
Starved men do know there 's meat , & blind men may 
Though hid from light , presume there is a day . 
The Rover in the mark his arrow sticks 
Sometimes , as well as he that shoots at pricks : 
And if that I might aim my shaft aright , 
The black mark I would hit , and not the white . 
BENJ. RUDIER TO THE PRINCE At his Return from SPAIN . 

SIR , such my fate was , that I had no store 
T' erect a goodly Pile before my door ; 
Nor were my Flagons tired by being taught 
Their several stages up and down the Vault , 
Upon the great blessed Day of your return , 
Wherein nothing at all was seen to mourn , 
Except it were the Heavens , and well they might , 
Fearing our triumphs should outshine their light : 
So open hearted men were , as ' 't 'had been 
no point of faith to think excess a sin . 
The poor man tricked himself with wine that day , 
And did not fear to make his Landlord stay ; 
The Tradesman shut his shop and did not care 
For the retailing his neglected ware ; 
For well he knew there landed on the shore , 
A prize that him and all the Isle might store . 
The Inland liver that could never find 
The east from west , but by a Church , nor wind 
In his lives compass ever yet did know , 
But that which to his Summer-fruits a foe , 
Was better learned ; and now he knew by art 
What filled your sails , & what wind filled his heart : 
I that have sense of blessings cannot show 
In outward things , the joy that I do own ; 
And thanks to heaven for your safe return , 
Yet have a fire within them that do burn 
As bright as theirs , which never shall decay 
Till fate assign to me a further day . 
R. Of deformity in a Man  

What if rude Nature hath lesle care expressed 
About thy shape , or wantonly in jest 
Composed thee ? or maliciously in despite ? 
Or lame with her left hand , or without light ? 
Be but as bold , thou may'st as well find Grace , 
As one that hath the most corrected face , 
Or levelled trunk , whose neatness to beget 
A Tailor , and a Barber's virtue met 
Upon a Sempster ; for a woman's eye 
Seldom betrays her heart to Cemetry : 
But some ill-favoured thought , that bears more sway 
To foulest hope , oft times prepares a way , 
Either that beauty fairest doth appear 
When some deformed obects planted near : 
Or Sovereignty ( at which they chiefly aim ) 
Is then most absolute when men can claim 
Lest favour , he who hopes , or strives to approve 
His person , doth submit , and yield to Love 
Upon conditions ; but that man whose state , 
Himself considered , seems quite desperate , 
Stoops to all usage , and will live , or die 
To serve , or suffer under tyranny . 
Some of these Reasons , or some else unknown , 
It may be more , or it may be none . 
An Epitaph on the Countess of Pembroke . 

Underneath this sable Hearse , 
Lies the subject of all Verse ; 
Syan●y's' Sister , Pembroke's Mother : 
Death , ere thou hast killed another , 
Learned , fair , and good as she , 
Time shall throw a dart at thee . 
Marble Giles let no man raise 
To her Name for after-dayes ; 
Some kind woman born as she , 
Reading this ( like Niobe ) 
Shall turn Marble , and become 
Both her Mourner , and her Tomb.  
Sonnet . P.  

Blind beauty ! If it be a loss 
To lose so poor a man , 
As neither multiply nor cross 
good or bad fortune can ; 
then are you poorer than you were , 
for I am gotten free ; 
Unwilling to acquaint your ear 
with what your eye might see . 
What needed words , when from mine eyes 
such sparks of Love flew out , 
That you might easily surmise 
his fires were there about . 
Though I forsaken the beaten way , 
the path in which I trod , 
Such as know all Love's Country , say 
was nearer than the Road. 
The tongue did great exploits at first , 
so did the Canon too ; 
But both those now have done their worst , 
and no such wonders do : 
As Engines of a naughty sort 
for Love to use in fight , 
After to make a loud report , 
then carry to the white ▪ 
I was a Lantern all of Love , 
though of the closer kind , 
Directing you which way to move , 
When it did others blind : 
And you might always undescried 
have walked from place to place ; 
Had you not turned the shining side 
backward upon your face : 
So since not want of light in me , 
but that ill governed light ; 
Both made yourself unapt to see , 
And taught the blind their sight : 
Henceforth I 'll close the Lantern quite , 
To expiate that sin ; 
And seem without as dark as night , 
though bright as day within . 
Mark how you Eddie steals a way , 
From the rude stream into the Bay : 
There locked up safe , she doth divorce 
Her waters from the Channels course , 
And scorns the torrent that did bring 
Her headlong from her native spring . 
Now doth she with her new Love play , 
Whilst he runs murmuring away . 
Mark how she court's the banks , whilst they 
As amorously their arms display 
TO embrace , and clip her silver waves ; 
See how she strokes their sides , and craves 
An entrance there , which they deny ; 
Whereat she frowns , threatening to fly 
Home to her stream , and begins to swim 
Backward , but from the Channels brim 
Smiling returns into the Creek , 
With thousand dimples on her cheek . 
Be thou this Eddie , and I 'll make 
My breast thy shore , where thou shalt take 
Secure repose , and never dream 
Of the quite forsaken stream ; 
Let him to the wild Ocean haste , 
There lose his Colour , name , and taste : 
thou shalt save all , and safe from him 
Within these arms for ever swim . 
Of Jealousy . 

Qu. From whence was first this Fury hurled , 
This Jealousy into the world ? 
Came she from hell ? no , there doth reign 
Eternal hatred with disdain ; 
But she the daughter is of Love , 
Sister of beauty . Resp . then above 
She must derive from the third sphere 
Her heavenly offspring . 
Ans . Neither there , 
From those immortal flames could she 
Draw her cold frozen pedigree . 
Qu. If not in heaven , nor hell , where then 
Had she her birth ? 
An : i' th' hearts of men : 
Beauty and Fear did her create 
Younger than Love , elder than Hate ; 
Sister to both , by Beauty's side 
To Love , by Fear to Hate allied : 
Despair her issue is , whose race 
Of frightful issues , drowns the space 
Of the wide Earth , in a swollen flood 
Of wrath , revenge , spite , rage and blood . 
Qu. O how can such a spurious Line 
Proceed from Parents so divine ? 
Ans . As streams which from the Crystal spring 
Do sweet , and dear , their waters bring : 
Yet mingling with the brackish Main , 
Nor taste , nor colour they retain . 
Qu. Yet Rivers betwixt their own banks flow 
Still fresh ; Can Jealousy do so ? 
Ans . Yes ; while she keeps the steadfast ground 
OH hope , and fear , her equal bound : 
Hope sprung from favour , worth , or chance , 
Towards the fair Object doth advance ; 
Whilst fear as watchful Centinel , 
Doth the invading foe repel ; 
And Jealousy ( thus mixed ) doth prove 
The season , and the salt of Love. 
But when fear takes a larger scope , 
Stifling the child of Reason , Hope 
then sitting in the usurped throne , 
She like a tyrant rules alone ; 
As the wild Ocean unconfined , 
And raging as the Northern wind . 
P. Sonnet . 

Ladies flee from Love's sweet tale , 
Oaths steeped in tears do oft prevail , 
Grief is infectious , and the air 
Inflamed with sighs , will blast the Fair ; 
then stop your ears when Lovers cry , 
Lest yourself weeping with soft eye , 
Shall with a sorrowing tear repay 
That pity which you cast away . 
Young men flee when beauty darts 
Amorous glances at your hearts ; 
A quick eye gives the surer aim , 
And Ladies lips have power to maim : 
Now in her lips , now in her eyes , 
Laped in a kiss , or smile , Love lies : 
then flee betimes ; for only they 
Do conquer Love , that run away . 
Sonnet . 

Fie that men should so complain 
Of women for unkindness , 
And accuse them of disdain , 
when 't is but their own blindness . 
For though at first they do seem coy , 
and use a faint denial ; 
It is not fit they should enjoy , 
that can abide no trial : 
Constant Love is like to Fire , 
that being oppressed , burns clearer , 
And women know when they retire , 
It makes true Love love dearer : 
How many favours should they miss , 
what wooing and protesting , 
Were 't not they use some art in this , 
and feed them with contesting . 
Women therefore wisely seem 
at first the more disdainful , 
Because they think that men esteem 
that sweet , that 's somewhat painful . 
But henceforth learn , although they swear 
And vow they cannot love you , 
Do not believe them , never fear , 
't is but their art to prove you . 
P. SONG . 

Say pretty wanton , tell me why 
thou canst not love so well as I ; 
Sat thee down , and thou shalt see 
That I delight in none but thee . 
Say pretty wanton , be not coy , 
For thou alone art all my joy : 
If a smile thou wilt not lend , 
Yet let thy gentle ears attend . 
If thou stop those gentle ears , 
then look upon these brinish tears ; 
Which do force me still to cry , 
Pity me now , or else I die . 
Fairest fair , my Love , my Jewel , 
wilt thou never cease to grieve me ? 
Look and pity , be not cruel , 
Let thy love at length relieve me ; 
Stay and hear my tongue 's sad speaking , 
Words must keep my heart from breaking . 
Long and dear have I loved thee , 
Love by right should be rewarded : 
Words and Vows could never move thee , 
Tears and sighs were not regarded . 
O let Love cause some relenting , 
Death succeeds thy not consenting . 
P. A Sonnet . 

SO glides a long the wanton Brook 
With gentle pace into the main , 
Courting the banks with amorous look , 
He never means to see again . 
And so does Fortune use to smile 
Upon the short lived favorite's face , 
Whose swelling hopes she doth beguile , 
And always casts him in the race ; 
And so doth the Fantastic boy , 
The god of the ill-managed flames , 
Who never kept word in promised joy 
To Lover , nor to to loving Dames : 
So all alike will constant prove , 
Both Fortune , running streams , and Love.  
P. Of a fair Gentlewoman scarce Marriageable . 

Why should Passion lead thee blind , 
cause thy Lydia proves unkind : 
She is too young to know delight , 
And is not plumed for Cupid's flight : 
She cannot yet in height of pleasure , 
Pay her Love with equal measure ; 
But like a Rose new blown , doth feed 
The Eye alone , but yields no Seed . 
She is yet but in her Spring , 
And bears no Fruit till Cupid bring 
A hotter season with his Fire , 
Which soon will ripen her desire : 
Autumn will shortly come and greet her , 
Making her taste and colour sweeter ; 
And than her ripeness will be such , 
That she will fall e'en with a touch . 
P. A Paradox , that Beauty lies not in Woman's faces , but in their Lover's Eyes . 

Why should thy look requite so ill 
all other Eyes , 
Making them Prisoners to thy will , 
Where alone thy Beauty lies : 
When man's Eyes first looked upon thee , 
They bestowed thy Beauty on thee . 
When thy Colours first were seen 
By judging sight , 
Had man's Eyes praised Black or Green , 
then thy Face had not been Bright : 
He that loved thee , then would find 
Thee as little fair as kind . 
If all others had been blind , 
Fair had not been ; 
None thy red and White could find 
Fleeting , if thou wert unseen . 
To touch white Skins is not Divine , 
Ethiopes Lips are soft as thine . 
P. A Lover to his Mistress . 

The purest piece of Nature is my choice , 
this days breath , 
and to morrow's death , 
Have several dooms from her all-charming voice , 
So beyond fair , that no glass can her flatter ; 
so sweetly mild , 
that tongues defiled , 
Dare not on her their envious stories scatter . 
The witty forms of beauty that are shed 
in flaming streams , 
from Poet's themes , 
Like shadows when herself appears , are fled . 
OH let me live in th' heaven of her bright eye ▪ 
Great Love , I 'll be thy constant Votary . 
Description of a wished Mistress . 

Not that I wish my Mistress , 
Or more or lesle than what she is , 
write I these lines ; for 't is too late , 
Rules to prescribe unto my fate . 
But yet as tender stomaches call 
For some choice meats that bear not all ; 
So a queasy Lover may impart 
What Mistress 't is must take his heart . 
First , I must have her richly sped 
With Nature's blossoms , white and red ; 
For flaming hearts will quickly die , 
That have no fuel from the eye . 
Yet this alone will never win , 
Except some treasure lie within ; 
For where the spoyl's not worth the stay , 
Men raise the siege , and march away . 
I 'd have her wise enough to know 
When , and to whom a Grace to show ; 
For she that doth at random choose , 
She will her choice as soon refuse . 
And yet methinks I 'd have her mind 
TO a flowing courtesy inclined , 
And tenderhearted as a Maid , 
Yet pity only when I prayed . 
And I could wish her true to be , 
( Mistake me not ) I mean to me ; 
She that love's me , and love's one more 
Will love the Kingdom o'er and o'er . 
And I would have her full of wit , 
So she know how to huswife it ; 
But she whose insolence makes her dare 
To cry her wit , will sell more ware . 
Some other things delight will bring , 
As if she dance , or play , or sing ; 
If hers be safe , what though her parts 
Catch ten thousand foreign hearts . 
But let me see , should she be proud , 
A little pride must be allowed : 
Each amorous Boy will sport & prate 
Too freely , where he sees no state . 
I cared not much if I let down 
Sometimes a chiding or a frown ; 
But if she wholly quench desire , 
't is hard to kindle a new fire , 
To smile , to toy , 't is not amiss 
Sometimes to interpose a kiss , 
But do not cloy ; Sweet things are good 
And pleasant , but are naught for food . 
But stay ! Nature hath over-writ my Art 
In her , to whom I offer up my heart : 
And Evening-passengers shall sooner trace 
The wanton beams that dance on Thames smooth face ; 
And find the tract where once the foot did stray 
On the moist Sands , which tides have washed away ; 
then men shall know my heart , or find her spot , 
If a revolt of hers procure it not . 
R , One that was a Suitor to a Gentlewoman more virtuous than fair , wrote these to a friend of his that disliked her . 

Why sleights thou her whom I approve , 
thou art no Peer to try my Love , 
Nor canst discern where her form lies , 
Unless thou saw'st her with my eyes ; 
Say she were foul , or blacker than 
The Night , or Sunburnt Indian , 
Yet rated in my fancy , she 
Is so as she appears to me : 
It is not Feature , nor a Face , 
That doth my free Election grace ; 
Nor is my fancy only led 
By a well tempered white and red ; 
could I enamoured be on those , 
The Lily and the blushing Rose 
United in one stock , might be 
As dear unto my thoughts as she . 
But I search farther , and do find 
A richer Treasure in her mind , 
Where something is so lasting fair , 
That Art nor Age cannot impair . 
Hadst thou a Perspective so clear , 
That thou couldst view my object there ; 
When thou her virtue shall espy , 
then wonder and confess , that I 
Had cause to like her ; & learn thence , 
To love by Judgement , not by sense . 
The EPICURES Paradox . 

no , worldling , no ; 't is not thy Gold , 
Which thou dost use but to behold ; 
Nor Fortune , Honour , nor long Lise , 
Nor large Possession , without strife , 
That makes thee happy , these things be 
But shadows of felicity . 
Give me a Virgin of Fifteen , 
Already voted to the Queen 
Of Lust and Lovers , whose soft Hair 
Fanned with the breath of gentle Air , 
OH ▪ respreads her shoulders like a Tent , 
And is her Veil and Ornament , 
whose tender touch would make the blood 
Wyld in the Aged , and the Good ; 
Whose Kisses fastened to the mouth 
Of threescore years , and longer sloth , 
Renews the Age , and whose bright eye , 
Obscures those lesser lights of Sky ; 
Whose snowy Breasts ( if we may call 
That Snow which never melts at all ) 
Make Jove invent a new disguise , 
In spite of Juno's Jealousies ; 
Whose every part doth reinvite 
The old decayed Appetite ; 
And in whose sweet embraces I 
Might melt myself to lust , and die . 
This is true belief , and I confess 
There is no other happiness . 
Opporiunity neglected . 

Yet was her Beauty as the blushing Rose , 
And greedy passionate was my desire , 
And Time , and Place , my reconciled Foes , 
Did with my wish , and her consent conspire : 
Why then o're-reachless of my Love's fruition , 
So eagerly pursued with rough intent , 
So dearly purchased with performed condition , 
Kept I my rude Virginity unspent ? 
Did she not sweetly kiss ? and sweetly sing ? 
And sweetly play ? and all to move my pleasure ? 
And every dalliance use , and every thing , 
And show my sullen Eyes her naked Treasure ? 
All this she did , I wilfully forbore ; 
And why ? Because me thought she was an whore . 
P. A Lover's Dedication of his Service to a Virtuous GENTLEWOMAN . 

What I in Woman long have wished to see , 
Rarest of thousands , I have found in thee ; 
Goodness , with Beauty : O! that crowns ye all , 
That makes thee perfect and Celestial . 
Beauty hath time to wither , we know ; 
But Goodness after death hath time to grow . 
Let then those Rarities in you remain , 
To show that Earth from Heaven so much can gain , 
That you a Pattern should to others be ; 
But such as aftertimes shall never see . 
Believe ( sweet Lady ) that all this is true , 
And these few Lines belong to none but you . 
P. Sonnet . 

A Restless Lover I espied 
That went from place to place , 
Lay down & turned from side to side , 
And sometimes on his face . 
And when that Medicines were applied 
In hope of intermission ; 
As one that felt no ease , he cried , 
Has Cupid no Physician ? 
What do the Ladies with their looks , 
Their kisses , and their smiles ? 
Can no Receipts in those fair Books , 
Repair their former spoils ? 
But they complain as well as we , 
Their pains have no remission , 
And when both Sexes wounded be , 
Hath Cupid no Physician ? 
Have we such Palsies , and such pains , 
Such Fevers , and such fits , 
no Quintessential Chemic Grains , 
no Esculapian wits ; 
no Creature can ( beneath the Sun ) 
Prevail in opposition ; 
And when all wonders can be done , 
Has Cupid no Physician ? 
Into what Poison do they dip 
Their Arrows and their Darts , 
That touching but an Eye or Lip , 
The pain goes to our hearts . 
But now I see before I get 
Into their Inquisition , 
That Death had never Surgeon yet , 
Nor Cupid a Physician . 
A Pastoral . 

LOVER . P.  

Shepherd , gentle Shepherd hark , 
As one that canst call rightest , 
Birds by their Name , 
Both wild and tame , 
And in their Notes delightest : 
What Voice is this , I prithee mark , 
with so much Music in it ? 
Too sweet methinks to be a Lark , 
too loud to be a Linnet ? 
Nightingales are more confused , 
And discant more at random , 
Whose warbling throats , 
( To hold out Notes ) 
Their airy tunes abandon . 
Angels stoop not now adays , 
Such Quirresters forsake us ; 
Yet Sirens may 
Our Loves betray , 
And wretched Prisoners make us ; 
Yet they must use some other way , 
then singing to deprive us 
Of our poor lives , since such sweet lays 
As these would soon revive us . 
SHEPHERD . R.  

't is not Siren we descry , 
Nor Bird in Grove residing , 
Nor Angel's Voice , 
Although as choice , 
Fond Boy thou hearest dividing ; 
But one if either thou or I 
Should face to face resemble her , 
To any of these would blushing cry , 
Away , away Dissembler . 
P. A straggling Lover reclaimed . 

Till now I never did believe , 
A man could love for virtue 's sake , 
Nor thought the absence of one Love could grieve 
That man that freely might another take . 
But since mine Eyes betrothed my heart to you , 
I find both true . 
Thy Innocence hath so my Love refined , 
I mourn thy Body's absence for thy Mind . 
Till now I never made an Oath , 
But with a purpose to forswear ; 
For to be fixed upon one Face , were sloth , 
When every Lady's Eye is Cupid's Sphere : 
But if she merit Faith from every Breast , 
Who is the best 
Of Womenkind ; how can I then be free 
To love another , having once loved thee . 
Such is the great and happy power 
Of Goodness , that it can dilate 
Itself , to make him virtuous in an hour , 
Who lived before perhaps a Reprobate . 
But since on me those wonders thou hast done , 
In truth work on 
Upon thyself , thy Sex doth want that Grace , 
To love my Truth more than a better Face . 
P. To a LADY weeping . 

DRY those fair , those Crystal Eyes , 
Which like growing Fountains rise , 
To drown their Banks ; Griefs sullen Brooks , 
Would better flow from furrowed looks : 
Thy lovely Face was never meant 
To be the Seat of Discontent : 
then clear those waterish stars again , 
That else portend a lasting Rain , 
Lest the Clouds which settle there , 
Prolong my Winter all the year ; 
And thy Example others make , 
In Love with sorrow , for thy sake . 
P. A Compliment to his Mistress . 

Ask me no more whither do stray 
The Golden Atoms of the Day ; 
For in pure Love , Heavens did prepare 
This Powder to enrich your Hair.  
Ask me no more whither doth hast 
The Nightingale when May is past ; 
For in your sweet dividing throat , 
She winters , and keeps warm her Note . 
Ask me no more where jove bestows 
( When June is passed ) the fading Rose ; 
For in your Beauties Orient deep , 
All Flowers as in their Causes sleep . 
Ask me no more where stars so bright , 
Do downward stoop in dark of Night ; 
For in your Eyes they sit , and there 
Fixed become , as in their Sphere . 
Nor ask me whether East or West , 
The Phoenix builds her spiced Nest , 
For unto you at last she fly's , 
And in your fragrant bosom dies . 
A Paradox in praise of a painted WOMAN . 

Not kiss ? by Love I must , and make impression 
As long as Cupid dares to hold his session 
Upon my flesh of blood , our kisses shall 
Out-minute time , and without number fall . 
Do not I know those Balls of blushing read , 
Which on thy Cheeks thus am'rously be spread ; 
Thy sinewy neck , those veins upon thy brow , 
Which with their azure winckles sweetly bow ; 
Are artsull borrowed , and no more thine own 
then Chains which on saint George's day are shown 
Are proper to the wearer ; yet for this 
I Idol thee , and beg a luscious kiss : 
The Fucus , and Ceruse , which on thy face 
Thy cunning hand lays on to add new grace , 
Deceive me with such pleasing fraud , that I 
find in thy Art what can in nature lie . 
Much like a Painter that upon some wall 
On which the splendent sunbeams use to fall ; 
Paints with such art a guilded Butterfly , 
That silly maids with slow moved fingers try 
To catch it , and then blush at their mistake ; 
Yet of this painted Fly much reckoning make : 
Such is our state , since that we look upon 
Is naught but colour , and proportion 
Take me a face as full of fraud and lies 
As Gypsies , or your running Lotteries ; 
That is more false , or more sophisticate 
Than are saints relics , or a man of state ; 
Yet such being glazed by the sleight of art 
Gains admiration , wins in many a heart ; 
Put case there be a difference in the mould , 
Yet may thy Venus be more choice , and hold 
A dearer treasure ; oftentimes we see 
Rich Candian wines in wooden boles to be . 
The odoriferous Civet doth not lie 
Within the Musk-cats nose , or ear , or eye ; 
But in a base place , for prudent nature 
In drawing up of various forms and stature , 
Gives from the curious shop of her rich treasure 
To fair parts comeliness , to base pleasure . 
The fairest flowers which in Spring do grow 
Are not so much for use , as for the show ; 
As Lilies , Hyacinth , and Gorgeous birth 
Of all pied flowers which diaper the earth , 
Please more with their discoloured purple train , 
then wholesome pot herbs which for use remain . 
Shall I a gaudy speckled serpent kiss ? 
Because the colour that he wears is his ? 
A perfumed Cordavant who will wear ? 
For that his scent is borrowed otherwhere . 
The robes and vestments which grace us all 
Are not our own , but adventitial . 
Time rifles Nature's Beauty , but sly Art 
Repairs by cunning this decaying part . 
Fills here a wrinkle , and there purls a Vein , 
And with her cunning hand runs o'er again 
The Breaches dented in the Arm of Time , 
And makes deformity to be no crime ; 
As when great men are gripped with sickness hand , 
Industrious Physic pregnantly doth stand 
To patch up foul Diseases , and doth strive 
To keep their tottering Carcases alive : 
Beauty a candle is , which every puff 
Blows out , and leaus naught but a stinking snuff 
To fill our Nostrils with this boldly think , 
Your clearest candle yields the greatest stink ; 
As your pure food , and choicest nutriment , 
Yields the most hot , and nose-strong excrement : 
Why hang we then on things so apt to vary , 
So fleeting , brittle , and so temporary ? 
That agues , coughs , tooth-aches , and catarrh , 
'Slight touches of diseases , spoil or mar : 
But when old age their beauty hath in chase , 
And ploughs up furrows in their own smooth face , 
then they become forsaken , and do show 
Like stately Abbeys ruined long ago . 
Nature but gives the model and first draught 
Of fair Complexion , which by art is taught 
To speak itself a complete form and birth , 
So stands a Copy to the shapes on earth . 
Love grants me then a reparable face , 
Which whilst that colours are , can want no grace . 
Pygmalion's painted statues I could love , 
So it were warm , and soft , and could but move . 
Sonnet . P.  

Now being caught in Cupid's Net , 
And no way forth that I can get ; 
My heart being fixed , I cannot move , 
Where I settle , I must love : 
My Love must still with you remain , 
Although my hoping be in vain . 
By Vows and Oaths now am I sure ; 
But mis'ry my heart must endure : 
So fickle are the Female kind , 
Which troubleth much my grieved mind ; 
Missing the Corpse I should enjoy , 
Brings me to ruin and annoy . 
But let them not then so false prove , 
But likewise join their Love for Love ; 
Or else come Cupid with thy dart , 
And quickly pierce my wounded heart . 
Seeing with her I can't remain , 
Let me be rid out of my pain . 
Being I am thus crossed in Love , 
I needs must play the Turtle-dove . 
For seeing that I have lost my Mate , 
My Joy is turned into hate . 
Therefore abroad then must I fly , 
And seek me out a place to die . 
Well Captain , now thou hast my heart , 
For thy sake now sore doth it smart ; 
With sobs and tears than do I cry , 
To think on thy false treachery . 
Thy sight to me even now is death , 
Come gentle Cupid stop my breath , 
P. On a Strawberry . 

How like a Virgin , white and red , 
A young Rose particoloured , 
Blusheth these Berries ; or like the Sun , 
Whose days journey 's new begun , 
Look here 't is white , and on this side 
't is like the Lily in her pride , 
Or newfallen Snow , or like fresh May , 
Which was blown but yesterday ; 
Both which Colours making one , 
Imitate perfection , 
Making it to seem as fair 
As a beauty past compeer ; 
Or the Apple cast from Jove 
To those of the Hesperian Grove : 
Yet not jealous where it grows , 
Every where they march in rows ; 
Fields , and Banks , and Roots of trees 
Are often spangled o'er with these ; 
Which though good themselves , yet be 
The better by Community . 
Taken how it hangs the head 
Like a Virgin ravished ; 
Bowing down , as if afraid , 
Like Daphne when she cried for aid ; 
Or like Calisto , that had been 
Tempted by great Jove to sin , 
And seeing that Diana spied it , 
Straight held down the head to hide it . 
I would a Mistress just like thee , 
thou pattern of humility ; 
As fair , fresh , patient , and free 
Of any thing but Chastity ; 
As silent , and which best would please , 
no lesle willing to increase . 
P. on VENNS and ADONIS . 

Venus' that fair loving Queen , 
Was sporting in the fairest Green , 
There fair Adonis did she see , 
As he was sleeping by a tree ; 
Swift as thought to him she hies , 
When she pursues , than still he fly's ; 
OH stay , stay , stay , sweet Boy quoth she , 
And come sit down , down , down by me : 
OH stay , said she , my only joy ; 
then in her arms she clipped the Boy . 
To speak , said she , let pity move ; 
But he said , no , I cannot love . 
Yet still she moved him for a kiss , 
Sweet , scant not that which plenty is . 
Into his arms herself she flung , 
But he cried , Fie , I am too young . 
Her Robes as fair , as fair might be , 
The Goddess plucked above her Knee ; 
In her fair twine she held him fast , 
And made him yield to love at last : 
Was ever Lady thus disgraced ? 
Art thou a God , and yet shame , faced ? 
then blushing , down his head he hung , 
And still cried , Fie , I am too young : 
Though he was young , yet stubborn . hearted , 
Away he flung , and so they parted . 
Her Rosy Cheek , fair Lady than , 
With sorrow looked pale and wan . 
Now for thy sake , wild Boy , quoth she , 
love 's God is blind , and still shall be . 
then sigh she did , with many a groan , 
And still sat weeping all alone . 
R , APOSIE for a Necklace . 

LO , on my Neck whilst this I bind , 
For to hang him that steals my mind ; 
Unless he hang alive in Chains , 
I hang and die in lingering pains . 
Those threads enjoy a double grace , 
Both by the Gemm , and by the place . 
P. For an EARRING . 

't is vain to add a Ring or Gemm , 
Your Ear itself outpasseth them ; 
When idle Words are passing here , 
I warn , and pull you by the Ear , 
This Silken Chain stands waiting here 
For Golden Tongues to tie on there . 
Here silence twine their locks , you see , 
Now tell me which the softer be . 
P. SONG . 

Come saddest thoughts possess my heart , 
And in my grief come bear a part ; 
Let all my words be turned to groans , 
Those sounds do best befit my moans ; 
Each breath I take a sigh must be 
To make up sorrows harmony : 
Mine eyes once glutted with delight , 
Are now eclipsed from that sight , 
From whose pure light and influence 
I borrowed both life and sense : 
Whilst then I draw this tedious breath , 
I shall but lead a living death : 
In sable weeds I 'll clothed be , 
And put on sorrow's livery ; 
then to some desert will I go , 
The fittest place to harbour woe ; 
Where Owls and Ravens horrid cries 
Shall Echo forth my miseries : 
My meat shall be of troubled cares , 
My drink shall be of brinish tears ; 
My house shall be of the dark Cell , 
Where no house is , there will I dwell ; 
The hardest rock shall be my bed 
Whereon to rest my troubled head ; 
In stead of man's society , 
Wild beasts shall keep me company ; 
I will converse without all fear 
With Lion , Tiger , Woolf , or Bear ; 
no Music but their roaring cries 
Each night shall close my wretched eyes ; 
Death's living Tomb thus will I be , 
And living die continually . 
To Birds and Worms I 'll it expose , 
That on my body when I die 
They may engrave this Elegy : 
no solemn burial will I crave , 
My Cell shall be my Tomb and Grave ; 
And ere I breathe my last thereon , 
I 'll write this sad Inscription ; 
Here lies enclosed in this Tomb , 
He that endured Love's Martyrdom . 
Amintas . P.  

Cloris sat , and sitting slept , 
Sleeping fighed , and sighing wept ; 
Sat , slept , and sighed , & wept again 
For Ami 'thas that was slain : 
Oh! had you seen his face , said she ; 
How fair , how full of Majesty . 
And there she stopped , 
And there she cried , 
Amintas , Amintas , 
And so she died . 
Sonnet . P.  

GO Soul , the Body's Guest , 
Upon a thankless Errand ; 
Fear not to teach the best , 
The truth shall be thy warrant . 
Go since thou must needs die , 
And tell them all they lie . 
Say to the Court it glows , 
and shines like rotten wood ; 
Say to the Church it shows 
what 's good , but doth not good 
If Court and Church reply 
then give them all the lie . 
Tell protestants they live 
acting but others actions , 
Not loved unless they give ; 
not strong but by their factions . 
It protestants reply , 
Give protestants the lie . 
Tell men of high Condition , 
that rule affairs of State , 
Their purpose is ambition , 
their practice only hate : 
And if they once reply , 
then give them all the lie . 
Tell Wit it wants Devotion , 
tell Love it is burr Lust ; 
Tell time it is but motion , 
tell Flesh it is but Dust , 
And wish them not reply , 
For thou must give the lie . 
Tell those that brave it most , 
They beg for more by spending , 
And in their greatest cost , 
seek nothing but commending , 
And if they once reply , 
then give them all the lie . 
Tell Age it daily wastes , 
tell Honour how it altars , 
Tell Beauty how she blasteth , 
tell favour that she falters : 
And as they do reply , 
Give every one the lie . 
Tell Wit how it wrangles , 
in tricks and points of niceness ; 
Tell Wisdom she entangles 
herself in others wiseness ; 
And as they do reply , 
So give them all the lie . 
Tell Physic of her boldness , 
tell Skill it is perversion , 
Tell Charity of her coldness , 
tell Law it is contention ; 
And if they do reply , 
then give them all the lie . 
Tell Fortune of her blindness , 
tell Nature of decay ; 
Tell Friendship of unkindness , 
tell Justice of delay , 
And if they do reply , 
then give them all the lie . 
P. On a Fountain . 

THE Dolphins trifling each on others side , 
For joy leapt up , and gazing there abide : 
And whereas other Water's fish do bring , 
Lo here from fishes do the Water's spring ; 
Who think 't is more glorious to give , 
then to receive the Juice by which they live ; 
And by this Milk-white Basin learn they may , 
That pure hands you should bring , or bear away : 
For which each Basin wants no Furniture , 
Each Dolphin wailing , makes his Mouth an Ewer . 
you 're welcome then , you well may understand , 
When Fish themselves give Water to your hand . 
To a Friend . P.  

Like to a hand which hath been used to play 
One Lesson long , still runs the usual way , 
And waits not what the Hearers bids it strike , 
But doth presume by Custom this will like . 
So run my thoughts , which are so perfect grown , 
So well acquainted with my passion , 
That now they dare prevent me with their haste , 
And ere I think to sigh , my sigh is past ; 
't is past , and flown to you ; for you alone 
Are all the Objects that I think upon . 
And did not you supply my soul with thought , 
For want of action they would muse of naught : 
What though our absent hands may not enfold 
Real ●mbracess ; yet we firmly hold 
Each other in Possession ; thus we see 
The Lord enjoys his Lands wherever be . 
If Kings possessed no more than where they sat , 
How were theirs greater than a mean Estate ? 
This makes me firmly yours , you firmly mine , 
That something more than bodies us combine . 
P. On his Mistress . 

Keep on your Mask , and hide your Eye , 
For with beholding you I die : 
Your fatal Beauty , Gorgonlike , 
Dead with astonishment will strike : 
Your piercing Eyes , if them I see , 
Are worse than Basilisks to me : 
Shut from my sight those Hills of Snow , 
Their melting Valleys do not show ; 
Those Azure paths lead to despair , 
O! vex me not , forbear , forbear : 
For whilst I thus in torments dwell , 
The sight of Heaven is worse than Hell. 
Your dainty Voice , and warbling-breath , 
Sounds like a Sentence passed for death ; 
Your dandling Tresses are become , 
Like Instruments of Final Doom , 
O! if an Angel torture so 
When Life is done , where shall I go . 
P. In praise of his Mistress IRONICE . 

MY Mistress hath a precious Eye , 
But that alas , it looks awry ; 
And like the Silver is her Hair , 
But it is Nitty every where ; 
And for a Brow , as black as Jet , 
But it is greasy all with sweat : 
As for her Nose , OH dainty Bill ! 
But it is ever dropping still : 
And for her Lips , both fair & smooth , 
But slavers like a Landress Booth ; 
And not a Tooth within her head , 
But like a Pearl unpolished : 
As for her Tongue , without compare , 
It never talks but out of square . 
And for her Chin , OH pretty chap , 
But that it hath a woolly Nap ! 
As for her Neck , both fair and white , 
But carries not the head aright . 
And for her Breasts , both full and soft , 
But that it hath been milcht too oft . 
As for her belly , and her back , 
Acquainted how to bear a pack . 
And for the best , that is untold , 
Alas , it hath been bought and sold . 
As for her Thighs , good flesh and fat , 
But rough and furred like a Cat. 
And for her Feet , and for her Toes , 
If that you do not stop your Nose , 
The scent will teach your patience , 
She is all sweet , Sir-reverence . 
Translated out of FRENCH . 

LOVE the great Workman , a new World hath made , 
The Earth's my Faith , w th' steady firmness Crowned ; 
The Earth's of the Universe for Centre laid , 
So is my Faith of this fair World the Ground . 
If any motion of a jealous War 
Shakes my heart's Faith , and lead it into error , 
't is as when Winds that in the Earth pris'ned are , 
Make Earthquakes that affect the earth with terror . 
My tears are th' Ocean ; for to draw them dry , 
Were no lesle work then to suck up the Sea : 
The storms that raise these billows in mine eye , 
Are ( dear ) the fears of you not loving me . 
The Sea is salt , although his Waters be 
Assembled Rivers first , and sweet enough ; 
Much Salter are my tears , and far to me , 
Sweeter their Sources since they spring from you . 
The air 's my will , that in its own Power free , 
Restless about my Faith hath his repair . 
The Winds are like desires that rage in me , 
And move my will , as the Wind moves the Air.  
The Fire invisible , that this Air unfolds , 
Is the dear Flame wherein for you I languish ; 
And as no Lie that subtle Fire beholds , 
So from the whole world hidden is my anguish . 
The Moon is Hope , which still doth wax and wane , 
Borrowing the Light it hath , from you alone ; 
When the moon 's clouded , 't is then when in vain 
My thoughts err after you , and cause my moan . 
The sun 's your Eye ( the fairest Light we see ) 
Fair Sun of Love , light and life of our hours ; 
For if the other Sun the world's light be , 
What Lover but derives his Light from yours . 
The Summer is your smile that quickens me , 
Winter , my fears , benumbing all my powers ; 
But what boot's fear , if my Love's Autumn be , 
As void of fruit , as was his Spring of flowers . 
P. A DREAM . 

When as the cheerful Light was overspread 
With misty darkness , and the Sun was fled 
Unto the Western Island ; who to rest , 
It called from toilsome labour man and beast . 
Methought within a shady blooming Grove , 
Where I was walking sad , perplexed with Love : 
Not far I spied a Damsel passing fair , 
Which might for Beauty with the Nymphs compare : 
She laid her down upon the Grass to rest 
Her tired Limbs , with weariness oppressed : 
Her pretty Fingers there I did behold , 
How cunningly her Tresses did unfold ; 
I saw her Lily Arm , her tender thigh , 
Her little waste , yet durst I not come nigh 
For fear she should descry me by her light 
Of horned Luna , which even then in sight 
Was seen to come from old Endymion's Bed , 
Scarce ' work , still shaking of his drowsy head . 
I lay down still , at length I did espy 
Her eyes with sleep fast shut , then presently 
I roused my spirits without fear of shame ; 
And to the place whereas I lay , she came . 
How fitly there her Legs abroad she laid , 
Betwixt , Dame Nature's Privity bewrayed 
Itself ; how fit she lay for to be pressed : 
Still was I cheerful , till at length possessed 
With more inflaming Lust , I softly fell 
Upon her Body ; Judge you that can tell 
The rest : So having finished without pain , 
From whence I came , I did return again . 
P. To a Lady residing at the Court.  

Each greedy hand doth catch and pluck the flower 
When none regards the stock it grows upon . 
Each Nature love's the fruit still to devour , 
But leaves the Tree to fall , or stand alone : 
then this advice fair Cteature take from me , 
Let none pluck fruit , unless he take the Tree . 
Believe no Vows , nor much-protesting-men , 
Credit no Oaths , nor no bewailing Song ; 
Let Courtiers swear , forswear , and swear again , 
Their hearts lie ten Regions from their Tongue : 
And when with Oaths thy heart is made to tremble , 
Believe them least , for than they most dissemble . 
no ; Let not Caesar's self corrupt thy heart , 
Nor fond Ambition scale thy modesty ; 
Say to the King , thou only constant art , 
He cannot pardon thine impurity : 
For if with one , with thousands thou'lt turn Whore ; 
Break Ice in one place , and it cracks in more . 
APOLLO'S Oath . 

When Phoebus first did Daphne love , 
And could no way her fancy move , 
He craved the Cause : the Cause , quoth she , 
Is , I have vowed Virginity . 
then Phoebus raging , swore , and said , 
past Fifteen none should die a Maid . 
If Maidens then perchance are sped 
E'er they can scarcely dress their head , 
Yet pardon them , for they are loath 
To make Apollo break his Oath ; 
And better it is a Child were born , 
then that a God should be forsworn . 
Yet silly they , when all is done , 
Complain our wits their hearts have wone ; 
When 't is for fear that they should be 
Like Daphne , turned into a Tree : 
And who herself would so abuse , 
To be a Tree , if she could choose . 
P. ASONG . 

Draw not too near , 
Unless you drop a tear 
On the Stone 
Where I groan , 
And will weep 
Until the eternal sleep 
Shall charm my wearied eyes . 
Cloris lies here 
Embalmed with many a tear , 
Which the Swain 
From the Plain 
Here hath paid , 
And many a Vestal Maid 
Hath mourned her Obsequys ; 
Their snowy breasts they tear , 
And rend their golden hair ; 
Casting cries 
To celestial Deities , 
To return 
Her beauty from the Urn , 
To remain 
Unparallelled on earth again , 
When straight a sound 
From the ground 
Piercing the Air ; 
Cried , she 's dead , 
Her soul is fled 
Unto a place more rare . 
You Spirits that do keep 
The dust of those that sleep 
Under ground , 
Hear the sound 
Of a Swain , 
That folds his arms all in vain 
To the Ashes he adores ; 
For pity do not fright 
Him wand'ring in the night , 
When he laves 
Virgins graves 
From his eyes , 
Contributing sad laments 
Unto their memories ; 
And when my name is read 
In number of the Dead , 
Some one may 
In charity repay 
My soul the tribute that I gave ; 
And howl some Requiem on my grave , 
then weep no more , weep no more , 
Soul's rest from care ; 
Since she is dead , 
Her soul is fled 
Unto a place more rare . 
A Prognostication upon Cards and dice . 

Before the sixth day of the next New-year 
Strange wonders in this Kingdom shall appear ; 
Four Kings shall be assembled in this Isle , 
Where they shall raise great tumults for a while ; 
Many men than shall have an end of crosses , 
And many likewise shall sustain great losses : 
Many that are now joiful , and full glad , 
Shall at that time be sorrowful and sad : 
Full many a Christians heart shall quake for fear , 
The dreadful sound of Trump when he shall hear . 
Dead Bones then shall be tumbled up and down 
In every City , and in every Town ; 
By day and night this tumult shall not cease , 
Until a Herald shall proclaim a Peace ; 
A Herald strange , whose like was never born , 
Whose mouth is flesh , and very beard is horn . 
FINIS . 

