The DESPAIRING LOVER . 

Whose Mind with Sorrow much was discontented , 
Because of his true Love he was prevented . 
To the Tune of , Aim not too high . 



Break heart and die , I may no longer live , 
T' enjoy this World nothing that I would give , 
I live forlorn , all joys are from me fled , 
I have lost my Love , alas , my heart is dead ! 
Each thing on earth continueth with his Love , 
The pretty Hidgeon and the Turtle dove ; 
And diverse others in this World I know , 
But my Love will not seem to love me so . 
I little thought what true I now do find , 
I did not dream my Love would prove unkind ; 
But 't is no news , for many proves untrue , 
And so doth mine , for she bids me adieu . 
Seeing 't is so , I 'll turn a Palmer poor , 
And I will range abroad the World half over , 
To see if I can find some dismal cave . 
There will I dwell , there will I d●g my grave . 
I will go travail to some new found Land , 
To France to Spain and Turkey out of hand ; 
Where unto Strangers there I will complain , 
How that my Love hath me unkindly slain . 
If I do land upon some new found shore , 
Whereas no M●n did ever land before , 
then should I think myself in happy case , 
For my delight is in a silent place . 
There will I write my fill of my true Love ; 
Did I say true ? what fancy did me move , 
〈…〉 her true that always was unkind , 



But now her smiles are turned to frowns and fire , 
To kill my heart with woe is her desire . 
Bright Phoebus' beams are darkened in the skies , 
When as the storms of Boreas do arise ; 
But she doth quickly shine after the rain , 
But my coy Mistress will not love again . 
I would I were now sin●ing in the Seas 
In some frail vessel , if the Fates did please : 
Where neither love nor comfort could be found , 
But every hour expecting to be drowned . 
My speeches all do but prolong my pain , 
For I did never sail the Ocean main ; 
Nor will I suffer life in me to ' bide , 
So long to wait the time of wind and tide . 
Seeing 't is so , to the wilderness I 'll high , 
amongst wild beasts , where I intent to die ; 
Where lion's tigers , bears , and panthers mourn , 
With dragons , elephants and unicorn . 
Thus many wishes I have wished in vain , 
And none of these can ease me of my pain : 
This piercing poniard now shall end the strife , 
And kill my heart that loathes this mortal life . 
This being spoken , forth His Love did rush , 
Beholding him with many a smile and blush , 
OH hold , quoth for , and hear what I do say , 
Do not despair , nor work thy lives decay . 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 fair I pray come lend an ear , 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 appear : 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ●●●●bled 〈◊〉 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 
A Constant and Kind MAID , 

Who saved in Love a proper young Man's Life , 
And after proved his dear and loving Wife . 
To the same TUNE . 





Content thyself my Love , a●d do not die , 
Thy life I l●ve , thy death I do defy , 
Live then in joy an● seek to banish pain , 
Take a good heart , and I will love again . 
Each thing on earth doth love his chosen Mate , 
And thou contemnest me , and said I hate : 
M●n love by fancy , beasts they love by kind , 
then fancy me , and thou shalt favour find . 
For all the gold that Croesus ever did own , 
I will not seem to leave my Love alone ; 
no , no , my Love , I will not prove untrue , 
Nor will I change an old Friend for a new . 
thou shalt not need to turn a Palmer poor , 
For I for thee have gold and silver store ; 
Instead of finding out some secret place , 
thou shalt have me within thy arms t' embrace ; 
thou shalt not travel to another land , 
For i'l● be ready still at thy command : 
thou shalt my Dear have no cause to complain , 
For I with joy thy love will entertain . 
If thou hadst landed on some foreign shore . 
Whereas no Man did ever land before : 
But seeing thou art here alive with me , 
thou shalt not go hence dangers for to see : 
What wilt thou wish of me my own true Love , 
F●ar not my Dear , for I will constant prove : 
I am thy own , and so thou shalt me find , 
To thee I will be loving true and kind . 
As I w●● 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 
I will not seek thy dearest blood to spi●l , 
But I will yield unto thy wished william  
Sweet I have listened to thy moan and cries , 
Weep thou no more , but wipe thy watery eyes : 
The storms are past , the sun shines after rain . 
And I do vow to love thee once again . 
If thou wert on the roaring Sea so wide , 
Upon the Dolphin's back then thou may'st ride : 
Desiring Neptune's favour out of hand , 
To be your Pilot to some other land  
Sweet Love abroad much dangers do ensue , 
The Seas and Wilderness bids thee adieu ; 
Never seek to write , nor think of wind and tide , 
But live with me and I will be thy Bride . 
OH stay at home my Love and go not there , 
Wild beasts in pieces will thy body tear : 
When I behold them for to suck thy blood , 
They shall have mine ; my Love , to do thee good . 
Lo thus to thee , my Love , I do make known , 
Vowing hereafter I will be thy own : 
OH stay thy hand , my Love , and do not kill 
Thy gentle heart , which I do love so well . 
then strait he took his Love into his arms , 
That had preserved his body from such harms , 
Welcome , quoth he , I love thee as my life 
And quickly after he made her his Wife . 
Thus have you heard my Song of we and joy . 
Let Maids and young Men listen t●●t I pray ▪ 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 
〈…〉 

