The Discontented Ploughman . 

This man was troubled in his mind , 
Because his love did prove to him unkind ; 
But now , she has granted his desire , 
And quenched his lovesick heart which was on fire 
To the Tune of , True Love rewarded , Or , Flora Farewell . 





MY dearest Love why art thou so unkind , 
As to forsake me now , and leave me behind , 
That am tormented in my mind . 
Because my Love doth prove to me unkind . 
I wonder she should prove so unkind to me , 
That have been so constant unto she , 
Ever since that we did fall in love , 
I faithful unto her did prove . 
I never kept other maid's company , 
Nor shall do till the day I die , 
●●d rather to be racked to death she shall find , 
〈◊〉 n ever for to change my mind . 
For three year we in love did live , 
Before that she did prove unkind , 
〈…〉 ach other we our troth did give , 
But now my love hath changed her mind , 
I am a Ploughman by my trade , 
And that will hold when other fade , 
Beside I have fifty pound a year , 
For to maintain my only dear , 
If that so be that I was poor , 
then might she bate me therefore , 
But seeing that I have means in store , 
One would think she should love me the more . 
And seeing that means it will not do , 
Nor love yet melt her stony heart , 
I must bear all patiently . 
Though for a while I feel the smart . 
The Youngman's praise of his Love. 
And I will show you the reason why , 
Her person I so much adore , 
Because she is the Phoenix of the world , 
Which makes me love her still the more . 




Her eyes doth like the Diamond shine , 
Which doth pierce this sick heart of mine ; 
And her hair is like the threads of gold , 
Which is both lovely to behold . 
Her cheeks are like the Roses red , 
Laid down with pure white and blue , 
Her person is most lovely to behold , 
These words I spoke are very true . 
Her teeth are like the I very white , 
And her breath is sweeter than Muscadine , 
Her lips that are bathe soft and fine , 
I wish they were inclined with mine . 
Her breasts like two Pillows lie , 
more brighter than white Ivory , 
Which makes me love her continually , 
And so I shall do till the day I die . 
Her fingers they are long and small , 
Her body is both proper and tall , 
Her legs and feet are so complete , 
And in every part most meet . 
And now I have set forth her praise , 
no more than what is her due in every ways , 
And if she comes not to ease my misery , 
then for the love of her I shall die . 
The Maids kind reply to the youngman . 

Hold up thy head my dearest love , 
I am coming to ease thy misery , 
The reason I did unconstant prove , 
It was but to try thy constancy . 
When thou didst walk the streets too and from , 
thou saidst I was so strange I would not thee know , 
It was but they constancy for to prove , 
And try whether or no thou didst me love . 
I know it is three year and above , 
Since we together did fall in love , 
The vows and promises made between thee & I 
I will keep them until I die . 
thou sayst thou art a Ploughman brave , 
I am likewise a Dary-maid , 
And for thy means thou hast in store , 
Thy love I value ten times more . 
And now my love thou know'st my mind , 
when we are married prove not to me unkind , 
And therefore now without delay , 
Let us appoint our wedding-day . 
The Youngman's Conclusion . 

Ten thousand thanks I give to thee my dear , 
That thou art come my love sick heart to ch●ar , 
I 'll be to thee both loving and kind , 
Nothing but death shall change my mind . 
And now my dear to end ●●ll sorrow , 
Our wedding-day shall be to morrow , 
Thy bridemen on thee shall attend , 
and lead thee to the Church both hand in hand . 
The bells shall ring and music play , 
For to pass the time away , 
And when that day in mirth is spent , 
The night we 'll pass away with much content . 
Young maidens wherever you be , 
Come take this council now of me , 
To them that you do vow to love , 
Look to it , and see that you do constant prove . 
As by this copy you may see . 
Though for a while she did try his constancy , 
Now they do live in love and unity , 
And I wish them many years of joy . 
Printed for F. Coles , T. Vere , I Wright , and I , Clerk . 

