The Maidens Nay , Or , I love not you . 

To a pleasant new Tune . 





I Spied a Nymph trip over the plain , 
I lured to her , she turned again , 
I wooed her as a young man should do , 
but her answer was , Sir , I love not you . 
I thought she seemed in every part 
So lovely framed by Nature's Art , 
Her beauty soon alured me to woo , 
but her answer was , sir , I love not you . 
I told her all the sweet of love , 
And whatsoever her mind might move , 
To entertain a Lover true , 
but her answer was , sir , I love not you . 
I told her how I would her deck , 
Her head with gold , with pearls her neck 
She gave a frown , and away she flew , 
but her answer was , sir , I love not you . 
Not me ( sweetheart ) OH tell me why ? 
thou shouldst my proffered love deny : 
To whom my heart I have vowed so true , 
but her answer was , sir , I love not you . 
My sweet and dearest love , quoth I , 
Art thou resolved a Maid to die ? 
Of such a mind I know but few , 
but her answer was , sir , I love not you . 
This is the pleasant Maying time , 
This is the pleasant golden prime , 
But age will come and make you to rue , 
that ever you said , sir , I love not you . 
OH do not thou my suit disdain , 
Nor make me spend my time in vain , 
But kindly grant a Lovers due : 
yet still she said , sir , I love not you . 
Fair Nymph , quoth I , but grant me this , 
To enrich my lips with one poor kiss , 
I grant you that which I grant but few , 
yet still she said , sir , I love not you . 
The young man proffering then to depart 
It grieved this Maiden then to the heart : 
For having kissed , OH then did she rue , 
that ever she said , Sir , I love not you . 
wherefore with speed she thought it best , 
To stay him by her kind request : 
Whose coyness thus hath caused her to rue 
that ever she said , Sir , I love not you . 
But now at last she did begin 
With gentle words to lure him in : 
The second part shall plainly show , 
she changed her note of , I love not you . 
The second part 

to the same Tune . 



Kind sir , quoth she , what needs this haste , 
With that a smile on him she cast , 
Shame curbed her long , but affection drew 
these word , I love no man but you . 
I feel the force of Cupid's dart 
So deep hath pierced my tender heart : 
Believe me then for my words are true , 
you will I love , sir , and none but you . 
Do not deny my proffered love , 
Nor think that I the wanton prove : 
Though women seldom use to woo , 
yet I will love , Sir , and none but you . 
When women love they will it hide , 
Until their Lover they have tried : 
Though I say nay , as maidens do , 
you will I love , Sir , and none but you . 
Here is , quoth she , my heart and hand , 
My constant love thou shalt command : 
And I do vow to be ever true , 
you will I love , sir , and none but you . 
Whilst golden Titan doth display 
His beams unto the cheerful day , 
Whilst Spring the Winter doth ensue , 
you will I love , Sir , and none but you . 
On thee my love is fixed fast , 
On thee my love is firmly placed , 
For thee I 'll bid the world adieu , 
you will I love , Sir , and none but you . 
If Hero should Leander leave , 
Fair Lucrece Collatine deceive , 
Or Syrinx prove to Pan untrue , 
yet I love you , Sir , and none but you . 
Object no former thy reply , 
Suspect no future constancy : 
Accept my love as a tribute due 
only to you , Sir , and to none but you . 
The young man noting well her words , 
This courteous answer than affords : 
Give me thy hand , take mine in lieu : 
my love I grant here , and so do you . 
To Church with speed then let us hie , 
In marriage bands ourselves to tie : 
Where interchanging hands and hearts , 
I 'll love thee dear till death us parts . 
Mark well my Song you Maidens coy , 
That count true love a foolish toy : 
Do not disdain when young men woo , 
but love them freely as they love you . 
FINIS . 

Printed for F. Coles , T. Vere , and J. Wright . 

