A brief discourse , concerning the power of the peers and Commons of parliament , in point of judicature . 

Written by a learned antiquery , at the request of a peer of this realm . 

Printed in the year , 1640.  

A brief discourse , concerning the power of the peers and Commons of parliament in point of judicature . 

Sir , to give you as short an account of your desires as i can , i must crave leave to lay you as a ground , the frame or first model of this state . 

When after the period of the Saxon time , Harrolld had lifted himself into the royal seat ; the great men , to whom but lately he was no more than equal either in fortune or power , disdaining this act , of arrogancy , called in William then Duke of Normandy , a Prince more active than any in these Western parts , and renowned for many victories he had fortunately achieved against the French King , than the most potent monarch in Europe . 

This Duke led along with him to this work of glory , many of the younger sons of the best families of Normandy , Picardy and Flanders , who as undertakers , accompanied the undertaking of this fortunate man . 

The usurper slain , and the crown by war gained , to secure certain to his posterity , what he had so suddenly gotten , he shared out his purchase retaining in each county a portion to support the dignity sovereign , which was styled Demenia regni ; now the ancient demeans , and assigning to others his adventurers such portions as suited to their quality and expense , retaining to himself dependency of their personal service , except such lands as in free alms were the portion of the church , these were styled barones regis , the King's immediate freeholders , for the word Baro imported then no more . 

As the King to these , so these to their followers subdivided part of their shares into knights fees , and their tenants were called barones comites , or the like ; for we find , as in the King's writ in their writs baronibus suis & Francois & anglois , the sovereign gifts , for the most part extending to whole counties or hundreds , an Earl being Lord of the one , and a Baron of the inferior donations to Lords of townships or manors . 

As thus the land , so was all course of judicature divided even from the meanest to the highest portion , each several had his court of law , preserving still the manor of our ancestors the Saxons , who jura per pages reddebant ; and these are still termed court-barons , or the freeholders court , twelve usually in number , who with the Thame or chief Lord were judges . 

The hundred was next , where the hundredus or Aldermanus Lord of the hundred , with the chief Lord of each townshippe within their limits judged ; God's persons observed this form in the public centureonis & decam judicabant plebem omni tempore . 

The county or generale placitum was the next , this was so to supply the defect , or remedy the corruption of the inferior , vbi curiae dominorum probantur defecisse , pertinet ad vice comitem provinciarum ; the judges here were comites , vice comites & barones comitatus qui liberas in hoterras habeant . 

The last & supreme , & proper to our question , was generale placitum aupud London universalis synodus in charters of the conqueror , capitalis curia by Glanvile , magnum & commune consilium coram rege et magnatibus suis . 

In the rolls of Henry the 3.  It is not stative , but summoned by proclamation , edicitur generale placitum apud London , saith the book of Abingdon , whether epium deuces principes , satrapae rectores , & causidici ex omni parte confluxerunt ad istam curiam , saith Glanvile : causes were referred , propter aliquam dubitationem quae emergit in comitatu , cum comitatus nescit dijudicare . thus did ethelweld Bishop of Winchester transfer his suit against Leostine , from the county ad generale placitum , in the time of King Etheldred , Queen Edgine against Goda ; from the county appealed to King Etheldred at London . Congregatis principibus & sapaientibus angliae , a suit between the Bishops of Winchester and Durham in the time of saint Edward . Coram episcopis & principibus regni in presentia regis ventilate & finita . in the tenth year of the conqueror , episcopi , comites & barones regni potestate adversis provinciis ad universalem synodum pro causis audiendis & tractandis convocati , saith the book of Westminster . and this continue all along in the succeeding Kings reign , until towards the end of Henry the third . 

As this great court or council consisting of the King and Barons , ruled the great affairs of state and controlled all inferior courts , so were there certain officers , whose transcendent power seemed to be set to bound in the execution of Prince's wills , as the steward , Constable , and marshal fixed upon families in fee for many ages : they as tribunes of the persons , or ex plori among the Athenians , grown by unmanly courage fearful to monarchy , fell at the feet and mercy of the King , when the daring Earl of Leicester was slain at Evesham . 

This chance and the dear experience hen. the 3. themselves had made at the parliament at Oxford in the 40. year of his reign , and the memory of the many straits his father was driven unto , especially at rumny-mead near Stanes , brought this King wisely to begin what his successor fortunately finished , in lessoning the strength and power of his great Lords ; and this was wrought by searching into the regality they had usurped over their peculiar sovereigns , whereby they were ( As the book of saint Albans termeth them . ) quot dominum tot tiranni . ) and by the weakening that hand of power which they carried in the parliaments by commanding the service of many knights , citizens , and burgesses to that great council . 

Now began the frequent sending of writs to the Commons , their assent not only used in money , charge , and making laws , for before all ordinances passed by the King and peers , but their consent in judgements of all natures whether civil or criminal : in proof whereof i will produce some few succeeding precedents out of record . 

When Adamor that proud prelate of Winchester the King's half brother had grieved the state by his daring power , he was exiled by joint sentence of the King , the Lords & Commons , and this appeareth expressly by the letter sent to Pope Alexander the fourth , expostulating a revocation of him from banishment , because he was a churchman , and so not subject to any censure , in this the answer is , si dominus rex & regni majores hoc vellent , meaning his revocation , communitas tamen ipsius ingressum in Anglian iam nullatemus sustineret . the peers subsign this answer with their names and Petrus de Mountford vice totius communitatis , as speaker or proctor of the Commons . 

For by that stile Sir John tiptofe , prolocutor , affirmeth under his arms the deed of entail of the crown by King Henry the 4. in the 8. year of his reign for all the Commons . 

The banishment of the two Spencers in the 15. of Edward the second , prelati comites & barones et les autres peers de la terre & communes the roialme give consent and sentence to the revocation and reversement of the former sentence the Lords and Commons accord , and so it is expressed in the roll.  

In the first of edw. the 3. when Elizabeth the widow of Sir John de Burgo complained in parliament , that Hugh Spencer the younger , Robert Boldock and William Cliffe his instruments had by duresse forced her to make a writing to the King , whereby she was despoiled of all her inheritance , sentence is given for her in these words , pur ceo que avis est all evesques Counts & barones & autres grandes & a tout Cominalte de la terre , que le dit escript est fait contre ley , & tout manere de raison si fuist le dit escript per agard del parliam . dampue elloques all liure a la dit eliz.  

In an. 4. edw. 3. it appeareth by a letter to the Pope , that to the sentence given against the Earl of Kent , the Commons were parties aswell as well as the Lords & peers , for the King directed their proceedings in these words , comitibus , magnatibus , baronibus , & aliis de communitate dicti regni ad parliamentum illud congregatis injunximus ut super his discernerent & judicarent quod rationi et justitiae , conveniret , habere prae oculis , solum deum qui eum concordi unanimi sententia tanquam reum criminis laesoe majestatis morti adjudicarent ejus sententia , &c.  

When in the 50. year of ed. 3. the Lords had pronounced the sentence against Richard Lions , otherwise then the Commons agreed they appealed to the King , and had redress , and the sentence entered to their desires . 

When in the first year of Richard the second , William Weston and John Jennings were arraigned in parliament for surrendering certain forts of the Kings , the Commons were parties to the sentence against them given , as appeareth by a memorandum amnexed to that record . In the first of hen. the 4. although the Commons refer by protestation , the pronouncing of the sentence of deposition against King rich. the 2. unto the Lords , yet are they equally interessed in it , as it appeareth by the record , for there are made proctors or commissioners for the whole parliament , one b. one abbot , one e. one Baron , & 2.  Knights , Gray and Erpingham for the Commons , and to infer that because the Lords pronounced the sentence , the point of judgement should be only theirs , were as absurd as to conclude , that no authority was best in any other commissioner of oyer and terminer then in the person of that man solely that speaketh the sentence . 

In 2. hen. 5. the petition of the Commons importeth no less than a right they had to act and assent to all things in parliament , and so it is answered by the King ; and had not the adjournal roll of the higher house been left to the sole entry of the clerk of the upper house , who , either out of the neglect to observe due form , or out of purpose to obscure the Commons right & to flatter the power of those he immediately served , there would have been frequent examples of all times to clear this doubt , and to preserve a just interest to the commonwealth , and how conveniently it suits with monarchy to maintain this form , lest others of that well framed body knit under one head , should swell too great and monstrous . It May be easily thought for ; monarchy again May sooner groan under the weight of an aristocracy as it once did , then under democracy which it never yet either felt or feared . 

Finis . 





liber s. Alban ▪ fo. 20.   ▪ an. 44. h. 3.  〈◊〉 orig. sub •igil ▪ a••h .  rot. parl ▪  e. 3. vel .  . Prelation•• parliam . 1. ed. 3. rot 11.        




