The army brought to the bar , legally examined , arraigned , convicted and adjudged . 

that they are not the self-denying army , nor the restorers of our laws , liberties , and privileges , but obstructors to the happiness of the King and persons . 

James 3. 13 , 14.  

Who is a wise man , and endued with knowledge amongst you ? let him show out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom . 

But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts , glory not , and lie not against the truth . 



Printed in the year , 1647.  

The army brought to the bar.  

It hath been for these six years' space and more , the complaints of divers of the inhabitants of this kingdom , concerning the slavish servitude they endured under the King and his cavaliers ; and there be others who complain of the servile bondage they groaned under by the parliament and their committees , but now 't is justly to be feared , that there is a yoke of servitude far worse than the two former , preparing to be put upon the necks of all Englishmen , by an overruling independent army , who have assumed so much boldness and audacity ( Having the power in their own hands ) to control the parliament , city , and whole kingdom , merely to drive on their own interests and designs . 

And our servitude is like to be very miserable , if three things be considered . 

1 the condition and nature of the servitude : 't is a martial servitude , the worst of all : what will not the sword in the hands of such an ignorant multitude do ? our estates , lives , fortunes , liberties , and religion , will prostrate themselves at the glittering of a naked sword , all shall be within the reach of a swords point , to be disposed of according to their pleasures and commands . 

2 the qualifications wherewith the persons are endowed who must rule us : namely the armies agitators , men of transcending knowledge and judgement , especially one of them , of whom ( By one that knows him ) i am credibly informed , can neither write nor read . If we were to be governed by men found in judgement , and experienced in the laws of the land , we Might expect a milder servitude , but from them we must expect according to education , for as their breeding is , so is their disposition , we cannot expect a gentle usage from men of rude education , but if these and such as they be men rightly qualified to give rules and laws to a parliament and kingdom , than i leave it all indifferent men to judge , than this proverb shall be verified , Sus mivervam docet : idiots shall teach the learned , and men scarce fit to be subject , shall become our rulers : but yet let the agitators and the rest of the counsellors , remember this , that malum concilium consultori pessimum . 

3 the third thing which will cause our servitude to be very miserable if it happens , ( Which i pray God i May never live to see ) will be the strangeness and unwontedness of it : we were before happily governed by our King ( Charles our dread Lord and sacred sovereign , ( Whose days God prolong , ) but now we shall be miserably governed by many tyrants , who would fain be rulers and magistrates , yet can scarce tell how to be men . We were before governed and ruled by monarchy , we shall now be governed by democracy , how will our English necks be accustomed to such unwonted and uneasy yokes , surely we must needs kick and winch , which if we do , let them set fast ( Being good-horse-men because soldiers ) lest they be cast out of the saddle to the ground . 

quest . but some May say ( And i do verily believe many merely upon that ground cleave to them ) that they have been the only instruments under God , of our preservation and safety , and therefore their proceedings now May be warrantable . 

answ. 't is true , they have done very nobly ( Through God ) in what they undertook , yet one good act committed cannot be a veil to hide all other offences : shall a villain be pardoned for murder , because he hath done some worthy deeds before , God forbid ? shall a man for some brave exploit before performed be so far exempted as to escape punishment , if he be guilty of a crime , no : the more noble and brave their former proceedings were ; makes their present undertakings seem more horrible , for nullius viri species vehementiùs accessit , quàm quae ab initio habuit dulcedinem : no wine becomes more sour than that which was at first the sweetest : so they , so long as they obeyed , and honoured the commands of the parliament , they were most notably victorious and successful in all their erterprises , and none did better , but now having revolted , and become like sweet wine turned to vinegar , & doing things , neither warrantable by law nor reason , in this none did worse . 

quest . but again , some May say , there is no fear of any oppression , or servitude , when as all their declarations , proclamations ; and letters do signify that they intend , nay , protest they will endeavour to preserve the prerogative and honour of the King , to uphold the privilege of parliament , to maintain the liberty of the subject , to establish a true and sound religion , and to settle a firm and lasting peace in this kingdom , and therefore before all these be established , 't is not necessary they should disband . 

answ. 't is true , it cannot be denied , that all their declarations , remonstrances do signify , they do really intend , or at least pretend all these , and first they will endeavour to preserve the honour and prerogative of the King , and to settle him in peace and happiness in this throne , which they will very hardly do , for the very tenants , and principles of an independent run cross , and quite blank against King and monarchy . Now if such as go quite contrary to me , May be said to go along with me , and if he be accounted my advancer , who endeavours to pull me down , then will i believe that an independent will preserve a King , but again , if example May strengthen belief in this particular , than this of major Scot by name , ( An independent by religion , a villain by his actions ) is most remarkable , who ( If fame hath not forgot to tell truth ) being asked by colonel Brown , whether he were come to kiss his majesty's hand , made answer , he had rather follow him to the gallows ; oh monstrum horrendum , inform , ingens , cui lumen ademptum : now , if this man's opinion being an independent May go for the rest , ( Man did i call him , more fit to be termed a devil ) i say if the rest agree with him in opinion , being of one and the same religion , then 't is plainly seen which way their hearts , and resolutions tend , although their declarations ( To delude the world ) seem and pretend to go quite contrary ; this is that sect , who being employed as a factor by the clothiers of barfould in Suffolk , runs away at one time with the value of 1500 pounds worth of cloth ( As i am credibly informed . ) I omit to recount many more ( As that daring affront offered by cornet Joyce ) in removing his majesty from Holdenby , contrary to the pleasure of both houses , and his own royal assent . I omit that of Crumwel , who ( When his majesty refused to sign a paper given him , by him ) answered his majesty , that he had as good he had : yet in passing by these , and many more his royal majesty hath showed an incredible patience , yet though the lion sleeps , he is not dead , but keeps a catalogue of all in his sacred breast , and will repay all with much use upon the backs of some , although he be now their prisoner , if such as these preserve the prerogative of the King , then say men go upon their heads , when they go upon their feet , and you May as well , — 

2 their declarations profess to uphold the privileges of the parliament , but i beseech you tell me who are less upholders , nay , who are greater dissolvers of the parliament , and confounders of the privileges thereof , than themselves ? which is manifestly evident by several particulars . First , what was the impeaching the eleven members upon a mere bare pretence of some great thing laid to their charge , when nothing could be proved against them , no , 't was merely their policy ( Under a pretence of frivolous slanders and reproaches ) to draw them out of the house , and to rob them of their birthright given them by their country ) whereby ( By their absence ) their own party Might be the more prevalent to carry on their own designs , and upon this bare pretence they must be forthwith suspended the house , although by the said house they were fully cleared , yet for modesty sake ( A thing very commendable in them ) they upon their own desire ( And to satisfy the humour of the army ) absented themselves from setting in the house , and yet for all this some of them are threatened , some •ought for , and some scandalous hue and cries sent after in a reproachful way , some taken , and others searched , as Sir William Waller , who had leave ( With the rest ) and passes from the speaker , to go beyond sea , or any other place whether they please . Now i would fain know by what authority they do these things , they could not have their authority from the parliament ( They having the speakers pass to go at their pleasure , ) 't is well known they had their authority from themselves , and the root and ground of all this malice , and calumny , and envy against them , is because they were not friends to their proceedings as they desired , and yet their charge is not yet brought in ( Because they pretend first to settle the more important affairs of the kingdom , which if it be not brought in before the kingdom is settled by them , the eleven members shall never need to be afraid of their trial , and again , was it not an encroaching upon the privileges of parliament , to set them a certain day , nay , a prefixed hour of the day , by which time they should send them an answer to their demands ( Though unreasonable ) or else they would do so and so , March with their army towards London , what was the result of the agitators of the army , when they voted all them to be suspended the house , and to sit there no more , or to sit at their peril : who sat in parl. when the speaker & the rest fled to them ? was not this a great diminution to the privileges of parl. but pray why are those that set then thus censured , because they did not ( Contrary to their consciences ) desert the house , and their trust , and come to them , i pray assure me you that know the laws of this land ( Of which i confess myself to be wholly ignorant ) who have been the faithfullest patriots , those that sat , or those that deserted the house , i know you will say those that sat , and maintained their trust against all opposition whatsoever ; however if it be their fortune ( I cannot say ill fortune ) to be driven from the house ( Though contrary to their privileges ) by the power of the army , yet they will have many companions , and foelice est miseris socios habuisse doloris , yet if it so come to pass , yet confident i am , that the time will come again , when they shall set to do their country service , and shall enjoy ( In spite of such an overruling army ) all their former privileges and honour , and shall at last be accounted the best lovers of peace , and their country . 

I admire what blood run then in our nobles veins , when they so deserted the parliament , was all the royal blood which was wont to run in our English nobles veins then lost , by my consent , if they commit the like act again , they shall forfeit both their honour and dignity , if such as these ( I mean not the Lords ) be the upholders of parliaments , they are like to have good householders , and if such acts as these be upholding , the privileges of parliament , i say no more but , o tempora ! O mores ! 

3 their declarations ( I confess ) demonstrate how that they will endeavour to maintain the liberty of the subject , which is a thing they as little intend as the former , else what means their oppressing the countries by their daily needless quarters ( Though it be not denied , they carry themselves very orderly where they come , 't is true and 't is policy so to do , for thereby they make their actions more plausible , and their ruling longer-lived than it would of itself be , for if they should carry themselves any way unbeseeming , all would vie with one hand and arm to subdue them ; the fetching home of the King , and settling him in his throne ( Which i know they never intended ) they declare to the world to increase their number ( Many following the King as a loadstone ) and to colour and varnish their unjust and unheard of proceedings , they are politicians and will prove the better statesmen : and they have already a little learned to dissemble , because they would verify that ancient proverb , nescit imperare , qui nescit dissimulare , witness else Cromwell ( Who being a member of the honourable house of Commons ) ( Which place by his forementioned unheard of authority , hath long since unjustly forfeited ) i say Cromwell in the house declared that if the houses would but send the very shadow of their commands to them for to lay down their arms , they would readily obey , and lay them down at the house of Commons door , and •ow they have verified this saying upon the houses command for their disbanding , sent to bury , and several commands sent them since . Let the world judge &c.  and again , if they maintain the liberty of the subject , what do they mean when they force the house ( Contrary to the dictates of their own consciences ) to recall and revoke their votes , passed in a free , and full house ; and all this because it doth not please the palate of the sweet toothed army , ( As i May justly term it ) these be them that in all their propositions , and remonstrances , speak for a free parliament , and yet none so much doth force the parliament as themselves . But we May see light through the least crevice . I would fain know what confidence , and trust , the subjects of England can repose upon any vote the houses passes concerning them , when as their votes are beat back again ( As i May say ▪ ) by the sword into their own mouths , or if they come forth , they are not obeyed by a lawless , and overruling multitude : what fruits , and enjoyements , can the subject have of this parliament , when as their votes are made void , and nulled ( Though contrary to humave reason , and their own privileges ) yet by the threatening power of an independent army . And by this their actions , they not only hinder the free course of the parliament , but they cause the persons to loath parliaments as long as this generation lasteth , and if the parliament shall vote what they desire our of fear , or condicend what they propound out of love ; what English man will ever again honour a parliament ? Furthermore , i desire to know what security , and hopes these subjects can have who are lenders of the public faith , for their money so lent , when as their greatest securities , the excise , and Bishops lands , and many other lies under the command of the sword of a revolting army . 

I wonder what liberty the citizens can expect , when Sir Thomas is the merchant's cashkeeper , and the tradsmens' shopkeeper . ( Pray God he gives a good account ) he commands all , the tower key is the picklock key , whereby he May enter every man's house at his pleasure . 

i wonder what privilege the apprentices will reap by their freedoms , when as every tag , rag , shagd soldier will be free of any trade in the city , by the army's copyhold . Is the liberty of the subject , and the freedom of the city like thus to be maintained ? Judge all reasonable men , to reason it is impossible , that that which is deliberately enacted by the parliament can be of force , when it is repealed again by violence . 

4 their declarations , &c. presents to the view of the world another false glass , which is , that they will to their utmost endeavours procure to settle a firm , and lasting peace in this kingdom . I believe they they will use their utmost endeavours , and do ( But what to do ? ) to procure all into their own clurches , not to settle peace and unity : which if they do , let their military preparations speak , their daily listings of men , there fetching arms and ammunition from the tower of London , the taking of Tilbury blockhouses in Essex , and their possessing themselves of many strong holds in this kingdom , the placing colonel Liburne governor of Newcastle , and yet for all that , the city , nor kingdom must not raise a man for their own defence , for fear of involving this kingdom in a second war . 

What means such acts as these ? be such preparations for war as these , settlers of a happy peace in England ? oh reason , speak the truth ! Fools do you determine ? Can he which comes thrusting with a naked sword at my breast , be termed the saver of my life ? Reason says no , and the same reason tells me , that their present proceedings truly considered , shall not ( Neither ever can ) settle peace in the land . But if they intend to settle peace , for what purpose do they surround and encompass London , ( Londoners look about you ) and their having the commands of some forts thereof , is it to confirm peace ? believe it , they that strive to settle peace by the sword , distract it ; however if all these be the mother of peace , i fear the child will be still-born , or if it see the light , it will not live long , but will die before the mother rises up , or to speak plain , before the armies lays down . But if it prove contrary to expectation , and reason ) that these their actions produce peace , it is a way newly found out , which our statesmen never knew : but they are politians , and policy is but a circumstantial dissembling , pretending one thing , intending another ; 't is like to prove such a policy ; i fear their hearts do turn tongues , to give their tongues the lie in this particular . 

5.  Lastly , their declarations profess that they will be establishers of true religion in its purity . if they be the guardians and establishers of our religion , actum est de nostra religione , you May shake hands with true religion ; if they settle true religion , it will be the clean contrary way , and under pretence of allowance to tender consciences , which they desire ) all schisms , sects , and dangerous . Opinions will ( Rush in ; that gap is so wide that many other opinions destructive to the common-waalth will rush in unavoidably . Though i confess in things merely indifferent , and no ways prejudicial to the commonwealth , a respect is necessary to be had to tender consciences , but in things of great concernment ( The word of God not sincerely construed ) is to bear more sway than a tender conscience , for if a religion or any thing else seizes a man's genius , he will fly to the altar of a tender conscience , though he hath not a tender conscience , or rather none at all , i say he will make conscience the shelter , and refuge for his villainies , but in any thing which the word of God distinctly commands , and reason , and experience , and examples confirms , in my opinion we must not control , nor disobey it , under pretence , or colour of a tender conscience . I pray God such ranging soldiers ( Used hereunto ) do not open this gap to let in all manner of four footed beasts , and two legged monsters as themselves to graze in the flourishing field of our true religion . But if such actors , and acts such these be the preservers of the prerogative of the King , the upholders of the privileges of parliament , the maintainers of the liberty of the subject , the setlers of a lasting peace , the establishers of true religion , i shall desire to use but one clause of the litany before it bids adieu to us , and gives it vltimum vale to the world . which is , from such preservers , upholders , maintainers , setlers , and establishers , good Lord deliver us . 

But rule they will , for in reference to some petitions presented to them , they say , this , and this is the sense of the army , whereby they make their sense the supreme law of the land . 

And the unreasonableness of their proceedings is seen in two things . 

1.  In this , the tumult of the apprentices on the 26. of July , forcing the parliament to unvote , what they had formerly voted , and disturbing and affronting the members of both houses ( Which truly i do not allow ) must be by them termed a breach of the parliaments privileges , and the contrivers and abettors thereof must be proceeded against according to law , and justice , and themselves ( Though gum  y of the same crime ) are scot free , and escape unpunished , and escape unpunished , not because they have not merited any , but because the sword says nay , they shall not suffer . 

1 now take a review of both their acts , the apprentices came ( 't is true ) in their persons , and compelled the members of parliament to revoke what had been before voted upon the desire of the army . But vollitur causa desinet effectus , there is never no effect without a cause ; if the army had not first ( By their unjust desires ) compelled the parliament by their votes to alter the old militia , the apprentices had never came in such a tumultuous manner to force them ( In the same kind ) to revoke that which before upon the armies unheard of demands had been passed ; so that if the army had not first piped , and led the way , the apprentices would never have danced after them , for they fierce knew the way to Westminster , so that the army was the only cause of that mutiny . 

2.  The army they ( 't is confessed ) came not in their own persons , but they sent their power , and command ( As their subordinate deputy ) to them , and forced them to revoke , and call in their declaration wherein they were proclaimed traitors ( Yet they will be traitors upon record ) or if they did not , they would do so , and so , thus , and thus , and March with their whole army up to London , as if they would compel them by their presence . 

Now the state of the cause stands thus , whether a deputy sent from a ruler , or an ambassador sent from a Prince , be not as effectual , and of as much force as the Prince , or ruler in person , if so , than the army are as deep in that crime ( Nay deeper ) than the apprentices , seeing they can command as much by their deputyes , as others can do by appearing in person ; however it stands with reason , that what is not allowable in the one , cannot be expedient in the other , and yet the army is not proceeded against , but quod defertur , non offertur . 

quest . but some May say that of the apprentices was the more unwarrantable in regard they forced the speaker , and some of the other members to fly from the house . 't is true , the substance doth work more upon man's nature then the shadow , yet being the shadow is the image of the substance , and the deputy represents the image of his Lord and Master , the army is as equal guilty of the said crime as the other , yet neither are warrantable neither by law , nor reason , nor can ever such clashings strike good fire to the commonwealth : but how can the speaker warrant that his absence , you say he was forced and affrighted , and was not they that stayed behind forced and affrighted as well as he and the rest , if so , how then comes it to pass that they deserted not the house as well as the other , yet for their faithfulness in cleaving close to their truth , they must be subject to the votes of acompany of illiterate agitators , and a council of war , and to desert the house according to their pleasure : if this be just , and to uphold , nay if it be not to break the free privileges of a parliament , let themselves be their own judges . Again doth it become the speaker and the rest , being placed as magistrates in such authority , to desert the house upon a pretence of fear , and leave the kingdom in the lowest ebb , and in the greatest storm , like a ship in a tempest ready to sink , no , 't was not fear , i believe it was a thing called a guilty conscience which made them fly . 

2.  There unreasonable proceedings are manifest in the manner of the impeaching the 11 honourable members , they did not ( As those which censure aright always do ) examine two things before they censure : first whether the parties censured have done good or ill : secondly whether they themselves could have done better . But they never have these considerations , but being turned by the wheel of their own in terests , never regard how men's good names are as white balls , which will infinitely get soil by tossing : but their censures against these 11 worthy impeached members , are like the butts of rams-horns against the walls of Jericho , they lay level all their worthy deeds at once . But for all this , the saying of a worthy writer May be fitly applied here .  mutatis , mutandis , ille crucem pretium sceleris tulit , hic diadema , it May be verified of them &c.  

Now a word to London : o London , sero sapium phryges , the phrygies were wise too late ; and so were you , 't is too late ( They being in ) to keep Sir Thomas and his followers out , 't is too late ( When the horse is stolen ) to shut the stable door , yet i dare say , and i verily believe , had the city but shown there teeth at them , they durst not have approached ; and i believe there were steeled swords in the city , which would have pierced Crumwell's skin , in spite of his iron sides , and there were sturdy mastiffs in the city , which would have baited that bull into the isle of Ely , from whence he came , and truly it would be a greater honour to him to turn brewer again in that island , and for colonel Pride to assume his profession of a brewer's clerk again in London , then in being such evil instruments of the commonwealth in the places they are for , praest•t in•p  esse ; quàm impium . 

I would speak one word ( If without offence ) to the revolted citizens within the city , and there erevolting neighbours , s  and i would ask them one question , what was there intention in lying dormant to let the army thus subdue the city ? I wonder what mercy either would have found , if the army had come in in fury ? they would all have been in the same shock of calamity ; and misery ; friends , and foes are both a like in the eyes of such a multitude , what honour have you achieved by selling and betraying the city ( As Judas did our saviour ? ) and although you have not Judas his first wages money , yet you May have his last wages , and reward , ( Hanging ) and truly it were a thing fit in my opinion , that all those that were in this crime of revolting , should have revolter written in all there foreheads , to there utter infamy to all ages , and posterity• . 

quest . but some say , 't is better it is thus ended , and that they stood it not out against the army , a great deal of precious blood is saved thereby ? 

answ. to that i answer , some blood ( I confess ) must have been spilt , how ever , 't were better a little were lost , than all your liberties lost , come citizens , libertas dici inaestim abilis , you applied a certain remedy to a suspected disease , you feared shedding of some blood , which was but suspected , and did not fear the losing of your liberties , which is certain ; if the city had stood out in a general defence , much blood could not have been spent , for Plus virtus unita valet , vis nihill vinci 
Si meus null fides null sit , null manus . 




And if the city had but done so , term time , that army would not have hurt it , but they Might have enjoyed their ancient freedoms , and liberties , which now they must bid adieu unto . 

A word to Sir Thomas and the army under his command , gentlemen soldiers , and agitators ; you shall scarce be warm in your honour by these proceedings ; thieves of honour seldom find joy , in there purchases , ( Stability never ) you seek honour ( Like Absalon ) by indirect means , but you May ( Like him ) be pulled down with a vengeance , you aspire to preferment by wrong means , being like them that ascend a pair of stairs on horseback , it is ten to one but your beasts will cast you before you reach the top of preferment ; though Caesar had not his equal , nor Pompey his superior , yet Fairefax May meet with both , and although yet no rubs cross him in his undertakings , but all things smile upon him with an auspicious reverence , yet before he attains the throne , many lets must encounter him . There is a King , who when ( Like the sun ) he shall arise again in our horizon , will by his glorious beams chase away these numerous flies : i say there is a King , a cavalier , a Bishop , a Presbyterian , a Round-head , and a true Englishman , all antipodes to independents ; therefore Fairefax hold thy hand , the beginning of thy reign shall not come in our almanacs this year ; agitators leave plotting , and counselling , it is better to desist betimes , then to be forced to it nolens , volens , a sword of gold will command an Englishman , more than a sword of steel ; Fairefax take warning , beware , and look behind to what hath been done , you sign all that is presented to you from your agitators , and your council of war ; your hand is upon record for all , your back must hear all , it will sink you if you be not strong backed ; you must answer and appear for all , when Crumwell and the rest of your counsellors will pull there necks out of the collar , though as guilty as you they will set you in the front of the battle to bear the brunt , when they thems•lves will fall back to the rear and be secure , oh beware , bewise , praestat sero , quum nunquam . 

A word to all true noble Englishmen , be patient you who have been grinded by the King , you that have been oppressed by the parliament , and now been slaves to this overruling revolting army , or oppressed by any subordinate power , derived from any of these three waits , and be patient all you that have lost your goods and estates ; flebile principium melior fortunae sequata est , there will come a time when all shall enjoy there own , when King Charles is settled agai in his throw and enjoys his own , which shall be my daily prayers , and that this kingdom May flourish again with all the freedoms , liberties and happiness it formerly enjoyed , which God of his infinite mercy grant , amen . 

Now soldiers ( Gentlemen soldiers ) i would term you if your proceedings were answerable ; if you wynch , 't is to be feared you are galled , and if i have any way incensed you , you must not stir ; you are bound to the peace , your hands are tied behind you in two regards . First , you go under the notion of saints , and saints are not envious nor vindictive , you allow liberty of conscience to do and speak , therefore you cannot exempt me , and in this regard , though i thought not to have revealed my name ; yet because you shall see i do not fear , my name is , 

Andrew , all truth . 

Courteous reader ; 

If in any thing in the foregoing discourse thou hast reaped any profit , i shall think myself fully satisfied for my pains : there is nothing in it , but what is as clear as the sun . And as my conscience commanded me , so have i obeyed and published it , though contrary to my desire . If any thing therein displease thee , thy pardon i humbly crave , and rest 

Thine 

Finis . 



















