A sermon preached before his majesty at Christchurch in Oxford , on the 3. of novemb. 1644. after his return from Cornwall . 

By John Berkenhead , fellow of All-souls college . 

Oxford , printed in the year , 1644.  

To the most illustrious Prince , Charles Prince of Wales , Duke of Cornwall , and Earl of Chester . 

Sir , 

It hath pleased your highness to command this sermon to the press , and me to be your servant : what you have observed from either , that Might incline you to so much grace & favour , i know not ; unless it were my plain dealing with the times . This ( Indeed ) your highness mentioned with a deep sense and relish . Would God the mad world knew it . Certainly it were enough to stop the foul mouths of some : enough to warm the honest hearts of others . God almighty so compose the present troubles of this state , that the government thereof May stand the surer for this shaking ; and continue and increase his graces in you for the glorious support thereof , when it shall please him to lay it upon your shoulders . 

thus prays your highness' most obliged humble servant , John Berkenhead . 

The necessity of Christian subjection . 

rom. 13. 5.  

wherefore ye must needs be subject , not only for wrath , but also for conscience sake . 

Would men but meditate , or were they persuaded of the truth of the prophet's speech , ( 1 sam. 15. 22. 23. ) behold to obey is better than sacrifice , & to hearken then the fat of rams ; for rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft , and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry . ( Were they i say persuaded of this truth ) there would not be so little harkening to the commands of authority , nor so little obeying what they hear ; nor would men run so fiercely into the fearful sin of rebellion , only to maintain and justify their own sacrifice of fools ; which is indeed no other than their foolish imaginations have devised , and their vain thoughts have set up as an idol to themselves . Or were we not fallen into those last and worst of times prophesied of by the apostle ( 2 tim. 3. 1. 5.  ) wherein men that make show of godliness ( Yea many that most show of it ) have only a show , but deny the power of it , being proud , cursed speakers , disobedient to parents : proud indeed , when they dare exalt themselves against God's vicegerent ; cursed speakers , when they dare libel and slander Prince and prelate ; disobedient to parents , natural , ecclesiastical , and political ; were we not i say fallen into such times , i should not need to urge the apostles inference , which the unseasonable sins of these seasons make so seasonable , [ wherefore ye must needs be subject , &c. ] 

In which words , infert conclusionem principaliter intentam , aq. wherein , concludit paraenesin subjectionis ejusque necessitatem , rol. showing that we must obey the magistrate , not only for fear of punishment , but much more because that ( Although the magistrate hath no power over the conscience of man , yet seeing he is God's minister ) he cannot be resisted by any good conscience , gen : notes , ex calv , & bez. in qua duas potissimum urget causas ob quas potestatibus necessariò obediendum , Marlor . first their power to cause fear of wrath . Secondly our conscience to obey God's ordinance ; in respect of both which we must be subject not only for wrath , but also for conscience sake : 

Wherein i shall consider these 5 particulars . 

1.  The illation , [ Wherefore , ] 
2.  The duty , [ subject ] 
3.  The necessity , [ must needs ] 
4.  The persons obliged , [ ye ] 
5.  The reasons persuading , and those twofold : 1.  From fear of wrath , although [ not only for wrath . ] 
2.  For conscience , [ but also for conscience sake . ] 

1.  The illation and inference in this word [ Wherefore ] being a conclusion , wherein quod initio praeceperat de praestandâ magistratibus obedientiâ , nunc per modum collectionis repetit , sed cum expositione : calv.  it will be convenient for conceiving fully the apostles meaning , and the force of his arguments , and the drift of this conclusion , that we reflict back as far as the beginning of this chapter ; where ( Besides those two mentioned , verse . 4.  Of 1.  Terror to the ill , which i reserve to be handled under that of wrath . 2.  And reward to the good , which i refer to that of conscience . ) We shall find four reasons premised to enforce this conclusion , [ wherefore ye must needs be subject , &c. ] 

1.  First , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ( v. 1. ) for there is no power but of God . How much soever we May perhaps dislike them , and how ill soever they May sometimes use their power ; as Pilate did his , in crucifying him whom he should have loosed , and losing him whom he should have crucified ; yet our saviour himselfacknowledgeth , that Eventhiss abused power was {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , given him from above ; ( ioh. 19 11. ) For misery comes not out of the dust , neither doth affliction spring out of the earth : ( iob. 5. 6. ) But as omne bonum desuper , every good gift is from above , ( iam. 1. 17.  ) so is there no evil in the city , and the Lord hath not done it , ( Amos 3. 6.  ) ( I. e. ) majum poena , no evil of punishment . 

per me reges regnant , by me Kings reign , is the general ground of the charter , both of good and evil Princes , and nobles , and all the judges of the earth , ( prov. 8. 15. 16. ) He it is that raiseth unto David a righteous branch , a King who shall reign & prosper , and execute judgement and justice upon the earth , in whose days the persons shall be safe ; and he it is that gives an evil King in his anger , & takes a good King away in his wrath : qui regnare facit hominem hypocritam propter peccata populi . ( iob. 34. 30.  ) vulg. . So that whether they be good or evil , we must be subject , sithence there is no power but of God ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , lest we will be found fighters against God , whose power none is able to resist , whether it be for protecting or for punishing ; [ wherefore we must needs be subject . ] 

2.  Secondly , they are not only not without God , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , and so of him permissiuè ; but they are the ordinance of God himself , and so of him positiuè , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , ordained of God ( v. 1. ) whereupon they worthily use in their stile , not only permissione divinâ , or providentiâ divinâ , although those be good titles taken in a good sense ; ( Yet they imply some intermediate means betwixt God and those who bear them : ) but Princes write dei gratiâ : for by the grace of God ( No favour of man ) they are what they are ; so that i May say of their government , as saint Paul said of his apostleship , it is not of man , nor by man , but by Jesus Christ , & God the father , for , cujus jussu homines nascuntar , hujus jussu & reges constituuntur ; apti his , qui in illo tempore ab ipsis regantur . ( iren. lib 5 cap. 24. ) Which May be demonstratively evidenced , if we shall take a survey of the series , and succession of governors , from the first man that was placed upon the earth , whom we find create with an intention to make him God's vicegerent ; ( gen. 1. 26.  ) and at his very first setting foot upon the earth , actually invested with monarchical government ; ( ver. 27. 28. ) That government being indeed the special form , whereby he could resemble the image of God who is in heaven , as he made him upon earth the sole unequalled monarch , from whom alone quicquid est ab uno est , & est id quod est ; and therefore he is worthy to receive glory , and honour , and power , for of him , and for him , and through him are all things . 

Nor was it his intention that he should only govern the beasts already create , but also he made him to be the monarch , and confirmed his authority jure naturali , potestate patriâ , over all mankind , which should be propagated after him ; who as the angels and those of heaven , had their beginning from God by creation , and therefore were subject to him ; so all the armies upon earth were to deduce their offspring from that one Adam by generation , and so to owe to him subjection ; whereas had not God intended to have principality , depended only upon his own institution and not upon the subordinate nobles , nor the multitudes of popular election , it had been as easy for him , to have create a company , a colony , a country , a nation , a world of men upon earth , with his own faciamus , as it was , and as he did , so many legions of angels in the heavens ; that so out of those choice colonies themselves Might have made choice of a commander . But he , who found the heavens not free from mutiny , when he produced a multitude of inhabitants there , although all were his offspring , would not give the least colour to contention , for superiority or equality , nor pretext of disobedience against his monarch upon earth , whilst he suffers no subject to be set by him but such as owed the subjection and duty of a son in descending from him ; thereby teaching all posterity , how the power of a Prince over his subjects is , and aught to be acknowledged , as natural , as the power of a father is over his son ; yea and also thereby signifying , that as naturally there can be but one father of one child , so politicly there should be but one Prince and monarch of one persons and nation . Whereupon God did not create two men ( No nor Eve , but out of the rib of Adam ) that so from them all others should issue , and they Might rule promiscuously , or that each of them should rule such as would make choice to be under his government , rather than under the others , ( Although perhaps propagated of the other ) nor that the mightiest hunter , he , that could get most , should govern most , as afterwards it fell out in the degenerating days of Nymrod . but he create only one , thereby to intimate , how far monarchical government is to be preferred before any other , aristocratical , democratical , oligarchical , or the like . This and this alone of man on earth , being an idea or resemblance of God's government in heaven ; and we pray daily , that his will May be done on earth as it is in heaven ; and how can it be so , if we reject or resist that form of government ? As also , thereby he implies , that all other forms of government are against the course of nature , different from the pattern of heaven , diverse from divine institution , and indeed punishments rather then blessed governments , if they be compared with monarchy ; which made the wisest of Kings affirm , that many Princes are imposed for the transgression of a land , but that realm only endures long which is ruled by one man of understanding and knowledge ( prov. 28. 2. ) Which doctrine seems to be squared to God's own practice throughout all ages , whensoever he designed any government over his persons the Jews ( After they were taken notice of for his peculiar ) although for a long time he retained the royal supreme title of King to himself , ( During which time , he oft times immediately delivered his regal mandates by urim , thummim , visions , oracles , prophecies . &c. ) Yet he appointed one supreme vicegerent over them , and not many ( For as for the Sanhedrim they were but as Moses or the high priests privy council , or as delegated judges because of the multiplicity of businesses ) one i say and not many , witness Moses 40. years betwixt Egypt and Canaan , Joshna near 60. years settling them in Canaan , after them Judah , after him Othniell , than Ehud , than Shamgar , than Deborah , than Gideon , then tolah , than Jair , than Jephthah , than Samson ; but never above one at onetime . And how lamentable the times were when there was not one supreme , but the multitude took power into their own hands ; that hideous story of the licentious Danites , and the ravished Levites wife , and the revenge of one upon another May serve to astonish all posterity , and affright them from affecting anarchy ; yea & when God , afterthat he had in mercy looked upon their misery , sent them new judges , Hely , and Samuel successively , and they not there with satisfied would have a 〈◊〉 like other nations , he doth not set several Kings over them , 〈◊〉 Joshua found 31. over the land at their entrance , but he appointed them only one King ( 1 sam. 8. 22. ) As being safest for persons , best resembling his government and most agreeable to 〈◊〉 ••dinance ; wherefore we must needs be subject to such 〈◊〉 of government , for it is the ordinance of God . 

Oh! how much therefore are those too blame who go about to alter this form of government , and to introduce a new deformed device of their own ambitious invention wherein they are not agreed , whether they shall be styled , 1.  The states of England as some of their preachers ( Forgetting the King in their prayers ) have sycophantically phrased them ; 2.  Or whether they shall be entitled , the perpetual senate , or assessors of the kingdom , as some have endeavoured to derive their stile , as the impress of a republic ; 3.  Or whether they shall be dignified with the princely attribute of gentlemen of the crown of England ( To which should be annexed the power of electing their King although hereditary ) as some of themselves have ambitiously expressed their affectation in assimilation to that of Poland ; only to the end that themselves Might be sharers in supremacy . A government which admitting a monarch whom yet they dare not deny , is neither monarchy , aristocracy , democracy , nor oligarchy ; and anarchy , i dare say , they would not have it entitled ; a government which if Aristotle himself were to sit in council at their close committees , he could not yet resolve what to call it , a government never grounded on the ordinance of God , nor practised in any established commonweal . And what fearful effects must necessarily follow it , besides , that it is to conjecture when men leave the fountains of the living waters , and take themselves to cisterns of their own digging . It May also be apparent to any indifferent understanding who reads or hears the story of hen. 3. when there was an attempt of 24.  Assessors and a traitorous appointing les Douze Piers , far short of this confused insolency , what robberies , what rapes , what murders , what burglaries , what extortions , what exactions followed , ( Every one shrouding himself under that assessor , which he followed , yea and every one of the assessors after a little time , bandying himself against another , either for their own faction , or favouring of their followers ) is rather to be imagined then reported , yet those times too really felt it , and all must necessarily taste the like bitter fruit , who will plant & nurse the tree of popular faction . 

And alas how foolish and fond of flitting ( To use King James his Scottish proverb in another case ) are those persons which will be bewitched to follow these many-headed Hydra's , before the voice of the lamb , and never consider that old adage Citius impletur unus saccus , quàm plures ? hath there been so much pains bestowed in vain , if it be in vain , ( As the apostle speaks in another case ) to bring this kingdom from an heptarchy to a monarchy ; that now one part of this island should be turned from a monarchiy to a Roman decemvirate , a Venetian senate , a Low-countries state , nay to the government without a name , God forbid : vis unita fortior , but a kingdom divided cannot stand . I beseech you therefore brethren mark them diligently which cause divisions amongst you , and avoid them : ( rom. 16. 17.  ) for those who at first cause divisions , in opinion , in doctrine , and in religion , will at the length attempt divisions in government , in policy , in countries and kingdoms . Let us in the fear of God consider with ourselves , that if there be no power but of God , even the punishing and persecuting power , and if we must be subject even to that , lest we should fight against God , oh howmuch more then , where Kings are nursing fathers , ought we to show our subjection with all readiness and cheerfulness ? If saint Paul enforce obedience to the Prince with so many forcible arguments , when that tyrant Nero ( Who devoured Christians like a lion ) reigned and raged . Oh how should we urge & press this point , when a Constantine , a patron of the church , and pattern of piety is our precedent in religious exercises , as well as precedent over us with righteous government : for certainly , [ they that resist , resist the ordinance of God ] which is the third reason whereupon our apostle grounds this inference , wherefore ye must needs be subject . 

For as in his church Christ gave some to be apostles , some prophets , some evangelists , some pastors and teachers , for the gathering together of the saints , and for the work of the ministry : so God in the commonweal appointed some to be King's {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , most eminent and excellent above all other , some to be governors under them {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , sent by commission from them : amongst whom some are nobles , some judges , ( prov. 8. 16.  ) some priests ( For those howsoever some conceive of them , were not incapable of government in the commonweal : ) yea , some things there are which could not be decided without them . ( deu. 17. 8. to 12. ) some are governors of cities , ( deut. 21. 3 , 4. ) some rulers of thousands , some of hundred , some of ten , ( exod. 18. 25 , 26. ) and some live merely in subjection , as the inferior poor servant , &c. whom Aristotle that Lynceus of nature affirmeth , nature itself framed only to that use ; and every man bound in conscience by the law of God to abide in that state wherein God hath placed him , and to be contented , with his vocation , degree , and calling , ( 1 cor. 7. 20 , 21 , 22. ) unless he will be as guilty of confusion in the body politic , or ecclesiastical , as the members should be in the body natural , if one should strive to usurp another's place ; the foot the head , the ear the eye ; and unless we will be as guilty in resisting the ordinance of God , as they should be of deforming the act of his creation . 

Submit yourselves therefore to all manner of ordinance of man for the Lord's sake , apov {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , take that which is thine own and go thy way . If thou be'st a ruler , do it with diligence : if an officer , wait on thy office : if a teacher , attend to teaching : if but a servant , do that without slothfulness , ( rom. 12. 7. to 11. ) If a judge , be learned , ( psal. 2. 11.  ) yea , and upright too , ( psal. 58. 1. ) If thou art to be judged , be obedient , or else thou must be cut off , both for thine own sin , and also for others example . Nor must thou be obedient only when superiors be good and courteous , but even when they are cruel and froward : nor only when they punish thee justly for ill doing , but even when thou sufferest wrongfully , yet must thou endure for conscience sake , ( 1 pet. 2. 18 , 19 ) which the apostle confirms by the example of our saviour Christ , to ( vers. 25. ) who when he suffered resisted not , no nor so much as threatened , ( vers. 23. ) although he could have had more than twelve legions of angels , ( mat. 26. 53.  ) teaching us , that we must not resist authority , although unjustly oppressing : ( Much less justly ruling although punishing . ) First , neither offending it , ( mat. 17. 27 , ) secondly nor defending ourselves against it , ( mat. 26. 52.  ) what specious pretences soever we May make for it . For who Might have pretended fairer in that kind , than the primitive Christians against idolatrous persecutors ? yet they profess , that armasunt preces & lachrimae ; so that nemo nostrum quando apprehenditur , reluctatur ; nec se adversus injustam violentiam vestrum , quamvis nimius , & copiosus noster sit populus , ulciscitur : Cyprian . who Might have pretended more rightly the defence of himself , of his fellow disciple , of his Master , yea of religion , than saint Peter ? yet hear our saviour's mandate and his menace , his mandate : [ put up thy sword into thy sheath : ] his menace , [ for all they which strike with the sword , shall perish with the sword . ] [ all ] whosoever clergy or laity , strike against authority , or without the licence of it , in what case soever without exception of 1 , se defendendo , or 2.  Maintenance of a covenant , or 3.  Defence of religion . And what manner of Christians those men are who dare resist their rightful , righteous , religious sovereign : or what manner of religion that is , which they pretend gives privilege to such rebellious practices , i leave to every good Christian to consider : only give me leave to tell you , sure i am , it is not such as was known to primitive Christians : it is not such as was allowed by our saviour to his apostles , nor is it such as the apostles taught the persons of their times : for they without any cloak , sub moderamine inculpatae tutelae ( Which indeed never can be by arms but only by laws ) howsoever pontificians and consistorians conspire : as Buchanan laboured to beguile his nation , and some of our countrymen have beguiled themselves , and Jesuits would have beguiled the whole world , and without any distinction foe offensive and defensive disobedience , the apostles taught the church of God , that he which resists , ( Be it how it will ) resists the ordinance of God . 

[ and he that resists purchaseth to himself damnation . ] which is the fourth reason to enforce this [ wherefore , &c. ] and bears a threefold reading , 1.  judicium , judgement : Tremel . 2.  Condemnationem , condemnation : Beza & Tompson . 3.  Damnationem , damnation : vulgar & King's bible . all which are but the graduations of the punishments , implied by the original , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; for not only {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , ( matth. 5. 22.  ) they shall be in danger of the judgement of censure and condemnation of the censorious : although this be a punishment which an ingenious spirit would willingly escape , which made David pray , ( psal. 39 8. ) Let me not be made a rebuke unto the foolish , whilst they censure , reprove , condemn my actions in their assemblies , much more a man that is shot through the head with popularity , as his majesty saith of the then revolted Rolloc , as indeed all factious persons in church and commonweal are , especially if they aspire by , or adhere to the popular faction ; for such , like the chameleon , which turns to all colours save white , lives only by the air , and delights rather in breath then other , ac si mallet coctam quam crudam ; so they who apply to popularity , and suit themselves to all company , saving the innocent , can live no longer ( At least not with delight ) than they suck the breath of applause from the multitude . But behold , not only those which sit in the gate ( The rulers ) speak against such disobedient persons , but if they escape the songs of the drunkards ( Who perhaps May whoop on their sides ) yet shall very babes and sucklings chant their disloyalty , and the viper's tongue shall slay them , ( iob. 20. 16. ) Thus an evil condemnation shall fall upon them , whereby their name shall rot , and their memorial shall stink , even {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , under the censure of those who are as censorious as themselves : nor only so , but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , they shall receive judgement , and condemnation : 1.  Both judgement before the tribunal of men , where the sentence of guiltiness shall proceed against them ; and when sentence is given upon them , they shall be condemned , for such ungodly persons shall not be able to stand in judgement , neither these sinners in the congregation of the righteous . 2.  And also they shall receive condemnation from the justice of God , who stands in the congregation of Princes , ( As to survey , so to assist ) and is a judge amongst the earthly gods , yea even of those whom they sometimes cannot come by to judge according to their deservings ; who when he shall arise ( As he will arise ) to judge the earth , he will recompense such wicked persons after their deservings ; he will reprove them , and set before them , even in order , the things that they have done : as first their pride , next their covetousness to maintain it , after that their rebellion to declare it , than their hypocrisy and counterfeiting religion to veil and defend it , & at the length he will bring death hastily upon them , and they shall go down into hell , sithence such wickedness is in their dwellings and amongst them ; and is not this a fearful judgement and condemnation ? so fearful , as what can be conceived to be added ? And yet behold , 3.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , rom. 14. 23.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the judgement , condemnation , yea , damnation of an accusing conscience shall consummate their misery , even such as drove Judas to be his own executioner upon earth ; this shall do continual execution of God's just judgement upon them in hell , by that worm that never dyes , and that fire which never shall be quenched , where their rebellious carcases shall be an abhorring to all flesh ; wherefore for the escaping such fearful 1.  Judgement . 2.  Condemnation , 3.  Damnation here , and hereafter from God and man ; we must needs be subject . 

2.  [ subject ] which is the duty ; that as the devil overcame man by his disobedience to God , so man May return to God and overcome the devil , by obedience to man for the Lord's sake . Christianity is a school of humility , and we must not look every one upon our own excellencies , but upon other men's ; having the same mind in us , which was in Christ Jesus , in giving ( Not in taking ) honour , preferring one before another , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , humbling ourselves as little children ; as they submit to their parents , so must we be subject to our Prince , for he is the person to whom principally the apostle presseth this subjection ; as aquin. Dion . Carth. Bruno . and claud. gloss it . The subjection to others being for his sake , as the subjection to him is for the Lord's sake ; which that we May perform aright , let us consider these three particulars : 

1.  qualibus , to what manner of Princes we must be subject . 
2.  in quibus , in what things we must be subject . 
3.  Quomodo , how we must express our subjection . 
1.  qualibus , to what manner of Princes we must be subject . As the apostle enjoins servants concerning obedience to their Masters , so say i to subjects concerning their sovereigns ; let as many as are under the yoke Count their governors worthy of all honour , ( sive fideles , sive infideles , whether they be gentle , or whether they be cruel ) that the name of God and his doctrine be not ill spoken of : 1.  And if they be believing , let us not despise them because they are faithful and beloved , and partakers of the benefit , to wit redemption . 2.  Or if they be unbelievers , let us not rebel , nor resist them ; because although , 1.  quidam illorum dantur ad timorem & poenam , & increpationem , some of them are sent merely for a terror and a punishment . 2.  Yea , quidam ad illusionem & contumeliam , & superbiam ; some of them set up themselves in pride , merely to contemn , and scorn , and scoff at their subjects , as the persecuting Emperors did , when they exposed the Christians naked to fight with beasts and beastly heathens . 3.  Aswell as quidam ad correctionem & utilitatem subjectorum , & conservationem justitiae ; for a fatherly reformation of offenders , a loveing protection of the obedient , and the preservation of justice for both : yet we must consider and confess , that ad utilitatem gentilium terrenum regnum positum est a deo , non a diabolo , qui nunquam omnino quietus est ; imo qui nec ipsas quidem gentes vult in tranquillo agere , ut timentes regnum humanum : earthly kingdoms are erected by God , not by the devil , who as he is never quiet himself , so would he not have the persons live in peace , ( As appears by his late practices ) which government is the means to procure and preserve , preventing men from devouring those that are more righteous than themselves : and for being like the fishes of the sea , or the creeping things who have no ruler over them : for , per legum positiones repercutiant multiplicem gentilium injustitiam , Kings and Princes by their laws restrain and bridle the fury and violence of our natural corruptions : yea , and the worst of Princes is never worse than quemadmodum populidigni sunt dei justo judicio in omnibus aliqualiter superveniente : iren. l. 5. c. 24. such as the persons have provoked God to set to afflict them , whose just judgement always interposeth itself in such weighty cases . Although sometimes we know it not , ofttimes we will not acknowledge it : which being so , May oblige every one of us to be subject to all powers , of all qualities , conditions , dispositions , tempers , religions , under whom the Lord hath placed us : sive 1.  Nutriciis , sive 2.  Hypocritis , sive 3.  Haereticis , sive 4.  Tyrannis : whether they be nursing fathers , for whom we must praise God : or dissembling hypocrites , or obstinate heretics , or bloody tyrants , for all which we must pray to God : whatsoever Sanders , Allen , Stapleton , Parsons , Mariana , Boucherius , Santarellus , &c. on the Romish part : and Knox , Buchanan , Gilbey , goodman , and Daneus , on the other extreme have formerly taught , Calderwood hath followed , and some too fiery spirits of late have seditiously and scandalously put in practice , of whom i May say in the apostles language , if any man teach other wise ( Than what i have affirmed ) he consenteth not to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ , and to the doctrine which is according to godliness : but is puffed up & knoweth nothing as he ought to know , but doateth about questions and strife of words , whereof cometh envy , strife , rallings , evil surmisings , froward disputations of men of corrupt minds , and destitute of the truth , which think that gain is godliness , ( Howsoever they pretend godliness rather than gain ) from such separate thyself : for howsoever we must perform active obedience to such Princes only so far as lawfully we May , calv.  Bez. marl. roloc. genev. usque adaras , so long as cum deo non comparabuntur , they are not set in competition with God : tertul.  yet we must perform passive obedience and absolute subjection , suffering without resistance , being subject without rebellion , even if they should command the most unjust superstitious , idolatrous , profane , or irreligious things which can be imagined ; yet i say we must not rebel , unless we will renounce Christianity , but we must let this be probatio subjectionis , the touchstone of our subjection , even our patient and constant sufferings : 

For , quae passos apostolos scimus manifestae est doctrina , the truth of this doctrine is sealed by the apostles sufferings , who endured of heathen Princes , and for not renouncing Christianity , carceres , vincula , flagella , saxa , gladios , impetus judaeorum , coetus nationum , & tribunorum elogia , & regum auditoria , & proconsulum tribunalia , & caesaris nomen interpretem non habent : imprisonment , bonds , stripes , stoning , wounds , violence of the Jews , conventing before the gentiles , questioning in the courts of tribunes , examinations and answers before Kings , arraignments at the tribunals of proconsuls , yea and could not find an appeal to the Emperor , any protection for their innocence ; yet they not only submitted themselves , and possessed their own souls with patience , but also taught all pious persons so to do ; as here our apostle makes it apparent , and ( Titus 3. 1 , 2. ) presseth it to all posterity : put them in remembrance ( For indeed we are too apt to forget ) that they be subject to the principalities & powers , and that they be obedient , & ready to every good work ; that they speak evil of no man , ( Much less of Princes and prelates , as some of late have done ) that they be no fighters , ( Much less armed rebels ) but soft , lowly , gentle , showing all meekness to all men , much more to rulers ; yea , and such effect did this doctrine produce , that sanguis martyrem semen ecclesiae , cypr.  the blood of the martyrs was the seed of the church . The blood , not the sword , that were too Turkish . And however , circa majestatem imperatoris infamemur , tert. ad scap. l. 2.  They were slandered as disloyal to the Emperor ; yet , nunquam Albiniani , vel nigriani , vel cassiani inveniri potuerunt christiani : never any Nigrian , who made religion the stalking-horse for rebellion ; nor never any Cassian who assaulted his sovereign by assassination , could be found amongst the Christians : christianus nullus est is vimirum imperatoris , quem sciens à deo suo constitui , necesse est ut & ipsum diligat , & revereatur , & honoret , & salvum velit , cum toto romano imperio , quousque seculum stabit , tam diu enim stabit : colimus ergo imperatorem , sic quomodo & nobis licet , & ipsi expedit , ut hominem à deo secundum , & quicquid est à deo consecutum , & solo deo minorem : for no true Christian can be an enemy to his King or Emperor , whom he knows to be placed over him by God , and therefore upon necessity must love him , reverence him , honour him , pray for him , and desire and endeavour his safety as the safety of the kingdom ; as being next to God , lesser only than God , and endowed with the power which he hath from God , over all the men in his dominions . Hereupon was it that the Christians fought so many valiant battles , and obtained so many glorious victories , even for heathen and persecuting Emperors , yea even for Julian the apostata himself : but never did they fight any battle , pitched any field , arrayed any army , armed any legions , or so much as entered into consultation against their Emperor . And thus you see , qualibus , to what manner of Princes we must be subject . And i think all will willingly conclude , si parendum est magistratui profane , certè multo magis obedire oportet sancto & christiano , bez.  if heathens were thus obeyed , much more should Christians ; if persecuting , much more pious Princes , such as our gracious sovereign , whose clemency May challenge our love , as well as his power command our duty , whom God preserve , and prosper long over us in honour and felicity , and give us the grace and gratitude to be subject , not only for fear , but even for conscience sake . and so i come to consider 

2.  in quibus ? in what things we must be subject ? Wherein the true stating of the question is much differenced from the mistaken and mistaking tenants of many of these times , who conceive and would bear the world in hand . 

1.  That they are bound no further to subjection , then with a rightly regulated conscience , they May perform active obedience to all their superiors edicts and commands . 
2.  That they are not bound to active obedience , where they have a doubting conscience , although not fully informed by the right rule of reason , or express authority of God's word . 
3.  That the supreme magistrate , must have express affirmative warrant in the word of God for all his injunctions , or else the subject needs not obey them . 
Whereas the truth is , 

1.  Concerning the first , that although active obedience binds only in the Lord , yet absolute subjection is due without any resistance for the Lord's sake , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , to human ordinances ( 1 pet. 2. 13. ) Even when man ordains ; not the load ( 1 cor. 7. 12.  ) yet such a man as is ordained of the Lord , and so presumed to ordain according to the Lord , we May not in any wise resist . 

2.  And as concerning the second , although when man is left to his own liberty , the rule is to be observed , quod dubitas ne feceris , because he that doubteth is condemned of his own conscience , yet when we are commanded by authority , and we only doubt in ourselves whether that be good and lawful which is commanded , or not , the rule of saint Augustine must be observed si dubitas feceris , if you only doubt do it , except you have express warrant out of God's word , or the analogy of faith , and undeniable necessary consequence to the contrary ; authority must turn the scale of thy doubting conscience , and weigh down thy judgement to active obedience , so that 

3.  The magistrate is not bound to express text for warrant of each of his particular edicts ; it is sufficient that it is contained in his general commission dixi dii estis , i have said ye are God's . ( psal. 82. 6.  ) and therefore have committed my delegated power to you , per me reges regnant , by me King's reign ( pro. 8. 15. ) And therefore by my authority May lay injunctions upon their subjects , and they are obliged to active obedience , except they can produce a negative act of parliament out of the high court of heaven ; for Princes are not only instead of God by representation ( exodus 4. 16.  ) but they have the power of God over those to whom they have commission ( exod. 7. 1. ) I have made thee Pharaoh's god , yea and put case the subject could produce a contradictory command of God to that of his King , yet is not his passive obedience dispensed withal , nor any part of his absolute subjection dissolved or canceled , but we must needs be subject , ( At least by suffering if not by doing ) in all things , even against the dictate of a doubting , yea , or a discerning conscience . 

3.  But then in the next place it remains to be resolved by what means , or in what manner this subjection is to be expressed , which must be by these seven means following ; where there are not jura regni by mutual consent of Prince and persons to supersede them , or dispense with any of them . 

1.  First by praying for them ( 1 tim. 2. 1. 10. 4. ) I exhort therefore that first of all , supplications , prayers , intercessions , and giving of thanks , be made for all men , for Kings and all that are in authority , that we May lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty , for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our saviour , who will have all men to be saved , and to come unto the knowledge of the truth . Where observe we must pray , 1.  To the end that we May live godly and peaceably , when we did not live so before : 2.  That they May come to the knowledge of the truth , when they knew it not before : 3.  And that they May be saved , when they were not in that state before . None so bad then , to and for whom we are not to express our subjection by this duty . 

2.  Secondly , we must speak no evil of them ; ( exod. 22. 28. ) thou shalt not revile the gods , nor curse the ruler of the persons . Is it fit to say to a King , thou art wicked ; and to priuces ye are ungodly ? ( iob. 34. 18  ) no certainly , nothing less , and therefore follow the counsel of Martialis , who lived in the primitive times , learned of the apostles , and taught to succession a murmuratione custodite corda vestra ; keep not only your hands from mutiny , and your tongues from muttering , but even your hearts from repining . 

3.  Thirdly , we must not dispute their commands , for where the word of a King is , there is power , and who May say unto him , what dost thou ? ( eccles. 8. 4.  ) ( i. e. ) not publicly and illegally to raise opposition against him , only we May privately inform our own judgement , to prepare as peaceably either for active obedience or for martyrdom . 

4.  Fourthly , we must express our subjection by doing all their commands which are not directly against God , resolving with the Israelites , all that thou commandest us we will do , and whithersoever thou sendest us we will go , only the Lord thy God be with thee . 

Fiftly , we must express it by suffering all punishments patiently without any resistance ; for those things which we dare not do when they command them , because they appear ( Not seem ) to be directly against God , ( As hath been before demonstrated ; ) imitating s. Chrysostom , ( epist. ad cyriacum ) cum à civitate fugarer , dicebam intra meipsum , si quidem vult regina me exulem agere , agate in exilium ; domini est terra & plenitudo ejus ; & si vult secare , secet ; idem passus est Isaias , &c.  Et si substantiam auferre , auferat , nudus exivi ex utero matris meae , nudus etiam revertar ; if the Queen will have me go into banishment , let her banish me ; the earth is the Lords , and all that therein is . If she will have me sawen in sunder , i submit myself ; Isaias suffered so before me . If she will confiscate my goods , i am contented ; naked came i out of my mother's womb , and naked must i return again . Behold , this must be the patience of the saints . 

Sixtly , by supplying means , ad necessaria secundum status sui conditionem ; lyr. paying due tribute to our Princes ; for this is the manner , quomodo velit te subjici protestatibus , redere jubens cui tributum , tributum : cui vectigal , vectigal ; ( I. e. ) quae sunt caesaris , caesari , & quae dei deo.  Tertul. which tribute must be paid without limitation of the quantity before , or account of the disposing of it after payment , gloss . Ordinar , if Calvin understand it aright , ( Which i dare not assure , nor will i dispute ) for , neque nostrum est vel principibus praescribere , quantum in res singulas impendant , vel eos ad calculum vocare : we have no power to prescribe to Princes what they shall expend upon occasions , nor to call them to account for their employment of what is expended which i conceive to be intended where there are not pacta inter principem & populum : nor fundamental laws of the land to the contrary . 

Seaventhly , we must express our subjection by guarding of the Prince's person , fighting for him upon occasion , and sparing him from going out with us to battle , lest he should quench the light of Israel , ( 2 sam. 21. 17. ) And what kind of consciences those men have , who can let their liege Lord go out to battle without them , ( They being required ) or who can leave him in his tents in the field , when they return to their own houses , i leave both to men experienced in the word , and practised in the sword to consider : and so proceed . 

3.  To the third part of my text , which is the necessity of this duty of subjection , employed in these words [ must needs . ] must is for the King , and so it is indeed : and so is this : and therefore implies a double duty by these two words [ must ] and [ needs ] terms of double necessity ; dominus opus habet , our Lord the King , the Lord of us and all we have hath need , and who will not then let all go presently ? He must have it : in case of true absolute , imminent necessity , to save ourselves and the public , according to the laws of the land . The supporting of his state is that vnum necessarium for our safeties , and the safety of the whole kingdom ; and therefore the apostle doth doth not only say , 1.  It is convenient that we be subject ( i. e. ) for ornament sake . 2.  Or it is fit that we be subject ( i. e. ) for order sake . 3.  Or it is profitable that we be subject ( i. e. ) for providence and discretion sake . 4.  Or it is contenting that we May be subject ( i. e. ) for peace and quiet sake . 5.  But {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , it is necessary obligationes juris & propter vim coactivam superioris , viz. quia tenemini & potestis ad hoc compelli ad profitendam veram subjectionem . [ we must needs be subject ] for absolute necessity sake : necessitate salutis , aq. even for the necessity of our salvation in heaven , and of our safety upon earth . What is it but subjection which continues the blessed harmony in heaven amongst the angels ? What is it but rebellion which bred that confusion in hell amongst the damned spirits ? What is it but subjection which can continue peace , plenty , piety , order , and unanimity amongst men upon earth , whereas rebellion brings forth war , waste , wickedness , confusion ; desolation , and destruction : wherefore for avoiding these , and preserving those , we must needs be subject . and so i come 

4.  To the persons obliged , which is the fourth thing proposed in my text , in this word [ ye ] {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , theoph. and so saint Chrysostom before him , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . With whom consent Theodoret and Oecumenius amongst the Greeks , and greg.  Mag. and s. Bernard amongst the Latins , express themselves both in opinion and phrase to the self same purpose ; we the clegy , ye the laity ; we the priests , ye the persons ; or ye the mighty peers , we the many multitude . 1.  For neither are peers excepted and reserved like the Lacedaemonian ephori , Roman tribunes , or Athenian demarchi , to restrain the insolences or exorbitances of Prince's oppressions . 2.  Nor are the priests exempted like the Roman hierarchy , to be insolent and exorbitant in the commonweal . 3.  Nor are the persons privileged ( As is pretended by some schismatical Demagogi ) to carry all by force of their collective body ; but we and ye , 1.  Peers , 2.  Priests , 3.  Persons , must all needs be subject : and that 

5.  [ not only for fear , but even for conscience sake . ] which is the last member proposed for prosecution . [ not only for fear ] and yet we must be subject for fear too , which , cogit vel invitos , Marlorat . compels those that have no conscience ; imo & possunt potestates etiam sine causa irasci , hieron. and yet we must fear and be subject too ( Though they oppress our tender conscience ) for fear of punishment from God , and from the Prince . 

1.  From God , who will not suffer his ordinance to be contemned ; non enim privati est hominis abrogare imperium ei quem dominus cum potestate nobis praefecit . Calv.  

2.  From the Prince ; for , vltionem reposcere possunt magistratus ob dignitatis suae contemptum . Idem . they May justly avenge the contempt of their authority , 1.  Either by their laws , by which in legum transgressores & inobedientes severiter animadvertunt : Marlorat . or else by arms ; for , portat gladium , he bears the sword , ( vers. 4. ) And if he draw it against schismatics , heretics , or rebellious persons , magistratus justè punit gladio , aug.  they must not cast off fear , and encourage themselves and their company against his commands , as if resisting for the cause of God ( As they pretend ) they were to be accounted martyrs ; for they are no more capable of martyrdom , dying in contempt of lawful magistracy , than the idol priests , or the devils themselves were by the subversion of their temples , or ceasing of their oracles , by virtue of our saviour's incarnation ; or by the command of the Emperor , converted to Christianity : aug. ubi supra . but on the contrary it May be verified , that they who under the royal command of a rightful King , obediently , constionably , zealously , and courageously fight against a schismatical , or heretical rebellious persons , ( Who make religion the pretext for rebellion ) if they die , they die martyrs , if they live , they live confessors : and therefore we must fear even the Prince's sword . That i May not insist upon loss of favour , friends , honour , credit , and the like ; although a wise man will consider even in this , that the indignation of a King is as the roaring of a lion ; and if this lion roar , who can but be afraid ? for he that provoketh him to anger , sins against his own soul ; and what then shall become of his body ? Or if any be so foolhardy as not to fear , yet must he be subject nevertheless , not only for fear , 

[ but even for conscience sake . ] Non solùm , quia resistere potentioribus & armatis impunè non liceret , quemadmodum toler ari solent injuriae quae propulsuri nequeunt : sed sponte docet obeundam hanc submissionem , ad quam verbo dei obstringitur conscientia : Cal , not only because they are armed and can overmaster us , for so men suffer injuries from private men , because they cannot withstand them : but the apostle teacheth , that a Christian is bound to subjection to his sovereign by the word of God ; and the tie of conscience more firm and close , then by a soldier's belt , or jailor's bolts and manacles : so that , etiamsi certò constaret nos manus illorum ( alioqui valde long as ) posse effugere : Marlor at . although we were assured that we could scape their reach , or oppose their power : yea , etiamsi exarmatus esset magistratus quem impune lacescere , & contemnere liceret , nihilo magis id tentandum quàm si poenam statim imminere cerneremus . although the magistrate had neither arms , nor armies , so that men Might provoke and contemn his power in respect of punishment , must we not presume to neglect him any more , then if we did see arms and armies , racks and gibbets , and all engines for execution prepared before us : quia nisi omnino subjiciamini principi polluta esset conscientia vestra obvians divinae ordinationi , Bruno . because unless we be absolutely subject to our Prince ( Pretend what purity we will ) our conscience isdefiled , and every step we March against him , we set ourselves in battle array against the ordinance of God : and indeed i cannot but wonder what hard hearts and cauterised consciences those men have , who do not presently smite themselves , and their hearts die within them like nabals when they find themselves guilty of subtracting subjection from their Prince , ( A greater ingratitude than which cannot be excogitated , and ingratitude is one of the greatest sins ; ) for subjects are obliged . 

1.  By the rule of right reason , to obey him , without whom we cannot be safe ; but without the King the commonweal cannot be safe , nomore then a ship without a pilot in a stormy ocean ; and therefore by the rule of right reason we must obey him . 

2.  By natural equity , which binds to do good to them which do good to us , but Kings and Princes do good to us , for by their means we obtain great quietness , and by their providence many worthy things are done to our nation : by them we receive honour , enjoy riches , peace , plenty , and freely profess and practice piety : and therefore even for natural equity , we must needs be subject , which is the least good we can do to them . 

3.  By moral civility we are bound to be subject to him who protects us : but Kings and Princes protect us from evil doers , who would violently take away our lives , insolently usurp our lands , prodigally misspend our goods , laciviously deflower and ravish our wives , & mercilessly slave our children , yea , they are the protectors and defenders of our faith , and therefore we are bound at least not to rebel sithence all these mischiefs have been , are , & will be the effects of such disobedience , from which good Lord deliver us . 

4.  By Christian religion and conscience , which enjoins , that we must not resist the ordinance of God : but Kings and Princes are the ordinance of God , and therefore we must not resist them . vers. 1 , 2.  

And do 1.  Right reason , 2.  Natural equity , 3.  Moral civility , 4.  Christian religion and conscience oblige us to subjection ? Oh then take heed , and never trust any ( Though never so fair professors ) who pretend conscience to countenance disobedience , at least to cast off subjection , as it is hard to disobey and not to rebel . Yet such always have been the fair pretence of the foulest practices . Thus the colour of the common good to free the persons from subsidies , taxes , and oppressions ( Which then seemed by their governors to lie upon them ) led the persons of the Jews , yea and some Romans too , to follow Theudas , Judas of Galilee , Catiline , and their companions . Thus the rebels of elder times in this island , christened their insurrections , the army of God & the holy church , making religion the patroness of their impiety . Jack Straw , Jack Cade , Wat Tyler , friar Ball , alias wall , and such others , made 1.  The oppression of the Commons , 2.  The insolency of the nobility , 3.  The covetousness of the priests , and the inequality of men of equal merit , the vail of all their violence and villainy . Thus the rebellion in the North , Lincolnshire , and Norfolk , were raised under pretence of 1.  Reforming religion , 2.  Freedom of conscience , and 3.  Bettering the commonweal ; yea , and they are always masked under the vizard of , 1.  pro lege , 2.  Pro grege , 3.  Pro rege ; whereas indeed they are against the King , break the laws , and make spoil of the persons , as Josephus relates the story of the rebellious Jews , pretending only against Florus harsh , unjust , and cruel usage , and not against the Romans : but as King Agrippa clears it by his remonstrance , they did but only say so ; for their actions were such as worse could not have been done by the greatest , enemies of the Roman empire , for they sacked the towns , robbed the treasuries , burned the houses , wasted the fields ; neither were they the towns , the treasuries , the houses , the fields of Florus , but of the Roman empire . I will not make application , but sithence these things have ever been so , i will only conclude with Solomon's admonition : my son , fear God and the King , and meddle not with them that are seditious ; for suddenly shall their destruction come , and who knoweth the ruin of them ? yet certain it is that ruined they shall be , and perhaps when themselves least suspect it , suddenly as with the arrow of lightning shot from the bow of God , which May serve as a corollary to our apostles premises to enforce this conclusion , [ wherefore ye must needs be subject , not only for wrath , but even for conscience sake . ] which God grant us all grace to be , for Jesus Christ's sake , the pattern and patron of perfect obedience ; to whom with the father and the holy ghost , be all honour , glory , power , might , majesty , and dominion , from this time forth for evermore . 

Amen . 

Finis . 





eccle. 5. 1.  Olympio . dor . in loc. his majesty's large declaration , p. 12. 13. 225. 256. 257. &c.  aquin. lyr. calv. bez. Marlor . Rolloc . jo. 19 20.  Matth. 27. 26.  August . de civitat . Dei , l. 5. c. 21.  jer. 33. 5 , 6.  Hos. 13. 11.  act. 5. 39  citat . gal. 1. 1.  boet. de unit . & uno . apoc. 4. 11.  rom. 11. 36.  Theophil . l. 2. chrysost. hon. 34. in 1 cor.  apoc. 12.  Theophil . Chrysost. ubi supr. gen 10. 9 , 10.  dan. Aphorif . Polit. p. 402. 24.  marth. 6. 10.  1 sam. 8.  judg. c. 10 c. 15.  judg. 19 , & 20.  2 sam. 8. 5  Josh. 12.  Speed h. 3. p. 635. ex . Mat. westmonast. . Martin . H. 3. p. 66 , 67 , 70 , 71 , 73 , 74.  upon the Lord's prayer . mat. 12. 25.  Esay 49. 23.  2 tim. 4. 17.  3.  ephes. 4. 11 , 12. 1 pet. 2. 13. ver. 14.  exod. 40. 15.  Heb. 7. 8.  polit. l. 1. c. 3. 4.  1 cor. 14. 12. to 31.  1 pet. 2. 13. to 17.  Mat. 20. 14  deut. 17. 9 to 13.  ambros. aug. l. 2• . cont. Faust . c. 75.  his majesty's proclamation and declaration , &c.  4.  larger declaration . p. 25. 405.  ps. 69. 12.  prov. 10. 7  ps. 41. 8.  Ps. 109. 6.  Ps. 1. 15.  ps. 82. 1.  verse . 8.  Ps 50. 21.  ps. 55. 16.  matth. 27. 3 , 4 , 5.  Esay 66. 24.  matth. 20. 27 , 28.  Philip . 2. 4  Verse . 5. to 9  Rom. 12. 10.  Matth. 18. 2.  1 1 , 1.  hab. 1. 13. 14.  1. tim. 6. 3 , 4 , 5.  scorpiae . act. 4. 19  gloss interlin . tertul. ubi supr. his majesty's declaration ubi supra . in matth. 22. 21.  ephes. 6. 1.  rom. 14.  ambros. to . 3. epis. l. 5.  Orat.  li. tit. 3. 1 , 2.  Citat . josh. 1. 16 , 17.  apoc. 13. 10.  calv. in ver. 6.  2 sam. 8. 11 , 12.  Et 10. 26. 2 sam. 2. 2 sam. 11. 11.  matth. 21. 3.  Luke 10. 42.  Dion : carth : calv. inst.  . 4. c. 20.  Buchan . Theophylact . Lombard . lib. 1.  & Parmon . c. 7.  prov. 20. 2.  Amos 3. 8.  ambros. Theophylact . calv.  1 sam. 25. 37.  act. 24. 2.  Josep . Antiq. Judai . l. 18. c. 1. & l. 20. c 6.  Sallust . conjurat . Catiline . Speed . Hollinshed rich. 2. p. 429.  Grafton p. 330 , 331.  l. 2. de bello Judaic . c. 16.  naucler . prov. 24. 21 , 22.  













































