The break-neck of presumptuousness in sjnnjng . appliable unto the occasions of these times . 

psal. 19 13.  

Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins , let them not have dominion over me : then shall i be upright , and innocent from the great offence . 



Oxford , printed by Leonard Lichfield , printer to the university . Mdcxliv . 

The break-neck of presumptuousness in sinning . 

mat. 4. 6.  

And he saith unto him , if thou be the son of God cast thyself down : for it is written , he shall give his angels charge concerning thee , and they shall bear thee up in their hands , lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone . 



The first word [ and ] hath relation to the former verse , expressing the place where Christ was tempted to throw himself down , even the pinnacle of the temple , which showeth the opportunity , and therein the occasion of this temptation of casting thyself down . but could this be safe ? Yes , saith the devil , in his hypothetical reason , if thou be the son of God . nevertheless , suppose the event be safe , yet what for the lawfulness thereof ? He showeth Christ a warrant , it is written , he shall give his angel's charge , &c.  

The parts of this text , for more methodical proceeding , May be thus contrived : 1.  To behold the combatants who they are , he and him , namely , the devil and Christ . 2.  The occasion of this temptation of casting thyself down , which was the opportunity of the place , the pinnacle of the temple , whereunto the copulative particle and doth refer us in the words immediately before . 3.  The reason , for it is written , he hath given , &c.  Therefore if thou be the son of God , cast thyself down . 4.  The temptation itself , cast thyself down . 

1. combatants Assaylor Devil . Assailed Christ . 

1.  The devil throughout all scripture is in all his properties ever blazoned with characters {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , that is , of eminency and transcendency in each kind . For his enmity to mankind , he is called {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the enemy , meaning the enemy beyond all enemies . For falsehood , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the traducer . in the former verse , for wickedness , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the evil one . for tempting to sin , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the tempter . for accusing those whom he seduces , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the accuser . and lastly , for tormenting whom he accused , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the destroyer . thus have we before us the lineaments of this tempter from joint to joint . Next is the assailed , the son of God ; he , whom the devil hypothetically seemeth but only to suspect to be , and afterwards catagorically and professedly proclaimeth , saying , thou art the son of God . 

A volume would not suffice to describe Christ in the excellency and transcendency of his properties , all far exceeding all devilish malice , falsehood , wickedness , mischievousness and whatsoever tyranny in his love , truth , holiness , mercifulness , and all saving goodness , as finiteness is excelled by infinity , and temporal state by eternity . But what is this concombatant unto us ? The apostle tells us , he is the captain of our faith , to note , that there is not any Christian , who can hope for life by him , who doth not sight under his banner : knowing , that if the tempter did dare to fall upon our general , he will be sure to assault his soldiery ▪ if he struck at the head , he will not fail to lay at those that are his members , and that it will be our part accordingly to resist the devil . and how so ? but by withstanding his treachery with wariness , his wickedness with righteousness , his mischievousness with contrary godly zeal and diligence . 

Now after the reference to the tempter , let us , from the relation of the word [ and , ] take notice of the occasion of the temptation ; which was , as i said , the opportunity of the place , for the devil now , as it is in the former verse , had Christ on the pinnacle of the temple , and now saith unto him . there is no circumstance belonging to temptation , wherein the devil doth not show his policy , as here we see in the choice of the place to begin his temptation , whilst he hath him in the wilderness alone without any second to animate him . Next , on the top of a high mountain , that he Might more easily take a compendious view of the whole world ; and then , on the pinnacle of the temple , as the fittest place to try an experiment by casting himselfdown . But this was an artificial pinnacle , which occasioneth a consideration of a moral pinnacle , and a spiritual casting down in three kinds far more agreeable to our discourse . First , devilish , the devil himself being both actor and author ; actor in himself , who , because he would be equal with the highest , and so a pinnacle , cast himself down into the lowest hell : author to others by tempting our first parents to be like unto God , which wrought the break-neck of all mankind . The second is a popish pinnacle , the man of Rome , appropriating unto himself many titles proper only to Christ the son of God , which are set down in epistles , and orations dedicated unto him and published by his orator bzovius of late , as to be called the oracle of truth , the anointed with unction above his fellows , the cornerstone , the celestial majesty . by Stapleton , the divine might , and in the Roman gloss extant yet from divers hundred of years , our Lord God the Pope . you see this pinnacle , and it is the pinnacle of the temple , for the scripture speaking of Antichrist , saith , that he sitteth in the temple of God , which is the church . 

But how shall we understand the fall of that pinnacle of Babel ? Thus , Rome by all expositors , as well Romish as others , is the city which is called Babylon , and where of it is witnessed by two Jesuits , Ribera and Viega out of the texts , that before the coming of Christ , it must , for the apostasy and idolatry in it , be consumed with fire , and by the Rhemists , that it shall be the seat of Antichrist . a third we May here term a politic pinnacle , which is a popular applause . hereupon was Herod set , when he drew in as his vital breath the vulgar acclamation , the voice of God and not of man : and immediately became as you know , but a lousy God . 

There is no question , but the devil is as busy now , as ever , to fix ambitiousness in thoughts and affections with men's consent , and it is as sure , that his endeavour is the casting them down against their wills . Neither will he want a reason for his temptation any more , than he doth here : which is the next general point . 

Why cast himself down ▪ his reason . 

for it is written , God hath given his angel's charge , &c.  

therefore cast thyself down . 

In this one reason we have divers observables . First is the allegation , it is written , he hath given his angel's charge , &c.  By his deceitful lying in concealing a necessary part thereof . The second , in dealing thus with sacred scripture , which maketh the lie utterly sacrilegious . Two others are discerned in the devil's consequence : one in his pretensions thus : if thou be the son of God , &c. to wit , that thereby thou Mayest manifest thy dignity and special interest thou hast in the favour of God : the second in his intention , if thou be the son , &c. that by trying conclusions he Might work his own destruction . Let us begin with his lie ; it is no news to hear that the devil can lie , whom Christ thus branded , saying , that he is a liar , and the father of lies , as if lying were a property essential unto him , who no sooner heard this question , who shall deceive Ahab ? but instantly answered , as if this were an office peculiar unto himself , and said , i will be a false speaker in the mouth of all Ahab's prophets . but the manner of this lying is worth enquiring into . The tenor of the text which he cited runneth thus ; he , namely God , will give his angel's charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways ; they shall hold thee up in their hands , that thou dash not thy foot against a stone . but the devil omitteth that clause , to keep thee in all thy ways , whereby is meant the ways of his own revealed ordinances , as all the psalms speak , which were directory words , and made against the devil's temptation of seeking extraordinary , and hazardous ways of man's own will . He did thereby intend therefore a lying delusion , as many expositors , ancient and others have observed : and the devil being as Christ hath said , the father of lies , every one that liveth in the world will acknowledge , that he hath had an innumerable offspring therein . Now , the manner of lying is twofold , one close , by that equivocation , which is called mental reservation , which we May call Jesuitical , because of their more special profession and practice thereof , instructing every priest , when he is examined by a magistrate , and in danger to be discovered , that being asked , art thou a priest ; he May answer slily , i am no priest , reserving this notion in his mind , to tell it unto you : which Jesuitical art and subtlety in the priest's answer , we discern here to have been satanical in this devilish temptation , by his concealment of the former words of the psalms . As for example thus , he hath given his angel's charge over thee , & not uttering the next words , in all thy ways , could not but reserve in his mind a purpose of not telling it unto Christ . For it is impossible , but that he , who omitteth words , lest they should be told hath the same conception in his mind . But they tell it and print it in their books , that this kind of answer by reservation is no lie . Let us therefore try this out of God's book . Ananias having sold his possession for a piece of money , and laid it down at the apostles feet to be distributed in common , craftily kept back a part thereof : to whom saint Peter said , why hath Satan possessed thy heart to lie to the holy ghost ? now , lying is not without some expression of words , which must have been to this question . Thou Ananias , hast thou sold them that possession but for so much ? and he answering , but for so much , and concealing a part , could not but conceive in his mind a selling it but for so much for aught that Peter should know ; which as we have heard from Peter himself , came from the devil , and therefore was as i said , a satanical lie . And i leave it , that i May come to that , which is open , direct and flat lying , which is commonly practised amongst men , and May be called , as Bernard termeth every brazen faced sin , daemon meridianus . 

We read of distinct and peculiar national sins , as being more predominant in some countries than others ; some branded with the infamy of drunkenness , some of gluttony , some of venery , and the like , some have become proverbialls for lying : whence we have the graeca fides , the faith ( Meaning faithlessness ) of the Grecians : punica fides , the faith of the punicks , and fides Cretensium , the Cretians faith : to which we May add ( If we consider our proficiency in forging lies in the compass of three years ) i speak to our shame ) our fides anglicana , whether privata or publica , exceeding the three former put them all together , when as still our to morrow doth give yesterday the lie . So epidemical is this leprosy amongst us . I return to the text , it is written . so then , this we speak of is used by the devil , in his false allegation of the said scripture , aggravating the lie to make it sacrilegious . The devil , saith the apostle , can translate himself into an angel of light ; this he doth most , whensoever under the colour of singularity , and of newly devised strictness of manners and opinions , he seduceth men into new heresies and schisms , as is taught us col. 2. 23.  But yet can there be any transformation more delusive and sacrilegious than this , the perverting of the right sense of scripture , whether by false glosses , or ( And that especially ) by abusing the sense of scriptures by omission of words and circumstances , which contradict the intention of the objectors ? upon which point come we now more especially to insist . 

Many hours would not suffice to rehearse the many Romish sophistries in this kind of abusing of scriptures in every controversy ; but i have singled out one only most pertinent for the present time , which is , their doctrine of subjects taking up arms against sovereignty for restoring of religion , and calling it a just cause , for justifying of their former Irish and now English popish rebellions , which May give you a clear scantling how to judge of the rest . 

Thus beginning with this their maxim , that the power of all government is always resident in the persons , and therefore for religion's sake , they May make their insurrections at pleasure . Their first scripture is out of the 1 pet. 2. 13. where speaking of a King , he saith he is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a creature of man , or human creature , which we say is most true , in constituendo , in constituting a King , or any form of government . But rege constituto , the King being constituted and established , the power of government by the ordinance of God is in the governor , and not in the persons ; and therefore they wittingly conceal that Peter having said of the creation of a King that it is human , addeth presently ( He being once authorised ) an injunction upon the persons , saying , submit yourselves unto him . how ? during their own wills ? nay , for he subjoineth , for the Lord's sake : so that now he is not man's creature , but gods , who immediately putteth an obligation upon them of obedience unto him . This is the first point , and for proof of this our exposition , we have the testimony of s. Paul , where that which s. Peter called {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , human creation , he entitleth it expressly {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the ordinance of God , rom. 13. 1. and therefore chargeth every soul to be subject unto it . 

Next , they object , that the governments spoken of by s. Paul , are written to be {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , powers and authorities : that is , in abstracto , say they , as aristocracy , or democracy , and monarchy ; not monarchs , or Aristocraticks , signifying the persons : concealing that , which is also written in the same place , the word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the rulers , ver. 3. which signifieth the persons ; and again , he carrieth the sword , ver. 4. accordingly Peter most expressly naming the King : all which have been concealed . 

But thirdly , they insist , that the power spoken of , as to be obeyed , is to be a terror to the evil , and a praise to the good . and therefore if a King prove tyrannous , they owe no more subjection ; concealing , that Paul notwithstanding tyranny itself enjoined subjection , saying , be subject to the powers that are : and you yourselves knowing right well that the principal of the powers that then were , was Nero , a most monstrous tyrant to his own heathenish subjects , and the fiercest persecutor of Christians for their religion : yea , not sparing these apostles themselves , Peter and Paul , but hunted them even unto martyrdom : notwithstanding Peter's direct doctrine was to the persons , submit yourselves ; and Paul's , be subject ; both commanding to pursue civil obedience . 

4.  Say they , although Peter giveth the King the supremacy , yet there is a power from the persons coordinate unto them : but this they speak from themselves without any scriptum est , cunningly concealing that which indeed hath scriptum est , which May discover their false figment : Peter requiring subjection both to the King , as supreme , and also to them that are sent from him , as namely , his officers : the law of relation evincing that supremacy with coordination is as true a solecism , as is an head equal with its shoulders . 

5.  They being left forlorn of defence in the new testament , post back to the old , urging scriptures according to their stale trick of concealment . 

first , alleging for their purpose examples which can neither affirm or deny , contrary to that known maxim , a facto ad jus non valet argumentum , but they stick to that , omitting God's direct precepts in behalf of King's commanding obedience , and forbidding all contempts : although precepts , as all know , be directories to overrule all examples . 

2.  For their examples , they instance in the deposing of Athaliah the Queen , the defection of Jeroboam , and Ehud his killing of King Eglon , concealing the circumstances there extant , to wit , that the Queen deposed was an usurptrix against the heir of the crown then living : that Jeroboam was a manifest rebel against Rehoboam , although for the sin of the same King expressly permitted by God , and that Eglon was an alien , tyrannising over them , whom it was lawful for an Israelite to kill as an enemy in open war against them . Thus of papistical allegations . But can this make any thing against our zealots and incediaries of these times ? Only thus much , that they in defence of the same conclusion of taking up arms against authority , in case of religion , depend wholly upon the same Jesuitical and papistical principles and practices : excepting two or three additionals , with which the latter delight themselves , it being the same art of violation of texts of scripture against the rules of due loyalty prescribed by God . The two which i shall mention shall not be inferior to the former . 

It was resolved in an ecclesiastical assembly , and published in print for the justification of an hostile manner of entrance into this kingdom without consent of the King , and affirmed , that if the English should deny them free passage , and victuals for their money , God would be offended with them , as he had been with the King of Edom , and his country , in not permitting the Israelites to pass through their coasts in their journey to the land of Canaan . The matter is storied , numb 20.  It is worth your reading . Wherein we find , that Moses , and all the host of Israel , came to Kadesh , which was the borders of Edom , intending to journey through that kingdom ; but concealing , first , that they did not offer to set a foot within the borders of Edom , before they had sent messengers to ask leave of the King thereof : secondly , concealing that the condition of passing , which they tendered , was to go only the high way , & that through without delay , or negotiating with the persons of the land , save only to have water for their money ; and again concealing how , when the King of Edom raised war against the camp of Israel , and came to face them , Moses and his host offered not the least resistance , but , as it is in the text , Israel turned away from him . all three circumstances directly contradictory to the practices that followed . 

In another late English treatise , we May find another allegation of scripture much boasted of ; which , indeed , if it were sincere , might , so far , as a topic place of example could enforce , conclude for justification of rebellion in part . For it is written , 2 king. 18. 7. in express terms , Hezekiah King of Judah rebelled against the King of Assyria . this is the allegation . Now hearken we to the omission of words in the same story of the same chapter , and but the eleventh verse following . and Hezekiah sent to the King of Assyria , saying , i have offended , return from me , that which thou puttest on me , i will bear : meaning for satisfaction and reparation . Oh that these glossers would follow his example in repenting for their rebellion , and that they would recant their wilful falsifications , which their art of perverting the scriptures , is no better than a kind of that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} condemned by the apostle , which we May term , cogging a die . It will not be sufficient to detect these incendiaries and trumpeters for rebellion , except we further pull off the vizards , wherewith they use to mask themselves by colourable pretences , that so the ugliness of their natural visages May more plainly appear . 

Their vizards are of these kinds . 

1.  Aspersions of jealousy . 2.  Name of religion . 3.  Ostentation of zeal . 4.  Assurance of happiness upon every one slain in the cause : besides 5. their plausible applications of their allegations and other pretences to the person of his majesty , and the present occasions . 

1.  aspersions of jealousy . ] it is your common practice to infuse into the hearts of persons an argument of jealously : but why ? because forsooth , his majesty useth the help and arms of Papists , to make him a defender of popery . But with what face or forehead ? seeing , that you yourselves , by the same argument , May be much more concluded papistical , for urging in this cause against the King's cause altogether the arguments of Papists : the difference will be , that Papists yield the assistance only in the name of subjects , according as God hath prescribed : you , contrary to the obligation of subjection from God , raise an alarm of war and hostile resistance . We add , that popish arguments do more hurt then their arms ; those fastening only upon the body , these upon the soul . 

2.  religion pretended . ] but yet only pretended , against the article of Christian religion , both ancient and modern in our church , which is loyalty and subjection to our Prince . We say , first , that as there is no article of religion concerning morality , more strictly , commonly and expressly taught in scripture , than loyalty of subjection to Princes ; so was the same article as absolutely professed and practised by the whole church Christian . Their profession we have in the apologies which were written in the name of the whole church of Christ , to remove all jealousies of Princes , and conceit of the least disloyalty , which is made most manifest , and indeed admirable , above all other professed subjects in the world , by these three contestations . First , avouching against the heathen themselves , saying , est nobis magis imperator quàm vobis , that is in true sense , we Christians profess more the right imperial , than you do . another giveth the reason , quia vos conscios tantum metuit is , nos conscientiam : in effect thus : the loyalty of your hearts , oh you heathens , is but only that , which you would be loathe any man should know besides yourselves , because but human , and so far only as your temporal occasions shall enforce ; but we Christians profess subjection To Emperors in our consciences , and in obedience unto God , although there were no rod , or sword of majesty to keep us in awe , according to the express doctrine of the apostle . A third , and with him divers others , almost in the same terms . Herein doth Christian religion excel all other , because , touching subjection , their profession is , occidi potius , quàm occidere , to be killed , in obeying the civil power , rather than to kill in making resistance . their principles we shall point out by & by . According to this primitive church have our English Protestant's always protested by their oath to the article of supremacy , by the church her article of subjection itself , & by her published homilies , all authorised by the statutes of the kingdom , besides the privileged books of Protestant divines against the Romish principles . We make bold herein to demand of you , first , why your doctrine of resistance being altogether repugnant to the doctrine of obedience to sovereignty , should not be judged a new heresy ? Secondly , after you had taken that oath , subscribed to that article , read and allowed of the homilies , and consented to the condemnation of former Romish principles , as contradictory to orthodox religion without exception , how you could receive a contrary oath , and not think that in stead of wholesome meat , you had taken hen-bane ? 

3.  ostentation of zealousness in your profession , ] having a great influence in persons prone to be seduced ; yet , we think , you know out of the writings of Josephus , that there was before his time among the Jews a sect called zealots , tumultuous spirits , and of extreme insolency , in disturbing all orders , as well religious as politic ; to whom if you join the Anabaptistical separatists , you will acknowledge , that there is a zeal no better than ignis fatuus , in animating men to draw the sword , as Peter was precipitate in drawing his . But whereas your doctrine is rather to resist by active disobedience , than ( As loyal subjects ) with passive obedience to suffer unjustly ; tell us in your ingenuity , whether sort expresseth the greater zeal ? 

4.  assurance of happiness upon the death in that quarrel . ] this the less true it is , the more damnable it must be to the quarrellous , and in itself more execrable . Sure we are , that the apostles express words concerning the resisters of sovereignty , are , that they shall receive to themselves {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , by which , both ancient and modern authors , and among these , as well Papists as Protestant's , understood that judgement of God , which is called in the strict sense damnation , as it is said of unworthy receiving the blessed sacrament , to infer an eating and drinking of a man's own damnation , and otherwise it cannot be expressed without violence to the text , wherein the subject is charged to obedience , as it is the ordinance of God . Rom. 13. as he will answer in conscience to God : where again subjection for conscience sake towards God , is opposite to subjection for wrath's sake , and to the fear of vengeance by the sword of magistracy : fain would we now know of our zealots , why did any of their doctors wrest the word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} to signify rather the judgement of man , then of God , if not to lessen the guiltiness of the party that should resist , wherein the diminishing of guiltiness , cannot but be a confession thereof in part ? for say we pray you : if contrarily , that which we have under a prohibition against resistance , had been delivered upon a precept of resisting of power in case of defence of religion , whether then this word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} should not have rung in your ears an utter condemnation , and that alone Might not more clearly have concluded your cause , than all other scripture , which could ever possibly be alleged for the defence thereof . The last point followeth . 

The application of all your arguments from scriptures concerning resistance by arms against usurpers , tyrants , or enemies to religion , is by you in this cause against a King in right and hereditary possession , without contradiction legal ; against a mirror of clemency , for deservings of the kingdom , gracious above his predecessors ; for religion established exemplary beyond comparison ; and vowing himself for the preservation thereof . And now then deliberate with yourselves , whether your misparalleling of these examples with our King , be not a most impious wresting of holy scripture , and injurious detraction from his majesty . But here i seem to hear some one of you interrupting me with a non confido : yea , whereas that his engagement is to the whole kingdom of Protestant's without exception , even as he will be accounted a King , and as he expects God's blessing upon himself and his posterity : and yet will ye stand upon a non confido ? will you make him a devil ? 

After our thus ending the warrantin scriptum est , it is written , we are to examine the two consequences thereof . First , if thou be the son of God , then cast thyself down , for he hath given his angel's charge &c.  If thou be the son of God : is this question of the devil devilish also ? Could he be ignorant what Christ was ? Yes , why not ? Devil , though he be an angelical spirit , yet is he a creature of finite apprehension , and his knowledge but experimental , and that he had not the absolute knowledge thereof in this case ( As the most of the fathers have thought ) our observation May satisfy in terming Christ only {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , son of God , which Might agree to any regenerate child of God ( I have not this note only from myself ) whereas afterwards upon full experience of divine miracles and correspondent prophecies of him , many devils at once at the sight of his approach unto them , as he was ready to dispossess them out of a man , all cried out , saying , thou art {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} the son of God {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as the learned know , by way of excellency and transcendency , betokening the essential and natural son of God . So then , supposing the devil spoke to Christ only upon this intuition of him , as only man , albeit a singular favouret to God above others , and so peradventure privileged to cast himself down and save himself , and yet peradventure neither . If he tempteth him to make trial with this intention , his casting himself down upon this temptation , Might be his death and destruction , and yet with this wily {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} and pretence , that this being warranted by the scripture of God for his protection , it would greatly redound to the honour of God . Of both which , as namely the devils malicious intention and feigned godly pretence , Christ quitteth himself by this one answer of God's precept , thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy god : but to try experiments of extreme dangers by an extraordinary means , where an ordinary way of stepping down May be had , were contrary to the said scripture of walking in my ways , and consequently is a tempting of God , being a transgression of God's commandments . These are the two results from the answer of Christ , and May teach us two lessons useful for our own soul's safety all our lives long . 

The first is not to try extremely hazardous actions , when safe means May be had , as we learn by Christ his example in this text , who afterwards likewise gave us the same document , when the Jews were about to cast him down from a steep precipice , but he returned back , and went through from among them , safe . The like conclusion s. Paul taught , when having had a revelation , that in that otherwise storm called Euroclydon threatening unavoidable wrack , none in the ship should perish ; yet perceiving the mariners in their incredulity seeking to shift for themselves by boat , peremptorily pronounced , saying , except these abide in the ship , you cannot be saved , thereby compelling them to return to their office , and look to their tacklings . Let us conclude . If that Christ notwithstanding the supposed decree of God of preserving him in the downfall , did not adventure to try ; and if Paul , notwithstanding the revelation of the general safety , did exact of the mariners to stay and perform their offices : we May justly challenge three sorts of wild and infatuated tempters of God . 

First , how many having heard of the doctrine of God's infallible predestination , choosing and refusing from all eternity , according to the pleasure of his will , have thus ( I had almost said reasoned ) rambled in their brains ? If i be elect , i cannot perish ; if not , i cannot but perish : seeing therefore saved or not saved they must needs be , i will therefore live after my heart's lust in the pleasures of sin . We say , that this is a devilish temptation , and a casting down the soul , without repentance , into the bottom of hell . Let every one thus tempted but translate his thoughts to the consideration of his bodily condition , and then will he see his own frenzy , seeing that none is so mad , as being upon the top of a high tower , will resolve concerning his body , ( And God hath as absolutely determined concerning body , as soul ) if i shall be preserved , it will be so ; if not , it cannot be so : i will therefore cast myself down headlong , and not rather take the way down , whence i came up , knowing otherwise , that by this downfall he maketh himself felo de se in man's court , and in God's judicature guilty of his own damnation . Our theorem therefore is this , that the directions of man's ways are not to depend upon the secret and unknown decree of God , but upon his precepts revealed unto us in his word . 

The second sort are the solifidians and Antinomians in their abuse of the doctrine of justification by faith without works : the one , as if together with the Papist he reasoned thus against Protestant's , you say , faith justifyeth without works , therefore you teach , that it is void of works : as much as to say , light in the fire doth enlighten men without heat , therefore is light in the fire without all heat ; altogether contradictory to the direct scriptum est of s. Paul , who describing justification by faith , faith he , faith which worketh by love . so then , a justifying faith is a loving , and therefore a living faith . 2.  Repugnant also to s. James , who speaking of a faith void of works , confuteth it by the most emphatical way of interrogation , saying , can this faith save ? fully as much as to have said , impossible , and therefore is the Solifidian faith a spiritual break-neck . 

The Antinomian taketh off justification by ( As he calleth it ) sole closely cleaving unto Christ thereby ; thus he slighteth the works of sanctification , insisting only upon those terms , that Christ is the only way , and urging this only way with manifold inculcations : and so indeed he is , if we speak either of an absolute exemplary way , or else of an effectual meritorious way to everlasting life . But if we speak of an introductory way prescribed by Christ , and without which we cannot come to Christ and to salvation , than we are to be directed to this scriptum est , concerning the whole course of our predestination to eternal life , saying , we are his , that is , God's workmanship create to good works , which he hath ordained we should walk in . do you mark ? good works ordained to walk in . plainly showing , first , that good working is a good walking . secondly , ordained of God , as the ordinary way , to all that are predestinate , to be saved ; which giveth us this conclusion , that to neglect good works destinated to attain to predestinate ends , is another desperate downfall into certain perdition and destruction . 

The Anabaptiss are the third praecipitates , the revived brood of old Catharists , who in opinion of ▪ their own sanctity , will not communicate in any congregation of faithful professors , wherein there is any mixture of hallowed and unhallowed men . Which sect Calvin according to the wisdom of God in him , did confute by a manifold scriptum est out of the history of God's book , even from genesis to the end of the Apocalypse , showing that there was never any congregation of any indifferent number of God's persons without mixture of chaff with wheat , and goats with sheep , and at length giveth us his determination , that they who profess all sanctity , separating themselves from all other congregations , are without the Catholic church , wherein only is remission of sins and salvation , notwithstanding they would show a more than angelical form of holiness . And therefore , say we , their not continuing in the church of Christ , is a manifest consequence of a damnable precipitation . 

The second consequence remaineth . As the devil tempted to presumption by instigating to dangerous ends in neglect of ordinary means : so did he , by a scriptum est , tempt thereunto , by pretence of a good and holy end of honouring God thereby , as hath been said , notwithstanding Christ giveth him a shameful repulse , by this his scriptum est , thou shalt not tempt , &c.  The full theorem in this is given by the apostle , not to do evil that good May come thereby , which draws me to a doctrine , than which , none is more necessary for these times , when our pretences for violent rapines , our sic volumus imprisonments , our thirsting after wounds and bloodsheds , as engendered , fomented , fostered and enforced by that which is called a cause , were it never so godly : yet sure we know , that be as much , as can be said , for a good intent of glorifying God by unjust means , it cannot but be to the dishonouring of him , whilst it wanteth God's own warrant and scriptum est : as hath been plainly shown ; only we cannot conceal that this theorem doth draw from us another inference , as our last conclusion . 

The ends of all actions morally , according as the learned know , are the principal forms , like the forms of creatures dant nomen & esse , making them good or ill , therefore will it directly follow , that , if ill actions for good ends be condemnable , then good actions for wicked ends much more , and that such actions May be devilish , the devils themselves have shown by their address to Christ , which hath been alleged ; where they made that open and joint confession of our fundamental article of Christian faith , saying , thou art the son of God , and again , the son of the highest , which they did more than once . Now none can deny , but the confession itself severed from all evil circumstances , had been divinely good , but Christ never would endure to hear devils preach , though a truth , concerning the honour of his godhead , but he put them to silence , knowing , that the devil , speak he well or ill , he will be the devil still : he either speaking a falsum , a lie , or if truth , yet ad falsum , to a false and wicked end . Enough of this doctrine , i come to our citation of three parties , which May appear , as they shall be summoned . 

First are the pharisaical hypocrites boasting of their fasts , and prayers , and just tithingings , but to what end ▪ the gospel tells us , to have applause of men , only their long prayers excepted , which were to devour widows houses . Behold their downfall , woe be unto you ! Woe be unto you ! Thus doth Christ multiply woes upon them . 

2.  Romish Pharisees are the next , who pride themselves in the merit of their works , merits of condignity according to the exact justice of God : which is an act of excellence proper to the son of God , and against that scriptum est , Luke 17. 10.  when you have done all that is commanded , say , you are unprofitable servants . and their downfall is elegantly resembled by Pope Gregory the first and best of that name , and therefore entitled a saint , who as he did disclaim all conceit of merit in himself , so did he condemn it in all others . His simile is this : Eleazar the valiant man of war killed an elephant that was coming upon him , but so , that the beast having received his deadly wound , in his downfall light upon Eleazar and crushed him to death : even so they , who glory in conquering their vices , are therein conquered , and subdued themselves , through their opinion of merit . 

3.  Lastly , to reflect upon our English selves , if it were that our fasts and prayers were not boasted of , they Might be better thought of . But did never any so before us ? Yes , in the prophet Esay . the Jews did exprobate God : we have fasted , and thou seest not . But let us see what God saith thereunto : you fast to strife and debate : is this a fast that i have chosen ? showing , that God did abhor it . Prayers we have , and that extraordinary long , beyond all examples of all times , in whatsoever persons of God ; whether some of them fish thereby for widow's houses , they themselves know best , but questionless it is done in a singularity , if not as Christ spoke of the pharisaical , thinking the rather to be heard of God . As for alms deeds , i wish they were so visible as to deserve a questioning the end why ? The acts which are most in sight are contributions against rebellious Ireland , and the popery thereof : and this we Might be persuaded of , if we saw not visibly the bait of their conditions , for devouring not only houses , but all of those Papists possessions and livedomes within the nation . Besides , the like faith here at home devouring in hope the use of money by public faith , or else , if that should fail , of delinquents lands . The downfall is infallible , for that , if goats , which are at Christ's left hand , because unprofitable creatures , are to receive a terrible doom , much more bears , wolves , tigers and all ravenous birds and beasts of prey , who have yielded to the temptation of the devil , must be in association with them in torment , whereof we have that scriptum est of Christ , saying , depart from me ye wicked into hell fire , prepared for the devil and his angels : from which Lord deliver us and every one of whom we have spoken , by the merits of Jesus Christ . 

Fjnjs . 





matth. 4. 3.  Adoc . 12. 10.  apoc. 9 11.  Mark . 3. 11.  heb. 12. 2.  jam•s 4. 7.  gen. 3.  bzovius lib. pontificatus . 2 thes. 2. 3.  Ribera , Viega in apoc. 14. 18.  Rhemists testam. annot. in apoc. 17.  psal. 91. 11.  John . 8. 4.  1 Kings 22. 21.  1 pet. cap. 2.  rom 13 3 , 4.  1 reg. 11.  1 Kings 11. 29.  Judges 3. 12.  eph. 4. 14.  rom. 13. 5.  1 cor. 11. 29.  gal. 5. 6.  e ph. 2. 10.  calvinus advers. anabapt. qui se ab universa soc ▪ •••te Christians segregant , ne contaminarentur co•um sordibus : porro quid accidit ? Dominus cos cum tam arroganti caepto dissipavit . Hinc ergo moneamur cum sub specie studii perfectionis imperfectionem nullam toll ▪ are possumus aut in corpore aut in membris ecclesiae , tum diabolum nos tumefacere superbia & hypocrisi seducere , ut ad deserendum Christ's gregem nos instiget , certo scicus se victoriam obtinere cum nos inde •bduxit . Cum enim nusquam alibi sit aut remissio peccatorum , aut sal•…s , tamet si vitae plusquam angelicae speciem prae nobis seramus , tamen si tali audacia nos sepa•emus a christiano coetu , simus diaboli . 


























































