to the right honourable , the supreme authority of this nation , the Commons assembled in parliament : 

An appeal in the humble claim of justice against tho.  Lord Fairfax , general of the English army , raised , and declared to be raised , for the propagation and defence of impartial justice , and just liberty in the nation ; by captain William Bray . 

For , and on the behalf of himself , and all the officers and soldiers , and other the free persons of this nation , that are for righteousness , settlement and peace . 

prov. 24. 23.  

These things also belong to the wise : it is not good to have respect of persons in judgement . 



prov. 28. 21  

To have respect of persons is not good , for a piece of bread that man will transgress . 



prov. 29. 25.  

The fear of man bringeth a snare : but whose putteth his trust in the Lord , shall be safe . 



London , printed in the year 1649.  

To the right honourable , the supreme authority of this nation , the Commons assembled in parliament : 

An appeal , in the humble claim of justice against Thomas Lord Fairfax , general of the English army , &c.  by captain William Bray . 

Right honourable , 

I have traced the actions of men in authority , and i find , that ( To my grief ) justice and righteousness ( As names ) are but a stalking horse to the designs of mere power and greatness , and to be in a capacity to lead whom it will , like sheep to the slaughter , without the bounds of law or reason . It will be admired at by some , that i should contend against so great a personage : but truly , right honourable , there is nothing that makes me willing to be silent now , but this , that i myself am compassed about with infirmities : but this is no argument why i should not seek justice ; but be destroyed , ( Together with others ) enslaved , and wasted time after time , by the wills of men , or of a man . It is true , i see the favour of my enemy ( He being great and potent ) will make me many enemies , because many gain honour and greatness merely by it : but there is a God that impartially judgeth the earth , and the small and the great are all one with him , and with just men . It is true , i expose myself by this to the power and stratagems of the general , and all his politicians , to undo me , and to work their revenge upon me , if the Lord of righteousness and justice doth not restrain them : but in this consideration ( Whatever my enemy's power and policies are ) i shall give up myself wholly to the great judge of the earth , and trust him , come life , come death . 

It is true , he is great and potent by the blood , adventures and ruins of the persons ( The effects of war ; ) and to me this is a great argument against the engrossing of all power and authority into his breast ; and much more against the acting arbitrarily and unlimitedly against any member of the persons or commonweal : and to my reason , it is to make such an end of war and blood , as that it is not worth the blood of one man ( As it May probably extend ) much less the blood of so many thousands as have been slain in the war , — civil war . — 

1.  Me thinks , i cannot but consider the contest betwixt the King and this honourable house : and surely , i cannot believe , but that , had it not been for injustice , monarchy had still remained ; and i do not think that any just man would have lift up his hand to engage in war — civil war — , for my part , i shall profess , i should not : for i am not against government , but can live with satisfaction either in monarchy , aristocracy , or democracy : for to me nothing is essential , but justice and righteousness in a common-weal . 

2.  I cannot but consider the glorious expressions of justice and righteousness in the many declarations of the army ; by which the penman thereof , and the chief heads did seem to be taken up conscientiously with the power of justice , in their engagement against the parliament , and excluded many that had formerly appeared valiant and fighting men in the cause of the nation , to their dishonour and infamy ; with this pretence , that justice and reason did only justify them , and an intention of a speedy settlement , of justice , and laws of reason to the persons . But there was a declining of that solemn engagement , which was like to have made all former victories hazardous , and to have totally endangered the army , and all the well-affected persons in the whole nation . And it was Mr. Edward hide 's speech at a conference of both houses , 6.  julii , 1641. against the Lord chief justice , Baron Davenport , Baron Trevor , and Baron Weston , in the case of ship-money : these are the men , saith he , that by doing , or not doing , have brought this war upon us : by this means , saith he , the peace of this island is shaked , and frighted into tumults , commotions , poverty and rage of war . and it had been an abuse of providence for these men to have pretended providence for their desisting from good , or their doing of evil : and i believe , it would not have been received as an excuse to save the King , to have used the expressions of providence ; which is much in use these times to countenance the throne of arbitrary power and dominion over the persons , by men that are now made great and potent by their blood , ruins , and adventures in war , — in civil war — . 

3.  I shall present my observation to you and the persons concerning the latest remonstrance from the army at St. Albans . Pag. 10. speaking against the King , ( Viz. ) Thus the persons were made to depend mainly upon the King for all , and his interest made necessary to all ; the other pretences were but made use of to serve his ends , and an easy way to set up him an• his interest above all . 

pages 16 , 17.  that no common council or parliaments at all should check him ; but that all matters of supreme trust , concerning safety , and all things else , Might rest in him , without limit from , or account to any upon earth ; and that all those extraordinary and arbitrary powers over the persons ; yea , their persons and consciences , Might be exercised at pleasure by himself , and such as he pleased to derive the same unto . 

page 20.  snares and chains were laid upon conscientious and zealous men , and the generality of persons held in darkness and superstition , and a blind reverence of persons , and outward things , fit for popery and slavery . 

page 21.  it was a brand of dishonour laid upon the King , to prefer such as had a mixture of ambition and vainglory , with a servile spirit , rendering them fit to serve another's power and greatness , for the enjoying some share therein to themselves . 

May it please this honourable house to give me leave to speak a few words , in order to the good of many of the Commons of England , the officery and souldie•y of this nation , bone of my bone , and flesh of my flesh , now in being and hereafter to be ; men that have or shall adventure their precious blood for the rights of the nation ; but not so , as unnaturally and unreasonably to exclude themselves , after their successes and deliverances , from justice and right ? 

The disadvantages of arbitrary power to reside in any person over all or any of the persons , May become at length to be so settled , as that it will be a personal interest in him and his creatures , and a pretended prerogative against the public interest of common right , peace and safety ; and at length this maxim will be brought in in time , that the general can do no wrong ; even as it was said , that the King can do no wrong ; which ( As Mr.  Solicitor cook saith in King Charles his case ) is blasphemy against the great God of truth and love ; for only God cannot err ; because , what he wills is right because he wills it : and it is a sad thing , saith he , to consider that learned men , for unworthy ends , should use such art to subdue the persons , by transportation of their senses , as to make them believe , that the law is , that the King can do no wrong . 



In these times of confusion , evil , apostasy , and warring unto blood [ which cries , ] i have weighed much with myself what is the only way to compose our differences amongst ourselves , and make a complete reconciliation : and i find nothing so likely as a mutual agreement amongst the persons , by making of just laws , agreeable to the law of nature ; which is undemonstrable , which needs no demonstration , were it not for corruption and interests . it is , as Mr. John cook saith in his book against the King , the unanimous consent of all rational men in the world , written in every man's heart with the pen of a diamond , in capital letters , and a character so legible , 

that he that runs May read . And it is nothing else but the policy of politicians , to live honourably by the ruins and warrings of the persons , to keep off an insisting upon laws of settlement and agreement ; and to insinuate into corruption and interests that are strongest and most prevalent , that so they May keep themselves in the power of the sword without reason , in war , and after war : oh sad end of war to the persons ! But now every drop of blood and injustice will be recorded in minds of just men . England hath eyes ; the persons thereof will not be deluded after so much blood : and for my part , i cannot but think , that all impartial men , whether Presbyterians or independents , or any else under any other name , ( That are not choked by preferments from the present power , or in expectation of honour by favour and promise ) would have impartial justice and an equal distribution according to principles amongst the persons : and i hope , there be many impartial men that have places of honour , who ( For their country's sake ) would willingly adventure ; but it is not common : dominion and avarice are the great gods of the world . But when politicians do wave the agreement of the persons in the laws of nature and reason , than we May justly fear a design ; for it is because they would not have the persons see , nor understand : for than they know they could not do what they please , and continue in the throne : they could not get persons to be esteemed more than principles . 

But i shall show unto this honourable house , how his excellency the general of the English people's army , hath dealt with me , as well as with other of the persons ; and how such actions are the paths of former powers . And i shall show of what a dangerous consequence the actings of the general are , and how consonant to the late King's actings amongst the persons . And indeed , Mr. solicitor cook saith , that if any of those that tried the King shall turn tyrants , or consent to set up any kind of tyranny by a law , or suffer any unmerciful domineering over the consciences , persons and estates of the free persons of this land , they have pronounced sentence against themselves . 



Master solicitor cook hath these several arguments against the King's tyranny and policies , cited in King Charles his case . 

First , the King , when there ever was a spirit of justice stirring and discovered in the house , he sends the black rod , and dissolves the parliament ; and so the parliament men were fain to go home with a flea in their ear , and tell the freeholders in the country of the bravery of the King and Lords . So the general , &c. when he saw the spirit of justice stirring in the army amongst the free persons and soldiery of this nation , that had adventured their blood , he dissolved their general council of two officers and two soldiers of every regiment , &c.  

Secondly , if the persons clamour for another parliament , than there goes out another summons ; yet a way made to make all fruitless , by a negative voice that the persons cannot save themselves without him ; and must cut their own throats , if commanded so to do . So if any of the persons in the army claim and clamour for their rights , even for their indisputable rights of petitioning ; then presently there is an order from the general and some other officers , or a command and negative voice , to hinder the same : whereas they charged Hollis and Stapleton for overthrowing the rights and liberties of the subjects of this nation , in arbitrary , violent , and oppressive ways , and endeavoured by indirect and corrupt practices to delay and obstruct justice , to the great damage and prejudice of divers of the poor commoners of England petitioning for the same . 

Thirdly , another means he had to put some others between him and the people's hatred , by a pretended prerogative to be the sole judge of chivalry ; and to have the sole power of conferring honours ; that so he Might be sure to have two against one to stand for his prerogative against all right and reason . And so , what gaping and depending upon the general after places of honour and profit ; what undermining any one that is out of favour ( Though without cause ; ) and what snares there are and have been laid for the casting out of those that have appeared conscientiously steadfast to their principles , for the rights of the persons , let all rational men judge . 

Fourthly , another means he had to delude the persons , to make the persons believe , that he had committed all justice to the judges , and distributed the execution thereof into several courts ; and that the King cannot so much as imprison a man without law or reason . But see what a mockery this was to justice : if the King have a mind to have any public spirited men removed out of the way , this man is killed , the murderer known , a letter comes to the judge , and it May be it shall be found but manslaughter . So , when the Lord did ( Though with much temperance , as i appeal to the world ) make me to own things that are just , according to their own former words and actions ( As after appears in my case ; ) then i was presently a mark to shoot at ; and though this hath not extended to murder me as yet : yet it hath extended ( As much as in him lay ) to disrepute me , and undo me ; snatch me off by force from the common cause of the nation , and unmercifully make me liable to insurrections and Invasiens' , if any shall be . 

Fifthly , for matter of liberty ; if the King , or any courtier sends a man to prison , if the judge set him at liberty , than he puts him out of his place : which is ( Saith he ) a temptation too heavy for those that love money and honour more than God . So , if any one appears out of a real affection to justice , for any one that is extremely oppressed ; then there is suspicion and jealousy ; and as the new colonel John Reynolds said to one , if he should speak for me , he should prejudice himself ▪ 

Sixthly , the King pretended a prerogative , that he Might avoid any of his grants ; and so Might cozen and cheat any man by a law ; and the ground thereof , that the King's grants shall be taken according to his intention : and by this means the King's grants have been like the devil's oracles , taken in any contrary sense for his own advantage . Whereas Master Solliciton cook saith , all the judges in England cannot make one case to be law , that is not reason . but the general ( Though he hath joined in many good things ) hath made void his own solemn engagements to the soldiers and persons , hath imprisoned and cashiered those that have appeared conscientious to their principles ; and used divers arbitary and oppressive ways , to make himself and his creatures absolute and unlimited , tending to the extreme prejudice of many of the common-weal ; ( viz. ) officers and soldiers of this nation , as appeared by his actions of cashierement , of captain Ingram , and then the lifeguard , myself , and divers others in the engagement equally concerned ; and so he goes on to an absolute will , divided interest , and conquest over many of those that have engaged in England's blood , and appear for England's liberty , and at length May over all others ; contrary to the declarations of the army in opposing the parliament , in the declaration of the fourteenth of June , 1647 , in the volume , pages 40 , 41 , 42.  But conquest or power makes a title amongst wolves and bears , but not amongst men , as Master solicitor cook saith against the King . What a sad thing is it , that after our engagements , double and treble engagements against absoluteness , tyranny , conquest , arbitrariness , the same things must be done amongst ourselves ? 

And now i appeal to you for judgement and justice that May appear without partiality to the understandings of all unbiased men . 

I shall only hint unto you the business of war in a few words , ( viz. ) if i had deserted the regiment at the time of the agreement of the persons , i had been a perfidious fellow to my principles , and the nation , and army ; and by that means the nations interest in that regiment had been the Kings ▪ for there were some Lords in the quarters courted them to it . But this honourable house , and all rational persons May see how inhumanly i was used . 

After my being apprehend in the field , i was six weeks in custody at Windsor , or thereabouts : i was justifiable in my grounds and reasons , which did relate to the engagement of the army , the agreement of the persons , and the generals just authority : and i was declared justifiable by lieutenant general Cromwell , as many can witness ; and commissary general Irevon told one in private ( viz. Mr.  sexbye ) that there was nothing against me . I was appointed my command again under the notion of an holy fast , and of their desiring an union , and embracing one another in love , ( Oh sad hypocrisy ! ) but it was to juggle me out of my right : ( Reason and justice being for me , as doth after appear ; ) that what reason and justice could not do , power should . After that , the general seemed to be dissatisfied : though commissary general Ireton said , that God did incline the hearts of the general and general council to desire a union , and embrace one another in love ( His very expressions , as many were witness ; ) and so i had lieutenant general Comwels' letter to Newcastle : but that apostate , my deadly enemy , Henry Lilburn ( Having influence in the general , when i came from Newcastle , two hundred and ten miles from London ) got me presently suspended my command : after some five or six week's stay , suspension or confinement there , a commission was sent from the general for another to have my place . I had some loss also by the tedious journey : lieutenant colonel Henry Lilburn had also broken open my trunk , and seized upon my commission , and kept it . I was fain after all this to return to London . i had been four or five months or thereabouts struck out of the muster-rols of the army without cause . When i came to London , i made my appeal to the general and his counsel of war , and delivered it to himself to be heard , and for justice ; but i spoke to the air , i could not get it granted . After that i made many private addresses by myself and others : he told me , it was his pleasure . I offered to refer it to some parliament-men to hear the business , i could not have that granted : i offered to refer it to some conscientious officers of the army in private , i could not have that granted : which actions were ( Under correction ) contrary to the solemn engagement of the army , the articles and discipline of war , and all manner of Christian society and reason amongst men . — oh unreasonablenessel — and at length , all that i could get from the general , was but twenty pound out of the contingent monies . And the truth of it was , it was extreme grievous to me to bring Odum upon the general and others , with continual hope : of his and others resurrection , or standing for principles of justice and freedom to the persons : but now i see it is of such an extension , as a continue design to disparage , dishonour , and destroy me , and consequently others ; i hope i shall be excused in the eyes of all rational men , that i now speak : though , for enemies to me , and apostates , i care not what they say . 

After all this injustice and dissatisfaction , when others would have wrought upon these things , and used it , as an argument to me , to revenge my own wrongs , and public injuries ; another pretending for the King and justice , insinuatingly , politicly , and privately , that if i would , i Might be a colonel against the grandees . But the Lord made me to abhor such motions , and the Lord kept me firm , steadfast , and sincere in the times of temptations , wrongs , apostasies , and danger , to the nation , the army , and this house ; and so to their persons , though my person have been tossed like a tennis-ball by them : and i raised a troop against the bloody insurrections , and in constancy to my principles , and by the generals own privity , unto whom i did in my affections and civility go for that end . And when i was dismissed out of the county of Kent . i have ever since kept up my troop , in order to the freedom , justice , and peaceable settlement of the nation , in colonel Reynold's regiment , and upon the same account that the army and the well-affected of the house have manifested themselves , have been at most excessive charges and damages this five months in order thereunto ; and have been entrusted with the guard of the Kings own person , at Hurst-castle by the authority of the army , and command of col. John Reinolds , ( Voted a col. of the army by this house . ) 

Yet notwithstanding May it please this supreme authority , i being at the general-council of the army , on , or about the first day of March last past , and there being a letter presented by some sou ldiers , to the general , and the council ; it was put to the question and the poll , whether the letter should be owned or not owned : and when i was demanded my vote in the council , ( Which should be free : ) i told them , that though i could have wished that many expressions that were taken offence at were left out ; yet in my judgement the substance of the letter did relate to the right of petitioning , and to a petition that was presented in parliament , and therefore i thought the work of that court was to consider of it , and so i owned it , though i had some temptation upon my spirit not to own it , because i saw a design upon me . A little after , i was ignominiously and unreasonably cast out of the council , and had not liberty ( Though i desired it ) to speak , as if it were now grown a capital offence to speak a man's judgement in a council , ( Which should be free ) and as capital a sin to speak a word for a private soldier ( Though with never so much temperance ) if contrary to the judgement of some officers ; whereas it was offered by the army , as a necessary expedient that there Might be a liberty of dissents in the house of Commons , that the nation Might readily come to know , who they are that perform their trust faithfully , and who not ; and this was offered to render a parliament less nocent , remonst . of 23 June , and in the volume of declar. page 143.  we appeal to all men whether it be just or tolerable , that any privilege of parliament , should contrary to the law of nature make a man judge in his own case on concernment . but the general would have that unreasonable power and dominion which he would not give to parliaments , and will not give that liberty that he takes to himself : unto what pass will this nation come to , unless this honourable house justly interpose with their just authority . But i humbly conceive , that this honourable house , the well-affected in army and nation , are bound in conscience , to interpose in their dying liberties ; for what man in the earth knows where such practices and designs will end ; for after i was cast out of the council without just cause , my troop was given away to another , and a commission given to another to be in the regiment , and i could not have that indisputable justice from the general , to suspend it till the business was determined in parliament , though i desired it in private of him . 

I shall desire the honourable house to consider the two cases before laid down ( Not mentioning my former arrears and losses in your service , and for your sakes ) by which injustice and wrongs will appear , and by reason of which i am engaged in the world : and to consider that the general would by virtue of his negative voice , ( Which the King so much stood upon under the specious notion of the use of his reason ) deprive me of my right , and give it to his creature ; and pretend that he hath an unlimited power to give ; and deny , to whom he please , which May extend as well to kill , and save alive , as to honour and dethrone , in an unreasonable arbitrary manen ; just like the King's practice , as i have showed before . He himself can receive a commission from parliament , against the King , and after that withstand the parliament , again and again , and rend and tear in pieces all power , and break all the reins of government , as to former constitutions , and tell them , that it is not the me•r punctilio of a commission ? but impartial justice , and freedom , principles of nature and right reason is his commission , ( Which actions are only justifiable before God and man , in order to justice and freedom ) but he can act arbitrarily , unreasonably , and fly to his own sword and power , without reason , when he pleases , to destroy the nations friends , and his own too ( Though not flatterers ) in their freedom and justice . This corruption May destroy the well-being of this army and common-weal ; for if this house , or any officers or soldiers in this army , do walk and speak never so reasonably , yet power and will May destroy and cast out both , or do both ; for by it he May do one as justifiably as the other . And if God in his appointments should give a great part of this army into the hands of future enemies , by future war and blood , than another part of the persons of this nation must be invited out with the names and expressions of judgement and conscience ; and after they have obtained victory also with the loss of many thousands , and the hazards of many more ; all their liberties , and equal good and right , shall be usurped and swallowed up into the hands of one man , ( Or a few men ) who May be partially swayed to destroy and save alive whom he please ; if he prove corrupt and apostatise as former powers have , and so one corrupt man in power corrupts many more , until at length they will come to call corruption justice ; and it must be so , because they call it so ; and then he is worthy of death and cashierment , that will not say , the crow is white . 

For my part , i shall profess myself to the world to be for the general's personal authority , and power of conduct ( So long as this entrusted authority thinks fit and just ; and as May appear by an address unto his excellency written by my own hand , and consented to by the troops about two month's last past ) as much as any insinuater or flatterer that hath interposed between the general and me , in order to the rights of the persons ; and i should be glad if the general did walk truly , justly , and honourably , suitable to such an authority . But to have ( As much as in him lay ) my body , little estate , and more especially , or above all , the liberties of my country , the liberty and freedom of my conscience , to be all enslaved at once by him , i had rather be racked to death or destroyed by the general , or by any unworthy , mercenary-spirited , insinuating officer or soldier , then subscribe in that sense . And i profess impartially , i know not what sense is expected from me else , by these and the like actings : just like the actings of Willam the Norman conqueror , who deprived the English natives of the comforts of riches , and places , and their smallest offences against his will and Norman laws , were made grants to entitle him to their lands , and places of trust , to fulfil his lust , satisfy his creatures , and carry on his tyrannous designs over the persons . And i do find it a very great evil , that when the persons and the soldiery claim just and undeniable things ; then presently some men commonly fly to a deceivable mistaking of the question , and subvert the persons and soldiery in their cause ; and say that the men are against authority , as the King did against the parliament : and so the persons and soldiery are juggled out of the question . 

But i desire this honourable house to consider , that injustice is the foundation of almost all evils in the world : and when politic murderers ( Which are the greatest murderers in the world ) give continue occasion , than they cry out against the evil , and rend and tear like unreasonable beasts of prey ; and cry out upon the lamb , if it seek but his just , righteous , natural , and reasonable safety ; they extremely offend , and then they are offended if a man speak in his just cause ; like Tiberius the successor of Octavius , who after a feigned clemency at the beginning of his reign , suffered no day to pass without shedding the blood of poor innocents' ; and he prohibited on pain of death , that no one should be so bold as to weep or to manifest sorrow : they make occasions ; they cry out of passions , though they abundantly provoke . 

And therefore right honourable , sithence authority is merely for that end , to do justice impartially , that one Might not oppress another , that Might May not ovorcome right ; and since you have overturned the face of other personal authorities , cast out , and imprisoned divers members of your own house , to their ignominy and dishonour , nulled the house of Lords , impartially beheaded the King and some Lords , and declared to the persons , that it is out of an affection to impartial justice and righteousness , according to the first institution of authority by judges , according to the scriptures , deut. i. 16 , 17.  I shall desire you would do justice for justice sake , that it May appear to the persons , and to the officers and soldiers of the nation , whom it justly concerns , and unto whom i am deeply engaged , whose cause i make my own , and whose blood i esteem as my own , and unto whom i have now discharged my conscience , and then you will justly oblige me to manifest myself yours , and to employ my small talon of reason and understanding for your service , and in defence of your supreme authority . 

Finis . 

















