Certain letters written to several persons . 

Anno dom. 1654.  

Sir , 

The sad and desperate condition his majesty's sacred person is in , hath filled me with much greater anxiety and disquietness , than hath been usual to me since these unhappy times : and it is not often that i think of any thing else , but what May or aught to be done in order to the preservation of it , as a Christian , as a subject : for i believe both duties are inseparably conjoined in this occasion . The inquisition after this led me into the consideration of God's dispensation of times and seasons : and that as those are not to be neglected , wherein there is freedom for our active-duty ; so neither these , wherein there is appearance of little else remaining , save only for others to be encouraged and revived by the passive . ( And truly i doubt not but the divine goodness will act for our good ends , by our Christian readiness for sufferings . ) And as it is thus with times , so also it is with persons : some are rather , or more decently qualified for this then that , at least to give example and authority to it . 

These cogitations drew from me the considerations herein enclosed ; which i have addressed to — because i assure myself much of your gentleness . i have already communicated them to a very learned , reverend and pious — but i will not adventure much further in it , until i have also your sense of the expediency of the thing . For neither to the reputation of the matter , until it be maturely considered of , nor to any person , would i be cause of inconvenience . and indeed , if it be so well encouraged by yourself , and such others of like reputation , as it is by him , it will become me afterward to be silent ( As i conceive , ) for i have a better heart than a head for this business . I profess i have a jealous eye upon the Scots and Presbyterians ; who , i doubt not , would make malicious advantages upon any colourable defect of our clergy . i shall add this , that those of my profession are not idle , but are confident and vigilant . and truly it were a vile shame for us of all qualifications , if this excellent Prince should be lost , and we not able to excuse ourselves , that no means was left unattempted for his preservation ; whom i beseech God to comfort and defend . to whose protection i also leave you , &c.  

feb. 11. 1647.  

Postscript . 

I think it gives weight and encouragement to this proceeding , both his majesty's late excellent declaration to his subjects ; as also the resolution of the houses to exhibit theirs to the persons . I heartily wish this were timely fitted for this conjuncture . 

The considerations enclosed . 

The straight durance his majesty's sacred person is held under , the late declaration of the army , ( With which the Commons have concurred , ) to act without and against the King , puts it past all scruple , that the flagitious and execrable resolution of these men hath engaged them past retiring ; and ( Which is yet worse ) that they cannot but proceed to the deepest and utmost villainies and impieties . 

There is not less question of this , then of what ought to succeed it ; which is , that their impudence must be encountered with a Christian courage , zeal , and resolution superior to it : otherwise 't is a doubt not to be slighted , that these men , and too many others seduced by them , will have a seeming cause to believe themselves , that theological truths are more controversial , than those astronomical or astrological , wherein lines and images are only fictioned , to make schemes for sciences and discourse . I am not altogether free of this scruple , though it looks so stupendiously irreligious . 

Will not the whole frame of Christian verity be shaken ( If not subverted , ) in this nation , when this so great a truth in it shall not be vigorously averred ; that an established magistracy is God's immediate minister ; and ought not , cannot , with Christian profession , be deposed by those that owe obedience and allegiance to it ? i am fully persuaded that it is so necessary a truth , that were it tied to the stake , and the flames about it , even there ought we to offer ourselves to vindicate it , and contend for it ; or else adieu Christian-protestant profession . 

the seed of the church was suffering : and shall it be lost for want of suffering , after it is grown to such a perfection ? The ancient patterns must be imitated , if we expect the same benediction should preserve to us , what was so piously and gloriously planted by them . i think i mistake not my measure , this error amongst men lies not in the brain but in the heart : therefore instructions want not , but strenuous examples of Christian zeal ; which ( I persuade myself ) will most daunt them . for those believe , what they want of us in truth , they supply in pertinacity . 

All this considered , is it not now seasonable ( I believe it was not so till now ; but because the reasons are so obvious i will not trouble you with them ) for a considerable number of our learnedest , gravest , and most pious divines ( Though they exceed not the number of 20 they will be enough ) in a grave and sober manner ( For those tart reprehensions , of which every day there wants not store , suit not the weight of this business , being rather movings of spleen than sanctity ) to present unto the houses , that a government established is God's immediate minister , and that an attempt to depose it is an high impiety against God , and his known truth plainly and expressly taught us in the holy scriptures ; that his majesty is indubitably God's vicegerent over us , and that this allegiance we owe unto him we have attested by the oaths of supremacy and allegiance ; that not any of his subjects can stretch forth their hands against him and be guiltless ; that they demand ( According to the practice of the holiest Christians in all ages ) a time and place to prove this great truth they now assert , by evidence out of the scripture ; and if this be not allowed them , then to declare , they refuse not to seal it by martyrdom ? 

I do very readily acknowledge that the qúalifications for so great an engagement ought to be weighty and serious ; and that to rush into martyrdom , ( As long as God hath left us any justifiable human means ) May want as much of true Christian piety , as it May seem of prudence . God hath engaged our nature to many and several duties and functions ; and each hath its several laws and rules proper , whereby they are so set on work , that each May attain their due and proper ends : nor is the greatest means always best , when there are others , though less , yet fit . but if i mistake not , ventum est usque ad triarios : we must bring up the reserve . God hath in his just judgements ( Upon our estates and persons ) permitted all our temporal endeavours to be dissipated and frustrated ; we May say , our van and our battle are routed : but if the courage of this our reserve fails us not , i hope we shall rally ourselves again about it , & by the divine goodness have a fair day of it . This will awaken all , encourage the half-spirited , corroborate all honest & sincere minds . Me thinks i have reason too on my side , when i believe it will easily fall into this sequence . All the clergy of England ( With very little exception ) will second so Christian an example . Besides most entire families will be engaged ; and scarce will there be one but will have a share in it . For to this point the Presbyterians will frankly concur : diverse reputed independents ( Of whom i know some much valued by themselves ) will be joined unto you : and even in the army the impression of it will be notable . Nor can their present power prevent the expression of so universal a sense , so piously incited , and so well warranted . 

Whereby will appear their paucity . upon good advertisement i am assured , that they believe they have the hearts of the greater number of the persons , so much hath their prosperity dazzled them : but of nothing am i more certain , then that they have not the fourtieth man . And an expedient like this , to let both the persons and them into a view one of another , i know not . And yet also would this be further prosecuted : this attestation would be sent into Scotland , and all the Protestant churches and states of Europe ( For with the others we communicate not . ) And for it i know an expedient proper and of reputation . 

If this progress of it should fail , though improbably , which hath such a politic seemingness in it ; yet in my opinion , it doth not at all vitiate the pious part of it : the means and end being throughout truly Christian . i say , if it should fail , yet i see not that any thing we can do or suffer , can more than answer the importunity of the occasion , and the necessity that lieth upon us as Christians to do the utmost of our duty . how long , and with how many arts and subtleties have these men abused and deluded the persons with the pretensions of their candid intentions , only to preserve the laws of the nation and the Protestant profession ? But now that they are possessed of so great power , with what impudence do they confound those , and with what impiety do they subvert this ? but since in this case both those do so well accord , were it not best to set this last-named in the front , and to draw up the civil affair to it ; and though we contend for both , yet to fight under the banner of this , in some such manner as i have stated it , and by your wisdom will be disposed into the best order ? 

I shall add such a consideration more , that if it stood singly , yet in my opinion would justify and quit the cost of any endeavour , or endurance . that is , the unparalleled sufferings of this great Prince ; to which i know nothing superior , but his incomparable virtues . believe me , multitudes of men are mistaken , if in the point of his temporal affairs , he had not been in a much better condition , ( Though i confess not in a good one , ) had he timely relaxed much of his constancy and sincerity towards the rights , preeminencies and patrimony of the church . neither is our obligation but very great to him ; his sufferings being for our laws ; so unquestionably is our prosperity mixed with his dignity . now shall this great personage suffer imprisonment , deprivation of majesty , absence of all worldly comforts , and minutely hazards of life , for his magnanimous steadfastness to your and our advantages ; and we not struggle for him with our utmost endeavours ? Life were inseparable from much infamy with such ingratitude . and truly in human reason ( The utmost employment whereof God ( I doubt not ) expects at our hands ) i know no guard for his life , but by some means or other to make it manifest how dear he is to his persons , and their readiness to testify how inseparably united God's truth is with the cause of his majesty . this only next under God must awe them , preserve him . 

I cannot refuse to believe that this cause , as to the crown , will rise again : because i see not a bottom or foundation in human reason for this surreptitious power to establish itself in the order it seems now to point at . Though i do also very fully confess , that great mischiefs are easily under their power . But if these only were prevented , amongst which the safety of this sacred person is of highest importance , we had no cause to repent of such pious endeavours . and should the cause of the crown ( With which God's truth is so firmly combined ) resuscitate without such Christian aids , little were it to the honour of the present clergy and those that now serve at the altar : and if redemption come singly some other way , their share could be little looked after ( Of which truly none is more passionately tender than myself ) nor were the Protestant profession well vindicated : which ( I doubt not to say ) hath received a deep wound ( But i hope not mortal ) by the unchristian proceedings of these vile and detestable men amongst us . 

This i have offered to your candour , prudence and piety , which truly i hold in great reverence ; otherwise i would not thus have exposed myself to the censure of it . The weakness of the advice , at least the unskilful digest of it , i shall readily acknowledge ; but the sincerity and zeal of my heart for the cause to which it is directed , i shall never be ashamed of . 

But after all this i shall make this conclusion ; and i pray believe i am serious and sincere in it . Let me not be mistaken , that i should seem to reprove a slackness in those whom i think proper to take up this matter of themselves . indeed i am not at all guilty of it . I doubt not but great numbers have been long since ready for this encounter ; and perhaps disposing themselves to it , in a much better manner , than i have proposed . I have only offered my opinion . receive it i pray , as it is , i May affirm , in the weakest part of it not wanting some measure of a pious jealousy ( As a son of this church ) for this great verity taught and professed in it , and as a transport of that duty and care i have for the safety of this gracious Prince , my Master . to which i shall add , that i have had too much experience in this world to be ignorant of this frequent truth in affairs ; that in good men there is always a modesty accompanying them , that oftentimes they begin over-late ; and it is almost proper to them neither to machinate , nor to be overhasty to encounter wicked designs . but , if i err not , this is that point and article of time , wherein your order are to manifest their full persuasion of this verity in Christian religion ; vindicate it as it is professed by the church of England ; answer the kindness and steadfastness of the King to the clergy ; protect that life which was our protection , and is in such imminent hazard for it : by all which ( Through God's blessing ) you May lay a foundation of reviving both in church and state , that which now looks so cadaverously . 

My Lord , 

It joys me not a little , that in the late refusal of the Lord's concurrence with the Commons house concerning the trial of his majesty , you were there , and had an eminent share in it . The blood of our families being mixed , it is a grief to me , i could not bear a part with you in so virtuous and commendable an action ; yet a large part of contentment in it cannot be denied me . 

You are ( Unquestionably ) on firm ground . if you stir an inch from it , you fall . If you keep your station confidently , magnanimously , you are safe , undoubtedly safest ; if coldly and with trepidation , you are ruined , lost . are the dangers great ? the occasion is much greater : and the whole affair is therefore great , because greatened by hazards of the highest nature to the public , to your particular . i have bought experience at a dear rate : but into the bargain i have no very imperfect knowledge of these men . let them but meet a well-grounded and justifyable zeal , greater than their misguided fury , you shall render them recollected : and you have begun a conquest upon them , when they perceive an engaged resolution . let them but see there is a generosity and incredible courage prepared to stem the torrent of their fury , they must , they will yield way to it . 

The case of the whole kingdom hath long been a sad and a heavy one ; but now at length it is a plain one too . Though your lordships seem at present to appear most upon the stage , the eclipse of the King hath very sensibly obscured the lustre and brightness of the gentry also : and therefore it May be the easylier believed , that although the King at present hath very little attendance , and solemnity about his person , his interment must be accompanied with the considerablest part of the nobility and gentry , and with the demolition of kingship ; and the mutation of monarchy in this commonweal , together with that of nobility and gentility , will be attended with that of the civil and sober distinction of all degrees . 

It is not uneasy to be discerned ( As elated as these men are with their victories ) that yet there is a kind of hesitation , and stop in their career . for now the time being come that they are to consider how they shall retain and rule what they seem to have gained , they begin to perceive that there is a wide difference between making a conquest over their fellow-citizens ( Of which their own unhappy differences will lay claim to the greatest share ) and governing them contrary to their own appetites by so small a part of themselves : and that means are easilyer found and readier at hand to discompose and disorder a state , than such as shall compose and rule it , especially when so differing to long-engraffed customs and the inclinations of the persons . Attack them then in this musing mood , though they do use an artificial confidence that they act the sense of the persons . 't is true , they are in some present awe of their power , or rather in a kind of present amazement at their boldness : an expedient must be used for the persons to resume courage , and to declare their inclinations . i need scarce name who are the fittest to contrive the way , and give the onset . it can be none but your lordships ; none will begin before you , and there is none but will follow you . Make then a declaration ( By a competent number of you that are readyest at hand ( For some haste must be used considering the King's danger ) the rest will speedily follow you ) of your horror and detestation to such a proceeding against your anointed King and lawful sovereign , ( Your lordships will best order it : ) invite all the clergy , all the professors of the law to make their several subscriptions under their several qualifications . Those in London are ready at hand , and will speedily follow you . Then the counties and cities will undoubtedly hasten their testimonies . This occasion is so large , it encloses , comprehends all opinions : whatsoever owns humanity , will be joined to you . The paucity of these prodigious regicides , parricides , will quickly appear as monsters not contained within the terms and limits of human nature . nor can the power and vigilancy of the army hinder the progress of this : or if they attempt it , they do half-work , it destroys their pretensions and will irritate the persons to a revenge . send such a declaration to the general and the council of war . let them see there is a noble confidence and resolution that will backe it and not be refused . Demand a stop of the proceedings , until the persons have delivered their suffrages by their subscriptions . They will own you as regardful of them for preserving them from the imputation of so high a guilt of so unspeakable a crime , as these would impose upon them . 

This proceeding ( I acknowledge ) is not ordinary , not exampled : but the occasion is altogether new , and so unimaginable , that ( All the circumstances weighed ) all histories are silent , that the like thing ever entered into the heart of man , as this intended enterprise of these men of the army : that a King and a free monarch , the protector of our municipal laws , should , contrary to all laws , to our own laws , but yet with the impudent semblance of a packed jury , be submitted unto a trial for his life . to encounter this horrid novelty a way altogether new must be excogitated , and seconded with a courage and confidence above ordinary . Why May not your lordships find it convenient to remonstrate to all Kings , Princes , states , potentates and nobility your disclaimure of so foul a matter ; and desire their assistance , if it May be timely had , for the preservation of his sacred majesty's life ? for if that were but in a reasonable security , you need not doubt but that the kingdom hath more than means enough to struggle for itself and recover its ancient laws and government from such a vertiginous and giddy generation ; who have the impudence to derive a title and authority for their proceedings from visions and revelations . give but the persons an honourable example they will follow you , and vindicate both you and themselves from being considered as such a silly generation , that they should suffer themselves , to be cozened out of their good , known , and established laws ; and in the place of them , to be imposed upon by imaginations and dreams . 

I despair not of God's wonderful providence over his sacred majesty's person and life : but that suspends not our endeavours . he expects we should work with him by those human means he hath left us . It grieves me , i can do nothing else but rub my fingers upon paper : an employment that fits not my genius . per force i must do it , or nothing . and because i would not be guilty of leaving any thing undone that i can do , i have applied myself to it , and directed it to your lordship . to whom i wish that all the advantages that ever happened to any noble endeavour May succeed , and rest . 

Yours , &c.  tower . jan. 9 1648.  

Sir , 

The conjectures of men are strangely various ( Yea of the same persons ) concerning the safety or danger of the King , my Master : some times their hopes , other times their fears prevail most . I should be much ashamed if i were the lest guilty of so universal an inquietude , in so justifiable an occasion , and arising from so good a ground , as a kindness and reverence they owe to their lawful Prince . i frankly give you leave to think ( Nor do i value the inconvenience it could draw a long with it , ) that there is not that honest expedient in the world to serve him by , that i would not hazard myself in , to employ for him : nor do i know what earthly felicity it is , could be so welcome to me , as to advance a step , beyond any other , in my duty toward him . but my present condition refuseth me the ability of any thing else , but that of invocating the favour of God for him ; and making my addresses to you , whom i take to be the figure that gives the denomination to the sequence of a great many cyphers that follow you : and therefore i do the rather believe that a person , that signifies so much , will the better apprehend what weight and signification reason and religion have in all human and Christian actions ; and that these at last will make a conquest upon all those , that act without their commission . 

I can hardly persuade myself into ( I think ) the too common opinion , that the extraordinary success and felicity that hath constantly followed your attempts ( Who as the saying is , seem to have hired fortune to serve you at day-wages ) hath dazzled that light of understanding that formerly was usual to you . You cannot forget the advantages on the house's part , and the infirmities and wants on the King's part at the beginning of the war ; and that the complication of many favourable accidents on the part of your affairs will challenge a share in the success ; yet is there a large room too left for your merit in martial conduct ; and you have cause enough to value yourself upon a better foundation than the event of battles , and successes in war . proverbial wisdom is not the worse , because easilyest learned ; it seldom happens that the same man is happy and wise together . And if that lesson also be good , that affliction makes men understand , it is the academy in which i have been strictly disciplined for 7 years ; so that i must either be an egregious dunce , or no ill counsellor for you ; there being a person scarce to be found , that lieth under so dangerous a temptation , of seeming prosperity , and therefore fittest to be advised and counselled to sobriety and wisdom . of this i do assure you i do so little repine at your prosperity , and easy opportunities of fixing yourself securely in it , that if you do as much justify your love to the tranquillity of the nation by a discreet uniting the King and his persons , as you have been instrumental in their long separation . i shall prize your prudence , courage , industry , and sobriety , at as high an estimate , as the sufficientest wit can deliver it in language . 

I doubt not , but both of us are easily agreed in this point , that success legitimats not a quarrel , nor the power which supports it ; neither are the instruments of the calamity of a nation thereby justified . we cannot but remember and observe , that it is no more than the filthyest and imperfectest creatures have heretofore effected ; which have driven persons out of their countries ; made desert , lands extremely fertile . have not frogs and locusts desolated empires ? and other vermin ruined great cities , and large territories ? By these means God magnifies his own power and justice : the instruments remain but what they were , their nature and quality not changed . but in the acts of God's grace and favour to those who have been instrumental in destructive practices , there is a mutation of qualities ; an ejection of those vicious , and an infusion of contrary graces ; and those affects and appetites , which are necessary and connatural , but misguided , are by his goodness guided to good ends . and thus was Saul from a furious persecutor transformed to a zealous professor ; from a destroyer of the church to a master-builder-up of it . No doubt but God in both had his ends by and upon s. Paul : and from my soul i wish it , that your case May have a similitude with his ; that of him in the spiritual affair , ( Which was the function to which he was separated ) you May be a resemblance in the temporal ; and from a destroyer ( By God's goodness ) rendered a restorer . this in passage to those other considerations i intended to you . 

That which weighs most , and lieth heaviest upon men's hearts is , the fear of the King's person ; that the whole kingdom May lie under the imputation of the guilt of violence offered to it ; and that a mutation of the form of government shall succeed it . If this be the end aimed at , than my present endeavour is to demonstrate to you , how humanly impossible it is to attain unto it . First there is no example ( The necessary circumstances observed ) that encourageth such an endeavour . For examine all the stories of all states , and you will not find so much as one instance ( I pray observe how i propose it ) that ever any persons within the fifth degree ( I Might double the proportion ) as we of England are , or in the same degree so spacious a territory , were ever transformed from a monarchy , to an aristocracy , or democracy . some cities and petty principalityes have sometimes suffered a change to those forms ; and from thence have arrived ( Yet not without desperate , intestine seditions and vexations ) to a great puissance : the persons growing up and increasing with the widening of the state , the governing by multitudinous counsels through constant habit and practice hath not always ill succeeded . But to attempt to introduce such a form ( Which is so vitrious and brittle , and so easily carried into distemper , tumult and multitude being scarce separable ) upon such a huge mass of persons , as we of this nation are , and altogether unexpect and undesirous of it , the matter itself in reason will be found manifestly repugnant to , and not susceptible of , such forms ; nor is there a pattern to be found , to give any light of direction for the managing of such a design . Reason's May be seduced from the accidents happening this parliament , which well weighed and pondered will afford matter more then enough to clear this question . Something like an example May be produced ( Though rarely too ) that large monarchies have been cantonized . but that ( I think ) few have any sealousy is intended . 

The next considerable is , that the change from the ancient and long-established rule of governing will demolish all the received rules of property . and if that inconvenience be , with difficulty provided for ; yet the persons will not expect other , but that with new Lords they must have new laws : and more than probable it is that the persons will be shaken into such an apprehension of it , that they May fall upon the heads of the enterprisers . we frequently see that persons are hardly reclaimed from customs barbarous and unreasonable ; how much less can our nation ( The best civilised the world hath known ) be withdrawn from the love of laws , so prudently constituted , and under which they have so long continue , that the very desires of the persons are assimilated into the nature of their laws . the persons & the laws will always be alike . Are their laws monarchical , so will be the affections of the persons ? custom is a second nature , and in many things goes beyond it . 

Upon what principle , upon what authority must such a proceeding be founded ? It can be no other but , that the persons have the right and power to depose an established government , erect a new form arraign the supreme magistrate , and execute him . herein is all history silent ; and it will not only be disclaimed by all those you call cavaliers and Presbyterians , but also by a considerable number of independents : the remainder than will amount to a slender body of persons . So that whereas the pretence is , that the sense of the persons is acted , nothing will prove to be a grosser mistake . but this embroilment in the state , especially upon this principle , will make all King's parties to the quarrel : yea all states that administer aristocratically , will be thoroughly engaged to defend their right of ruling . so that there is little question but that the greatest calamity that can befall a nation will inevitably be drawn upon us , that is , a foreign invasion . and trade ( Which nature seems to have designed our nation most properly for ) will be embarred by all Kings and those states . nor can it be expected that permission will be given to those of our nation to traffic , who derive themselves from a state , from whence they shall bring the contagion of so destructive a maxim to those rules of governing , where they expect commerce . yea even popular states will abhor so prodigious a principle and proceeding ; they having been urged by necessity to use a supreme magistrate , though for time limited , yet exempt from question and trial : whereof the ancient state of Rome gives us frequent examples . No man sure is so mad as to search our chronicles for a precedent of this nature . 

The consideration of Scotland will have a large share in this affair : for the regal rule can receive no diminution , much less alteration here , but that it must make a notable impression on that state ; and can have no other event but a disunion of the nations ; the union of which hath ever been so much considered and vehemently desired by all our prudentest Princes , and by the most fortunate Martialists of them , ( With so much fruitless loss of blood ) often attempted , yet afterward by God's providence so happily effected , and in a most peaceable manner , to the universal contentment of all sorts in both nations . 't is not possible there can be an union of nations , where there is a dissimilitude in the nature and form of government ; for they will perpetually strive one with another . nor can a violence upon the person of the King but prepare a way to let Scotland into a quarrel undeniably just , and unavoidably necessary , for the loss of their liege Lord and lawful sovereign , and unconsulted with . To this consideration of Scotland I 'll join that of Ireland . 't is apparent that the army will have more than their hands full ( If Scotland slept ) with the vexations and difficulties that will arise here at home . for of the Commons house ( Which you call ) the representative of the persons , an eighth part remains not , with any countenance for the army ; nor those neither doth the awe of the army retain united to one sense : take also into the reckoning those who have been expelled the house for adhering to the King in this war , which at least will be four or five parts more : the remaining part of the Lords have disclaimed to have any share in such proceeding . So that by this index of the nation you May see the spirit of the whole body of it , the nobility , gentry , all persons of distinction , and all of any competent subsistence : and i am persuaded , ( Besides the unsuccessful trial that hath been made of some persons practised and learned in the laws , ) even those of your late selected jury or judges for the King's trial , will fail the promoters of it . Indeed all things refuse them ; and doubtless so will you too : when calmly and recollectedly you shall cast your eye upon so horrible a spectacle , you cannot let it long rest there . We then thus turmoiled and disquieted , Ireland will be left to itself ; or rather worse , a prey to a foreign nation : a large kingdom , the fertilest soil of the Northern parts of Europe , happy beyond England for number and conveniency of ports and havens : so that inevitably with it the destruction of the empire of this nation over the seas , and the cessation of trade must ensue ; and after it , unspeakable misery and poverty to our nation , and eternal infamy to the causers of it . 

Very considerable also is the fashion and shape of the proceeding , which ( They say ) is intended against his majesty ; so ugly , monstrous , and deformed , that when it appears upon the stage to act , the horror of it will irritate the whole nation to revenge . what ? ( For it is not otherwise apprehend ) that a council of war of that army , that profess to act under and by the authority of the two houses , should impose rules to judge by , and judges for those rules too , upon those whom they have professed to be their legislators ; and that for the trial ( By their own acknowledgement ) of the dignifiedst person of the kingdom ; therefore not more than any other submittable to an arbitrary power and extra-judicial proceeding . who is it that after this can expect security of life , or quiet possession of any thing he hath ? It is said ( But who almost can believe it ? ) that a title is derived from revelation and inspiration : if it were but talk , it were but ridiculous , and would be thought so simple , that it would not be condemned as guilty of malice ; but to act under such a notion , were a plain confession that all other titles are insufficient . Nay if it be but mingled with any other pretensions , the pestilent quality of it would poison all the rest : and , believe it , the dropping of such expressions , by the unsoberest of those that call themselves of your party , hath incredibly discredited those who are indeed well-advised . away with it then , as that which will bring the certainest and suddenest destruction ; as that which will enrage the whole nation to a furious vindication of themselves , from being considered as such a silly generation of persons , that should be cozened out of their good , known , and established laws ; and in the place of them suffer themselves to be imposed upon by imaginations and dreams , which every morning must be declared to be the foregoing nights legislative power . the persons do already take themselves to be scornfully mocked , that they must be stigmatised with the defamation of so impious an act , as a violence offered to the life of their sacred and anointed King ; and that the act of so slight a part of their trustees must redound to their shame ; who shunning the light of established rules , which would have guided them , ( The paths they expected they should have walked in ) do in this so palpably wander from their trust , and the sense of those who trusted them ; and that so inconsiderable a part of them should set up a figment of fancy to be idolised . consider the Commons house ( If yet it May be so called ) allow ( Which cannot be refused ) the knights to be the representatives of the shires , which truly is the main of the persons , you shall not find knights for the tenth county in England , i am persuaded , not a far smaller proportion : is it then possible that men shall believe against sense and evident demonstration , that the persons incline to you ; nay that they are not diametrically opposite and bent against you ? We read that God , as an expression of his gracious favour to his church , hath promised , that Kings and Queens shall be nursing fathers and mothers of his church ; but that his church should set up new forms , or any forms of trial , to execute their own Kings and Queens , is monstrous and unknown to religion , is less than an idle dream , 't is the fiction of a dream , and so it will be esteemed not deducible out of the sacred scriptures ; defamatory to the Christian profession , and the nearest way to introduce paganism or Mahometanism , their prophet practising such delusions . so that hereby as Christians is all Europe engaged , as Protestant's all of our belief either in this or other nations . 

The last consideration that impedes the mutation of the government is the person of the King : which we find doth unavoidably mix itself with all the former considerations ; so that the discourse of the one , will not be without the aid of the other . Yet this following hath somewhat more in it . 't is this King , such a King , so conspicuously virtuous and sufficient ; therefore ( It must be acknowledged ) that hath a right apprehension and clear vision of the true interest of kingship , which is the peace and prosperity of his persons ; a Prince of undaunted resolution and clear courage , therefore not vindicative , and far above base revenges . Example me , in any one person , of any vindication , or disrespect , or injury , that the King can be charged with . 

I 'll give you many instances of his placability and readiness to be reconciled ( Let me in a short parenthesis give you this advertisement ; revenge is to be doubted from the persons , not from the King ; he alone must be , can be , your security ; upon such a Prince you May rely : ) a Prince of exemplary devotion and sobriety , therefore dear to all persons so qualified . 't is this King , during whose happy days , ( No less than 17. years , ) in which he quietly possessed and ruled the sceptre , such an inward tranquillity was joined to such a security from without , and both accompanied with such an opulency , that no period of like time , with the like felicity , have the former ages delivered over to us . And it is no impertinent question to ask ; whether ever any other nation ever enjoyed the like . I am persuaded ( And that upon no ill grounds of conjecture , ) were it in the power of the nation to elect out of the catalogue of all their Kings , the spirit of which of them they would have rest upon this ; if they wished him the fortune of Henry the v. yet they would not refuse his own virtues , for the most signal of any of the former . so notable an impression doth the memory of the peaceable part of his reign make upon the affections of his persons : and such an horror and aversion hath the disquiet thereof wrought in them to any other form of rule , that they look upon their tormentors as salamanders , that only live and are cherished by the flames , that have scorched them . Is it not now high time then to stop and make a halt ? Is there not enough done to satiate the vanity and quench the thirst after military renown , when you have vanquished your compatriots and fellow citizens , and under such a Prince ? 

Look upon the brink of what a dreadful precipice you are ; and let this last , and those other considerations be seriously revolved by you : to which being added those weights which your own judgement can cast into the scales , undoubtedly you will see that there is a wide distance between making a conquest over a persons , ( Of which their own differences will lay claim to the greatest share , ) and governing them contrary to their own appetites by so small a part of themselves ; and that means are easilyer found and readier at hand to desolate and disorder states , than such as shall compose and rule them , various to long engrafted customs , and their own inclinations . invisa imperia nunquam retinentur diu . hated rule is never long-lived . Me thinks you cannot well avoid the observation that the most perspicacious and sagacious persons of your party , who with a wonderful steadfastness and undismayedness have kept company with you in your counsels and affairs , and in the greatest hazards ( For you have not always been without such , ) do herein , and in this action , and in this highest time of your power and prosperity , not only make a stop , but avowedly withdraw themselves , and declare against it ; no doubt but very evidently foreseeing the fatality of such an enormous and unparalleled attempt . but the imagination that some have , that this design will be carried on by dispatching the King out of the way , excluding the Prince and Duke of York ( Both now out of the realm ) and setting up the Duke of Gloucester , until the persons are better seasoned by this new fashion of government , is such a mockery , that it cannot be believed but the most purblind understanding will see all the shapes of the design , when it stands but behind so slender a thread . this will not do the feat ; nor will the persons of this age be so deluded : wherein there are but too many ( For the public peace , ) that understand arts and policies of state , or , at least , would have it so thought . 

Upon the prospect of these foregoing considerations , ( And there want not others important ) draw a short state of the whole affair ; and it will be thus , or little otherwise . At the present , you of the army stand high ; but naked , unloved ; the bulk of the persons that assists you , small ; they are , to speak of , all in one cluster , the army ; and that not all ripe for such designs : through the kingdom they are so thinly disseminated , that the appearance of them by the eye is scarcely discernible ; and lastly , to deal frankly with you , ( Because their temper in your affair will make a notable impression , ) for the greater number a vertiginous and giddy generation , that will never suffer quiet to themselves , you , nor others . the opposites to these are the most prudent-constituted form of rules the world hath known ; a vast number of persons wedded to it ; the matter therefore irreconcilable ; no example friendly to you ; all potentates made parties against you ; the certain disunion of Scotland with England ; the damage and infamy for the loss of Ireland ; the defamation of Christian religion , more especially of the Protestant professors ; and lastly the person of a most excellent Prince , loved , reverenced , and desired by the generality of his persons . Besides all these , and others that are obvious to the commonest understandings ; trust me , no mortal man can have a prevision of the future vexations which such a regicide , such a parricide will bring to the persons , affairs and designments of the army ; if a prognostic May be made by the rules of reason , by the constant course of human actions , by the conjunction of the present affairs of this kingdom . It is the certain expectation of all sober men , that Jacob followed not Esau closer by the heel , than the army's destruction will that of such an inhuman act of violence upon the sacred person of this King . what then , in the name of God , is it that hinders you , answerable to reason , suitable to duty , and agreeable to piety , from making haste to join yourself to the law , and to agnize that Prince , whom the laws and ordinance of God have set over you ? Obey then the municipal law under which you were born , that hath nourished and cherished you ; restore it , promote it all you can ; reverence that Prince , into whose custody God hath committed both the laws and yourself ; who , i doubt not , will find it most conveniency to employ yourself , and the soberest of your party , in the eminentest administrations under him : and verily i wish it . Nor do i think it in any degree reprehensible for you , or any other to observe the physician's rule , accipe dum dolet ; take this opportunity of the present anguish of the King and kingdom ; restore it to its former habit of quiet and peace . there is none that will grudge you such sober commodity , as May arrive to you by it . But with such manner of discourses i will not detain you , least i should thereby mislead you into a false opinion of me . my principles , according to the temper of these times , are very remote from self-safety ; or to employ ungenerous flatteries for it . Know this assuredly , that i firmly believe , that an established magistracy is God's immediate minister , nor can it be deposed by those that owe obedience and subjection to it , without the highest guilt of impiety ; and that this is a verity so plainly held forth to us by the sacred scriptures , ( As an ordinance employed by God , for the manifestation of his power and goodness in the conservation of human communion and society , ) that the conscientious sufferers for it May expect a crown of martyrdom by it . That this government is a monarchy , and his majesty the right and lawful King , hath not a colourable objection to gainsay it . Read the act of recognition 1 Jacobi calmly done by the whole parliament , and unanimously pursued by the whole nation , at a season and opportunity that Might have encouraged pretences , if any could have been found . How happens it •hat the lawfulness of regal rule is questioned ? Search the scriptures : God it is that owns their charter ; he it is that gave it them : per me reges regnant , ( Prov. 8.15 . ) not per nos : 't is no plurality they hold by . Where Solomon speaks in the person of the eternal wisdom , thereby to advertise us of ( No doubt ) greater reverence and circumspection . God himself appoints Moses the first Prince of the politic state of the Jews ; after him Joshua , &c.  Is it the title and hereditary succession of Kings you look for ? See then , God himself chooseth Saul ; afterwards guides the lot ; lastly , follows the publication and acknowledgement of the persons . Afterward God rejects that dynasty , and by especial command fixeth David ; whom , by like appointment , Solomon succeeds : and from him continue that family in the rule , in the elder son of that family . Yet is the person so sacred , so delicate , that no violent hand must come near to approach it . Wherein are the scriptures more plain and express then in this particular , touch not mine anointed ? David , before he was a King , and persecuted by a King , who can ( Saith he ) stretch forth his hand against the Lord's anointed , and be guiltless ? 1. sam. 24.5.6 . Multitude of texts there are that both justify the dignity , and enjoin reverence to the person . and conformably it hath been the avowed doctrine and practice of the church in all ages , even under heathen Princes . 't is an argument too copious for a paper to contain the reasons and instances for it ; rather indeed it is too manifest to be disputed . Hath not God coupled the fear due to himself , with the duty of reverence toward the King ? Prov. 24.21 , 22.  my son , fear thou the Lord and the King ( In conjunction : ) meddle not with them that are given to change . mix not with such machinators : for a like end shall be to the offenders against both , destruction . 

Sir , my conclusion shall be very plain , because you May thereby be the better assured of my sincerity in all the rest . The ancient constitutions and present laws of this kingdom are my inheritance and birthright : if any shall think to impose upon me that which is worse than death , which is the profane and dastardly parting from these laws , i will choose the less evil , which is death . i have also a right in kingship , the protector of those laws ; this is also , by a necessity and conjunction with that other , dearer to me then life . and lastly , in this King is my present right ; and also obligations of inestimable favours received from him . I would to God my life could be a sacrifice to preserve his . could you make it an expedient to serve that end , truly i would pay you more thanks for it , than you will allow yourself for all your other merits , from those you have most obliged , and die 

Your most affectionate friend . 

Postscript . 

Sir , 

I add this postscript . when with the most unheard of and highest violation of all laws human and divine , of morality and sanctity , both upon the person of the King and municipal laws of the kingdom so execrable an act is perpetrated , let the profit of it to the actors be summed up , it amounts to nothing more than this , that a King is escaped out of their present possession ; but the succeeding King obliged by all the ties of religion , nature , duty , and honour ; encouraged with all the irritations of this nation , Scotland , and Ireland ; fortified by the interests of all Christian Princes and states to animate and aid him , for his revenge upon the actors . i am not guilty of so implacable and inveterate malice , as to wish that the contrivers of this villainy Might pursue a counsel that shall draw such sharp revenges and infallible destruction upon themselves : but truly i think that those who have been , or are their veriest friends , and who have any light of understanding or motions of conscience , will never forgive them so outrageous a folly , madness , and wickedness . i must confess the present proceedings torment me with terrible apprehensions : but truly i cannot make myself believe , that God will permit the devil to draw Christian Protestant professors unto the consummation of so detestable and impious a fact . God of his infinite mercy prevent it . 

Enclosed in a letter , thus . 

Sir , 

This short letter hath no other errand , but to excuse that longer which is enclosed . I pray read it over , though it comes from a person that is not proper to apply himself to you ; and using an instrument ( A pen ) not suitable to my genius . but believe it , 't is the extremity of this present occasion extorts it from me . God guide you , and recall you , if you are engaged in this horrid proceeding . i rest , 

Sir , Your humble servant tower , jan. 15. 1648.  

A letter written to his Lady the day before his suffering . 

My dearest life , 

My greatest care in relation to the world is for thy dear self : but i beseech thee that as thou hast never refused my advice hitherto , do thou now consummate all in this one . And indeed it is so important both for thee , me , and all our children , that i presume passion shall not overrule thy reason , nor my request . i beseech thee again and again , moderate thy apprehension and sorrows for me ; and preserve thyself to the benefit of our dear children , whom God , out of his love to us in Christ Jesus , hath given us : and our dear mall ( In the case she is in , ) and our comforts in that family depend entirely upon thy preservation . i pray remember that the occasion of my death will give thee more cause to celebrate my memory with praise , rather than to consider it with sadness . God hath commanded my obedience to the fifth commandment ; and for acting that duty i am condemned . God multiply all comforts to thee . I shall leave thee my dear children : in them i live with thee ; and leave thee to the protection of a most gracious God . And i rest 

thy , &c.  

Another written the same day he suffered . 

My dearest life , 

My eternal life is in Christ Jesus . my worldly considerations in the highest degree thou hast deserved . Let me live long here in thy dear memory , to the comfort of my family , our dear children , whom God out of mercy in Christ hath bestowed upon us . I beseech thee , take care of thy health . Sorrow not unsoberly , unusefully . God be unto thee better than an husband ; and to my children better than a father . i am sure , he is able to be so ; i am confident he is graciously pleased to be so . God be with thee , my most virtuous wife ; God multiply many comforts to thee and my children , is the fervent prayer of 

thy , &c.  

A letter to Mr. e.s. from a reverend and grave divine . 

Sir , 

I hope this paper will find you upon your recovery . you have my daily and hearty prayers for it ; not so much for your own sake ( For i doubt not but it would be much better for you , in regard of your self , to be dissolved and be with Christ ) but in the behalf of the church , your friends , and poor family : to which notwithstanding be assured , God will be merciful , howsoever he disposeth of you , either for this life , or for a better . but if you live ( As i pray and hope you will ) you shall do very well to write the life and death of that noble Lord and blessed martyr , who professed at his death , that he died for the fifth commandment : & to die in the defence , & for the testimony of any divine truth , is truly and properly to be a martyr . 

That which i can contribute towards this work is , to communicate some few observations i made of him and from him , before and after his condemnation . i was several times with him , and always found him in a very cheerful and well-composed temper of mind ; proceeding from true Christian grounds , and not from a Roman resolution only , ( As his enemies are pleased to speak of him . ) He told me often , it was the good God he served , and the good cause he had served for , that made him not to fear death : adding , he had never had the temptation of so much as a thought , to check him for his engagement in this quarrel : for he took it for his crown and glory ; and wished he had a greater ability , and better fortune to engage in it . 

After his condemnation , and the afternoon before his suffering , we were a great while in private together : when , bewailing with that sense which became a true ( And not despairing ) penitent , the sins of his life past ; the greatest he could remember was his voting my Lord of Straffords death : which though ( As he said ) he did without any malice at all , yet he confessed it to be a very great sin ; and that he had done it out of a base fear ( They were his own words ) of a prevailing party : adding , that he had very often and very heartily repent of it , and was confident of God's pardon for it . Then he told me , he had a great desire to receive the blessed sacrament ( So he called it ) before he died the next morning : asking what divine of the King's party i would recommend to him . I replied , that ( Though many were more worthy , yet ) none would be more willing to do him that service then myself . which he accepting very kindly , told me he durst not desire it , for fear it Might be some danger to me . after this , and some conference in order to his preparation , both for his viaticum and his voyage , the sacrament and his death ; he desired me to pray with him . Which after i had performed , and promised to be with him by seven the next morning , i left him for that time to his own devotions . 

The next day i was there at the time assigned : and after some short conference in order to the present occasion , he desired me to hear him pray : which he did for half an hour in an excellent method , very apt expressions , and most strong , hearty , and passionate affections : first confessing and bewailing his sins with strong cries and tears ; then humbly and most earnestly desiring God's mercy through the merits of Christ only . secondly , for his dear wife and children , with some passion ; but for her especially , with most ardent affections : recommending them to the divine providence with great confidence and assurance ; and desiring for them rather the blessings of a better life , then of this . thirdly , for the King , church , and state ; and lastly , for his enemies , with almost the same ardour and affection . After this sending for my Lord of Norwich and sr. John Owen , i read the whole office of the church for good Friday : and then , after a short homily i used for the present occasion , we received the sacrament . in which action he behaved himself with great humility , zeal , and devotion . and being demanded after we had done , how he found himself ; he replied , very much better , stronger , and chearfuller for that heavenly repast ; and that he doubted not to walk like a Christian through the vale of death , in the strength of it . But he was to have an agony before his passion , and that was the parting with his wife , elder son , son in law , two of his uncles , and sr. to : c : especially the parting with his most dear Lady ; which indeed was the saddest spectacle that ever i beheld . In which occasion he could not choose but confess a little of human frailty ; yet even then he did not forget both to comfort and counsel her , and the rest of his friends . Particularly , in blessing the young Lord , he commanded him never to revenge his death , though it should be in his power : the like he said unto his Lady . he told his son he would leave him a legacy out of David's psalms , and that was this , Lord , lead me in a plain path . for , boy , ( Said he ) i would have you a plain honest man , and hate dissimulation . 

After this , with much ado i persuaded his wife , and the rest to be gone ; and then being all alone with me , he said , doctor , the hardest part of my work in this world is now past , meaning the parting with his wife . then he desired me to pray preparatively to his death , that in the last action he Might so behave himself , as Might be most for God's glory , for the endearing of his dead Master's memory , his present Master's service ; and that he Might avoid the doing or saying of any thing which Might savour either of vanity , or sullenness . this being done , they were all carried to Sir Robert Cotton's house ; where i was with him , till he was called unto the scaffold , and would have gone up with him , but the guard of soldiers would not suffer me . 

precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints . psalm 116.15 . 





the righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance : he shall not be afraid of any evil tidings ; his heart is fixed , trusting in the Lord . psalm 112.6.7 . 





rejoice ye in that day , and leap for joy ; for behold your reward is great in heaven , for in the like manner did their fathers to the prophets . Luke 6.23 . 





i saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God , and for the testimony which they held . And they cried with a loud voice , saying , how long oh Lord , holy and true , dost thou not avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth ? And white robes were given unto every one of them and it was said unto them , that they should rest yet for a little season , until their fellow-servants also , and their brethren , that should be killed as they were , should be fulfilled . revel. 6.9 , 10 , 11.  





they overcame him by the blood of the lamb and by the word of their testimony , and they loved not their lives unto the death . revel. 12.11 . 





i heard a voice from heaven , saying unto me , write ; blessed are the dead which die in the Lord , from henceforth , yea , saith the spirit , that they May rest from their labours ; and their works do follow them . revel. 14.13 . 





Finis . 











