God and the King : OR Monarchy proved from Holy Writ , To be the only Legitimate Species of Politic ▪ Government , and the only POLITY Constituted and Appointed by GOD.  

Wherein the Phantasied Principles of Supereminencing the People's welfare above the King's Honour ; and Popular Election of Kings , Are manifested to be groundless and unreasonable . 

Briefly Collected , by Robert Constable , M. A.  

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Rom. 13. 1.  


Wherhfore we must be subject , not because of wrath only , but also for Conscience sake , Rom. 13. 5.  




London , Printed for W. L at the Crown in Cornhill near the Stock-market , 1680.  

To the REVEREND , and His Loving Father , Robert Constable . 

Dear Father , 

HOW much I am Obliged to you both for my Being and Wellbeing , I desire now to testify unto the world ; for though to requite your Love , and Bounty be not within the Sphere of my Ability , yet since the Apostle commands Children to learn to requite their Parents , and Nature itself hath taught unreasonable ( a ) Creatures this Lesson , I shall Endeavour ( by God's help ) to pay that threefold debt of Obedience , Reverence , and Gratitude , which all Children owe to their Parents . And therefore I shall ever devote myself unto your Service , to whom ( next under God and my King ) I owe myself , and those Abilities I have , both Natural , and which through God's Blessing upon your Liberal Education , by a double Apprenticeship , in two famous and flourishing Societies , I have acquired . To express therefore my due Observance , and grateful Recognition of your former Care , and Cost ; I here present you with ( the first = born of all my Labours ) a brief Collection of the Divine Right of Monarchy , evidently deduced ( e Sacris paginis ) to be the only Species of Politic Government , and that the people have no Right in the Collation of their King , or any Colour to presume to the same . The undeniable Right of this Subject absolutely lessens my Endeavours ; because to prove a Principle is to deny it the force of a Principle : But , because some in the world are not ashamed to make this Case disputable , therefore , ( pregnant with zeal , though weak in the Delivery ) I brought this into the world , presuming that the always assented to Truth hereof would strengthen me in my Travel . And thus brought forth I beg for it ( as a true born Son ) your Baptism . Hoping that for the Father's sake , qualis qualis est , aequo animo consules : And so to the world , under your Protection , it is committed , by 

Reverend Sir , your ever Obedient Son , and Humble Servant . Robert Constable . 

GOD and the KING . 

Government , in general , is , the Administration and Exercise of that Power and Authority which the Superior hath over the Inferior ; which , at the very instant of the Creation of the world , took beginning ; For the very first Creatures which God made , being inferior to him both in Glory and Power , became subject unto his Guidance , Rule , and Government . And God , who is a God of Peace and Unity , to the end to establish and preserve peace and unity amongst his Creatures of different Kind's and Nature's , did by his Providence and Wisdom create all their kinds in several Degrees of Superiority and Subordination , that as one kind did naturally exercise a Rule , so the other might as naturally yield Submission and Obedience . So that Government , being a word of Relation , necessarily requires a Correlatum , which is Subjection , the one not existing without the other . And therefore as Government is an undeniable Institution of God ( as in the Series of the whole Universe is most evident and clear , every Creature having a certain Rule Dominion , and Dependency one of anoher ) so Subjection or Obedience , being its necessary Correlate , is as undeniably requisite and necessary . For the wisdom of God which saw the preservation of the Universe , to have a necessary dependence upon the mutual peace and unity of these three several kinds of Creatures , ( viz. the Angelical , Intellectual , and Natural Agents ) whereof the Universe was composed , and that peace and unity to have the like dependency upon their Order and Government , did likewise see it necessary that the same means should have the same efficacy in the particulars of each of these three species , lest confusion in particulars should produce the destruction of the species , and by consequence of the Universe . For most true is that Saying of Nazianzen , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Order is the Mother and preserver of all things . Therefore the Lord did not terminate the influence of Order and Government in the species of any of the three several sorts of Creatures , but did also originally constitute the particulars of each in different degrees of Superiority and subordination or subjection . As amongst the holy Angels we find Arch-angels , 1 Thess . 4. 16. and , Judas v. 9  And amongst the Devils Belzebub , the Prince of Devils , Matth. 9 34.  And the obedience of Angels ( I mean not that of the whole species unto God , but their obedience unto one another , ) is strongly intimated by Christ in the third Petition of that Prayer ( which he gave to all Christians as a precept , Luk. 2. 11.  ) wherein we desire that our observance of Gods Will here on earth , may be such as the Angels perform in heaven : But our observance of Gods will is not terminated in the obedience of the species unto God , but further comprehends the performance of those duties , adhibited in the fifth Commandment between Inferiors and Superiors , whether it be in political or paternal Government . 

And amongst the natural Agents which by a natural instinct are dependant and subservient one to another ; as the Heavens to the Earth , the Earth and Heavens to the Plants and these three to Sensible Creatures ; amongst whom the Lion is invested with a certain natural Power and Authority over the Beasts of the field ; the Eagles over the Fowls of the Air , and the Leviathan or Whale over the Fish of the Sea. And Jerome affirmeth the same order to be observed amongst every particular Society of Sensible Creatures . The dumb beasts and wild herds ( faith he ) do follow their Leaders ; the Bees have their King , and the Cranes fly after one another like an Alphabet of Letters . 

But this Wisdom and Providence of God in the constitution of Degrees of Superiority and Subordination amongst the particulars of the immediate species of the Universe , is most manifest and perspicuous in the species of the Rational Creatures . For God , in the very first beginning of the world invested Adam , Gen. 1. 26. not only with the Rule and Dominion over all the other Creatures of the world , but likewise with a Monarchical Supremacy ; not only Oeconomical over the one created family in Paradise , but Political over a Society consisting of many families , which were to descend of Adam . For the same Law which commanded obedience to Parents did oblige all Adam's posterity to the performance of this Monarchical obedience to Adam . Now although this Government be styled most commonly Paternal , because all Adam's Subjects could derive their Pedigree from the blood Royal ; Yet is it the very same with that we term Regal . Therefore the Holy Ghost , to demonstrate unto us that the name did not create any real difference between this Paternal and Regal Government , did afterwards in the Penning of the Decalogue , use only the word , Father , to express all sorts of Government . And this indeed is the ground of Monarchy : which , as a Learned Divine hath well described , is a Politic Government instituted and approved by God , consisting in the prudential Administration and Exercise of the Supreme Power and Authority of one Person over all other within the same Society , for the preservation of Peace and Unity in order to God's Glory , the King's honour , and the People's welfare . Where we may observe , 

1.  The Efficient cause of Monarchy . 

2 The End or Final cause thereof , 

The Efficient cause of Monarchy , is , either Principal or Instrumental . The Principal Efficient cause of Monarchy is God , by whom all Power is ordained , Rom. 13. 1.  For God is the universal , principal , and primary Efficient cause of all things ( sin only excepted ) Rom. 11. ult . And Gen. 14. 18. there we find a King of Gods own making , and His Regal Power of God's own Institution . For Sem ( alias Melchisedec ) was by God's special Ordinance a Type of Christ , both in his Regal and Sacerdotal Office , Heb. 7. 12.  And therefore is styled by the Holy Ghost , the King of Righteousness , and King of Salem , which is Jerusalem , where this Melchisedec reigned until Jacob's time . And also several persons received their Regal Investiture from God's immediate and particular Consignation , who had no other Title to that Monarchical Honour and Supremacy ; as , Saul , 1 Sam. 10. 1.  David , 1 Sam. 13. 14. and Solomon , 1 King. 1. 30.  Kings of Israel , Jeroboam , 1 King. 11. 30.  Jehu , 2 King. 11.  Kings over the ten Tribes ; and amongst the Heathens , Hazael , 1 King. 19 16. was made King of Syria by God's particular appointment ; and Cyrus , Isa . 45. 1. who , although a Heathen , is there called Gods Anointed , Ergo.  

Obj. But it may be Objected . That when the people of Israel asked God for a King , He was very angry with them , and did declare his dislike thereof by a miraculous Thunder and Rain , 1 Sam. 12. 18.  Ergo.  

Sol. To this I Answer ; that God was not angry with the People's desire of a King , as in relation to the Object of their desire , viz. Monarchy , but rather was well pleased therewith , being the very Ordinance of God himself , Deut. 17. 14 , 15. and therefore was sanctified to the people with the promise of a blessing , 1 Sam. 12. 14. and further confirmed unto them by God himself in his own particular Election of another King , viz. King David , a man after Gods own heart : But as in relation to the end of their desire , which was Idolatrous and sinful , laying the hopes of their deliverance , from those pressures under which they then groaned , upon the King , looking for deliverance from him , and not from God , He was angry with them ; as God deolared unto Samuel , 1 Sam. 1. 7.  They have not rejected thee , but they have rejected me ; Imputing more to the power of a King for their deliverance than unto my power , so forgetting me their Creator and Preserver . 

And for the further manifestation of the Divine Right of Monarchy God was pleased to sanctify it with the Blessing of Divine prescription . For Monarchy began in Adam , and so continued in his Posterity successively until the Flood ; and after the Earth was again replenished , the Church was limited to Sem ( as aforesaid ) King of Jerusalem , where he Reigned till Jacob was fifty years of Age. Who went down to Egypt with all his posterity , and there lived in Bondage and slavery , till God raised up Moses their Monarch and Ruler , by whose hand he delivered them , and after Successively continued that Monarchical Rule over them ( as is manifest in the holy History of the Israelites ) even from Moses unto our Saviour Christ , King of Kings , and the true King of the Jews , Matth. 2. 2.  Except where their sin and ingratitude made them incapable and unworthy of the great blessings and favour of the Monarchical Government , and brought that heavy curse of Anarchy upon them . For whilst there was no King in Israel , in those days every man did what was right in his own eyes , measuring their Actions by the Law of their own Lusts . All which enormities the Holy Ghost justly imputeth to the want of a King and Regal Government in Israel . Although they had their Synedrim and great Council amongst them ; Yet it pleased God in all their Captivities and Distresses during those sinful times wherein they wanted a King and Regal Government , to raise them up occasional Judges and Monarches for their occasional deliverances ; thereby to manifest to them the benefit of Monarchy , and how conducent Regal and Monarchical Government was to their constant security and happiness ; God himself honouring this blessing of Monarchy with many gracious Pactions and promises , as to David , 2 Sam. 7.  To Solomon , 1 King. 3. yea and to wicked Saul , 1 Sam. 12. and Idolatrous Jeroboam , 1 King. 11. and therefore a token of God's approbation of that calling of Monarchy , as a natural gift and blessing ▪ requisite to human perfection , for the Lord did never thus directly declare his approbation of any curse or privation of these blessings , which was an effect of sin ; nor of any calling which was grounded thereupon , such as that Monkish mendicancy which is used in the Church of Rome . For that command of Christ to the young man in the Gospel was principally probatory ; and all Christ's promises made , either to him , or his Disciples for remuneration of their piety , who forsake all for his sake , relate primarily and properly to the love of Christ , and to such disvaluations and desertions of worldly and natural gifts and blessings , only Accidentally and in a Secundary sense , when they come in competition with Christ , who is to be preferred above all other things whatsoever , although never so dear unto us , Matth. 16. 25  : But I say such curses and privations of Worldly and natural gifts and blessings were never directly and positively honoured with a Sanction of a remunerative promise , as Monarchy is in the prementioned Texts . And this I hope may suffice to evidence the Primary and principal cause of Monarchy , to be God alone . Now it rests to speak of the Secondary or Instrumental cause thereof . 

In Crowns as in all other ( nay much more than in any other ) Possessions , he that entereth not in by the door of Right and Justice is a Thief and a Robber whose intent is but to Rob and Steal , whereby to satisfy his own Ambition and Avarice , as the constant event hath manifested in all Usurping Traitors , Abimelech , Absalon , Baasha , Zimri , Omri , and many others both Ancient and Modern , as that Traitor the bane of our English Nation O. Cromwell , whose wickedness ( I fear ) hath drawn those National Judgements upon us , which since we have suffered : whose name ( I call God to Record with me ) when I remember , makes my flesh tremble , stupifies all my senses to think flesh and blood should be guilty of such execrable Acts , the perpetration whereof Hell with all its damnable Crew scarcely could or ever did exceed . But the prodigious guilt of this Miscreant so much exceedeth the mild point of my pen , that in the further process , I should but lessen my own resentments , and seem to favour that which is the fittest subject for the greatest Satire in the world . 

The instrumental cause of Monarchy , is the secondary means which God makes use of , for the immediate collation of this Supremacy upon any man , whereby to Entitle him to the Regal Diadem , and that , either Extraordinary , when God doth declare his will by extraordinary revelation , and that either for a blessing to his people , over whom he placeth him , by making him a Minister of his favours and mercies , or for the Executioner of his Judgements for the punishment of the people's sins . 

Or Ordinary , when God doth advance a man to this Regal Dignity and Honour by those ordinary ways and means , which are constant Rules for us to judge of , whereby to acknowledge this Sovereignty and yield our obedience ; and this likewise either , when the Sovereign Power is attained by those ordinary ways and means which are approved and warranted by the word of God , and the Rules of Reason and Equity : Or when the same is attained by Violence and Injustice , and such cursed ways and means , as are repugnant to the word of God , and the Rules of Justice and Equity . The dispute of the former would be arrogant and impious ; for the extraordinary ways of God , are far above our Judgement , and further above our imitation : God never intending such for a precedent whereby to frame our Actions , but only our Submissions thereunto . And therefore I shall insist upon those ordinary ways and means which are the rule of our Actions in this kind ; which ( as I have said ) is twofold . Either when attained by violence and injustice , and repugnant to the word of God , and the Rules of Justice and Equity ; which is called Vindicative : Or when it is attained by those ordinary means which are approved and warranted by the word of God ; and this is called Gracious . 

Concerning which , there are two opinions , the one , propugned by some , that the Right of the Royal Investiture pertaineth to the people . The other , and that most certainly , is imputed to Birthright and Hereditary Succession . Their Arguments , whereupon they ground the former opinion , are , partly instantial , and partly rational . 

The instances alleged for the propugnation hereof , are the Inaugurations of those Kings which the Scriptures mention , to be made or Anointed by the people ; as Saul , 1 Sam. 11. 15.  All the people of the Land came to Gilgal to make him King. And David whom all the men of Juda Anointed King at Hebron , 2 Sam. 2. 4.  And afterwards was Anointed King over Israel at Hebron by all the Tribes of Israel , 2 Sam. 5. 3.  And Solomon who was likewise Anointed by the people , 1 Chron. 29. 20.  And Jeroboam , whom the people made King , 1 King. 12. 20.  And Vzziah , whom the people of the Land made King , 2 King. 14. 21.  And Jehoahas , who ( although he was the second Son of Joshuah ) was made King by the people in his father's stead , 2 Chron. 23. 20.  

The reason , they ground this opinion upon , is taken from that Aristotelian principle , Honour est in honour ante , & none in honorato . And therefore the honour ( say they ) and Submission , which Kings receive , is originally in the people . And therefore they think it not reasonable , that the people should be obliged to give obedience and yield honour to any person but him whom they think and judge worthy of it , and so manifest their Judgement of his worth , by their Election of him to be their King and Sovereign . 

And lastly , they add St. Peter's Testimony , 1 Pet. 2. 13. who terms Regality an Ordinance of Man , which were false , if it did proceed from God , and not from the people ; for than it were an ordinance of God and not of Man  

Now from these grounds they deduce two damnable ( because Rebellious ) Consequences and Corollaries . 

1.  That though the King be Mayor singulis , yet he is Minor universis ; and therefore that is no Rebellion , but duty in the people , to resist and oppose the King , nay to depose and dethrone him , where the people judge it necessary in relation to the defence of their own safety . 

2.  That the King doth receive and enjoy this honour only by virtue of a stipulation or Covenant between himself and the people . And therefore if the King do violate this Covenant and break the Trust reposed in him by the people , by any acts which are destructive , ad Salutem populi , ( whereof they presuppose themselves to be Judges : ) that then the people are absolved from their Allegiance grounded upon that Trust and Covenant , and may Lawfully provide for their own safety and welfare , either by resistance , deposition , dethronement , or any such means as themselves shall judge thereunto conducent . 

Now to confute this opinion concerning the People's Right and Power in this Regal Investiture , and in answer , to the Arguments alleged for the propugnation thereof , and to those damnable and execrable inferences grounded thereupon ; we must know , that these acts of the People , mentioned in the premised instances of Scripture of making and Anointing Kings , are , 

Either acts of Homage and Duty , by way of acknowledgement and testification of the Supremacy already Legally confirmed upon the person to whom these duties are performed ; which in Scripture are expressed upon two several occasions ; The one , where God did confer this Supremacy and Regal Honour , by any extraordinary ways and means , as in Saul , David , Solomon , and Jeroboam . The other , where God used their means for the vindication of the King's just Title against an Usurper , as in Joas , whom Jehoida the Priest , and the Captains , and the people crowned and anointed King in the Temple ; restoring him to his just Rights which had been usurped by his Grandmother Athaliah , 2 King. 11. 12 , 13.  And in Hosiah the son of Amaziah whom the people restored to his just Power , which the Conspirators ( who slew his Father ) had usurped : And in both these cases , the acts of the People are good and Lawful , and approved by God ; being declared to be the will of God , upon the former occasion , extraordinarily ; upon the latter , ordinarily . And indeed is nothing else , but the people's necessitated assent and manifestation of joy , for that blessing which God hath bestowed upon them ; and therefore bound to perform all acts of obedience and Loyalty to him so Invested , whereunto they do by this act of theirs silently and implicitly promise and engage . And not by this act of theirs stipulating ▪ or adding any Authority or Supremacy to the person so inaugurated ; as in those instances , if severally and seriously considered , will appear : For , 1 Sam. 10. 1. we find Saul , and that by God's appointment ( where the Text faith ) hath not the Lord anointed thee to be Governor over his inheritance ? as also David , who was Anointed King by Samuel , according to God's command , 1 Sam. 16. 13.  Solomon by Zadoc the Priest and Nathan the Prophet , 1 King. 1. 34.  Jeroboam , by the Prophet Ahijah , 1 King. 11. 30 , 31. all which being performed by the immediate command of God , declaring his will and pleasure concerning the advancement of them to their several Power and Pre-eminence by Extraordinary Revelations , do evidence , the Right of Royal Investiture , to pertain only to God ; by whom King's Reign : And that , not only when he doth so declare his will by those Extraordinary means ; but also , when that Power is attained by those ordinary ways and means , which are warranted by God's word and the Rules of Reason and Equity ; as in Joas whom Jehoida the Priest made King in pursuance to the promise of God to his servant David that his house should be established for ever . 

Or else these acts of the people are acts of seeming Power or Authority , collating this Supremacy and Regal Power upon some person , who hath no other Right or Title thereunto , neither of Birthright , nor of Revelation from God ; as upon Absalon , Adonijah , Jehoadas , Judas , Theudas , and Barchozba , ( who professed himself the Messiah , and drew the people into Rebellion against the Roman Emperor ▪ which occasioned those wars wherein Jerusalem and the Jews were destroyed , ) and these acts of the People are execrable , sinful , and Rebellious , and so declared by God's Judgements thereupon , for wheresoever the Scriptures mention the constitution of a King after this manner , you shall find that they likewise record ( not only the frustration of the people's endeavours , but also ) that they were frustrated by some heavy and sudden Judgements of God , both upon the Usurper ( whereby he was degraded from his undue honour ) and the people , who presume to confer that honour upon him without a warrant from God , and so by that means to obtrude a Deputy upon God of their own and not of God's Election . Whereof we have a lively instance in the madness of the People of England in these late times , placing forsooth their ( Lord Protector ) by those horrible sins of Rebellion and Sacrilege , not only perpetrated against the Right and Power of our late dread Sovereign , but even against his Sacred and most Royal Person . OH Heaven ! OH Earth ! what satisfaction can be made for that Sacred blood , shed , to satiate the gluttonous and Sacrilegious lust of Traitors and Rebels , who build up Zion with blood , and Jerusalem with iniquity ? But surely God will avenge the blood of his Servant , crying ( like the blood of Abel ) for vengeance . 

These acts of the people in Anointing of Kings are only mentioned where some of these occasions happened ( that is ) where there was an interruption of the ordinary means of conferring the Supremacy by birthright and Hereditary Succession ; either by the interposition of God's just Prerogative in the Advancement of some Person by Extraordinary and Immediate Revelation , or else by the usurpation of some who had no right or Title at all , but Force and Violence , ( either private of themselves and some few partners , wherein God stirred up the people to vindicate the King's right ; or Public of the people ) but where the Supremacy and Sovereign Power ( with all the Appendages ) descended by Birthright ; there is no mention at all made of the people ; though the act of Duty and Homage was as necessary to be performed to all who enjoyed the Crown by Hereditary Succession ( as to Abijah , Asa , Jehosaphat , Jehoram , and the rest , to whom the people were no lesle obedient and subject than to those who were appointed by God ) but I say in those cases , the people's acts of Submission and Homage are not expressed but presupposed , as known acts of Duty to those Kings who attained the Supremacy by those ordinary and known means of Birthright . And how many Instances are there in Scripture of the inefficacy of the people's endeavours in this kind , as in Aaron's and the Israelites honouring and Proclaiming the Golden Calf , to be a God and Guide in Moses stead , yet did not that popular Election Legitimate that Calf's power and Title , Exod. 32.  And Absalon was proclaimed King by all the thousands of Israel , yet did not that act of the people Legitimate Absaloms' Title to the Crown . For the Holy Ghost termeth it a Conspiracy when it was at the very height , 1 Sam. 15. 12.  Shcba had Ten Tribes for him , when David had but one , and yet was he never termed a King , but a man of Belial , 2 Sam. 20.  Adonijah confesseth that ( although the faces of all Israel were set on him to make him King , yet ) he never had any just Title or Right to the Kingdom ; for the Lord had designed it for his Brother Solomon , 1 King. 2. 15. upon all which God manifested the guilt of their sin , by sending those fearful judgements both upon the people and the Traitors so exalted . 

To the reason grounded upon that principle ( quoth honour est in honorante & non in honorato ) let it be premised ; that honour involves a twofold relation : The one primarily and per se to that quality or excellency which is found in the person , for which he is honoured and esteemed . The other secondarily and virtute prioris to the act of honour and estimation whereby we judge well of the person so and so qualified ; and therefore all acts of honour in the secondary sense are acts of duty , as being the effect of that qualification in the person so magnified and honoured . So that it is evident the honour and submission which the people exhibit to their King , even from this ground and principle of Aristotle , are not acts of favour to be conferred and disposed voluntarily at their own will and pleasure , but acts of Duty , not only morally , as the acts of honour in the premised principle merely intimates ; but also by a Divine necessity , being thereto obliged by the Law of God. And therefore must be performed to such , as God esteems worthy of the honour to be his Deputies ; and not upon such as themselves judge worthy to be their Rulers : For you know the people are obliged to exhibit acts of honour and reverence to a Judge ; but it doth not therefore follow ▪ that the people make that man a Judge , but he is made such by Letters Patents from the King , without ask any consent from the people . 

To St. Peter's Testimony I answer , that the Apostles expression there , relates to the subject of Sovereignty and Power , which is the King , and those who are over us under him ; As manifestly appears by the immediate following words of the Text , 1 Peter 2. 13 , 14.  Submit yourselves unto every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake , whether it be to the King as Supreme or unto Governors as them that are sent by him : ( as if he had said ) Submit yourselves to every Human Power and Authority that God hath set over you , not only to the King himself , but also to his Ministers and Magistrates , although they are his Subjects as well as you : for there is no power but of God , and whosoever resisteth the Power , resisteth the Ordinance of God. And they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation , etc. Rom. 13.  But it doth not at all relate to the Original and Efficient cause of that Power , which is God , and neither King nor people . 

And now ( I hope ) the profanity of that former inference of theirs is perspicuous , appearing most damnable being directly contradictory to that express Rule , which God himself hath prescribed in this case , Exod. 23. 2.  thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil , neither agree in a controversy to decline after many . Where God plainly declares that the universality of the offenders cannot legitimate the fault ; as appears in the sin in erecting the Golden Calf , and Absaloms' Conspiracy . For though it be a Maxim in Policy , that Multitudo peccantium tollit peccatum ( i e ▪ ) Poenam peccati : and therefore in crimes of the blackest die the offenders often times escapes their due punishment . It is as true a Maxim in Divinity , that multitudo peccantium aggravat peccatum ( i e. ) culpam peccati ; and the more I seduce the more guilt I contract : Although the multitude of partakers may secure me from punishment , in foro judicii humani , yet I am sure to receive the just reward of that sin at God's Tribunal ; from which the whole Society of men and Devils , cannot secure me . 

But not to bind these nice Disputants to an Argument of Conscience ( which indeed is scarce to be found amongst them ) to evince their error , let us consider the absurdity and sencelesness of their opinion both in Policy and Reason . For if the Mayor part of the people be Superior to the King , than the Government is not Monarchical , but Democratical , every species of Policy deriving its Denomination and nature from those that are Invested with the Supremacy : But that Democracy is the basest kind of Policy ( Confusion and Destruction being the conclusion of such a Government ) both experience , and the general consent of all Politians do declare and so asserted both by Jerome , and Cyprian , and even Calvin himself ( although a favourer of the People's Right , in appointing of their King and Monarch ) diverse men have diverse minds and meanings , and therefore amongst a multitude of Governors , Emulation and dissension are no rare springs . Nay ( both Jerome and Cyprian ) record it for a probatum in daily experience , that so many Leaders , so many followers , so many Rulers , so many Factions , do tear and rent in pieces the peace and Unity of all Societies . To which agrees Calvin , affirming , an equality amongst Governors to be the mother of Factions . 

it 's one of our Saviour's own Maxims , Matth. 3. 24.  That a Kingdom divided against itself cannot stand ; but every Democracy must necessarily divide a Kingdom against itself , Ergo , etc.  That Democracy must necessary divide a Kingdom against itself , is proved from another of Christ's own Maxims , Matth. 6. 24.  no man can serve two Masters ( much less three or four hundred masters ) but in every Democracy there are ( at least ) two Masters . And therefore no man can be a true Subject or servant in such a Commonwealth ; but ( as Christ faith ) must necessarily be factious , by loving one and hating all others , and adhering to one , and rebelling against others . And therefore it is observed , that in Christ's time , when esay had prophesied , that there should be an Universal peace over the whole Earth ; that then , there was not any kind of Polarchy in any Kingdom in the world ; because in its own nature every Polarchy is inconsistent with Peace and Unity ; the end and conclusion thereof being absolute ruin and desolation ( the common fate of all divided Kingdoms ) except God in his mercy , prevent the same by the reducement of such a Government to a Monarchy ; a manifest experience whereof we have both in the Athenian , Syracusan , Lacedaemonian , and Roman Commonwealths ; whose Polarchical Dissensions occasioned many Intestine Wars and Tragical Conflicts , which in fine must necessarily have produced the ruin and desolation of them all , if the opportune reducement of those Polarchies to a Monarchy had not prevented it . 

Lastly , every individual member of the same Society is obliged to exhibit acts of Obedience and Loyalty to their Lawful Prince ( as the former part of this distinction of these subtle Logicians intimate ) allowing the King to be Major singulis , but upon what grounds they deny his Authority in Vniversis , I leave to the Censure of every rational Judgement seriously considering this deduction , Peter is obliged to exhibit acts of obedience to his Prince , so Paul , so John , and so every individual member of the same Society ; Ergo , ( according to that Logical Maxim , a particularibus ad universale valet consequentia ) they all in universal , are obliged to exhibit acts of Obedience to their King.  

To the second Inference ( viz. ) That the King doth receive and enjoy this honour only by virtue of a stipulation or Covenant between himself and the people ; and therefore if the King doth violate this Covenant , and break the Trust reposed in him by the people ; that then the people are absolved from their Allegiance , grounded upon that Trust and Covenant , and may Lawfully provide for their own safety and welfare , either by Resistance , Deposition , Dethronement , or any such means as themselves judge to be most conducent to their own security . To this I answer that this Covenant ( its true ) implieth a mutual engagement of the parties therein concerned ; but the parties primarily and originally concerned are , God upon the one party , and the people upon the other party , as Moses declareth , when he reciteth that Original and general Covenant ( which is indeed the ground of all other particular Covenants ) Leu. 26.  Deut. 28.  

And therefore Solomon , Eccles . 8. 4. maketh this Covenant a ground why people should obey the King's Commandments , not as the Kings , but as God's Commandments ▪ whose Vicegerent the King is ; for where the word of the King is there is power , and who shall say unto him what dost thou ? for the King's heart is in the hand of the Lord , as the Rivers of water he turns it which way soever he will , prov. 21. 1.  And therefore the King is only the deputative party assigned by God , and entrusted by him for the performance of the Covenant upon God's part , either for a vengeance , or recompense to the people , as the Lord himself judgeth of their merits . And though the King may spare the wicked and persecute the Righteous even unto death , as Pilate did our Saviour , yet even in that the King doth but execute Gods Decrees , as the Holy Ghost doth declare concerning that unjust Judgement of Pilates , Acts 4. 28. for Pilate did nothing but what God had Determined before to be done , For every man's judgement is from the Lord , prov. 29. 26. and not from the Judge or Ruler . So that ( in a word ) the King may do male ( that is ) a wrong to himself , ( for which he is accountable to God ) but he cannot do malum ( that is , any wrong to us ) by inflicting any thing upon us , which is not just and according to our deserts from God , whose place the King supplies in Judgement , which is the ground of Solomon's assertion , that , The King's lips do pronounce Divine sentences , and that his mouth transgresseth not in Judgement , Proverbs 16. 10.  Now therefore upon these grounds of Solomons it is manifest , that there is no sense , why the people should claim any power over the King by virtue of this Covenant . 

First , Because the King is not their Deputy , but Gods , and every man must account to him for his Actions , who doth constitute and depute him ; as when the King doth depute a Judge for any Province or City , the people under his Command have no power to question him for any act which they conceive unjust , but either by Petition to that Judge , or else by their addresses to the King his Master , whose trust all corrupt Judges do deceive , and not the Trust of the people ; for they receive not any Power or Authority from the people , but from the King : And in like manner the people for redress of their grievances from the King's oppressions , must address themselves to the King by Petition , and if that prevail not , then to God by prayer , ( who is the King's sole Lord and Master , and from whom he receives his Power , and whose Trust all Tyrannical Kings break by acts of Injustice ) which is the ultimum refugium , as Samuel declares when he Prophesieth of Saul's Tyranny , whereby the people should be grievously oppressed ; for redress whereof the people ( when the King would not hear ) should cry unto the Lord , 1 Sam. 8. 18. other means of remedy than which , the Prophet Samuel did not dream of , nor could prescribe to the people to make use of ; and whereas if he had conceived resistance to be Lawful , he might soon have found out that way , and have the people so to provide for their own security . 

Secondly , Because the people never receive Injustice from the King , if they look upon themselves ; for the Judgement is the Lords , who cannot do injustice , nor break the Covenant upon his part ; although his Minister and Deputy may fail and offend in the execution of his Office in his own particular , which is his own guilt . As a Hangman that Executes the just sentence of death upon a Malefactor , if in doing his office , his intentions have not reference to the sentence of Justice , but the satisfaction of some private grudge , or some Covetous Design or the like , that Officer is guilty of Murder , although the Malefactor receive from his hand nothing but his due deserts . And thus much ( I hope ) sufficiently declares the error and vanity of that opinion , that the people's consent and approbation , are the ordinary and instrumental means and causes of that Supremacy and Sovereign Power , which doth Pre-eminence the Monarch above all others within the same Society . 

Now it rests to speak of that opinion , which ( and that most certainly ) imputeth the Secondary and Instrumental cause of Monarchy and Regal Dignity to Birthright and Hereditary Succession ; the Efficacy whereof Holy Writ doth manifest , Preheminencing , the first born above all his brethren in Honour and Possessions , as the Lord declared to Cain , Gen. 4. 7. nor was it in the Father's power , either for love or hatred , to alter the Law of the first born , and to transmit the Honour and Inheritance due to him , to his younger Brother , Deut. 21. 15. and in that statute , which the Lord himself made , ordering the descent of honours and possessions , Num. 27. the Lord doth direct that they be conferred by Birthright and Hereditary Succession ; and not by the Election or Discretion either of Moses or the people . 

But more specially to our Case , the Lord was pleased to honour it with the promises of perpetuating these Honours and Royal Dignities unto any Family , which were always grounded upon the perpetuation of the Royal Issue , in giving Sons that should sit upon the Throne , as appears in his promises to David , 2 Sam. 7. 12. to Solomon , 1 King. 9 4. to Jehu , 2 King. 10. 30. and most manifestly upon Jacobs Prophecy , which upon this very ground Entailed the Crown and Sceptre unto Judah , until Shiloe came , Gen , 49. 10.  

The performance of which gracious promise was executed in Abijam , who succeeded Rehoboam , and Asa him , Jehosaphat him , and Jehoram him , and so in the rest , as the Sacred Chronicle doth at large relate , who all inherited the Crown by virtue of this Birthright , without the concurrence of any other cause or meancs . And this may suffice as touching that Instrumental and ordinary means ( viz. Gracious ) whereby God doth advance a man to the Regal Diadem , Dignity and Honour , and which is a constant Rule for us to Judge of whereby to acknowledge this Sovereignty and yield our obedience . 

The other Instrumental means of this Supremacy , which creates a Right and Title to the Crown , is Vindicative , and that is Sword and Conquest , which the Lord declareth to be one of the severest and heaviest of his Curses and Judgements upon a Nation , Leu. 26. 25.  And the Lord styled the victorious King of Assyria , Isa . 10. 5.  The Rod of his wrath , and staff of his Indignation ; because by his sword he was resolved to pour out the Vials of his fierce wrath upon the Ten Tribes , for their Idolatries and abominations . 

Quest . It may be here demanded , whether Conquest be a Lawful and good Title , and whether any King who doth claim from thence , be a Lawful King , or only an Usurper . 

Answ . Conquest in itself makes no better Title to a Crown , than Ahab had to Naboths Vineyard , or than the Robber hath to the Traveller's purse : For as it is an affliction and punishment to the passive party , so it is a sin and Injustice in the active party ; and directly contrary to the Law of God which prohibits all injuries to our neighbours ; but yet such a Title may be legitimated and made Lawful by the declaration of Gods will concerning the same . Now Gods will in this case is declared two ways . 

First , Extraordinarily , by immediate Revelation ; and so Jeroboam's , Jehues , and Nebuchadnezars Titles were Legitimated . 

The second Ordinarily , by the Extinguishment of the Royal Family , which is a Declaration of his wrath and vengeance upon that House ; and so the Lord did Legitimate Baasha's Title , as himself acknowledgeth by the Extinguishment of Jeroboams House , 1 King. 15. 29.  Now where the Lord hath declared his will by either of these ways , the Conquerors Title is good and Legal , and all those who claim from that Conqueror are Lawful Kings . But where the Conquerors . Title is not Legitimated by one of these two ways , the Conqueror is but a mere Usurper , and it is not only Lawful , but a necessary duty in the people to resist him , and to use their utmost endeavours for the Deposition of that Usurper , and the restitution of their Lawful Sovereign to his just Rights , as Jehojada , and the people restored Jehoash , by the Deposition and Murder of Athaliah , after she had Reigned peaceably for six years , 2 King. 11. and as the people restored Vzziah by the Deposition of those Conspirators , who slew his father Amaziah , after they had Reigned peaceably eleven years , 2 Chron. 26.  

Quest . If it be not Lawful for a people to Elect their own King , nor any means assigned by God for Collation of this honour , but either Birthright or Conquest ; what is to be done when the Royal Family is Extinct , and no Conqueror doth claim ; and where a mixed multitude ( amongst whom there is no Relation of Blood to Pre-eminence one above the rest ) do consent to make a Plantation , and to Erect a new Commonwealth ? 

Ans . Samuel hath set us a Precedent in this case , 1 Sam. 10. 20 , 21.  For though the Lord had revealed his will to Samuel concerning his own Election and appointment of Saul to be King , 1 Sam. 9 15. yet because Samuel foreknew that King should be a Tyrant , to plague the people for their Idolatrous Trust in a King , he concealed that Revelation , and would not nominate their King , lest the people should afterwards ( when they suffered by Saul's oppression ) blame Samuel for appointing him : but used the means of Lots , to declare the will and pleasure of God in Electing of a King unto the people . And the like was used by the Eleven Apostles , when they had no warrant from God to Appoint or Elect another Apostle , nor durst presume to confer that High calling upon any man without a warrant from God , as you may read , Acts 1. 23.  So that in both those cases mentioned in this question , we are to use the means of Lots ; for that means is likewise warranted by God , where his will is not otherwise known and declared , prov. 16. 33. but the people's Election is absolutely unlawful ( as the premises , ( I hope ) have sufficiently manifested ) either in those or any other cases . And this of the Efficient Causes of Monarchy . 

The End or Final Causes thereof , are , either Principal , and that is God's Glory and the King's Honour ; or lesle Principal , and that is , the Subjects welfare . The principal End of Monarchy is , either , ( as the Schoolmen term it ) Originans , which is God's Glory ; or Originatus , that is , the King's Honour . Now concerning the Original Principal End which is God's Glory , it is to be understood that we do not speak of it here in its extent and latitude , as it is the universal end of all things , but only as it is limited to Monarchical Actions and Duties ; in which sense , God's Honour and the Kings , are not really , but modally only different , both of them consisting in the very same Duties , and are of the same Nature in reference to Monarchy . For all excellency , worth and goodness is radically and essentially in God , from whom is communicated Personae honoratae that worth and goodness for which he is honoured and esteemed . And therefore this Politic honour which Preeminences the Monarch above all others in the same Society , is that excellency which God communicates to him , enabling him for the execution of the Duties of his Calling , in the Rule and Government of his people and subjects ; and with a Power to constitute and Enact Laws and Statutes for the Public good , and benefit of the Commonwealth ; and with power to execute the same Laws , either by remunerating the integrity of pious and just men , according to the merits of their service and obedience ; or by correcting and punishing the Delinquences of Disobedient and evil men : For a Seditious person seeketh only evil , and a cruel messehger shall be sent against him , prov. 17. 11.  

Obj. But it may be objected , that seeing the King's Honour is subsequent to God's Glory ( it being the chief principal End of Monarchy ) that then when the King's Commands are contrary to Gods , we may resist . 

Sol. We may resist his Commands , but not his Power , for in those Cases we must obey God by an Active , the King only by a Passive Obedience : For which we have the precedent of the Apostles themselves , Acts 4. 5. who did refuse to obey the Commands of the Rulers , prohibiting them to preach in the Name of Jesus , but yet submitted to their power , in yeiding themselves to be imprisoned and beaten , according to the commands of the Rulers . So that they obeyed both God and the Magistrate ; the first by doing , the latter by suffering . For Rom. 13. we must needs be subject , not only for wrath , but also for Conscience sake , by Christ's example , who needed not to have submitted to Pilate , or the Jews for wrath ( for he was able to overthrew them all with a blast of the breath of his mouth ) but yet to honour the Substitute and Deputy of his Father , he submitted to their power , Acts 4. 28. which is the Ground of Nazianzens advice , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; We must submit to good Kings , as to the Lord himself ; to bad Kings , for the Lords sake . And Solomon , Eccles . 10. 20 ; makes this more evident , where he extends the Honour and reverence due to Kings , unto the very thoughts and imaginations of the heart ( notwithstanding they were both Fools , Tyrants , and Idolaters ) for when Solomon prohibited the cursing of the King , yea even in the thought , he was not ignorant that Saul had been a Tyrant , himself an Idolater , and that his Son Rehoboam , who should succeed him , was a fool . 

Object . You will say , what ? must men then think and believe manifest lies ? must we neither say nor think that those Kings are evil and wicked , which manifest themselves to be such in all their actions , such as the Scriptures record for most infamous and notorious finners ? 

Sol. Kings in reference to their duty towards God , may be more wicked than other men , because they may offend in a double capacity . 

First , In their Natural , by transgressing Gods Commandments , which do oblige them equally ▪ as they do other men . 

Secondly , In their Politic , as God's Deputies by breach of that Trust , which God hath reposed in them , for Ruling and Governing of his people according to Justice and Equity . But in reference to their duty towards us , they cannot do wicked things , ( as before showed : ) so that the words of Solomon are to be understood only of Kings , in reference to the exercise of their Power upon us ; which whether it be for good or hurt , is still from God : And therefore we may not think them evil and unjust to us ; for the Judgement is not theirs but Gods , prov. 26. 29. who cannot be unjust . 

Now as God did deligate unto Kings a Power over our persons in his Ordinance , for their Primary power and Authority ; so did he likewise give them a Power over our Estates , for the Magnificent Maintenance and support of that Honour , which is their Secondary honour of Maintenance and Revenue : Which was the ground of Christ's command , Matth. 22. 21. to render a Tribute of our Goods to Caesar , intimating that this temporal honour of Tribute , was ( by virtue of God's Deligation ) as due unto Caesar , as the spiritual honour of Praise and Worship was unto God. And upon the same ground St. Paul commands to render Custom and Tribute to Kings , not as a gift and favour , but as a due and just debt , Rom. 13. 7 ; and gives this reason for it , because they are Gods Ministers , appointed to supply his place in Ruling and Judging us . And seeing God hath transferred the greater power to Kings , ( viz. ) over our lives , by putting the sword into his hands ; the Apostle thence concludes their Investiture with the lesle , ( viz. ) a Power over our Estates , and the like Power we see exercised by Pharaoh in that Ordinance for storeing up a fifth part of all the Corn in Egypt for seven years together ; which Law was Enacted by Pharaoh upon the single Counsel of Joseph , with the Approbation only of Pharao's servants , or Council , and not by the general consent of the people , Gen. 41. 34. neither can we pretend this Law to be Tyrannical , for it proceeded from the wisdom of God , who in this business directed the mind of Joseph , Gen. 45. 57 nor can any man imagine , but the State and magnificence of Saul , David , Jeroboam , and others , who of private persons and others , were advanced by God himself to Regal Honour and Dignity , was supported by this means of Custom and Tribute , nor do I find any particular Law or Statute for the particular endowment of those Kings , but only that general Right and Prerogative , which they derive from God , Investing them with a Power over both our persons and Estates . 

And now ( I hope ) our obedience ( either Active or Passive ) being a necessitated Duty and incumbency upon us ( as the premises do sufficiently declare ) to be performed ( both from our persons and Estates ) to our Lawful King and Monarch , doth absolutely manifest the people's welfare to be the lesle principal end of Monarchy ; which ( though it be really distinct from the King's honour , yet ) is indeed a mere result and product of the same . For Salus populi can never be effected or energated by any other means , but those which in the first place do effectuate and energate the King's honour , whether we look upon the Monarchical Actions of King or Subjects , both which are versant about the same object and matter , only in a diverse manner . For the King is Interested only in the Active part of Government , by Enacting , and duly Executing of Laws for God's Glory , his own honour , and the people's welfare ; the people in the Passive part of Government , by their obedience and submission to such Laws and Commands of the King , the violation whereof is a direct means of Dishonour to God and the King , and of Ruin and of Destruction to the people . 

FINIS . 





 Quicquid est quod dat patri filius , utique minus est , quia hanc ipsam dandi facultatem patri debet . Seneca , lib. 3.   1 Tim. 5. 4.  ( a ) The Stork .  St. Leonards College in St. Andrews in Scotland , and Gray Inn in London . 

lib. the Moderatione in disp . Servand . Ad rusticum Monachum .  Jerom. cap. 1. ad Titum Ep. ad Evagrium . 