A SATYR AGAINST Atheistical Deism With the Genuine Character of a DEIST To which is Prefixed , An account of Mr. Aikinhead's NOTIONS , Who is now in Prison for the same Damnable APOSTASY . 

By MUNGO CRAIG S. Ph. & Sac. Th.  

Do you Admire , why with Satiric Rhyme , 
I Scourge the whifling Scoundrels of the Time ? 
To be resolved , turn over the Page , and you 
The Justice of my Quarrel will avow , 
And must Adopt the same ; if you be not 
A silly Fop , or Epicurean Sot.  
Semper ego auditor tantum ? nunquamque reponam 
Vexatus toties — 
Si Natura negat , facit indignatio versum 
Qualemcunque potest . Quales ego — 
Juven . Sat. 1.  



EDINBURGH , Printed for Robert Hutchison , and Sold at his Shop in the Head of the Colledge-wind . M. DC . XCVI . 

A Catalogue of the Works promised to the World , by T. Aik . Gent. the merest Don Quixot in Nature , but one of the principal Patrons and Promoters of the Witty , I would have said , Witless Sect.  

I Death Dead and Buried without hope of Resurrection ; or , A discovery of the as incomparable , as impossible , Aurum Potabile Aikinheadaeum , i e. Chimaericum : Being a Sovereign Antidote , against all external and internal Causes of Death : And when applied by Art , can raise the Dead , and perfect the imperfect works of Nature : Yea , it can cure a Man , although he were cloven in twain , or , to give you the Authors own Phrase , Thou he were speldered like a dry Haddock . 

II Machina Dedalaea magna atque nova ; or , A new Engine of the same use in Air that Ships are in Water ; whereby we may have easy Commerce with the other Vortices , and especially with the World in the Moon . 

III The indies in a Crucible ; or , An expeditious , infallible and cheap way of making the Philosopher-stone , in four Hours time , and for 4 should . expenses , being an excellent Proposal for maintaing the present War , without troubling the Leidges either for Pol-penny or Hearth-money . 

iv. Lux e tenebris ; or , A clear Refutation of all the Self-evident Principles of Reason , with the establishment of those of Nonsense , exactly Calculated to the Capacity of Blockheads , whereby they may be able to toss any Thing ( extempore ) promise & con , without the help of the Lullian Art  

v. The Power and Extent of Imagination demonstrated ; or , The way of working All Things by Exalted Fancy ; especially of bringing the Author to the Gallows , if not to the infernal Lake . 

By what is here said , concerning Mr. Aikinhead's ridiculous Works , the Reader may easily judge how Frothy and Crackbrained a Fellow he is . But should we trouble you with a Recital of his damnable Extravagancies in Divinity , it would prove no lesle ungrateful Task to our Pen , than nauseous to any Pagan , let be Christian Ear , being a complete Aggregat of all the Blasphemies that ever were vented , maintained , or excogitated , by the Atheistical Ministers of Satan in all Ages , with an Overplus of his own Coining : So , that without Envy , he may be denominated the Non plus ultro of Atheism . 

lest any think that this is only a Calumny cast either upon the Party or Person forenamed ; the Book-binder promises , in name of the Author , to produce a considerable Number of Witnesses , who can give their Oath that they heard him boast of the abovementioned ridiculous Notions . 

A SATYR against DEISM . 

Great GOD ! what dire Enimity , do I 
' Amongst my divided Faculties espy . 
How , in the Palace of my Soul , each Power 
Another fiercely threatens to devour . 
Which Horror and Confusion , in the end , 
Do civil War and bloody Jars protend ; 
Unless All-ruling Providence direct 
Another Event , than we do expect , 
Or Man from second Causes could detect . 
For while with resolute and factious Bands , 
My partial Judgement , selfishly gain-stands 
The venting of my Rage , against the Proud 
Ungodly Scumms , and Self-conceited Crowd ; 
( Not , that it doth not judge them worth the Strips 
Of Juvenal and Horace , or the whips 
Of bitter Perseus ; but , that still it pleads 
Self-impotence for such Heroic Deeds : ) 
My lofty Will , inflamed with zealous Fire , 
TO achieve more Noble Projects hath desire ; 
Despising private Infamy , the stain 
Of Clown or Poetaster doth disdain . 
When great Jehovah's thought-surpassing Love 
Toward His undeserving Creatures , move 
The Wheels of my Affections , swelled to see 
This scoffed at , with an impious We-hee , 
Of Hell's abortive Brood ; Or when the Right 
And Dignity of Human Souls : the Light 
And Product of sound Reason do compete , 
With the small Credit of my humble state . 
OH Joys ! I see the Cub-web Sophistry , 
That did misguide my Judging Faculty , 
Dispelled , and her resolving to fulfil 
The Dictates of the better-guided William  
then let the Spring tide of my Passions rise , 
TO its greatest height ; and O! that I had thrice 
As great a Force , as ever in Mortal yet , 
Our Natural Constitution did permit . 
For why should I suspect the Breach of Bounds ? 
When , though they were composed of Rage of Hounds , 
Wolves , Bears , with Viper's Tongues & Adder-stings , 
The Quintessence of Choler , and all things 
That savour both of Madness and of Rage , 
When on improper Objects they assuage 
Their extreme Fury , then though never so large , 
Would be impotent found for such a Charge , 
As I 'm obliged now to engage them in ; 
To whip the maddest-heaven-daring Sin , 
That e'er was hatched in Hell , or acted upon 
This Universal Theatre ; since the Throne 
Of Soul-destroying Sin began to show , 
it 's Sacrilegious Tragedy below . 
A Sin ! which , though Natures engrafted Light , 
And all Gods holy Councils , with Despite , 
It totally rejects ; and doth deny 
An other Notion of a Deity , 
Than what of mere Repugnancies is coined , 
A Sorry maimed Bugbear , where disjoined 
Are all th' essential Attributes divine , 
That in an independent God combine . 
Yet marching from th' infernal Lake in State , 
And Equipage of Hell , Malice and Hate , 
Undaunted Impudence and strong Delusion . 
Satanick Rage , and Machines' of Confusion : 
To act the Devil's utmost Spite , and try 
How this last powerful Scene of his Envy , 
Can the Foundations of Christ's Kingdom shake , 
And spread the Jurisdiction of his Lake . 
Hath so possessed some Epicurean Beasts , 
Stuned with the Fumes of wine , luxurious feasts 
And hellish Magic , void of saving Grace , 
Pedantic Bruits , who neither time nor space 
On Truth's investigation can bestow , 
Vain glorious Nothings with an empty show : 
●hat briskly reeling , where the roving Light 
●f misled Fancy , terminates their sight : 
●elight themselves to catch at empty Wind , 
●nd Creatures of an ill-distracted Mind ; 
●ill utterly they , lacking Sense and Terror , 
●e lost , in Satan's Labyrinth of Error . 
And yet a Drunkard , or distempered Man , 
Who , rising from his Couch of Rest , doth scan , 
●y Night , a Precipice , led by the vain 
imagination's of his troubled Brain : 
●nows as much of the Danger he is in , 
●s they do of their ex●ecrable Sin.  
Yet these our Heroes be , profoundly wise , 
Who Things Divine and Human so despise , 
●lown up with airy Possibilities , 
And Sceptick-doubting of all Destinies , 
Huffing at Reason , like the Cuckoo cry , 
Begun ! God , Christ , Scripture and Piety , 
Let 's Eat and Drink , to Morrow must we die . 
Such be the scurvy Wittling who deplore , 
That we a Wise and Loving GOD Adore , 
●n Whom we Move , in Whom we Live & Be , 
Who , from Sins dreadful Slavery , set us free , 
Such only , do reject all called Divine , 
And swear , no Spirits exists , but those of Wine . 
Dubbed Knights of Nonsense , yet in their conceits 
Wits of the Age , who can Gigantic Feats 
Perform at Reasoning ; whereas they know 
As little as an Ass , what 's truly so . 
Those be the course-grained Philosophs , who stuff 
Their Heads with Contradictions & pure Buff , 
Chimaeras coined in Hell and horrid Fopp'ry , 
Surpassing Transubstantiating Pop'ry . 
Such are as wild in sound Philosophy ; 
And Law , as in profound Theology . 
Such are the blazing Comets that attract 
th' Amazement of the Novel-catching Pack . 
Whose sluttish Minds , drowned in the Lethargy 
Of Ignorance , black Singularity 
So eagerly affect , that rather they 
Will damn their Souls , than walk the Vulgar way 
And since they can't , to eternize their Name , 
Erect a lasting Monument of Fame , 
they 'll choose by far the shorter course to take , 
And headily themselves resolve to make 
Famous for Infamy , by running down 
What they don't understand , just as a Clown 
would mock , to hear us prove , that Phoebus' bright 
Descended to our Antipodes all Night ; 
And did surmount in Magnitude so far , 
This vast and spacious Glob whereon we are . 
Who would believe , with Mahomet , that he , 
All Night , were rather drowned in the Sea. 
Or , with Old Epicure , would sing a Sonnet , 
That he were little bigger than his Bonnet . 
A Course ! of such successful operation . 
That all the Blockhead Swineherds of the Nation , 
Might , in a point of Time , brisk Wits commence 
And singl , arise themselves for men of Sense . 
Yet such are they , who Scoffingly deride 
Those sacred Mysteries , which we ought to dread 
Such Giants , with Loud-laughters empty Phrase 
Our Rational and Holy Faith debase : 
And yet when they opugned , can naught proffer , 
But what one lesle than a Philosopher 
Without the straining of his Wit could solve , 
And to its Native-nothing make 't dissolve . 
Since that , upon its Front th' infamous Brand 
Of Falsity self-evident doth stand 
And since the Fundamentals of their Light 
Dissents from Reason , as the day from night . 
And more , when they defend the monstrous Bees 
Of their half-codled Brains and hellish Lies , 
The very Light of Nature they 'll deny ; 
And with a brazen Countenance will cry , 
I know 't 't is Nonsense if it but dessent 
From this my demonstrable Sentiment . 
As if their Crazy Noddles only were 
th' Unerring Rule , of all we should aver . 
But sirs , would it not be a pretty sport , 
To see Baboons , Aps and th' inferior sort 
Of Animals , with Mock'ry to despise 
Scholastic Demonstrations of the wise ; 
And Scoff at deep-drawn policy of Sat , 
Because 't is far above their humble fate , 
To judge of Matters of so high a rate . 
What shall we say then , of those cursed curs 
who still resolve , with diabolick Slurrs . 
God's mighty power and wisdom to reject 
And providential Ruling to neglect ; 
Because their purblind Souls the Mystery . 
Can't Sound of Divine Christianity . 
Hence of us Men if different Species were , 
On Corrolary sure I could infer : 
That like us only in our outward shape . 
To be Created was their harder hap , 
Devoid of that reflexive power so bright , 
Which from the Soul dispells the cloudy Night 
Of Ignorance , and high conceited Wit , 
Which is a sure Concomitant of it . 
And shows us , from each object that we see , 
That so profess Socratic Modesty , 
Is to be wise ; while of our flut'ring Souls 
The high flown-aims , gross muddy Earth controls . 
But , could Job's Patience suffer one to hear , 
( Without atrembling , Terror , Wrath & Fear , ) 
Those Sycophants , sprung from th' accursed line 
Of Judas , with the Devil now combine , 
Under the Name of Deist ; to essay 
If they God , Good , and Reason can betray . 
A Deist ! o ! how far 's this from the thing , 
That their Assertions in my Fancy bring , 
A greater distance is not surely found 
By Thought , in that Vacuity profound ; 
Wherein their Atoms merrily did Dance , 
When they were Modified thus by Chance . 
For Men to acknowledge that there is a GOD , 
And not a Providence ! OH thing most odd ! 
And if a Providence , than not to be 
A Christian , is an odder thing to me . 
Methinks a Stoic Moralist , who knew 
The Reasons why I whip so mad a Crew ; 
Might be convinced , how hard it is to fight , 
' 'Gainst what inheres in us , by Nature's Right : 
And learn from hence , that none of innat dower , 
Lacks its own proper Use , had we the power 
To Use 't aright , unless that we ( like Stocks 
Or Stones ) were Metamorphosized to Rocks . 
When all th' Intelligences that do dwell , 
IN th' upper Regions , or yet out of Hell , 
Except a Deist , in their proper way , 
Banners of sullen Frowning still display , 
To see the Race of Mankind so decay . 
Ungrateful Monsters , Slaves of Hell and Sin ! 
O! that each Curse and Plague pronounced within 
That Sacred Volumn , which with Scoffing ye 
Reject , may on you verified be . 
On you more Wo's , ten Thousand times , denounced 
From Heaven let be , than Ovid hath pronounced 
Against his Ibis , and OH that the God , 
who 's ' established Councils ye Revile , the Rod 
Of His intolerable Wrath may put 
In execution , and in pieces cut , 
Your good-contemning Carcases , before 
In Tophet ye be scorched for evermore . 
Let every thing in Heaven Earth and Hell 
Concur , this Pestilence of Sin to quell ; 
And make th' infected , Monuments of Wrath , 
For Confirmation of our Christian Faith : 
Except , whom God's unsearchable Decree , 
Culls out for Objects of His Clemency . 
But o ! though we by Charity are bound , 
This venerable Abyss not to sound , 
Wherein the prying Seraphims are drowned . 
Yet in the Sacred Pages naught I find , 
But Ruin for a Christ-denying Mind . 
OH Times ! OH Manners ! may I justly cry , 
Will Scotland nourish such Apostasy ? 
A Covenanted People ! and even while 
Such Glorious Sunshine over-spreads the Isle ! 
Shall this than be th' effect of Gospel Light ? 
To petrisy our Hearts and dim our Sight 
In Things of God ? if it be so , no lesle 
Than Famine , Sword , and Pestilent Distress 
I Prophecy : Neither by taking part 
With Delphos , Magic , or Stargazing Art : 
But from a reasonable Scrutiny 
Into th' eternal Rolls of Verity . 
Which do more Plagues ' 'gainst such a Case protest 
Than ever Egypt's Borders did infested ; 
Or yet on Sodom and Gomorrah fell , 
With all the Punishments reserved for Hell.  
Come ! let a Rational and Holy Flame , 
Of Zeal to Christ and God's most glorious Name , 
Our Nation's Honour , and our Christian Right , 
Inspire God's Deputes with Celestial Light , 
Who sit at Justice : That they may atone 
with Blood , th'affronts of heavens offended throne : 
And turn away that Deluge of God's Ire , 
Which threatens us worse than devouring Fire . 
Oyes ! all Sons of Adam eat the way , 
And Commerce of the Witlings o' the Day ; 
As if he Furies of the Dungeon deep , 
The noisome Entry , thereunto did keep : 
Would I intrust that Monster with a Straw , 
To whom Self-intrest is so much a Law , 
That all to this subordinate must be . 
Drowned so in stupid Sensuality , 
That only this he studies as his End , 
From worldly Cares his Carcase to defend : 
All ye on whom right Reason to its Throne 
Advanced by Divine Oracles hath shown , 
By Grace illuminated to that pitch , 
That perverse Prejudice cannot bewitch . 
Lo ! here 's a Trial of your zealous Love , 
And Touchstone to your Faith sent from Above . 
Endure with Courage then , your Royal Yoke : 
For ye are surely builded on a Rock . 
In fine ; Remember ye , who ' 'gainst the High , 
And Holy One , Who blessed Eternity 
Inhabits , vomit out proud Blasphemy 
Those , whom He hath examplified before , 
And that ever long , ye'll Tremble and Adore , 
Among your Brother Wits : who never could be 
Persuaded that there was a Deity , 
Who punished Sin : Till wholly stuned with Evil 
They got as much Religion as the Devil . 
FINIS . 

THE GENUINE CHARACTER OF A DEIST . 

A Deist Reduplicatively Considered , falling neither under the Laws of Description , nor legitimat Definition , may be called a mere . I wot not what . Nor can we have a notion of him any other way , than the Vulgar has of Nothing , when they define it , A Bodiless Shirt wanting the Sleeves , viz. By Amputation of all Realities , Yet I 'm of Opinion , that he is more apositly termed , An accidental aggregat of Contradictions actually existent , which is the greatest Paradox , that ever was offered to a Philosopher . Or an Eas rationis objectively taken , not only having an Ideal , but a real existence : Which is a Degree beyond any Sophister , that ever pretended to that Chimaera . And hence we have light in the very Fundamentals of his Nonsense ; first why he is so virulent in propugning his beloved Fortuitous concourse : And why impossibile est idem simul esse et non esse , eodem respectu : with other Principles of the like Quality , has so little weight with him : Seeing he can produce himself , as an undeniable conviction of their Falsities . He may be fitly called an incomparable Hero of Wit , and is truly as impregnable by Reason , as the Bass by blank Powder ; having not left so much as Archimedes his Punctum for you to build upon . And that day , in which you prove any thing against him , at least convince him that you have done so ; I 'll prove the Moon to be made of Green Cheese ; especially so long as he keeps his Achillean distinction ; Secundum vestrum , cognoscendi modum Co. Secundum meam nego . He pretends to be a great Friend to Reason , which nevertheless he 's as much acquainted with , as an Ass with Mathematics ; and truly ere you and he agree , you must divest yourself of that Armour ; for he 's a Sceptic of the first Magnitude , and the chiefest of that size too ; for discourse him upon never so cleat and evident Truths , you must of necessity run in Infinitum to prove 'em ; since he acknowledges no Principles , further than they serve his turn . And I dare swear he 'd put a crack-brained Philosopher out of his Wits , either to prove or defend , that it were himself . he 's General Generalissimo of Sophisters ; for so long as he keeps within the Burrows of his Warren , which are contrived more Artificially for his purpose , than Daedalus his Labyrinth , you 'll never catch him : And if you follow him in , I 'll promise you a Foil before you come out again , seeing he has deprived you of the Cord of Reason to lead your way back . For he applies the objects of Sense to be judged by the Intellect , & vice versa ; and that so dextrously , that in all the Justice of he World he might be dubbed Knight-errant of Juggling or Leiger-demain ; and for this end , he has prepared an Helmet of Adamant ; and a complete Coat of Armour consisting of loud Laughter , huffing and nauseating disdain for a Shield with this motto , Nego totum etiam antequam audiverim : His Lance is made of Reviling , Calumniating , Cursing and Lying : his Sword is much of affinity to the same Metal , being framed of Sophistical quibbles , having as little connexion among themselves , as dependence upon the self-evident principles of Reason . And how can any conceive it to be otherwise when it was forged by the Father of Lies , upon the Anvil of Falsity And whereas a Christian has no back-peice to be a Defence in his flight , he hath this to brag of above him , that he has one , which is a Sluggish Carelessness whatever come of his Opinion , providing that his Body be well . you 'd think that he were a Monkish Hermit at his Devotion , if you saw how seriously he looks , when he deplores the World's Stupidity in paying a Reasonable Service to God their Creator , Preserver and Redeemer . He bears the same Love to Churchmen , that Cats does to Mustard : for he Wrayes his Face bitterly when he sees or hears 'em ; & it 's no wonder , if we consider that there 's as much Enmity betwixt them , as between a Basalisks and a Man he 's so great a lover of Monarchy , that to have a pretence to the Title , he 's content to attribute the same to all Mankind ; and to have it Absolute , he calls all civil power such , whether it be Aristocracy , Democracy , or Monarchy . And to attain his End ( as he thinks ) the more honourably , he rejects the Notions of Good and Evil , but in so far as they contribute to , or opugn his Designs : As likewise those of Justice , and Injustice . Before mutual Paction , which he resolves never to make sure , as long as he can keep his darling of Mental Reservation , and that he may turn his Coat with the times under the pretence of Reason , he has learned this among the rest from his Apostle Hobb's , to keep stive with the Strongest . and will cite that of the Poet , Tempora mutantur & nos mutamur in illis , ● for a sufficient Authority . He is so biggor on Singularity and Fame that to acquire both , he feeds on Nonsense , as Toads does on Filth & Venom And because he cannot be singular for Rationality , which is the common Attribute of human Nature ; he degrades himself to a Beast , and turns Irrational . He disdains I Confess to swear in any one Philosopher's words , but under the Notion of philosophic Liberty , and free use of Reason , has stored the Magazine of his Brain , with all the ridiculous Fopprie , that either fell by Inadvertancy , Contention , Malice or Ignorance , from the pens of Ancient and Modern Philosophers . wherefore , he 's highly enamoured , with Aristotel's Eternity of the world , paucis mutatis , with Epicure's Denial of Providence , and fortuitous production of the Universe , with his denial of the Souls Immortality ; and especially with his Assertion that temporal Pleasure is the Summum bonum , or lastend of Mankind , and inveighs against Gassendus , for spending so much pains in vindicating the Old Dotard from this Brand of Infamy , which he accounts his chiefest Glory . Nor is he lesle taken with Des Cates his Dubitation , adoring it as a chief Pillar of his Scepticism and his Vortices , with the assertion , that Mater and motion being granted , all could fall out as they are , without the concurrence of an inteligent Overruling Power . This differing nothing from Epicure , but that the Particles lack a Vocuum to honorable and dance in . He likewise animadurerts an admirable Congruence , betwixt this Author's Clockworks animals , and Epicurus his denial of the Souls Immortality ; For ( says he ) Men and Beasts vary only in the more and the lesle . He no lesle savours this Authors rejecting of the Consideration of Final Causes in Physics , interpreting it to be an implicit denial of Providence . But lest I weary you with his Nonsenfe , it shall suffice to indicat what for a Philosopher he is , to declare what cursed author 's are his dearest darlings ; which are , first the excellent Head-pice of Malmsbury the incomparable ( for Nonsense to Wit , ) Theologue and Philosoph Spinoza , with Lucretius Redivivus , I mean Blunt's Oracles of Nonsense . he 's so great an Affector of Novelties ( & that so much the more in how much they contradict Sense & Reason ) that he looks upon the author 's of them , as second Solomons , or third Cato's fallen from Heaven And although , he reject all Histories that are above Forty Years old , for mere Romances , yet , he is as didactical , in in the Embrios of his Fancy , which he thinks may serve his turn any way , as if you had seen it with your Eyes ; though he feign it to have been done Forty Thousand Years since . And hence it is , that he will rather believe , that there are Rosy-crusian Chemists wandering about the World in aereal Vehicles , than that there ever was such a Man as Moses or julius Caesar ; for which cause he has a very ill gust of Mr. lock 's Moral way of Demonstration , however well he may please other parts of his works But to extricat ourselves from this stinking Tale , he 's a transcendental Evil ( which is another Paradox , or rather , Rhetorical Hyperbole , though not so far strained as Sublimi feriam sidera vertice ) or if you will , he is a Constellation fixed in direct opposition to all Good , composed of Malice , Hatred and Self-conceit , which two first , are as inseparable from the last , as Heat from Fire ; and is truly the greatest plague that can be inflicted on a human Society , though he accounts himself the primum mobile of it . He surpasses the most malevolent of all the Devils , in every thing except knowledge ; and happy is't for the World that 't is so ordered , for had he knowledge preportionate to his Diabolical Qualities , he would degrade Lucifer , and lead the Van of Hell himself ; for fear of whose Tyranny the Furies themselves would tremble . If you speak seriously to him he 'll swear you 're an Enthusiast , and 't is as great folly to discourse him that way , as to read Moral Dissertations to an Ass . he 's a mere Ape mounted on the pegasian Wings of a rampant Imagination , delighting himself to rove in an imaginary Vacuity , where he eager pursues the Quary which his ill-codled Brains exhibites to him ; ignorant that he shall incontinently tumble into the infinite Abyss of a bottomless Pit. Or , he 's a Galleass of the first Rate , of the kingdom of Darkness , tossed by the wind of Pride in an Ocean of Folly , were the Devil personally drives at the Helm . Finally , he 's the Excrements of the Creation , the ultimat Butt of God's Wrath , the Subject of Satan's laughter , and Object of Man's Derision ; Where we leave him . 

Having put a Period to our Conception of a Deist , we shall in the last place present the Reader with that Unerring Character which the Spirit of God describes them by , in the Oracles of Truth . Which may serve , if not for the Conviction of their seared Consciences , yet both for the establishing of wavering or weak Christians , and for corroborating or encouraging the stronger . And may be unto us as a Mirror , in which we may evidently contemplate the Immensity of God's Love and Providence , in giving us a Watchword against so strong Delusion ; which ( as our Saviour Himself affirms ) would deceive the Elect , if it were possible . 

Of these accursed Apostats who separate themselves from us by the Name of Deists , Saint Paul speaks in 2 Tim. 3. 2. thus , For Men shall be Lovers of their own selves , Covetous , Boasters , Proud , Blasphemers , Disobedient to Parents , Unthankful , Unholy , Verse . 3.  Without natural Affection , Truce-breakers , false Accusers , Incontinent , Fierce , Despifers of those that are Good , Verse . 4.  Traitors , Heady , Highminded , Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God. Verse . 8.  Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses , so do these also resist the Truth : Men of corrupt Minds , reprobat concerning the Faith. Verse . 9  But they shall proceed no further : for their Folly shall be manifest to all Men , as theirs also was . And Judas excellently describes them in this manner , Verse . 4. — Who were of old before ordained to this Condemnation , ungodly Men , turning the Grace of God into Lasciviousness , and denying the only Lord God , and our Lord Jesus Christ . Verse 8.  Likewise also these filthy Dreamers defile the Flesh , despise Dominion , speak Evil of Dignities . Verse . 10.  But these speak Evil of those things which they know not : but what they know naturally as bruit Beasts , in these things they corrup themselves . Verse . 11.  Woe be unto them , for they have gone the way of Cain , etc. Verse . 12.  Those are spots in your Feasts of Charity , when they feast with you , feeding themselves without fear : Clouds they are without water , carried aboat with winds ; Trees whose Fruits withereth , without Fruit twice dead , plucked up by the roots ; raging Waves of the Sea foaming out their own shame , wandering Stars , to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever . 16.  These are Murmurers , Complainers , walking after their own Lusts , and their Mouths speaking great swelling words , etc. Verse . 19  These be they that separate themselves , sensual , having not the Spirit . To the same purpose speaks Peter in the whole 2 Chapter of his Epistle , with many other places of sacred Write . We shall conclude with that in 2 Pet. 3. 17 , 18.  ye therefore , Beloved , seeing ye know these things before , beware lest ye also being led away with the Error of the Wicked , fall from your own steadfastness . But grow in Grace , and in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ ; to Him be Glory both now and ever . Amen . 

FINIS . 

