COLLECTION Of many wonderful PROPHECIES Relating to the Government of England , etc.  Since the First Year of the REIGN of King JAMES I To this present Time.  

All which have been truly Fulfilled and Accomplished . 

ALSO Of many PROPHECIES , yet foretelling what Government is to Succeed to make this Kingdom happy : With the certain Time of the Downfall of ANTICHRIST throughout the World.  

Written and Published in the Years , 1623. , 1628. , 1641 , 1647 , and 1660.  

With many Special Remarks on the same , and on the Several Changes of Government . 

By P. C. M. D. a Lover of Religion and his Country . 

Dedicated to the LORD'S and COMMONS' now Assembled . 

LONDON , Printed for Thomas Salusbury at the Sign of the Temple , near Temple-bar . 1689.  

Advertisement . 

Several Discourses and Characters , Addressed to the Ladies of the Age. Wherein the Vanities of the Modish Women are discovered . Written at the Request of a Lady , by a Person of Honour . Printed for Thomas Salusbury , at the Sign of the Temple , next to the Inner Temple-gate in Fleetstreet , 1689.  

To the Right Honourable the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal , and the House of Commons Assembled in this present Convention . 

THE following Poem containing several remarkable Prophecies of what has happened for several Ages past , with Directions and Assurances of what must succeed to make this Kingdom happy ; which Business being at present under Your joint Consideration , I thought it expedient to dedicate these Lines to Your Honours ; which , if perused , I doubt not may be both acceptable and useful , and is the only Reason that it is published , hoping the Success may be according to the earnest Desire of a Lover of Religion and his Country . 

P. C.  

To the Reader . 

THE ensuing Prophecies being of great use in this present Conjuncture , I thought it not amiss to expose them for the public Benefit , which all true English Men desire should be settled under a happy Government , without Personal Interest , and will certainly be effected according to the Purport of this Poem ; the Author having had the said Revelations from God so many several Years before they were acted , which are past , as also those that succeed , as may appear by the several Dates when they were exposed by the said Author , and I hope will be now acceptable to all that love their Religion and Country , and are Enemies of Antichrist and his Adherents . 

Farewell . 

AN EXACT COLLECTION Of many wonderful PROPHECIES Relating to the Government of England , etc.  

This was Printed in the Year 1623.  

AND since Men wand'ring in a Wood by Night , 
When they shall through a Glade behold some light , 
Take thereby Courage to walk cheerly on , 
In hope their Fears and Toils are nearly gone . 
I 'll from a Cloud flash out a little Gleam 
Of Lightning , and disclose a little Beam ; 
Whereby on you a Glimmering shall be cast 
Of what you may attain to at the last . 
For I will show you by what Pedigree 
That Government to you derived shall be , 
Which will at last the British Islands bless 
With Inward Peace and Outward Happiness : 
It was of late a brief Presage of his 
Who oft hath Truth foretold , and it is this . 
When here a Scot shall think his Throne to set 
Above the Circle of a British King , 
He shall a Dateless Parliament beget , 
From whence a Dreadful Armed Brood shall spring . 
This Offspring shall beget a wild Confusion ; 
Confusion shall an Anarchy beget : 
That Anarchy shall bring forth in Conclusion 
A Creature that you have no Name for yet . 
This Creature shall conceive a sickly State , 
Which will an Aristocracy produce : 
The many Headed Beast , not liking that , 
To raise Democracy shall rather choose . 
And then Democracy's Production shall 
A Mooncalf be , Which some a Mole do call ; 
A false Conception of imperfect Nature , 
And of a shapeless and a brutish Feature . 
For these Descents shall live and reign together , 
So acting for a while , that few shall know 
Which of them has the Sovereignty , or whether 
There be among them a Supreme or no. 
When they with Jars and Janglings have defaced 
Your Triple Building , and themselves nigh worn 
Into Contempt , they of one Cup shall taste , 
And into their first Elements return . 
Five of them shall subdue the other Five ; 
And then those Five shall , in a doubtful Strife 
Each others Death so happily contrive , 
That they shall die to live a better Life ; 
And out of their Corruption rise there shall 
A true Supreme , acknowledged by all : 
In whom the Power of all the Five shall be , 
With Unity , made visible in Three . 
Prince , People , Parliamen , with Priests and Peers , 
Shall be a while your emulous Grandees , 
Make a confused Pentarchy some Years , 
And leave off their distinct Claims by degrees . 
And then shall Righteousness ascend the Throne , 
then Truth and Love and Peace re-enter shall , 
then Faith and Reason shall agree in one , 
And all the Virtues to their Council call . 
And timely out of all these shall arise 
That Kingdom and that happy Government , 
Which is the Scope of all those Prophecies 
That future Truths obscurely represent . 
But how this done shall be , few Men shall see ; 
For wrought in Clouds and Darkness it will be : 
And ever it come to pass to public View , 
Most of these following Signs must first ensue . 
A King shall willingly himself unking , 
And thereby Grow far greater than before . 
The Priests their Priesthood to Contempt shall bring , 
And Piety thereby shall thrive the more . 
A Parliament itself shall overthrew , 
And thereby shall a better Being gain . 
The Peers , by setting of themselves below , 
A more Ennobling Honour shall obtain . 
The People for a time shall be enslaved ; 
But that shall make them for the future free . 
By Private Loss the Public shall be saved . 
An Army shall , by yielding , Victor be . 
The City's Wealth her Poverty shall cause . 
The Laws Corruption shall reform the Laws . 
And Bullocks of the largest Northern Breed 
Shall fatted be where now scarce Sheep can feed . 
You may perhaps deride what 's here recited , 
As heretofore you other Truths have slighted ; 
But some of my Presage you have beheld 
Already in obscurity fulfilled : 
The rest shall in its time appointed come , 
And sooner than will pleasing be to some . 
The last Nine Signs or Symptoms of the Ten , 
Which should precede them , shall appear to men 
Of all Conditions ; but our Author saith , 
The first is but in Hope , not yet in Faith , 
And may be , or not be ; for so or so 
That King shall have his Lot as he shall do . 
If all his Sins he heartily repent , 
God will remit even all his Punishment , 
And him unto his People's Hearts restore , 
With greater Honour than he had before . 
If he remain impenitent , like Saul 
God from the Throne shall cast both him and all 
His whole Descent , and leave him not a Man 
To fill it , though he had a Jonathan ▪ 
If Ahab-like his Mourning has respects 
To temporary Losses or Effects , 
Like Ahab then it therewithal shall carry 
Some Benefit , which is but temporary . 
A real Penitence , tho' somewhat late , 
The Rigour of his Doom may much abate , 
By leaving him a part of what he had . 
When he a Forfeiture of all hath made ; 
Or else by Rooting out those who in Sin 
With him have actually Partakers been ; 
And placing in their steads a Branch of his , 
Whose Innocency no way questioned is . 
This was Printed in the Year 1628.  

GOD hath a Controversy with our Land ; 
And in an evil Plight Affairs do stand : 
And though we always smart for doing ill , 
Yet us the hand of God afflicts still ; 
And many see it not , as many be 
So wilful , that his Hand they will not see . 
Some plainly view the same , but nothing care . 
Some at the sight thereof amazed are , 
Like Belteshazar , have a trembling Heart , 
But will not from their Wickedness depart . 
Some dream that all things do by Chance succeed , 
And that I prate more of them than I need . 
But Heaven and Earth to Witness I invoke , 
That nothing causelessly I here have spoken . 
If this , O! sickly Island , thou believe , 
And for thy great Infirmities shalt grieve , 
And knowing of thy Follies , make Confessions , 
And then bewail thine infinite Transgressions , 
And then amend those Errors , God shall then 
Thy manifold Distempers cure again , 
Make all thy Scarlet Sins as white as Snow , 
And cast thy threatened Judgement on thy Foe . 
But if thou , fond thinking thou art well , 
Shalt slight this Message which my Muse doth tell , 
And scorn her Counsel ; if thou shalt not rue 
Thy former ways , but frowardly pursue 
Thy wilful Course , then hark what I am bold 
( In spite of all thy madness ) to unfold : 
For I will tell thy Fortune , which when they 
That are unborn shall read another day , 
They shall believe God's Mercy did infuse 
Thy Poet's Breast with a Prophetic Muse ; 
And know that he This Author did prefer , 
To be , from him , this Isle's Remembrancer . 
— This Land shall breed a nasty Generation , 
Unworthy either of the Reputation 
Or Name of Men ; for they , as Lice , shall feed 
Even on the Body whence they did proceed . 
There shall moreover Swarms of diverse Flies 
Engendered be in thy Prosperities , 
To be a Plague , and still are humming so , 
As if they meant some weighty Work to do ; 
Whenas upon the common Stock they spend , 
And naught perform of what they do pretend . 
then shall a Darkness follow , far more black 
Than when the Light Corporeal thou dost lack . 
For grossest Ignorance , oreshadowing all , 
Shall in so thick a darkness thee enthrall , 
That thou a blockish People shalt be made , 
Still wand'ring on in a deceiving Shade ; 
Mistrusting those that safest Paths are showing , 
Most trusting them who Counsel thy undoing ; 
And ay tormented be with doubts and Fears , 
As one who Outcries in dark places hears . 
Nor shall the Hand of God from thee return , 
Till he hath also smote thine elder Born ; 
That is , till he hath taken from thee quite 
Even that whereon thou sett'st thine whole delight ; 
And filled every House throughout the Nation 
With Death's unlooked for and Lamentation . 
So great shall be thy Ruin and thy Shame , 
That when thy Neighbouring Kingdoms hear the same , 
Their Ears shall tingle ; and when that day comes , 
In which thy Follies must receive their Dooms , 
A day of Clouds , a day of Gloominess , 
A day of black Despair and Heaviness 
It will appear ; And than thy Vanities , 
Thy Gold and Silver , thy Confederacies , 
And all those Reeds , on which thou hast depended , 
Will fail thy Trust , and leave thee unbefriended . 
Thy King , thy Priests , and Prophets than shall mourn , 
And peradventure feignedly return , 
To beg of God to succour them ; but they 
Who will not harken to his Voice to day 
Shall cry unheeded , and he will despise 
Their Vows , their Prayers , and their Sacrifice . 
A Sea of Troubles all thy Hopes shall swallow ; 
As Wave on Wave , so Plague on Plague shall follow : 
And every thing that was a Blessing to thee 
Shall turn to be a Curse to help undo thee . 
And when thy Sin is fully ripe in thee , 
Thy Prince and People then alike shall be ; 
thou shalt have Babes to be thy Kings , or worse , 
Those Tyrants who by Cruelty and Force 
Shall take away the ancient Charters quite 
From all their Subjects , yea , themselves delight 
In their Vexation ; and all those that are 
Made Slaves thereby shall murmur , yet not dare 
To stir against them . By degrees they shall 
Deprive thee of thy Patrimonials all ; 
Compel thee , as in other Lands this day , 
For thine own Meat and thine own Drink to pay ; 
And at the last begin to exercise 
Upon thy Sons all heathenish Tyrannies , 
As just Prerogatives : To these Intents 
Thy Nobles shall become their Instruments . 
For they who had their Births from noble Races 
Shall some and some be brought into Disgraces ; 
From Offices they shall excluded stand , 
And all their virtuous Offspring from the Land 
Shall quite be worn : Instead of whom shall rise 
A Brood advanced by Impieties , 
That seek how they more great and strong may grow , 
By compassing the Public Overthrow . 
These shall abuse thy Kings with Tales and Lies , 
With seeming Love and servile Flatteries ; 
They shall persuade them , they have Power to make 
Their Wills their Law , and as they please to take 
Their People's Goods , their Children and their Lives , 
Even by their just and due Prerogatives . 
When thus much they have made them to believe , 
then they shall teach them Practices to grieve 
Their Subjects by , and Instruments become , 
To help the Screwing up by some and some 
Of Monarchies to Tyrannies : They shall 
Abuse Religion , Honesty , and all 
To compass their Designs they shall device 
Strange Projects , and with Impudence and Lies 
Proceed in settling them ; they shall forget 
Those reverend Usages which do befit 
The Majesty of State , and rail and storm , 
When they pretend Disorders to reform 
In their High Councils ; and where Men should have 
Kind Admonitions , and Reprovings grave , 
When they offend , they shall be threatened there , 
And scoffed and taunted , tho' no Cause appear . 
Whatever from thy People they can tear , 
Or borrow , they shall keep , as if it were 
A Prize which had been taken from the Foe , 
And they shall make no Conscience what they do 
To prejudice Posterity ; for They , 
To gain their Lusts but for the present day , 
Shall with such Love unto themselves endeavour , 
That tho' they know it will undo for ever 
Their own Posterity , it shall not make 
These Monsters any better Course to take . 
Nay , God shall give them up , for their Offences , 
To such uncomely reprobated Senses , 
And blind them so , that when the Axe they see 
Even hewing at the Root of their own Tree , 
By their own handy Strokes , They shall not grieve 
For their approaching Fall ; no ; nor believe 
Their Fall approacheth , nor assume that heed , 
Which might prevent it , till they fall indeed . 
Mark well , O! Britain , what I now shall say , 
And do not slightly pass these Words away ; 
But be assured , That when God begins 
To bring this Vengeance on thee for thy Sins , 
Which hazard will thy total Overthrow , 
Thy Prophets and thy Priests shall slily sow 
The Seeds of that Dissension and Sedition , 
Which Time will ripen for thy said Perdition ; 
But not unless the Priests thereto consent : 
For in those days shall few Men innocent 
Be grieved through any Quarter of the Land , 
In which thy Clergy shall not have some hand . 
Thy Cities and thy Palaces , wherein 
Most Neatness and Magnificence hath been , 
Shall heaps of Rubbish be . — 
Instead of Lion's Tyrants thou shalt breed , 
Who nor of Law nor Conscience shall take heed ; 
But on the weak Man's Portion lay their Paw ▪ 
And make their Pleasures to become their Law. 
Thy Judges wilfully shall wrist the Laws , 
And , to the Ruin of the common Cause , 
Shall misinterpret them , in hope of Grace 
From those who might despoil them of their place . 
Yea , that whereto they are obliged both 
By Conscience , by their Calling , and their Oath , 
To put in Execution , they shall fear , 
And leave them helpless who oppressed are . 
This was Dedicated to the City of LONDON , in the Year 1647.  

Though I have Written heretofore in vain , 
And may do now , yet I will write again , 
In hope that what , by Reason and by Rhyme , 
Was not effected , may be done in time ; 
And that although my Pains be lost to some , 
It may not fruitless unto all become . 
Behold that which was coming long ago 
Draws now so near , that none shall need foreshow 
What at the last will thereupon ensue ; 
For we without a Glass may plainly view 
Such things in Kenning , that unless our God 
To them shall please to put a Period ; 
Or make some such Diversion as no Man 
Conjecture of by any Symptom can , 
An universal Plague will on us seize , 
Instead of Remedies for our Disease . 
Have you not yet discovered , who be they 
That cheat you , and for whom this Game you play , 
By your Divisions ; and when others find 
Their Falsehood for you , will you still be blind ? 
Or wink , as careless of the things you heed , 
Till by long winking you grow blind indeed ? 
Cannot you yet discover , through the Mist , 
These Juggle which the Spawn of Antichrist , 
False Priests and lying Prophets practise now , 
To raise themselves and work your Overthrow ; 
Nor with what Impudence they publish Lies , 
Their bitter Swagger , and their Blasphemies , 
To make new Breaches , or to widen those 
Which Love and Prudency began to close ; 
And which ere this time closed up had been , 
Had they not cast intempered Dirt between ? 
Have you concluded never to retire , 
In your Career , till all is on a Fire ; 
And you and yours lie sprawling in the Plashes 
Of your own Blood , and in your City Ashes ; 
And till you see this goodly stately Frame , 
The Work of many Ages , in a Flame ? 
Withers's Prophesy OF THE DOWNFALL OF ANTICHRIST . Published Anno 1644.  

That Year in which Rome's long-lived Empery 
Shall , from the Day in which it was at height , 
Sum up MDCLXV and I , 
In Order as these Letters do incite , 
That Year , that Day , that Hour , will put a Date 
To her usurped Power , reserving neither 
Top , Root , or Branch , of that accursed State , 
Nor Hand or Body , Limb , Horn , Claw or Feather ; 
For here are all the Numerals of Rome , 
And cannot make a lesle or greater Sum , 
Without Disorder , Want , or Iteration . 
Nor shall it longer stand , or sooner fall , 
If I mistake not him , who Governs all . 
Two famous Numbers are in them contained ; 
The first declares the length of time , wherein 
The Devil was by Providence restrained 
From setting up that Mystery of Sin. 
The Later is the Number of the Beast , 
Which , when the Let was taken quite away , 
Whereby he was a Thousand Years suppressed , 
Doth number out his Kingdom to a Day . 
It is the Number of the Name or Power 
Even of a Man , of that mysterious Man , 
By whom that Mystery is to this hour 
Continued , and by whom it first began . 
And he that can begin the Thousandth Year , 
Shall find the Ruin of both Beasts are near . 
To search that out , it seems not hard to me , 
Who do believe that when of her chief Sin. 
Rome to be Guilty did appear to be , 
Her Declination did even then begin . 
And sure of all her Sins the greatest Crime 
Was Crucifying of the Lord of Life ; 
And her unjustly persecuting them 
Who tendered saving Grace to their Belief . 
then I presume she first to fall began , 
And that God measured , weighed , and numbered out , 
How many backward Rounds her Wheel should Run , 
Before it should the last time run about . 
Thus in those Numerals which are her own , 
Joined altogether was her Fate written down . 
To bring to pass that Work there was a Let 
To be removed , of no mean Consequence , 
Which was removed at the time foreset ; 
And her new Offspring hath Reigned ever since . 
But with exceeding Infamy and Scorns , 
The Beast which now so powerful seems to some , 
Shall lose his Head , and moult away his Horns , 
And to the World a Laughingstock become . 
then many Juggle hitherto concealed , 
And which , to blind the heedless Christian's Eye , 
In seven dark Mysteries have long been sealed , 
Shall to the faithful Soul uncovered lie . 
That Kingdom which the Jew did long ago 
Mould out according to his erring Brain , 
And whereof many zealous Christians too 
Unwarrantable Fancies entertain . 
That Kingdom , whereof now in Types we hear , 
Shall to the World essentially appear . 
Be patient therefore , ye that are oppressed ; 
This Generation shall not pass away , 
Till some behold the Downfall of that Beast 
Which yet among us with his Tail doth play . 
then will the Lamb of God begin to take 
The Kingdom to himself , and every King , 
That of his Right shall Usurpation make , 
To Judgement and Destruction he shall bring . 
no Kingling then assume the boldness shall , 
Blasphemously ( for know it is no lesle ) 
To style himself the King Catholical , 
As if Earth's universal Globe were his . 
For tho' another hath usurped thereon , 
That Title doth belong to Christ alone . 
And 't is no wonder , if the Potentates , 
Kings , and the Rulers of the World combine 
By Policy to strengthen their Estates , 
And with the Beast , with Gog and Magog join . 
no Marvel , if enraged they appear , 
Through Jealousies and Fears of losing that 
By which their Pride and lust maintained were , 
And which base Fear and Flattery first begat . 
For all those Kingdoms , and those Emperies , 
Throughout the World , which their beginnings took 
By human Wit , Fraud , Force , and Tyrannies , 
Shall pass away , and vanish into Smoke . 
An Army , whereof yet there 's little hope , 
Shall wrist the Sceptre both from Turk and Pope . 
Religion , and mere Shows of Piety , 
Have been so long the Mask of base Designs ; 
The great Vicegerents of their Deity 
Have made such Politicians of Divines , 
And these together have so fooled and cheated 
The Consciences of persons well inclined , 
That of all Freedoms men are nigh defeated , 
Belonging to the Body or the Mind . 
Yea , they have so mocked God , and on his Throne 
And his Prerogative so far encroach , 
That of his Honour being jealous grown , 
Much longer bear he will not such Reproach ; 
But to the Saints their Liberties restore , 
And give those Kings their Portions with the Whore. 
d' ye startle at it , as if I had spoken 
High Treason , or as if what I now say , 
Without a Warrant I had undertaken 
To Publish , as perhaps you think I may . 
George Withers HIS PROPHECY , OF THE Downfall of ANTICHRIST . Published Anno 1660.  

AND if , by Storm , they take my Life away , 
Which I as little do regard as they ; 
It in their Souls may leave a Sting behind it , 
Which will , with Torment , make them sometimes mind it . 
But here I yet remain , and , for a Close , 
In reference to our Antichristian Foes , 
I 'll add this Corollary by the way , 
Whilst , on his Horns , the Beast is tossing Hay : 
For if deceived I am not , our Disease 
chiefly proceedeth underhand from these . 
And though a further-off removed Cause , 
Pretending they bescratch us with the Paws 
Of other Beasts , it plainly may be seen . 
By whom our Troubles have contrived been . 
I therefore make but a defensive War , 
With such as mine own Adversaries are . 
And to his Captains , as th' Assyrian King , 
Once gave Command , intent no Dart to fling , 
To be Destructive to Men , Great or Small , 
Whose Hate to me is only Personal ; 
But as those only , whose Hate doth extend 
To him , and his , on whom I do depend . 
To act their last Scene , which precedes their Doom , 
They now , new vamped , upon the Stage are come . 
And tho' , that with the King , as if his Friends , 
They seem to side , they come to other Ends ; 
Which he , not yet discerning , in his Grace 
Vouchsafes them a considerable place : 
And of prevailing , they already boast , 
As if they saw the Lamb , and all his Host 
Quite overthrown , which me as confident 
Hath made , that God their proud Hope will prevent , 
And overthrew that Tyranny outright , 
By what they think shall raise it to its height . 
But many Trials must the Saints abide , 
And very much their Patience will be tried , 
Here and elsewhere , before that Act is done , 
Which with an Antimask is now begun . 
Our Friends inhabiting beyond the Waters , 
And who were of our Tragedies Spectators 
Now twenty Years , though they perceive it not , 
Or seem not to perceive it , in that Lot , 
Which these have cast for us , designed are , 
Or in what follows next to have a share : 
For Haman's Purs on foot , not only here , 
But likewise almost every other where ; 
And these think , that to take them by his Gin 
With some speed , is with us first to begin . 
But there 's a Countermine which will be sprung , 
Will blow up them , and all their mines , ever long . 
Six hundred sixty six draws on apace , 
And not one day beyond that shall they pass . 
It is the Number of that Man of Sin , 
Whereto his Kingdom hath confined been 
By him that cannot lie ; and long ago 
To many that Epocha I did show , 
From whence his Reign begins , and by a Light , 
As I believe , which shines without Deceit , 
It numbers out his Reign , as certainly 
As Women reckon the Nativity 
Of Children in their Wombs , which hath Success 
Within a very few days , more or lesle . 
And of that Mystery what heretofore 
I have expressed , I 'll here express once more , 
Because those Notions which may much be needed , 
Cannot be too oft told , nor too well heeded . 
To former times this Mystery was dark , 
And lay a long while covered , like a Spark 
In Ashes , lest perhaps what at this time 
Will comfort us , might have discouraged them , 
Who lived then ; For Men rejoice to hear 
The day of their Deliverance is near . 
But nothing , save Discomfort , could they gain ▪ 
By knowing Tyranny so long should Reign . 
Herein I circumstantially perchance 
May somewhat Err , through human Ignorance ; 
But as to that which was essentially 
To us intended by this Mystery , 
I shall not fail of , which is to presage , 
That Babylon shall fall in this our Age. 
Seven Numerals the Roman Empire had , 
By which of old they Computations made ; 
And in them was their Destiny foreshewn , 
Tho' to themselves perhaps it was unknown . 
These placed singly , as they valued are , 
Do truly , tho' mysteriously , declare , 
How long that Empire , with what sprung therefrom , 
Should last , when to the full height it was come . 
For MDCLX , with FIVE and I , 
Do number up , in Chronogrammistry , 
Years sixteen hundred sixty six , and that 
Will be of Roman Tyrannies the Date . 
no other Number , either more or lesle , 
If none of these you double or displace , 
Can be by them expressed : If you ask , when 
This Number did begin , I say even then 
When Rome declined first from her height of Pride , 
Which was when Jesus Christ was Crucified . 
For at that Time her Glory did abate ; 
This Number therefore you must Calculate 
From , or about , the known time of Christ's Passion , 
Not from the first day of his Incarnation : 
A Silence ( as it were ) seemed to have been 
In Heaven , during th' Interval between 
His Death and his Ascension , as if caused , 
By seeing that done , which had much amazed 
The whole Creation , when that they did see 
The Lord of Life hang dead upon a Tree . 
The Devil probably , at that time too , 
Was at a stand , and knew not what to do ; 
But soon perceiving , That the Snare he wrought 
Was broke , to make another strait he sought : 
Which to prevent ▪ an Angel , in a Chain , 
His other Powers him suffering to retain , 
Did , for a Thousand Years , restrain the Devil 
From setting up the Mystery of Evil , 
Which in Paul's time he was at work upon ; 
But when those Thousand Years were fully gone , 
He raised it up , and God permitted him . 
To manage his own Engine for a time ; 
That Truth and Error might here for a space 
Make Trials of their Strength , and that each Grace 
And Virtue of the Saints , by Exercise , 
Improved might be to fit them for the Prize , 
Prepared for those who shall engage with Christ , 
To overcome the Dragon and the Beast . 
A Thousand Years sharp Trials they withstood ; 
Yet than they struggled but with Flesh and Blood : 
And for the most part all their Combats than 
Were like s t Pawles at Ephesus , with Men 
Resembling Beasts : But since Iniquity 
Was set up , veiled with a Mystery , 
As in these later times , with greater Evils 
The Saints do grasp , for they contend with Devils 
In shape of Men , in Temporal Confusion , 
Made terrible by Spiritual Delusion . 
And therefore God allotted unto him , 
Who Tyrannizeth now , a shorter time ; 
And to a certain day his Reign did six , 
Which is Six hundred sixty Years and six : 
And he who knows on what day it begun , 
May know the day on which it will be done ; 
Which I believe will visibly appear , 
In or about the Seventeen-hundredth Year . 
And thus much therefore only to foreknow , 
With how nigh to an end it seemeth now , 
May make us hopeful , and our Faith uphold , 
As well as if Day , Year , and Hour were told : 
Yea , and it better serves to exercise 
Our Constancy , than if 't were otherwise , 
And , if well heeded , peradventure may 
Keep some upright , who else might fall away , 
In these backsliding days , wherein they see 
The Beast's late deadly Wound nigh cured to be . 
They on a sudden are become as Jolly , 
As if they thought it to be cured wholly ; 
And , to impose their Mark , will now begin 
To be more strict than ever they have been ; 
So that ere long few Men shall live in Peace , 
Bear Office , or a free Estate possess , 
Where they have Power , unless they marked are 
In Hand or Forehead with their Character . 
But if that , whereof some imperfect Views 
Far off appears , accordingly ensues , 
There will , to thwart their hopes , a new Star blaze 
Within the West , which will the World amaze , 
And Influences , through the Universe , 
So quickly and prodigiously disperse , 
That , aided by concurring Constellations , 
It will have some effect upon most Nations , 
And cause such Changes which will make a Stand 
In those Attempts , which they have now in hand . 
FINIS . 





 M. Charles I raised Money , viz. Ship-money and Loan-money , without a Parliament .  The long Parliament , whom the K. granted to fit until they should put a Period to their own Sitting .  The Army .  K. Charles' Death .  Ol. Cromwell L. Protector .  When Rich. Cromwell was deposed ,  The Committee of Safety , where happened so great a Confusion between Lambert , Fleetwood Hazelrig , Lenthal , Sir Hen. Vane , etc. that none knew who was uppermost , all aiming to be chief .  Our Government of King , Lord's , and Commons' .  All to private men again .  Five Commissioners or Generals were appointed by the Army for the Government thereof ▪ and Five by the Rump Parliament , of which last Monk was chief , who acting distinct from the other four , carried the matter , & brought in K. Charles the Second .  King Charles' the Second his Reign .  10 Signs to forerun this happy State.   K. James the Second .  An Apology follows for this Expression .  This is now acting .  The last Parliament at Oxford .  This is now , when the Peers decline the King's Interest , and join with the People .  This has been under the late Governments .  The King's Loss .  The King's Army .  This happened upon the Chamber of London being broke , and the Charter seized , etc.   Improvements by Clover Seed in the West of England , which was before very barren .  Priests , Parliaments , 〈◊〉 , Peers , People , Arm , etc.   the King willingly to unking himself .  King James the Second .  Lord Chancellor , Judge's , etc.  ( i e. ) of the king 's . 

 This is effected since the Restauration .  Popery in King James the Second Reign .  Several put to death , both here and in the West , about the Duke of Monmouth's Plot.   In time of the Popish Plot.   The Reign of these two last Kings .  As Oxford , Clarendon , Bedford , etc.   As Jefferies , etc.   Ecclesiastical Commission .  The Privy Council .  Oxford , Chester , Durham , etc.   〈◊〉 Fire of 〈◊〉 City of ●●●don .  Mayors and ●●●riffss and ●●●ticess in the ●●●ntry .  ●udgess . 

 Popish Priests .  〈…〉 of London . 

 The Devil bound a thousand Years in the Revelations .  This Beast to Reign 666 Years .  Prince of Orange's Army .  Kings . 

At the Restauration , Popery came in .  The Wound given by Luther and Calvin , etc.   The mark of the Forehead is by open Profession ; the mark in the hand is those who mercenarily will be bribed to be their Drudges .  The blazing Star in the Year 1680 , which is the only Star that ever appeared in the West . 