A SERMON Preached on the 29 th' of May 1661.  

THE DAY OF His MAIESTIE'S BIRTH , AND HAPPY RESTAURATION , After along Exile , to His CROWN and KINGDOM . 

Before His EXCELLENCY WILLIAM L d MARQVIS of NEWCASTLE . at his House of WELBECK . 

By CLEMENT ELLIS M. A. Household Chaplain to his EXCELLENCY . 

OXFORD , Printed by Henery Hall Printer to the University , for Edward and john Forrest , 1661.  

TO HIS EXCELLENCY WILLIAM L d MARQVIS OF NEWCASTLE , PRIVY COUNSELLOR TO HIS MAJESTY , etc.  

My most Noble Lord and Patron . May it please your EXCELLENCY , 

The Duty which I owe , first unto GOD , as his Minister , then to my SOVEREIGN , as his Subject , and in the next place to Your EXCELLENCY , as Your Domestic Chaplain , made the threefold cord whereby I found myself indispensibly obliged , to contribute that little I was able , towards the Solemnity of that memorable and happiest Day , which this poor Kingdom hath in many years beheld . And having , after my weak manner , preached this plain and short Sermon , which had then Your Excellency's approbation , and ( I hope ) since God's pardon for my failing therein ; I had very well satisfied myself ; as I shall always have great reason to do , when by serving GOD , I can please Your EXCELLENCY . I confess , I then understood no obligation that lay upon me to do , what now I am commanded to do , to preach it over again this Second time to the World ; being ( I bless GOD for it ) yet uninfected with that ambitious itch of making myself known abroad , and loving to be gazed upon , as somebody by the Multitude . 't is very fit that they , and only they , should wear great names , who have great merits to support them ; and that they alone should be permitted to present their labours to the public eye , whose great abilities , by being so made manifest , may become more instrumental to the public Good : But ( My LORD ) Your HONOUR seemed very well to understand the extent of that Talon wherewith GOD hath entrusted me , when You presented me to the charge of my little Flock in the Country ; but too much to value it , when You committed to me that other of Your Family : being thus entertained and employed , I need not seek abroad for more work or more honour : and therefore ( My LORD ) that I now expose this rude piece , & my self with it , to the forward censures of all that see it , it is a piece of mere Obedience to Your EXCELLENCIES express , and indeed , importunate Commands : I always resolving , so far as they are Just ( and I know they will ever be most exactly so ) rather to suffer by them , then to disobey them . 

I have often heard Your EXCELLENCY , and My Lord , ( would it signify any thing to say what pleased me ) I would say , with much pleasure I have harkened to You , discoursing of that satisfaction You reaped , from that sweet privacy and retirement his MAJESTY is pleased to grant Your LORDSHIP here in the Country , where You live free from the Noise and Cumbrance of Court and City . Indeed , the greatest reward his MAJESTY can possibly recompense Your matchless services withal , is thus to bestow YOURSELF upon YOURSELF ; and I know You think it greater happiness to enjoy My LORD MARQVIS of NEW CASTLE at WELBECK , than all the Offices and Honours which your exemplary Loyalty has merited : And there 's all the reason in the World for it , that He who hath so Nobly sacrificed the Fairest of his Years , and the Amplest of his Revenues , to the service of his King and Country , should now have leave to consecrate the remainder to his Health and Quiet . My LORD , could I ever hope to merit of Your EXCELLENCY , I would not yet leave begging a Favour of the same kind ; that , as I have an Honourable place in Your Family , so I might live retiredly from all the world besides . But seeing . ( My LORD ) Your commands lie so heavy upon me , I will endeavour to bear them with the best strength I have , and still encourage myself with this confidence , that it is all one with Your EXCELLENCY to Command and Patronise : And therefore after others have served in their solemn joys , with all becoming State and Magnificence , I hope I may ( atleast ) obtain a pardon , If I make bold to drop in , in the Rear , and offer too my poor dish of cold water in the name of a Disciple . Many , 't is true , go before me , and it is very fit they should ; Others come with richer clothing , and finer language , and why not ? They that wear soft raiment , and they that speak soft words too , are in King's houses . It is the great freedom Your EXCELLENCY is pleased to indulge me , to speak mine own sense in mine own words , fully and freely ; and I am so much the servant of my greatest Master , that I greedily embrace all the Liberty can be granted me in this kind . If there be any thing in this short Discourse , disrelishing to the palates of those that read it ; it will be enough for me to tell them , it is a Sermon , and therefore not purposely suited to any man's humour : and yet , I will add ; it hath passed Your EXCELLENCY'S approbation , and that will be enough to answer whatever may be objected against it . Let men say what they will , I have abundantly satisfied myself , by praying that all , even they that despise it ( if it be possible ) may be bettered by it ; and in taking this opportunity of expressing myself , by this , as by all honest means , I shall always labour to do , My LORD , 

Your EXCELLENCY'S most obedient Servant , and Chaplain CLEM. ELLIS . 

Psal : CXVIII . v : 22 , 23 , 24.  

v : 22.  The stone which the builders refused , is become the Headstone of the Corner . 

23.  This is the lord 's doing , and it is marvellous in our Eyes . 

24.  This is the day which the LORD hath made , we will rejoice and be glad in it . 



Should the great GOD forbear to express his Goodness towards the sinful sons of men , till man begin to understand what is best for himself ; we should soon become all as miserable , as at present we are ignorant ; we should die in our sins , and drop into Hell , ere we would understand the happiness of an Heaven , or the loveliness of that way which leads unto it . And yet doth our grossest Ignorance fall much short of our perverseness ; what now aggravates our guilt , and ( without a timely repentance ) will add to our torments hereafter , is this , that we so often know what we ought to do , when we yet stubbornly refuse to do what we know to be our duty . So that if our good GOD did delight only there to show Mercy , where he meets with merit , did he not , on the contrary , love to magnify his Goodness , by pitying even those , whose daily business it has been to provoke his justice : Blessings would soon be as rare , as Sins are rife ; and Heaven would at last be as empty of men , as Hell is of Saints . 

But ( Blessed be our Good GOD ! ) his mercy endureth for ever . The unnatural sinner ever Kicks and spurns at the yerning bowels of a tenderly compassionate Father ; and they only swell the more , and extend the wider towards the miserable wretch ; even so wide , till they reach a Miracle ; such a miracle as forceth Stupidity itself into wonder and Admiration ; yea such a wonder as cannot contain itself , but suddenly breaks forth into a signal joy , and a solemn thanksgiving . This , and more than all this , we read in the Text.  

1.  A blessing proffered , no sooner proffered but rejected , and though rejected , yet sent again , and that with advantage . The stone which the builders refused is become the Head stone of the Corner . 

2.  This great mercy thus rejected , and thus returning , is ( as it ought to be ) humbly acknowledged , highly admired . This is the lord 's doing , and it is marvellous in our Eyes . 

3.  This great wonder and Humility are seasonably seconded with an Hearty Joy , and Solemn Thangs-giving . This is the day which the LORD hath made , we will rejoice and be glad in it . 

Thus , the Text wants nothing that 's fit : for the day , presenting us with a Wonderful Blessing , an Humble Reception , and a joyful Thanksgiving : In all which we shall . briefly consider , first , the History and the Doctrine ; next , the Parallel and the Use.  

1.  We begin with the great Blessing : concerning which , let us inquire , 1.  What it was ? 2.  To whom it was proffered ? 3.  What welcome it found ? 

1.  This Blessing in the Metaphor , is a Stone ; in the History , David in the Prophecy , Christ : and whether David ; the Type of Christ , or Christ the Seed of David ; still we shall find it a Precious Stone , and a great Blessing . 

1.  The Stone in the History is David , thatholy King , in whose Royal Person most of the Happiness of the Old , & in whose Heavenly Seed all the Happiness of the New Israel of GOD did consist . David the Author and the Subject of this Gratulatory hymn , an Hymn composed and set for the Solemn Choir of Israel to be sung by them in their joyful commemoration of the happy return of God's Anointed , and their long exiled King : He is the stone . A stone hewn out of the rock , by God's own hand ; consecrated with the Holy Oil by God's own Prophet ; set apart by God's appointment , to smite down the great Goliath of the Philistines , to dash in pieces the Tyranny of a wicked Saul , to crush to nothing the Enemies of God and of his chosen Israel . A stone fitted and squared to be the foundation , and pillar of his Jerusalem , his Zion ; solid and firm , such as the hottest fires of Persecution could not crack ; nor all the storms and tempests of Affliction impair ; of that weight , and so well fixable , that all the strength and art of Satan and his Instruments could not remove or shake it ; but still he stood fast , the Foundation , the Pillar , the sure stay and support of God's Church and People committed to his Charge . He is the stone in the History : which in the Prophecy is . 

2.  Christ JESUS our Lord , the everlasting seed of David . The sure rock of our Salvation . So He himself applies the text to himself . Math : 21. ) and after him , his Apostle S t Peter ( CITIZEN Pet : 2. ) He , who was a stone of stumbling , and a Rock of Offence , to the jew first , and then to the gentile ; is a most sure hold , and a strong Tower of defence to all those that steadfastly believe in him ; the firm and everlasting Foundation of the New Jerusalem : the chief cornerstone , In whom all the building fitly framed together , groweth unto an Holy Temple in the Lord Ephes : 2. 20.  & 21.  This is the living stone , of which that former was no more but the bare shadow : the stone whereon our Hopes , our Comforts , our present privileges , and our future Inheritance , all are surely founded : the Rock on which , if we be once well bottomed , let the winds blow , and the waves beaten , and all these with all the violence they can , yet shall we stand sure and unshaken to all eternity . These be the stones here proffered in the Text , David first and afterwards Christ ; and ( what I would desire you to note ) both these Kings 

A good King is indeed a most precious stone , the most solid foundation of the Church's peace and the Peopl's happiness : remove this stone , and the whole house comes down upon your head ; touch but the Lord's anointed , and you disjoint all , the whole Kingdom shatters into confusion ; all falls into pieces , and all the wit of man is not able to bind it up again : Proofs and instances of this sad truth we have too many , our own lamentable experience , still fresh in our memories , renders all citations of them at present needless : Hereby we have found , that whosoever wildly bushes at these sacred stones , he only runs his head against an hard Rock , which though he should have the unhappy strength to shake a little , yet he shall be sure withal to dash out his own brains , at lest he must expect to receive such a wound , as cannot easily be healed but he is like to bleed into a too late repentance : He that fights against the powers set up by God , can only beaten the skin off his own fingers . It will be therefore our Prudence as well as our duty , not to strike with too much violence upon these holy stones , left like men hammering too boldly on a good flint , we thence produce such a fire as will not again be quenched : Saint Paul dares not warrant so strange a Confidence , when he tells us , ( Rom. 13. ) They that resist the power shall receive to themselves Damnation . Rather pray we , that we may never come to want such a Stone as God here proffered in the Text. but , 

2.  To whom did he proffer it ? 

Even to those , who wanted not eyes to see it , nor experience to understand the worth and value of it , nor skill sufficient to make a right use of it . David was proffered , not to the poor rude Israelites , that could not distinguish their right hand from their left , but to the Grandees of Israel , to Saul and his Counsellors ; whose business and Profession it was to deal in such Stones . Our Blessed JESUS was proffered , not only to a few blind Gentiles , who had all their knowledge but at the second hand ; the wonder had not been great if these had refused what they so little understood ; but he was proffered to the Wise men and Rulers of the jews , to the great Maister-builders of that Church , Scribes and Pharisees , Lawyers and Doctors ; those that knew the Law , and had read the Prophets , and understood what was foretold , and prefigured concerning him : whose bare acceptance of him , had been precedent and warrant enough for the People's Faith ; as appears by that question ( john 7 , 48. ) have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him ? So would they doubtlessly have said , Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees received this stone ? If they have , than so will we . 

This is God's method , he so proffers his great Blessings as to leave the refuser without excuse ; to those who best could discern the worth of it , and therefore should first in all reason have begun to use it , was this Gift proffered : lest afterwards they should go about to excuse themselves with a Non novimus , we knew is not : The fittest Blessing to the fittest persons , the stone to the builders . 

3.  Let 's now see , what 's its welcome . 

Indeed very course and more strange , considering the persons to whom it was proffered : so foolish were they , or so selfish , or both ; they refused it . 

1.  David is thrust out from the presence of Saul , banished the Land , driven into Caves and Dens , to lead a sad & melancholy life with Bears and Tigers ; or at best , amongst strangers , too frequently more inhuman and barbarous , than those beasts of prey . He is hunted like a silly partridge upon the Mountains , and no means that a cruel and jealous Saul could invent , left unattempted , to rid him of his Kingdom and the world at once . 

2.  And in this particular too , was our Blessed JESUS , very truly the Son of David . He is refused of his own People and Nation : rejected by the chief Rulers , and High-priests , with a — no King but Caesar : — Not this man , but Barrabas . Any murderer , rather than the Lord of life ; a bloody Tyrant , rather than the God of mercies ; away to the Cross with him . This is the very voice of the builders , no stone of God's squaring for our building , out with it amongst the rubbish : Give us rather a Nero , any lump of clay kneeded up in Christian blood : Give us such stones as will admit of no Cement , but what 's made of the blood of us and of our Children : that blood which Caesar sheds , be it on the heads of us and ours , but this stone which God would in mercy bestow upon us , be it thrown out into the streets , and trampled under our feet forever . This is the language of these prudent builders . 

Thus , even thus do the builders too often prove the unhappy demolishers , and when they should strengthen , race to the ground the walls of Jerusalem : whilst they lay their own ambition , their Humours , and their Interests , the only Foundations of all their actions ; they are sure to refuse that stone , which is sent down from Heaven . here 's the Wisdom of the Wise , this is the Counsel of the Prudent , when they have not God before their Eyes . The stone is refused , which yet in spite of all their little Policies , and petty devices , shall most certainly return the Headstone of the building . Which brings us from the Folly and Baseness of the builders , to the unerring Wisdom , and Constant Goodness , of God Almighty . 

They cast out the stone , God brings it in again , They reject it with scorn , He sets it in with advantage , They refuse it as useless , and unfit for any thing , He restores it the Beauty , the strength of the whole Fabric . 

David , after his long and tedious exile , is called home again , even by those same persons who at first were as ready as any to reject him ; with the shouts and acclamations of Israal he is welcomed , and made the Glory of that people , and their bulwark , by whom he had been so much slighted . 

And thus was it with the great Rock of our Salvation , after his numerous and grievous sufferings , hardly ending in a bitter and a shameful death ; He rose again , and ascended into Heaven in Glory and Triumph , and is become the Head of the Universal Church , and the only Sanctuary those very Enemies who refused him can confided in . 

God will have his design , let man do his worst ; he will make all those in his due time to understand their own folly , who would not when they ought , embrace his Counsel . The stones which He sends are more precious in his eyes then to lie always unreguarded on a Dunghill : David's Palace and Kingdom shall not forever be a Cave and a wilderness ; Christ's Crown shall not always be made of Thorns ; Those Cruel hammerings , and rougher usages , which the despised stone at present undergoes , shall not break and Crush it , but , on the Contrary , Square and smooth , and polish it , and make it the more serviceable , and fitter for the building ; His Enemies at length shall know , that those many torments they barbarously inflicted on him , shall reflect with doubled force upon themselves ; and by a seasonable and unexpected restauration they shall be made to acknowledge , that the undeserved exile of their David , was not the punishment of his Sins , but the greatest curse could be laid upon his very Persecutors . 

And here , on the one hand , we may clearly behold , the folly and blindness of worldly men , even of those who would fain be esteemed the wisest and skilfullest builders & repairers of a broken state ; on the other hand , the Infinite Wisdom and Providence of God , even in those actions which seem lest considerable to the dim eyes of men . Here we see man's Unworthynesse and perverseness in slighting and refusing the very choicest of God's blessings , there God's Infinite mercy and unalterable Goodness in redoubling his blessings after they have been refused : In short , here 's man's impiety in rejecting the stone which God had designed , and by proffering it , Commended : there 's God's Justice in making that despised stone to become at last , all that he intended it for at first , even the Headstone of the Corner . 

2.  Thus are we , from the wonderful mercy , come to the cheerful reception thereof . It is received ( as so great a blessing ought to be ) with an humble acknowledgement of the Author , with an high admiration of the Mercy . 

1.  This is the lord 's doing : There King David acknowledgeth , and there he would have all those that join with him , to acknowledge the Divine Author of this great blessing . To the Honour & Glory of his gracious GOD , to the Comfort and justification of the late suffering David , to the shame & confusion of his once insulting persecutors , he utters it aloud — It is the lord 's doing . The Restauration of this Royal person , and in him of Israel's happiness , was a work more peculiarly & properly the Lord's whereby he was wonderfully pleased to exhibit to the world , as it were , under his hand and seal , a most signal testimonial of David's Just and Righteous cause : Most things He brings to pass by such ordinary & common Instruments , and after so plain and easy a manner and method , that , though they be the Lord's doings too , yet the homeliness of the visible Instrument , together with the frequency of such operations , keep us from taking so much notice of them , as we ought to do : But such rare and remarkable passages of providence as this was , cannot go by us without a due observation , a seasonable wonder , and an humble reflection upon the glorious and Omnipotent agent : If David had yet had any visible means left him , of ridding himself out of Danger , and attaining unto that Crown , which was fitted by God for his head , they would have been less apt through the multitude of human means , to eye the hand of God in his advancement : But that he should be restored even now and thus , whose doing should this be but the LORD ' s ? for 

1.  Behold the poor exiled Prince , wandering to and from , in a rude wilderness , as destitute of all hopes to man's thinking , as of companions : his strength failing him , his lovers and his friends standing aloof from his Soul , many enemies on all sides , and perhaps some few well wishers , but , alas , no helpers : 

2.  Behold the sweetness of his generous & Princely Soul , abhorring to be cruel more than desiring to be King : more delighting in Mercy , and contented in his sufferings , and confiding in his GOD , and reverencing a King , though a Saul , a Tyrant , then to revenge himself , when GOD had put the life of his Enemies into his hand . 

3.  Behold his Enemies , for multitude innumerable , for malice implacable , for Interest insatiable ; no force could subdue , no Reasons persuade , no condescensions mollify , no hopes of a reconciliation or agreement upon terms or articles ; so that in the first place to the Glory of the Author we must confess — It was the Lord's doing . 

And again , for the Justifying of David's righteous cause , and for the abatement of his adversaries confidence and boasting , he shows , it was the Lord's doing . Prosperity and Success accompanied with Oppression and Violence , make but a slender argument , for the Honesty and Innocence of a thriving Tyranny : but a sudden promotion out of the dust , by an unexpected hand from Heaven , conducting a poor rejected David , through the fury of his Enemies , into the embraces of his friends , from a Cave to a Throne , may beget a very strong persuasion of a Righteous cause : when the mouth of the fierce Lions are closed by a naked Daniel ; when the extreme raging of a fiery Furnace is stilled and cooled at the approach of three fettered Innocents' ; when the Bolts fall off , and the doors fly open without a Key or a File , to set the shackled Apostles at Liberty ; who will not presently say , that God's favour is Sanctuary enough for an Injured Innocence ; his purpose to save , armour enough against man's endeavours to destroy ; that there is no Policy against Providence , no stratagem against Heaven ? Had David by force of arms , with a great Host of men entered the Land , and so made havoc of his Enemies , the residue of them might still have cbeered themselv's up with such hopes as these , that seeing there were yet more men in the world , they might yet come to regain all , as they got it a first , or lost it now , by an arm of flesh . But now when they behold the LORD making bare his own arm from Heaven , & showing himself mindful of David in his lowest condition , bringing all the subtle devices of the long prosperous sinner to none effect , & without the help of man , even against all the projects of man , restoring his Anointed to his own : how can they choose , but seeing , be amazed & wonder , be silenced , and condemning themselves and their own Folly , with all humility , at least , with shame and confusion of face acknowledge , that it is the LORD ' s doing ? and therefore 

2.  Truly Marvellous in our eyes . 

Indeed all the works of GOD , when considered as they ought to be , are wonders , but such works as this was , the more immediate doings of the LORD , are to be acknowledged above measure wonderful : Considering 

1.  The rarity of them , such blessings come not every day , the LORD makes a Day for them , and by them . He is not altogether prodigal of his Miracles , but reserveth them for special occasions , and for great Ends : that he may thereby manifest his power in the weakness of his servant David ; and his adversary's weakness and folly , in the very height of their policy and Confidence ; and the equity of David's cause in the midst of his Enemy's triumph : Ordinarily GOD works by common and known methods , but when such a singular act of Providence , as unusual and new , as true and effectual , discovers itself to our view , must it not be marvellous in our eyes ? 

2.  Again , when such deliverances are wrought by methods so far above all , both expectations and Inventions of friends ; and not only so , but above all fears too and preventions of Enemies : when so many means formerly , in the eyes of man more likely , had proved utterly ineffectual ; so many endeavours and projects , in the opinion of most men strong and sure , had been altogether quashed and frustrated ; and yet notwithstanding all this , the blessing , when even almost despaired of , comes at last , and that with interest ; it must needs be truly marvellous . 

3.  Once more , When GOD so works , that man doth not see it , yea even secretly in the hearts of those who do not yet understand it ; directing their actions to those very ends which , it may be , they lest intended ; strangely , and secretly charming the Disobedient into Duty , the Rebellious into Loyalty : when the promoters of David's exile , are made the main Instruments of his restauration ; and all those fretting Shimeys which would still fain curse , can or dare do nothing but bless and congratulate : certainly , This must needs be the lord 's doing , and altogether marvellous in our eyes . 

And as it was the Lord's doing , thus graciously to re-establish , what man had so stubboruly and scornfully rejected ; so must it too be acknowledged his doing , to make these foolish men embrace what the second time he proffered them . However without all doubt , it is man's duty in receiving the many and great blessings which GOD of his infinite bounty confers upon him , to look upon them as God's doings , not as the rewards & purchases of his own merits and endeavours ; & withal to admire therein the Goodness , the Power , the Wisdom and Justice of the Author and Donor ; all which if we do but see as clearly as we ought and may , we shall not rest'till we break out into an holy joy and thanksgiving : after such a mercy and such a wonder , 't were a greater wonder yet , if Israel should not be Glad and Rejoice . 

3.  Which is the third branch of the Text. And truly David was never backward , nor David's followers , to answer God's miracles of Meroy , with holy returns of Praise . Whilst the Blessings of GOD , descend upon the wicked as the dew of Heaven on a dunghill , begetting nothing but a nauceous stench , & unwholesome weeds ; when they meet with a David like the same dew upon a good and pleasant Garden , they produce first a fair Springtide of sweet and lovely flowers , and afterwards as full an harvest of sound and wholesome fruits . Good words of Praise , and better works of Righteousness . 

And , as private mercies challenge our private praises , so public and national blessings call for public and Solemn thansgivings ▪ when the Crown is restored to David , and David to his People , 't is very fit that all Israel should keep Holiday : And thus they did , and for this they have a double warrant . 

First , David's command , or ( if any will rather have it so ) his invitation . He sends forth a General Summons unto all Israel , in the second verse ; particularly to the house of Aaron , verse the third , and in short , to all that fear the LORD , at the fourth verse : and all the reason in the world they should comply with his will , who would share in his happiness . And yet behold , a greater authority than David's is here , for — 

Secondly , 't is the Day which the LORD hath made . He that made every Day , is pleased to make some days over again and again : and so hath he new-made by some extraordinary mercy or other all those days , which Holy Church has commanded us ( in commemoration of the same ) to keep Holy : such was this Day , made again , by a new Sun shine of his Special favour overthe Land ; a Day by a most glorious mercy , so guilded and dignified , that it were a profaneness to fully it with the low drudgeryes of our common employments : Graced it must be with hearts and countenances as glad and cheerful , as the day itself is bright and glorious . 

There must be gladness in the heart ; not only in the mouth and in the clothes : such new-made days are to be celebrated with all inward cheerfulness and alacrity of soul , proceeding from a sweet and pleasing sense of his favour who made them for us : away which that grudging and Irksomeness of spirit , we meet with Amos 8. 5. which is ever crying out , when will the Sabbath be gone , that we may set● forth wheat ? except we please ourselves in the observation of these Days , we cannot please the LORD that made them : And as Gladness is required ; so is 

2.  Rejoicing : a signification of that gladness to the world : an external expression and profession ought always to be the inseparable attendant of that internal affection which GOD delights in ; thus were the feasts of old celebrated with shouting , and sounding of trumpets , and distributing gifts etc : all sober manifestations of Joy become that day , whereon GOD vouchsafes to manifest his Favour : Only men are to take heed , how instead of be glad and rejoice , they read , be drunk and Profane : that were not to sanctify but pollute the Day : David and his Subjects express their joy , by entering into the Gates of Righteousness , into the Courts of God's house , provoking mutually each other cheerfully to acknowledge ; and heartily to sing aloud to his Honour and Glory , who had done such great things for them , whereof they are glad , with an — OH give thanks unto the GOD of all God's for his mercy endureth forever . 

We have heard of the Day which the LORD once made for Israel , let us now descend to consider the Day the LORD hath lately made for England : where it would be very easy , would it not be too tedious , almost in every particular to show you , how King David and his Day is paralleled by King CHARLES the Second ( to whom God make many long and happy Days ) and his Day . 

How much of England's happiness is bound up in the Prudence and Fortune of England's Kings : How long this famous Nation may possibly continue one Body , without one Head , How long those two great sides of this glorious Fabric the Church and State , may stand firm and unshaken , as they ought to be , the beauty , the strength and support of each other , if not well knit together by these Corner-stones : Our ancient flourishing , and out late miserable and never sufficiently deplored condition , when compared together , will too manifestly evidence . We have known what it is to have Kings our Nursing Fathers , and Queens our nursing Mothers : and how happily those two Twins : the Church and Commonwealth did thrive , and grow , and flourish , when fed and cherished at such breasts : and , alas ! we have to our sorrow found , what sad Days those were , wherein there was no King in our Israel , days full of nothing but black clouds , raging winds , and fat all storms , in which both God's house and Cesar's were blown down to the ground ; all honest and Loyal men driven out of the Land , or dispersed , and scattered , and hurled into the little narrow Corners of the earth , making privacy and poverty their sanctuary : nothing appeared for many years together but the horrid face of Rebellion and confusion ; no Religion , no Law , no Justice , no Charity , no Order , nay , nothing but the bare name of that , a mere pretence whereof was craftily imposed upon a deluded multitude as a sufficient warrant for their disobedience , & a sure basis for Anarchy , or what 's nearest of Kin to it , a Democracy , indeed nothing but the bare name of Liberty . Was it ever thus , so long as England willingly embraced the Corner-stones which GOD proffered her ? and did she ever want such praecious stones , till her State-architects became altogether as wise as the foolish builders in the text , refusing the stone which GOD had prepared ? They rejected a stone such as England never saw before , and therefore could never know how to prise sufficiently , and I would to GOD , that it might truly be said in diminution of their guilt , that through Ignorance they did it ! The singular worth and use of that Headstone they first rejected ( alas , so altogether brutish were we ) nothing could teach us to understand , but the succeeding ruin of three most flourishing Kingdoms . A stone indeed he was so truly precious in himself , and for those many signal excellencies , which never shone brightes to the eye of the Christian world , than ( as such true stars and Diamonds use to do ) in the darkest night of his persecution ; that he was highly and deservedly valued of all that knew him , is still cabinetted up in the hearts and affections of those that loved him , and shall ( I doubt not ) be found in the first row , in that great day , when GOD shall make up his jewels . And as our Cornerstone , he was so exactly squared , so solidly laid by the great author of all piety and Justice , that nothing but Satan and Envy could find a fault . His Pious reign had left us nothing but a superfluity of happiness to be sick of , and his exemplary Clemency nothing but too much mercy to coplain of , the noted softness and freedom of his nature , gave those rude flints that came against him too great an advantage over him so good a man , and so gracious a King , that his most inveterate enemies had nothing else to fear , hardly to pretend , but that God's house would , by the help of such a stone , in a very short time , become more strong & glorious than their own . Late Posterity may indeed very well believe that God removed this stone so early , as too rich a Pearl to be thrown away upon such unworthy swine ; but what faith will be so daring as to believe , that the very Master builders did reject this stone as useless and cumbersome . Oh! that it might be however forgotten in Gath , & silently buried in the streets of Askalon , how that a Christian Nation , an English Subject rejected a King that was as a Saint , & such a Saint as CHARLES' the First . O , the desperate tementy of a blinded zeal . The infatiable fury of a cove●ous , Sanctity . The horrible attempts of a malicious Hypocricy . What execrable villainies barbarism may execute when is walk 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the vizard of purity and Reformation ! for The LORD ' s Anointed was murdered . 

And , can it be so much as thought , that those very Builders who were called together to make up the breaches , and repair the decays in the walls of Zion , should thus rashly pull out , and dash in pieces in the open street the Cornerstone thereof ; and afterwards contrive and labour to fill up its room with such Rubbish as a Commonwealth ; or such a rough and unhewen Flint , as that late prodigious Tyrant ; which whilst with all their Art and skill they striven to fit and polish , they could never hope to produce anything but a fire to consume at once both the builders and the building ? But will it not yet seem more strange and incredble , that even our Spiritual builders too , those that pretended , to be joint labourers with Christ for the aedification of his heavenly kingdom upon earth , should make it their Pulpit and their Lecture trade , to meet out to their auditors such large measure of factions and seditious doctrine each Market day , and like the Jewish High-priests move and incense the People to run raging up and down the streets with a Crucify him , Crucify him , and never cease watching at the doors , with their traitorous Petitions in their hands , till they had obtained their request , the Murder of their King , and the ruin of his Kingdom ? And yet such unskilful builders had unfortunate England on all sides set on work , who had a far greater longing to grow rich upon the ruins , then famous by the repairs of Jerusalem . 

Yet , as if this had amounted but to some light matter , and were a thing excusable , or ( as they would have it ) very commendable : Observe how bravely and resolutely they go on . It had pleased our Indulgent GOD to hew us out a Second most excellent stone , out of the same Royal rock ; exactly squared and fitted for the same place , and dignity too : and this again the Builders reject , and throw as far out of their sight as out of their affections , saying within themselves , as those honest servants we know where , This is the Heir , come let us kill him , and the Inheritance shall be ours ; thus stoutly resolve they , that neither they themselves who had been so long sools , would ever again grow wise ; nor that Church , which they had so Sacrilegiously ruined , glorious . 

But there is no fight against Heaven , the same wise hand which fitted this Second stone is an Omnipotent hand too , and hath fixed it Even that same Royal stone , which ( with shame we may speak it ) for so many years together had lain in the dust , neglected by the People , Hated by the Builders , beaten upon by storms and Tempests ; and hath felt the heavy hammers of his implacable Enemies ; is now sent home again , more solid and firm for all that Hammering , more sound and undecayed by reason of that long obscurity , more welcome and acceptable , after so long an absence . With whom is restored a lost Justice , a long time smothered amongst numberless Interests and Factions : a lost Liberty , so long shackled by a most intolerable Tyranny and Usurpation ; a lost Religion , so long buried in grossest Atheism , only with a fair flourish of Hypocricy , and an inscription of Holiness over her grave : This stone , the Basis of our Laws , the Pillar of our Church the Bulwark of our Peace , and I may truly add , the Landmark of our Estates , for whilst he was removed , no man knew what to call his own , even this stone , uncracked by the blows of his Enemies , unmollified by the flatteries of his false friends , which the builders for so many years have shamefully refused , is now become ( Blessed be our good GOD ) the Headstone of the Corner . 

And now , Whose doing is this ? 

who 's but his who is the great King of Kings , Protector of the Fatherless , Wise , Mighty , and lust , who putteth down one , and lifts up another , and makes the most prosperous sinners to know themselves to be but men : He alone it is , that could do these mighty things for us , whereof we are Glad , he that hath so strangely turned again the Captivity of Zion , that we seem yet like men that dream : Now we see what that is , whereof our adversaries so boasted themselves , Divine Providence ; and in whose power it is , to still the raging of the waves , and in whose hands are the Hearts of the Mighty ; and by whom it is that Kings do reign . 

This is a work which the LORD hath all this while reserved to make his own Doing , that all the Earth might see , and be afraid , because there is a reward for the Righteous , there is a GOD that judgeth in the Earth . This cannot be the work of any hand but God's : for 

1.  If we cast an eye back upon our gracious David whilst under the cloud an Exile : what can we see , but the LORD alone , he had to confided in ? How was he round about begird with miseries ? It is hard to say in which he was most unfortunate , his many inhuman Enemies , or his more cowardly friends . They of his own Religion ( If they were of any ) thought it more prudence to comply with a prosperous Tyrant , then to succour a banished Prince ; The sons of Rome grudged him their friendship , who was afraid to share in their slavery : Nay such is the natural sweetness wherewith GOD hath blessed our Prince , and such a gracious Prince hath GOD designed for us , that he was afraid to become a King by Conquest , and choose rather to wait for the Affections , then to triumph over the Life's of his rebellious Subjects . 

2.  Again , amongst his enemies here at home , we saw nothing could befriend him : A Power seemingly invincible , a malice utterly implacable , a Confidence built upon a long and wonderful success ; and yet certainly a conscience full of guilt , and consequently full of jealousies , and therefore most vigilant : Interests espoused in Rebellion , and therefore only to be maintained by Injustice and Cruelty . Besides all these , a Confederacy of Oaches , Covenants , and Engagements , though these ( 't is true ) made little opposition to any thing but honesty , and Loyalty , being only set up as mere engines of Policy , which might easily be screwed into all postures , to serve the Swearer's Interest Add now unto all this , on the one hand , that grand and Master-craft of Hypocricy , whereby their enemies did their best endeavours to cozen even God himself as well as men into a false beliofe of their integrity and Innocence ; and on the other hand the Irreligion & profaneness of pretended friends , whereby too many were thoroughly persuaded that a King could have no favourite but wickedness , no friend , but the profane : considering this lewd temper of spirit in too many , and a coldness , an indifferency , a cowardice in more , we must needs confess , it was the Lord's doing . 

And certainly a very wonderful Doing in our eyes . Hopes and expectations all dying , all Projects and endeavours failing , enemies rejoicing , flourishing , triumphing ; friends scattered , impoverished , imprisoned , all disponding ; the Conquerors sitting down securely , and dividing the spoil , and crying with David's enemies , Ah , so would we have it , persecute and take him , for there is none to deliver him : even than God throws in the Apple of dissension , and in pieces they fall , and a sudden storm from the North scatters them . An Army marches up not knowing whither ; all Sects and Factions meet it , and congratulate , and know not for what ; Well , the all-knowing God brings all this to an happy Issue ; the lord 's Anointed is restored , his dying friends revived , all barking Shimeys silenced , Sectaries and Schismatics confounded , Rome and her Children troubled and amazed . This surely was the Lord's doing , and therefore marvellous in our Eyes . 

What Praises therefore do we now owe unto God for all these his Marvellous works ? This is the Day , which God hath thus ( as you have heard ) remade for England ; a bright and clear Sunshine , after black clouds and thick darkness , The Day of our Redemption from a more than Egyptian bondage and slavery ; the Day of our freedom from Tyranny and Oppression ; the Day wherein our gracious King was at first ushered into the world with a new & miraculous light from Heaven ; and the Day wherein he was welcomed into his Kingdom by all the lights of the Nation ; Stars of all Magnitudes with all the lustre and Glory they could cloth themselves withal . A Day , by the light whereof we begin to see our late Follies , God grant we may truly repent us of them ! And our present happiness , O , that we could be heartily thankful for it ! A Day , wherein Religion begins to appear again in her own dress , and all those masks and vizors , too freequently worn in the dark night of Ignorance , begin to fall off from her face : All the Night-birds of prey and rapine begin to betake themselves to their Holes : & the doors of God's house are set wide open , that we his servants may freely enter in and worship the God of our Fathers , after the manner of our Fathers , solemnly and decently . 'T were an endless task , to recount half the blessings of this Day ; the sum of all is this , The Anointed of the LORD , whom we feared to have been taken in their nets , is returned in peace . 

Let us therefore be Glad and Rejoice : be Glad inwardly , and Rejoice outwardly , be so glad , that God may accept of our Joy , as an acceptable sacrifice of praise and thansgiving for his great and provident mercy , in having regard unto his holy One : and so rejoice that the world may see we are glad indeed , & acknowledge him the Author of our Happiness . It is most fit , that as the world hath seen us sad , yea , perhaps too sinfully dejected in the Day of our Afflictions ; so it should now behold us cheerful and full of joy , but still without sinfulness , in this Day which the LORD hath made . 

Only let us here beware , lest we so rejoice as to forfeit again the ground of our joys : In vain do we observe this Day as a Thanksgiving-day , except we labour to keep every Day of our life henceforward Holiday . It is not enough to say LORD we thank thee , but we are to Sacrifice our persons and our endeavours to his honour and glory ; returning him not only the Calves of our lips , but the Affections of our hearts , and the labours of our hands , and the obedience of the whole man for the abundance of his mercies . Our King , our Church , our Land have all too long groaned under our Sinful rejoy cing , and let us take heed lest all these suffer over again by our confident and presumptuous reassuming of such carnal Joys : Why should it be any longer said , and that with so much colour of truth , that Loyalty and Piety cannot dwell together in the same breast ? Why should it be any longer said to our shame , that swearing , & drinking , and deriding Religion , and making a mock of Holiness , are the Principal badges of such as call themselves Royalists ? We know who and what they are who have long ago publicly boasted , that they have been the King's best Subjects and Friends , the way to confute them is not to swear they are not so , but to prove by our actions that we indeed are so : and to do this , there 's no way left us but to be as sincerely Religious , as they hypocrytically : We may safely give leave to the Covenanter , the Engager , and the rest of a Schismatical people to pretend as high as they can , whilst we are sure we are as much as they can pretend to Let us but once outdo and out live them , 't is no great matter who out-talks , and out-braves us : but let us by no means give occasion to the enemies of God to Blaspheme ; but whilst we endeavour to express our Loyalty in our joy , let our joy be most clearly manifested in our Obedience to His just commands , and in our Conformity to his good example ; whose first Proclamation was to condemn and prohibit , and whose whole course of life is to shame all manner of Profaneness and debauchery . Let but our good and righteous actions first stop the mouths of our Enemies , and then our Righteous God will undoubtedly bind their hands , and turn their hearts , and make us all at last charitably and unanimously to join in the Praises of that great God , who hath miraculously restored our Cornerstone , and rebuilt our Jerusalem , and made her once more a City in a fair way to be at unity within herself . He will then make our King a glorious Prince , and us happy Subjects , and all of us at last more happy Saints , when we shall all obtain Crowns and Kingdoms , and be built up together one triumphant Church on our Head Cornerstone Christ JESUS ; full of all Gladness , and Rejoicing , and perpetual sing , to the Honour and Glory of him that sitteth upon the everlasting Throne , who is LORD of Lords , and KING of Kings ; to whom for his unspeakable mercy to our Gracious King , and to us his Subjects in his happy Restauration , let us ascribe all Honour and Glory , Praise and Thanksgiving now and for ever . 

AMEN . 

