A brief character of the Low-countries under the states 

Being three weeks observation of the vices and virtues of the inhabitants 

— non seria semper . 

London , printed for Henry Seile . 〈◊〉 

To the reader . 

As i live gentlemen i am amazed how any piece could be made such minced-meat as this ha••h been by a twice-printed copy , which i find flying aroad to abuse the author , who long since , travelling for compaenies-sake with a friend into the low.  Countries would needs for his own recreation write this essay of them as he then found them : i am sure as far from ever thinking to have it public , as he was from any private spleen to the nation : or any person in it ; for i have moved him often to print it , but could never get his consent , his modesty ever esteeming it among his puerilia , and ( As he said ) a piece too light for a prudential man to publish : the truth is , it was merely occasional in his youth , and the time so little , that he had for observation ( His stay there not being above three weeks ) that it could not well be expected he should say more ; and though the former part be joculary and sportive , yet the seriousness of the latter part , renders the character no way injurious to the persons . And now finding some ruffled feathers only presented for the whole bird , and having a perfect copy by me , i have presumed to trespass so much upon the author as to give it you ( In vindication of him ) so as i am confident it was dressed by his own pen . And after i have begged his pardon for exposing it without his warrant , i shall leave you to judge by comparing this and the former impressions , whether or no he hath not been abused sufficiently . 

three week's observations of the Low-countries ; especially Holland . 

They are a general sea-land . The great bog of Europe . there is not such another marsh in the world ; that 's flat . They are an universal quagmire , epitomised , a green cheese in pickle . there is in them an aequilibrium of mud and water . A strong earthquake would shake them to a chaos , from which the successive force of the sun , rather than creation , hath a little e mended them . They are the ingredients of a black pudding , and want only stirring together . Mary 't is best making on 't in a dry summer , else you will have more blood than grist ; and than have you no way to make it serve for any thing , but to tread it under zona torrida , and so dry it for turfs . Says one , it affords the persons one commodity beyond all the other regions ; if they die in perdition , they are so low , that they have a shorter cut to hell than the rest of their neighbours . And for this cause , perhaps all strange religions throng thither , as naturally inclining towards their centre . Besides , their riches shows them to be Pluto's region , and you all know what part that was which the poets did of old assign him . Here is Styx , Acheron , Cocytus , and the rest of those muddy streams that have made matter for the fablers . Almost every one is a Charon here , and if you have but a naulum to give , you cannot want or boat or pilot.  To confirm all , let but some of our separatists be asked , and they shall swear that the Elysian fields are there . 

It is an excellent country for a despairing lover : for every corner affords him willow to make a garlandon ; but if justice doom him to be hanged on any other tree , he May in spite of the sentence live long and confident . If he had rather quench his spirits than suffocate them , so rather choose to feed lobsters than crows ; 't is but leaping from his window , and he lights in a river or sea ; for most of their dwellings stand like privies in moted houses , hanging still over the water . If none of these cure him , keep him but a winter in a house without a stove , and that shall cool him . 

The soil is all fat , though wanting the colour to show it so ; for indeed it is the buttock of the world , full of veins and blood , but no bones in 't . Had s. Steven been condemned to suffer here , he Might have been alive at this day ; for unless it be in their paved cities , gold is a great deal more plentiful than stones , except it be living ones , and then for their heaviness you May take in almost all the nation . 

't is a singular place to fat monkeys in . There are spiders as big as shrimps , and i think as many . Their gardens being moist , abound with these . No creatures ; for sure they were bred , not made , were they but as venomous as rank , to gather herbs were to hazard martyrdom . They are so large , that you would almost believe the Hesperides were here , and these the dragons that did guard them . 

You May travail the country though you have not a guide : for you cannot balk your road without the hazard of drowning . There is not there any use of a harbinger . Wheresoever men go the way is made before them . Had they cities large as their walls , Rome would be esteemed a babble . Twenty miles in length is nothing for a wagon to be hurried on one of them , where if your foreman be sober , you May travail in safety , otherwise , you must have stronger faith than Peter had , else you sink immediately . A starting horse endangers you to two deaths at once , breaking of your neck , and drowning . 

If your way be not thus , it hangs in the water , and at the approach of your wagon shall shake as if it were ague-strooken . Duke d' Alva's taxing of the tenth penny frighted it into a palsy , which all the mountebanks they have bred since could never tell how to cure . 

't is indeed but a bridge of swimming earth , or a flag somewhat thicker than ordinary , if the strings crack your course is shortened , you can neither hope for heaven nor fear hell , you shall be sure to stick fast between them , mary if your faith flow purgatory height , you May pray if you will for that to cleanse you from the mud shall soil you . 

't is a green sod in water , where if the German eagle dares to bathe himself , he 's glad again to perch that he May dry his wings . 

Some things they do that seem wonders . 't is ordinary to see them fish for fire in water , which they catch in nets and transport to land in their boats , where they spread it more smoothly than a mercer doth his velvet when he would hook in an heir upon his coming to age . Thus lying in a field , you would think you saw a Cantle of green cheese  Spread over with black butter . 

If Aetna be hells mouth or foregate , sure here is found the postern . 't is the Port-esquiline of the world , where the full earth doth vent her crude black gore , which the inhabitants scrape away for fuel , as men with spoons do excrements from civit cats . 

Their ordinary packhorses are all of wood , carry their bridles in their tails , and their burdens in their bellies . A strong tide and a stiff gale are the spurs that make them speedy . When they travel they touch no ground ; and when they stand still they ride ; and are never in danger but when they drink up too much of their way . 

There is a province among them , where every woman carries a coney in a lambskin . 't is a custom and not one that travelse ver leaves it behind her . Now guess if you can what beast that is , which is clad in a fur both of hair and wool . 

They dress their meat in aqua caelesti , for it springs not as ours from the earth , but comes to them , as manna to the Israelites , falling from heaven . This they keep under ground till it stinks , and then they pump it out again for use . So when you wash your hands with one hand , you had need hold your nose with the other ; for though it be not cordial , 't is certainly a strong water . 

The elements are here at variance , the subtle over swaying the grosser , the fire consumes the earth , and the air the water , they burn turffs , and drain their grounds with windmills ; as if the colic were a remedy for the stone ; and they would prove against philosophy the world's conflagration to be natural , even showing thereby that the very element of earth is combustible . 

The land that they have they keep as neatly as a courtier does his beard . They have a method in mowing . 't is so interveined with waters and rivers , that it is impossible to make a common among them . Even the Brownists are here ata stand , only they hold their pride in wrangling for that which they never will find . Our justices would be much at ease although our English poor were still among them : for whatsoever they do they can break no hedges . Sure had the wise men of Gotham lived here , they would have studied some other death for their cuckoo . 

Their ditches they frame as they list ; and distinguish them into nooks , as my Lord major's cook doth his custards . Cleanse them they do often ; but 't is as physicians give their potions , more to catch the fish , than cast the mud out . 

Though their country be part of a mainland , yet every house almost stands in an island . And that though a boor dwell in it , looks as smug , as a Lady that hath newly locked up her colours , and laid by her srons . A gallant masking suit sits not more complete , than a coat of thatch though of many years wearing . 

If it stand dry 't is embraced by vines , as if it were against the nature of a Dutchman not to have Bacchus his neighbour . If you find it lower seated , 't is only a close Arto rin a plump of willows and alders ; pleasant enough while the dog-day's last ; but those past once , you must practise wading , or be prisoner till the next spring . Only a hard frost , with the help of a sledge , May release you . 

The bridge to this is an outlandish plank with a box of stones to poise it withal , which with the least help turns round , like the executioner when he whips off a head . That when the Master is over , stands drawn , and then he is in his castle . 

't is sure his fear that renders him suspicious . That he May therefore certainly see who enters , you shall ever find his window made over his door . But it May be that is to show you his pedigree ; for though his ancestors were never known , their arms are there ; which ( In spite of heraldry ) shall bear their atchieument with a helmet for a Baron at least . Mary the field perhaps shall be charged with 3. basquets , to show what trade his father was . 

Escutcheons are as plentiful as gentry is scarce . Every man there is his own herald ; and he that has but wit enough to invent a coat , May challenge it as his own . 

When you are entered the house , the first thing you encounter is a looking glass . No question but a true emblem of politic hospitality ; for though it reflect yourself in your own figure , 't is yet no longer than while you are there before it . When you are gone once , it flatters the next comer , without the least remembrance that you e'er were there . 

The next are the vessels of the house marshalled about the room like watchmen . All as neat as if you were in a citizen's wives cabinet ; for unless it be themselves , they let none of God's creatures lose any thing of their native beauty . 

Their houses , especially in their cities , are the best eye-beauties of their country . For cost and sight they far exceed our English , but they want their magnificence . Their lining is yet more rich than their outside ; not in hangings , but pictures , which even the poorest are there fur-nishtwith . Not a cobbler but has his toys for ornament . Were the knacks of all their houses set together , there would not be such another Bartholmew-fair in Europe . 

Their artists for these are as rare as thought ; for they can paint you a fat hen in her feathers ; and if you want the language , you May learn a great deal of Dutch by their signs ; for what they are they ever write under them . So by this device hang up more honesty than they keep . 

Coaches are as rare as comets ; and those that live loosely need not fear one punishment , which often vexes such with us : they May be sure , though they be discovered , they shall not be carted . 

All their merchandise they draw through the streets on sledges ; or as we on hurdles do traitors to execution . 

Their rooms are but several land boxes : if so , you must either go out to spit , or blush when you see the map brought . 

Their beds are no other than land-cabines , high enough to need a ladder or stairs . Up once , you are walled in with wainscot , and that is good discretion to avoid the trouble of making your will every night ; for once falling out else would break your neck perfectly . But if you die in it , this comfort you shall leave your friends , that you died in clean linen . 

Whatsoever their estates be , their houses must be fair . Therefore from Amsterdam they have banished sea-coal , lest it soil their buildings , of which the starelier sort are sometimes sententious , and in the front carry some conceit of the owner . As to give you a taste in these . 

Christus Adjutor mens ; 
Hoc abdicato Perenne quaero ; 
Hic medio tutius itur . 


Every door seems studded with diamonds . The nails and hinges hold a constant brightness , as if rust there were not a quality incident to iron . Their houses they keep cleaner than their bodies ; their bodies than their souls . Go to one you shall find the andirons shut up in net work . At a second , the warming pan muffled in Italian cutwork . At a third the sconce clad in cambric . And like a crown advanced in the middle of the house , for the woman there is the head of the husband , so takes the horn to her own charge , which she sometimes multiplies , and bestows the increase on her man . 

't is true , they are not so ready at this play as the English ; for neither are they so generally bred to 't , nor are their men such linnen-lifters . Idleness and courtship has not banished honesty . They speak more , and do less ; yet doth their blood boil high and their veins are full , which argues strongly that  When they will they May take up the custom of entertaining strangers . And having once done it , i believe they will be notable , for i have heard they trade more for love than money , but 't is of the sport not the man , and therefore when they like the pastime they will reward the gamester ; otherwise their gross feed and clownish breeding hath spoilt them for being nobly minded . And if you once in public discover her private favours or pretend to more than is civil , she falls off like fairy wealth disclosed , and turns like beer with lightning to a sourness , which neither art nor labour can ever make sweet again . 

But this i must give you on report only ; experience herein hath neither made me fool nor wise . 

The persons are generally boorish ; yet none but May be bred to a statesman , they having all this gift not to be so nice-conscienced but that they can turn out religion , to let in policy . 

Their country is the God they worship . War is their heaven . Peace is their hell , and the Spaniard is the devil they hate . Custom is their law , and their will reason . 

You May sooner convert a Jew than make an ordinary Dutchman yield to arguments that cross him . An old bawd is easilyer turned Puritan , than a waggoner persuaded not to bait thrice in nine miles . And when he doth , his horses must not stir , but have their manger brought them into the way , where in a top-sweat they eat their grass , and drink their water , and presently after hurry away . For they ever drive as if they were all the sons of Nimishi , and were furiously either pursuing an enemy or flying him . 

His spirits are generated from the English beer , and that makes him headstrong . His body is built of pitckled herring . and they render him testy : these with a little butter , onions & Holland cheese are the ingredients of an ordinary Dutchman ; which a voyage to the East-indies , with the heat of the equinoctial consolidates . 

If you see him fat he hath been rooting in a cabbage ground and that bladdered him . Viewing him naked you will pray him to pull of his masque and gloves , or wish him to hide his face , that he May appear more lovely . For that and his hands are Egypt , however his body be Europe . he hath exposed them so much to the sun and water as he is now his own disguise , and without a vizard May serve in any antimasque you put him in . 

For their condition they are churlish as their breeder Neptune : and without doubt very ancient ; for they were bred before manners were in fashion . Yet all they have not , they account superfluity , which they say mendeth some , and marreth many . 

They should make good justices ; for they respect neither persons nor apparel . A boor in his liquored slop shall have as much good use as a courtier in his bravery ; nay more ; for he that is but courtly or gentile , is among them like a Merlyn after Michaelmas in the field with grows . they wonder at and envy ; but worship no such images . Mary with a silver hook you shall catch these gudgeons presently . The love of gain being to them as natural as water to a goose , or carrion to any kite that flies . 

They are seldom deceived ; for they trust no ; so by consequence are better to hold a fort than win it ; yet they can do both . Trust them you must if you travel . For to ask a bill of particulars is to purr in a wasp's nest ; you must pay what they ask as sure as if it wereth  Assessment of a subsidy . 

Compliment is an idleness they were never trained up in , and 't is their happiness that court vanities have not stole away their minds from business . 

Their being sailors and soldiers have marred 2 parts already , if they bathe once in court oil they are painted trapdoors . And shall then let the Jews build a city when e Harlem mere is and after cozen 'em on 't . 

They shall abuse a stranger for nothing , andafter a few base terms scotch one an other to a carbonado , or as they do their roaches when they fry them . 

Nothing can quiet them but money and liberty , yet when they have them they abuse both ; but if you tell them so you awake their fury ; and you May sooner calm the sea than conjure that into compass again . Their anger hath no eyes . And their judgement doth not flow so much from reason as passion and partiality . 

They are in a manner all aquatiles : and therefore the Spaniard calls them water dogs . To this though you need not condescend ; yet withal you May think they can catch you a duck as soon . Seagulls do not swim more readily : nor more hens from their nest run sooner to the water . Every thing is so made to swim among them , as it is a question if elizeus his axe were now floating there , it would be taken for a miracle . 

They love none but those that do for them ; and when they leave off , they neglect them . They have no friends but their kindred ; which at every wedding , feast among themselves like tribes . 

All that help them not , they hold popish ; and take it for an argument of much honesty to rail bitterly against the King of Spain . and certainly this is the badge of an ill nature , when they have once cast off the yoke , to be most virulent against those to whom of right they owe respect and service . Grateful dispositions , though by theirlords they be exempt from service , will yet be paying reverence and affection . I am confident that had they not been once the subjects of Spain , they would have loved the nation better . But now cut of dying duties ashes all the blazes of hostility and flame . And 't is sufficien ground to contemn their eternal hate , to know the world remembers , they were once the lawful subjects of that most Catholic crown . 

Their shipping is the Babel which they boast on for the glory of their nation . 't is indeed a wonder , and they will have it so . But we May well hope they will never be so mighty by land , least they show us how doggedly they can insult where they get the mastery . 

't is their own chronicle business , which can tell you that at the siege of Leyden , a fort being held by the Spanish , by the Dutch was after taken by assault . The defendants were put to the sword , where one of the Dutch in the fury of the slaughter , ripped up the captain's body , and with a barbarous hand tore out the yet living heart panting among the reeking bowels , then with his teeth rent it still warm with blood into gobbets , which he spitted over the battlements , in defiance to the rest of the army . 

Oh tigers breed ! The scythian-bear could ne'er have been more savage , to be necessitated into cruelty , is a misfortune to the strongly tempted to it ; but to let spleen rave , and mad it in resistless blood , shows nature steeped i' th' livid gall of passion ; and beyond all brutishness displays the unnoble tyranny of a prevailing coward . 

Their navies are the whip of Spain , or the arm wherewith they pull away his Indies . nature hath not bread them so active for the land as some others : but at sea they are water-devils , to attempt things incredible . 

In fleets they can fight close , and rather hazard all than save some , while others perish : but single , they will flag and fear like birds in a bush when the sparrow-hauks bells are heard . 

A Turkish man of war is as dreadful to them as a a falcon to a mallard ; from whom their best remedy is to steal away . But if they come to blows , they want the valiant stoutness of the English , who will rather expire bravely in a bold resistance , than yield to the lasting slavery of becoming captives to so barbarous an enemy . And this shows they have not learned yet even pagan philosophy , which ever preferred an honourable death before a life thralled to perpetual slavery . 

Their ships lie like high woods in winter : and if you view them on the northside you friez without hope , for they ride so thick , that you can through them see no sun to warm you with . 

Sailors among them are as common as beggars with us . They can drink , rail , swear , niggle , steal , and be lousy alike ; but examining their use , a mess of their knaves are worth a million of ours : for they in a boisterous rudeness can work , and live , and toil , whereas ours will rather laze themselves to poverty ; and like cabbages left out in winter , rot away in the loathsomeness of a nauseous sloth . 

Almost all among them are seamen born , and like frogs can live both on land and water . Not a country Uriester but can handle an oar , steer a boat , raise a mast , and bear you out in the roughest straits you come in . The ship she avouches much better for sleep than a bed . Being full of humours , that is her cradle , which lulls and rocks her to a dull phlegmatickness , most of them looking like a full grown oyster boiled . Slime , humid air , water , and wet diet , have so bagged their cheeks , that some would take their paunches to be gotten above their chin . 

The country's government is a democracy , and there had need be many to rule such a rabble of rude ones . Tell them of a King , and they could cut your throat in earnest . The very name carries servitude in it , and they hate it more than a Jew doth images , a woman old age , or a Nonconformist a surplice . 

None among them hath authority by inheritance , that were the way in time to parcel out their country to families : they are chosen all as our Kings choose sheriffs for the counties : not for their sin of wit , but for the wealth they have to bear it out withal ; which they so over-affect that mynhere shall walk the streets as usurers go to bawdy houses , all alone and melancholy . And if they May be had cheap , he will daub his faced cloak with two pennyworth of pickled herrings which himself shall carry home in a string . A common voice hath given him pre-eminence , & he loses it by living as he did when he was but a boor . but if you pardon what is past , they are about thinking it time to learn more civility . 

Their justice is strict if it cross not policy : but rather than hinder traffic tolerates any thing . 

There is not under heaven such a den of several serpents as Amsterdam is , you May be what devil you will , so you push not the state with your horns . 

't is an university of all religions , which grow here confurdly ( Like stocks in a nursery ) without either order or pruning . If you be unsettled in your religion , you May here try all , and take at last what you like best . If you fancy none , you have a pattern to follow , of two , that would be a church by themselves . 

't is the fair of all the sects , where all the pedlars of religion have leave to vent their toys , their ribbons , and fanatic rattles . And should it be true it were a cruel brand which Romists stick upon them . For ( Say they ) as the chameleon changes into all colours but white : so they admit of all religions but the true . For the Papist only May not exercise his in public yet his restraint they plead is not in hatred but justice : because the Spaniard abridges the Protestant . and they had rather show a little spleen , than not cry quit with their enemy . His act is their warrant ; which the••••etaliat justly . And for this reason rather than the dunkirks they take shall not die , Amsterdam having none of their own , shall borrow a hangman from Harlem . 

Now albeit the Papists do them wrong herein , yet can it not excuse their boundless toleration , which shows they place their republic in a higher esteem than heaven itself and had rather cross upon God than it . For whosoever disturbs the civil government is liable to punishment : but the decrees of heaven . and sanctions of the deity , any one May break unchecked , by professing what false religion he please . So consulary Rome of old , brought all the straggling gods of other nations to the city , where blinded superstition paid an adoration to them . 

In their families they all are equals , and you have no way to know the Master and Mistress , but by taking them in bed together . It May be those are they : otherwise Malky can prate as much , laugh as loud , be as bold , and sit as well as her Mistress . 

Had logicians lived here first , father and son had never passed so long for relatives . They are here individuals , for no demonstrance of duty or authority can distinguish them , as if they were create together , and not born successively . And as for your mother , bidding her good-night , and kissing her , is punctual blessing . 

Your man shall be saucy , and you must not strike ; if you do , he shall complain to the Schont , and perhaps have recompense . To is a dainty place to please boys in : for your father shall bargain with your schoolmaster not to whip you : if he doth , he shall revenge it with his knife , and have law for it . 

Their apparel is civil enough and good enough : but very uncomely ; and hath usually more stuffthan shape . Only their huykes are commodious in winter : but 't is to be lamented , that they have not wit enough to lay them by when summer comes . 

Their women would have good faces if they did not mar them with making . Their ear-wyers have so nipped in their cheeks , that you would think some fairy , to do them a mischief , had pinched them behind with tongues . these they dress , as if they would show you all their wit lay behind , and they needs would cover it . And thus ordered , they have much more forehead than face . 

They love the English gentry well ; and when soldiers come over to be billeted among them , they are emulous in choosing of their guest , who fares much the better for being liked by his hostess . 

Men and women are there starched so blue , that if they once grow old , you would verily believe you saw winter walking up to the neck in a barrel of indigo : and therefore they rail at England for spending no more blewing . 

Your men among them is elseclad tolerably , unless he inclines to the sea-fashion : and then are his breeches , yawning at the knees , as if they were about to swallow his legs unmercifully . 

They are far there from going naked , for of a whole woman you can see but half a face . As for her hand that shows her a sore labourer ; which you shall ever find as it were in recompense loaden with rings to the cracking of her fingers . If you look lower she 's a monkey chained about the middle , and had rather want it in diet , than not have silver links to hang her keys in . 

Their gowns are fit to hide great bellies , but they make them show so unhandsome that men do not care for getting them . Marry this you shall find to their commendation , their smocks are ever whiter than their skin . 

Where the women lies in , the Ringle of the door does penance , and is lapped about with linen , either to show you that loud knocking May wake the child ; or else that for a month the ring is not to be run at . But if the child be dead there is thrust out a nosegay tied to a sticks end ; perhaps for an emblem of the life of man , which May wither as soon as born ; or else to let you know , that though these fade , upon their gathering , yet from the same stock the next year a new shoot May spring . 

You May rail at us for often changing ; but i assure you with them is a great deal more following the fashion ; which they will plead for as the ignorant laity for their faith . They will keep it because their ancestors lived in it . Thus they will rather keep an old fault though they discover errors in it , than in an easy change to meet a certain remedy . For their diet , they eat much and spend little : when they set out a fleet to the Indies , it shall live three months on the offals , which we here fear would surfeit our swine : yet they feed on 't , and are still the same Dutchmen . 

In their houses roots and stockfish are staple-commodities . If they make a feast & add flesh , they have art to keep it hot more days , than a pigs-head in by corner . Salt meats , and sour cream , they hold him a fool that loves not , only the last they correct with sugar , and are not half so well pleased with having it sweet at first , as with letting it sour that they May sweeten it again , as if a woman were not half so pleasing being easily won , as after a scolding fit she comes by man to be calmed again . 

Fish indeed they have brave and plentiful ; and herein practice hath made them cooks as good as ere Lucullus his latter kitchen had , which is some recompense for their wilfulness , for you can neither pray nor buy them to alter their own cookery . 

To a feast they come readily , but being set once you must have patience . They are longer eating meat than we preparing it . If it be to supper you conclude timely when you get away by daybreak . They drink down the evening star , and drink up the morning star . At those times it goes hard with a stranger , all in courtesy will be drinking to him , and all that do so he must pledge : till he doth , the filled cups circle round his trencher , from whence they are not taken away till emptied . For though they give you day for payment , yet they will not abate the sum . 

They sit not there as we in England , men together , and women first , but ever intermingled with a man between ; and instead of March panes , and such juncates , 't is good manners if any be there , to carry away a piece of apple by in your pocket . 

The time they there spend , is in eating well , in drinking much , and prating most . For the truth is , the completest drinker in Europe is your English gallant . There is no such consumer of liquor as the quaffing off of his healths . Time was the Dutch had the better of it ; but of late he hath lost it by prating too long over his pot . He sips , and laughs , and tells his tale , and in a tavern is more prodigal of his time , than his wine . He drinks as if he were short wound ; and as it were eats his drink by morsels , rather besieging his brains then assaulting them . But the English man charges home on the sudden , swallows it whole , and like a hasty tide , fills , and flows himself , till the mad brain swims , and tosses on the hasty fume . As if his liver were burning out his stomach , and he striving to quench it , drowns it . So the one is drunk sooner , and the other longer . As if striving to recover the wager , the Dutchman would still be the perfectest soker . 

in this progress you have seen some of their vices , now view a fairer object . 

Solomon tells of four things that are small and full of wisdom , the pismire , the grass-hopper , the coney , and the spider . 

For providence they are the pismires of the world : and having nothing but whatgrafs affords them ; are yet for almost all provisions , the storehouse of the whole of Christendom . what is it which there May not be found in plenty ? They making by their industry all the fruits of the vast earth their own . What land can boast a privilcgethat they do not partake of ? They have not of their own enough materials to compile one ship ; yet how many nations do they furnish ? The remoter angles of the world do by their pains deliver them their sweets . And being of themselves in want , their diligence hath made them both Indies nearer home . 

They are frugal to the saving of eg. shells , and maintain it for a maxim , that a thing lasts longer mended than new . 

Their cities are their molehills ; their Schutes and flyboats , creep and return with their store for winter . Every one is busy and carries his grain ; as if every city were a several hive , and the bees not permitting a drone to inhabit . For idle persons must find some other mansion . And lest necessity bereave men of means to set them on work , there are public banks that ( Without use ) lend upon pawns to all the poor that want . 

There is a season when the pismires fly , and so each summer they likewise swarm abroad with their armies . 

The ant says one , is a wisecreature , but a shrewd thing in a garden or orchard . And truly so are they ; for they look upon others too little , and upon themselves too much . And wheresoever they light in a pleasant or rich soil , like suckers and lower plants , they rob from the root of that tree which gives them shade and protection , so their wisdom is not indeed heroic or numnial ; as courting an universal good ; but rather narrow and restrictive ; as being a wisdom but for themselves . Which to speak plainly , is descending into craft ; and is but the sinister part of that which is really noble and celestial . 

Nay in all they hold so true a proportion with the emmet , as you shall not find they want so much as the sting . 

For dwelling in rocks they are coneys . And while the Spanish tumbler plays about them , they rest secure in their own inaccessible berries . Where have you under heaven , such impregnable fortifications ? Where art beautifies nature , and nature makes art invincible : herein indeed they differ ; the coneys find rocks , and they make them . And as they would invert the miracle of Moses , they raise them in the bosom of the waves . Where within these twenty years , ships furrowed in the pathlesocean , the peaceful plough now unbowels the fertile earth , which at night is carried home to the fairest mansions in Holland . 

Every town hath his garrison : and the keys of the gates in the nighttime , are not trusted but in the statehouse . From these holds they bolt abroad for provisions , and then return to their Fastnese replenished . 

For war they are grasshoppers , & without a King , go forth in bands to conquer Kings . They have not only defended themselves at their own home , but have braved the Spaniard at his . In anno 1599 , under the command of Vander does , was the grand canary taken . The chief city sacked ; the King of Spain's ensigns taken down , and the colours of his excellency set up in their room . In the year 1600 the battle of Nieuport was a gallant piece , when with the loss of a thousand or little more , they slew 7000 of their enemies , took above a 100 ensigns , the admiral of Arragon a prisoner . The very furniture of the arch duke 's own chamber and cabinet , yea the signet that belonged to his hand . 

In 1607. they assailed the armado of Spain in the bay of gibraeltar , under covert of the castle and towns ordnance , and with the loss of 150 , slew above 2000 , and ruined the whole fleet . Certainly a bolder attempt hath ever scarce been done . The Indian mastiff never was more fierce a 'gainst the angry lion . Nor can the cock in his crowing valour , become more prodigal of his blood than they . 

There hardly is upon earth such a school of martial discipline . 't is the Christian world's academy for arms ; whither all the the neighbour-nations resort to be instructed ; where they May observe how unresistible a blow , many small grains of powder will make being heaped together , which yet if you separate , can do nothing but sparkle and die . 

Their recreation is the practice of arms ; and they learn to be soldiers sooner than men . Nay as if they placed a religion in arms , every Sunday is concluded with the trained band 's Marching through their cities . 

For industry , they are spiders , and are in the palaces of Kings . Of old they were the guard of the person of the Roman Emperor , and by the Romans themselves declared to be their friends and companions . There is none have the like intelligence ; their merchants are at this day the greatest of the universe . What nation is it where they have not insinuated ? Nay , which they have not almost anatomised , and even discovered the very intrinsic veins on 't ? 

Even among us , they shame us with their industry , which makes them seem as if they had a faculty from the world's creation , out of water to make dry land appear . They win our drowned grounds which we cannot recover , and chase back Neptune to his own old banks . 

All that they do is by such labour as it seems extracted out of their own bowels . And in their wary thrift , they hang by such a slender sustentation of life , that one would think their own weight should be enough to crack it . 

Want of idleness keeps them from want . And 't is their diligence makes them rich.  

A fruitful soil increaseth the harvest . A plentiful sun augmenteth the store ; and seasonable showers drop fatness on the crop we reap . But no rain fructifies more than the dew of sweat . 

You would think being with them you were in old Israel , for you find not a beggar among them . Nor are they mindful of their own alone ; but strangers also partake of their care and bounty . If they will depart , they have money for their convoy . If they stay , they have work provided . If unable , they find an hospital . Their providence extends even from the Prince to the catching of flies . And lest you lose an afternoon by fruitless mourning , by two of the clock all burials must end . Wherein to prevent the wast of ground , they pile coffin upon coffin till the sepulchre be full . 

In all their manufactures they hold a truth and constancy : for they are as fruits from trees , the same every year that they are at first ; not apples one year and crabs the next ; and so for ever after . In the sale of these they also are at a word , they will gain rather than exact ; and have not that way whereby our citizens abuse wise , and cozen the ignorant ; and by their infinite over-asking for commodities proclaim to the world that they would cheat all if it were in their power . 

The depravation of manners they punish with contempt , but the defects of nature they favour with charity . Even their bedlam is a place so curious , that a Lord Might live in it ; their hospital Might lodge a Lady : so that safely you May conclude , amongst them , even poverty and madness do both inhabit handsomely . And though vice makes every thing turn sordid , yet the state will have the very correction of it to be neat , as if they would show that though obedience fail , yet government must be still itself , and decent . To prove this they that do but view their Bridewell will think it May receive a gentleman though a gallant . And so their prison a wealthy citizen . But for a poor man 't is his best policy to be laid there , for he that cast him in must maintain him . 

Their language though it differ from the higher Germany , yet hath it the same ground , and is as old as Babel . and albeit harsh , yet so lofty and full a tongue as made Goropius Becanus maintain it for the speech of Adam in his paradise . And surely if there were not other reasons against it , the significancy of the ancient Teutonic Might carry it from the primest dialect . Stevin of Bruges reckons up 2170 monasillables , which being compounded , how richly do they grace a tongue ? A tongue that for the general profession is extended further than any that i know . Through both the Germanies , Denmark , Norway , Sweden , and sometimes France , England , Spain . and still among us all our old words are Dutch , with yet so little change , that certainly it is in a manner the same that it was 2000 years ago , without the too much mingled borrowings of their neighbour nations . 

The Germans are a persons that more than all the world i think May boast sincerity , as being for some thousands of years a pure and unmixed persons . And surely i see not but their conduction by Tuisco from the building of Babel , May passas unconfuted story , they yet retaining the appellation from his name . 

They are a large and numerous persons having ever kept their own , and transported colonies into other nations . In Italy were the Longobards ; in Spain the Goths and Vandals ; in France the Franks or Franconians ; in England the Saxons : having in all these left reverend steps of their antiquity and language . 

It is a noble testimony that so grave an historian as Tacitus hath left still extant of them , and written above fifteen hundred years ago . deliberant dum fingere nesciunt : constituunt dum errare non possunt . they deliberate when they cannot dissemble : and resolve when they cannot err . 

Two hundred and ten years he reckons the Romans were in conquering them . In which space on either side were the losses sad and fatal . So as neither the Samnites , the Carthaginians , the Spaniards , the Gauls , no nor the Parthians ever troubled them like the Germans . they slew and took prisoners several commanders of the highest rank , as Carbo , Cassius , s. Caurus Aurelius , cervilius cepio , and m. Manlius . they defeated five consulary armies , and Varus with three legions , yet after all this he concludes , triumphati magis quam victi sunt , they were rather triumphed over than conquered . To confirm this , the keeping of their own language is an argument unanswerable . The change whereof ever follows upon the fully vanquished , as we May see it did in Italy , France , Spain , England . 

And this he speaks of the nation in general . Nor was the opinion of the Romans less worthy in particular concerning these lower provinces which made them for their valour and warlike minds , style them by the name of Gallia Belgica , and especially of the Batavians , which were the Hollanders and part of gelders . you May hear in what honourable terms he mentions them , where speaking of the several persons of Germany he says , omniumharam gentium virtute praecipui Batavi . Nam nec tributis contemnuntur nec publicanus atterit : exempti oneribus & collationibus , et tantum in usum praeliorum sepositi , velut tela atque arma bellis reservantur . of all these nations the principal in valiant virtue are the Batavians : for neither are they become despicable by paying of tribute , nor oppressed too much by the farmor of public revenues ; but free from taxes and contributions of servility ; they are specially set apart for the fight , as armour and weapons only reserved for war . 

All this even at this day they seem to make good : for of all the world , they are the persons that thrive and grow rich by the war , like the poropisce that plays in the storm , but at other times keeps sober under the water . 

War , which is the world's ruin , and raven's upon the beauty of all , is to them prosperity and ditation . And surely the reason of this is their strength in shipping , the open sea , their many fortified towns , and the country by reason of its lowness and plentiful irriguation becoming unpassable for an army when the winter but approaches . Otherwise it is hardly possible that so small a parcel of mankind , should brave the most potent monarch of Christendom , who in his own hands holds the mines of the wars sinews , money , and hath now got a command so wide , that out of his dominions the sun can neither rise nor set . 

The whole seventeen provinces are not above a thousand English miles in circuit . And in the state's hands there is not seven of those . Yet have they in the field sometimes 60000 soldiers , besides those which they always keep in garrison , which cannot be but a considerable number near thirty thousand more . There being in the whole countries above two hundred walled towns & cities . So that if they have persons for the war , one would wonder where they should get money to pay them ; they being when they have an army in the field at a thousand pound a day charge extraordinary . 

To maintain this , their excise is an unwasted mine , which with the infiniteness of their traffic , and their untired industry , is by every part of the world in something or other contributed to . 

The sea yields them by two sorts of fish only , her rings and cod ,  sixty thousand pound per annum ; for which they go out some times seven or eight hundred boats at once , and for greater ships they are able to set out double the number . 

Their merchandise amounted in Guicciardines' time to fourteen million per annum . whereas England which is in compass almost as large again , and hath the ocean as a ring about her , made not above six million yearly : so sedulous are these bees to labour and enrich their hive . 

As they on the sea , so the women are busy on land in weaving of nets , and helping to add to the heap . And though a husband's long absence Might tempt them to lascivious ways : yet they hate adultery , and are resolute in matrimonial chastity . I do not remember that ever i read in story , of any great Lady of that nation , that hath been taxed with looseness . And questionless 't is their everbing busy makes them not have leisure for lust . 

't is idleness that is Cupid's nurse ; but business breaks his bow , and makes his arrows useless . 

They are both merchants and farmers . And there act parts , which men can but discharge with us . As if they would show that the soul in all is masculine , and not varied into weaker sex as are the bodies that they wear about them . 

Whether this be from the nature of their country , in which if they be not laborious they cannot live ; or from an innate genius of the persons by a superior providence adapted to them of such a situation ; from their own inclination addicted to parsimony ; from custom in their way of breeding ; from any transcendency of active parts more than other nations ; or from being in their country , like persons in a city besieged , whereby their own virtues do more compact and fortify ; i will not determine . But certainly in generally they are the most painful and diligent persons on earth : and of all other the most truly of Vesp asians opinion , to think , that exre qualibet bonus odour lucri ; be it raised from what it will , the smell of gain is pleasant . 

Yet they are in some sort gods , for they fet bounds to the sea : and when they list let it pass them . Even their dwelling is a miracle . They live lower than the fishes . In the very lap of the floods , and encircled in their watery arms . They are the Israelites passing through the red sea . The water's wall in them , and if they set open their sluices shall drown up their enemies . 

They have struggled long with Spain's Pharaoh , and they have at length enforced him to let them go . They are a Gideon's army upon the March again . They are the Indian rat , knawing the bowels of the Spanish crocodile , to which they got when he gaped to swallow them . They are a serpentwreathed about the legs of that elephant they are the little sword fish piicking the bellies of the whale . they are the wane of that empire , which increased in Isabel , and in Charles the 5th . was at full . 

They are a glass wherein Kings May see that though they be sovereigns over lives and goods , yet when they usurp upon God's part , and will be Kings over conscience too , they are sometimes punished with loss of that which lawfully is their own . That religion too fiercely urged is to stretch a string till it not only jars , but cracks ; and in the breaking , whips ( Perhaps ) the streiners eye out . 

That an extreme taxation is to take away the honey , while the bees keep the hive , whereas he that would take that , should first either burn them , or drive them out . That tyrants in their government , are the greatest traitors to their own states . That a desire of being too absolute is to walk upon pinnacles and the tops of pyramids , where not only the footing is full of hazard , but even the sharpness of that they tread on May run into their foot and woundthem . That too much to regrate on the patience of but tickle subjects , is to press a thorn till it prick your finger . That nothing makes a more desperate rebel than a prerogative enforced too far . 

That liberty in man is as the skin to the body not to be put off , but together with life . That they which will command more than they ought , shall not at last command so much as is fit . 

That moderate Princes sit faster in their regalities , than such as being but men , would yet have their power over their subjects , as the gods unlimited . That oppression is an iron heat till it burns the hand . That to debar some states of ancient privileges ; is for a falcon to undertake to beat a flock of wild-geese out of the fens . That to go about to compel a sullen reason to submit to a wilful peremptoriness is so long to beat a chained mastiff into his kennel , till at last he turns and flies at your throat . That unjust policy is to shoot as they did at Ostend into the mouth of a charged canon to have two bullets returned for one . That he doth but endanger himself , that riding with too weak a bit provokes a head strong horse with a spur . That 't is safer to meet a valiant man weaponless , than almost a coward in armour . That even a weak cause with a strong castle , will boil salt blood to a rebellious itch. that 't is better keeping a crazy body in an equal temper , than to anger humours by too sharp a physic . 

That admonitions from a dying man are too serious to be neglected . That there is nothing certain that is not impossible . That a cobbler of Ulushing was one of the greatest enemies that the King of Spain ever had . 

To con••lu••e , the country itself is a moted castle keeping a garnish of the richest jewels of the world in 't ; the Queen of Bohemia and her princely children . 

The persons in it are Jews of the new testament , that have exchanged nothing but the law for the gospel : and this they rather profess than practice . Together a man of war riding at anchor in the downs of Germany . 

For foreign Princes to help them is wise self-policy . When they have made them able to defend themselves against Spain , they are at the pale , if they enable them to offend others they go beyond it . For questionless were this thorn out of the Spaniards side he Might be feared too soon to grasp his long intended monarchy . And were the Spaniard but possessed Lord of the Low-countries , or had the states but the wealth and power of Spain , the rest of Europe Might he like persons at sea in a ship on fire ; that could only choose whither they would drown or burn . Now , their war is the peace of their neighbours . So Rome when busied in her civil broils , the Parthians lived at rest ; but those concluded once , by Caesar next are they designed for conquest . 

If any man wonder at these contraries , let him look in his own body for as many several humours . In his own brain for as many different fancies . In his own heart for as various passions ; and from all hese he May learn , that there is not in all the world such another beast as man . 

Finis . 



























