A Trip to Holland , BEING A DESCRIPTION OF THE Country , People and Manners : As also some Select OBSERVATIONS ON Amsterdamc 

His Motto Jason and the Fleece 
Who had a notable Head-piece , 
( Who though agross one of 't would boast 
Himself a Wit , like Quixots' Host 
Inlaid with brass , and for his Crest 
A ship , displayed with Back and Breast , 
On Billow Rampant with fullsails 
Ermined with Cod , and Herring Scales . 
Dutch Hudibrass . 



Printed in the Year , 1699.  

THE PREFACE TO THE READER . 

Certainly a Trip to Holland may be as grateful as one to Jamaica ? I am sure the Dutch can furnish one with as good a Subject as any English Colony whatsoever And if I am not so Witty as the Plantation Author I am certain I am somewhat Wiser . He takes the liberty of abusing his own fellow Subjects , and consequently beshits his own Nest , but I fall upon a Nation which shits upon all the world beside , if over witting it may be called so , and I think nasty terms are fitly applied to such nasty People . I am afraid our West-india Poet is some transported Felon , who being sent to the Plantation for a Venture , lit on a bad Master , and with a true Newgate Courtesy to revenge his Spleen on one House , he squirt his Excrement against a whole Island . But no more of his Trip : it has Sold very well , and it 's my business to sell mine if I can , and like a true Author Preface it heartily , or the Ignorant Puppy my Chap will never buy it . For unless a a Writer nowadays , like a Dutch Painter , sets the name under the Beast he has drawn , the Devil a bit , does the Reader know what he means ; and indeed some of our modern Compositions , as our Aesop's , etc. have as much occasion for a Key to let you into their meaning , as Mine Heer Van Butterbox his Picture has for a Name to be written under it . In short Gentlemen , I am resolved to get rid of my Commodity , which will stick upon my Hands , unless I give such an account of it as may make it Saleable . And saith right or wrong I can satisfy the Reader it shall not want my Commendation . What a Plague would he have , if what follows won't please him ? here 's * Collection of all Bartholomew-fair in one single Dutchman , and Fool , Knave , and Monster , is but part of the Medley ofwhich he is Composed . To talk with him is present Deafness , and to deal with him is no other than to be certainly Cheated : To Eat with him is to save the charge of a Vomit , and to Lie with him is to put you in mind what occasion you have the next day for an Apothecary . For if you chance to escape the Itch , the Lice will overtake you , If you go to make application to one of their Women by knocking at her Fore-door she immediately claps her A — see , and points to the Postern ; and to offer to do any thing the right way , is immediately to be told you are in the wrong : To conclude , all things are so irregular , as to think only of order , is to forget the People we are about to treat of , and to declaim against Rebellion , is to put 'em in mind to whom they owe their Allegiance , which is a far greater sin amongst them than Rebellion itself . But that the Reader may be no longer detained at the Threshold , let him ( if he has Money ) put his hand into his Pocket and pull out Sixpences , which will admit him into the House , otherwise he is no Man for our turn , for he can't imagine that we who are about to show him the Mercenary'st Beasts in the World , will be such Asses ourselves as to do it for nothing . Let the Gentlemen therefore that have a mind to see the Raree-show , down with their Money , and take their places , for we are just going to begin , whilst those-who cannot produce the Ready , may march off , for we are for no such Customers . 

A Trip to Holland . 

Having in the Month of August last passed , some earnest occasions which called me to Holland , I accordingly took Coach for Harwich , in order to Embark . But arriving there too late for the Packet-boat , which had set Sail some time before , I was forced to lay hold on an opportunity , which gave me an insight into the Manners of that Country I was going to pay a visit to . It happened a Dutch Smack was weighing Anchor for Helvoetsluys , and the Longboat staying for the Master who was drinking at a Publick-house , I was told by some persons on the Key , that he had taken in some Passengers , and would gladly accept of my Company too . Pursuant therefore to the directions which were given me , I went up to the Sign of the Amsterdam , where he was drinking , and ask for him , had admision into his Company . But Lord when I had the first sight of the Beast how I was in a surprise ! He had no lesle than half a Pint of Brandy in his hand , which he had infallibly swallowed without any other Ceremony , had he not thought it more breeding to defer the Execution of it ( for his Country manner of drinking is no other than downright Murdering the Liquors they gorge down ) till he had first saluted me . Which was a manner of complimenting which I amid a thousand Extravagancies had hitherto been ignorant of . For being fearful of losing his Liquor should he set it down , and solicitous lest his addresses should not be timed soon enough , up he made towards me and hit me such a cursed slap on the Chaps with his damned Phiz , that though time has worn off the mark of the blow he gave me with his intended Kiss , yet I shall always retain the memory of the stink it left behind it . He was as well acquainted in lesle than a minute with me as the best Friend I left behind me at the Rose-tavern in London , and without ask me my business , after having sputtered out a little Dutch , which was as much as to say , My dear Friend here 's to you , down went the half pint at one draught , which was filled up to the Brim for me to do the same . But I having been used more to Hippolito's and Chaves his Chocolet-house than any Distillers whatsoever , and by consequence more conversant with the Looking-glass , than Glasses which held such destructive Liquors to the Face in 'em , begged his excuse by the wry Faces I made to him for that was the only way I had to let him into my meaning , since my Friends had educated me more like a Christian than to teach me abominable Dutch , But the Skipper for his part answered me in worse Grimaces than I made him , and was so importunate with his sputtering which I understood not till a Chaplain to a Regiment during the War in Flanders , and who was going to fetch his Wise from thence , told me 't was his Country fashion , and if I would be civility used , and designed to be a Passenger , submission to his temper was the only means to acquire it ; and though such a reception to a Gentleman of my appearance ( for I must tell you I looked like no small Fool ) might savour of rudeness , yet it was Mine here 's chief accomplish meant and grace , who served every one after that manner , whom he had an esteem for . The Parson having acquainted me with his own resignation in drinking three full Pints of this F●ea-killing Medicine , I even forgave the Puppy his intolerable stinking Kiss , and up I topped a Draught , which never a Beau in Covent-garden would have submitted to but myself , and which I should have had the Grace to have refused , had not the urgency of my Concerns joined with the entreaties of my spiritual Adviser prevailed over me . I had no sooner dispersed this Emblem of Hell amid my Guts , but our Heavenly Ambassador had whipped off his supernaculum , a way of drinking Customary to our Military Clergy . I immediately looked in his Face , to see whether the vehemency of that Flood of Liquor , had driven out no Carbuncle ; already enquiring for a Looking-glass , in order to mortify those , which I did not doubt but I had encouraged , with a Patch . But the man of the House told me in short , he had no such wry faced Company , who kept to his House , that should ask for any such Foppish Instrument ; and I must say this in Sir Crape's defence ; he had performed to a Miracle , for the Devil a bit could a Pimple be seen in his Face , it being all over but one continued Carbuncle , and one must have used the same means to find it out , as Astronomers do in searching for Motes in the Sun , for nothing under a Telescope could have satisfied you in your enquiry after it . But enough of the Soulsaving , but Body-destroying Parson , my business is with the Skipper , and a Plague on him , for he plied me so with Liquor , that all Mount Aetna would have been but a Spark to what I had in my Guts . In short , I began very much to repent me of my journey , and could have wished my Friend had rather lived , who left me the Legacy I was going for , than I had fallen into such an execrable Society . But since I was come so far , and it could not be long before the Ship went off , I comforted myself with the short continuance of these Hellish proceedings , and endeavoured to make the Glass stand still by telling the Master of the Vessel by my Vallet my Interpreter , that I was come to be his Passenger . He answered he knew that , though how he should , increased my Wonder , since he had plied me so by drinking to me , that I had not time to tell him ; but it seems these Skippers are such intolerable Soakers , that no body will bear the fatigue of their Conversation by Land , but those who must have their Company by Water . When heaven 's be praised in came the Boats-crew , who without any Ceremony with their Hats on their Heads , sat down by their Commander , and told him all things were ready for our Departure . 

Good God What an alteration did these Fellows make in me , who could not but think myself almost in a state of Damnation before their coming ! Every one was a good Genius to me , though they had all , like their ill favoured Master , the appearance of evil ones . Four and twenty hours would complete my deliverance , for whatever came on 't I was resolved to make my return in an English Vessel . But one damned Ceremony was to be encountered with still , Mine Heer must have a Bumper to our good Voyage , and the Parson cried blessings attend the Cup , which I agreed to , but was forced to go out , to ease my Stomach which was overcharged before . At last , though the Liquor over came me , all obstacles were overcome too , and we got aboard ; where I was Conducted into my Apartment which was like our Little-ease at Guild-hall , there was small fear of falling out of my Bed , for the Tenement I had taken up was nothing else , and lesle , of being made lightheaded by the Waves , since the Brandy had discharged the weight from my Brain before : In short I fell asleep , and kept in that lazy posture till my Man came to give me notice we were in sight of Helvoe●sluys , which made me put off my close bodied Coat the Cabin , and come above Deck , from whence to my no small surprise , I saw at least two or three Hundred Boats making towards us . Every one was for making a Market of us , when for as much as I could see , all the Passengers Equipage besides my own , might have been landed in a Hand-basket . I had now nothing to do , but to ask my Blockhead , the Skipper , what he must have for my Passage , which he had like to have prevented me in , by demanding it from me , for they are as hasty for their Money , as they are for their Drink , and they 'll as soon abate you a spoonful or two in your Glass , as they will Half a Skilling of their first demands , In fine , the Price was Seven Pistols , which I to get rid of his Company paid down readily , though I knew the Exaction . Having left my Spark , whose Conversation had made me so uneasy , I made towards the Land in a pair of Oars , first bargaining with the two Sco●erkinss my Boatmen for a Ducatoon : Indeed , they performed their parts like any Water-rats , and put me a shore with such expedition , as one might perceive the Love they bore to the Ducatoon , by the hast they made to finger it . Being on the Land ( if we may call a Country which is half Water so ) the first Inn of any tolerable appearance which I met with , was the sign of the Angel , which I could not but admire at in a place where all the Inhabitants bear the Characters of mere Devils . Here I put in , as thinking by the sign they must be something better than Dutchmen that dwelled in it , but I was soon undeceived by the first sight of the Master of the House , who came with his Hat on his Head , and asked my Business . I resolved him by my Man , for his Language was Heathen Greek to me , and being very Hungry , bespoke two or three Dishes , as Scotch-collops , Fowls , etc.  Lord , Sir , cries my Servant , do you intent to be ruined , there are at least thirty Taxes laid on the several ingredients with which the several Sances are to be made . However , I was resolved to try the Experiment , and according to his Words , found such a Reckoning , as a Candidate for a Parliament might have treated a Mayor and his whole Corporation with . Sèveral Compliments passed here , as distasteful as those my Skipper paid . But to detain my Reader no longer from the general Observations , I made of the whole Country , let it suffice , if I tell him I took Sledge , for they travel here in the same manner as our Criminals take a journey to Tyburn in , for the Hague , and having ended my Business in a day or two , I spent three Weeks in visiting the several Provinces , on which he may take the following Remarks . 

They are a general Sea Land , the Great Bog of Europe ; and there is not such another Marsh in the World that 's flat . They are an Universal Quagmire Epitomised . A Green Cheese in Pickle . There is in them an Aequilibrium of Mud and Water . A strong Earthquake would shake them to a Chaos , from which the successive force of the Sun , rather than Creation , hath a little amended them . They are the Ingredients of a Black Pudding , and want only stirring together . Mary , 't is best making on 't in a dry Summer , else you will have more Blood than Grist : And then have you no way to make it serve for any thing , but to tread it under Z●na Torrida , and so dry it for Turfs ? 

Says one , it affords the People one Commodity beyond all the other Regions , If they die in Perdition , they are so low , that they have a shorter cut to Hell than the rest of their Neighbours . And for this Cause , perhaps all strange Religions throng thither , as naturally inclining towards their Centre . Besides , their ●●●chess show them to be Pluto's Region , and you all know what Part that was which the Poets did of old assign him . Here is Styx , Acheron , Cocytus , and the rest of those muddy Streams that have made Matter for the Fablers . Almost every one is a Charon here ; and if you have but a Naulum to give , you cannot want a Boat or Pilot. To confirm all , let but some of our Separatists be asked , and they shall swear , That the Elezian Fields are there . 

It is an excellent Country for a Despairing Lover ; for every Corner affords him a Willow to make a Garland on ; but if Justice doom him to be hanged on any other Tree , he may , in spite of the Sentence , live long and confident . If he had rather quench his Spirits than suffocate them , rather choose to feed Lobsters than Crows ; 't is but leaping from his Window , and he lights in a River or Sea ; for most of their dwellings stand like Prives in Moted Houses , hanging still over the Water . If none of these cure him , keep him but a Winter in a House without a Stove , and that shall cool him . 

The Soil is all Fat , though wanting the Colour to show it so ; for indeed it is the Buttock of the World , full of Veins and Blood , but no Bones in 't . Had Saint Steven been condemned to suffer here , he might have been alive at this day , for unless it be in their paved Cities , Gold is a great deal more plentiful than Stones , except it be living ones ; and then for their heaviness , you may take in almost all the Nation . 

't is a singular Place to fat Monkeys in . There are Spiders as big as Shrimps , and I think as many . Their Gardens being moist , abound with these . no Creatures ; for sure they were bred , not made . Were they but as Venomous as Rank , to gather Herl ; were to hazard Martyrdom . They are so large , that you would almost believe the Hesperides were here , and these the Dragons that did Guard them . 

You may travel the Country , though you have not a Guide ; for you cannot balk your Road , without the hazard of Drowning . There is not there any use of an Harbinger . Wheresoever Men go , the Way is made before them . Had they Cities large as their Walls , Rome would be esteemed a Bauble ; 20 Miles in length is nothing for a Wagon to be hurried on one of them , where , if your Foreman be sober , you may travel in safety , otherwise you must have stronger Faith than Peter had , else you sink immediately . A Startling Horse endangers you to two Deaths at once , breaking of your Neck and Drowning . 

If your way be not thus , it hangs in the Water , and at the approach of your Wagon , shall shake as if it were Ague-strucken . Duke d' Alva's ask of the Tenth Penny , frighted it into a Palsy , which all the Mountebanks they have bred since , could never tell how to cure . 

't is indeed but a Bridge of Swimming Earth , on a Flag somewhat thicker than ordinary ; if the Strings crack , your course is shortened ; you can neither hope for Heaven , nor fear Hell ; you shall be sure to stick fast between them . Mary if your Faith flow Purgatory height , you may pray if you will for that to cleanse you from the Mud that shall soil you . 

't is a green Sod in Water , where , if the Germane Eagle dares to Bathe himself , he 's glad again to perch , that he may dry his Wings . 

Some things they do that seem Wonders . 't is ordinary to see them fish for Fire in Water , which they catch in Nets , and transport to Land in their Boats , where they spread it more smoothly than a Mercer doth his Velvet , when he would hook in an Heir upon his coming to Age. Thus lying in a Field , you would think you saw a Cantle of Green Cheese spread over with Black Butter . 

If Aetna be Hell's Mouth , or Foregate , sure here 's found the Postern . 't is the Port Esquiline of the World , where the whole Earth doth vent her crude black Gore , whick the inhabitants scrape away for Fuel , as Men with Spoons do Excrements from Civet-cats . 

Their ordinary Packhorses are all of Wood , who carry their Bridles in their Tails , and their Burdens in their Bellies . A strong Tide and a stiff Gale are the Spurs that make them speedy . When they travel , they stand still , they drink up too much of their Way . 

T●●● is a Province amongst them , where every Woman carries a Concy in a Lamb Skin . 't is a Custom , and not one that travels ever leaves it behind her : Now guests , if you can , what Beast that is , which is clod in a Fur both of Hair and Wool.  

They dress their Meat in Aqua Coelesti ; for it spring's not as ours , from the Earth , but comes to them as Manna to the Israelites , falling from Heaven . This they keep under ground till it stinks , and then they pump it out again for use . So when you wash your Hands with one Hand , you need to hold your Nose with the other ; for though it be not Cordial , 't is certainly a Strong Water . 

The Elements are here at Variance , the subtle overswaying the grosser . The Fire consumes the Earth , and the Air the Water . They Burn Turfs , and Drain their Ground with Windmills ; as if the Colic were a Remedy for the Stone : And they would prove against Philosophy , the World's Conflagration to be Natural ; even showing thereby , that the very Element of Earth is Combustible . 

The Land that the have , they keep as neatly as a Courtier does his Beard . They have a Method in Mowing . 't is so intervened with Water and Rivers , that it is impossible to make a Common among them . Even the Brownists are here at a stand , only they hold their Pride in wrangling for that which they never will find . Our Justices would be much at ease , although our English Poor were still among them ; for , whatsoever they do , they can break no Hedges . Sure had the Wise Men of Gotham lived here , they would have studied some other Death for the Cuckoo . 

Their Ditches they frame as they list , and distinguish them into No●kss , as my Lord Mayor's Cook doth his Custards . Cleanse them they do often ; but it is as Physicians give their Potions , more to catch the Fish , than cast the Mud ●●t . 

Though their Country be part of a Main Land , yet every House almost lands in an Island . And that though a Boor dwell in it , looks as smug as a Lady that hath newly locked up her Colours , and laid by her Irons . A gallant Masking Suit sits not more complete than a Coat of Thatch , though of many years wearing . 

If it stand dry , 't is embraced by Vines , as if it were against the nature of a Dutchman , not to have Bacchus his Neighbour . If you find it lower seated , 't is only a close Arbour in a Plump of Willows and Alders , pleasant enough while the Dog-days last ; but those past once , you must practise Wading , or be Prisoner till the next Sprink , only a hard Frost , with the help of a Sledge , may release you . 

The Bridge to this , is an Outlandish Plank , with a Box of Stones to poise it withal , which with the least help turns round , like the Executioner when he whips off a Head. That when the Master is over , stands drawn , and then he is in his Castle . 

't is sure his fear that renders him suspicious . That he may therefore certainly see who enters , you shall ever find his Window made over his Door . But it may be , that is to show you his Pedigree ; for though his Ancestors were never known , their Arms are there ; which ( in spite of Heraldry ) shall bear their Archievement , with a Helmet for a Baron , at least . Mary , the Field , perhaps , shall be charged with their Baskets , to show of what Trade his Father was . 

Escutcheons are as plentiful as Gentry is scarce . Every man there is his own Herald ; and he that has but Wit enough to invent a Coat , may challenge it as his own . 

When you are entered the House , the first thing you encounter is a Looking-glass . no question but a true Emblem of Politic Hospitality ; for though it reflect yourself in your own Figure ; 't is yet no longer than while you are there before it . When you are gone once , it flatters the next Comer , without the least remembrance that you ever were there . 

The next , are the Vessels of the House , marshaled about the Room like Watchmen ; all as neat as if you were in a Citizen's Wife's Cabinet ; for , unless it be themselves , they let none of God's Creatures loose any thing of their Native Beauty . 

Their Houses , especially in their Cities , are the best Eye beauties of their Country : for Cost and Sight they far exceed our English , but they want their Magnificence . Their Lining is yet more rich than their Outside , not in hangings , but Pictures , which even the poorest are there furnished with . Not a Cobbler but has his Toys for Ornament . Were the Knacks of all their Houses set together there would not be such another Bartholomew-fair in Europe . 

Their Artists for these are as rare as thought , for they can paint you a Fat Hen is her Feathers ; and if you want the Language , you may learn a great deal of Dutch by their Signs ; for , what they are , they ever write under them . So by this Device , hang up more honesty than they keep . 

Coaches are as rare as Comets ; and those that live loosely need not fear one Punishment , which often vexes such with us ; they may be sure , though they be discovered , they shall not be Carted , 

All their Merchandise they draw through the Streets on Sledges ; or as we on Hurdles do Traitors to Execution . 

Their Rooms are but several Sand-boxes : if so , you must either go out to spit , or blush when you see the Mop brought . 

Their Beds are no other than Land-cabins , high enough to need a Ladder or Stairs ; Up once , you are walled in with Wainscot ; and that is good Discretion to avoid the trouble of making your Will every Night ; for once falling out , would break your Neck perfectly . But if you die in it , this Comfort you shall leave your Friends , That you Died in Clean Linen . 

Whatsoever their Estates be , their Hovess must be Fair ; therefore from Amsterdam they have banished Sea-coal , left it soil their Buildings , of which the stateliet sort are sometimes Sententious , and in the Front carry some Conceit of the Owner ▪ is to give you a taste in these : Christvs Adiv●or M●vs 
Hoc abdicato perenne pereo . 
HIC Me DIO 〈◊〉 ●●vr . 




Every Door seems studded with Diamonds . The Nails and Hinges hold a constant Brightness , as if Rust there were not a quality incident to Iron . Their Houses they keep cleaner than their Bodies , their Bodies than their Souls . Go to one , you shall find the Andirons shut up in Network . At a second , the Warming-pan mu●●●ed in Italian Cut work . At a third , the Sconce clad in Cambric , and like a Crown , advanced in the middle of the House ; for the Woman there is the Head of the Husband , so takes the Horn to her own charge , which she sometimes multiplies , and bestows the increase on her Man  

't is true , they are not so ready at this play , as the English ; for neither are they so generally bred to 't ; nor are their Men such Linen lifters . Idleness and Conrtship has not banished Honesty . They speak more , and do lesle ; yet doth their Blood boil high , and their Veins are full , which argues strongly , that when they will , they may take up the Custom of Entertaining Strangers : and having once done it , I believe they will be notable ; for I have heard , they trade more for Love than Money ; but 't is for Sport , not the Man ; and therefore , when they like the Pastime , they will reward the Gamester ; otherwise their gross Fool and clownish Breeding hath spoilt them from being nobly-minded . And if you once in public discover her Private Favours , or pretend to more than is Civil , she falls off , like Fairy-wealth disclosed , and turns , like Beer with Lightning , to a Sourness , which neither Art nor Labour can ever make sweet again . 

But this I must give you on Report only ; Experience herein hath neither made me Fool nor Wise.  

The People are generally Boorish , yet none but may be bred to a Statesman they having all this Gift , Not to be so Nice-conscienced , but that they can turn out Religion to let in Policy . 

Their Country is the God they worship . War is their Heaven . Peace is their Hell : and the Spaniard is the Devil they hate . Custom is their Law ; and their Will , Reason . 

You may sooner convert a jew , than make an ordinary Dutchman yield to Arguments that cross him . An old Bawd is easilier turned Puritan , than a Waggoner persuaded not to bait thrice in nine Miles : and when he doth , his Horses must not stir , but have their Manger brought them into the Way , where , in a top sweated they eat their Grass , and drink Water , and presently after hurry away ; for they ever drive as if they were all the Sons of Nim●●● , and were futiously either pursuing an Enemy , or flying him . 

His Spirits are generated from the English Beer , and that makes him Headstrong ▪ His Body is built of Pickled Herring , and they render him Testy ; these with a little Butter , Onions and Holland Cheese , are the Ingredients of an ordinary Dutchman ; which a Voyage to the East-indieses , with the Heat of the Aequinoctial consolidates . 

If you see him fat , he hath been rooting in a Cabbage ground , and that bladdered him . Viewing him Naked , you will pray him to pull off his Masque and Gloves , or wish him to hide his Face , that he may appear more lovely . For that and his Hands are Egypt , however his Body be Europe . He has exposed them so much to the Sun and Water , as he is now his own Disguise , and without a Vizard , may serve in any Antimasque you put him in . 

For their Condition , they are churlish , as their Breeder Neptune ; and without doubt , very Ancient , for they were bred before Manners were in Fashion ; yet all they have not , they accounted Superfluity , which they say , mends some , and mars many . 

They should make good Justices ; for they respect neither persons nor Apparel . A Boor in his liquored Slop , shall have as much good usage as a Courtier in his Bravery ; nay , more ; for he that is but courtly or gentile , is among them like a Merlin after Michaelmas in the field with Crows . They wonder at and envy , but worship no such Images . Mary , with a Silver Hook you shall catch these Gudgeons presently ; the love of Gain being to them as natural as Water to a Goose , or Carrion to any Kite that fly's . 

They are seldom Deceived ; for they Trust no body ; so by consequence are better to hold a Fort that , win it ; yet can do both . Trust them you must if you travel ; for to ask a Bill of Particulars , is to put in a Wasp's Nest ; you must pay what they ask , as sure as if it were the Assessment of a Subsidy . 

Compliment i● an Idleness they were never trained up in ; and 't is their Happiness , that Court-vanities have not stolen away their Minds from Business . 

Their being Sailors and Soldiers , have marred two parts already ; if they bathe one in Court oil , they are painted Trapdoors , and shall then let the jews build a City where Harlem M●er i● , and after cozen 'em on 't . 

They shall abuse a Stranger for nothing , and after a few base terms , scotch one another to a Carbonado , or as they do their Roches when they fry them . 

Nothing can quiet them but Money and Liberty , yet when they have them , they abuse both ; but if you tell them so , you awake their Fury ; and you may sooner calm the Sea ; than conjure that into compass again . Their Anger hath no Eyes ; their Judgement doth not flow so much from Reason , as Passion and Partiality . 

They are in a manner all Aquatiles , and therefore the Spaniards calls them Water Dogs . To this , though you need not condescend , yet withal , you may think they can catch you a Duck as soon . Sea Gulls do not swim more readily ; nor Moorhens from their Nest run sooner to the Water . Every thing is so made to swim among them as it is a Question , if Elizeus' Axe were now floating there , it would be taken for a Miracle . 

They love none but those that do for them , and when they leave off , they neglect them . They have no Friends but their Kindred , which at every Wedding , Feast among themselves like Tribes . 

All that help them not , they hold Popish ; and take it for an Argument of much Honesty , to Rail bitterly against the King of Spain . And certainly , this is a Badge of an ill Nature , when they have once cast off the Yoke , to be most virulent against those , to whom of right they owe Respect and Service . Grateful Dispositions , though by their Lords they be exempted from Service , will yet be paying Reverence and Affection . I am confident , that had they not been once the Subjects of Spain , they would have loved the Nation better . But now out of dying duty 's Ashes arise the Blazes of Hostility and Flame . And 't is sufficient Ground to condemn their eternal haté , to know the World remembers , They were once the lawful Subjects of that most Catholic Crown . 

Their Shipping is the Babel , which they boast on for the Glory of their Nation , 't is indeed a Wonder , and they will have it so . But we may well hope , they will never be so mighty by Land , lest they show us how doggedly they can insult , where they get Mastery . 

't is their own Chronicle-business , which can tell you , that at the Siege of Leyden , a Port being held by the Spanish , by the Dutch was after taken by Assault ; the Desendants were put to the Sword , where one of the Dutch , in the Fury of the Slaughter , ripp 't up a captain 's Body , and with a barbarous hand tore out the yet living Heart , panting among the reeking Bowels , then with his Teeth rend it ; still warm with Blood , into Gobbets , which he spit over the Battlements in Defiance to the rest of the Army . 

Their Natives are the Whip of Spain , or the Arm wherewith they pull away his indies . Nature hath , not bred them so active for the Land , as some others ; but at Sea they are Water-devils , to attempt things incredible . 

In Fleets they can fight close , and rather hazard all , than save some , while others perish ; but single they will flag and fear , like Birds in a Bush , when the Sparrowhawk's Bells are heard . 

A Turkish Man of War is as dreadful to them as a Falcon to a Mallard ; from whom their best Remedy is to steal away : But if they come to Blows , they want the valiant Stoutness of the English , who will rather expire bravely in a bold Resistance , than yield to the lasting Slavery of becoming Captives to so barbarous an Enemy . And this shows , they have not learned yet even Pagan Philosophy , which ever prefer an honourable Death before a Life thrawled to perpetual Slavery . 

Their Ships lie like high Woods in Winter ; and if you view them on the North side , you frieze without hope ; for they ride so thick , that you can through them see no Sun to warm you with . 

Sailors among them are as common as Beggars with us . They can drink , rail , swear , niggle , steal , and be lousy a like ; but examining their use , a Mess of their Knaves are worth a Million of ours ; for they in a hoisterous rudeness can work , and live and toil ; whereas ours will rather laze themselves to Poverty , and like Cabbages left out in Winter , rot away in the loathsomeness of a nauseous Sloath.  

Almost all among them are Seamen born , and like Frogs , can live both on Land and Water . Not a Country-vrister but can handle an Oar , steer a Boat , raise a Mast , and bear you out in the roughest strai●ss you come in . The Ship she a vouches much better for Sleep than a Bed. Being full of Humours , that is her Cradle , which lulls and rocks her to a dull Phlegmatickness , most of them looking like full grown Oysters boiled . Slime , humid Air , Water , and wet Diet , have so baged their Cheeks , that some would take their Paunches to be gotten above their Chin.  

The Country's Government is a Democracy , and there had need be many to rule such a Rabble of rude ones . Tell them of a King ; and they could cut your Throat in earnest The very Name carries Servitude in it , and they hate it more than a jew doth Images , a Woman Old Age , or a Nonconformist a Surplice . 

None among them hath Authority by Inheritance , that were the way in time to parcel out their Country to Families . They are chosen all as our Kings choose Sheriffs for their Counties ; not for their sin of Wit , but for the Wealth they have to bear it out withal ; which they so over-affect , that Mine Heer shall walk the Streets as Usurers to go to Bawdy-houses , all alone and melancholy . And if they may be had cheap , he will dawb his faced Cloak with Two pennyworth of picked Herrings , which himself shall carry home in a String . A Common Voice has given him Pre-eminence , and he loses it by living as he did when he was but a Boor. But if you pardon what is past , they are about thinking it time to learn more Civility . 

Their Justice is strict , if it cross not Policy ; but rather than hinder Traffic , tolerates any thing . 

There is not under Heaven such a Den of several Serpents as Amsterdam is ; you may be what Devil you will , so you push not the State with your Horns . 

't is an University of all Religions , which grow here confusedly ( like Stocks in a Nursery ) without either Order or Pruning . If you be unsettled in your Religion , you may here try all , and take at last what you like best : If you fancy none , you have a Pattern to follow , of two , that would be a Church to themselves . 

't is the Fair of all the Sects , where all the Pedlars of Religion have leave to vent their Toys , their Ribbons , and Fanatic Rattles . And should it be true , it were a cruel brand which Romists stick upon them ; for say they , as the Chamaleon changes into all Colours but White ; so they admit of all Religions but the true ; for a Papist only may not exercise his in Public : Yet , his Restraint , they pled , is not in Hatred , but Justice , because the Spaniards abridges the protestants . And they had rather show a little Spleen , than not cry quit with their Enemy . His Act is their Warrant , which they retaliate justly . And for this Reason , rather than the Dunkirkers they take shall not Die , Amsterdam having none of their own , shall borrow a Hangman from Harlem . 

Now , albeit the Papists do them wrong herein , yet can it not excuse their boundless Toleration , which shows they place their Republic in a higher esteem than Heaven itself ; and had rather cross upon God than it . For , whosoever disturbs the Civil Government , is liable to Punishment ; but the Decrees of Heaven , and Sanctions of the Deity , any one may break unchecked , by prosessing what False Religion he please . So Consulary Rome of old , brought all the straggling Gods of other Nations to the City , where blinded Superstition paid an Adoration to them . 

In their Families they are all Equals ; and you have no way to know the Ma stir and Mistress , but by taking them in Bed together : it may be those are they , otherwise Malky can prate as much , laugh as loud , be as bold , and sit as well as her Mistress . 

Had Logicians lived here at first , Father and Son had never passed so long for Relatives : they are here Individuals ; for no Demonstrance of Duty or Authority can distinguish them , as if they were created together , and not born successively . And as for your Mother , bidding her Good Night , and Kill her , is punctual Blessings . 

Your Man shall be Saucy , and you must not Strike ; if you do , he shall complain to the Scout , and perhaps have Recompense . 't is a dainty place to please Boys in , for your Father shall bargain with your Schoolmaster , not to Whip you , if he doth , he shall Revenge it with his Knife , and have Law for it . 

Their Apparel is Civil enough , and Good enough , but very uncomely , and has usually more stuff than shape . Only their Huikes are commodius in Winter : but 't is to be lamented , that they have not Wit enough to lay them by when Summer comes . 

Their Women would have good Faces , if they did not mar them with making . Their Ear-wyers have so nipped in their Cheeks , that you would think some Fairy to do them a mischief , had pinched them behind with Tongues . These they dress , as if they would show you all their Wit lay behind , and they needs would cover it . And thus ordered , they have much more Forehead than Face . 

They love the English Gentry well ; and when Soldiers come over to be billeted among them , they are emulous in choosing of their Guest , who fares much the better for being liked by his Hostess . 

Men and Women are there starched so blue , that if they once grow old , you would verily believe you saw Winter walking up to the Neek in a Barrel of Indigo : And therefore they rail at England for spending no more Blewing . 

A Man among them is else clad tolerably , unless he incline to the Sea fashion ; and then are his Breeches yawning at the Knees , as if they were about to swallow his Legs unmercifully . 

They are far there from going Naked ; for of a whole Woman , you can see but half a Face . As for her Hand , that shows her a fore Labourer ; which you shall ever find , as it were in Recompense , loaded with Rings , to the cracking of her fingers . If you look lower , she 's a Monkey , chained about the middle ; and had rather want it in Diet , than not have Silver Links to hang her Keys in . 

Their Gowns are fit to hide great Bellies , but they make 'em show so unhandsome that men do not care for getting them . Mary this you shall find to their Commendation , their Smocks are ever whiter than their Skin . 

Where the Woman lies in , the Ringle of the door does Pennance , and is lapped about with Linen , either to show you that loud knocking may waken the Child , or else for a Month the Ring is not to be run at . But if the Child be dead , there is thrust out a Nosegay , tied to a stick 's end , perhaps for an Emblem of the Life of man , which may wither as soon as born ; or else to let you know , that though these fade upon their gathering , yet from the same stock , the next year a new shoot may spring . 

You may rail at us for often changing ; but I assure you , with them it is a great deal more following the Fashion , which they will pled for as the Ignorant Laity for their Faith ; they will keep it , because their Ancestors lived in it . Thus they will rather keep an old Fault , though they discover Errors in it , than in an easy Change to meet a certain Remedy . 

For their Diet , they eat much , and spend little : when they set out a Fleet to the indies , it shall live three months on the Offals , which we hear fear would furfeit our Swine ; yet they feed on 't , and are still the same Dutchmen . 

In there Houses , Roots and Stockfish are Staple Commodities . If they make a Feast , and add Flesh , they have Art to keep it hot more days than a Pigs-head in Pie-corner . Salt meats and sour Cream they hold him a Fool that love's not , only the last they correct with Sugar ; and are not half so well pleased with having it sweet at first , as with letting it sour , that they may sweeten it again ; as if a Woman were not half so pleasing being easily wone , us after a Scolding sit she comes by a man to be calmed again . 

Fish indeed they have brave and plentiful ; and herein Practice hath made them Cooks , as good as ever Lucullus his latter Kitchen had , which is some P 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ce for their Wilfulness ; for you can neither pray nor ●●y them to 〈◊〉 their own Cookery . 

To a Feast they come readily , but being set once , you most have Patience . They are longer Eating Meat , than we are preparing it . If it be to Supper , you conclude timely when you get away by Daybreak . They drink down the Evening Star , and drink up the morning Star. At those times it goes hard with a Stranger ; all in Courtesy will be drinking to him ; and all that do so he must pledge ; till he doth , the filled Cups circled round his Tre●cher , from whence they are not taken away till emptied . For though they give you a day for payment , yet they will not abate the Sum. They sit not there as we in England , Men together , and Women first ; but ever intermingled , with a Man between : and instead of Marchpanes , and such Juncates , 't is Good manners if any be there , to carry away a piece of Apple-pye in your Pocket . 

The time they spend there is in eating well , in drinking much and prating most . They sip , and laugh , and tell their Tales , and in a Tavern are more Prodigal of their Time than their Wine . They drink as if they were short wound , and as it were eat their drink by morsels , rather besieging their brains than asfausting them . 

In short , to come to a Conclusion , what they do is so far from being like other men's actions , that they are wholly the reverse of Humanity , as they are the backside of the whole World. And the men of Old did no more wonder , that the Great Massias was born in so poor a Town as Bethlem in judec , than I do wonder that so brave a Prince as King William should be born in such a Land of beasts , as Lousy Holland . 

Of AMSTERDAM . 

As Amsterdam is the Metropolis of the seven Wicked Provinces , so it is the chief in respect of the many Vices which have taken Sanctuary in it . To call a man an Amsterdamer , is as much as to say , he is no Christian , and to tell the place of his Nativity , is enough to ingratiate himself with the most persecuting Dioclesian . The King of japan being a great Enemy to Christianity , would permit none that professed our Saviour's Doctrine , to Traffic with his Subjects without a previous Oath , that they would not exercise their Religion curing their continuance in his Dominions ; several Nations , amongst the rest , the English refused to comply with proposals so dishonourable to themselves and the Holy Religion they were instructed in : But the Dutch from this place being resolved to have something to Pamper their Bodies which though they damned their Souls for it , send instructions for their two Heathenish Deputies to sign whatever should be demanded of ' 'em . Accordingly the two Rascals , instead of owning themselves Christians , signed the Agreement by the m●●e of Hollanders , which has ever since been a current Name with those of japan for a downright fellow Subject , and Infidel . This stands upon Record , and they have Wormed out all other Nations from that Country's Traffic by it . 

As to its Situation the Inhabitants call it the Land of Canaan , though instead of flowing with Milk and Honey it overflows , with nothing but Water . The Heavenly showers which add to the Fertilty of other soils , takes from the fruitfulness of this , and God Almighty has punished 'em with Water in this life , since they are to have another Element to torture 'em in the next . 

However , though it be not the Land of Canaan , it 's certainly a Land of Promise , but if you look for Performances , or an Israelite in it without guile , you may chance to be never the near to your journey 's end . 

As its riches comes by its Shipping , so the Foundation of all its building , is laid upon huge Piles of Masts , and that which makes their floating houses move , is the only thing which renders those that are fixed on Land without motion . 

And though if a good strong Tide ▪ would but bring their Masts by the board ( as they call it ) there would be no occasion for a Wind to drive 'em to Sea , I 'll warrant ' 'em . 

Every Private house here looks like an Alehouse and is painted with Green red , and White , and they are so sensible of their Country Villainies , that every Window has its Iron Grates , like our Jayls , in order to keep the Felon its owner out of harms way . 

An eminent Surgeon who life's there , told me , That for the space of three years last passed , notwithstanding the frequent Quarrels which happened among 'em : He had none under his hands but such as were wounded in the back ; and if a man was but so fortunate as to get a scotch in the forehead , etc. he was immediately made an Officer in the Militia . 

They are as dextrous in flying from a Foe , as they are in the pursuit of riches , and they hate the French Religion , because the Te Deum is in it , which they have been so fortunate as to make use of against ' 'em . 

To go into one of their Churches , is to catch cold , for there are so few People in 'em that their breath can never warm you : But their Bawdy-houses are so crowded that half an hours staying there would save you the charge of a Bagnio . 

They love ' all pictures but that of the King of Spain , and if any one is desirous to end his days , the most Expeditious way to effect it , is to hang up his head at his Signpost . 

Their Stadt-house , which is the most famous piece of building in the whole Province , would be very fine were it not for the pitiful entrance into it , as indeed their buildings in general , were it not for the nasty Inhabitants . 

If you talk with one of their Preachers about Religion , he diverts you to Trade , and still thinks himself upon his first Topick , which is the only truth he is Guilty of , for though they differ in Name , they are the same in Substance . 

The King of England has a Consul here , who makes some small Figure , and fits in an eminent Pew in the English Church , where there is sorry Preaching , a dull and tedious Sermon , about an hour and three quarters long , and a few Auditors , all Presbyterians . The Chancel is let out for a Ioyner's Shop , because they hate any thing that has the appearance of Popery in it . 

The De Wits were born here , those noted Enemies of his present Majesty of Great Britain , and there are yet some of that Faction in this City , for which the English owe 'em no great Thanks , and the Remembrance of Amboyna , and those horrid cruelties perpetrated on us there , may make us more cautious in our dealings with 'em for the future . 

They have public Stews or Brothel-houses erected at the charge of the public , and to see a Magistrate come to receive the Taxes laid on that which distinguish the Female Sex , is as common as to see a Burgomaster with a Rope of Onions in his hand , or a Judge shouldering a Bunch of Turnips . 

But I am so weary of this abominable Town , the Description of which must have tired the Reader , as well as myself , that I shall have said , all when I have told him . 

Their Religion , I mean the chief of the many which are tolerated there , is rank Calvinis● , their Manners downright Brutishness , their dealings perfect Knavery , their City a Den of Thiefs , their Exchange their Church , and their Church a wide covert place to take the Air in , their buildings without Gates , their Hospitals without Wounded People , their crimes without Punishment , their Assurances without Honesty , and their Heads without Brains . And so much for Amsterdam , whose Sluices I wish opened , that the City might set fail , to some Country more remote than at present that cursed place is in . 

Which Heaven permit , if pitying Heaven can hear 
What ills we suffer , and what wrongs we bear , 
To be caressed , defrauded , and betrayed , 
Promised their Friendship , though refused their Aid , 
Disgraced abroad , and fawned upon at home , 
Is every Neighbouring Nations common doom . 
But thou , OH Land of Europe's Realms the chief , 
The Guard of Empires , and the World's Relief , 
Whose hands have raised 'em , and whose Arms have Blessed 
Their States to HIGH AND MIGHTY from DISTRESSED . 
BRITANNIA , thou ! ah ! thou canst chiefly show 
Their guilt unmeasured as is now thy woe : 
And in thy Sons from thy embraces torn 
Behold their Friendship , and beholding mourn , 
Whilst in Amboyna's cruelties are shown , 
Crimes now their practice , as not then unknown . 
Instructions from thy former harms receive , 
How far to trust 'em , and how far believe , 
Interest will shorten what they promise long , 
When never to trust is never to suffer wrong . 
And if the wishes of thy Son may join 
With those which either are , or should be thine , 
May'st thou once more Thy Ancient rights regain , 
Empress at Land , and Mistress of the Main : 
no Fleets but thine amid the Ocean ride , 
Thy Neighbour's Terror , and thy Country's Pride ; 
Whilst injured King's petition for thy Aid , 
And thou thy own support , art that of Others Made . 
FINIS . 

