Charity triumphant , or the virgin-shew : exhibited on the 29th . of October , 1655.  

Being the Lord mayor day . 

London , printed for nath.  Brooks , at the angel in Cornhill , 1655.  

To the right honourable , alderman Dethicke , Lord major of the city of London . 

My Lord , 

View the Roman state under which government soever you please , whether in the beginnings , under many happy Kings , or in its change from monarchy to democracy , or in its little resurrection to aristocracy , under the Marian and Scyllan tyranny , or then in its exaltation into empire , and absolute sovereignty ; you shall always find every age , and sort of governors , adorning and exemplifying their several authorities by anniversary shows and pomps to the persons , who are naturally pleased with such gleams and irradiations of their superiors , and gains at once honour to the magistrate and effects content to the persons . 

The severest and in other matters most rigid policies or commonwealths ( To wit the Spartan , and Lacedamonian , and Athenian ) smoothed the rugged front of their power in this punctilio and reason of state , and Plato and Aristarchus , and Aristides ( Though never so just , never so strict ) indulged always these ingratiations to the persons . It is the public banquet , whereunto you invite the Commons of the city ; who expect and rejoice always to see some of their money spent upon themselves , and so for recreations , and other permissions of supreme governors , it was always thought a piece of prudential and warrantable licence and wise dispensation , to let the persons spend their own time , and some of their money , where they pleased , especially in innocent and delightful diversions . I cannot here set forth the reason of the late extinguishing these civic lights , and suppressing the genius of our metropolis , which for these planetary pageants and Praetorian pomps was as famous and renowned in foreign nations , as for their faith , wealth , and valour . The ingeny , artifices , mysteries , shows , festivals , ceremonies , and habits of a state , being amongst the decora , and unseparable ornaments of it . Take away the fasces , and the consuls are no more feared , but scorned ; let fall the noble sword of the city in any place , and you are sure the mayor has there no privilege , no livery , no distinguishing of societies , and fraternities , no caps ( In days of old ) no prentices , no trunks , no citizens , no robes no judges , no maces , no magistrate : and so for anniversary shows , and harmless and merry recreations , without a moderate permission of them , very little content to the multitude . right honourable , i therefore , being the son of a citizen , congratulate this return of the city-gallantry and manifestation of her several splendours in your majority to your honoured self , it being most proper that the lost beauty and magnificence of the place , should be restored by one ( If i mistake it not ) a brother of the prime company , and therefore most fit to lead , that so it being begun in the virgin society ; it May like vestal fire never go out : and because the scenical contrivement & pageant bravery is but an Ephemeron , or diurnal birth and issue of one day , and so exit till the next year . Poetical fancy does beg leave to supply that defect , and to enlarge the glory of your day ( My Lord ) to the period of your year ; and because many a far off will be glad to hear what they could not see , and some would willingly retain and keep , what this day was seen by them . This short poem shall be to those that saw it , a remembrancer , or representation , and to the remote wellwishers of the city's honour , a written pageant or pegma metricum , and so i address myself ( My Lord ) to your virgin , whom i shall labour to make as famous , as your honour has made her dowagable ; and by this paper-work to give a procession unto your nobleness and piety beyond the demeans of Cheapside . 

your honour's servant , emd. Gayton . 

No more let Perseus noble story 
Carry away the public glory : 
Nor let Andromeda the fairt , 
With this our virgin star compare , 
Nor let St. George ( Though England's saint ) 
Of his grand legend longer vaunt : 
Nor let the maid , whom dragon green , 
( The fairest monster ever seen ) 
For killing maids , and such prey stealing , 
If we May credit doctor Heyling . 
Let not that maid , nor any other , 
( Always except the virgin-mother ) 
Stand in so great Italicâ 
As does the virgin of this day . 
That virgin sacrifice that died 
With veil unveiled , and zone untied , 
Upon her father's oath ill made , 
And worse performed , aside belayd ; 
And that of Iphigenia 
( If those be two ) they must give way : 
And lipsius-virgin in his gown 
Is by our virgins dress put down . 
( Alas his gown could naught procure , 
Critics and poets still are poor ! ) 
See how she rides ! See how she comes ! 
Alarmed in with fifes and drums : 
Not Venus with the bribed winds 
Blowing her hair ( The snare of minds ) 
and all her fluttring blind array 
Of Cupids , that forerun the way ; 
Not in her richest pearly shell , 
Nor yet Proserpina for hell 
When the great Lord of wealth ( Her love ) 
Did all the entrails of his earth improve , 
To catch ( The not so taken maid ) 
In 's ebon Car made light afraid , 
And richest stones , benighted day , 
Did so much gallantry display : 
As when our virgin and her pages , 
The pride of this , the talk of ages 
That are to come , did pass the street 
In satin all from head to feet ; 
 And every virgin who stood by , 
 wished secretly , oh would that i 
 Were of the mercer's company ! 
The sight was rare , but envious clouds , 
The glorious day in showers beshrowds ; 
And winds in malice , or in love 
To sport or court her highly strove . 
Avaunt you hollow issue of the earth , 
And mountains vast unruly birth , 
Play with our naval sights and toss 
The barges ; there 's the smaller loss : 
Prostrate yourselves before that barge 
That carries now the cities charge ; 
those red white streamers now are come , 
And do command you to be dumb ; 
Or if you 'll blow , your breath dispose , 
To fill them like the red white rose : 
That all the azure Thames May tell , 
The mayor is coming by the smell . 
Will you not cease ? then canons roar , 
And fire them off from Lambath shore . 
The winds they are but four , and you 
Are thirty strong , in open view . 
Gunner the lintstock straight prepare , 
And we will thin foul winds to air : 
Or if our virgin do desire , 
we 'll turn you all from air to fire . 
When so translated you will be 
More like unto virginity . 
For rain , and earth , and winds are gross , 
But rarified they lose their dross : 
Then you will proper convoys be 
For this great act of charity : 
Which is of love a grateful strife , 
To deck a virgin for a wife ? 
And by the trophies of an hour , 
To make her a perpetual dower . 
 Which makes the virgins who stood by 
 wish heartily , oh would that i 
 Were of the mercer's company . 
Finis . 





[ jepth . ] the ci•y barges in the Thames . the Lord mayor's barge . all the rest of the barges in blue . thirty canons went off . 




