De corpore politico . Or the elements of law , moral & politic . With discourses upon several heads ; as Of The law of nature . 
Oaths and covenants . 
Several kinds of government . 

with the changes and revolutions of them . 

By tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury . 

London , printed by t. r. for j. Ridley , and are to be sold at the castle in Fleetstreet , by Ram-alley . 1652.  

To the reader . 

Reader , 

You May be pleased to take notice , that the first part of the work depends upon a former treatise of human nature written by Mr. Hobbs , and by a friend of his committed to the press for the benefit of mankind . It was thought fit , that nothing of so worthy an author should be left unprinted , especially considering , that this piece is most useful for the society of reasona•le creatures , being the grounds and principles of policy , without which there would be nothing but confusion in the world . I am confident , if men's minds were but truly fixed upon the centre of this discourse , they would not prove such weathercocks , to be turned about with the wind of every false doctrine , and vain opinion . We should then be free from those disorders which threaten distraction to the soul , and destruction to the common wealth . But let others write never so well , if our practice do not second their instructions , we May be wise enough to foresee our misery , but never know how to prevent it . What pity is it , that such rare conclusions as these are , should produce no other effect , but to inform our knowledge , and confute our conversation ; whilst we neglect the truth that is apprehend . Yet there is some hope , that such observers , whose wisdom hath received the stamp of goodness , will improve their skill to a real advancement of those benefits , which lie hoarded up in this curious cabinet , to whose use and behoof , these excellent notions are commended , as the best that ever were writ in this kind , and May serve for a general ground and foundation to all regular conceptions , that concern the essence and existence of man , the government of kingdoms and commonwealths , and by consequence our eternal salvation . 

De corpore politico . 

Chap. i. 1.2 . Men by nature equal . 3.  By vain glory indisposed to allow equality with themselves , to others . 4.  Apt to provoke another by comparisons . 5.  Apt to encroach one upon another . 6.  Right defined . 7.  Right to the end , implieth right to the means . 8 every man his own judge by nature . 9  Every man's strength and knowledge for his own use . 10.  Every man by nature hath right to all things . 11.  War and peace defined . 12.  Men by noture in the state of war . 13.  In manifest inequality , Might is right . 14.  Reason dictateth peace . 

In a former treatise of human nature already printed , hath been set forth the whole nature of man , consisting in the powers natural of his body and mind , and May all be comprehended in these four , strength of body , Experinece , reason , and passion . 

2.  In this , it will be expedient to consider in what estate of security this our nature hath placed us , and what probability it hath left us , of continuing and preserving ourselves against the violence of one another . And first , if we consider how little odds there is of strength or knowledge , between men of mature age , and with how great facility he that is the weaker in strength , or in wit , or in both , May utterly destroy the power of the stronger ; since there needeth but little force to the taking away of a man's life , we May conclude that men , considered in mere nature , aught to admit amongst themselves equality ; and that he that claimeth no more , May be esteemed moderate . 

3.  On the other side , considering the great difference there is in men , from the diversity of their passions , how some are vainly glorious , and hope for precedency and superiority above their fellows , not only when they are equal in power , but also when they are inferior ; we must needs acknowledge that it must necessarily follow , that those men who are moderate , and look for no more but equality of nature , shall be obnoxious to the force of others , that will attempt to subdue them . And from hence shall proceed a general diffidence in mankind , and mutual fear one of another . 

4.  Farther , since men by natural passion are divers ways offensive one to another , every man thinking well of himself , and hating to see the same in others , they must needs provoke one another by words , and other signs of contempt and hatred , which are incident to all comparison , till at last , they must determine the pre-eminence by strength and force of body . 

5.  Moreover , considering that many men's appetites carry them to one and the same end ; which end sometimes can neither be enjoyed in common , nor divided , it followeth , that the stronger must enjoy it alone and that it be decided by battle who is the stronger . And thus the greatest part of men , upon no assurance of odds , do nevertheless through vanity , or comparison , or appetite , provoke the rest , that otherwise would be contented with equality . 

6.  And forasmuch as necessity of nature maketh men to will and desire bonum sibi , that which is good for themselves , and to avoid that which is hurtful ; but most of all , the terrible enemy of nature , death , from whom we expect both the loss of all power , and also the greatest of bodily pains in the losing : it is not against reason , that a man doth all he can , to preserve his own body and limbs , both from death and pain . And that which is not against reason , men call right , or jus , or blame•esse liberty , of using our own natural power and ability . It is therefore  right of nature , that every man May preserve his own life and limbs , with all the power he hath . 

7.  And because where a man hath right to the end , and the end cannot be attained without the means ; that is , without such things as are necessary to the end , it is consequent that it is not against reason , and therefore right for a man to use all means , and do whatsoever action is necessary for the preservation of his body . 

8.  Also every man by right of nature , is judge himself of the necessity of the means , and of the greatness of the danger . For if it be against reason , that i be judge of mine own danger myself , than it is reason , that another man be judge thereof . But the same reason that maketh another man judge of those things that concern me , maketh me also judge of that that concerneth him . And therefore i have reason to judge of his sentence , whether it be for my benefit , or not . 

9  As a man's judgement in right of nature is to be employed for his own benefit , so also the strength , knowledge , and art , of every man is then rightly employed , when he useth it for himself ; else must not a man have right to preserve himself . 

10.  Every man by nature hath right to all things , that is to say , to do whatsoever he listeth to whom he listeth , to possess , use , and enjoy all things he will and can . For seeing all things he willeth , must therefore be good unto him in his own judgement , because he willeth them , and May tend to his preservation some time or other , or he May judge so , and we have made him judge thereof , sect. 8. it followeth , that all things May rightly also be done by him . And for this cause it is rightly said , natura dedil omnia omnibus , that nature hath given all things to all men ; insomuch that jus & utile , right and profit , is the same thing . But that right of all men to all things , is in effect no better than if no man had right to any thing . For there is little use and benefit of the right a man hath , when another as strong , or stronger than himself hath right to the same . 

11.  Seeing then to the offensiveness of man's nature one to another , there is added a right of every man to every thing , whereby one man invadeth with right , and another man with right resisteth , and men live thereby in perpetual diffidence , and study how to p•eoccupate each other : the estate of men in this natural liberty , is the estate of war . For war is nothing else but that time wherein the will and contention of contending by force , is either by words or actions sufficiently declared ; and the time which is not war , is peace . 

12.  The estate of hostility and war being such , as thereby nature itself is destroyed , and men kill one another : ( As we know also that it is , both by the experience of savage nations that live at this day , and by the histories of our ancestors , the old inhabitants of Germany , and other now civil countries , where we find the persons few , and short-lived , and without the ornaments and comforts of life , which by peace and society are usually invented and procured ) he therefore that desireth to live in such an estate as is the estate of liberty and right of all to all , contradicteth himself . For every man by natural necessity desireth his own good , to which this estate is contrary , wherein we suppose contention between men by nature equal , and able to destroy one another . 

13.  Seeing this right of protecting ourselves by our own discretion and force proceedeth from danger , and that danger from the fquality between men's forces , much more reason is there , that a man prevent such equality before the danger cometh , and before the necessity of battle . A man therefore that hath another man in his power to rule or govern , to do good to , or harm , hath right , by the advantage of this his present power , to take caution at his pleasure , for his security against that other in time to come . He therefore that hath already subdued his adversary , or gotten into his power any other , that either by infancy , or weakness , is unable to resist him , by right of nature May take the best caution , that such infant , or such feeble and subdued person can give him , of being ruled and governed by him for the time to come . For seeing we intend always our one safety and preservation , we manifestly contradict that our intention , if we willingly dismiss such a one , and suffer him at once to gather strength and be our enemy . Out of which May also be collected , that inresistable Might in the state of nature is right . 

14.  But since it is supposed by the equality of strength and other natural faculties of men , that no man is of might sufficient , to assure himself for any long time , of preserving himself thereby , while he remaineth in the state of hostility and war ; reason therefore dictateth to every man for his own good , to seek after peace , as far forth as there is hope to attain the same : and strengthen himself with all the help he can procure , for his own defence against those , from whom such peace cannot be obtained : and to do all those things which necessarily conduce thereunto . 

Chap. ii 1.  The law of nature consisteth not in consent of men , but reason . 2.  That every man devests himself of the right he hath to all things is one precept of nature . 3.  What it is to relinquish and transferr ones right . 4.  The will to transfer , and the will to accept , both necessary to the passing away of right . 5.  Right not transferred by words , de futuro , only . 6.  Words de futuro , together with other signs of the will , May transferr right . 7.  Free gift defined 8.  Contract , and the sorts of it . 9  Covenant defined . 10.  Contract of mutual trust , is of no validity in the estate of hostility . 11.  No covenant of men but with one another . 12.  Covenant how dissolved . 13.  Covenant extorted by fear , in the law of nature , valid . 14.  Covenant contrary to former covenant , void . 15.  An oath defined . 16.  Oath to be administered to every man in his own religion . 17.  Oath addeth not to the obligation . 18.  Covenants bind but to endeavour . 

What it is we call the law of nature , is not agreed upon by those , that have hitherto wtitten . For the most part such writets as have occasion to affirm , that any thing is against the law of nature , do allege no more than this , that it is against the consent of all nations , or the wisest and most civil nations . But it is not agreed upon , who shall judge which nations are the wisest . Others make that against the law of nature , which is contrary to the consent of all mankind , which definition cannot be allowed , because than no man could offend against the law of nature ; for the nature of every man is contained under the nature of mankind . But forasmuch as all men are carried away by the violence of their passion , and by evil customs , do those things which are commonly said to be against the law of nature ; it is not the consent of passion , or consent in some error gotten by custom , that makes the law of nature . Reason is no less of the nature of man than passion , and is the same in all men , because all men agree in the will to be directed and governed in the way to that which they desire to attain , namely , their own good which is the work of reason , there can therefore be no other law of nature than reason , nor no other precepts of natural law , than those which declare unto us the ways of peace , where the same May be obtained , and of defence where it May not . 

2.  One precept of the law of nature therefore this is , that every man divest himself of the right he hath to all things by nature . for when divers men having right not only to all things else , but to one another's persons , if they use the same , there ariseth thereby invasion on the one part , and resistance on the other , which is war , and therefore contrary to the law of nature , the sum whereof consisteth in making peace . 

3.  Wen a man devesteth and putteth from his right , he either simply relinquisheth it , or transferreth the same to another man . To relinquish it , is by sufficient signs to declare , that it is his will no more to do that action , which of right he Might have done before . To transfer right to another , is by sufficient signs to declare to that other accepting thereof , that it is his will not to resist , or hinder him , according to that right he had thereto before he transferred it . For seeing that by nature every man hath right to every thing , it is impossible for a man to transfer unto another any right that he had not before . And therefore all that a man doth in transferring of right , is no more but a declaring of the will , to suffer him to whom he hath so transferred his right , to make benefit of the same , without molestation . As for example , when a man giveth his lands or goods to another , he taketh from himself the right to enter into , and make use of the said lands or goods , or otherwise to hinder him of the use of what he hath given . 

4.  In transferring of right , two things therefore are required , one on the part of him that transferreth , which is a sufficient signification of his will therein : the other , on the part of him to whom it is transferred which is a sufficient signification of his acceptation thereof . Either of these failing the right remaineth where it was : nor is it to be supposed , that he which giveth his right to one that accepteth it not , doth thereby simply relinquish it , and transfer it to whomsoever will receive it : in as much as the cause of transferring the same to one , rather than to another , is in the one , rather than in the rest . 

5.  When there appear no other signs that a man hath relinquished , or transferred his right , but only words , it behooveth that the same be done in words , that signify the present time , or the time past , and not only the time to come . For he that saith of the time to come ( As for example ) to morrow , i will give , declareth evidently , that he hath not yet given . The right therefore remaineth in him to day , and so continues , till he have given actually . But he that saith , i give , presently , or have given to another any thing , to have and enjoy the same to morrow , or any other time future , hath now actually transferred the said right , which otherwise he should have had at the time that the other is to enjoy it . 

6.  But because words alone are not a sufficient declaration of the mind , as hath been showed , chap. 13.  sect. 8 words spoken , de futuro , when the will of him that speaketh them May be gathered by other signs , May be taken very often , as if they were meant de praesenti . for when it appeareth , that he that giveth , would have his words so understood by him to whom he giveth , as if he did actually transfe•r his right , than he must needs be understood to will all that is necessary to the same . 

7.  When a man transferreth any right of his to another , without consideration of reciprocal benefit past , present , or to come , this is called free gift . and in free gift , no other words can be binding , but those which are de praesenti , or de praeterito . for being de futuro only , they transfer nothing , nor can they be understood , as if they proceeded from the will of the giver ; because being a free gift , it carrieth with it no obligation greater than that which is enforced by the words . For he that promiseth to give , without any other consideration but his own affection , so long as he hath not given , deliberateth still , according as the causes of the affections continue , or diminish : and he that deliberateth , hath not yet willed , because the will is the last act of his deliberation . He that promiseth therefore , is not thereby a donor , but Doson ; which name was given to that Antiochus , that promised often , but seldom gave . 

8.  When a man transferreth his right upon consideration of reciprocal benefit , this is not free gift , but mutual donation , and is called contract . and in all contracts , either both parties presently perform , and put each other into a certainty and assurance of enjoying what they contract for . As when men buy or sell , or barter : or one party performeth presently , and the other promiseth , as when one selleth upon trust : or else neither party performeth presently , but trust one another . And it is impossible there should be any kind of contract besides these three . For either both the contractors trust , or neither , or else one trusteth , and the other not . 

9  In all contracts where there is trust , the promise of him that is trusted , is called a covenant . and this though it be a promise , and of the time to come , yet doth it transfer the right , when that time cometh , no less than an actual donation . For it is a manifest sign , that he which did perform , understood it was the will of him that was trusted , to perform also . Promises therefore , upon consideration of reciprocal benefit , are covenants and signs of the will , or last act of deliberation , whereby the liberty of performing , or not performing , is taken away , and consequently are obligatory . For where liberty ceaseth , there beginneth obligation . 

10.  Nevertheless , in contracts that consist of such mutual trust , as that nothing be by either party performed for the present , when the contract is between such as are not compellable , he that performeth first , considering the disposition of men to take advantage of every thing for their benefit , doth but betray himself thereby to the covetousness or other passion of him with whom he contracteth . And therefore such covenants are of none effect . For there is no reason why the one should perform first , if the other be likely not to perform afterward . And whether he be likely or not , he that doubteth shall be judge himself , as hath been said , chap. 1. sect. 8. as long as they remain in the estate and liberty of nature . But when there shall be such power coercive over both the parties , as shall deprive them of their private judgements in this point , then May such covenants be effectual , seeing he that performeth first shall have no reasonable cause to doubt of the performance of the other , that May be compelled thereunto . 

11.  And forasmuch as in all covenants , and contracts , and donations , the acceptance of him to whom the right is transferred , is necessary to the essence of those covenants , donations , &c.  it is impossible to make a covenant or donation to any , that by nature , or absence , are unable ; or if able , do not actualty declare their acceptation of the same . First of all therefore , it is impossible for any man to make a covenant with God almighty , farther than it hath pleased him to declare who shall receive and accept of the said covenant in his name . Also it is impossible to make covenant with those living creatures , of whose wills we have no sufficient sign , for want of common language . 

12.  A covenant to do any action at a certain time and place , is then dissolved by the covenantor , when that time cometh , either by the performance , or by the violation . For a covenant is void that is once impossible . But a covenant not to do without time limited , which is as much as to say , a covenant never to do , is dissolved by the covenantor then only , when he violateth it or dyeth . And generally , all covenants are dischargeable by the covenantee , to whose benefit , and by whose right , he that maketh the covenant is obliged . This right therefore of the covenantee relinquished , is a release of the covenant . And universally , for the same reason , all obligations are determinable at the will of the obliger . 

13.  It is a question often moved , whether such covenants oblige , as are extorted from men by fear . As for example , whether if a man for fear of death , hath promised to give a thief an hundred pounds the next day , and not discover him , whether such covenant be obligatory , or not . And though in some cases such covenant May be void , yet it is not therefore void , because extorted by fear . For there appeareth no reason , why that which we do upon fear , should be less firm than that which we do for covetousness . For both the one and the other maketh the action voluntary . And if no covenant should be good , that proceedeth from fear of death , no conditions of peace between enemies , nor any laws , could be of force , which are all consented to from that fear . For who would lose the liberty that nature hath given him , of governing himself by his own will and power , if they feared not death in the retaining of it ? What prisoner in war Might be trusted to seek his ransom , and ought not rather to be killed , if he were not tied by the grant of his life , to perform his promise ? But after the introduction of policy and laws , the case May alter , for if by the law the performance of such a covenant be forbidden , than he that promiseth any thing to a thief , not only May , but must refuse to perform it . But if the law forbid not the performance , but leave it to the will of the promiser , than is the performance still lawful ; and the covenant of things lawful is obligatory , even towards a thief . 

14.  He that giveth , promiseth , or covenanteth to one , and after giveth , promiseth , or covenanteth the same to another , maketh void the later act. for it is impossible for a man to transfer that right which he himself hath not ; and that right he hath not , which he himself hath before transferred . 

15.  An oath is a clause annexed to a promise , containing a renuciation of God's mercy by him that promiseth , in case he perform not as far as is lawful and possible for him to do . And this appeareth by the words which make the essence of the oath , so help me God . so also was it amongst the heathen . And the form of the Romans was , thou Jupiter kill him that breaketh , as i kill this beast . the intention therefore of an oath being to provoke vengeance upon the breakers of covenant ; it is to no purpose to swear by men , be they never so great , because their punishment by divers accidents May be avoided , whether they will or no , but God's punishment not . Though it were a custom of many nations , to swear by the life of their Princes ; yet those Princes being ambitious of divine honour , give sufficient testimony , that they believed , nothing ought to be sworn by , but the deity . 

16.  And seeing men cannot be afraid of the power they believe not , and an oath is to no purpose , without fear of him they swear by , it is necessary that he that sweareth , do it in that form which himself admitteth in his own religion , and not in that form which he useth , that putteth him to the oath . For though all men May know by nature , that there is an almighty power , nevertheless they believe not , that they swear by him in any other form or name , than what their own ( Which they think the true ) religion teacheth them . 

17.  And by the definition of an oath , it appeareth , that it addeth not a greater obligation to perform the covenant sworn , than the covenant carrieth in itself , but it putteth a man into greater danger , and of greater punishment . 

18 covenants and oaths are de voluntariis , that is , de possibilibus . nor can the covenantee understand the covenantor to promise impossibles ; for they fall not under deliberation : and consequently ( By chap. 13.  sect. 10. which maketh the covenanter interpreter ) no covenant is understood to bind further , then to our best endervour , either in performance of the thing promised , or in something equivalent . 

Chap. iii 1.  That men stand to their covenants . 2.  Injury defined . 3.  That injury is done only to the covenantee . 4.  The signification of those names , just , unjust . 5.  Justice not rightly divided into commutative , and distributive . 6.  It is a law of nature , that he that is trusted , turn not that trust to the damage of him that trusteth . 7.  Ingratitude defined . 8.  It is a law of nature , to endeavour to accommodate one another . 9  And that man forgive upon caution for the future . 10.  And that revenge ought to respect the future only . 11.  That reproach and contempt declared , is against the law of nature . 12.  That indifference of commerce is of the law of nature . 13.  That messengers employed to procure or maintain peace , aught to be safe by the law of nature . 

It is a common saying , that nature maketh nothing in vain . And it is most certain , that as the truth of a conclusion , is no more but the truth of the premises that make it , so the force of the command , or law of nature , is no more than the force of the reasons inducing thereunto . Therefore the law of nature mentioned in the former chapter , sect. 2. namely , that every man should divest himself of the right , &c. were utterly vain , and of none effect , if this also were not a law of the same nature , that every man is obliged to stand to , and perform , those covenants he maketh . for what benefit is it to a man that any thing be promised , or given unto him , if he that giveth , or promiseth , performeth not , or retaineth still the right of taking back what he hath given ? 

2.  The breach or violation of covenant , is that which men call injury , consisting in some action or omission , which is therefore called unjust . for it is action or omission without jus , or right , which was transferred or relinquish before . There is a great similitude between that we call injury , or injustice in the actions and conversations of men in the world , and that which is called absurd in the arguments and disputations of the schools . For as he which is driven to contradict an assertion by him before maintained , is said to be reduced to an absurdity ; so he that through passion doth , or omitteth that which before by covenant he promised to do , or not to omit , is said to commit injustice : and there is in every breach of covenant a contradiction properly so called . For he that covenanteth , willeth to do , or omit , in the time to come . And he that doth any action , willeth it in that present , which is part of the future time contained in the covenant . And therefore he that violateth a covenant , willeth the doing and the not doing of the same thing , at the same time , which is a plain contradiction . And so injury is an absurdity of conversation , as absurdity is a kind of injustice in disputation . 

3.  In all violation of covenant ( To whom soever accrueth the damage ) the injury is done only to him to whom the covenant was made . For example , if a man covenant to obey his Master , and the Master command him to give money to a third , which he promiseth to do , and doth not , though this be to the damage of the third , yet the injury is done to the Master only . For he could violate no covenant with him with whom none was made , and therefore doth him no injury . For injury consisteth in violation of covenant , by the definition thereof . 

4.  The name of just , unjust , justice , injustice ; are equivocal , and signify diversely . For justice and injustice , when they be attributed to actions , signify the same thing with no injury , and injury , and denominate the action just , or unjust , but not the man so . For they denominate him guilty or not guilty . but when justice or injustice , are attributed to men , they signify proneness , and affection , and inclination of nature , that is to say , passions of the mind , apt to produce just and unjust actions . So that when a man is said to be just , or unjust ; not the action , but the passion and aptitude , to do such actions , is considered . And therefore a just man May have committed an unjust act ; and an unjust man May have done justly , not only one , but most of his actions . For there ts an oderunt peccare in the unjust as well as in the just , but from different causes . For the unjust man who abstaineth from injuries for fear of punishment , declareth plainly , that the justice of his actions dependeth upon civil constitution , from whence punishments proceed , which would otherwise in the estate of nature be unjust , according to the fountain from whence they spring . This distinction therefore of justice and injustice , aught to be remembered , that when injustice is taken for guilty , the action is unjust , but not therefore the man ; and when justice is taken for guiltlesness , the actions are just , and yet not always the man . Likewise when justice and injustice are taken for habits of the mind , the man May be just , or unjust , and yet not all his actions so . 

5.  Concerning the justice of actions , the same is usually divided into two kinds , whereof men call the one commutative , and the other distributive ; and are said to consist , the one in proportion arithmetical , the other in geometrical : and commutative justice , they place in permutation , as buying , Seling , and barter ; distributive , in giving to every man according to their deserts . Which distinction is not well made , in as much as injury , which is the injustice of action , consisteth not in the inequality of the things changed , or distributed , but in the inequality that men ( Contrary to nature and reason ) assume unto themselves above their fellows . Of which inequality , shall be spoken hereafter . And for commutative justice placed in buying and selling , though the thing bought be unequal to the price given for it ; yet for as much as both the buyer and the seller are made judges of 〈◊〉 value , and are thereby both satisfied , there can be no injury done on either side , neither party having trusted , or covenanted with the other . And for distributive justice , which consisteth in the distribution of our own benefits , seeing a thing is therefore said to be our own , because we May dispose of it at our own pleasure , it can be no injury to any man , though our liberality be farther extended towards another , then towards him ; unless we be thereto obliged by covenant : and then the injustice consisteth in the violation of that covenant , and not in the inequality of distribution . 

6.  It happeneth many times , that man benefitteth , or contributeth to the power of another , without any covenant , but only upon confidence and trust of obtaining the grace and favour of that other , whereby he May procure a greater , or no less benefit and assistance to himself . For by necessity of nature , every man doth in all his voluntary actions intend some good unto himself . In this case it is a law of nature , that no man suffer him , that thus trusteth to his charity , or good affection towards him , to be in the worse estate for his trusting . for if he shall so do , men will not dare to confer mutually to each others defence , nor put themselves into each others mercy , upon any terms whatsoever , but rather abide the utmost and worst even of hostility , by which general diffidence , men will not only be enforced to war , but also afraid to come so much within the danger of one another , as to make any overture of peace . But this is to be understood of those only , that confer their benefits ( As i have said ) upon trust only , and not for triumph or ostentation . For as when they do it upon trust , the end they aimed at , namely to be well used , is the reward ; so also when they do it for ostentation , they have the reward in themselves . 

2.  But seeing in this case there passeth no covenant , the breach of this law of nature is not to be called injury . it hath another name , to wit , ingratitude . 

8.  It is also a law of nature . that every man do help and endeavour to accommodate each other as far as May be , without danger of their persons , and loss of their means , to maintain and defend themselves . for seeing the causes of war and desolation proceed from those passions , by which we strive to accommodate ourselves , and to leave others as far as we can behind us , it followeth , that tha• passion by which we strive mutually to accommadate each ather , must be the cause of peace . And this passion is that charity defined , chap. 9  sect. 17.  

9  And in this precept of nature , is included and comprehended also this , that man forgive and pardon him that hath done him wrong , upon his repentance and caution for the future . for pardon , is peace granted to him that ( Having provoked to war ) demandeth it . It is not therefore charity , but fear , when a man giveth peace to him that repenteth not , nor giveth caution for maintaining thereof in the time to come . For he that repenteth not , remaineth with the affection of an enemy ; as also doth he that refuseth to give caution , and consequently , is presumed not to seek after peace , but advantage . And therefore to forgive him is not commanded in this law of nature , nor is charity , but May sometime be prudence . Otherwise , not to pardon upon repentance and caution , considering men cannot abstain from provoking one another , is never to give peace . and that is against the general definition of the law of nature . 

10.  And seeing the law of nature commandeth pardon , when there is repentance and caution for the future , it followeth , that the same law ordaineth , that no revenge be taken upon the consideration only of the offence past , but of the benefit to come , that is to say , that all revenge ought to tend to amendment , either of the person offending , or of others , by the example of his punishment ; which is sufficiently apparent , in that the law of nature commandeth pardon , where the future time is secured . The same is also apparent by this , that revenge when it considereth the offence past , is nothing else , but present triumph and glory , and directeth to no end : and what is directed to no end , is therefore unprofitable ; and consequently the triumph of revenge , is vainglory : and whatsoever is vain , is against reason ; and to hurt one another without reason , is contrary to that , which by supposition is every man's benefit , namely peace , and what is contrary to peace , is contrary to the law of nature . 

11.  And because all signs which we show to one another of hatred and contempt , provoke in the highest degree to quarrel and battle , ( In as much as life itself , with the condition of enduring scorn , is not esteemed worth the enjoying , much less peace ) it must necessarily be employed as a law of nature , that no man reproach , revile , deride , or any otherwise declare his hatred , contempt , or disesteem of any other . but this law is very little practised . For what is more ordinary than reproaches of those that are rich , towards them that are not ? or of those that sit in place of judicature , towards those that are accused at the bar ? although to grieve them in that manner , be no part of the punishment for their crime , nor contained in their office . But use hath prevailed , that what was lawful in the Lord towards the servant whom he maintaineth , is also practised a• lawful in the more mighty towards the less though they contribute nothing towards their maintenance . 

12.  It is also a law of nature , that one man allow commerce and traffic indifferently to one another . for he that alloweth that to one man , which he denyeth to another , declareth his hatred to him , to whom he denyeth . And to declare hatred , is war . And upon this title was grounded , the great war between the Athenians , and the Peloponnesians . for would the Athenians have condescended to suffer the Megareans , their neighbours , to traffic in their ports , and markets , that war had not begun . 

13.  And this also is a law of nature , that all messengers of peace , and such as are employed to procure and maintain amity between man and man , May safely come and go . for seeing peace is the general law of nature , the means thereto ( Such as are these men ) must in the same law be comprehended . 

Chap. iv. 1.  A law of nature , that every man acknowledge other for his equal . 2.  Another , that men allow aequalia aequalibus . 3.  Another , that those things which cannot be divided , be used in common . 4.  Another , that things indivisible and incommunicable , be divided by lot . 5.  Natural lot , primogeniture , and first possession . 6.  That men submit to arbitration . 7.  Of an arbitrator . 8.  That no man press his counsel upon any man against his will . 9  How to know suddenly what is the law of nature . 10.  That the law of nature taketh place after security from others to observe the same . 11.  The right of nature not to be taken away by custom , nor the law of nature abrogated by any act. 12.  Why the dictates of nature are called laws . 13.  Whatsoever is against conscience in a man that is his own judge , is against the law of nature . 14.  Of malum poenae , malum culpae ; virtue and vice . 15.  Aptitude to society , fulfilleth the law of nature . 

The question which is the better man , is determinable only in the estate o• government and policy , though it be mistaken for a question of nature , not only by ignorant men , that think one man blood better then another's by nature , but also by him , whose opinions are at this day and in these parts , of greater authority than any other human writings . For he puttet so much difference between the powers 〈◊〉 men by nature , that he doubteth not to s• down as the ground of all his politic , that some men are by nature worthy to govern and others by nature ought to serve which foundation hath not only weakne• the whole frame of his politics , but hath also given men colour and pretences , whereby to disturb and hinder the peace of one another . For though there were such a difference of nature , that Master and servant were not by consent of men , but by inherent virtue , yet who hath that eminency of virtue above others and who is so stupid , as not to govern himself , shall never be agreed upon amongst men , who do every one naturally think himself , as able , at the least to govern another , as another to govern him . And when there was any contention between the finer and the courser wits , ( As there hath been often in times of sedition and civil war ) for the most part , these latter carried away the victory ; and as long as men arrogate to themselves more honour than they give to others , it cannot be imagined , how they can possibly live in peace : and consequently we are to suppose , that for peace sake , nature hath ordained this law , that every man acknowledge other for his equal . and the breach of this law , is that we call pride . 

2.  As it was necessary that a man should not retain his right to every thing , so also was it , that he should retain his right to some things ; to his own body ( For example ) the right of defending , whereof he could not transfer ; to the use of fire , water , free air , and place to live in , and to all things necessary for life . Nor doth the law of nature command any divesting of other rights , then of those only which cannot be retained without the loss of peace . Seeing then many rights are retained , when we enter into peace one with another , reason and the law of nature dictateth , whatsoever right any man requireth to retain , he allow every other man to retain the same . for he that doth not so , alloweth not the equality mentioned in the former section . For there is no acknowledgement of worth , without attribution of the equality of benefit and respect . And this allowance of aequalia aequalibus , is the same thing with the allowing of proportionalia proportionalibus . for when a man alloweth to every man a like , the allowance he maketh , will be in the same proportion , in which are the numbers of men to whom they are made . And this is it men mean by distributive justice , and is properly termed equity . the breach of this law is that which the Greeks call {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , which is commonly rendered covetousness , but seemeth to be more precisely expressed by the word encroaching . 

3.  If there pass no other covenant , the law of nature is , that such things as cannot be divided , be used in common , proportionably to the numbers of them that are to use the same , or without limitation , when the quantity thereof sufficeth . for first supposing the thing to be used in common , not sufficient for them , that are to use it without limitation , if a few shall make more use thereof then the rest , that equality is not observed , which is required in the second section . And this is to be understood , as all the rest of the laws of nature , without any other covenant antecedent : for a man May have given away his right of common , and so the case be altered . 

4.  In those things which neither can be divided , nor used in common , the rule of nature must needs be one of these , Lot , or alternate use : for besides these two ways , there can no other equality be imagined ; and for alternate use , he that beginneth , hath the advantage ; and to reduce that advantage to equality , there is no other way but Lot . In things therefore indivisible and incommunicable , it is the law of nature , that the use be alternate , or the advantage given away by lot ; because there is no other way of equality . And equality is the law of nature . 

5.  There be two sorts of lots ; one arbitrary , made by men , and commonly known by the names of lot , chance , hazard , and the like ; and there is natural lot , such as is primogeniture , which is no more but the chance , or Lot , of being first born , which it seemeth they considered , that call inheritance by the name of kleronomia , which signifieth distribution by lot . Secondly , prima occupatio , first feizing , or finding of a thing whereof no man made use before , which for the most part also is merely chance . 

6.  Although men agree upon these laws of nature , and endeavour to observe the same ; yet considering the passions of men , that make it difficult to understand by what actions , and circumstances of actions , those laws are broken , there must needs arise many great controversies about the interpretation thereof , by which the peace must need• be dissolved , and men return again to their former estate of hostility . For the taking away of which controversies , it is necessary that there be some common arbitrator and judge , to whose sentence , both the parties to the controversies ought to stand . And therefore it is a law of nature , that in every controversy , the parties thereto ought mutual•• to agree upon an arb•trator , whom they bot• trust , and mutually to covenant to stand to the sentence he shall give ther•in . for where every man is his own judge , there properly is no judge at all ; as wh•re every man ca•veth out his own right , it hath the same effect , as if there were no right at all : and where is no judge , there is no end of controversy ▪ and therefore the right of hostility remaineth . 

7.  An arbitrator therefore , or he that is judge , is trusted by the parties to any controversy , to determine the same by the declaration of his own judgement therein . Out of which followeth first , that the judge ought not to be concerned in the controversy he endeth ; for in that case he is a party , and aught by the same reason to be judged by another . Secondly , that he maketh no covenant with either of the parties , to pronounce sentence for the one , more than for the other . Nor doth he covenant so much , as that his sentence shall be just ; for that were to make the parties judges of the sentence , whereby the controversy would remain still undecided . Nevertheless for the trust reposed in him , and for the equality which the law of nature requireth him to consider in the parties , he violateth that law , if for favour , or hatred to either party , he give other sentence than he thinketh right . And thirdly , that no man ought to make himself judge in any controversy between others , unless they consent and agree thereto . 

8.  It is also the law of nature , that no man obtrude or press his advice or counsel to any man , that declareth himself unwil•ing to hear the same . for seeing a man taketh counsel concerning what is good or hurt of himself only , and not of his counsellor , and that counsel is a voluntary action , and therefore tendeth also to the good of the counsellor , there May be often just cause to suspect the counsellor : and though there be none , yet seeing counsel unwillingly heard , is a needless offence to him that is not willing to hear it , and offences tend all to the breach of peace , it is therefore against the law of nature to obtrude it . 

9  A man that shall see these laws of nature set down and inferred with so many words , and so much ado , May think there is yet much more difficulty and subtlety required to acknowledge and do according to the said laws in every sudden occasion , when a man hath but a little time to consider . And while we consider man in most passions , as of anger , ambition , covetousness , vainglory , and the like , that tend to the excluding of natural equality , it is true . But without these passions , there an easy rule to know upon a sudden , whether the action i be to do , be against the law of nature , or not . And it is but this ; that a man imagine himself in the place of the party with whom he hath to do , and reciprocally him in his . which is no more but a changing ( As it were ) of the scales . For every man's passion weigheth heavy in his own scale , but in the scale of his neighbour . And this rule is very well known and expressed in this old dictate , quod tibi fieri non vis , alteri ne feceris . 

10.  These laws of nature , the sum whereof consisteth , in forbidding us to be our own judges , and our own carvers , and in commanding us to accommodate one another ; in case they should be observed by some , and not by others , would make the observers but a prey to them that should neglect them , leaving the good both without defence against the wicked , and also with a charge to assist them : which is against the scope of the said laws , that are made only for the protection , and defence of them that keep them . Reason therefore , and the law of nature over and above all these particular laws , doth dictate this law in general , that those particular laws be so far observed , as they subi•ct us not to any incommodity , that in ou• own judgements May arise , by the neglect thereof in those towards whem we observe them ; and consequently requireth no more , but the desire and constant intention to endeavour , and be ready to observe them , unless there be cause to the contrary in other men's refusal to observe them towards us . The force therefore of the law of nature , is not in foro externo , till there be security for men to obey it , but is always in foro interno , wherein the action of obedience being unsafe , the will and readiness to perform , is taken for the performance . 

11.  Amongst the laws of nature , customs and prescriptions are not numbered . For whatsoever action is against reason , though it be reiterated never so often , or that there be never so many precedents thereof , is still against reason , and therefore not a law of nature , but contrary to it . But consent and covenant May so alter the cases , which in the law of nature May be put by changing the circumstances , that that which was reason before , May afterwards be against it ; and yet is reason still the law . For though every man be bound to allow equally to another , yet if that other shall see cause to renounce the same , & make himself inferior , then , if from thenceforth he consider him as inferior , he breaketh not thereby that law of nature , that commandeth to allow• equality . In sum , a man's own cons•nt May abridge him of the liberty which the law of nature leaveth him , but custom not ; nor can either of them abrogate either these , or any other law of nature . 

12.  And forasmuch as law ( To speak properly ) is a command , and these dictates as they proceed from nature , are not commands , they are not therefore called laws , in respect of nature , but in respect of the author of nature , God almighty . 

13.  And seeing the laws of nature concern the conscience , not he only breaketh them that doth any action contrary , but also he whose action is conformable to them , in case he think it contrary . For though the action chance to be right , yet in his judgement he despiseth the law . 

14.  Every man by natural passion , calleth that good which pleaseth him for the present , or so far forth as he can foresee ; and in like manner , that which displeaseth him , evil . And therefore he that forseeth the whole way to his proservation , ( Which is the end that every one by nature aimeth at , ) must also call it good , and the contrary evil . And this is that good and evil , which not every man in passion calleth so , but all men by reason . And therefore the fulfilling of all these laws is good in reason , and the breaking of them evil . And so also the habit , or disposition , or intention to fulfil them good ; and the neglect of them evil . And from hence cometh that distinction of malum Poen• , and malum culpae , ; for malum p•n• is any pain or molestation of the mind whatsoever ; but malum culpae is that action which is contrary to reason , and the law of nature : as also the habit of doing according to these and other laws of nature , that tend to our preservation , is that we call virtue , and the habit of doing the contrary , vice . as for example , justice is that habit by which we stand to covenants , injustice the contrary vice ; equity that habit by which we allow equality of nature , arrogancy the contrary vice ; gratitude the habit whereby we requite the benefit and trust of others , ingratitude the contrary vice ; temperance the habit , by which we abstain from all things that tend to our destruction , intemperance the contrary vice ; prudence the same with virtue in general . As for the common opin•on , that virtue consisteth in mediocrity and vice in extremes , i see no ground for it , nor can find any such mediocrity . Courage May be virtue , when the daring is extreme , if the cause be good ; and extreme fear no vice , when the danger is extreme . To give a man more than his due , is no injustice , though it be to give him less : and in gifts , it is not the sum that maketh liberality , but the reason . And so in all other virtues and vices . I know that this doctrine of mediocrity is Aristole's , but •is opinions concerning virtue and vice , are no other than those which were received then , and are still by the generality of men , unstudied , and therefore not very likely to be accurate . 

15.  The sum of virtue is to be sociable with them that will be soc•able , and formidable to them that will not . And the same is the sum of the law of nature : for in being sociable , the law of nature taketh place by the way of peace and society ; and to be formidable , is the law of nature in war , where to be feared is a protection a man hath from his own power : and as the •ormer consisteth in actions of equity and justice , the latter consisteth in actions of honour . And equity , justice , and honour , contain all virtues whatsoever . 

Chap. v. a confirmation out of holy scripture of the principal points mentioned in the two last chapters concerning the law of nature . 

The laws mentioned in the former chapters , as they are called the laws of nature , for that they are the dictates of natural reason , and also moral laws , because they concern the manners and conversation , one towards another , so are they also divine laws in respect of the author thereof , God almighty ; and ought therefore to agree , or at least not to be repugnant to the word of God , revealed in holy scripture . In this chapter therefore , i shall produce such places of scripture , as appear to be most consonant to the said laws . 

2.  And first , the word of God seemeth to place the divine law in reason , by all such texts as ascribe the same to the heart and understanding ; as psal. 40.8 . thy law is in my heart : heb. 8.10 . after those days saith the Lord , i will put my laws in their mind . and heb. 10.16 . The same psal. 37.31 . speaking of the righteous man he saith , the law of God in his heart , psal. 19.7 , 8.  the law of God is perfect , converting the soul . It giveth wisdom to the simple , and light unto the eyes . jer. 31.33 . I will put my law in their inward parts , and write it in their hearts . and joh. 1.  The lawgiver himself , God almighty , is called by the name of {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , which is also called , ver. 4.  the light of men . and vers. 9  the light which lighteth every man which cometh into the world . all which are descriptions of natural reason . 

3.  And that the law divine , for so much as is moral , are those precepts which tend to peace , seemeth to be much confirmed by such places of scripture , as these , rom 3.17 . Righteousness ( Which is the fufilling of the law ) is called , the way of peace . and psa. 85.10 . righteousness and peace shall kiss each other . and matth. 5.9 . blessed are the peacemakers . and heb. 7.2 . Melchisedeck King of Salem , is interpreted King of righteousness , and King of peace . and ver. 21.  Our saviour Christ is said to be , a priest for ever after the order of M•lchisedeck : out of which May be inferred , that the doctrine of our saviour Christ annexeth the fulfilling of the law to peace . 

4.  That the law of nature is unalterable , is intimated by this , that the priesthood of Melchisedeck is everlasting ; and by the words of our saviour , matth. 5.18 . heaven and earth , shall pass away , but one jot , or tittle of the law shall not pass till all things be fulfilled . 

5.  That men ought to stand to their covenants , is taught , psal. 15.  Where the question being asked , vers. 1.  Lord , who shall dwell in thy tavernacle , &c.  It is answered , vers. 4.  he that sweareth to h•s own hindrance , and yet changeth not . and that men ought to be gratified , where no covenant passeth , deut. 25.4 . thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn , which s. Paul , 1 cor. 9.9 . interpreteth not of oxen but of men . 

6.  That men content themselves with equality , as it is the foundation of natural law , so also is it of the second table , of the divine law , matth. 22 39.40 . thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself . On these two laws depend the whole law and the prophets ; which is not so to be understood , as that a man should study so much his neighbours profit as his own , or that he should divide his goods amongst his neighbours ; but that he should esteem his neighbour worthy all rights and privileges that himself enjoyeth ; and attribute unto him , whatsoever he looketh should be attributed unto himself : which is no more , but that he should be humble , meek , and content with equality . 

7.  And that in distributing of right amongst equals , that distribution is to be made according to the proportions of the numbers , which is the giving of aequalia aequalibus , & proportionalia proportionalibus ; we have , numb 26.53.54 . the commandment of God to Moses ; thou shalt divide the land according to the number of names ; to many thou shalt give more , to few thou shall give less , to every one according to his number . that decision by lot is a means of peace . Prov. 18.18 . the lot causeth contention to cease , and maketh partition among the mighty . 

8.  That the accommodation and forgiveness of one another , which have before been put for laws of nature , are also law divine , there is no question . For they are the essence of charity , which is the scope of the whole law , that we ought not to repr•ach , or reprehend one another , is the doctrine of our saviour , matth. 7.1 . judge not that ye be not judged . vers. 3.  why seest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye , and seest not the beam that is in thine own eye ? Also the law that forbiddeth us to press our council upon others further than they admit , is a divine law . For after our charity and desire to rectify one another is rejected , to press it farther , is to reprehend him , and condemn him , which is forbidden in the text last recited ; as also rom. 14.12 . every one of us shall give account of himself to God . Let us not therefore judge one another any more , but use your judgement rather in this , that no man put an occasion to fall , or a stumbling block before his brother . 

9  Farther , the rule of men concerning the law of nature , quod tibi fieri non vis , alteri ne feceris , is confirmed by the like , matth. 7.12 . whatsoever therefore you would have men do unto you , that do you unto them : for this is the law and the prophets . and rom. 2.1 . in that thou judgest another , thou condemnest thyself , &c.  

10.  It is also manifest by the scriptures , that these laws concern only the tribunal of our conscience ; and that the actions contrary to them , shall be no farther punished by God almighty , then as they proceed from negligence , or contempt . And first that these laws are made to the conscience , appeareth , matth. 5.20 . for i say unto you , except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees , ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven . now the Pharisees were the most exact among the Jews in the external performance ; they therefore must want the sincerity of conscience ; else could not our saviour have required a greater righteousness than theirs . For the same reason our saviour Christ saith , the publican departed from the temple justified rather than the Pharisee . and Christ saith , his yoke is easy , & his burden light , which proceedeth from this , that Christ required no more than our best endeavour . And rom. 14.23 . he that doubteth is condemned , if he eat . and in innumerable places both in the old and new testament , God almighty declareth , that he taketh the will for the deed , both in good and evil actions . By all which it plainly appears , that the divine law is dictated to the conscience one the other side is no less plain ; that how many and heinous actions soever a man commit through infirmity , he shall nevertheless , whensoever he shall condemn the same in his own conscience , be freed from the punishments that to such actions otherwise belong . For at what time soever a sinner doth repent him of his sins from the bottom of his heart , i will put all his iniquties out of my remembrance , saith the Lord . 

11.  Concerning revenge which by the law of nature ought not to aim ( As i have said , chap. 3.  Sect 10. ) at present delight , but future profit , there is some difficulty mad• , as if the same accorded not with the law divine , by such as object the continuance of punishment after the day of judgement , when there shall be no place , neither for amendment nor for example . This objection had been of some force , if such punishment had been ordained after all sins were past ; but considering the punishment was instituted before sin , it serveth to the benefit of mankind , because it keepeth men in peaceable and virtuous conversation by the terror . And therefore such revenge was directed to the future only . 

12.  Finally , there is no law of natural reason that can be against the law divine : for God almighty hath given reason to a man to be a light unto him . And i hope it is no impiety to think , that God almighty will require a strict account thereof , at the day of judgement , as of the instructions which we were to follow in our peregrination here , notwithstanding the opposition and affronts of supernaturalists now adays , to rational and moral conversation . 

Chap. vi . 1.  That men notwithstanding these laws , are still in the state of war , till they have security one against another . 2.  The law of nature in war , is nothing but honour . 3.  No security without the concord of many . 4.  That concord of many cannot be maintained without power to keep them all in awe . 5.  The cause why concord remaineth in a multitude of some irrational creatures , and not of men . 6.  That union is necessary for the maintaining of concord . 7 how union is made . 8.  Body politic defined . 9  Corporation defined . 10.  Sovereign subject defined . 11.  Two sorsts of bodies politic , patrimonia , and common wealth . 

In chap. 12.  Sect. 16. of the treatise of human nature , it hath been showed that the opinions men have of the rewards and punishments which are to follow their actions , are the causes that make and govern the will to those actions . In this estate of man therefore , wherein all men are equal , and every man allowed to be his own judge , the fears they have one of another are equal , and every man's hopes consist in his own slight and strength : & consequently when any man by his natural passion , is provoked to break these laws of nature , there is no security in any other man of his own defence but anticipation . and for this cause , every man's right ( Howsoever he be inclined to peace ) of doing whatsoever seemeth good in his own eyes , remaineth with him still , as the necessary means of his preservation . And therefore till there be security amongst men for the keeping of the law of nature one towards another , men are still in the estate of war , and nothing is unlawful to any man that tendeth to his own safety or commodity : and this safety and commodity consisteth in the mutual aid and help of one another , whereby also followeth the mutual fear of one another . 

2.  It is a proverbial saying , inter arma silent leges . there is little therefore to be said concerning the laws that men are to observe one towards another in time of war , wherein every man's being and w•ll-being is the rule of his actions . Yet thus much the law of nature commandeth in war , that men satiate not the cruelty of their present passions , whereby in their own conscience they foresee no benefit to come . For that betrayeth not a necessity , but a disposition of the mind to war , which is against the law of nature . And in old time we read , that rapine was a trade o• life , wherein nevertheless many of them •hat used it , did not only spare the lives of those they invaded , but left them also such things , as were necessary to preserve that life which they had given them ; as namely , their oxen and instruments for tillage , though they carried away all their other cattle and substance . And as the rapine itself was warranted in the law of nature , by the want of security otherwise to maintain themselves , so the exercise of cruelty was forbidden by the same law of nature , unless fear suggested any thing to the contrary . For nothing but fear can just•fie the taking away of another's life . And because fear can hardly be made manifest , but by some action dishonourable , that bewrayeth the conscience of ones own weakness , all men , in whom the passion of courage or magnanimity hath been predominant , have abstained f•om cruelty , insomuch , that though there be in war no law , the breach whereof is injury , yet there are in war those laws the breach whereof is dishonour . In one word therefore , the only law of actions in war , is honour , and the right of war , providence . 

3.  And seeing natural aid is necessary for defence , as mutual fear is necessary for peace , we are to consider how great aids are required for such defence , and for the causing of such mutual fear , as men May not easily adventure on one another . And first it is evident , that the mutual aid of two or three men is of very little security . For the odds on the other side , of a man or two , giveth sufficient encouragement to an assault . And therefore before men have sufficient security in the help of one another , their number must be so great , that the odds of a few which the enemy May have , be no certain and sensible advantage . 

4.  And supposing how great a number soever of men assembled together for their mutual defence , yet shall not the effect follow , unless they all direct their actions to one and the same end ; which direction to one and the same end is that , which chap. 12.  Sect. 7. is called consent . this consent ( Or concord ) amongst so many men , thoug• it May be made by the fear of a present invader , or by the hope of a present conquest , or booty , and endure as long as that action endureth , nevertheless , by the diversity of judgements and passions in so many men contending naturally •or honour and advantage one above another ; it is impossible , not only that their consent to aid each other against an enemy , but also that the peace should last between themselves , with out some mutual and common fear to rule them . 

5.  But contrary hereunto May be objected , the experience we have of certain living creatures irrational , that nevertheless continually live in such good order and government for their common benefit , and are so free from sedition & war amongst themselves , that for peace , profit , and defence , nothing more can be imaginable . And the experience we have in this , is in that little creature the bee , which is therefore reckoned amongst animalia politica . why therefore May not men that foresee the benefit of concord , continually maintain the same without compulsion , as well as they ? To which i answer , that amongst other living creatures , there is no question of precedence in their own species , nor strife about honour , or acknowledgement of one another's wisdom , as there is amongst men , from whence arise envy and hatred of one towards another , and from thence sedition and war . Secondly , those living creatures aim every one at peace , and food common The will of man being voluntary , but the beginning of voluntary actions , is not subject to deliberation and covenant , yet when a man covenanteth to subject his will to the command of another , he obligeth himself to this , that he resign his strength and means to him , whom he covenanteth to obey . And hereby he that is to command , May by the use of all their means & strength , be able by the terror thereof , to frame the will of them all to unity and concord , amongst themselves . 

8.  This union so made , is that which men call now adays , a body politic , or civil society and the Greeks call it {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , that is to say , a city , which May be defined to be a multitude of men , united as one person , by a common power , for their common peace , defence and benefit . 

9 and as this union into a city or body politic , is instituted with common power over all there particular persons , or members thereof , to the common good of them all , so also May there be amongst a multitude of those members instituted , a subordinate union of certain men , for certain common actions to be done by those men for some commo• benefit of theirs , or of the whole city ; a• for subordinate government , for counsel for trade , and the like . And these subordinate bodies politic are usually calle•corporationss ; and their power such over the particulars of their own society , as the whole city whereof they are members have allowed them . 

10.  In all cities , or bodies politic not subordinate , but independent , that one man , or one council , to whom the particular members have given that common power , is called their sovereign , and his power the sovereign power ; which consisteth in the power and the strength , that every of the members have transferred to him from themselves by covenant and because it is impossible for any man really to transfer his own strength to another , or for that other to receive it , it is to be understood , that to transfer a man's power and strength , is no more , but to lay by or relinquish his own right of resisting him to whom he so transferreth it . And every member of the body politic , is called a subject , to wit , to the sovereign . 

11.  The cause in general , which moveth a man to become subject to another , is ( As i have said already ) the fear of not otherwise preserving himself . And a man May subject himself to him that invadeth , or May invade him , for fear of him ; or men May join amongst themselves , to subject themselves to such as they shall agree upon for fear of others , and when many men subject themselves the former way , there ariseth thence a body politic , as it were naturally . From whence proceedeth dominion , paternal , and despotique . and when they subject themselves the other way , by mutual agreement amongst many , the body politic they make , is for the most part called a common wealth in distinction from the former , though the name be the general name for them both . And i shall speak in the first place of commonwealths , and afterward of bodies politic , patrimonial , and despotical . 

The second part . 

Chap. i. 1.  Introduction . 2.  A multitude before their union , &c. 3.  Express consent of every particular , &c. 4.  Democratical , aristocratical , monarchial union , May be instituted for ever , or , &c. 5.  Without security no private right relinquished . 6.  Covenants of government without power of coercion are no security . 7.  Power coercive , &c. 8.  The sword of war , &c. 9  Decision in all debates &c. annexed to the sword . 10.  Laws civil , &c. 11.  Appointment of magistrates , &c. 12.  Sovereign power includeth impunity . 13.  A supposed common weal•h , where laws are made first , and the commonwealth after . 14.  The same refelled . 15.  Mixed forms of government sup•osed in sovereignty . 16.  That refelled . 17.  Mixed government , &c. 18.  Reason and experience to prove absolute sovereignty somewhere in all commonwealths . 19  Some principal , &c. marks of sovereignty . 

In that treatise of human nature which was formerly printed , hath been wholly spent in the consideration of the natural power , and the natural estate of man , namely , of his cognition and passions in the first eleven chapters , and how from thence proceed his actions ; in the twelfth , how men know one another's minds : in the last , in what estate men's passions set them . In the first chapter of this treatise , what estate they are directed unto by the dictates of reason , that is to say , what be the principal articles of the law of nature , in the 2.3.4.5 . And lastly , how a multitude of persons natural , are united by covenants into one person civil , or body politic . In this part therefore shall be considered , the nature of a body politic , and the laws thereof , otherwise called civil laws . And whereas it hath been said in the last chapter , and last section of the former part , that there be two ways of erecting a body politic ; one by arbitrary institution of many men assembled together which is like a creation out of nothing by human wit ; the other by compulsion , which is as it were a generation thereof out of natural force ; i shall first speak of such erection of a body politic , as proceedeth from the assembly and consent of a multitude . 

2.  Having in this place to consider , a multitude of men about to unite themselves into a body politic , for their security , both against one another , and against common enemies , and that by covenants , the knowledge of what covenants they must needs make , dependeth on the knowledge of the persons , and the knowledge of their end . First , for their persons they are many , and ( As yet ) not one ; nor can any action done in a multitude of persons met together , be attributed to the multitude , or truly called the action of the multitude , unless every man's hand , and every man's will , ( Not so much as one excepted ) have concurred thereto . For multitude , though in their persons they run together , yet they concur not always in their designs . For even at that time when men are in tumult , though they agree a number of them to one mischief , and a number of them to one another ; yet in the whole , they are amongst themselves in the state of hostility , and not of peace ; like the seditious Jews besieged in Jerusalem , that could join against their enemies , and fight amongst themselves . Whensoever therefore any man saith , that a number of men hath done any act , it is to be understood , that every particular man in that number hath consented thereunto , and not the greatest part only . Secondly , though thus assembled with intention to unite themselves , they are yet in that estate in which every man hath right to every thing , and consequently as hath been said , chap. 1. sect. 10. in an estate of enjoying nothing . And therefore meum & tuum , hath no place amongst them . 

3.  The first thing therefore they are to do is expressly , every man to consent to something by which they May come near to their ends , which can be nothing else imaginable , but this , that they allow the wills of the major part of their whole number , or the wills of the major part of some certain number of men by them determined and named ; or lastly , the will of some one man , to involve and be taken for the wllis of every man . And this done they are united , and a body politic . and if the major part of their whole number be supposed to involve the wills of all the particulars , then The wills of the particulars , then are they said to be a democracy , that is to say , a government wherein the whole number , or so many of them as please , being assembled together , are the sovereign , and every particular man a subject . If the major part of a certain number of men named or distinguished from the rest , be supposed to involve the wills of every one of the particulars , then are they said to be an oligarchy , or aristocracy , which two words signify the same thing , together with the divers passions of those that use them . For when the men that be in that office please , they are called an aristocracy , or otherwise an oligarchy , where in those the major part of which declare the wills of the whole multitude being assembled , are the sovereign , and every man severally a subject . Lastly , if their consent be such , that the will of one man whom they name , shall stand for the wills of them all , then is their government or union called a mornarchy , and that one man a sovereign , and every of the rest a subject . 

4.  And those several sorts of unions , governments , and subjections , of man's will May be understood to be made , either absolutely , that is so say , for all future time , or for a time limited only . But forasmuch as we speak here of a body politic , instituted for the perpetual benefit and defence of them that make it ; which therefore men desire should last for ever , i will omit to speak of those that be temporary , and consider of those that be for ever . 

5.  The end for which one man giveth up , and relinquisheth to another , or others the right of protecting & defending himself by his own power , is the security which he expecteth thereby , of protection and defence from those to whom he doth so relinquish it ; and a man May then account himself in the estate of security , when he can foresee no violence to be done unto him , from which the doer May not be deterred by the power of that sovereign , to whom they have every one subjected themselves : and without that security , there is no reason for a man to deprive himself of his own advantages , and make himself a prey to others . And therefore when there is not such a sovereign power erected , as May afford this security , it is to be understood that every man's right of doing whatsoever seemeth good in his own eyes , remaineth still with him ; and contrariwise , where any subject hath right by his own judgement and discretion , to make use of his force , it is to be understood that every man hath the like , and consequently that there is no common wealth at all established . How far therefore in the making of a common wealth , man subiecteth his will to the power of others , must appear from the end , namely , security . For whatsoever is necessary to be by covenant transferred for the attaining thereof , so much is transferred , or else every man is in his natural liberty to secure himself . 

6.  Covenants agreed upon by every man assembled for the making of a common wealth ; and put in writing without erecting of a power of coercion , are no reasonable security for any of them that so covenant , nor are to be called laws , and leave men still in the estate of nature and hostility . For seeing the wills of most men are governed only by fear , and where there is no power of coercion , there is no fear , the wills of most men will follow their passions of covetousness , lust , anger , and the like , to the breaking of those covenants , whereby the rest also , who otherwise would keep them , are set at liberty , and have no law , but from themselves . 

7.  This power of coercion as hath been said , chap. 2. sect. 3. of the former part consisteth in the transferring of every man's right of resistance against him , to whom he hath transferred the power of coercion . It followeth therefore , that no man in any common wealth whatsoever hath right to resist him , or them , on whom they have transferred this power coercive , or ( As men use to call it the sword of justice , supposing the not resistance possible . For part 1. Chap. 2. sect. 18.  Covenants bind but to the utmost of our endeavour . 

8.  And forasmuch as they who are amongst themselves in security , by the means of this sword of justice , that keep them all in awe , are nevertheless in danger of enemies from without , if there be not some means found , to unite their Strength• and natural forces , in the resistance of such enemies , their peace amongst themselves is but in vain . And therefore it is to be understood as a covenant of every member , to contribute their several forces fore the defence of the whole , whereby to make one power as sufficie•t , as is possible for their defence . Now seeing that every man hath already transferred the use of his strength to him , or them , that have the sword of justice , it followeth , that the power of defence , that is to say , the sword of war , be in the same hands , wherein is the sword of justice ; and cons•quently those two swords are but one , and that inseparably and essentially annexed to the sovereign power . 

9  Moreover , seeing to have the right of the sword , is nothing else but to have the use thereof depending only on the judgement and discretion of him or them that have it , it followeth , that the power of indenture in all controversies , wherein the sword of justice is to be used ; and in all deliberations concerning war , ( Wherein the use of that sword is required ) the right of resolving and determining what is to be done , belong to the same sovereign . 

10.  Farther , considering it is no less , but much more necessary to prevent violence & rapine , then to punish the same when it is committed , & all violence proceedeth from controversies that arise between men concerning meum & tuum , right and wrong , good and bad , and the like which men use every one to measure by their own judgements , it belongeth also to the judgement of the same sovereign power , to set forth and make known the common measure by which every man is to know what is his , and what another's ; what is good and what bad , and what he ought to do and what not , and to command the same to be observed . And these measures of the actions of the subjects are those , which men call laws politic , or civil . The making whereof , must of right belong to him that hath the power of the sword , by which men are compelled to observe them ; for otherwise they should be made in vain . 

11.  Farthermore , seeing it is impossible that any one man that hath such sovereign power , can be able in person , to hear and determine all controversies , to be present at all deliberations concerning common good , and to execute and perform all those common actions that belong thereunto , whereby there will be necessity of magistrates , and ministers of public affairs ; it is consequent that the appointment , nomination , & limitation of the same be understood , as an inseparable part of the same sovereignty , •o which the sum of all judicature , and execution hath been already annexed . 

12.  And forasmuch as the right to use the forces of every particular member , is transferred from themselves , to their sovereign , a man will easily fall upon this conclusion of himself , that to sovereign power ( Whatsoever it doth ) there belongeth impunity . 

13.  The sum of these rights of sou•r•ignty ; namely the absolute use of the sword in peace and war , the making and abrogating of laws , supreme , judicature , & decision , in all debate judicial and deliberative , the nomination of all magistrates , and ministers , with other rights contained in the same , make the sovereign power no less absolute in the commonwealth , then before commonwealth , every man was absolute in himself , to do , or not to do , what he thought good ; which men that have not had the experience of that miserable estate , to which men are reduced by long war , think so hard a condition , that they can not easily acknowledge such covenants , and subjection on their parts , as are here set down to have been ever necessary to their peace . And therefore some have imagined that a commonwealth May be constituted in such manner as the sovereign power May be so limited , and moderated , as they shall think fit themselves . For example ; they suppose a multitude of men to have agreed upon certain articles , ( Which they presently call laws ) declaring how they will be governed , and that done , to agree farther upon some man , or number of men , to see the same articles performed , and put in execution ; and to enable him , or them thereunto , they allot unto them a provision limited , as of certain lands , taxes , penalties , and the like then , which ( If misspent ) they shall have no more , without a new consent of the same men that allowed the former . And thus they think they have made a common wealth , in which it is unlawful for any private man to make use of his own sword for his security ; wherein they deceive themselves . 

14.  For first , if to the revenue , it did necessarily follow , that there Might be forces raised and procured at the will of him that hath such revenue , yet since the revenue is limited , so must also the forces : b•t limited forces against the power of an enemy , which we cannot limit , are unsufficient . Whensoever therefore there happeneth an invasion greater than those forces are able to resist , and there be no other right to levy more , than is every man by necessity of nature , allowed to make the best provision he can for himself ; and thus is the private sword , and the estate of war again reduced . But seeing revenue , without the right of commanding men , is of no use , neither in peace nor war , it is necessary to be supposed , that he that hath the administration of those articles , which are in the former section supposed , must have also right to make use of the strengths of particular men . And what reason soever giveth him that right over any one , giveth him the same over all . And then is his right absolute . For he that hath right to all their forces , hath right to dispose of the same . Again , supposing those limited forces and revenue , either by the necessary , or negligent use of them to fail , and that for a supply the same multitude be again to be assembled , who shall have power to assemble them , that is to compel them to come together ? If he that demandeth the supply , hath that right , to wit , the right to compel them all , then is his sovereignty absolute ; if not , then is every particular man at liberty to come , or not ; to frame a new common wealth , or not , and so the right of the private sword returneth but suppose them willingly , and of their own accord assembled to consider of this supply , if now it be still in their choice , whether they shall give it , or not , it is also in their choice , whether the common wealth shall stand , or not . And therefore there lieth not upon any of them any civil obligation that May hinder them from using force , in case they think it tend to their defence . This device therefore of them that will make civil laws first , and then a civil body afterwards ( As if policy made a body politic , and not a body politic made policy ) is of no effect . 

15.  Others , to avoid the hard condition , as they take it , of absolute subjection ( Which ( In hatred thereto ) they also call slavery ) have despised a government , as they think , mixed of three sorts of sovereignty . As for example ; they suppose the power of making laws , given to some great assembly democratical , the power of judicature to some other assembly , and the administration of the laws to a third , or to some one man ; and this policy they call mixed mona•chy , or mixed aristocracy , or mixed democracy , according as any of these three sorts do most visibly predominate . And in this estate of government , they think the use of the private sword excluded . 

16.  And supposing it were so , how were this condition which they call slavery , eased thereby . For in this estate they would have no man allowed , either to be his own judge , or own carver , or to make any laws unto himself ; and as long as these three agree they are as absolutely subject to them , as is a child to the father , or a slave to the Master , in the state of nature . The ease therefore of this subjection , must consist in the disagreement of those amongst whom they have dist•ibuted the rights of sovereign power . But the same disagreement is war . The division therefore of the sovereignty , either worketh no effect to the taking away of simple subjection , or introduceth war , wherein the private sword hath place again . But the truth is , as hath been already showed in 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12. precedent sections , the sovereignty is indivisible . And that seeming mixture of several kinds of government , not mixture of the things themselves , but confusion in our understandings , that cannot find out readily to whom we have subjected ourselves . 

17.  But though the sovereignty be not mixed , but be always either simple democracy , or simple aristocracy , or pure monarchy , nevertheless in the administration thereof , all those sorts of government May have place subordinate . For suppose the sovereign power be democracy , as it was sometimes in Rome , yet at the same time they May have a counsel aristocratical , such as was the senate ; and at the same time they May have a subordinate monarch , such as was their dictator , who had , for a time , the exercise of the whole sovereignty , & such as are all generals in war . So also in monarchy there May be a council aristocratical of men , chosen by the monarch , or democratical of men chosen by the consent ( The monarch permitting ) of all the particular men of the common wealth . And this mixture is it that imposeth , as if it were the mixture of sovereignty . As if a man should think , because the great council of Venice doth nothing ordinarily but choose magistrates , ministers of state , captains , and governors of towns , ambassadors , councillors , and the like , that therefore their part of the soveraigt , is only choosing of magistrates : & that the making of war , and peace , and laws were not theirs , but the part of such counsellors as they appointed thereto ; whereas it is the part of these to do it but subordinately , the supreme authority thereof being in the great council that choose them . 

18.  And as reason teacheth us , that a man considered out of subjection to laws , and out of all covenants obligatory to others , is free to do and undo , and deliberate as long as he listeth ; every member being obedient to the will of the whole man , that liberty being nothing else but his natural power , without which he is no better than an inanimate creature , not able to help himself ; so also it teacheth us , that a body politic , of what kind soever , nor subject to another , nor obliged by covenants , aught to be free , and in all actions to be assisted by the members , every one in their place , or at least not resisted by them . For otherwise , the power of a body politic ( The essence whereof , is the not resistance of the members ) is none , nor a body politic of any benefit . And the same is confirmed by the use of all nations and commonwealths , wherein that man or council which is virtually the whole , hath any absolute power over every particular member ; or what nation or commonwealth is there , that hath not power and right to constitute a general in their wars ? But the power of a general is absolute ; and consequently there was absolute power in the common wealth , from whom it was derived . For no person , natural or civil , can transfer unto another more power than himself hath . 

19  In every common wealth , where particular men are deprived of their right to protect themselves there resideth an absolute sovereignty ; as i have already showed . But in what man , or in what assembly of men the same is placed , is not so manifest , as not to need some marks , whereby it May be discerned . And first , it is an infallible mark of absolute sovereignty in a man or in an assembly of men , if there be no right in any other person , natural or civil , to punish that man , or to dissolve that assembly . For he that cannot of right be punished , cannot of right be resisted ; and he that cannot of right be resisted , hath coercive power ove• all the rest , and thereby can frame and govern their actions at his pleasure , which is absolute sovereignty . Contrariwise , he that in a commonwealth is punishable by any , or that assembly that is dissolvable , is not sovereign . For a greater power is always required to punish and dissolve , than theirs who are punished or dissolved ; and that power cannot be called sovereign , than which there is a greater . Secondly , that man or assembly , that by their own right not derived from the present right of any other , May make laws , or abrogate them at his or their pleasure , have the sovereignty absolute . For seeing the laws they make , are supposed to be made by right , the members of the common wealth to whom they are made , are obliged to obey them , and consequently not resist the execution of them , which not resistance , maketh the power absolute of him that ordaineth them . It is likewise a mark of this sovereignty , to have the right original of appointing magistrates , judges , councillors , and ministers of state . For without that power , no act of sovereignty or government can be performed . Lastly , and generally , whosoever by his own authority independent , can do any act , which another of the same common wealth May not , must needs be understood to have the sovereign power . For by nature men have equal right . This inequality therefore must proceed from the power of the commonwealth . He therefore that doth any act lawfully by his own authorit• , which another May not , doth it by the power of the commonwealth in himself , which is absolute sovereignty . 

Chap. ii 1.  Democracy precedeth all other , &c. 2.  The sovereign persons covenanteth not with the subjects . 3.  The sovereign , &c. cannot , &c. do injury , &c. 4.  The faults of the sovereign persons , &c.  5 democracy , &c. an aristocracy of orators . 6.  Aristocracy how made . 7.  The body of the optimates not properly said to injure the subjects . 8.  The election of the optimates , &c. 9  An elective King , &c. 10.  A conditional King , &c. 11.  The word persons equivocal . 12.  Obedience discharged by release . 13.  How such releases are to be understood . 14.  Obedience discharged by exile . 15.  By conquest . 16.  By ignorance of the right of succession . 

Having spoken in general concerning instituted policy in the former chapter , i come in this , to speak of the sorts thereof in special , how every of them is instituted . The first in order of time of these three sorts , is democracy ; and it must be so of necessity , because an aristocracy and a monarchy , require nomination of persons agreed upon , which agreement in a great multitude of men must consist in the consent of the major part ; and where the votes of the major part involve the votes of the rest , there is actually a democracy . 

2.  In the making of a democracy , there passeth no covenant between the sovereign and any subject . For while the democracy is a making , there is no sovereign with whom to contract . For it cannot be imagined , that the multitude should contract with it seif , or with any one man , or number of men parcel of itself , to make itself sovereign nor that a mulritude considered as one aggregate , can give itself any thing which before it had not . Seeing then that sovereignty democratical is nat conferred by the covenant of any multitude , which supposeth union and sovereignty already made ; it resteth that the same be conferred by the particular covenants of every several man , that is to say , every man with every man , for and in consideration of the benefit of his own peace and defence , covenanteth to stand to and obey whatsoever the major part of their whole number , or the major part of such a number of them , as shall be pleased to assemble at a certain time and place , shall determine and command . And this is that which giveth being to a democracy , wherein the sovereign assembly was called of the Greeks , by the name of Demus , ( That is , the persons ) from whence cometh democracy . So that , where to the supreme and independent court , every man May come that will and give his vote , there the sovereign is called the persons . 

3.  Out of this that hath been said , May readily be drawn , that whatsoever the persons doth to any one particular member or subject of the common wealth , the same by him ought not to be styled injury . For first injury ( By the definition , part 1. chap. 3. sect. 2. ) is breach of covenant ; but covenants ( As hath been said in the precedent section ) there passed none from the persons to any private man ; and consequently ( To wit the persons ) can do him no injury . Secondly , how unjust soever the action be , that this sovereign D•mus shall do , is done by the will of every particular man subject to him , who are therefore guilty of the same . If therefore they style it injury , they but accuse themselves . And it is against reason for the same man , both to do and complain , implying this contradiction , that whereas he first ratified the people's acts in general , he now disalloweth the same of them in particular . It is therefore said truly , volenti non fit injuria . nevertheless nothing doth hinder but that divers actions done by the persons May be unjust before God almighty , as breaches of the law of nature . 

4.  And when it happeneth , that the persons by plurality of voices , that decree or command any thing contrary to the law of God or nature , though the decree and command be the act of every man , not only present in the assembly , but also absent from it , yet is not the injustice of the decree , the injustice of every particular man , but only of those men , by whose express-sufferag•ss the decree or command was passed . For a body politic , as it is a fictious body , so are the faculties and will thereof fictious also . But to make a particular man unjust which consisteth of a body and soul natural , there is required a natural and very will . 

5.  In all democracies , though the right of sovereignty be in the assembly which is virtually the whole body , yet the use thereof is always in one , or a few particular men . For in such great assemblies , as those must be , whereinto every man May enter at his pleasure , there is no means any ways to deliberate and give council what to do but by long and set orations , whereby to every man there is more or less hope given to incline & sway the assembly to their own ends . In a multitude of speakers therefore where always either one is eminent alone , or a few being equal amongst themselves are eminent above the rest , that one or few must of necessity sway the whole . Insomuch that a democracy , in effect is no more than an aristocracy of orators , interrupted sometimes with the temporary monarchy of one orator 

6.  And seeing a democracy is by institution , the beginning both of aristocracy and monarchy , we are to consider next , how aristocracy is derived from it . When the particular members of the common wealth growing weary of attendance at public courts , as dwelling far off , or being attentive to their private businesses , and withal , displeased with the government of the persons , assemble themselves to make an aristocracy , there is no more required to the making thereof , but putting to the question one by one , the names of such men as it shall consist of , and assenting to their election ; and by plurality of vote to transfer that power , which before the persons had , to the number of men so named and chosen . 

7.  And from this manner of erecting an aristocracy , it is manifest , that the few , or optimates , have entered into no covenant with any of the particular members of the common wealth , whereof they are sovereign ; and consequently cannot do any thing to any private man , that can be called injury to him , howsoever their act be wicked before almighty God , according to that which hath been said before sect  . Farther it is impossible , that the persons , as one body politic , should covenant with the aristocracy or optimates , on whom they intend to transfer their sovereignty . For no sooner is the aristocracy erected , but the democracy is annihilated , and the covenants made unto them void . 

8.  In all aristocracies the admission of such as are from time to time to have vote in the sovereign assembly , dependeth on the will and decree of the present optimates . For they being the sovereign , have the nomination ( By the 11.  Section of the former chapter ) of all magistrates , ministers , and counsellors of state whatsoever , and May therefore choose either to make them elective , or hereditary , at their pleasure . 

9  Out of the same democracy , the institution of a political monarch proceedeth in the same manner , as did the institutio• of the aristocracy , to wit , by a decree of the sovereign persons , to pass the sovereignty to one man named and approved by plurality of suffrage . And if this sovereignty be truly and indeed transferred , the estate or commonwealth is an absolute monarchy wherein the monarch is at liberty , to dispos• as well of the succession , as of the possession and not an elective kingdom . For suppos• a decree be made first in this manner , tha• such a one shall have the sovereignty for hi• life , and that afterward they will choose a new ▪ in this case , the power of the persons is dissolved , or not ; if dissolved , then after the death of him that is chosen , there is no man bound to stand to the decrees of them that shall , as private men , run together to make a new election ; and consequently , if there be any man , who by the advantage of the reign of him that is dead , have strength enough to hold the multitude in peace and obedience , he May lawfully , or rather is by the law of nature obliged so to do ; if this power of the persons were not dissolved at the choosing of their King for life , than is the persons sovereign still , and the King a minister thereof only , but so , as to put the whole sovereignty in execution , a great minister , but no otherwise for his time , than a dictator was in Rome . in this case at the death of him that was chosen , they that meet for a new election , have no new , but their old authority for the same . For they were the sovereign all the time , as appeareth by the acts of those elective Kings , that have procured from the persons , that their children Might succeed them . For it is to be understood , when a man receiveth any thing from the authority of the persons , he receiveth it not from the persons his subjects , but from the persons his sovereign . And farther though in the election of a King for his life , the persons grant him the exercise of their sovereignty for that time ; yet if they see cause , they May recall the same before the time . As a Prince that conferreth an office for life , May nevertheless upon suspicion of abuse thereof , recall it at his pleasure ; in as much as offices that require labour and care , are understood to pass from him that giveth them , as onera , burdens , to them that have them ; the recalling whereof are therefore not injury , but favour . nevertheless if in making an elective King , with intention to reserve the sovereignty , they reserve not a power at certain known and determined times and places to assemble themselves , the reservation of their sovereignty is of no effect , in as much as no man is bound to stand to the decrees and determinations of those that assemble themselves without the sovereign authortiy . 

10.  In the former section is showed , that elective Kings that exercise their sovereignty for a time , which determines with their life , either are subjects , or not sovereigns ; and that it is , when the persons in election of them , reserve unto themselves the right of assembling at certain times and places limited and made known ; or else absolute sovereigns to dispose of the succession at their pleasure , and that is , when the persons in their election have declared no time nor place of their meeting , or have left it to the power of the elected King , to assemble and dissolve them at such times as he himself shall think good . There is another kind of limitation of time to him that shall be elected to use the sovereign power , ( Which whether it hath been practised anywhere , or not i know not , but it May be imagined , and hath been objected against the rigour of sovereign power ) and it is this , that the persons transfer their sovereignty upon conditions . As for example , for so long as he shall observe such and such laws , as they then prescribe him . And here as before in elected Kings , the question is to be made , whether in the electing of such a sovereign , they reserved to themselves a right of assembling at times and places limited and known , or not ; if not , then is the sovereignty of the persons dissolved , and have neither power to judge of the breach of the conditions given him , nor to command any forces for the deposing of him , whom on that condition they had set up , but are in the estate of war amongst themselves , as they were before they made themselves a democracy ; and consequently , if he that is elected by the advantage of the possession he hath of the public means , be able to compel them to unity and obedience , he hath not only of the right of nature to warrant him , but of the law of nature to oblige him thereunto . But if in electing him , they reserved to themselves a right of assembling , and appointed certain times and places to that purpose , then are they sovereign still , and May call their conditional King to account at their pleasure , and deprive him of his government , if they judge he deserve it , either by breach of the condition set him , or otherwise . For the sovereign power can by no covenant with a subject be bound to continue him in the charge he undergoeth by their command , as a burden imposed not particularly for his good , but for the good of the sovereign persons . 

11.  The controversies that arise concerning the right of the persons , proceed from the equivocation of the word . For the word persons hath a double signification . In one sense it signifieth only a number of men , distinguished by the place of their habitation ; as the persons of England , or the persons of France , which is no more , but the multitude of those particular persons that inhabit those regions , without consideration of any contracts or covenants amongst them , by which any one of them is obliged to the rest . In another sense , it signifieth a person civil , that is to say , either one man or one council , in the will whereof is included and involved , the will of every one in particular . As for example ; in this later sense , the lower house of parliament is all the Commons as long as they sit there with authority and right thereto ; but after they be dissolved , though they remain , they be no more the persons nor the Commons , but only the aggregate , or multitude of the particular men there sitting , how well soever they agree , or concur , in opinions amongst themselves ; whereupon they that do not distinguish between these two significations , do usually attribute such rights to a dissolved multitude , as belong only to the persons virtually contained in the body of the common wealth or sovereignty . And when a great number of their own authority flock together in any nation , they usually give them the name of the whole nation . In which sense they say the persons rebelleth , or the persons demandeth , when it is no more than a dissolved multitude , of which though any one man May be said to demand or have right to something , yet the heap , or multitude , cannot be said to demand or have right to any thing . For where every man hath his right distinct , there is nothing left for the multitude to have right unto : and when the particulars say , this is mine , this is thine , and this is his , and have shared all amongst them , there can be nothing whereof the multitude can say , this is mine ; nor are they one body as behooveth them to be , that demand any thing under the name oh mine , or his : and when they say ours every man is understood to pretend in several , and not the multitude : on the other , side , when the multitude is united into a body politic , and thereby are a persons in the other signification , and their wills virtually in the sovereign , there the rights and demands of the particulars do cease ; and he or they that have the sovereign power , doth for them all demand and vindicate under the name of his , that which before they called in the plural , theirs . 

12.  We have seen how particular men enter into subjection by transferring their rights ; it followeth to consider , how such subjection May be discharged . And first , if he or they that have the sovereign power , shall relinquish the same voluntarily , there is no doubt , but every man is again at liberty to obey or not . Likewise , if he or they retaining the sovereignty over the rest , do neverthless exempt some one or more , from their subjection , every man so exempted , is discharged , for he or they to whom any man is obliged , hath the power to release him . 

13.  And here it is to be understood , that when he or they that have the sovereign power , give such exemption , or privilege , to a subject , as is not separable from the sovereignty , and nevertheless directly retaineth the sovereign power , not knowing the consequence of the privilege they grant , the person or persons exempted or privileged , are not thereby released . For in contradictory significations of the will , part 1. chap. 13.  Sect. 9  That which is directly signified , is to be understood for the will , before that which is drawn from it by consequence . 

14.  Also exile perpetual , is a release of subjection , forasmuch , as being out of the protection , of the sovereignty that expelled him , he hath no means of subsisting but from himself . Now every man May lawfully defend himself , that hath no other defence ; else there had been no necessity , that any man should enter into voluntary subjection , as they do in commonwealths . 

15.  Likewise a man is released of his subjection by conquest . For when it cometh to pass , that the power of a common wealth is overthrown , and any particular man thereby lying under the sword of his enemy , yieldeth himself captive , he is thereby bound to serve him that taketh him , and consequently discharged of his obligation to the former . For no man can serve two Masters . 

16.  Lastly , ignorance of the succession dischargeth obedience . For no man can be understood to be obliged to obey he knoweth not whom . 

Chap. iii 1.2 . Titles to dominion ; Master and servant , &c. 3.  Chains and other , &c. bonds &c. slave defined . 4.  Servants have no property against their Lord , &c. 5.  The Master hath right to alienate his servant . 6.  The servant of the servant , &c. 7.  How servitude is discharged . 8.  The middle Lord . &c. 9  The title of man , &c. over beasts . 

Having set forth in the two preceding chapters , the nature of a common wealth institutive by the consent of many men together , i come now to speak of dominion , or a body politic by acquisition , which is commonly called a patrimonial kingdom . But before i enter thereinto , it is necessary to make known upon what title one man May acquire right , that is to say , property or dominion over the person of another . For when one man hath dominion over another , there is a little kingdom . And to be a King by acquisition , is nothing else but to have acquired a right or dominion over many . 

2.  Considering men therefore again in the estate of nature , without covenants or subjection one to another , as if they were but even now all at once create male and female , there be three titles only , by which one man May have right and dominion over another ; whereof two May take place presently , and those are , voluntary offer of subjection , and yielding by compulsion : the third is to take place upon the supposition of children begotten amongst them . Concerning the first of these three titles , it is handled before in the two last chapters . For from thence cometh the right of sovereigns over their subjects in a common wealth institutive . Concerning the second title , ( Which is when a man submitteth to an assailant for fear of death ) thereby accrueth a right of dominion . For where every man ( As it happeneth in this case ) hath right to all things , there needs no more for the making of the said right effectual but a covenant from him that is overcome , not to resist him that overcometh . And thus cometh the victor to have right of absolute dominion over the conquered . By which there is presently constituted a little body politic , which consisteth of two persons , the one sovereign , which is called the Master or Lord ; the other subject , which is called the servant . and when a man hath acquired right over a number of servants so considerable , as they cannot by their neighbours be securely invaded , this body politic is a kingdom despotical . 

3.  And it is to be understood that when a servant taken in the wars , is kept bound in natural bonds , and chains and the like , or in prison , there hath passed no covenant from the servant to his Master . For those natural bonds have no need of strengthening by the verbal bonds of covenant , and they show , that the servant is not trusted . But covenant , ( Part 1. chap. 15.  Sect. 9 ) supposeth trust . There remaineth therefore in the servant thus kept bound , or in prison , a right of delivering himself , if he can , by what means soever . This kind of servant is that which ordinarily , and without passion , is called a slave . the Romans had no such distinct name , but comprehended all under the name of servus ; whereof such as they loved and durst trust , were suffered to go at liberty , and admitted to places of office , both near to their persons , & in their affairs abroad ; the rest were kept chained , or otherwise restrained with natural impediments to their resistance . And as it was amongst the Romans , so it was amongst other nations , the former sort having no other bond but a supposed covenant , without which the Master had no reason to trust them ; the later being without covenant , and no otherwise tied to obedience , but by chains , or other like forcible custody . 

4.  A Master therefore is to be supposed to have no less right over those , whose bodies he leaveth at liberty , then over those he keepeth in bonds and imprisonment , and hath absolute dominion over both , and May say of his servant , that he is his , as he May of any other thing : and whatsoever the servant had , and Might call his is now the Master's ; for he that disposeth of the person , disposeth of all the person could dispose of : insomuch , as though there be meum & tuum among servants distinct from one another by the dispensation and for the benefit of their Master , yet there is no meum & tuum belonging to any of them against the Master himself , whom they are not to resist , but to obey all his commands as law . 

5.  And seeing both the servant and all that is committed to him , is the property of the Master , and every man May dispose of his own , and transfer the same at his pleasure , the Master May therefore alienate his dominion over them , or give the same by his last will to whom he list . 

6.  And if it happen , that the Master himself by captivity or voluntary subjection , become servant to another , than is that other Master paramount ; & those servants of him that becometh servant , are no farther obliged , than their Master paramount shall think good ; forasmuch as he disposing of the Master subordinate , disposeth of all he hath , and consequently of his servants . So that the restriction of absolute power in Masters , proceedeth not from the law of nature , but from the political law of him , that is their Master supreme or sovereign . 

7.  Servants immediate to the supreme Master , are discharged of their servitude , or subjection in the same manner that subjects are released of their allegiance in a common wealth institutive . As first , by release . For he that captiveth , ( Which is done by accepting what the captive transferreth to him ) setteth again at l•berty , by transferring back the same . And this kind of release is called manumission . secondly , by exile . For that is no more but manumission given to a servant , not in the way benefit , but punishment . Thirdly , by a new captivity , where the servant having done his endeavour to defend himself , hath thereby performed his covenant to his former Master , and for the safety of his life , entering into new covenant with the conqueror , is bound to do his best endeavour to keep that likewise . Fourthly , ignorance of who is successor to his diceased Master , dischargeth him of obedience : for no covenant holdeth longer than a man knoweth to whom he is to perform it . And lastly , that servant that is no longer trusted , but committed to his chains and custody , is thereby discharged of the obligation in foro interno , and therefore if he can get loose , May lawfully go his way . 

8.  But servants subordinate , though manumitted by their immediate Lord , are not thereby discharged of their subjection to their Lord paramount , for the immediate Master hath no property in them , having transferred his right before to another , namely , to his own and supreme Master . Nor if the chief Lord should manumit his immediate servant , doth he thereby release his servants of their obligation to him that is so manumitted . For by this manumission , he recovereth again the absolute dominion he had over them before . For after a release , ( Which is the discharge of a covenant ) the right standeth as it did before the covenant was made . 

9  This right of conquest , as it maketh one man Master over another , so also maketh it a man to be Master of the irrational creatures . For if a man in the state of nature be in hostility with men , and thereby have lawful title to subdue or kill , according as his own conscience and discretion shall suggest , unto him for his safety and benefit , much more May he do the same to beasts ; that is to say , save and preserve for his own service , according to his discretion , such as are of nature apt to obey , and commodious for use ; and to kill and destroy with perpetual war , all other , as fierce and noisome to him . And this dominion is therefore of the law of nature , and not of the divine law positive . For if there had been no such right , before the revealing of God's will in the scripture , then should no man to whom the scripture hath not come , have right to make use of those his creatures , either for his food or sustenance . And it were a hard condition of mankind , that a fierce and savage beast , should with more right kill a man , than a man a beast . 

Chap. iv. 1.  The dominion over the child , &c. 2.  Pre-eminence of sex giveth not the child to the father , rather than to the mother . 3.  The title of the father or mother , &c. 4.  The child of a woman-servant , &c. 5.  The right to the child given from the mother , &c. 6.  The child of the concubine , &c. 7.  The child of the husband and the wife , &c. 8.  The father , or he or she that bringeth up the child , have absolute power over him . 9  Freedom in subjects what it is . 10.  A great family is a patrimonial kingdom . 11.  Succession of the sovereign power , &c. 12.  Though the successor be not declared , yet there is always one to be presumed . 13.  The children preferred to the succession , &c. 14.  The males before females . 15.  The elder before the rest of the brothers . 16.  The brother next to the children . 17.  The succession of the possessor , &c.  

Of three ways by which a man becometh subject to another , mentioned sect. 2. chap. the last , namely , voluntary offer , captivity and birth , the former two have been spoken of , under the name of subjects and servants . In the next place , we are to set down the third way of subjection , under the name of children , and by what title one-man cometh to have propriety in a child , that proceedeth from the common generation of two , ( To wit ) of male and female . And considering men again dissolved from all covenants one with another , and that ( Part 1. chap. 4. sect. 2. ) every man by the law of nature , hath right or propriety to his own body , the child ought rather to be the propriety of the mother , ( Of whose body it is part , till the time of separation ) then of the father . For the understanding therefore of the right that a man or woman hath to his or their child , two things are to be considered ; first , what title the mother , or any other originally hath , to a child new born : secondly , how the father , or any other man , pretendeth by the mother . 

2.  For the first , they that have written of this subject have made generation to be a title of dominion over persons , as well as the consent of the persons themselves . And because generation giveth title to two , namely , father , and mother , whereas dominion is indivisible , they therefore ascribe dominion over the child to the father only , ob praestantiam sexus ; but they show not , neither can i find out by what coherence , either generation inferreth dominion , or advantage of so much strength , which , for the most part , a man hath more than a woman , should generally and universally entitle the father to a propriety in the child and take it away from the mother . 

3.  The title to dominion over a child , proceedeth not from the generation , but from the preservation of it ; and therefore in the estate of nature , the mother , in whose power it is to save or destroy it , hath right thereto by that power , according to that which hath been said , part 1. chap. 1. sect. 13.  And if the mother shall think fit to abandon , or expose her c•ild to death , whatsoever man or woman shall find the child so exposed shall have the same right which the mother had before ; and for this same reason , namely , for the power not of generating , but preserving . And though the child thus preserved , do in time acquire strength , whereby he Might pretend equality with him or her that hath preserved him , yet shall that pretence be thought unreasonable , both because his strength was the gift of him , against whom be pretendeth , and also because it is to be presumed that he which giveth sustenance to another , whereby to strengthen him , hath received a promise of obedience in consideration thereof . For else it would be wisdom in men , rather to let their children perish , while they are infants , then to live in their danger or subjection , when they are grown . 

4.  For the pretences which a man May have to dominion over a child by the right of the mother , they be of divers kinds . One by the absolute subjection of the mother ; another , by some particular covenant from her , which is less than a covenant of such subjection . By absolute subjection , the Master of the mother hath right to her child , according to sect. 6. chap. 3. whether he be the father thereof , or not . And thus the children of the servant are the goods of the Master in perpetuum 

5.  Of covenants that amount not to subjection between man and woman , there be some which are made for a time ; they are covenants of cohabitation , or else of copulation only . And in this later case , the children pass by covenants particular . And thus in the copulation of the Amazons with their neighbours , the fathers by covenant had the male children only , the mother's retaining the females . 

6.  And covenants of cohabitation are either for society of bed , or for society of all things ; if for society of bed only , then is the woman called a concubine . and here also the child shall be his or hers , as they shall agree particularly by covenant . For although for the most part , a concubine is supposed to yield up the right of her children to the father , yet doth not concubinate enforce so much . 

7.  But if the covenants of cohabitation be for society of all things ; it is necessary that but one of them govern and dispose of all that is common to them both ; without which , ( As hath been often said before ) society cannot last . And therefore the man , to whom for the most part , the woman yieldeth the government , hath for the most part also , the sole right and dominion over the children . And the man is called the husband , and the woman the wife . But because sometimes the government May belong to the wife only , sometimes also the dominion over the children shall be in her only . As in the case of a sovereign Queen , there is no reason that her marriage should take from her the dominion over her children . 

8.  Children therefore , whether they be brought up and preserved by the father , or by the mother , or by whomsoever are in most absolute subjection to him or her , that so bringeth them up , or preserveth them . And they May alienate them , that is , assign his or her dominion , by selling , or giving them , in adoption or servitude , to others ; or May pawn them for hostages , kill them for rebellion , or sacrifice them for peace , by the law of nature , when he or she , in his or her conscience , think it to be necessary . 

9  The subjection of them who institute a common wealth amongst themselves , is no less absolute than the subjection of servants . And therein they are in equal estate . But the hope of those is greater than the hope of these . For he that subiecteth himself uncompelled , thinketh there is no reason he should be better used than he that doth it upon compulsion ; and coming in freely calleth himself , though in subjection , a freeman ; whereby it appeareth that liberty is not any exemption from subjection and obedience to the sovereign power , but a state of better hope than theirs , that have been subjected by force and conquest . And this was the reason , that the name which signifieth children in the Latin tongue , is liberi , which also signifieth free men . and yet in Rome nothing at that time was so obnoxious to the power of others , as children in the family of their fathers . For both the state had power over their life without consent of their fathers , and the father Might kill his son by his own authority , without any warrant from the state . Freedom therefore in commonwealths , is nothing but the honour of equality of favour with other subjects , and servitude the estate of the rest . A freeman therefore May expect employments of honour , rather than a servant . And this is all that can be understood by the liberty of the subject . For in all other senses , liberty is the state of him that is not subject . 

10.  Now when a father that hath children hath servants also , the children ( Not by the right of the child , but by the natural indulgence of the parents ) are such fremen . And the whole consisting of the father or mother , or both , & of the children , & of the servants , is called a family , wherein the father or mother of the family is sovereign of the same , and the rest ( Both children and servants equally ) subjects . The same family , if it grow by multiplication of children , either by generation or adoption ; or of servants , either by generation , gonquest , or voluntary submission , to be so great and numerous , as in probability it May protect itself , than is that family called a patrimonial kingdom , or monarchy by acquisition , wherein the sovereignty is in one man , as it is in a monarch made by political institution . So that whatsoeu•r rights be in the one , the same also be in the other . And therefore i shall no more speak of them as distinct , but of monarchy in general . 

11.  Having showed by what right the several sorts of commonwealths , democracy , aristocracy , and monarchy , are erected , it followeth , to show by what right they are continue . The right by which they are continue , is called the right of succession to the sovereign power ; whereof there is nothing to be said a democracy , because the sovereign dyeth not , as long as there be subjects alive . Nor in any aristocracy , because it cannot easily fall out , that the optimates should every one fail at once : and if it should so fall out , there is no question , but the common wealth is thereby dissolved . It is therefore in a monarchy only , that there can happen a question concerning the succession . And first , forasmuch as a monarch , which is absolve sovereign , hath the dominion in his own right , he May dispose thereof at his own will . If therefore by his last will , he shall name his successor , the right passeth by that will . 

12.  Nor if the monarch die without any will concerning the succession declared , it is not therefore to be presumed , it was his will his subjects , which are to him as his children and servants , should return again to the state of anarchy , that is to war and hostility . For that were expressly against the law of nature , which commandeth to procure peace , and to maintain the same . It is therefore to be conjectured with reason , that it was the intention to bequeathe them peace , that is to say , a power coercive , whereby to keep them from sedition amongst themselves ; and rather in the form of a monarchy , than any other government ; forasmuch as he , by the exercise thereof in his own person , hath declared , that he approveth the same . 

13.  Farther , it is to be supposed , his intention was , that his own children should be preferred in the succession ( When nothing to the contrary , is expressly declared ) before any other . For men naturally seek their own honour , and that consisteth in the honour of their children after them . 

14.  Again , seeing every monarch is supposed to desire to continue the Governmen• in his successors , as long as he May ; and that generally men are endued with greate• parts of wisdom and courage , by which al• monarchies are kept from dis•olution , than women , are it is to be presumed , where no express will is extant to the contrary , he preferreth his male children before the female . Not but that women May govern and have in divers ages and places governed wisely , but are not so apt thereto in generals , as men . 

15.  Because the sovereign power is indivisible , it cannot be supposed , that he intended the same should be divided , but that it should descend entirely upon one of them , which is do be presumed , should be the elder , assigned thereto by the lot of nature , because he appointed no other lot for the decision thereof . Besides , what difference of ability soever there May be amongst the brethren , the odds shall be adjudged to the elder , because no subject hath authority otherwise to judge thereof . 

16.  And for want of issue in the possessor , the brother shall be presumed successor . For by the judgement of nature , next in blood , is next in love , and next in love , is next to preferment . 

17.  And as the succession followeth the first monarch , so also it followeth him or her that is in possession ; and consequently , the children of him in possession , shall be prefe•red before the children of his father , or predecessor . 

Chap. v. 1.  The utility of the commonwealth , &c. 2.  The loss of liberty , &c. 3.  Monarchy approved , &c. 4.  Monarchy less subject to passion , &c.  5.6 . Subjects' in monarchy , &c. 7.  Laws in monarchy less changeable , &c. 8.  Monarchies less subject to dissolution . 

Having set forth the nature of a person politic , and the three sots thereof , democracy , aristocracy , and monarchy , in this chapter shall be declared , the convencies , and inconveniences , that arise from the same , both in general ; and of the said several sorts in particular . And first , seeing a body politic is erected only for the ruling and governing of particular men , the benefit and damage thereof consieth in the benefit or damage of being ruled . The benefit is that for which a body politic was instituted , namely , the peace and preservation of every particular man , than which it is not possible there can be a greater , as hath been touched before , part 1. chap. 1. sect. 12.  And this benefit extendeth equally both to the sovereign and to the subjects . for he or they that have the sovereign power , have but the defence of their persons , by the assistance of the particulars ; and every particular man hath his defence by their union in the sovereign . As for other benefits , which pertain not to their safety and sufficiency , bu• to their well and delightful being , such as are superfluous riches , they so belong to the sovereign , as they must also be in the subject ; and so to the subject , as they must also be in the sovereign . For the riches and treasure of the sovereign , is the dominion he hath over the riches of his subjects . If therefore the sovereign provide not so , as that particular men May have means , both to preserve themselves , and also to preserve the public the common or sovereign treasure can be none . And on the other side , if it were not for a common and public treasure belonging to the sovereign power , men's private riches would sooner serve to put them into confusion and war , then to secure and maintain them . Insomuch , as the profit of the Soveraiegn & subject goeth always together . That distinction therefore of government , that there is one government for the good of him that governeth , & another for the good of them that be governed ; whereof the former is despotical , ( That is lordly ) the other , a government of freemen , is not right . No more is the opinion of them that hold it to be no city , which consisteth of a Master and his servants . They Might as well say , it were no city that consisted in a father and his own issue , how numerous soever they were . For to a Master that hath no children , the servants have in them all those respects , for which men love their children . For they are his strength , and his honour . And his power is no greater over them , then over his children . 

2.  The inconvenience arising from government in general , to him that governeth consisteth partly in the continual care and trouble about the business of other men , that are his subjects , and partly in the danger of his person . For the head always is that part , not only where the care resideth , but also against which the stroke of an enemy most commonly is directed . To balance this incommodity , the sovereignty , together with the necessity of this care and danger , comprehendeth so much honour ; riches and means , whereby to delight the mind , as no private man's wealth can attain unto . The inconveniences of government , in general to a subject are none at all , if well considered , but in appearance . There be two things that May trouble his mind , o• two general grievances , the one is loss of liberty ; the other , the uncertainty of meum & tuum . for the first , it consisteth in this , that a subject May no more govern his own actions according to his own discretion and judgement , ( Which is all one ) conscience , as the present occasions from time to time shall dictate to him , but must be tied to do according to that will only , which once for all , he had long ago laid up , and involved in the wills of the major part of an assembly , or in the will of some one man . But this is really no inconvenience . For , as it hath been showed before , it is the only means , by which we have any possibility of preserving ourselves . For if every man were allowed this liberty , of following his conscience , in such difference of consciences , they would not live together in peace an hour . But it appeareth a great inconvenience to every man in particular , to be debarred of this liberty , because every one a part considereth it as in himself , and not as in the rest , by which means , l•berty appeareth in the likeness of rule and government over others . For where one man is at liberty , and the rest bound , there that one hath government ; which honour , he that understandeth not so much , demanding by the name simply of liberty , thinketh it a great grievance and injury to be denied it . For the second grievance concerning meum & tuum , it is also none , but in appearance only ; it consisteth in this , that the sovereign power , taketh from him that which he used to enjoy , knowing no other propriety but use and custom . But without such sovereign power , the right of men is not propriety to any thing , but a community , no better than to have no right at all , as hath been showed , part. 1. chap. 1. sect. 10.  Propriety therefore being derived from the sovereign power , is not to be pretended against the same , especially , when by it every subject hath his propriety against every other subject , which when sovereignty ceaseth , he hath not , because in that case they return to war amongst t•ems•lveses . Those levies therefore which are made upon men's estates , by the sovereign authority , are no more but the price of that peace and defence which the souraignty maintaineth for them . If this were not so , no money nor forces for the wars , not any other public occasion , could justly be levied in the world . For neither King , nor democracy , nor aristocracy , nor the estates of any land , could do it , if the sovereignty could not . For in all those cases it is levied by virtue of the sovereignty . Nay more , by the three estates , here the land of one man May be transferred to another , without crime of his from whom it was taken , and withomt pretence of public benefit , as hath been done ; and this without injury , because done by the sovereign power . For the power whereby it is done , is no less than sovereign , and cannot be greater . Therefore this grievance for meum & tuum is not real , unless more be exacted then is necessary ; but it seemeth a grievance , because to them that either know not the right of sovereignty , or to whom that right belongeth , it seemeth an injury , and injury howsoever little the damage is always grievous as putting us in mind of our disability to help ourselves , and into envy of the power to do us wrong . 

3.  Having spoken of the inconveniences of the subject , by government in general , let us consider the same in the three several sorts thereof , namely , democracy , aristocracy and monarchy ; whereof the two former are in effect but one . For ( As i have showed befo•e ) democracy is but the government of a few orators . The comparison therefore will be between monarchy and aristocracy : and to omit that the world as it was create , so also it is governed by one God almighty ; and that all the ancients have have preferred monarchy before other governments , both in opinion , because they feigned a monarchial government amongst their gods , and also by their custom ; for that in the most ancient times all persons were so governed ; and that paternal government which is monarchy , was instituted in the beginning from the creation , & that other governments have proceeded from the dissolution thereof , called by the rebellious nature of mankind , and be but pieces of broken monarchies cemented by human wit , i will insist only on this comparison upon the inconvenies that May happen to the subjects , in consequence to each of these governments . 

4.  And first , it seemeth inconvenient there should be committed so great a power to one man , as that it Might be lawful to no other man or men to resist the same ; and some think it inconvenient eo nomine , because he hath the power . But this reason we May not by any means admit . For it maketh it inconvenient to be ruled by almighty God , who without question hath more power over every man , then can be conferred upon any monarch . This inconvenience therefore must be derived , not from the power , but from the aff•ctionss and passions which reign in every one , as well monarch , as subject , by which the monarch May be swayed to use that power amiss . And because an aristocracy consisteth of men , if the passions of many men be more violent when they are assembled together , than the passions of one man alone , it will follow , that the inconvenience arising from passions will be greater in an aristocracy than a monarchy . but there is no doubt , when things are debated in great assemblies , but every man delivering his opinion at large without interruption eneavoureth to make whatsoever he is to set forth for good , better ; and what he would have apprehend as evil , worse , as much as is possible , to the end his counsel May take place ; which counsel also is never without aim at his own benefit , or honour ; every man's end •e•ng some good to himself . Now this cannot be done without working on the passions of the rest . And thus the passions of these that are singly moderate , are altogether vehement , even as a great many coals , though but warm asunder , being put together , inflame one another . 

5.  Another inconvenience of monarchy , is this , that the monarch , besides the riches necessary for the defence of the common wealth , May take so much more from the subjects , as May enrich his children , kindred and favourites , to what degree he pleaseth ; which though it be indeed an inconvenience , if he should so do , yet is the same both greater in an aristocracy , and also more likely to come to pass . For their , not one only , but many have children , kindred , and friends to raise . And in that point they a•e as twenty monarchs for one , and likely to set forward one another's designs mutually , to the oppression of all the rest . The same also happeneth in a democracy , if they all do agree , otherwise they bring a worse inconvenience , to wit , sedition . 

6.  Another inconvenience of monarchy , is the power of dispencing with the execution of justice , whereby the family and friends of the monarch May with impunity , commit outrages upon the persons , or oppress them with extortion . But in ar•stocracieses , not only one , but many have power of taking men out of the hands of justice , and no man is willing his kindred or friends should be punished according to their demerits . And therefore they understand amongst themselves without further speaking , as a tacit covenant , hodie mihi , cras tibi . 

7.  Another inconvenience of monarchy , is the power of altering laws . Concerning which , it is necessary that such a power be , that laws May be altered , according as men's manners charge , or as the coniuncture of all circumstances within and without the common wealth shall require ; the change of law being then inconvenient , when it proceedeth from the change , not of the occasion , but of the minds of him or them , by whose authority the laws a•e made . Now it is manifest enough of itself , that the mind of one man is not so variable in that point , as are the decrees of an assembly . For not only they have all their natural changes , but the change of any one man May be enough with eloquence and reputation , or by solicitation and faction , to make that law to day , which another by the very same means shall abrogate to morrow . 

8.  Lastly , the greatest inconvenience that can happen to a common wealth , is the aptitude to dissolve into civil war , and to this are monarchies much less subject than any other governments . For where the union or band of a common wealth is one man , there is no distraction whereas in assemblies , those that are of different opinions , and give different counsel are apt to fall out amongst themselves , and to cross the designs of the common wealth for one another's sake : and when they cannot have the honour of making good their own devices , they yet seek the honour to make the counsels of the adversaries prove vain . And in this contention , when the opposite factions happen to be any thing equal in strength . they presently fall to war . Wherein necessity teacheth both sides , that an absolute monarch , to wit , a general , is necessary both for their defence against one another , and also for the peace of each faction within itself . But this aptitude to dissolution , is to be understood for an inconvenience in such aristocracies only , where the affairs of state are debated in gr•at and numerous assemblies , as they were anciently in Athens , and in Rome ; and not in such as do nothing else in great assemblies , but choose magistrates and counselors , and commit the handling of state-affairs to a few ; such as is the aristocracy of Venice at this day . For these are no more apt to dissolve from this occasion , than monarchies , the counsel of state being both in the one and the other alike . 

Chap. vi . 1.  A difficulty concerning absolute subjection to man , arising from our absolute subjection to God almighty , propounded . 2.  That this difficulty is only amongst those Christians , that deny the interpretation of scripture , to depend upon the sovereign authority of the commonwealth . 3.  That human laws are not made to govern the consciences of men , but their words and a••ionss . 4.  Places of scripture to prove obedience due from Chr•stians to their sovereign in all things . 5.  A distinction propounded betwe•n a fundamental point of faith , and a superstruction . 6.  An explication of the points of faith , that be fundam•ntal . 7.  The bel•ef of those fundamental points , is all that is required to salvation , as of fai•h . 8.  That other points not fundamental , are not necessary to salvation , as matter of faith ; and that no more is required by way of faith to the salvation of one man , th•n to another . 9  That super••ructionss are not points of the faith necessary to a Christian . 10.  How faith and justice c•ncurre to salvation . 11.  That in Christian commonwealths , obedience to God and man stand well together . 12.  This tenet , whatsoever is against the conscience , is sin , interpreted 13.  That all men do confess the necessity of submitting of controversies to some human authority . 14.  That Christians under an infidel , are discharged of the injustice of disobeying them , in that which concerneth the faith necessary to salvation , by not resisting . 

Having showed , that in all commonwealths whatsoever , the necessity of peace and government requireth , that there be existent some power , either in one man , or in one assembly of men , by the name of the power sovereign , to which it is not lawful for any member of the same commonwealth to disobey ; there occurreth now a difficulty , which if it be not removed , maketh it unlawful for a man to put himself under the command of such absolute sovereignty , as is required thereto . And the difficulty is this ; we have amongst us the word of God for the rule of our actions : now if we shall subject ourselves to men also , obliging ourselves to do such actions , as shall be by them commanded , when the commands of God and man shall differ , we are to obey God , rather than man ; and consequently , the covenant of general obedience to man is unlaw•ull . 

2.  This difficulty hath not been of very great antiquity in the world . There was no such Dilemna amongst the Jews ; for their civil law , and divine law , was one and the same law of Moses ; the interpreters whereof were the priests , whose power was subordinate to the power of the King ; as was the power of Aaron to the power of Moses . nor is it a controversy that was ever taken notice of amongst the Grecians , Romans , or other Genti•eses : for amongst these their several civil laws , were the rules whereby not only righteousness and virtue , but also religion , and the external worship of God was ordered and approved ; that being esteemed the true worship of God which was {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , according to the laws civil . Also those Christians that dwell under the temporal dominion of the Bishop of Rome , are free from this question ; for that they allow unto him ( Their sovereign ) to interpret the scriptures , which are the law of God as he in his own judgement shall think right . This difficulty therefore remaineth amongst , and troubleth those Christians only , to whom it is allowed , to take for the sense of the scripture , that which they make thereof , either by their own private interpretation , or by the inte•pretation of such as are not called thereunto by public authority ; they that follow their own interpretation continually demanding liberty of conscience ; and those that follow the interpretation of others not ordained thereunto by the sovereign of the commonwealth , requiring a power in matters of religion , either above the power civil , or at least not depending on it . 

3.  To take away this scruple of conscience , concerning obedience to human laws , amongst those that interpret to themselves the word of God in the holy scriptures , i propound to their consideration , first , that no human law is intended to oblige the conscience of a man , unless it break out into action , either of the tongue , or other part of the body . The law made thereupon would be of none effect , because no man is able to discern , but by word or other action , whether such law be kept or broken . Nor did the apostles themselves pretend dominion over men's consciences concerning the faith they preached , but only persuasion and instruction . And therefore s. Paul saith , 2 cor. 1.24 . writing to the Corinthians , concerning their controversies , that he and the rest of the apostles had no dominion over their faith , but were helpers of their joy . 

4.  And for the actions of men which proceed from their consciences , the regulating of which actions is the only means of peace , if they Might not stand with justice , it were impossible that justice towards God , and peace amongst men , should stand together in that r•ligion that teacheth us , that justice and peace should kiss each other , and in which we have so many precepts of absolute obedience to human authority ; as mat. 23.2 , 3. we have this precept . the scribes & Pharisees sit in Moses seat ; all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe that observe and do . and yet were the scribes and Pharisees not priests , but men of temporal authority . Again , Luke 11.17 . every kingdom divided against itself shall be desolate ; and is not that kingdom divided against itself , where the actions of every one shall be ruled by his private opinion or conscience , and yet those actions such as give occasion of offence and breach of peace . Again , rom. 13.5 . wherefore you must be subject , not because of wrath only , but also for conscience sake , tit. 3.1 . put them in remembrance , that they be subject to principalities and powers , 1. pet. 2.13.14 . submit yourselves unto all manner of ordinance of man , for the Lord's sake , whether it be unto the King , as unto the superior , or unto governors , as unto them that are sent of him for the punishment of evil doers . Jude verse 8.  these dreamers also that defile the flesh , and despise government , and speak evil of them that are in authority . and forasmuch as all subjects in commonwealths are in the nature of children and servants , that which is a command to them is a command to all subjects . But to these s. Paul saith , colos. 3.20.22 . children obey your parents in all things , servants be obedient to your Masters according to the flesh in all things . and verse 23.  do it heartily as to the lo•d . these places considered , it seemeth strange to me , that any man in a Christian common wealth , should have any occasion to deny his obedience to public authority , upon this ground , that it is better to obey God then man . for though s. Peter and the apostles did so answer the council of the Jews , that forbade them to preach Christ , there appeareth no reason that Christians should allege the same against their Christian governors that command to preach Christ . To reconcile this seeming co•tradiction of simple obedience to God , and simple obedience to man , we are to consider a Christian subject , as under a Christian sovereign , or under an infidel . 

5.  And under a Christian sovereign we are to consider , what actions we are forbidden by God almighty to obey them in , and what not . The actions we are forbidden to obey them in , are such only , as imply a denial of that faith which is necessary to our salvation : for otherwise there can be no pretence of disobedience ; for why should a man incur the danger of a temporal death , by displeasing of his superior , if it were not for fear of eternal death hereafter . It must therefore be enquired , what those propositions and articles be ; the belief whereof our saviour or his apostles have declared to be such as without believing them a man cannot be saved ; and than all other points that are now controverted and made distinction of sects , Papists , Lutheran , Calvinists , Arminians &c. as in old time , the like made Paulists , Apollonians , and Cephasians , must needs be such , as man needeth not for the holding thereof , deny obedience to his superiors . And for the points of faith necessary to salvation , i shall call them fundamental , and every other point a superstruction . 

6.  And without all controversy , there is not any more necessary point to be believed for man's salvation then this , that Jesus is the Messiah , that is , the Christ ; which proposition is explicated in sundry sorts , but still the same in effect ; as that he is God's anointed , for that is signified by the word Christ . that he was the true and lawful King of Israel , the son of David , the saviour of the world , the redeemer of Israel , the salvation of God he that should come into the world , the son of God , and ( Which i desire by the way to have noted , against the now sect of Arrians ) the begotten son of God , act. 3.13 . Heb. 55.  the only begotten son of God , 1 joh. 1.14.18 . Joh. 3.16 , 18. 1 joh. 4.9 . that he was god joh. 1 1 joh. 20.28 . that the fullness of the god•ead dwelled in him bodily . moreover , the holy one , the holy one of God , the forgiver •f sins , , that he is risen from the dead . these are explications , and parts of that general article , that Jesus is the Christ . this point therefore , and all the explications thereof are fundamental ; as also all such , as be evidently inferred from thence : as , belief in God the father . joh. 12.44 . he that believeth in me , believeth not in me , but in him that sent me : 1 joh. 2.23 , he that denyeth the son , hath not the father , belief in God the holy ghost , of whom Christ saith , joh. 14.26 . but the comforter which is the holy ghost , whom the father will send in my name . and joh. 15.16 . but when the comforter shall come whom i will send unto you from the father , even the spirit of truth . belief of the scriptures , by which we believe those points , and of the immortality of the soul , without which we cannot believe that he is a saviour . 

7.  And as these are the fundamental points of faith necessary to salvation , so also are they only necessary as matter of faith •nd also essential to the calling of a Christian ; as May appear by many evident places of holy scripture : joh. 5.39 . search the scriptures , for in them you think to have eteral life , and they are they which testify of me . now , forasmuch as by the scripture , is meant there the old testament ( The new being then not written ) the belief of that which was written concerning our saviour in the old testament , was sufficient belief for the obtaining of eternal life : but in the old testament there is nothing revealed concerning Christ , but that he is the Messiah , and such things as belong to the fundamental points thereupon depending . And therefore those fundamental points are sufficient to salvation as of faith . And joh. 6.28.29 . then said they unto him , what shall we do , that we Might work the works of God ? Jesus answered and said unto them , this is the work of God , that ye believe in him , whom he hath sent . so that the point to be believed is , that Jesus Christ came forth from God , and he which believeth it , worketh the works of God . joh. 11.26.27 . whosoever liveth and beleiveth in me , shall never die . Believest thou this ? She said unto him , yea Lord , i believe that thou art the Christ the son of God , which should come into the world . hence followeth , he that beleiveth this shall never die . joh. 20.31 . but these things are wri•ten that ye Might believe , that Jesus is the Christ , the son of God , and that in believing , ye Might have life through his name . by which appeareth , that this fundamental point is all that is required , as of faith to our salvation . 1 joh. 4.2 . every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come into the flesh is of God : 1 joh. 5.1 . whosoever beleiveth that j•s•s is the Christ is born of God , and ver. 5.  who is it that overcometh the world , but he that beleiveth that Jesus is the son of God : and vers. 13.  these things have i written unto you that believe in the name of the son of God , that ye May know that ye have eternal life . act. 8.36.37 . the eunuch said , here is water , what doth let me to be baptised ? And Philip said unto him , if thou believest with i• thy heart , thou Mayst . He answered and said , i believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God . this point therefore was sufficient for the reception of man into baptism , that is to say , to Christianity . And act. 16.30 . the keeper of the prison , fell down before Paul and Silas , and said , Sirs , what shall i do to be saved ? And they said , believe in the Lord Jesus Christ . and the sermon of s. Peter upon the day of Pentecost , was nothing else but an explication , that Jesus was the Christ . And when they had heard him , asked him , what shall we do , he said unto them , ac. 2.38 . amend your lives , and be baptised every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins . rom. 10.9 . if thou shalt conf•ss with thy mouth the Lord Jesus , and shalt believe in thy heart , that God raised him up from the dead , thou shalt be saved . to these places May be added , that wheresoever our saviour Christ doth approve the faith of any man , the proposition believed ( If the same to be collected out of the text ) is always some of those fundamental points before mentioned , or something equivalent : as the faith of the centurion , mat. 8.8 . speak the word only , and my servant shall be healed , believing he was omnipotent : the faith of the woman , which had an issue of blood , math , 9.21 . if i May but touch the him of his garment , implying , he was the Messiah , the faith required of the blind men , mat. 9.28 . believe you that i am able to do this ? The faith of the Canaanitish woman , matth. 15.22 . That he was the son of David , implying the same . And so it is in every one of those places ( None excepted ) where our saviour commendeth any man's faith , which because they are too many to insert here , i omit , and refer them to his inquisition that is not otherwise satisfied . And as there is no other faith required , so there was no other preaching : for the prophets of the old testament , preached no other , and John the Baptist preached only the approach of the kingdom of heaven , that is to say , of the kingdom of Christ , the same was the commission of the apostles , mat. 10.7 . go preach , saying , the kingdom of heaven is at hand . and Paul preaching amongst the Jews , act. 18.5 . did but testify unto the Jews that , Jesus was the Christ . and the heathens took notice of Christians no otherwise , but by this name that they believed Jesus to be a King , crying out . Act. 17.6 . these are they that have subverted the state of the world , and here they are , whom Jason hath received . And these all do against the decrees of Caesar , saying , that there is another King , one Jesus . and this was the sum of the predictions , the sum of the confessions of them that believed , as well men as devils . This was the title of his cross , Jesus of Nazareth , King of the Jews ; this the occasion of the crown of thorns , sceptre of reed , and a man to carry his cross ; this was the subject of the Hosan•a's' ; and this was the title , by which our saviour commanding to take another man's goods , bade them say , the Lord hath need : and by this title , he purged the temple of the profane market kept there . Nor did the apostles themselves believe any more , then that Jesus was the M•ssiah , nor understand so much ; for they understood the Messiah to be no more than a temporal King , till after our saviour's resurrection . Furthermore , this point , that Christ is the Messiah , is particularly set forth for fundamental by that word , or some other equivalent thereunto in divers places . Upon the confession of Peter , matth. 16.16 . thou art the Christ , the son of the living God , our saviour ver. 18. saith , upon this rock will i build my church . this point therefore is the whole foundation of Christ's church . Rom. 15.20 . S. Paul raith , i so enforced myself to preach the gospel , not where Christ was named , lest i should have built upon another man's foundation , 1 cor. 3.10 . S. Paul when he had reprehended the Corinthians for their sects , & curious doctrines and questions , he distinguisheth between fundamental points , and superstruction ; and saith , i have laid the foundation , and another buildeth thereupon ; but let every man take heed how he buildeth upon it , for other foundation can no man lay , then that which is laid , which is Jesus Christ . colos. 2.6 . as you have received Christ Jesus the Lord , so walk in him , rooted and builded in him , and established in the faith . 

8.  Having showed this proposition , Jesus is the Christ , to be the only fundamental and necessary point of faith , i shall set down a few places more , to show , that other points , though they May be true , are not so necessary to be believed , as that a man May not be saved , though he believe them not . And first , if a man could not be saved without assent of the heart to the truth of all controversies , which are now in agitation concerning religion , i cannot see , how any man living can be saved ; so full of subtlety , and curious knowledge it is to be so great a divine . Why therefore should a man think that our saviour , who , mat. 11.30 . saith , that his yoke is easy , should require a matter of that difficulty ? or how are little children said to believe . Mat. 18.6 . or how could the good thief be thought sufficiently catechised upon the cross ? or s. Paul so perfect a Christian presently upon his conversion ? and though there May be more obedience required in him that hath the fundamental points explicated unto him , then in him that hath received the same but implicitly ; yet there is no more faith required for salvation in one man , then in another . For if it be true , that whosoever shall confess with his mouth the Lord Jesus , and believe in his heart , that God raised him from the dead , shall be saved ; as it is , rom. 10.9 . and that whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ , is born of God , the belief of that point is sufficient for the salvation of any man whosoever he be , for as much as concerneth faith . And seeing he that believeth not that Jesus is the Christ , whatsoever he believe else , cannot be saved , it followeth , that there is no more required to the salvation of one man , than another , in matter of faith . 

9  About these points fundamental , there is little controversy amongst Christians , though otherwise of different sects amongst themselves . And therefore the controversies of religion , are altogether about points unnecessary to salvation ; whereof some are doctrines raised by human ratiocination , from the points fundamental . as for example ; such doctrines as concern the manner of the real presence , wherein are mingled tenets of faith concerning the omnipotency & divinity of Christ , with the tenets of Aristotle and the peripatelicks , concerning substance and accidents , species , hypostasis , and the subsistence and migration of accidents from place to place ; words some of them without meaning , and nothing but the canting of Grecian sophisters . And these doctrines are condemned expressly , col. 2.8 . where after s. Paul had exhorted them to be rooted and builded in Christ , he giveth them this farther caveat ; beware lest there be any man that spoil you through philosophy and vain deceits , through the traditions of men , according to the rudiments of the world . and such , are such doctrines , as are raised out of such places of the scriptures , as concern not the foundation , by men's natural reason ; as about the concatenation of causes , and the manner of God's predestination ; which are also mingled with philosophy : as if it were possible for men that know not in what manner God seeth , heareth , or speaketh , to know nevertheless the manner how he intendeth , and predestinateth . A man therefore ought not to examine by reason any point , or draw any consequence out of scripture , by reason , concerning the nature of God almighty , of which reason is not capable . And therefore s. Paul , rom. 12.3 . giveth a good rule , that no man presume to understand above that which is meet to understand , but that he understand according to sobriety , which they do not , who presume out of scripture , by their own interpretation , to raise any doctrine to the understanding , concerning those things , which are incomprehensible . And this whole controversy concerning the predestination of God , and the free will of man , is not peculiar to Christian men . For we have huge volumes of this subject , under the name of fate & contingency , disputed between the Epicurians and the Stoics , and consequently it is not matter of faith , but of philosophy : and so are also all the questions concerning any ot•er point , but the foundation before named : and God receiveth a man which part of the question soever he holdeth . It was a controversy in s. Paul's time , whether a Christian gentile Might eat freely of any thing which the Christian Jews did not : and the Jew condemned the gentile that he did eat , to whom s. Paul saith , rom. 14.3 , let not him that eateth not , judge him that eateth : for God hath received him . and vers. 6. in the question concerning the observing of holy days , wherein the gentiles the Jews differed , he saith unto them , he that observeth the day , observeth it to the Lord , and he that observeth not the day , observeth it not to the Lord . and they who strive concerning such questions , and divide themselves into sects , are not therefore to be accounted zealous of the faith , their strife being but carnal , which is confirmed by s. Paul , 1 cor. 3.4 . when one saith , i am of Paul , and another , i am of Apollo's , are ye not carnal ? For they are not questions of faith , but of wit , wherein carnally men are inclined to seek the mastery one of another . For nothing is truly a point of faith , but that Jesus is the Christ ; as s. Paul testifieth , 1 cor. 2.2 . for i esteemed not the knowledge of any thing amongst you , save Jesus Christ , and him crucified . and 1 tim. 6.20 . oh Timotheus , keep that which is committed un•o thee , and avoid profane and vain babblings , and opposition of science falsely so called , which while s•me profess , they have erred concerning the faith . 2 tim. 2.16 . stay profane and vain babblings , &c. vers. 17.  of which sort is Hymeneus and Philetus , which as concerning the truth , have erred , saying , that the resurrectionis past already . whereby s. Paul showed , that the raising of questions by human ratiocination , though it be from the fundamental points themselves , is not only not necessary , but most dangerous to the faith of a Christian . Out of all these places , i draw only this conclusion in general , that neither the points now in controversy amongst Christians of different sects , or in any point that ever shall be in controversy , excepting only those that are contained in this article , Jesus is the Christ , are necessary to salvation , as of faith ; though in matter of obedience , a man May be bound not to oppose the same . 

10.  Although to the obtaining of salvation , there be required no more , as hath been already declared out of the holy scriptures , as matter of faith , but the belief of those fundamental articles before set forth , nevertheless , there are required other things , as matter of obedience . For as it is not enough in temporal kingdoms ( To avoid the punishment which Kings May inflict ) to acknowledge the right and title of the King , without obedience also to his laws ; so also it is not enough , to acknowledge our saviour Christ to be the King of heaven , in which consisteth Christian faith , unless also we endeavour to obey his laws , which are the laws of the kingdom of heaven , in which consisteth Christian obedience . And forasmuch as the laws of the kingdom of heaven , are the laws of nature , as hath been showed , part. 1. chap. 5. not only faith , but also the observation of the law of nature , which is that for which a man is called just or righteous , ( In that sense , in which justice is taken not for the absence of gild , but for the endeavor and constant will to do that which is just ) not only faith , but this justice , which also from the effect thereof , is called repentance , and sometimes works , is necessary to salvation . So that faith and justice do both concur thereto ; and in the several acceptation of this word justification , are properly said both of them to justify ; and the want of either of them is properly said to condemn . For not only he that resisteth a King upon doubt of his Titl• , but also he that doth it upon the inordinateness of his passions , deserveth punishment . And when faith and works are separated , not only the faith is called dead without works , but also works are called dead works without faith , and therefore s. James , chap. 2.17 . saith , even so the faith , if it have no works , is dead in itself , and vers. 26.  for as the body without the spirit is dead , even so faith without works is dead . and s. Paul , heb. 6.1 . calleth works without faith , dead works , where he saith ; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works . and by these dead works , is understood not the obedience and justice of the inward man , but the opus operatum , or external action , proceeding from fear of punishment , or from vain glory , and desire to be honoured of men : and these May be separated from faith , and conduce no way to a man's justification . And for that cause , s. Paul , rom. 4. excludeth the righteousness of the law , from having part in the justification of a sinner . For by the law of Moses , which is applied to men's actions , and requireth the absence of gild , all men living are liable to damnation , and therefore no man is justified by works , but by faith only . But if works be taken for the endeavour to do them , that is , if the will be taken for the deed , or internal , for external righteousness , then do works contribute to salvation . And then taketh place that of s. James , chap. 2.24 . ye see then how that of works a man is iustisted , and not of faith only . and both of these are joined to salvation , as in s. Mark . 1.5 . repent and believe the gospel . and luk. 18.18 . when a certain ruler asked our saviour , what he ought to do to inherit eternal life , he propounded to him the keeping of the commandments ; which when the ruler said he had kept , he propounded to him the faith , sell all that thou hast , and fellow me . and joh. 3.36 . he that believeth in the son , hath everlasting life . and he that obeyeth not the son , shall not see life . where he manifestly joineth obedience and faith together . And rom 1.17 . the just shall live by faith : not every one , but the just . for also the devils believe and tremble . but though both faith and justice ( Meaning still by justice , not absence of gild , but the good intentions of the mind , which is called righteousness by God , that taketh the will for the deed ) be both of them said to justify , yet are their parts in the act of justification to be distinguished . For justice is said to justify , not because it absolveth , but because it denominates him just , and setteth him in an estate , or capacity of salvation , whensoever he shall have faith . But faith is said to justify , that is , to absolve , because by it a just man is absolved of , and forgiven his unjust actions . And thus are reconciled the places of s. Paul , and s. James , that faith only justifieth , and a man is justified by faith only : and showed how faith and repentance must concur to salvation . 

11.  These things considered , it will easily appear , that under the sovereign power of a Christian common wealth , there is no danger of damnation from simple obedience to human laws : for in that the sovereign alloweth Christianity , no man is compelled to renounce that faith , which is enough for his salvation , that is to say , the fundamental points . And for other points , seeing they are not neces•ary to salvation , if we conform our actions to the laws , we do not only what we are allowed , but also what we are commanded by the law of nature , which is the moral law taught by our saviour himself . And it is part of that obedience , which must concur to our salvation . 

12.  And though it be true , whatsoever a man doth against his conscience , is sin , yet the obedience in these cases is neither sin , nor against the conscience . For the conscience being nothing else but a man's settled judgement and opinion , when he hath once transferred his right of judging to another , that which shall be commanded , is no less his judgement , than the judgement of that other . So that in obedience to laws , a man doth still according to his own conscience , but not his private conscience . And whatsoever is done contrary to private conscience , is then a sin , when the laws have left him to his own liberty , and never else . And than whatsoever a man doth , not only believing it is ill done , but doubting whether it be ill or not , is done ill , in case he May lawfully omit the doing . 

13.  And as it hath been proved , that a man must submit his opinions in matter of controversy to the authority of the common wealth , so also is the same confessed by the practice of every one of them that otherwise deny it . For who is there differing in opinion from another , and thinking himself to be in the right , and the other in the wrong , that would not think it reasonable , if he be of the same opinion that the whole state alloweth , that the other should submit his opinion also thereunto ; or that would not be content , if not that one or a few men , yet all the divines of a whole nation , or at least an assembly of all those he liketh , should have the power to determine all the controversies of religion ? or , who is there that would not be content , to submit his opinions either to the Pope , or to a general council , or to a provincial council , or to a presbytery of his own nation ? And yet in all these cases he submitteth himself to no greater than human authority . 

Nor can a man be said to submit himself to holy scripture , that doth not submit himself to some or other for the interpretation thereof . Or , why should there be any church government at all instituted , if the scripture itself could do the office of a judge in controversies of faith , ? But the truth is apparent , by continual experience , that men seek not only liberty of conscience , but of their actions , nor that only , but a farther liberty of persuading others to their opinions ; nor that only , for every man desireth that the sovereign authority , should admit no other opinions to be maintained , but such as he himself holdeth . 

14.  The difficulty therefore of obeying both god and man in a Christian common wealth is none : all the difficulty resteth in this point , whether he that hath received the faith of Christ , having before subjected himself to the authority of an infidel , be discharged of his obedience thereby , or not , in matters of religion . 

In which case it seemeth reasonable to think , that since all covenants of obedience are entered into for the preservation preservation of a man's life , if a man be content without resistance to lay down his life , rather than obey the commands of an infidel , in so hard a case he hath sufficiently discharged himself thereof . For no covenant bindeth farther than to endeavour ; and if a man cannot assure himself to perform a just duty , when thereby he is assured of present death , much less it can be expected , that a man should perform that , for which he believeth in his heart he shall be damned eternally . And thus much concerning the scruple of conscience , that May arise concerning obedience to human laws , in them that interpret the law of God to themselves . It remaineth , to remove the same scruple from them , that submit their controversies to others not ordained thereunto by the sovereign authority . And this i refer to the chapter following . 

Chap. vii . 1.  The questions propounded , who are the magistrates in the kingdom of Christ . 2.  The questions exemplified , in the controversies between Moses and Aaron , and between Moses and Corah . 3.  Amongst the Jews , the power temporal and spiritual in the same hand . 4.  Parallel of the twelve Princes of Israel , and the twelve apostles . 5.  Parallel of seventy elders , and seventy disciple . 6.  The hierarchy of the church in our saviour's time , consisted in the twelve , and in the seventy . 7.  Why Christ ordained not priests for sacrifices , as Moses did . 8.  The hierarchy of the church in the apostles time , apostles , Bishops , and priests . 9  The preaching of the gospel , was not commanding , but persuading . 10.  Excommunication . Sovereign's immediate rulers ecclesiastical under Christ . 11.  That no man hath any just pretence of religion against obedience to commonwealth . God speaketh to man by his vicegerents . 

In the former chapter have been removed those difficulties opposing our obedience to human authority ; which arise from misunderstanding of our saviour's title and laws : in the former whereof , namely , his title , consisteth our faith ; and in the latter , our justice . Now they who differ not amongst themselves concerning his title , and laws , May nevertheless have different opinions concerning his magistrates , and the au•hority he hath given them . And this is the cause , why many Christians have denied obedience to their Princes , pretending that our saviour Christ hath not given this magistracy to them but to others . As for example , some say , to the Pope universally ; some to a synod aristocratical ; some , to a synod democratical in every several common wealth ; and the magistrates of Christ being they by whom he speaketh , the question is , whether he •peak unto us by the Pope , or by convocations of Bishops and ministers , or by them that have the sovereign power in every commonwealth . 

2.  This controversy was the cause of those two mutinies , that happened against Moses in the wilderness . The first by Aaron and his sister Miriam , who took upon them to censure Moses for marrying an Ethiopian woman . And the state of the question between them and Moses , they set forth , numb 12.2 . in these words , what hath the Lord spoken but only by Moses ? hath be not spoken also by us ? and the Lord heard this , &c. and punished the same in Miriam , forgiving Aaron upon his repentance . And this is the case of all them that set up the priesthood against the sovereignty . The other was of Corah , Dathan , and Abiram , who with two hundred and fifty captains gathered themselves together against Moses , and against Aaron . the state of their controversy was this , whether God were not with the multitude , as well as with Moses , and every man as holy as he . For numb 16.3 . thus they say , you take too much upon you , seeing all the congregation is holy , every one of them , and the Lord is amongst them : wherefore then lift ye yourselves above the congregation of the Lord ? And this is the case of them that set up their private consciences , and unite themselves to take the government of religion out of the hands of him or them , that have the sovereign power of the common wealth : which how well it pleaseth God , May appear by the hideous punishment of Corah and his complices . 

3.  In the government therefore of Moses , there was no power neither civil , nor spiritual , that was not derived from him . Nor in the state of Israel under Kings , was there any earthly power by which those Kings were compellable to any thing , or any subject allowed to resist them in any case whatsoever . For though the prophets by extraordinary calling , did often admonish and threaten them , yet they had no authority over them . And therefore amongst the Jews , the power spiritual and temporal , was always in the same hand , 

4.  Our saviour Christ , as he was the rightful King of the Jews in particular , as well as King of the kingdom of heaven , in the ordaining of magistrates , received that form of policy , which was used by Moses . according to the number of the children of Jacob , Moses took unto him by the appointment of God , numb 1.4 . twelve men , every one of the chief of their tribe , which were to assist him in the muster of Israel . and these twelve , vers. 24. are called the Princes of Israel , twelve men , every one for the house of their fathers , which are said also , numb 7.2 . to be heads over the houses •f their fathers and Princes of the tribes , and •ver them that were numbered . and these were every one equal amongst themselves , in like manner our saviour took unto him twelve apostles to be next unto him in authority , of whom he saith , matth. 19.28 . when the son of man shall sit in the throne of his majesty , ye shall follow me in the regeneration , shall sit also upon twelve thrones , and judge the twelve tribes of Israel . and concerning the equality of the twelve apostles amongst themselves , our saviour saith , matth. 20.25 . ye know that the Lords of the gentiles have domination over them , &c. vers. 26.  but it shall not be so amongst you ; but whosoever will be greatest among you , let him be your servant . and matth. 23.11 . he that is greatest among you , let him be your servant , and a little before , vers. 8.  be not called rabbi , for one is your doctor , Christ , and all ye are brethren . and act. 1. in the choosing of Mathias to be an apostle , though s. Peter used the part of a prolocutor , yet did no man take upon him the authority of election , but referred the same to Lot . 

5.  Again Moses had the command of God , num. 11.16 . gather to me seventy men of the elders of Israel , whom thou knowest that they are the elders of the persons , and governors over them , and bring them unto the tabernacle , &c.  and Moses did accordingly , verse . 24.  And these were chosen to help Moses in bearing the burden of the government , as appeareth vers. 17. of the same chapter . And as the twelve Princes of the tribes were according to the number of Jacob's children ; so were the seventy elders according to the number of the persons that went down with Jacob into Egypt . in like manner our saviour in his kingdom of heaven , the church , out of the whole number of those that believed in him , ordained seventy persons , which peculiarly were called the seventy disciple , to whom he gave power to preach the gospel and baptise . 

6.  In our saviour's time therefore , the hierarchy of the church consisted ( Besides himself that was the head ) of twelve apostles , who were equal amongst themselves , but ordained over others , as were the twelve heads of the tribes , or seventy disciple , who had every one of them power to baptise and teach , and help to govern the whole flock . 

7.  And whereas in the common wealth instituted by Moses , there was not only an high priest for the present , but also a succession and order of priest ; it May be demanded why our saviour Christ did not ordain the like ? To which May be answered , that the high priesthood , for as much as concerneth the authority thereof , was in the person of Christ , as he was Christ , that is , King . So also was it in Moses , Aaron having the ministerial part only . For notwithstanding that Aaron was the high priest , yet the consecration of him belonged to Moses exod. 29.1 . All the utensils of sacrifice , and other holy things , were ordered by Moses , and in sum , the whole levitical law was delivered by God , by the hand of Moses , who was to Aaron a God ; and Aaron to him a mouth . And for the ministerial part , there could no high priest be ordained but himself : for seeing our saviour was himself the sacrifice , who but himself could offer him up ? And for the celebration of that sacrifice for ever after , our saviour annexed the priesthood to those whom he had appointed to govern in the church . 

8.  After the ascension of our saviour , the apostles dispersed themselves for the spreading of the gospel , and continually as they converted any number of men , in any city , or region , to the faith ; they chose out such as they thought fittest to direct them in matter of conversation and life , according to Christ's law , and to explicate unto them , that mystery of Christ come in the flesh , that is to say , to unfold unto them at large the office of the Messiah . And of those elders some were subordinate to others , according as the apostles who ordained them , thought meet : so s. Paul gave power unto Titus , to ordain elders in Crete , & to redress things that were amiss . So that Titus was an elder & ordained elders . Tit. 1.5 . for this cause i left thee in Crect , that thou shouldst continue to redress the things that remain , & ordain elders in every city , where the word is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} that is constitute ; whereby it appeareth , that in the apostles times , one elder had authority over another , to ordain and rule them . For , 1 tim. 5.16 . Timothy an elder , is made judge of accusations against other elders . And act. 14.23 . The disciple are said to ordain elders , for all the congregations of the cities , they had preached in . And though the word there be {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , yet it signifieth not election , by holding up of hands , but simply and absolutely ordination . For the ordinary choosing of magistrates amongst the Grecians , which were all either popularly governed , or else by Oligarehy , being performed by holding up of hands , made that word be taken simply , for an election , or ordination , howsoever made . And thus in the primitive church , the hierarchy of the church was apostles , elders that governed other elders , and elders that ruled not , but their office was to preach , to administer the sacraments , to offer up prayers and thanksgiving in the name of the persons . But at that time there appeared no distinction between the names of Bishop and elder . But immediately after the apostles time , the word Bishop was taken to signify such an elder as had the government of elders ; and other elders , were called by the name of priests , which signifieth the same that elder doth . And thus the government of Bishops hath a divine pattern in the twelve rulers , and seventy elders of Israel , in the twelve apostles , and seventy disciple of our saviour , in the ruling elders , and not ruling-elders in the time of the apostles . 

9  And thus much of the magistrates over Christ's flock in the primitive church . For the office of a minister , or ministress was to be subject to the flock , and to serve them in those things which appertained to their temporal business . The next thing to be considered is the authority which our saviour gave to them , either over those whom they had converted , or those whom they were about to convert . And for these latter , which as yet were without the church , the authority which our saviour gave to his apostles was no more but this , to preach unto them that Jesus was the Christ , and to explicate the same in all points , that concern the kingdom of heaven , and to persuade men to embrace our saviour's doctrine , but by no means to compel any man to be subject to them : for seeing the laws of the kingdom of heaven , as hath been showed , par. 1. chap. 5.  sect. 10. are dictated to the conscience only , which is not subject to compulsion and constraint , it was not congruent to the style of the King of heaven to constrain men to submit their actions to him , but to advise them only ; nor for him that professeth the sum of his law to be love , to extort any duty from us with fear of temporal punishment . And therefore as the mighty men in the world , that hold others in subjection , by force , are called in scripture by the name of hunters , so our saviour calleth those whom he appointed to draw the world unto him , by subduing their affections , fishers . and therefore he saith to Peter and Andrew , math 4.19 . follow me and i will make ye fishers of men . and Luke 10.3 . behol• ( Saith Christ ) i send ye forth as lambs amongst wolves . and it were to no end to give them the right of compelling without strengthing the same with greater power than of lambs amongst wolves . moreover , math 10. where our saviour giveth a commission to his twelve apostles . to go forth and convert the nations to the faith , he giveth them no authority of coercion and punishment , but only saith , vers. 14.  whosoever shall not receive you , nor hear your words , when ye depart out of that house or that city , shake off the dust of your fee . It shall be easier for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgmemt then for that city . whereby it is manifest , that all that the apostles could do by their authority , was no more than to renounce communion with them , and leave their punishment to God almighty , in the day of judgement . Likewise the comparisons of the kingdom of heaven , to the seed math 13.3 . and to the Leven , math 13.33 . doth intimate unto us , that the increase thereof ought to proceed from internal operation of God's word preached , and not from any law or compulsion of them that preach it . Moreover our saviour himself saith joh. 18.36 . that his kingdom is not of this world , and consequently his magistrates derive not from him any authority of punishing men in this world . And therefore also math 26.52 . After s. Peter had drawn his sword in his defence , our saviour saith , put up thy sword into his place . For all that take the sword , shall perish by the sword . and vers. 54.  how then shall the scriptures be fullfilled , which say , that it must be so ? showing out of the scriptures , that the kingdom of Christ was not to be defended by the sword . 

10.  But concerning the authority of the apostles or Bishops over those who were all-•eady converted and within the church , •here be that think it greater than over them •ithout . For some have said . though the law of Christ deprive no Prince of his dominion , and Paul did rightly appeal unto Cesar , whilst Kings were •nfidellss and out of the church , yet when they became Christians , and of their own accord under went the laws of the gospel , presently as sheep to a shepherd , and as members to the head , they became subject to the prelate of the ecclesiastical hierarchy . Bell. lib. de rom. pont. chap. 29. which whether it be true or not , is to be considered by that light which we have from the holy scripture , concerning the power of our saviour and his apostles ▪ over such as they had converted . But our saviour , as he imitated the commonwealth of the Jews in his magistrates , the twelve and the seventy , so did he also in the censure of the church , which was excommunication ; but amongst the Jews , the church did put the excommunicated persons from the congregation , which they Might do by their power temporal ; but our saviour and his apostles , who took upon them no such power , could not forbid the excommunicated person to enter into any place and congregation , into which he was permitted to enter , by the Prince , or sovereign of the place . For that had been to deprive the sovereign of his authority . And therefore the excommunication of a person subject to an earthly power , was but a declaration of the church , which did excommunicate , that the person so excommunicated was to be reputed still as an infidel , but not to be driven by their authority out of any company , he Might otherwise lawfully come into . And this is it our saviour saith , math. 18.17 . if he refuse to hear the church , let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican . so that the whole effect of excommunicating a Christan Prince , is no more than he or they that so excommunicate him depart and banish themselves out of his dominion . Nor can they thereupon discharge any of his subjects of their obedience to him ; for that were to deprive him of his dominion ; which they May not do , for being out of the church . It is confessed by them that make this objection , and proved in the former section , that our saviour gave no authority to his apostles to be judges over them . And therefore in no case can the sovereign power of a commonwealth be subject to any authority ecclesiastical , besides that of Christ himself . And though he be informed concerning the kingdom of heaven and subject himself thereto , at the persuasions of persons ecclesiastical , yet is he not thereby subject to their government and rule . For if it were by their authority he took that yoke upon him , and not by their persuasion , then by the same authority he Might cast it off . But this is unlawful . For i• all the churches in the world should renounce the Christian faith , yet is not this sufficient authority for any of the members to do the same . It is manifest therefore , that they who have sovereign power , are immediate rulers of the church under Christ , and all other but subordinate to them . If that were not , but Kings should command one thing upon pain of death , and priests another , upon pain of damnation , it would be impossible that peace and religion should stand together . 

11.  And therefore there is no just cause for any man to withdraw his obedience from the sovereign state , upon pretence , that Christ had ordained any state ecclesiastical above it . And though Kings take not upon them the ministerial priesthood , yet are they not so merely laic , as not to have sacerdotal jurisdiction . To conclude this chapter ; since God speaketh not in these days to any man by his private interpretation of the scriptures , nor by the interpretation of any power above or not depending on the sovereign power of every common wealth , it remaineth , that he speaketh by his vice-gods , or lieutenants here on earth , that is to say , by sovereign Kings , or such as have sovereign authority as well as they . 

Chap. viii 1.  The things that dispose to rebellion , discontent , pretence , and hope of success . 2.  Discontent that disposeth to sedition , consisteth partly in fear of want , or punishment . 3.  Partly in ambition . 4.  Six heads of pretences to rebellion 5.  The first of them , that men ought to do nothing against conscience , confuted . 6.  The second , that sovereigns are subject to their own laws , confuted . 7.  The third , that the sovereignty is divisible , confuted . 8.  The fourth , that subjects have a property distinct from the dominion of the sovereign confuted . 9  The fift . That the persons is a person distinct from the sovereign , confuted . 10.  The sixt , that tirannicide is lawful confuted . 11.  Four heads of hope of success in rebellion . 12.  Two things necessary to an author of rebellion , much eloquence , and little wisdom . 13.  That the authors of rebellion necessarily are to be men of little wisdom . 14.  That the same are necessarily eloquent . 15.  In what manner they concur to their common effects . 

Hitherto of the causes why , and the manner how , men have made commonwealths . In this chapter i shall show briefly by what causes , and in what manner they be again destroyed ; not meaning to say any thing concerning the dissolution of a common wealth , from foreign invasions , which is as it were the violent death thereof . I shall speak only of sedition , which is also the death of the commonwealth , but like to that which happeneth to a man from sickness and distemper . To dispose men to sedition , three things concur . The first is discontent ; for as long as a man thinketh himself well , and that the present government standeth not in his way to hinder his proceeding from well to better , it is impossible for him to desire the change thereof . The second is pretence of right ; for though a man be discontent , yet if in his own opinion there be no just cause of stirring against , or resisting the government established , nor any pretence to justify his resistance , and to procure aid , he will never show it . The third is hope of success : for it were madness to attempt without hope , when to fail , is to die the death of a traitor . Without these three , discontent , pretence , and hope , there can be no rebellion : and when the same are all together , there wanteth nothing thereto , but a man of credit to set up the standard , and to blow the trumpet . 

2.  And as for discontent , it is of two sorts : for it consisteth either in bodily pain present or expected , or else in trouble of the mind ; ( Which is the general division of pleasure and pain , part 1. cha. 7 sect. 9 ) The presence of bodily pain disposeth not to sedition ; the fear of it doth . As for example ; when a great multitude or heap of persons , have concurred to a crime worthy of death , they join together , and take arms to defend themselves for fear thereof . So also the fear of want , or in present want , the fear of arrests and imprisonment dispose to sedition . And therefore great exactions , though the right thereof be acknowledged , have caused great seditions . As in the time of hen 7. the seditions of the Cornish men that refused to pay a subsidy , and under the conduct of the Lord Audley , gave the King battle upon black heath ; and that of the Northern persons , who in the some King's time , for demanding a subsidy granted in parliament , murdered the ea•l of Northumberland in his house . 

3.  Thirdly , the other sort of discontent , which troubleth the mind of them who otherwise live at ease , without fear of want , or danger of violence , ariseth only from a sense of their want of that power , and that honour and testimony thereof , which they think is due unto them . For all joy and grief of mind consisting ( As hath been said part 1. chap. 9  Sect. 21. ) in a contention for precedence to them with whom they compare themselves , such men must needs take it ill , and be grieved with the state , as find themselves postposed to those in honour , whom they think they excel in virtue and ability to govern . And this is it for which they think themselves regarded but as slaves . Now seeing freedom cannot stand together with subjection , liberty in a common wealth is nothing but government and rule , which because it cannot be divided , men must expect in common ; and that can be nowhere but in the popular state or democracy . And Aristotle saith well , lib. 6. c. 2. of his politics , the ground or intention of a democracy , is liberty . which he confirmeth in these words ; for men ordinarily say this , that no man can partake of liberty , but only in a popular common wealth : whosoever• therefore in a monarchical estate ▪ where the sovereign power is absolutely in one man , claimeth liberty , claimeth ( If the hardest construction should be made thereof ) either to have the sovereignty in his turn , or to be colleague with him that hath it ; or to have the monarchy changed into a democracy . But if the same be construed ( With pardon of that unskilful expression ) according to the intention of him that claimeth , than doth he thereby claim no more but this , that the sovereign should take notice of his ability and deserving , and put him into employment and place of subordinate government , rather than others that deserve less . And as one claimeth , so doth another , every man esteeming his own desert greatest . Amongst all those that pretend to , or are ambitious of such honour , a few only can be served , unless it be in a democracy ; the rest therefore must be discontent . And so much of the first thing that disposeth to rebellion , namely , discontent consisting in fear , and ambition . 

4.  The second thing that disposeth to rebellion , is pretence of right . and that is when men have an opinion , or pretend to have an opinion , that in certain cases they May lawfully resist him or them that have the sovereign power , or deprive him or them of the means to execute the same . Of which pretences , there be six special cases . One is , when the command is against their conscience , and they believe , it is unlawful for a subject at the command of the sovereign power , to do any action , which he thinketh in his own conscience not lawful for him to do , or to omit any action , which he thinketh not lawful for him to omit . Another is , when the command is against the laws , and they think the sovereign power in such sort obliged to his own laws , as the subject is ; and that when he performeth not his duty , they May resist his power . A third is , when they receive commands from some man or men , and a supersedeas to the same from others , and think the authority is equal , as if the sovereign power were divided . A fourth is , when they are commanded to contribute their persons or money to the public service , and think they have a propriety in the same distinct from the dominion of the sovereign power ; and that therefore they are not bound to contribute their goods and persons , no more than every man shall of himself think fit . A fifth , when the commands seem hurtful to the persons ; and they think every one of them , that the opinion and sense of the persons , is the same with the opinion of himself , and those that consent with him , calling by the name of persons , any multitude of his own faction . The sixth is , when the commands are grievous ; and they account him that commandeth grievous things , a tyrant ; and a tyrannicide , that is the killing of a tyrant , not only lawful , but also laudable . 

5.  All these opinions are maintained in the books of the dogmatics , and divers of them taught in public chairs , and nevertheless are most incompatible with peace and government , and contradictory to the necessary and demonstrable rules of the same . And for the first , namely , that a man May lawfully do or omit any thing against his conscience , and from whence arise all seditions concerning religion and ecclesiastical government , it hath been plainly declared in the two last chapters , that such opinion is erroneous . For those two chapters have been wholly spent , to prove , that Christian religion not only forbiddeth not , but also commandeth , that in every common wealth , every subject should in all things to the uttermost of his power , obey the commands of him or them that is the sovereign thereof , and that a man in so obeying , doth according to his conscience and judgement , as having deposited his judgement in all controversies in the hands of the sovereign power ; and that this error proceedeth from the ignorance of what and by whom God almighty speaketh . 

6.  As for the second opinion , which is this , that the sovereign is in such sort obliged to his own laws , as the subject is ; the contrary thereof hath been showed , part 2. chap. 1. sect. 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12. by which it appeareth , that the sovereign power is not to be resisted ; that it carrieth the sword both of war and justice ; that it hath right of deciding all controversies , both judicial , and deliberative ; that it hath the the making of all the laws civil , that it appointeth magistrates and public ministers , and that it implieth an universal impunity . How can he or they be said to be subject to the laws which they May abrogate at their pleasure , or break without fear of punishment ? And this error seemeth to proceed from this , that men ordinarily understand not aright , what is meant by this word law , confounding law and covenant , as if they signify the same thing . But law implieth a command ; covenant is but a promise . And not every command is a law , but only ( Part 1. chap. 13.  Sect. 6. ) when the command is the reason we have of doing the action commanded . And then only is the reason of our actions in the command , when the omitting is therefore hurtful , because the action was commanded , not because it was hurtful of itself ; and doing contrary to a command , were not at all hurtful , if there were not a right in him that commandeth to punish him that so doth . He or they that have all punishments in their own disposing , cannot be so commanded , as to receive hurt for disobeying , and consequently no command can be a law unto them . It is an error therefore to think , that the power which is virtually the whole power of the common wealth , and which in whomsoever it resideth , is usually called supreme , •r sovereign , can be subject to any law but that of God almighty . 

7.  The third opinion , that the sovereign power May be divided , is no less an error than the former , as hath been proved , part 2. chap. 1. sect. 15.  And if there were a common wealth wherein the rights of sovereignty were divided , we must confess with bod•n , lib. 2. chap. 1.  de repub. that they are not rightly to be called commonwealths but the corruption of commonwealths . For if one part should have power to make the laws for all , they would by their laws at their pleasure , forbid others , to make peace or war , to levy taxes , or to yield fealty and homage without their leave ; and they that had the right to make peace and war , and command the militia , would forbid the making of other laws , than what themselves liked . And though monarchies stand long , wherein the right of sovereignty hath seemed so divided , because monarchy of itself is a durable kind of government , yet monarchs have been thereby diverse times thrust out of their possession . But the truth is , that the right of sovereignty is such , as he or they that have it , cannot ( Though they would ) give away any part thereof , and retain the rest.  As for example ; if we should suppose the persons of Rome to have had the absolute sovereignty of the Roman state , and to have chosen them a council by the name of the senate , and that to this senate they had given the supreme power of making laws , reserving nevertheless to themselves in direct and express terms , the whole right and title of the sovereignty ; ( Which May easily happen amongst them that see not the inseparable connexion between the sovereign power , and the power of making laws ) i say , this grant of the persons to the senate , is of no effect , and the power of making laws is in the peopl• still . For the senate understanding it to be the will , in intention of the persons to r•tain the sovereignty , ought not to take that for granted , which was contradictory thereto , and passed by error . For part 1. chap. 13.  Sect. 9  In contradictory promises , that which is directly promised , is preferred before that which is oppositp thereunto by consequence , because the consequence of a thing is not always obscured , as is the thing itself . The error concerning mixed government hath proceeded from want of understanding of what is meant by this word , body politic , and how it signifieth not the concord , but the union of many men . And though in the chapters of subordinate corporations , a corporation being declared to be one person in law , yet the same hath not been taken notice of in the body of a common wealth or city , nor have any of those innumerable writers of politics , observed and such union . 

8.  The fourth opinion , to wit , that subjects have their meum , tuum , & suum , in property , not only by virtue of the sovereign power over them all , distinct from one another , but also against the sovereign himself , by which they would pretend to contribute nothing to the public , but what they please , hath been already confuted , by proving the absoluteness of the sovereignty and more particularly , part 2. chap. 5.  Sect. 2. and ariseth from this , that they understand not ordinarily that before the institution of sovereign power , meum & tuum employed no propriety , but a community , where every man had right to every thing , and was in state of war with every man . 

9  The fifth opinion , that the persons is a distinct body from him or them that have the sovereignty over them , is an error already confuted part 2. chap. 2. sect. 11. where is showed , that when men say , the persons rebelleth , it is to be understood of those particular persons only and not of the whole nation . And when the persons claimeth any thing otherwise then by the voice of the sovereign power , it is not the claim of the persons , but only of those particular men , that claim in their own persons . And this error ariseth from the equivocation of the word persons . 

10 lastly , for the opinion , that tyrannicide is lawful , meaning by a tyrant , any man in whom resideth the right of sovereignty , is no less false and pernicious to human society , then frequent in the writings of those moral philosophers , Seneca and others , so greatly esteemed amongst us . For when a man hath the right of sovereignty , he cannot justly be punished , as hath been often showed already , and therefore much less deposed , or put to death . And howsoever he Might deserve punishment , yet punishment is unjust without judgement preceding , and judgement unjust without power of judicature , which a subject hath not over a sovereign . But this doctrine proceedeth from the schools of Greece , and from those that writ in the Roman state , in which not only the name of a tyrant , but of a King was hateful . 

11.  Beside discontent to the disposing of a man to rebellion , and pretence there is required in the third place , hope of success , which consisteth in four points : 1.  That the discontented have mutual intelligence . 2.  That they have sufficient number . 3.  That they have arms . 4.  That they agree upon an head . For these four must concur to the making of one body of rebellion , in which intelligence is the life , number the limbs , arms the strength , and an head the unity , by which they are directed to one and the same action . 

12.  The authors of rebellion , that is , the men that breed these dispositions to rebel in others , of necessity must have in them these three qual•tieses . 1.  To be discontented themselves . 2.  To be men of mean judgement and capacity . And thirdly , to be eloquent men , or good orators . And as for their discontent , from whence it May proceed , hath been already declared and for the second and third , i am to show now , first , how they May stand together ; for it seemeth a contradiction , to place small judgement , & great eloquence , or ( As they call it ) powerful speaking in the same man . And then in what manner they concur , to dispose other men to sedition . 

13.  It was noted by Sallust , that in Catiline ( Who was author of the greatest sedition that ever was in Rome ) there was eloquentiae satis , sapientiae parum , eloquence sufficient but little wisdom . and perhaps this was said of Catiline , as he was Catiline . but it was true of him , as an author of sedition . For , the conjunction of these two qualities made him not Catiline , but seditious . And that it May be understood , how want of wisdom , and store of eloquence , May stand together , we are to consider , what it is we call wisdom , and what eloquence . And therefore i shall here again remember some things , that have been said already , part 1. chap. 5.6 . It is manifest that wisdom consisteth in knowledge . Now of knowledge there are two kinds ; whereof the one is the remembrance of such things , as we have conceived by our senses , and of the order , in which they follow one another . And this knowledge is called experience ; and the wisdom that proceedeth from it , is that ability to conjecture by the present , of what is past , and to come , which men call prudence . this being so , it is manifest presently , that the author of sedition , whosoever he be , must not be prudent . For if he consider and take his experience aright , concerning the success which they have had , who have been the movers and authors of sedition , either in this or any other state , he shall find , that for one man that hath thereby advanced himself to honour , twenty have come to a reproachful end . The other kind of knowledge , is the remembrance of the names or appellations of things , and how every thing is called , which is in matters of common conversation , a remembrance of pacts and covenants of men made amongst themselves , concerning how to be understood of one another . And this kind of knowledge is generally called science , and the conclusions thereof truth . But when men remember not how things are named , by general agreement , but either mistake & misname things , or name them aright by chance , they are not said to have science , but opinion , and the conclusions thence proceeding , are uncertain , and for the most part erroneous . Now that scie•ce in particular , from which proceed the true and evident conclusions of what is right and wrong , and what is good and hurtful to the being , and well-being of mankind , the Latins call sapientia , and we by the general name of wisdom . For generally , not he that hath skill in geometry , or any other science speculative , but only he that understandeth what conduceth to the good and government of the persons , is called a wise man . Now that no author of sedition can be wise in this acceptation of the word , is sufficiently proved , in that it hath been already demonstrated , that no pretence of sedition can be right or just . And therefore the authors of sedition must be ignorant of the right of state , that is to say , unwise . It remaineth therefore , that they be such , as name things , not according to their true and generally agreed upon names , but call right and wrong , good and bad , according to their passions , or according to the authorities of such , as they admire , as Aristotle , Cicero , Seneca , and others of like authority , who have given the names of right and wrong , as their passions have dictated ; or have followed the authotity of other men , as we do theirs . It is required therefore in an author of sedition , that he think right , that which is wrong ; and profitable , that which is pernicious ; and consequently that there be in him sapientiae parum , little wisdom . 

14.  Eloquence is nothing else but the power of winning belief of what we say . And to that end we must have aid from the passions of the hearer . Now to demonstration and teaching of the truth , there are required long deductions , and great attention , which is unpleasant to the hearer . Therefore they which seek not truth , but belief , must take another way , and not only derive what they would have to be believed from somewhat believed already , but also by aggravations and extenuations , make good and bad , right & wrong , appear great or less , according as shall serve their turns . And such is the power of eloquence , as many times a man is made to believe thereby , that he sensibly feeleth smart and damage , when he feeleth none , and to enter into rage and indignation , without any other cause , than what is in the words and passion of the speaker . This considered , together with the business that he hath to do , who is the author of rebellion , namely , to make men believe , that their rebellion is just , their discontents grounded upon great injuries , and their hopes great ; there needeth no more to prove , there can be no author of rebellion , that is not an eloquent and powerful speaker , and withal ( As hath been said before ) a man of little wisdom . For the faculty of speaking powerfully , consisteth in an habit gotten of putting together passionate words , and applying them to the present passions of the hearer . 

15.  Seeing then eloquence and want of discretion concur to the stirring of rebellion , it May be demanded , what part each of these acteth therein . The daughters of Pelias King of Thessaly , desiring to restore their old decrepit father to the vigour of his youth , by the counsel of Medea , chopped him in pieces , and set him a-boiling with i know not what herbs in a cauldron , but could not revive him again . So when eloquence and want of judgement go together , •ant of judgement like the daughters of Pelias consenteth through eloquence , which is as the witchcraft of Medea , to cut the common wealth in pieces , upon pretence , or hope of reformation , which when things are in combustion , they are not able to effect . 

Chap. ix. . 1.  The law over sovereigns , salus populi . 2.  That sovereigns ought to establish the religion they hold , for best . 3.  That to forbid unnatural copulation , promiscuous use of women &c. is the law of nature . 4.  That to leave man as much liberty as May be , etc is the duty of a sovereign by the law of nature . 5.  Meum & tuum to be set out to the subjects distinct from one another , &c. a duty of sovereigns by the law of nature . 6.  An extraordinary power for judging the abuses of magistrates necessary , &c. 7.  The suppressing of popularity , &c. necessary , &c. 8.  The institution of youth , &c. necessary , &c. 9  Avoiding of unnecessary war , a necessary duty of the sovereign , ctc.  

Having hitherto set forth how a body politic is made , and how it May be destroyed , this place requireth to say something concerning the preservation of the same , not purposing to enter into the particulars of the art of government , but to sum up the general heads , wherein such art is to be employed , and in which consisteth the duty of him or them that have the sovereign power . For the duty of a sovereign consisteth in the good government of the persons . And although the acts of sovereign power be no injuries to the subjects who have consented to the same by their implicit wills , yet when they tend to the hurt of the persons in general , they be breaches of the law of nature , and of the divine law ; and consequently the contrary acts are the duties of sovereigns , and required at their hands to the utmost of their endeavour by God almighty , under the pain of eternal death . And as the art and duty of sovereigns consist in the same acts , so also doth their profit . For the end of art is profit , and governing to the profit of the subjects , is governing to the profit of the sovereign , as hath been showed part 2. chap. 5.  Sect. 1.  And these three : 1.  The law over them that have sovereign power 2.  Their duty ; 3.  Their profit , are one and the same thing contained in this sentence , salus populi suprema lex . by which must be understood , not the mere preservation of their lives , but generally their benefit and good . So that this is the general law for sovereigns , that they procure to the uttermost of their endeavour , the good of the persons . 

2.  And for as much as eternal , is better ••en temporal good , it is evident , that they •ho are in sovereign authority , are by the •aw of nature obliged to further the esta•lishing of all such doctrines and rules , and the commanding of all such actions , as in •heir conscience they believe to be the true •ay thereunto . For unless they do so , it •annot be said truly , that they have done the •ttermost of their endeavour . 

3.  For the tempo•al good of the persons , ••consisteth in four points : 1.  Multitude 〈◊〉 commodity of living . 3.  Peace amongst themselves . 4.  Defence against foreign •ower . Concerning multitude . It is the •uty of them that are in sovereign autho••ty , to increase the persons ; in as much as ••ey are governors of mankind under God •lmighty , who having create but one •an , and one woman , declared , that it •as his will they should be multiplied and •ncreased afterwards . And seeing this is to •e done by ordinances concerning copu•ation , they are by the law of nature bound •o make such ordinances concerning the •ame , as May tend to the increase of man•ind . And hence it cometh , that in them •ho have sovereign authority , not to for•id such copulations as are against the use 〈◊〉 nature ; not to forbid the promiscuous use •f women , not to forbid one women to •ave many husbands , not to forbid marriages within certain degrees of kindred and affinity , are against the law of nature . For though it be not evident , that a private man living under the law of natural reason only , doth break the same , by doing any of the things aforesaid , yet it is manifestly apparent , that being so prejudicial as they are to the improvement of mankind , that not to forbid the same , is against the law of natural reason , in him that hath taken into his hands any portion of mankind to improve . 

4.  The commodity of living consisteth in liberty and wealth . By liberty i mean , that there be no prohibition without necessity of any thing to any man , which was lawful to him in the law of nature , that is to say , that there be no restraint of natural liberty , but what is necessary for the good of the common wealth , and that well-meaning men May not fall into the danger of laws , as into snares , before they be aware . It appertaineth also to this liberty , that a man May have commodious passage from place to place , and not be imprisoned or confined with the difficulty of ways , and want of means for transportation of things necessary . And for the wealth of persons it consisteth in three things , the well ordering of trade , procuring of labour , and forbidding the superfluous consuming of food and apparel . All those therefore that are in sovereign authority , and have taken upon them the government of persons , are bound by the law of nature to make ordinances consisting in the points afore named , as being contrary to the law of nature , unnecessarily either for ones own fancy , to enthrall , or tie men so , as they cannot move without danger , or to suffer them whose maintenance is our benefit , to want any thing necessary for them , by our negligence . 

5.  For maintaiinng of peace at home , there be so many things necessary to be considered , and taken order in , as there be several causes concurring to sedition . And first , it is necessary to set out to every subject , his propriety and distinct lands and goods , upon which he May exercise , and have the benefit of his own industry , and without which , men would fall out amongst themselves , as did the herdsmen of Abraham and Lot , every man enchroaching and usurping as much of the common benefit as he can , which tendeth to quarrel and sedition . Secondly , to divide the burdens and charges of the common wealth proportionably . Now there is a proportionably to every man's abilily , and there is a proportionably to his benefit by common weath . And this latter is it , which is according to the law of nature . For the burdens of the common wealth being the price that we pay for the benefit thereof , they ought to be measured thereby . And there is no reason , when two men equally enjoying by the benefit of the common wealth , their peace and liberty , to use their industry to get their livings , where of one spareth , and layeth up somewhat , the other spendeth all he gets , why they should not equally contribute to the common charge . That seemeth therefore to be the most equal way of dividing the burden of public charge , when every man shall contribute according to what he spendeth , and not according to what he gets . And this is then done , when men pay the commonwealths part in the payments they make for their own provision . And this seemeth not only most equal , but also least sensible , and least to trouble the mind of them that pay it . For there is nothing so aggravateth the grief of parting with money to the public , as to think they are overrated , and that their neighbours whom they envy , do thereupon insult over them , and this disposeth them to resistance , and ( After that such resistance hath produced a mischief ) to rebellion . 

6.  An other thing necessary for the maintaining of peace , is the due execution of justice ▪ which consisteth principally in the right performance of their duties , which are the magistrates , ordained for the same by and under the authority of the sovereign power , which being private men in respect of the sovereign , and consequently such as May have private ends , whereby they May be corrupted with gifts , or intercession of friends , aught to be kept in awe by an higher power , lest persons ( Grieved by their injustice ) should take upon them to make their own revenges , to the disturbance of the common peace ; which can by no way be avoided in the prineipal and immediate magistrates , without the judicature of the sovereign himself , or some extraordinary power delegated by him . It is therefore necessary , that there be a power extraordinary , as there shall be occasion from time to time , for the syndication of judges and other magistrates , that shall abuse their authority , to the wrong and discontent of the persons , and a free and open way for the presenting of grievances to him or them that have the sovereign authority . 

7.  Besides these considerations , by which are prevented the discontents that arise from oppression , there ought to be some means for the keeping under of those , that are disposed to rebellion by ambition ; which consist principally in the constancy of him that hath the sovereign power , who ought therefore constantly to grace and encourage such , as being able to serve the common wealth , do nevertheless contain themselves within the bounds of modesty , without repining at the authority of such as are employed , and without aggravating the Errors which ( As men ) they May commit , especially when they suffer not in their own particular ; and constantly to show displeasure , & dislike of the contrary . And not only so , but also to ordain severe punishments for such , as shall by reprehension of public actions , affect popularity and applause amongst the multitude , by which they May be enabled to have a faction in the common wealth at their devotion . 

8.  Another thing necessary , is the rooting out of the consciences of men all those opinions which seem to justify and give pretence of right to rebellious actions ; such as are the opinions , that a man can do nothing lawfully against his private conscience ; that they who have the sovereignty , are subject to the civil laws : that there is an authority of subjects , whose negative May hinder the affirmative of the sovereign power ; that any subject hath a propriety distinct from the dominion of the common wealth ; that there is a body of the persons without him or them that have the sovereign power ; & that any lawful sovereign May be resisted under the name of a tyrant ; which opinions are they , which part 2. chap. 8.  Sect. 5.6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10. have been declared , to dispose men to rebellion and because opinions which are gotten by education , and in length of time , are made habitual , cannot be taken away by force , and •pon the sudden ; they must therefore be •aken away also by time and education . And •eeing the said opinions have proceeded •rom private and public teaching , and •hose teachers have received them from grounds and principals , which they have •earned in the universities , from the doctrine of Aristotle , and others , who have delivered nothing concerning morality and policy demonstratively , but being passionately addicted to popular government , have insinuated their opinions by eloquent sophistry . There is no doubt , if the true doctrine concerning the law of nature , and the properties of a body politic , and the nature of law in general , were prespicuously set down and taught in the universities , but that young men , who come thither void of prejudice and whose minds are as white paper , capable of any instruction , would more easily receive the same , and afterwards teach it to the persons , both in books and otherwise , than now they do the contrary . 

9  The last thing contained in that supreme law , salus populi , is their defence , and consisteth partly in the obedience and unity of the subjects , of which hath been already spoken , and in which consisteth the means of levying soldiers , and of having money , arms , ships , and fortified places in readiness for defence ; and partly , in the avoiding of unnecessary wars . For such commonwealths , or such monarchs , as affect war for itself , that is to say , out of ambition , or of vain glory , or that make account to revenge every little injury , or disgrace done by their neighbours , if they ruin not themselves , their fortune must be better than they have reason to expect . 

Chap. x. 1.  All expressions , &c. concerning future actions , are either covenant , council or command . 2.  The difference between a law and a covenant , 3.  The command of him whose command is law in one thing , is law in every thing . 4.  The difference between law and counsel . 5.  The difference between jus and lex . 6.  The division of laws , ctc. 7.  That the divine moral law , and the law of nature , is the same . 8.  That the civil laws are the common measure of right and wrong , &c. 9  Martial law is civil law . 10.  Written laws , &c. unwritten , &c. customs and opinions , &c.  

Thus far concerning the nature of man , and the constitution and properties of a body politic . There remaineth only for the last chapter , to speak of the nature and sorts of law . And first , it is manifest , that all laws are declarations of the mind , con•erning some action future to be done , or omitted . And all declarations and expres•ionss of the mind concerning future actions and omissions , are either promissive , as i will do , or not do , or provisive . as for example , if this be done or not done , this will follow ; or imperative , as do this , or do it not . in the first sort of these expressions , consisteth the nature of a covenant , in the second , consisteth counsel , in the third , command 

2.  It is evident when a man doth , or forbeareth to do any action , if he be moved thereto by this only consideration , that the same is good or evil in itself ; and that there be no reason why the will or pleasure of another , should be of any weight in his deliberation , that then neither to do nor omit the action deliberated is any breach of law-and consequently , whatsoever is a law to a man , respecteth the will of another , and the declaration thereof . But a covenant is a declaration of a man's own will . And therefore a law and a covenant differ : and though they be both obligatory , and a law obligeth no otherwise then by virtue of some covenant made by him who is subject thereunto , yet they oblige by several sorts of promises . For a covenant obligeth by promise of an action , or omission especially named and limited ; but a law bindeth by a promise of obedience in general , whereby the action to be done , or left undone , is referred to the determination of him , to whom the covenant is made . So that the difference between a covenant and a law , standeth thus : in simple covenant , the action to be done , or not done , is first limited and made known , and then followeth the promise to do or not to do ; but in a law , the obligation to do or not to do , precedeth , and the declaration what is to be done , or not done , followeth after . 

3.  And from this May be deduced , that which to some May seem a paradox , that the command of him , whose command is a law in one thing , is a law in every thing . for seeing a man is obliged to obedience before what he is to do be known , he is obliged to obey in general , that is to say , in every thing . 

4.  That the counsel of a man is no law to him that is counselled , and that he who alloweth another to give him counsel , doth not thereby oblige himself to follow the same , is manifest enough . And yet men usually call counselling , by the name of governing , not that they are not able to distinguish between them , but because they envy many times those men that are called to counsel , & are therefore angry with them that they are counselled ▪ but if to counselors there should be given a right to have their counsel followed , then are they no more counselors , but Masters of them whom they counsel ; and their counsels no more counsels , but laws . For the difference between a law and a counsel being no more but this , that in counsel the expression is do , because it is best ; in a law do , because i have a right to compel you ; or do , because i say do ; when counsel should give the reason of the action it adviseth to , because the reason thereof itself is no more counsel , but a law . 

5.  The names lex & jus , that is to say , law and right , are often confounded , and yet scarce are there any two words of more contrary signification . For right is that liberty which law leaveth us , and laws those restraints by which we agree mutually to abridge on another's liberty . Law and right therefore are no less different than restraint and liberty , which are contrary , and whatsoever a man doth , that liveth in a common wealth jure , he doth it jure civili , jure naturae , and jure divino . for whatsoever is against any of these laws , cannot be said to be jure . for the civil law cannot make that to be done jure , which is against the law divine , or of nature . And therefore whatsoever any subject doth , if it be not conrary to the civil law , and whatsoever a sovereign doth , if it be not against the law of nature , he doth it jure divino , by divin right . but to say lege divina , by divine law , is another thing . For the laws of God and nature allowing greater liberty than is allowed by the law civil ; ( For subordinate laws do still bind mo•e then superior laws , the essence of law being not to loose , but to bind ) a man May be commanded that by a law civil , which is not commanded by the law of nature , nor by the law divine . So that of things done leg• , that is to say , by command of the law , there is some place for a distinction between lege divina & lege civili . as when a man giveth an alms , or helpeth him that is in need , he doth it not lege civili but lege divina , by the divine law , the precept whereof is charity . but for things that are done jure , nothing can be said done jure divino , that is not also jure civili , unless it be done by them that having sovereign power , are not subject to the civil law . 

6.  The differences of law , are according to the differences either of the authors and lawmakers , or of the promulgation , or of those that are subject to them . From the difference of the authors , or law makers , cometh the division of law into divine , natural , and civil . From the difference of promulgation , proceedeth the division of laws , into written and unwritten . and from the difference of the persons to whom the law appertaineth , it proceedeth , that some laws are called simply laws , and some penal . As for example , thou shall not steal is simply a law ; but this , he that stealeth an ox , shall restore fourfold , is a penal or as other •all it a judicial law . Now in those laws which are simply laws , the commandment is addressed to every man ; but in penal laws the commandment is addressed to the magistrate , who is only guilty of the breach of it when the penalties ordained , are not i•flicted : to the rest appertaineth nothing but to take notice of their danger . 

7.  As for the first division of law into divine , natural , and civil , the first two brea•heses are one and the same law . For the law of nature , which is also the moral law , is the law of the author of nature , God almighty ; and the law of God taught by our saviour Christ , is the moral law . For the sum of God's law is ; thou shalt love God above all and thy neighbour as thyself ; and the same is the sum of the law of nature , as hath b•en showed , part 1. chap. 5.  And although the doctrine of our saviour be of three parts , moral , theological and ecclesiastical , the former part only , which is the moral , is of the nature of a law universal ; the latter part is a branch of the law civil ; and the theological which containeth those articles concerning the divinity and kingdom of our saviour , without which there is no salvation , is not delivered in the nature of laws , but of counsel and direction , how to avoid the punishment , which by the violation of the moral law , men are subject to . For it is not infidelity that condemneth , ( Though it be faith that saveth ) but the breach of the law and commandments of God , written fi•st in man's heart , and afterwards in tables , and delivered to the Jews by the hands of Moses . 

8.  In the state of nature where every man is his own judge , and differeth from other concerning the names and appellations of things , and from those differences arise quarrels and breach of peace , it was necessary there should be a common measure of all things , that Might fall in controversy . As for example ; of what is to be called right , what good , what virtue , what much , what little , what meum & tuum , what a pound , what a quarter , &c.  for in these things private judgements May differ , and beget controversy . This common measure , some say is right reason , with whom i should consent , if there were any such thing to be found or known in rerum natura . but commonly they that call for right reason to decide any controversy , do mean , their own . But this is certain , seeing right reason is not existent , the reason of some man or men must supply the place thereof , and that man or men is he or they , that have the sovereign power , as hath been already proved ; and consequently the civil laws are to all subjects the measures of their actions whereby to determine whether they have right or wrong , profitable , or unprofitable , virtuous or vicious , and by them the use and definition of all names not agreed upon , and tending to controversy , shall be established . As for example , when upon the occasions of some strange and deformed birth it shall not be decided by Aristotle , or the philosophers , whether the same be a man , or no , but by the laws , the civil law containing in it the ecclesiastical , as a part thereof , proceeding from the power of ecclesiastical government , given by our saviour to all Christian sovereigns , as his immediate vicars , as hath been said part 2. chap. 7.  Sect. 10.  

9  But seeing it hath been said , that all laws are either natural , or civil , it May be demanded , to which of these shall be referred that law , which is called martial law , and by the Romans , disciplina militaris ? And it May seem to be the same with the law of nature ; because the laws by which a multitude of soldiers are governed in an army are not constant , but continually changing with the occasion ; and that is still a law , which is reason for the present , and reason is the law of nature . It is nevertheless true , that martial law is civil law , because an army is a body politic , the whole power whereof is in the general , and the laws thereof made by him ; and though they still follow and change as reason requireth , yet it is not as the reason of every private man but as the reason of the general requireth . 

10.  When he or they in whom is the sovereign power of a common wealth , are to ordain law for the government and good order of the persons , it is not possible they should comprehend all cases of controversy that May fall out , or perhaps any considerable diversity of them ; but as time shall instruct them by the rising of new ocasions , so are also laws from time to time to be ordained : and in such cases where no special law is made , the law of nature keepeth its place , and the magistrates ought to give sentence according thereunto , that is to say , according to natural reason . The constitutions therefore of the sovereign power , by which the liberty of nature is abridged , are written , because there is no other way to take notice of them , whereas the laws of nature are supposed to be written in men's hearts , written laws therefore are the constitutions of a common wealth expressed ; and unwritten , are the laws of natural reason . Custom of itself maketh no laws . Nevertheless when a sentence hath been once given by them that judge by their natural reason , whether the same be right or wrong , it May attain to the vigour of a law ; not because the like sentence hath of custom been given in the like case , but because the sovereign power is supposed tacitly to have approved such sentence for right , and thereby it cometh to be a law , and numbered amongst the written laws of the common wealth . For if custom were sufficient to introduce a law , than it would be in the power of every one that is deputed to hear a cause , to make his errors laws . In the like manner , those that go under the title of respons a prudentum , that is to say , the opinions of lawyers , are not therefore laws , because responsa prudentum , but because they are admitted by the sovereign ; and from this May be collected , that when there is a case of private contract between the sovereign and the subject , a precedent against reason shall not prejudice the cause of the sovereign ; no precedent being made a law , but upon supposition that the same was reasonable from the beginning . And thus much concerning the elements and general grounds of laws natural and politic . As for the law of nations , it is the same with the law of nature . For that which is the law of nature between man and man , before the constitution of common wealth , is the law of nations between sovereign and sovereign after . 

Finis . 

































































































































































































































































































































































