Aphorisms political . 

The second edition enlarged , by James Harrington . 

Obsequium amicos , veritas odium parit . 

London : printed by j. c. for Henry Fletcher , at the sign of the three gilt cups in St. Paul's churchyard . 1659.  

Aphorisms political . 

i.  the errors and sufferings of the persons , are from their governors . 
ii  when the foundation of a government cometh to be changed , and the governors change not the superstructures accordingly , the persons become miserable . 
iii  the monarchy of England was not a government by arms , but a government by laws , though imperfect or ineffectual laws . 
iv.  the later governments in England , have been governments by arms . 
v.  the persons cannot see , but they can feel . 
vi . the persons having felt the difference between a government by laws , and a government by arms , will always desire the government by laws , and abhor that of arms . 
vii . where the spirit of the persons is impatient of a government by arms , and desirous of a government by laws , there the spirit of the persons is not unfit to be trusted with their liberty . 
viii . the spirit of the persons of England , not trusted with their liberty , driveth at the restitution of monarchy by blood and violence . 
ix. . the spirit of the persons of England , trusted with their liberty , if the form be sufficient , can never set up a King ; and if the form be insufficient , ( As a parliament with a council in the intervals , or two assemblies coordinate ) will set up a King without blood or violence . 
x.  to light upon a good man , May be in chance ; but to be sure of an assembly of good men , is not in prudence . 
xi . where the security is no more than personal , there May be a good monarch , but can be no good commonwealth . 
xii . the necessary action or use of each thing , is from the nature of the form . 
xiii . where the security is in the persons , the government maketh good men evil ; where the security is in the form , the government maketh evil men good . 
xiv . assemblies legitimately elected by the persons , are that only party which can govern without an army . 
xv . not the party which cannot govern without an army , but the party which can govern without an army , is the refined party , as to this intent and purpose truly refined ; that is , by popular election , according to the precept of Moses , and the rule of scripture : take ye wise men , and understanding , and known among your tribes , and i will make them rulers over you . 
xvi . the persons are deceived by names , but not by things . 
xvii . where there is a well-ordered commonwealth , the persons are generally satisfied . 
xviii . where the persons are generally dissatisfied , there is no commonwealth . 
xix . the parties in England declaring for a commonwealth , hold every one of them something that is inconsistent with a commonwealth . 
xx . to hold that the government May be managed by a few , or by a party , is inconsistent with a commonwealth ; except in a situation like that of Venice . 
xxi . to hold that there can be any national religion or ministry without public endowment and inspection of the magistracy , or any government without a national religion or ministry , is inconsistent with a commonwealth . 
xxii . to hold that there May be liberty , and not liberty of conscience , is inconsistent with a commonwealth that hath the liberty of her own conscience , or that is not popish . 
xxiii . where civil liberty is entire , it includes liberty of conscience . 
xxiv . where liberty of conscience is entire , it includes civil liberty . 
xxv . either liberty of conscience can have no security at all , or under popular government must have the greatest security . 
xxvi . to hold that a government May be introduced by a little at once , is to wave prudence , & commit things unto chance . 
xxvii . to hold that the wisdom of God in the formation of an house , or of a government , goeth not universally upon natural principles , is inconsistent with scripture . 
xxviii . to hold that the wisdom of man in the formation of an house , or of government , May go upon supernatural principles , is inconsistent with a commonwealth , and as if one should say , God ordained the temple , therefore it was not built by masons ; he ordained the snuffers , therefore they were not made by a smith . 
xxix . to hold that hirelings , ( As they are termed by some ) or an endowed ministry , aught to be removed out of the church , is inconsistent with a commonwealth . 
xxx . nature is of God . 
xxxi . some part in every religion is natural . 
xxxii . an universal effect , demonstrateth an universal cause . 
xxxiii . an universal cause is not so much natural , as it is nature itself . 
xxxiv . every man , either unto his terror or consolation , hath some sense of religion . 
xxxv . man May rather be defined a religious , than a rational creature ; in regard that in other creatures there May be something of reason , but is nothing of religion . 
xxxvi . government is of human prudence , and human prudence is adequate unto man's nature . 
xxxvii . the prudence or government that is regardless of religion , is not adequate nor satisfactory unto man's nature . 
xxxviii . where the government is not adequate or satisfactory unto man's nature , it can never be quiet or perfect . 
xxxix . the major part of mankind giveth itself up in the matter of religion unto the public leading . 
xl . that there May be a public leading , there must be a national religion . 
xli . where the minor part taketh away the national religion , there the major part is deprived of the liberty of conscience by the minor . 
xlii . where the major part is deprived of the liberty of conscience by the minor , there they will deprive the minor of that liberty of conscience which they Might otherwise enjoy . 
xliii . in Israel there was an endowed clergy or priesthood , and a national religion under inspection of the magistrate : whence the Christians in Apostolic times , defraying their own ministry , could have liberty of conscience ; whereas if the Christians by going about to take away tithes , and abolish the national religion , had endeavoured to violate the consciences of the unconverted Jews , these being far greater in number , must needs have taken away the liberty of conscience from the Christians . 
xliv . Paul in Athens could freely and undisturbedly convert Dionysius and others ; therefore in Athens there was liberty of conscience : but if Paul and his converts had gone about to drive hirelings , or an endowed priesthood or clergy out of that church , who seeth not that the Athenians would have driven Paul and his converts out of Athens ? 
xlv . that there May be liberty of conscience , there must be a national religion . 
xlvi . that there May be a national religion , there must be an endowed clergy . 
xlvii . commonwealths have had their ways of union . As the Athenians , by bringing their confederates unto subjection . As the united provinces , by an equal league . Or as the Romans , by an unequal league . The first way is tyrannical : in the second , one commonwealth under the league , is no more than another , and each one as to herself hath a negative : which kind of union , is not only obstructive , but tendeth ( As we have seen both in Holland and Switz ) towards division . In the third way , the commonwealth uniting other commonwealths , retaineth unto herself the leading of the whole league , leaving unto each of the rest her own laws , and her own liberty . 
xlviii . till a commonwealth be first framed , how such a commonwealth should make an effectual union with another nation , is not possible to be seen . 
xlix . the new , unpractised , and heretofore unheard-of union , ( As it is vulgarly spoken ) with Scotland , by uniting deputies of divers nations , not in a council apart , or by way of state's general , as in the united provinces , but in the standding councils of some one commonwealth in the league , is destructive to liberty both in England and in Scotland . 
l.  if the commonwealth of England receive deputies from Scotland in a greater number than that of her own , she receiveth law from a foreign interest , and so loseth her own liberty . 
li.  if Scotland be received in an equal number , it obstructeth the freedom of both , or occasioneth war or dissension . 
lii . if Scotland be received in an inferior number , she receiveth law from England , and so loseth her liberty . The like is understood of Ireland . 
liii . whereas a well-ordered commonwealth should give the balance to her confederates , and not receive it from them . The councils in which divers others are thus united , though in a far inferior number of deputies , yet if these lie in wait , or lay their heads together , May be overruled , obstructed , or over-balanced by foreign interests . 
liv. where countries are divers in their laws , and yet are to receive laws one from the other , neither the commonwealth giving law , knoweth what to give , nor the commonwealth receiving law , understandeth what she receiveth : in which case the union returneth unto force or confufion . 
lv . the best way of holding a nation different or not different in laws , is the Roman , that is , by way of province . 
lvi . a province , especially if she have strong holds , May by defraying of a small guard , be kept unto a just league , and for the rest enjoy her own laws , her own governmeut , and her perfect liberty : other ways of union , will be found more chargeable , and less effectual , on both sides : for if England have no army in Scotland , Scotland will receive no law from England ; and if England have an army there , her hold consisteth not in the union , but in the force . The like is to be understood of Ireland . 
lvii . if a country be very small , and not able to subsist of itself , as Wales , it May be safely united and held : but the advantage that Wales hath in participation of all magistracies and offices , is not that which England is able to afford unto such a country as Scotland , without subjecting her neck unto the yoke . 
lviii . the order of a commonwealth requireth , that it consist , first , of a civil ; secondly , of a religious ; thirdly , of a military ; and fourthly , of a provincial part.  The manner of uniting provinces or different nations , appertaineth unto the last part ; and in the formation of a commonwealth , to begin with that first , which is naturally last , is to invert the order , and by consequence the commonwealth , which indeed is nothing but order . 
lix . where there can be any other government , there can be no commonwealth . 
lx . where there can be a commonwealth , what tumults soever there happen , and which soever prevail , there can be no other government ; that is to say , without foreign invasion , which throughout , i must be understood to except . 
lxi . if Sir George Booth had prevailed , he must either have introduced a commonwealth , or have restored a King . 
lxii . if a King were restored , he must either govern by an army , or by parliaments . 
lxiii . a King governing now in England by an army , would for the same causes find the same effects with the late protector . 
lxiv a King governing now in England by parliaments , would find the nobility of no effect at all . 
lxv . a parliament where the nobility is of no effect at all , is a mere popular council . 
lxvi . a mere popular council , will never receive law from a King . 
lxvii . a mere popular council giving law unto a King , becometh thereby a democracy , or equal commonwealth ; or the difference is no greater than in the imperfection of the form . 
lxviii . a commonwealth or democracy to be perfect in the form , must consist especially of such an assembly , the result whereof , can go upon no interest whatsoever , but that only which is the common interest of the whole persons . 
lxix . an assembly consisting of a few , May go upon the interest of one man , as a King ; or upon the interest of one party , as that of divines , lawyers , and the like ; or the interest of themselves , and the perpetuation of their government . 
lxx . the popular assembly in a commonwealth , May consist of too few , but can never consist of too many . 
lxxi . in every commonwealth there hath been a popular assembly . This in Israel at the least consisted of twenty four thousand , upon a monthly rotation . In Athens , Lacedaemon , Rome , it consisted of the whole citizens , that is , of all such as had right in the commonwealth , whether they inhabited in city or country . In Venice it consisteth of about two thousand . In the province of Holland only , which containeth eighteen or nineteen sovereignties , the popular or resolving assemblies consist at the least of five hundred persons : these in the whole union , May amount unto five or six thousand ; in Switz i believe they come unto a greater number . And the most of these assemblies have been perpetually extant . 
lxxii . if the popular assembly consist of so few , and so eminent persons as are capable of any orderly debate , it is good for nothing but to destroy the commonwealth . 
lxxiii . if the popular assembly consist of so many , and for the greater part of so mean persons as are not capable of debate , there must be a senate to help this defect . 
lxxiv . the reason of the senate , is , that a popular assembly rightly constituted , is not capable of any prudent debate . 
lxxv . the reason of the popular assembly , is , that a senate rightly constituted for debate , must consist of so few and eminent persons , that if they have the result too , they will not resolve according unto the interest of the persons , but according to the interest of themselves . 
lxxvi . a popular assembly without a senate , cannot be wise . 
lxxvii . a senate without a popular assembly , will not be honest . 
lxxviii . the senate and the popular assembly being once rightly constituted , the rest of the commonwealth will constitute itself . 
lxxix . the Venetians having slain divers of their Dukes for their tyranny , and being assembled by such numbers in their great council as were naturally incapable of debate , pitched upon thirty gentlemen who were called pregati , in that they were prayed to go apart , and debating upon the exigence of the commonwealth , to propose as they thought good unto the great council ; and from thence first arose the senate of Venice , to this day called the pregati ; and the great council , that is , the senate and the popular assembly of Venice : and from these two arose all those admirable orders of that comwealth 
lxxx . that a persons of themselves should have such understanding as when they of Venice did institute their pregati or senate , is rare . 
lxxxi . that a senate or council of governors having supreme power , should institute a popular assembly , and propose to it , though in all reason it be the far more facile and practicable , is that which is rarer . 
lxxxii the diffusive body of the persons is not in a natural capacity of judging ; for which cause , the whole judgement and power of the diffusive body of the persons must be entirely and absolutely in their collective bodies , assemblies or representatives , or there can be no commonwealth . 
lxxxiii . to declare that the assemblies or representatives of the persons have power in some things , and in others not , is to make the diffusive body , which is in a natural incapacity of judging , to be in a political capacity of judging . 
lxxxiv . to bring a natural incapacity of judging , unto a political capacity of judging , is to introduce government . To bring a natural incapacity of judging , to such a collective or political capacity of judging , as yet necessarily must retain the interest of the diffusive body , is to introduce the best kind of government . But to lay any appeal whatsoever from a political capacity of judging , to a natural incapacity of judging , is to frustrate all government , and to introduce anarchy . Nor is anarchy , whether imposed or obtruded by the legislator first , or by the persons , or their demagogues or incendiaries afterwards , of any other kind whatsoever , then of this only . 
lxxxv . to make principles or fundamentals , belongeth not unto men , unto nations , nor unto human laws . To build upon such principles or fundamentals as are apparently laid by God in the inevitable necessity or law of nature , is that which truly appertaineth unto men , unto nations and unto human laws . To make any other fundamentals , and then build upon them , is to build castles in the air . 
lxxxvi . whatever is violent , is not secure nor durable ; whatever is secure or durable , is natural . 
lxxxvii . government in the whole persons , though the major part were disaffected , must be secure and durable , because it waveth force , to found itself upon nature . 
lxxxviii . government in a party , though all of these were well-affected , must be in-secure , and transitory , because it waveth nature , to found itself upon force . 
lxxxix . commonwealths , of all other governments , are more especially for the preservation , not for the destruction of mankind . 
xc . commonwealths that have been given to cut off their diseased limbs , ( As Florence ) have brought themselves unto impotence and ruin . Commonwealths that have been given unto healing their diseased limbs ( As Venice ) have been healthful and flourishing . 
xci . Athens under the oligarchy of four hundred , was in finitely more afflicted and torn with distraction , blood and animosity of parties , then is England ; yet by introduction of a senate of four hundred , and a popular assembly of five thousand , did thereupon , so suddenly , as if it had been a charm , recover Might and glory . see the eighth book of Thucydides ; a story in these times most necessary to be considered . 
xcii . to leave ourselves and posterity to a farther purchase in blood or sweat , of that which we May presently possess , enjoy , and hereafter bequeathe unto posterity in peace and glory , is inhuman and impious . 
xciii . as certainly and suddenly as a good state of health dispelleth the peevishness and peril of sickness , doth a good state of government , the animosity and danger of parties : 
xciv . the frame of a commonwealth having first been proposed and considered , expedients ( In case such should be found necessary for the safe , effectual and perfect introduction of the same ) May with some aim be applied or fitted ; as to an house , when the model is resolved upon , we fit scaffolds in building . But first to resolve upon expedients , and then to fit unto them the frame of a commonwealth , is as if one should set up props , and then build a house to lean upon them . 
xcv . as the chief expedients in the building of an house are axes and hammers ; so the chief expedient in the building of a government , is a standing army . 
xcvi . as the house , which being built , will not stand without the perpetual noise or use of axes & hammers , is imperfect ; so the government , which being form , cannot support itself without the perpetual use of a standing army . 
xcvii . while the civil and religious parts of a commonwealth are in forming , there is a necessity that she should be supported by an army ; but when the military and provincial parts are rightly form , she can have no farther use of any other army . Wherefore at this point , and not till then , her armies are by the practice of commonwealths , upon slighter occasions , to have half pay for life , and to be disbanded . 
xcviii . where there is a standing army , and not a form government , there the army of necessity will have Dictatorian power . 
xcix . where an army subsisteth upon the pay or riches of a single person , or of a nobility , that army is always monarchical . Where an army subsisteth not by the riches of a single person , nor of a nobility , that army is always popular . 
c.  the English armies are popular armies . 
ci.  where armies are popular , and exercise Dictatorian power in deposing single persons , and monarchical assemblies , there can be no greater , nor needs any other expedient for the introduction of a commonwealth . Nevertheless unto this May be added some such moderate qualifications as May prune the commonwealth , not land off her branches . Whom these will not satisfy , it is not a commonwealth , but a party , that can . 
cii . if the late King had freely permitted unto the persons the exercise of the power inevitably devolved upon them by the change of the balance , he had not been destroyed . If either of the late single persons had brought the persons into an orderly exercise of the power devolved upon them , he had been great . What party soever shall hinder the persons from the exercise of the power devolved upon them , shall be certainly ruined : who or what party soever shall introduce the persons into the due and orderly exercise of the power devolved upon them , shall be forthwith secure , and famous for ever . 
ciii . a man useth , nourisheth and cherisheth his body , without understanding it ; but he that made the body , understood it . 
civ. the reason why the nations that have commonwealths , use them so well , and cherish them so much , and yet that so few nations have commonwealths , is , that in using a commonwealth , it is not necessary it should be understood : but in making a commonwealth , that it be understood , is of of absolute necessity . caput reipublicae est nosse rempub. Cicero . 
cv . as the natural body of a Christian or saint can be no other , for the frame , than such as hath been the natural body of an Israelite or of an heathen ; so the political bodies , or civil governments of Christians or saints , can be no other , for the frame , than such as have been the political bodies or civil governments of the Israelites , or of the heathens . 
cvi  it shall be as soon found when and where the soul of a man was in the body of a beast , as when or where the soul or freedom natural unto democracy , was in any other form , then that only of a senate , and an assembly of the persons . 
cvii . in those things wherein , and so far as art is directed or limited by the nature of her materials , it is in art as in nature . 
cviii . that democracy , or equal government by the persons , consist of an assembly of the persons , and a senate , is that whereby art is altogether directed , limited and necessitated by the nature of her materials . 
cix . as the soul of man can never be in the body of a beast , unless God make a new creation ; so neither the soul or freedom natural unto democracy in any other form whatsoever , then that only of a senate , and a popular assembly . 
cx . the right constitution , coherence and proper symmetry of a form of government goeth for the greater part upon invention . 
cxi . reason is of two parts ; invention , and judgement . 
cxii . judgement is most perfect in an assembly . 
cxiii . invention is most perfect in one man . 
cxiv . in one man , judgement wanteth the strength which is in a multitude of counselors . 
cxv . in a multitude of counselors , invention is none at all . 
xcvi . through the defect of invention , the wisest assemblies in the formation or reformation of government , have pitched upon a sole legislator . 
xcvii . it is not below the dignity of the greatest assembly , but according unto the practice of the best commonwealths , to admit of any man that is able to propose to them , for the good of his country . 
cxviii . unto the making of a well-ordered commonwealth , there goeth little more of pains or charge , or work without doors , than the establishment of an equal or apt division of the territory , and the proposing of such election unto the divisions so made , as from an equal foundation , May raise equal superstructures ; the rest being but paper-work , is as soon done , as said or voted . 
cxix . where such elections are proposed , as being mad by the persons , must needs produce a well-ordered senate and popular assembly , and the persons ( Who as we have already found by experience , stick not at like work ) elect accordingly ; there not the proposers of any power in themselves , but the whole persons by their peculiar and natural right and power , do institute and ordain their whole commonwealth . 
cxx . the highest earthly felicity that a persons can ask , or God can give , is an equal and well-ordered commonwealth . Such an one among the Israelites , was the reign of God ; and such an one ( For the same reason ) May be among Christians the reign of Christ , though not every one in the Christian commonwealth should be any more a Christian indeed , than every one in the Israelitish commonwealth was an Israelite indeed . 
septem. 12. 1659.  

Finis 

Errata . 

Aphor. 47. line 1. for their ways , read three ways . 







