THE JUDGEMENT and DOCTRINE Of the Clergy of the Church of England , CONCERNING One special Branch of the King's Prerogative , Viz. In dispencing with the Penal Laws , Asserted by The most Reverend Fathers in God , The Lords Arch-bishops Bancroft , Laud and Usher . 

The Right Reverend Fathers in God , The Lords Bishops Sanderson and Cartwright . 

The Reverend Doctors , Sir Thomas Ridley L. L. D. Doctor Heylin , Doctor Barrow , Doctor Sherlock Master of the Temple , Doctor Hicks , Doctor Nalson and Doctor Puller . 

And by the ANONYMUS , Author of the Harmony of Divinity and Law.  

Together with the Concurring Resolutions of our Reverend Judges , as most Consonant and Agreeable thereunto . 

In a Letter from a Gentleman of Oxford , to his Friend at London . 

Licenced the 2d . of May 1687.  

Upon whomsoever God is understood to bestow the Sovereign Authority , he must also be understood to bestow upon him all the Jura Majestatis ; or Essential Rights of Sovereignty , according to that Maxim , Qui dat esse , dat & omnia pertinentia ad esse ; He that gives the Essence , gives also the Properties belonging to the Essence . Jovian , or an Answer to Julian the Apostate , chap. 11.  



London , Printed for J. H. and T. S. and are to be had at most Booksellers , in London and Westminster . 

SIR , 

IN one of the late Conferences you were pleased to have with me , you seemed to be somewhat disatisfied upon the subject we were discoursing of , which was , whither the King had by Law such a Supreme Power inherent in , and inseparably annexed to his Crown , as to Dispense with Penal Laws . 

I remember I then told you , we could not resolve ourselves of this Great Point , but by these two ways . 

1.  To see , how far the Judgement of our Churchmen , appearing in their Doctrines ( which are for our Edification ) doth Warrant this Prerogative to be in the King.  

II To see how far the Judge's Resolutions ( in declaring their sense of the Law of the Land in this doubtful Question , ) do agree with such their Judgements and Doctrines . 

And as for the First , Sir , I doubt not but to make it clear , past all peradventure , that our Reverend Clergy of the Church of England have unanimously concurred in this Point of Doctrine , that it doth inseparably belong to the Kingly office to dispense with Penal Laws , when ever such a Supremacy of Power shall be thought necessary to be exerted for the safety of the King , and the Good and Ease of his People in general . And if I can prove this undeniably to You ; I hope then that this nice Scruple of yours ( which by the way , I suppose , you will allow me to call your tender Conscience ) will easily be removed ; and consequently than it may be presumed , I shall have lesle difficulty to Satisfy You in the other Point , that this sense of the Law of the Land in the point in Question , is no other , than what is exactly Correspondent with the Judgement and Doctrine of the Clergy of the Church of England . 

To begin then , 

The Reverend Dean of Worcester , in his so deservedly applauded Answer to Julian the Apostate , declares , that the English Realm is a perfect sovereignty , or Empire , and that the King of England by the Imperial Laws of it , is a Complete , Imperial , and Independent Sovereign . And he quotes Coke in Cawdrye's Case , who saith , that by the ancient Laws of this Realm , England is an absolute Empire , and Monarchy ; and that the King is furnished with plenary and Entire Power , Prerogative , and Jurisdiction , and is supreme Governor over all persons within this Realm . 

Now it would be a contradiction to call this an Imperial Crown ; to acknowledge the King for supreme over all persons , — and that he is furnished with Plenary and entire Power , unless He have all Those Rights , which are involved in the very Notion of his Imperial Sovereignty . 

By the Rights of Sovereign , saith He , I understand Those Prerogatives , and Preeminences of Power and Greatness , which are involved in the Formal Conception of Sovereignty , and are inseparably annexed to the Sovereign . — He hath no sharers or Copartners in the Sovereignty ; None Coordinate with him in Government ; no Equal , nor Superior , but only God , to whom Alone He is subject , — All Power and Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal is derived and deducted from Him , as supreme Head of These Churches , and Realms . 



There are some Essential Rights of the Crown , which the Subjects cannot obtain from their Sovereign by any Grant or prescription , without destroying the essential and individual Rights of Monarchy . These Rights , called the Flowers of the Crown , are Regalia Suprema , or Summa Jura Imperij , regno tuendo servientia , inherent to his Royal Function , and politic Capacity , and serve for the strength and support thereof — such are the Rights of making War and Peace , of having the last Appeal unto him , or his Great Council and supreme Court ; and of making Leagues , and of Dispensing with Penal Laws , granting pardons , and such like . 

Now if the King hath a perfection and fullness of Imperial Power in him , as Doctor Hicks hath clearly made out , and This Power of dispensing with Penal Laws be ( as it must be , or nothing ) one of those Prerogatives and Pre-eminencies of power and Greatness , which are involved in the Formal Conception of Sovereignty ; then certainly it is very plain , that This is an Essential Right inseparably annexed to our Imperial Sovereign : and to go about to deprive him of such an inherent Right , it would tend to the disinherison of the King and his Crown . This Phrase , he saith , of the disinherison of the King and the Crown in other Acts of Parliament is called , The Destruction of the King's Sovereignty , his Crown , his Regality , and things that tend thereunto , things that are openly against the King's Crown in Derogation of this Regality . 

And , Sir to convince You , that the King hath this Perfection and fullness of Power , more especially in matters of Religion , in his sacred Person , you may please to be informed , that that Great Metropolitan of All England , Archbishop Bancroft , when Question was made of what matters the Ecclesiastical judges have cognisance , either upon the exposition of the Statutes concerning Tithes , or any other thing Ecclesiastical , or upon the Statute 1 Eliz. concerning the High Commission , or in any other case in which there is not express Authority in Law , 

declared , That the King himself may decide it in his Royal Person ; and that the Judges are but the Delegates of the King , and that the King may take what cause's he shall please to determine , from the Determination of the Judges , and may determine them himself . And the Archbishop said , that this was clear in Divinity , that such Authority belongs to the King by the word of God in the Scripture . 

So that Eminent Prelate . 

For , as it is well observed by that Learned Knight , and Doctor in the Civil Law , Sir Thomas Ridley . His Majesty , by communicating his Authority to the Judges to expound his Laws , doth not thereby abdicate the same from himself , but that he may assume it again to him , when , and as often as he pleaseth , whose Interpretation in that is to be preferred before theirs . 

For , as he saith in another place , He is both by the Ordinance of God and Man , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , ( as the Apostle terms him ) among them , that is , One who is Supreme Sovereign above the Rest , and whom they ought in all things to obey , so it be not against the Law of God , and Common Justice ; for himself is instead of the whole Law , Yea , he is the Law itself , and the only INTERPRETER thereof , as in whose Breast is the whole Knowledge of the same . 



Now , Sir , what Answer can you give to all This ? if it be clear in Divinity , that such Authority belongs to the King by the word of God in the Scripture , with what Colour of Reason can you deny the king 's Imperial Sovereignty in dispensing with Penal Laws ? 

But to proceed more clearly to the Point in Question , The most Reverend , Renowned and Religious Prelate and Patriot , Doctor W. Laud , Archbishop of Canterbury , A man of such Eminent virtue , ( as the Author of his life writes of him ) Such an Exemplary Piety towards God , such an unwearied fidelity to his Gracious Sovereign , and of such a Public Soul towards Church and State , that he lived the Honour , and died a Martyr of both . I say , this Great , but at last unfortunate Prelate , thus delivers his Considerate Opinion , that the Supreme Magistrate in the Estate Civil , may not abrogate the Laws made in Parliament , though he may dispense with the Sanction or Penalty of the Law , quoad hic & nunc , as the Lawyers speak . 



The next I shall give You , is , that Learned and moderate Primate and Metropolitan of all Ireland , Dr. James Usher , late Lord Archbishop of Armagh , who in his Book entitled , The Power communicated by God to the Prince , and the obedience required of the Subject , composed purposely for the Rights both of Princes and Subjects , and for the comfirmation of staggering Loyalty , assures us , that POSITIVE LAWS , being ( as other works of men are ) IMPERFECT and not free from many discommodities , if the STRICT OBSERVATION thereof should be pursued in EVERY PARTICULAR ; it is fit the SUPREME Governor should not himself only be EXEMPTED from SUBJECTION thereunto , but also be so far LORD OVERDO THEM , that where he feeth cause he may ABATE , or TOTALLY REMIT the PENALTY incurred by the Breach of them , DISPENSE with others for the NOT OBSERVING of them at all ; yea , and generally SUSPEND the EXECUTION of them , when by experience he shall find the Inconveniences to be greater than the profit that was expected should redound thereby unto the Commonwealth . PLUTARCH setteth this down as a chief point of that natural skill which PHILOPOEMEN had in Government , that he did not only rule according to the Laws , but overruled the Laws themselves , when he found it conducing to the weal-public . 



And he saith a little before , by the LAW OF THE KING , I understand such ordinances as are MERELY CIVIL and POSITIVE ; the COACTIVE POWER whereof being DERIVED from him who is the SUPREME LAWGIVER UNDER GOD ON EARTH , He himself cannot properly be said to be tied thereby . For as with the Grammarians , the Imperative mood hath no first Person , so with the Civilians , no man can command or forbid himself ; at least wise , no man can impose such a Law upon himself , but that he may recede from it when he pleaseth . And with the Schoolmen ▪ a Law hath power to direct such Acts as belong to those who are subject to the Government of another ; whereupon no man , if we speak properly , doth impose a Law upon his own Acts. As no man therefore is superior to himself , so no man hath Jurisdiction over himself ; because none can oblige a man against his will , but only his Superior , and the Jurisdiction over a man's self may be dissolved at Pleasure . 

KING'S therefore , as he affirms in another place , are said to be ABOVE THE LAWS whereby they govern their People , partly in respect of Themselves , partly in respect of Others : Of OTHERS , in as much as they have POWER to JUDGE according to their own CONSCIENCE , and not according to the Letter of the Law ; as also to DISPENSE in some Cases with the very OBEDIENCE , in some with the PUNISHMENT required by the LAW . 

For , he quotes Aeneas Silvius a little after saying , Equity is that which is just beyond the written Law : Now if the Law doth command one thing , and Equity persuade another , it is fit the Emperor should temper the Rigour of the Law with the Bridle of Equity , as He who alone may and aught to look unto that interpretation which lieth interposed between Law and Equity . Especially seeing no Decree of the Law , although weighed with never so considerate Council , can sufficiently answer the varieties and unthought on plotting of Man's Nature . And seeing the Condition of human Law is such , that it runneth always without stint , and there is nothing in it which can be at a perpetual stand ; it is manifest , that in tract of time the Laws which before were just , prove afterwards to be unjust , and become now unprofitable , now harsh , now unrighteous : for the moderating whereof there is need of the Prince , who is Lord of the LAWS . For if it fall out , that any thing hath been more obscurely delivered therein , it is fit the Emperor should clear it , and amend that harshness of the Laws , which he shall find to be contrary and disagreeable to his humanity . For where it is said , that a Law , although it be hard , should yet be observed ; that respecteth the inferior Judges , and not the Emperor ; in whom is that Power of moderating the Laws which they call 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , or Equity , which is so annexed to the Supremacy of the Prince , that by no Decrees of man it can be pulled from it . Thus far Aeneas Silvius out of him . 



In regard of Themselves Kings are said to be exempted from Subjection to the Laws , both because they are not tied 

( otherwise than for conveniency and good Example's sake ) to the observance of such as are mere positive and temporary Laws ; and because they are not liable to the Civil Punishments set down for the breach of any Law , as having no superior upon earth that may exercise any such Power over them . 



And again , saith this Great Prelate , while the Laws do stand in force , it is fit that sometimes the King's Clemency should be mingled with the severity of them ; especially when by that means the subjects may be freed from much detriment and damage : The Condition of the Magistrates , whose Sentence is held corrupt , if it be milder than the Laws , being one thing ; the Power of Princes , whom it becometh to qualify the sharpness of them , a far different matter . 



To this Eminently Reverend and Judicious Primate , I shall next subjoin the humble , patient and learned Doctor Robert Sanderson , late Lord Bishop of Lincoln , that you may see what his Opinion is in this matter . But before I give you his Words , let me beg your favour to hear what the Modest and Holy Writer of his Life , Doctor Isaac Walton says of that Book from whence I produce them . How much the Learned World stands obliged to Him for his Lectures de Conscientia , I shall not attempt to declare , as being very sensible , that the Best Pens must needs fall short in the commendation of them : So that I shall only add , that they continue unto this day , and will do for ever , as a Complete Standard for the Resolution of the most material doubts in Casuistical Divinity . And now Sir , pray observe what the Bishop says . 

Upon a Doubt , how may that be understood which so commonly is spoken , Salus Populi est Suprema Lex , the safety of the People is the Supreme Law ; he , among other things , thus declares , There is no sober man will deny , that the Safety of the People , that is , of the whole Commonalty , as that word comprehends the King , together with the Subjects , is the Supreme Law ; but that the Safety of the People , that is , of the Subjects , the King being excluded , is the Supreme Law , there is no man will affirm it , unless he be a Fool , or an Imposter ; a Fool , if he doth believe what he himself saith , and an Imposter , if he doth not believe it . But if any man will seriously look into the Original of this Aphorism , I do believe he will more easily grant , that it ought more precisely to be understood of the Safety of the Prince , than of the Safety of the Subjects . This Saying , so tossed up and down in the Mouths of all Men , came to us from the Romans , and was then used by them when their Republic did flourish most of all under a Popular State : And there is no great Reason that any man should wonder , that the People's Safety was the Supreme Law with them , with whom the People themselves were the Supreme Power ; In the Judgement therefore of those wise Ancients , who were the first Authors of this Aphorism , the Safety of the Supreme Power was the Supreme Law , of the People indeed in a Democracy , but of a King in Monarchy . 



But I say , it being admitted , but not granted , that this Aphorism is properly understood of the Safety of the People , that is , of the Subjects , it is nevertheless perversely wrested to the Prejudice of Regal Dignity , which even so doth render its Power more Ample and Illustrious in this sense . A King that gives Laws and Statutes to his People will not be so bound up by his Laws , that it shall not be lawful for him , the safety of the Commonwealth being in an apparent danger , to provide for the safety of Kingdom and People committed to him by God , even against the words of the Law ; not that it is lawful for Subjects under the pretence of the defence of their Liberty to break all the bonds of Laws and Fidelity , and by an intolerable presumption to trample on the Authority of their King , but that it is lawful for the Prince , in the Preservation of his own and his Subjects Safety , to lay aside for a while all strict observance of the Laws , and to make use a little of an Arbitrary Right , least by too unseasonable and superstitious Reverence of the Laws , he may suffer both his own Person , and his People that are subject to him , and even the Laws themselves , to fall into the Power of his Enemies . 



I will close up this Christian Doctrine of our Bishops with one Authority more , and that is of our Present Right Reverend Father in God , Thomas Lord Bishop of Chester , in his Sermon on the 6th of Feb. 1685 / 6 ; . in the Collegiate Church of Rippon , where you will find him thus to inform you , and all other good Subjects ; So that the King may , it seems , make use of his Prerogative , as God does of his Omnipotence , upon some extraordinary occasions : For as my Lord Hobart well observes , The Statute Laws are made to ease him of his Labour , not to deprive him of his Power , and that he may make a Grant with a Non-obstante to them : And indeed the Power of dispensing with particular Laws , in some Emergencies , is such a Lex Coronae , such a Prerogative , without which no Kingdom can be well governed , but Justice will be turned into Wormwood . For there never was yet , nor ever will be , any human Law , framed with such exact Skill and Policy , that it might not , on some occasion or other , be burdensome to the Subject , and obstructive to the public good of the Commonwealth : There being particular Cases and Exigencies , so infinitely various , that 't is impossible for the wit of man to foresee or prevent them . And therefore in all Government there must be a Power Paramount to the written Law ; and we have good reason to bless God , that this is lodged but in One , and in him whom he hath set over us , to be his Vicegerent ; by whose Authority , they who break the Letter of the Law , in pure Zeal and Loyalty , to serve the ends of Government , and to uphold the Crown on the Right Head , that does and aught to wear it , may be relieved , and pardoned , and rewarded too . 



Thus Sir , have I given you in short the Sense and Judgement of our Spiritual Guides , the Great Fathers of the Church of England in the Point in Question between us ; I will now descend to men of lesle degree in the Church , but they shall be men of great and eminent Learning , sober Understandings , and of exemplary Piety and Gravity , and you shall hear how they All concur in the same Judgement as concerning this Point of Regal Sovereignty . 

The First shall be the Reverend Doctor Peter Heylin . whose knowledge was extensive as the Earth , and who had a perfect familiarity with the present State of all the Countries in the World , 

( as the Ingenious Author of his Life informs us ) and one who is honoured by all true Sons of the Church of England , with a due veneration for his Learned and Elabourate Works . And He speaks thus . 



He ( viz. the King ) hath Authority by his Prerogative Royal to dispense with the Rigour of the Laws , and sometimes to pass by a Statute with a Non-obstante . 



The Learned and Judicious Doctor Isaac Barrow , late Master of Trinity College in Cambridge , in his Treatise concerning the Pope's Supremacy affirms thus — It is indeed a proper Endowment of an absolute Sovereignty , immediately and immutably constituted by God , with no Terms or Rules limiting it , that its will declared in way of Precept , Proclamations concerning the Sanction of Laws , the Abrogation of them , the Dispensation with them , should be observed . 



And says he a few Leaves further , The Power of enacting and dispencing with Ecclesiastical Laws touching exterior Discipline did of old belong to the Emperor . And it was reasonable that it should ; because old Lawss might not conveniently suit with the Present State of things , and the public welfare ; because new Laws might conduce to the good of Church and State , the care of which is incombent on him ; because the Prince is bound to use his Power and Authority to promote God's Service , the best way of doing which may be by framing Orders conducible thereunto . 



And in another place he declares that it is a Privilege of Sovereigns to grant Privileges , Exemptions , Dispensations . 



Thus says the Reverend Doctor Sherlock , Master of the Temple , in a positive manner , it does not become any man , who can think three Consequences off , to talk of the Authority of Laws , in derogation to that Authority of the Sovereign Power . 

The Sovereign Power made the Laws , and can repeal them , and dispense with them , and make new Laws : the only Power and Authority of the Laws is in the Power which can make and execute Laws . Sovereign Power is inseparable from the Person of a Sovereign Prince . 



I shall in the next place give you the words of the Ingenious , and most painful Searcher into Truths , John Nalson , Dr. of Laws , whose indefatigable Industry hath sufficiently appeared in those Volumes of Historical Collections he lived to see published to the World , his words are These . 

In the King's Power it is to remit the Severities of the Penal Laws , whereby he may manifest his Goodness and Clemency as well as his Greatness and Justice , by graciously pardoning the Smaller Breaches of his Laws , and the more Capital Offences which he might most justly punish . 



And who in the World can dispute this ? When , as Dr. Hick's in his Jovian tells us for certain , that upon whomsoever God is understood to bestow the Sovereign Authority , he must also be understood to bestow upon him all the Jura Majestatis , or essential Rights of Sovereignty , according to that Maxim , Qui dat esse , dat et omnia pertinentia ad esse ; He that gives the Essence , gives also the Properties belonging to the Essence . 

And doth not all mankind consent in this , that the King is the fountain of mercy as well as of Justice ? Surely then the Penal Laws , especially those made merely for diversity of Opinions in Religion , which ( not to call them unchristian ; since our Saviour never offered any external force and Compulsion to make men obey his Laws , as the Learned master of the Temple assures us , but however ) are in themselves by experience proved very unreasonable , ought at least to be Subject to the Goodness and Mercy of the Prince , to dispense with them , when He in his Wisdom shall judge it most necessary for the Good of his People in general . For as the Egyptian Hieroglyphic for Government was an Eye in a Sceptre : So the chief Magistrate is like a watchman upon a Tower , who is to look down and view the general state of his People , and to conduct himself accordingly . 



The Reverend Doctor Puller , in his most extraordinary Book concerning the Moderation os the Church of England , saith , that 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Moderation , as it is now generally used , is a word borrowed from the Law , and is used by the Masters thereof , to denote such a gentle and benign temper , as disposeth those who have the Administration of the Laws 

( which , You see , is the Imperial Sovereign , who hath the Supreme Jurisdiction over all others , and Jurisdiction is defined by the Civilians to be , Potestatem Juris dicendi , a Power of giving Laws to others ) to remit of their Rigour , where either ( first ) they press too hard upon particular persons ; or else ( secondly ) to supply the defects of the said Laws , where they provide not sufficiently for particular cases ; in order thereunto , squaring their Determination by the natural rules of Justice and goodness , rather than by the Letter of the Law.  



And a little further , the same Doctor goes on , saying , moderation , in the Forensick sense wherein we take it , is defined by Aristotle to be the Correction of the Laws wherein because of their Universality they are deficient . From whence , as it must be supposed , to be confined to those to whom the Administration of the Laws is committed , who Alone can have the Power of correcting them : So nothing therefore will be further requisite to show , than that it disposeth them ; where the Laws press too hard upon particular persons , to relax the Rigour of them ; as on the other side , where they do not sufficiently provide for them , to supply their defect . 



All Laws , we know , are for the punishment of Evil Doers , or for the praise of them that do well : but it being impossible so to provide for the punishment of evil doers , as not sometimes to bring even the Innocent within the compass of it ; because what , generally considered , aught to be looked upon and censured as evil , may yet upon sundry considerations and circumstances have nothing of evil in it , or at least be worthy of pardon ; either the Innocent must suffer together with the nocent , ( which so benign a virtue as that we treat of cannot allow ) or it must dispose those to whom the Administration of the Laws is committed to remit of their rigour in such particulars , and exempt them from the undergoing of it : it being in like manner impossible for Laws so to provide for the encouragement of those who deserve well , as that sometime such may not be passed over or neglected ; partly because all cases cannot be foreseen by the Lawgiver ; and partly by reason of the shortness of his expressions ; either some who may deserve encouragement may be excluded from partaking of it , ( which so benign a virtue as we speak of cannot casily permit ) or it must dispose those to whom the Administration of the Laws is committed to ampliate their favours ; and to take such within the compass of them . 



Once again , Equity and moderation , saith He in the next page , is the public honesty of the Laws ; without which , Justice often would be turned into Wormwood : it contains the excellent Spirit ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) the mind and reason of the Law , and is the most Sacred and venerable part of it : As it is the honour and perfection of the Laws , so it is the Sanctuary of such as happen to be oppressed by the Rigour of the Letter . 



I will now , Sir , trouble you with but one instance more upon this Subject , ( though I could multiply , I am confident , Authorities of this kind even beyond your patience ) and that is of One , that will needs be Anonymus , and therefore so he shall pass for me , but his words are These . 

It is the Prerogative of the King , to dispense with many Acts of Parliament by a * Non-obstante , or clause of notwithstanding , especially such , as bind him from any Prerogative , that is solely , and inseparably annexed to his Sacred Person , and Royal Power . 



And even to the Asterick * There is this marginal Note , viz. 44.  Eliz. in the house of Commons Sir George Moor said ; We know the Power of her Majesty cannot be restrained by any Act. Why therefore should we thus talk ? admit we should make the statute with a Non-obstante , yet the Queen may grant a Patent with a Non-obstante to cross this Non-obstante . 



I have done , Sir , now with our Reverend Prelates and Doctors of the Church of England as to this Particular , and hope , I have sufficiently proved to you , that their Judgement and Doctrine doth clearly warrant this Great Prerogative of dispencing with Penal Laws , to be in the King.  

Let us see in the next place what were the Reasons that induced the Reverend Judges in Westminster Hall , ( who ( the Law says ) are the Expositors of Acts of Parliament , and are likewise Custodes jurati ss . Praerogativae Regiae , ) so openly and solemnly , after mature deliberation , to declare their Resolutions in this Point for the King.  

The Reasons that persuaded them were These that follow , viz.  

I That the Kings of England are Sovereign Princes . 
II That the Laws of England are the King's Laws . 
III That therefore it is an Incident Inseparable Prerogative in the Kings of England ; as in all other Sovereign Princes to dispense with Penal Laws in particular cases , and upon particular necessary Reasons . 
iv. That of these Reasons , and these Necessities , the King himself is the sole Judge . And than which is Consequent upon all . 
v. That this is not a Trust invested in , or granted to the King by the People , but is the ancient Remain of the Sovereign Power , and Prerogative of the Kings of England , which never yet was taken from them , nor can be . 
Now , Sir , if such hath been the Doctrine of our most Eminent Clergy of the Church of England , ( and in it they have delivered to us nothing but the words of Truth in Righteousness ) that the King by his Imperial Sovereignty , when he shall see the Necessity of the State to require it , ( of which he is the only Judge , ) may dispense with Penal Laws ; How can you , or any man , who is a sincere lover of the Church of England , be dissatisfied with the Resolution of our Reverend Judges in this matter , seeing the Reasons they went upon were only such as were exactly correspondent with the avowed Doctrines before recited ; and that by this Declaration of theirs , the Law of the Kingdom of England concerning this sovereign Power in the Crown , is no more , than what was before publicly asserted to be the Divinity of the Kingdom . 

Besides , Lex vigilat pro Rege , saith the Law , and the Judges are sworn to maintain all the King's Prerogatives ; which are part of the Law of England , and comprehended within the same ; therefore it is said , that Imperij Majestas est Tutelae Salus , the Dignity of the Prince is the People's Security . The King's Prerogative and Privileges , are incident to his Crown , and He need not prescribe in any Prerogative , for it is as ancient as his Crown is , and is not only the Law of the Exchequer , but the Law of the Land , as that which is his by the ancient Laws of the land wherefore the Judges of the Courts of Westminster are to judge in matters of Prerogative by this Rule , that whatsoever may be for the Benefit and Profit of the King , shall be taken most largely for him , & whatever may be against him , and for his disprofit shall be taken strictly : and it is the Duty of every Judge of all Courts , High and Low , to take great care to preserve the Kings Right , and for that purpose to take every thing at the best for him . 

And , Sir , unto the Judges the People are bound lastly and finally to submit themselves for matter of Law , according to the opinion of the Learned Author of the Royalists Defence . 

But I remember likewise you seemed to startle at the thoughts of this Power ; and were afraid , if at any time the King should think it necessary and convenient to exert it , and to grant a general Liberty of Conscience , that the Church of England would be extremely shaken in her security . What strange Jealousies and Suspicions some weak men may have , I suppose it will not be here worth while to consider ; but certainly our Great Supporters of the Ark of God can never allow themselves in so feminine a passion . They know they have an infinitely wise God , and a most Gracious King to trust to : this hath been their Doctrine , and ought we not to practise it ? They say , 

1.  They have the Care and Providence of God for their Security , who is King of Kings , Lord of Lords , and the only Ruler of Princes ; and that the Hearts of Kings are in his Rule and Governance , and He doth dispose and turn them as seemeth best to his godly Wisdom : according to what Solomon said , and perhaps upon his own experience , 

That the King's Heart is in the hand of the Lord , as the Rivers of Water , he turneth it whithersoever he william  SO THAT THEY HAVE ALL THE SECURITY THAT ANY PEOPLE IN THE WORLD EVER HAD , HAVE , OR AUGHT TO HAVE . Besides , 



2.  They have a most Gracious King to trust to . For , 

1.  They have his Royal Word , that he will protect and maintain the Church of England , in the free exercise of her Religion , as by Law established ; and can she ever be trusted in safer Hands than his ? He hath done more than ever any of us durst ever venture to look for , to give us Confidence in him ; enough to puzzle our Understandings , as well as our Gratitude : And how can he give us better security than he has done ? Shall we suspect him without cause ? or remain dissatisfied when he hath given us the best security that our Cause admits of ? To suspect our Prince , where we cannot help ourselves , is of all fears the most unreasonable . 



2.  Again , We have the Conscience of the Prince for our security , who hath all the moral Obligations , and the fear of God , to keep him from oppressing us , so long as we keep ourselves within the Conscience of the Duty which we owe unto him . 



The Common Principles of Humanity , Justice and Equity , are engraven by the Finger of God upon the Minds of Kings , as well as upon other men's ; and they cannot do wrong upon any particular Person , much lesle to great numbers of their Subjects , without undergoing the same uneasy remorse that other men do , when they injure one another . This hath been found by sad experience in Pagan Princes . — And if Conscience be a restraining Principle in Heathen Princes , if they cannot without such Soul torment's pervert Justice , and violate their Oaths , and the Laws , it must needs much more be a powerful Principle of Restraint to Christian Kings , who are taught to know that they are Gods Ministers , and that he will call them to a severe Account for oppressing his People over whom he set them : And shall not the fear of God's Anger and Judgements keep the Sovereign from injuring of them ? 



3.  But further still , As the Church of England hath the Prince's Conscience , for her Security , so she hath his honour too . For Princes ( like other men ) are tender of their Honour , and good Name , and are powerfully restrained by shame from doing Evil to their Subjects . — Though they may be desirous for their honour to have the Times computed from their Conquests , yet the same Principle of Honour will ordinarily make them ashamed to have them computed from their Massacres , and Persecutions , which will but get them the Surname of the Bloody , or the Tyrant , unto the end of the World. Honour , as Moralists observe , is a Secondary , or Civil Conscience . 



And as for our Prince , who was ever so exceeding tender of his Honour as He ? 

so just to all , and hath He not promised to uphold and maintain this Church , and her Legitimate Children ? — He knows , that ours is a Religion that hath always asserted the Rights of the Crown , with life and fortune : and how cheerfully the Members of it have spent their Blood and Treasure in his Own , his late majesty 's , and his Father's Service , and how they stand affected to his Prerogative . 



And He is very well content , we should be as faithful to God , as we are to him ; as true to our Religion , as to our King : God preserve and prospero him for it . 



Now since our own Religion ( as to the free exercise of it ) is thus Secured to us , and seeing that by his Majesty's Gracious Declaration he is willing that no man should be forced to his Religion , or driven against his Conscience from the Religion he professeth ; and seeing it is manifestly necessary , that , as Sails , so Laws , are to be turned , and as Occasion , time and circumstance , and reason of state shall direct , either to be altered , or revoked : And if Acts of Parliament formerly made to try what good effects they could work in the state , do apparently prove mischievous and ineffectual by their too great rigour and violence , and by the Great Numbers of those that are of dissenting Judgements ? 

What dishonour can it be for the King to lay them asleep for a while to stay those passionate heats , and fierce oppositions of such as seem adversaries to his Grace , or for any Parliament to repeal them , for the same Reasons , non coercet sed provocat violentia , For too heavy a hand upon those whom the Law casts down , shows the will rather to oppress the Offender , then to cure the offence ? 't is the greatest honour to Kings , that their mercy , like that of the Almighty , is more eminent than their Justice , and that their Benches , and Courts , can witness more compassion than severity ; for He that sets open the Prison doors in so wise and gracious a manner , meaneth not to conquer the Hearts and Consciences of his People by Torment , but to win them by mercy and sweetness . Clemency is a virtue sometimes of as great policy as Piety , because it begets Love , and Love breeds Loyalty , commands the very Soul , and lays the Body at the Feet of the obliger : Mercy kindles Fire and Zeal in the Hearts of Subjects . 

Liberty of Conscience is a Natural Right , and therefore our Saviour compelled none to receive his Doctrine , but est Dominus non Cogens , he is not a constraining Lord , but committing his Liberty to the will , said publicly to all , if any man will come after me ; and to his Apostles , Will ye also go away ? and his Disciples were not Commanders , but Instructors and Teachers , which was their Commission . Compulsion and terrene Penalties are out of his Jurisdiction , whose Kingdom was not of this World , which he acknowledgeth not only in speech , but in practice : For when the Disciples would have commanded Fire from Heaven to have consumed the Samaritans , he rebuked them ; and when he was apprehended by the Chief Priests and Elders , he could have commanded Legions of Angels , but would not . It is Irreligion to take away the Liberty of Religion ; so Tertullian , ad Irreligiosiatis Elogium concurrit , this concurreth to the commendation of Irreligion , to take away the liberty of Religion , etc. and therefore , saith the Apostle , we have not Dominion over Your Faith.  

Sir , I cannot tell how well to shut up this Discourse without the words of that Learned and most Reverend Dr. Gerard Langbaine , who was Provost of Queen's College in Oxford , so well known to all , not only at home , but abroad , that the Famous Rhetorician , Longinus , could scarce speak any thing beyond the merit of so excellent a Person : This Doctor in his Judicious Refutation of the Damnable League & Covenant , ( which was then so furiously contended for ) to be imposed upon the Consciences of those who expressed their Zeal to his Majesty's righteous cause , in which , without all peradventure , he spoke the inward Sentiments of all the Loyal Suffering Clergy of England , doth there most admirably instruct us , what a sandy Foundation that is , which supports Persecution for Conscience sake . His words follow . 

Persecution in matters of mere Religion is a Course against the Nature of Religion itself , for Faith , the Soul of Religion , is an inward Act of the Soul , which all the Tyranny in the World , that the malice of the Devil can invent , or the wit of man can exercise , can neither plant where it is not , nor extirpate where it is . It is the gift of God , freely begotten in the Hearts of Men , not by threats and Terrors , not by Tortures and Massacres , but by the quiet still voice of the word preached , Suadenda , non cogenda . And therefore St. Paul , though a Lawful Governor in the Church , flatly disclaims any domineering Power over the Conscience . As for the outward profession of Religion , neither is that Subject to force and violence : A man may confefs Christ , and his Faith in him , as freely in bonds , as at Liberty ; as gloriously upon the Cross , as upon the Throne . Fear indeed may incline a weak Conscience to dissemble his Opinion , but cannot constrain him to alter it : Fire and Faggot are strong Arguments of a weak Cause , undeniable Evidences of Cruelty in Those that use them , but slender , motives of Credibility to beget faith in those that suffer by them . Lastly , for the external , free , and public practice of Religious Duties , that I grant may be restrained by the outward violence of man , but when it is so , it is not required by God , who never expects to reap what he did not fow . 



In another place , he says , the most Ancient Apologists for the Christian Faith , use this as an Argument to prove the Religion of their Persecutors to be false , and their own true , That stood in need of human force to maintain it , but theirs stood by the sole Power of God.  



It is against ( says he a little further ) the Innate Principle of the Law of Nature , Quod tibi fieri non vis , alteri ne feceris . Those , who pled most for extirpation of Heretics , when it comes to be their own Turn to be under the Cross , stand for Liberty of Conscience , and declaim against Persecution for Religion , as a thing utterly unlawful ; and surely if we will not suffer it from others , we may not use it ourselves . 



Therefore , as Doctor Puller rightly says , if ever the Practice of Moderation , as well as any Discourse thereof , were seasonable ; it may be supposed now , when , for aught we know , the lasting happiness of the Kingdom and Church , may depend immediately upon this rare and desirable Temper , acknowledged of all most excellent . 



I will conclude all with that Admirable Sentence of Doctor Barrow in his forementioned Treatise , that Relief of the Oppressed , or Clemency to the distressed , are noble Flowers in every Sovereign Crown . 

Thus , Sir , You see how ready I am , as far as my Abilities will extend , to contribute to the Satisfaction of Your Judgement . I shall be as zealous still to go on in so pious a Duty , if there be any remaining doubts and Scruples you will make known to , 

SIR , Your humble Servant , etc.  

FINIS . 





Doctor Hick's Jovian . chap. 10.  Sir Robert Pointz Knight of the Bath , his vindication of Monarchy . chap. 8.  Dr. Hicks ut . Sup.  4.  Inst . p 14.  Suprema Jurisdictio & potestas Regia , et si Princeps velit , se seperari non possunt , sunt enim ipsa forma , et Substantialis Essentia Majestatis , ergo manente Rege ab eo abdicari non possunt . Cavedo , Pract. observe . p. 2. decis . 40. n. 8.   Stat. of Praemunire , 16.  R. 2. cap. 5.  Dr. Richard Bancroft made Lord Archbishop of Cant. 1604.  12.  Co. foe . 64. 5. Jac.  Ridley's View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law , dedicated to King James 1. 3d Edition , part 4. chap. 1.  Sect. 1  Id. part 2. changed . 1. sect . 7.  1 Pet. 2. 13.  Cyprianus Anglicus , by Doctor Heylin , D. D. and Chaplain to Charles the 1st and Charles the 2d , 2 part . Epist . Dedicat.  Archbishop Laud against Fisher , Printed 1673.  Vid Epis . dedicat . to King Charles 2. by James Tyrr●●l Esq Plutarch , in Comparat . Flaminij et Philopoemen .  Marcian in l. si de re sua , de recept , arbit , vid. et Ulpian in l. ille a quo , Sect. Tempestivum , D. ad Senat . Trebel . et in l. Quod autem , Sec. Vxori quis D. de donat inter , viz.   Hermog , in l. si quis Sect. 1  D. deleg 3.   Thom. 112. quest . 93. artic . 5.   Cynus in l. rescript , Cod. de precib . Imper . offerend . Thom. in 1. 2. quest . 96. artic . 5. ad 3.  Aeneas Silvius de Ortu & Authoribus Imperii , cap. 20. 21.   Justin Junior , Imp. in praefatione conceit 3.   Symmach , l. 10.  Ep. ult .  In his Preface and Life by Doctor Isaac Walton . Bishop Sanderson's Cases of Conscience , translated by Robert Codrington , Master of Arts , Printed 1660. ninth Lecture . Sermon preached upon the aniversary solemnity of the happy Inauguration of our dread Sovereign Lord King James 2. by Thomas Cartwright , D. D. Dean of Rippon , and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty . Colt and Glover against the Bishop of Litchfield . In the Account of Doctor Heylin's Life . Doctor Sherelock's Case of Resistance , chap. 6.  Doctor Nalson's Common Interest of King & People , chap. 6.  Case of Resistance . De jure Uniformitatis Ecclesiasticae : by Hugh Davis , L. L. B. lib. 3. chap. 15.  Chap. 1.  Davia's ut sup . lib. 2. chap. 6.  Doctor Puller's Moderation of the Church of England , chap. 1.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Arist . Eth. l. 5. chap. 14.  Est Scriptum Legis angustum inter pretatio diffusa . Senec. l. 4. controv . 27.  The Harmony of Divinity and Law , in a discourse about not resisting of Sovereign Princes . Townsend's Collect. pag. 234.  Co. 2 Inst . f. 496.  1.  Inst . 64. b.  Lane. 26.  N. Bendl. 117.  Sheph. tit . Prerog . 2 Ro. rep . 508.  Royalists defence chap. 5. pag. 49.  Jovian chap. 12.  His Majesty's most Gracious Declaration , etc.  Bishop of Chester's Sermon ut sup . Jovian ut sup . Bishop . of Chesters Serm. ut sup . Grotius . Luke 9 54.  Math. 26. 53.  Chap. de Act. Imp. f. 139.  2 Cor. 1. 24.  Langbain's Review of the Covenant , Printed 1661.  Puller's Moderation . To the Reader . 