A modest advertisement concerning the present controversy about church-government ; wherein the main grounds of that book , entitled , the unlawfulness and danger of limited prelacy . are calmly examined . 

London , printed for Robert Bostock , anno 1641.  

A modest advertisement concerning the present controversy about church-government . 

The blessed apostle saint Paul writing to Timothy , Bishop of the church of Ephesus , ( As is confessed by all writers , though in this last age of the world it is at length disputed , what the meaning of that word Bishop is ) among many instructions that he gives him concerning the direction of the presbyters , and persons committed to his care , begins first with this exhortation , that supplications , prayers , intercessions , and giving of thanks , be made for all men , for Kings , and for all that are in authority ; that we May lead a quiet and peaceable life , in all godliness and honesty . teaching us thereby , both that all government is the ordinance of God , and that it is an effect of his great love to his children , to be placed in such a state , where temporal peace and true religion are so joined together , that they are not put upon the fiery trial , to lose the contentment of this life , to attain the happiness of that which is to come . Neither is this only a great blessing of almighty God , but a duty also that belongs both to our care and wisdom , and even to our piety and devotion itself , to endeavour , as much as in us lies , to preserve a quiet and a peaceable life , together with all godliness and honesty . 

This therefore seems to me to be the end that all religious prudence ought to aim at , that men be not in their consultations so misled , either by some appearances of godliness , and fair colours of extraordinary zeal , as thereby to hazard the disturbance of the public quiet ; nor , on the other side ▪ so wedded to the enjoying of their temporal good , as to neglect the attaining of that which is eternal . 

This foundation being laid , let us apply it to the controversy now in hand , and so eagerly pursued by those , who are swayed by different interests and opinions , concerning the retaining , or amending , or total changing of ecclesiastical government . 

And first , let me have leave to propose a few questions to those , who so earnestly desire a total change , and to bring a new face of things into the church of England . Of which i humbly desire them , that they will ( As in the presence of the Lord ) consider with all godly wisdom , passion and prejudice being laid aside , and then make answer with truth and sobriety . 

First therefore , is the discipline already established so ill , that they who live under it are not capable of salvation ? May they not enjoy the virtues of faith , and hope , and charity , and humility ▪ and repentance from dead works ? May they not be justified and sanctified in this church of ours ? Are they enforced by it to any action which is in itself a sin ? or to omit any work in itself very good ? If so , certainly those great lights of our reformation have been in a great darkness ; and those our episcopal martyrs who have laid down their lives for the love of truth , have been exceeding miserable . 

Secondly , the discipline they so much desire in stead of it , are they all agreed of it what it shall be ? Or if they be , is it of divine or human institution ? If of divine , can this be plainly proved out of the holy scriptures ? And shall the sense of the places thence alleged , be made evident and necessary by true logical inference ( Not to perverse gainsayers , but ) to such as seek for truth with indifferency and sincerity ? Or if the sense be probable only , is it such a sense as is countenanced by all holy and learned writers , through all ages of the church ? Or is it a late sense acknowledged by all Protestant churches ? Or by some only , and by others accounted to have little probability ? Or is there any place of scripture that will not admit of a sense which to some men will appear probable , especially if they be engaged by faction or interest ? 

Lastly , is their discipline commanded plainly by God , upon pain of damnation , or the contrary plainly forbidden ? For so it must be , if it be unlawful ( As is pretended ; ) for nothing is unlawful in divinity , but what is against some divine law . 

And the episcopal discipline being already in possession , is it not just and equal , that the arguments brought against it be much more convincing , than those that are brought for it ; seeing possession itself is one reason why it should continue ? For though those principles which are laid for proving the unlawfulness of limited episcopacy , were granted , namely , that all officers in God's house must be of God's institution : that man can no more make the office , than give the grace : but that the institution of the office must proceed from him that gives the blessing to the work . ( For these are the main grounds of that book , concerning the unlawfulness of limited prelacy , which is written with much art & eloquence to insinuate into unwary readers . ) I say , if these propositions were granted , the sense of them will be but this ; that none May administer the sacraments , impose hands , preach the word , nor use the keys , but such as Christ himself hath appointed to do so . And that it is otherwise practised in the church of England , is not yet proved ; and when it is proved , May easily be amended without noise or scandal . 

But that among these , who are by Christ enabled to execute duties , some May not be higher , and some lower , during life ; is the thing that is required to be proved out of plain texts of scripture , or sound grounds of uncontroverted divinity : when this is done , this controversy will be ended . 

But it will be required also , that the same proofs be brought for the whole discipline , and every part of it which shall be established . 

In the mean time many places of scripture are alleged by those who maintain episcopacy , and these places are interpreted , not by a few late writers in a little spot of the world here in the West , but by all Christian writers since the time of the apostles , for fifteen hundred years ; and by the agreeable concurrent practice of all churches in Europe , Asia , and Africa ; though flowing from different fountains , and having been founded by several apostles , which alone shows the order to be apostolical : and that as the creed for doctrine , so this for practice , was delivered from the beginning . So that the proofs of it are all ages of the church , divers empires , very many kingdoms ( In which there are many provinces , whereof some one is bigger than Scotland , and the Netherlands , and those parts of France in which the presbyterial discipline is accepted ) and above a thousand bishoprics , many of which were the chairs of the apostles , disciple , and other saints in scripture , among different sects of Christians , that are of several communions , and received this order from several beginnings , not all from one , and whereof many as much detest the Bishop of Rome , as any Protestant in England . 

Among all these i say there are some elders , which being separated to holy things by the laying on of hands , are ruled , and these are called priests , or presbyters : and some which during their life do rule , and these are called Bishops . and no reason can be given why all churches should agree in this , unless they received it together with their Christianity . So that episcopacy is supported by these three props , time , place , persons . all histories confirm it , the very maps of the world bear witness to it , and the scriptures themselves are not delivered to us with a more universal , unquestioned tradition , than the order of Bishops is . 

As for the presbyterial discipline , we can name the time , the place , and the person that began it . The time , for aught we can find , was within this last age ; the place , Geneva ; the person , John Calvin , of whom i will only say thus much , that he was a wise man , and knowing what was fit and necessary for that city , stood not upon names , so he had the things . But for my own part , i should be sorry to see any Bishop in this land have such authority over other ministers , as he had at Geneva , or John Knox in Scotland . 

And therefore for any man or church to say , that episcopacy is a plant that God had not planted , but that it is Antichristian , is to condemn all Christians as Antichristian ; and to say that Christ has not been rightly worshipped upon the earth , till this last age ; which , whether it be a sober and charitable opinion , i submit to consideration . 

In the mean time , we account these proofs which follow , insufficient either against episcopacy , or for the presbytery . 

1 that the office of a Bishop , is not found in scripture , because not in the epistles to the Romans , Corinthians , Ephesians ; for it May be , and is found somewhere else ; namely , in those to Timothy and Titus . secondly , though it were not , it being a matter of practice , discipline , and government , the universal tradition of the whole Catholic church , is sufficient to prove it . 

2 that all officers of the new testament are designed , and distinguished by names ( But by the way , then where are lay-elders ) therefore there are no Bishops : for we think Bishops , presbyters and deacons , are so distinguished , and that those who are not properly Bishops , are no more called Bishops in scripture , than those are called apostles , who are not properly apostles ; nay this author says so himself . For he says in one place , that a pastor , and a Bishop are one thing , pag. 4. line 11. and in another , that an apostle is in degree before a pastor , and a pastor before a presbyter , and deacon , pag. 4. line 20. therefore if a pastor and a Bishop be but one thing ( As indeed the words were anciently used ) and a pastor be in degree before a presbyter , ( As is confessed ; ) a Bishop also is indeed before a presbyter : which was the thing required to be proved . This we take to be as good a demonstration as any in euclids elements . 

That power ecclesiastical is not given to one , but to many . If he mean any power ecclesiastical , we deny it , for a presbyter May preach , and administer the sacraments alone : if he mean of some only , the sense will be , only that a Bishop in the laying on of hands , and use of the keys , aught to be assisted by presbyters ; in the former he is already : the other we shall not much stand upon . In God's name let it be so , and then those places of scripture which seem to give presbyters a share in imposing of hands , and use of the keys , will be no objection . 

As for that place of Kings of nations , the sense will be but this , that those who are greater , i. e. higher in degree than others , aught to do all things , nor for their own glory and greatness , but for the good and utility of those whom they govern , rather serving them , than ruling them ; according to our saviour's example , who though he were greater than his disciple , yet was among them as one that ministered . 

That all incentives , causes , provocations , and beginnings of evil are forbidden ; we acknowledge , if they be in themselves so ; and not by the craft and malice of the devil ; for if so , the sacraments and scriptures themselves , the law and the grace of God , must be removed : for these by his malice have been made so . 

That the rules of reformation , must be taken from the prime times ; if the pattern be a thing framed by God , we grant : but presbyterial government is not proved such : but that all the fathers , and all Christians in all ages throughout the world , have agreed to bring forth Antichrist , we cannot believe . 

Nor that prelacy , and popery , are unsepaable ; for the former is in many churches that detest the later : yea , according to this author's sense of prelacy , even in many churches of Protestant's . 

And whereas he says , that episcopacy is a step to popery , those who have read histories with judgement , May remember that the abasing of episcopacy , has been a great and constant design of the papacy ; and that it was so in the Trent council : no one thing having more exalted that mother of abominations , the see of Rome , than the exempting of presbyters , as Jesuits and others , from the power and government of Bishops . And i pray God that as villifying of Bishops on the one side , by setting up the presbyters and deacons of Rome above them , has begot an Antichristian monarchy , and tyranny ; so the casting them off on the other , and setting up presbyters without Bishops over them , do not produce the greatest confusion , anarchy , and schism , that ever was yet in the church of Christ . Which lest it May be thought , i speak more out of interest than reason , i shall desire this author to look over his own principles once again , which are these : that whatsoever God has not established in his church , is unlawful ; but God has not established , that some pastors should be over others ; therefore this is unlawful . Now ( To say nothing of the weakness of either proposition ) i desire him to consider , whether the divines of new England , do not hence rationally conclude , that since no pastors by God's word have authority over others , therefore no classes , nor no synods , have authority over others ; for that every minister has his power , both of order and jurisdiction , immediately from Christ Jesus ; and therefore to him only , he is responsible for the doctrine that he teaches , the discipline that he exercises , and the censures that he inflicts : and therefore though it May sometimes be useful for ministers to meet in synods to consult ; yet , the decrees they make , being but of human authority , do bind none but those who assent to them , and those also no longer than till they alter their opinions , and that therefore for any number of ministers in a synod , to take to themselves authority over others , who are equal to them in dignity , have their commission from Christ , as well as they , and partake of the spirit as much or perhaps more than they , ( For the spirit is not tied to any number ) is to set up a human authority that Christ never instituted , and to exercise a tyranny , and popery of the presbytery , as bad , nay worse than that of the Bishops . For the apostles indeed ( Whose successors the Bishops pretend to be ) did meet in a synod , and make decrees to bind the church : but that the disciple only or presbyters ever did so , cannot be proved out of scripture . Thus this author May see what is concluded out of his principles , by those who have very logically driven them home to the conclusion , they naturally produce , that is ( Not from one tyranny to an other ) but to an absolute liberty . But as for us , i pray him to remember , that the state of the question between him and us , is not ( As he pretends ) whether in the prime times , a Bishop were without a presbytery under him , but whether down from the apostles , a presbytery was ever heard of , without a Bishop over it . This is the thing we desire to see solidly proved . 

That no limitations are sufficient , because those of the assemblies in Scotland , were not so , is a weak argument . 

Where assemblies will not tie , parliaments May . 

Whether prelacy be a cause , or a cure of schisms ; look but into new England , and the divisions that are there among ministers , and their churches . 

That it is easier to root up the tree , than to land off the branches ; is perhaps true : so it is easier to pull down a house , than to repair it : but we consider not what is easiest , but what is best to do . 

That that government of the church is most useful for Kings , and kingdoms , which is warranted by God's word , which is most for preservation of piety , righteousness , and sobriety , which makes the face of the church and religion glorious , not with outward pomp like Kings of nations , but with sound faith , pure worship , holy life , which conduceth most for truth , and peace , against schism and heresy ; we heartily confess ; and together with all the Christians upon the face of the earth ( Except a few in the West of Europe ) we esteem the government by Bishops , to be that government . 

That it is no good government , which a wise man would not endure in his own house ; we acknowledge : and we know who applied that saying , first against a democracy , and think it very fit to be retorted upon those , who desire a parity of ministers ; for no wise man would endure a parity in his family . 

As for other arguments , that if we admit not the presbytery , there will be jealousies between us and Scotland , that there will be changes and periods of states , of families , and kingdoms ; ( For these are insinuated in this book ; and some are reported to have said that the Bishops must down , or much blood will be shed ) these we think not proofs , but threatenings ; and fit for the mouth of a Turkish Dervise , who plants religion by the sword , than for a minister of the gospel of Christ ; the sum whereof is love : and therefore cannot be forced , but persuaded . In the mean time , we desire men seriously to consider , whether it be not true and proper popery to persecute Christians , not for publishing but for holding opinions only , and in what degree the presbyterial government , uses to be guilty of this pressure and tyranny upon the souls and consciences of men . 

As for that objection , that otherwise there will be a schism between us and the reform churches ( Though we are heartily grieved at the name only of such a thing ) we answer , that there May be mutual charity in those that have a different discipline ; and therefore this argument has no good consequence . Secondly , that the church of England , has hitherto had that prudent moderation , to desire the esteem and affection , not only of the reform , but of all the Protestant churches , who are more in number , and equal in learning and piety to the reform . Thirdly , that it is better for us ( If it be God's will that the reform do continue as they are ) to be divided from them in this particular only , than from all other Christians of the first three hundred years , under persecution of the heathen Emperors , to which ancient church , we desire to be excused , if we account the late reformation of Scotland , to be much inferior in learning , in piety , in patience , in humility , in charity , and many other Christian virtues . 

That though the parliament be for Bishops , yet all the godly and religious will be against it ; we cannot believe till it be made plain to us , that to resist lawful authority is a matter of godliness , or that there is any humility in those that think no Christians are godly and religious , but those who are for the presbytery . 

That the reforming abuses in episcopal government will take long time , that we are apt to believe ; but we think this to be no objection . But that it being a great and a weighty work , and likely to have great influence upon the civil estate , it ought to be a business of much debate and long deliberation : and that it imports not so much to be quickly done as well done . 

Lastly , we think the time of persuasion to be , not when men by fraud or force shall effect their ends , but when all parties having been first heard , and their reasons maturely weighed , things are settled according to justice and piety ; and this only will produce a settled and well grounded peace , not only for the present , but for future times . And is a consideration well worthy the wisdom , and greatness of the English parliaments . 

Thus much be said to those who pretend the necessity , the profitableness , and the divine institution of the presbyterial government which they pretend to introduce ; and of the unlawfulness of episcopal government which they so eagerly oppose . 

Now to those who desire a change , and yet confess their discipline to be a human institution . 

I shall humbly desire them briefly to consider of this , whether they can demonstrate the advantage of that they would introduce , to be so exceeding great above this already received ( The abuses being reform ) that it will make abundant amends , not only in the present , but in all times to come , for the danger the change will produce . 

This that we have , is rooted in the laws , the persons are enured to it . It has so long agreed with the constitutions of this monarchy . Nay , it is agreeable even to that in other states , as in Venice to a republic . It is the same that almost all Christians are governed by . It has produced men of as great learning and piety , and as able oppugnors of the Roman church as any the Christian world affords , and has made our church so reverenced by the churches abroad , that in the last Archbishop's time , even as far as from Alexandria , the patriarch sent a Greek to be educated in our church , to be thereby better fitted for the government and defence of their own . So ready are all Christians ( But the Roman ) to desire our communion , which certainly when we cease to have Bishops , they will cease to do . 

Secondly , will the conveniences of the new discipline prove so great in effect , as they are in promise ? or ( As it happens in all human affairs ) will not the inconveniences be much greater in the practice , than they are in the speculation ? or though for the present they do not , yet will they not fall out , and multiply daily hereafter ? 

Nay , is it not a part of prudence to stay some few years at the least , and in the mean time ( Mending our old discipline as well as we can ) to consider , and look on upon the effects which that new one will produce in our neighbour nation . 

For that the effects of it will not be so great for the temporal happiness , we have some reason to fear , remembering the great unquietness they suffered , even in the height of it . 

And for the eternal happiness ( Which is infinitely more to be weighed ) we have some reason also to doubt that this discipline will not produce such marvellous effects as are propounded , since many of us can remember heretofore , that those persons who had been bred from their youth under a presbyterial government , though they have been indeed persons of great honour and merit , yet have not so very far exceeded either in truth or holiness or sobriety , or chastity , or charity , or humility or sweetness of a religious conversation , those of the same rank in our nation , who had their breeding under this so much detested episcopal government ; neither do we find more piety abroad under a presbytery , than under a perpetual presidency of Protestant episcopacy or superintendency ; and therefore i say , it is well worthy a weighty consideration , whether there be so great an excellency in that above this , as is pretended . 

As for the objection , that unless we receive this new discipline there will be heartburnings between us and the Scotish nation . I answer , that i am confident that the commissioners whom they employ , are persons of so great honour and justice , that they will account it as unreasonable for their discipline to be pressed upon us , as they have done for our liturgy to be pressed upon them . And that there is no more cause why it should be necessary for us to receive their ecclesiastical , than it is to receive their temporal laws : they being as much interested to procure with us the change of the one , as of the other . 

And we doubt not the wisdom of the English parliament to be so great , that they can find a better expedient to secure that nation in their liberty and laws ecclesiastical and civil , than by a change of ours here at home , and by taking away from this church an apostolical institution which it has retained since its first Christianity . Otherwise the Scotish church being by their absolute independent power at liberty to frame new orders daily , we also shall consequently be obliged ever to conform to them or ( By this reason ) no peace will be between us . 

Thus have i briefly and in a plain manner unfolded my thoughts for the peace of this church ; and such , as i hope will rather bring water than oil to the flame that is kindled . 

If the author of the book which is here considered , shall think that it is ambition , and desire of preeminence that causes this short treatise , as he has insinuated to be in all who oppose his design , i shall desire him to remember one thing , & to know another . 

To remember , that there May be as much ambition in Corah , as in Aaron , and as much pride in refusing to be governed , as in desiring to govern ; and to consider whether these two speeches are very unlike ( Is there none in the assembly fit to be precedent but one ? ) page . 15. line 4. and this , the congregation is all holy , wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the Lord ? numb 16. 3.  

The thing that i desire him to know is this , that the person who writes this , is one of them who is to be governed , and not to govern , and therefore would not have written it , had he not been persuaded that it was most agreeable not only to justice , and equity , but to the holy scriptures , and all antiquity . 

And for the light which he says , pag. 7. has discovered to the reformers , that at the beginning there was no difference of a Bishop from a presbyter , we desire him not to be too confident of any light which will not abide the discussion of sober reason ; and does so suspiciously balk all the ancient writers to be judges of that , ( Namely whether a Bishop were above a presbyter ) which they Might not only discern with their minds aswell as we , but even see with their eyes , and as it were , experimentally feel with their hands , which we cannot ; but rather that he will remember that of the apostle , that Satan sometimes changes himself into an angel of light ; and causes that to be reverenced as an illumination , which many times is but an illusion . 

Lastly to those who are obstinate , to retain whatsoever is established , i shall only say this , that falsehood cannot subsist without some truth to uphold it , that something certainly is amiss that causes this general and constant clamour , in which the voice of the whole persons , being perhaps in some few particulars , the voice of God , † it would be a sin in us not to hearken to it , and i fear it is one cause of our chastisements , that we have been deaf to it so long . 

And here i cannot but commend in this one particular , though in some things i must crave leave to diffent from him , the prudent moderation of the author of the antiremonstrance , namely , that he fetches his pattern of reformation , not from the times of persecution , nor from the Eastern empire , being times and circumstances unfit for our case ; but from the times of Charles the great , a Prince of great valour , and piety , and wisdom , and learning ; and governing a persons in customs , and constitutions not unlike to this of ours . 

To conclude , that abuses May be taken away and good uses continue , and be restored , is the desire and prayer of all good and wise men ; and there being but three things to be considered in the Bishops , their order , their jurisdiction , their persons ; the first is ancient and universal almost to all Christians : the second where it is extravagant , May be limited by good and prudent laws , and their persons are not so great but the offender May be corrected by a higher authority . 

I have done , humbly submitting whatsoever i have written to the judgement of the holy Catholic church , the spouse of Christ , to my dear mother the miserably distracted church of England , beseeching God to amend , and forgive the authors , and causes of it , and to the wisdom and justice of the high and most honourable court of parliament . 

Finis . 





† as that the Lord's day be entirely kept holy by public prayers , hearing the word , and other exercises of devotion , that piety and godliness ( the substance of religion ) be more attended than rites and ceremonies , the shadow of it only , that residence on benefices with cure and the instruction of souls be mainly attended ; that the clergy wait diligently on the spiritual function without hunting after secular employments ; that the censures of the church be not issued by laymen , and that in them reformation of life be more aimed at : especially that all church government be by rule and canon , and none left arbitrary . 



