PAUSANIAS' THE BETRAYER OF HIS COUNTRY . A TRAGEDY , Acted at the Theatre Royal , By his MAJESTY'S SERVANTS . 

Written by a Person of Quality . 

LONDON : Printed for Abel Roper , E. Wilkinson , and Roger Clavell in Fleetstreet . 1696.  

TO Anto. Henly Esq Of the Grange in Hampshire . 

SIR , 

I 'm sorry for 't , and beg your Pardon , like a Hangman in the Compliment of his Office : but you were doomed to fall under the Fate of your Favours to Me , and a Dedication was to light upon you , one time , or other : since the sentence was past , I thought I could not execute it , with a greater justice to the trust I am engaged in , or with more favour to you , than by bringing You upon the Stage , in the defence of a Cause , which you may so Honourably maintain : besides the present Obligation of your very good Epilogue , if I had been inclining to be merciful , made it impossible to Reprieve You any longer . 

This Play was put into my hands by a Man of Quality ; Sink , or Swim , his Fortune was not embarked in this bottom ; secure in the Reputation of very good Sense , he built for the Experiment , upon the Model of the Ancients , and according to the reformation of the French Stage : Here is their singleness of Action , which does not so well agree with our dispositions to variety : An Action too , that seems intended to Instruct , rather than to Please , which the greatest part of an Audience would never be in the humour to thank him for neither . What he designed , he has Masterly performed . And if Love ( which begets all the success of the Stage ) had fallen into his subject , he would have recommended that Passion as engagingly to the Ladies , and drawn it as near their Wishes , as any thing in Picture could do . The Author had his reasons for the choice of this Story ; and I have many to convince Me , that he could not have failed in any other . You will find it written , to be Envied , rather than Excelled , and in some places , with an Elevation , above the pitch of the Stage . Some things will need your Patronage , but many will deserve it ; so the pleasure will recompense the pains of defending them . Sir , I am satisfied I should not pretend to guide you , who have so many Lights of your Own , who have not only a thorough insight to Poetry in general , and can try it by its own Laws , but examine it by the rules of other Arts too , for you can discover through the Perspective of Painting whether the Parts are in Proportion , or no. With these qualifications , and inspired with the Soul of Music too , you must be allowed a Judge of these performances ; as such , in justice to this cause , you are appealed to by 

Sir , Your very Humble Servant Tho. Southern . 

PROLOGUE , 

Written by an Unknown Hand ; Spoken by Mr. Horden . NEW Plays have been so frequent , all this Season ; 
We must believe you 're tired , and you have Reason : 
Some , like Rich Timon's Feasts , have pleased your palates , 
Others have proved , damned Apemantus Sallates , 
What ever has happened , or how ever disgraced , 
We hope this night to put Your Mouths in taste : 
The Season of the Year our Rival grows , 
The Country , and the Park , are constant Foes , 
Which to our thoughts , like Blazing Stars appear , 
Foretelling our worst Fate , an Empty Theatre , 
Empty not only of our Noble Friends , 
Whom Love of Wit , or Beauty , hither sends , 
But even our Gests o' th' Gallery will leave Us : 
The Emperor of the Moon , will now deceive Vs. 
Nay , which is stranger yet ( We han't forgot . ) 
The very Masques , will tell you they 're too hot : 
The Poets now Spurring their jaded Brains , 
write not for Summer Laurels , but Winter gains ; 
Winter is their Campaign , as well as Ours : 
Give us the Profit , be the Pleasure yours . 
While thus We sigh , while thus your Absense mourn , 
Double our joys with Hastening your Return : 
Since we must soon , we 'll strive to Leave you easy : 
we 're in no other Plot , but how to Please you . 
EPILOGUE , 

Spoken by Mistress Verbruggen . 't is sign the Poets young : is this an Age 
To teach you rigid Virtue on the Stage ? 
In good Queen Bess' days 't was well enuff : 
But now 't is more Ridiculous than a Ruff. 
Knav'ry is grown the Nations Darling Sin , 
And though a Thousand Foreign Modes comes in , 
Yet ( like a Shirt ) that 's still worn next your Skin . 
' was said , the French would fain Invade the Nation , 
And here , and there made Mighty Preparation : 
't is even so Bad , 't is hardly Worth their having , 
At least the Beauxs wont think it Worth their Saving : 
And We should treat him , as an Innovator 
Who wastes his brains , in Hopes to make it Better . 
Lady's confess the truth , you 'd all be loath 
To change your several Teas for Spartan Broth , 
And should your Lovers be obliged to expose 
Themselves abroad against their Countries Foes , 
The Nation were Undone : there must be some 
To make the Money Circulate at home . 
Should Spartan Laws prevail , I 'm very certain 
Twoved runie many an Honest Gentleman's Fortune . 
The Sharpers would be Damnably unwilling 
To have an Act to Encourage General stealing . 
no , no , that would their Property Invade : 
joynt-stocks are best to Manage such a Trade . 
Let Us be what we are : since 't is our Curse , 
Never to have Changed but once — but for the worse : 
And even then ( Nature so much prevails ) 
For Leeks , and Slavery , we would truck Our Quails . 
Or else what mean Nonswearing Pulpit-praters ? 
Protestant Popish Plots , and Non-associators ? 
Our honest Spartans' should not show their Faces , 
Where none are Patriots , but for want of Places . 
persons Represented . 

Pausanias' , Regent of Sparta , Mr. Verbruggen . 
Argilius a Noble Youth bred up by Pausanias . Mr. Powell . 
Artabazus , Ambassador from Persia.  Mr. Cibber . 
Polaemon , one of the Ephori . Mr. Pinkeman . 
Lysander , Friend to Argilius . Mr. Horden . 
Ephori and Servants . 

Anchilthea , Mother to Pausanias . Mistress Rogers . 
Pandora , a Persian Lady Mistress to Pausanius . Mistress Knight . 
Demetria , a Rich Spartan Widow . Mistress Verbruggen . 
Mawkine , her Daughter Mistress Lucas . 
SCENE Lacedaemon . 

Pausanius THE Betrayer of his Country . 

ACT I  

SCENE I Pausanias' Apartment . 

Enter Pausanias , Argilius . Arg.   What shall I say to him ? 


Paus.   He must come in . Argilius goes to the door . 
The Officious Fool brings me news from the Ephori , 
To which Honour I got him this year Elected . 
He is my Creature , such tools must be had . 
He has just sense to find he is of Use , 
And therefore knows he may be troublesome : 
I must have patience . 


Enter Polaemon . Pol.   I beg your Grace's pardon for disturbing your retirement . 



Paus.   O you are ever welcome dear Polaemon . 



Pol.   But my Lord I was with Child till I had given you an account of what has passed in our Senate just now , we have had huge doings , you know who my Lord , I need not tell you my Lord , his name begins with a C. he gets me up and with his wont gravity , with a pox to him , makes a most tearing Speech against the Persianites , no better titles he gave us than Traitors to our Liberty , our Country and our Laws ; Laws quotha , I thought he 'd never have done with his Laws ; he throated you out Laws , Laws Laws for an hour together , I stood up my Lord , and what do me I , my Lord , but — but wished the Devil had him , and his Laws , I never had so much of the Laws in my Head in all my life ; my head does so sing of his Laws , that I don't know what to do my Lord , I am quite and clean deaf with ' 'em . 



Paus.   Well Polaemon and what then ? 



Pol.   My Lord ? 



Paus.   How did our Friends take it ? 



Pol.   A — Plague of his Laws , I can't hear a word my Lord  



Paus.   Eternal blockhead how shall I endure him ? aside . 



Pol.   Why truly my Lord you 'll find it a hard matter , he is never to be gained over to us my Lord , he is a bitter Enemy to Persia and to your Lordship . 



Paus.   no matter , I fear him not Polaemon . 



Pol.   The Laws , did your Lordship say any thing of the Laws ? 



Paus.   I say I fear him not . loud . 



Pol.   O ho you fear him not , no hang him , fear him but then my Lord don't think we had nothing to say to this grim Gentleman , we told him he was of the Sect of Lycurgus , and would set up a Democracy amongst us , an Athenian in his heart , and then railed at Democracy , and said 't was a nasty slovenly Government , and not fit for a Gentleman , and then the most Tyrannical Government of all , he had need talk against Tyranny indeed — pray what did your Lordship say ? 



Paus.   Nothing Polaemon nothing . 



Pol.   Aye my Lord , as you say , their we were even with his Laws ; but then he began to reflect upon you with a side wind methought ; by Juno's bedstaff I grew into choler then and said , and said , and said — my Lord — 



Paus.   Aye you did so , my Lord Polaemon I thank you kindly , you have spent yourself with Zeal , I advise you to go home , and refresh yourself my dear Friend , — and be Crucified . aside . 



Pol.   And so I will , my Lord , for indeed I am in a very bad way — but my Lord I did what I is going & returns . could to serve you , and so did some body else that you little think off , for my Lord to tell you the whole thing as it happened — 



Paus.   Nay , nay , you are not well : I must take care of you : you shall go home . goes with him towards the door . 



Pau.   Impertinence , and busy Knaves increase the weight 
Of all those deeper cares , which load exalted State. 
But there 's a rising Pleasure still in being great . 
Argilius comes to him . Argilius , thou art always my retreat 
From Crowds , and Fools . I would retire awhile : 
Thy Friendship be my guard . Some minutes hence . 
I must confer with thee . Exit . 


Arg.   I will attend — 


A knockin , Argilius goes to the door . The Ambassador of Persia by his knocking . The door opened , the Ambassador enters in haste . Amb.   where 's the Regent ? The Lord Pausanias ? 


Arg.   my Lord , he has commanded Stops him . 
None shall have admittance farther . 


Amb.   Prithee , fond Youth , I must , and will go in . 


Arg.   my Lord , you have forgot Thermopylae : 
You may have heard Spartans can keep a pass . 


Amb.   What do you mean.  


Arg.   To act Leomidas , 
To learn from him the lesson of my duty , 
To Stand against a Persian Army , and 
In such a cause , Die in my Post like him . 


Amb.   Noble Argilius I commend thy truth : 
more than a thousand Trials I have known . 


Arg.   then this might have been spared . 


Amb.   Come , we are Friends . 
Here is a pledge , you shall accept this trifle , 
Offers him a Ring . A kind forerunner of succeeding Love.  


Arg.   My Lord , I serve the Regent out of Love , 
And am a Spartan , Sir , of Noble Blood , 
We Spartans never take gifts from Foreigners : 
If there be found such honest Men , that do : 
At least I know my duty to my Country . 


Amb.   Well then I must find out some other way , 
To prove my just Esteem — 
My interest with the Regent shall be used , 
To raise his kindness equal to your merit . 


Arg.   My Lord , the Regent now comes forth himself . 


Enter Pausanias . Pau.   My Lord Ambassador , 
You have been here some time . 


Amb.   I did not think it long . 
I was delighted with the company 
Of sweet Argilius : his Spartan honesty , 
And wondrous faithful love he bears to you , 
Trust me , deserve the friendship you have for him . 


Pau.   His Spartan honesty ! I like it not ; 
Pretended Liberty , and sawey Pride : 
there 's nothing good that 's Spartan — 
But kind advice , like gently falling showers , 
Will wash a stain out of the hardest marble : 
I hope it will , Argilius . By the bright Sun 
I love thee , as I ought , and can no more , 
thou One Example of a faithful Friend ! 


Amb.   Emportant business , and my zeal to serve you 
Brought me thus early — 


Pau.   Retire Argilius , We must be private . 
Keep off the buzzing crowd of fawning Rascals ; 
Those teazing Candidates for Places , and Preferment , 
Filling the restless Courts of great ones , 
With lies , and feathers , falsehood and perfume . 


Arg.   Would to the Gods I could prevent your ruin , 
As sure , as that Ambassador designs it . Exit . 


Pau.   So , now no more Ambassador , but Friend . 
Dear Artabazus , tell me , hast thou ought 
Received from Persia ? 


Amb.   Long live my Master , the great King , and you 
The backward fruit , which you despaired to taste , 
Behold this moment to perfection brought , 
And here 's the Sun , that ripens it . 


gives him a Letter . Pau.   I know well the policy of Xerxes , 
Deep , Universal , hid in time to come , 
With such dexterity performed , that all 
The lazy Counsels of the World are stunned , 
Nor can they fend the blow . 


Amb.   His Letter will inform you . Pausanias reads . 


Thus saith King Xerxes to Pausanias . As for all thy kindness , and sufferings on my account the benefit is laid up in our house , indelibly registered for ever ; my Daughter also is thine , as thou desirest ; let neither night nor day , make thee remiss in what thou hast promised Me ; neither be thou hindered by the expense of Gold , or Silver ; I have a hundred thousand Men lie ready at Rhodes , who wait thy orders to Set sail for Greece : with Artabazus do boldly Mine , and thine own business , as shall be most fit for the dignity of Us both . 

Amb.   What think you now my Lord ? 


Pau.   As One , whom Nature made imperfect , 
Whose Mother gave him blind into the World , 
Hearing of day , or light , or the bright Sun , 
Cannot conceive , but thinks 't is mockery ; 
Or that he is in Nature's Work house still , 
Conversing with unfinished beings , like himself : 
His faculties , like false Lotteries , most Blanks : 
Few his Ideas , dark , and unstampt the rest : 
They tell him it indeed , but all his Sense 
Just gives him power to feel himself a Man : 
If in a moment , the dark curtain drawn , 
Darkness is couched , and light spring's all around , 
Like him , I stand aghast , like him admire : 
Hush with enlightened joy my other senses lie , 
And I forget to speak . 


Amb.   Blessed be the glorious Ruler of the day , 
Blessed the great Xerxes , and my Lord Pausanias 
O! be not silent , Sir but give your pleased 
Resentment way . 


Pau.   Gods ! the Stupendious , goodness of the King ! 
Kind , as he 's great ! he calls his interest , Mine . 
And with a hundred thousand Swords , offers 
To make it good . All my misfortunes , all 
My former sufferings are now pleasures to me , 
Since they have given me favour with the King. 
O! that I could deserve such condescension ! 
Aye , there 's the point , good Artabazus , how 
O! tell me , how ? 


Amb.   Sir , you deserve it all , you are his Friend . 


Pau.   O! now you flatter me . 


Amb.   My dearest Lord , you know your Artabazus 
Better . He bids me tell you , Sir he has enuff 
In having you his Friend , and hopes his actions 
Will well persuade the generous Pausanias 
Still to continue so . 


Pau.   He asks my Friendship , desire's to make me Great 
In both my growing happiness is sure : 
But to be known his Friend , is to be great . 
He asks my friendship , he should have asked my life : 
All that I am , or have , is his . He , he desire's 
To make me great , Xerxes , that God on Earth ! 
I should desire it , he can make me so . 
Tell him I 'm Guardian to an Infant King , 
An Infant too he 'll find himself in power 
When I no more an Regent , a Servant to 
The Ephori , a King in naught but name , 
I would be Lord of the Inheritance , 
A King to all the purposes of Power , 
A King indeed , to every thing , but Xerxes . 
And unless I can make him absolute 
Supreme of Greece , I wonot be at all . 


Amb.   Spoken like yourself my Lord  


Pau.   But yet , I know not what , methinks I fear 
The crafty Ephori again may find us out , 
And prove too Powerful . 


Amb.   Pausanias' fear ! the trembling Ephori will scarce 
Have time to fear , if you will push : in such 
A readiness things are ; so near the Goal , 
You cannot miss the way , or lose the Prize . 
Dispatch your orders then , and call the Persians in . 
they 'll bring such tools with 'em , will quickly free 
th' imprisoned Crown , cleanse every Jewel there , 
And bnrnish the dim Gold , made cheap , and soiled 
With sawey handling of the Populace . 
Not the jest rust , lest speak of liberty 
Shall scape the file , till bright , and glittering 
The Royal Circles set upon your worthy Head.  


Paus.   OH you transport Me ! 


Amb.   Million of dazzling streams from every side 
Shall shoot , making the slavish Ephori first behold 
The King despotic darted in their eyes . 


Paus.   O! what a pleasure such a day would bring , 
To humble Sparta with an enraged King ? 


Amb.   But two Sweet words shall then make all the Law , 
— I will — those charming , Royal words — I william 
With resty Laws , volumnious Statutes , Rights , 
Charters , and privileges ( dusty heaps 
Of those worm eaten Monuments of power ) 
Vast bonfires shall be built — 


Paus.   Like Becons blaze , 
To show the coming wrath of Majesty : 
These are fit victims to the Sovereignty . 
Xerxes shall see my Triumph , and shall be 
The Lord of humbled Greece , and Lord of Me. 
OH you immortal Powers ! 


Amb.   riches , and Force will make you great abroad , 
As you 'll be Idolised , and Feared at home . 
you 'll be as jove himself , who reigns above , 
Absolute Lord , and not to be controlled . 
Dispatch your orders then , and bring the Persians in . 


Paus.   I will be sudden — stay — I had forgot — 
A hundred Thousand let me pause on them . aside . 
The Spartan Army being sent abroad 
To War with the Athenians , 
The Friends my Interest can raise at home , 
With the assistance of the Helots' ( whom 
Upon their promised Freedom I have gained ) 
Are strength enough to execute the Deed.  


Amb.   It works , it cannot fail . 


Paus.   To morrow is the day appointed , for 
The general insurrection : then what need 
Of Persians ? they may hinder my more deep designs . 
Dear Artebazus , I will to Pandora , 
't is very fit she know this mighty news , 
she 'll bear a joyful part . 


Amb.   But now , my Lord , the wind sits fair from Rhodes . 
Consider , Sir , what mischief may produce 
Delay in this conjuncture — 
Greece waits to call you King of Sparta too : 
Can you be great too soon ? 
then Sir make haste , and bring the Persians in . 


Paus.   She , who has born a share in all my labours , 
She , who inspired Me first with love , and zeal 
For the great Xerxes Royal interest ▪ 
Pandora , who has left Luxurious Persia , 
Contented with hard Spartan entertainment , 
Advised in our most secret Councils , 
Must have a share too in our hopes and joy . 
To her I must this welcome news impart : 
no time is lost , where gratitude is paid . 
You meet me there retires . 


Ambassador alone . Amb.   What does he mean ? 't is the first time i  failed . 
I have not studied thee so long , Pausanias , 
To be taught cunning by thee at last . 
My tool thou hast been , and my tool shalt be . 
So the good labouring Hound , with eager chase , 
Pursues the Game , his sporting Master eats : 
Encouraged , Praised , his youth , and strength he wastes , 
Till growing old , and having done his most , 
The useless cur is hanged — 
His Mistress is a Persian , and our Pensioner , 
And which is well , last night she had a Jewel 
From me , worth a Province : Cunning she is , 
And knows our drift ; and now the last stake 
Is playing , may prevent Us ; first , because 
She love's Pausanias ; then , which I think 
May be the stronger with her , she well knows 
She parts with her dear profit , if she loses him — 
That must be answered , and made up to her . 
Rich Petticoats , Rich Jewels , Furniture , 
And Equipage , don't always come from visible Estates . 
I must exert my utmost cunning with her , 
Before his business gives him time to see her , 
For on this turn depends our whole design . 
If I succeed , I have served my Master well . 
The Spartan Army by this time may be 
Well beaten by the Athenians ; be it so . 
Such numbers Landing will be quickly known — 
But then We know the Spartan temper too , 
Lazy in Preparation , and , they think , 
To brave to need to be upon their guard . 
Their Troops at home , raw , and undisciplined , 
Ours seasoned , and long practised in their trade . 
Hast , Artabazus , haste , the means prepare , 
And bring 'em in , to make new Conquests here . Exit . 


Pausanias enters . Pau.   Now to Pandora — I 'll stop the Persian Army . 
What need of strangers , when our Friends can do 't ? 
Pleased with my promises , 't is true , i  had 
Some of their Persian Gold , employed it too 
To serve my own , and not their Interest . 
Vain Xerxes ! think'st thou I'm to toil for thee ? 
And only Conquer for a Spartan Crown ? 
no , though ruin I design , and rather than fail , 
I would call in , and even assist thy arms , 
Yet first I 'll try to get the spoil myself . 
Greece I design shall fall , and Crown 
With Sovereign Rule my pains alone . 
When General of the Grecian force , I driven 
Almost three hundred thousand Persians , 
Mardonius slain , from famed Platea's fields . 
then I sought glory with my Countries good . 
Now with its undoing , still I seek for glory . 
Honour , that cheats the World , is but a Name : 
't is waste , and ruin lead the way to Fame . Exit . 


The End of the First Act.  

ACT II  

SCENE I A Public Place . 

Enter Argilius . Arg.   I Left Pausanias in Pandora's lodgings , 
Where Love alone now does not entertain 'em : 
Something of mighty consequence , and Ill , 
I fear , is hatching . The Minister of Mischief , 
Artabazus , is very busy Besides Commanded 
By the Regent to withdraw , as I went out , 
I heard Pandora say , the Persians , my Lord , 
Are trusty Friends , and I a Persian , first 
Salute you King — a King ! 
Is not the Young Plistarchus living ? 
Does not each man enjoy his property ? 
Security and Peace reigns thro'out Sparta , 
Justice and Mercy flowing , from the throne , 
And like the Sun , give comfort every where ; 
What revolution can bring better days ? 
Pausanias , 't is Ambition leads thee on : 
When thou art blindly fallen into the snare ; 
Too late thou 'lt find thy flattering hopes deceive thee . 
I 'll to the Princess Anchilthea , 
Acquaint her with my fears , — 
A Mother's Council with a Mother's love , 
May all the Gods assist , and change his Mind . 


Enter Lysander . Lys.   My dear Argilius good Morrow , I know When you get into this Piazza , you are in a Melancholy way . 



Arg.   You know my Temper Lysander and I wonder at your goodness that you can bear with me , you that are all Spirit and Fire , and never knew one minutes care , would I could say as much . 



Lys.   Why what in the Name of Pluto would ye have ? You are the Regent's favourite , you swim in the Stream of Prosperity and all the World court's you , Men and Women , and may if you will enjoy the Charming'st Creature Umph Pandora — Umph.  



Arg.   Not a word of that Lysander there 's none but you must know it , besides I have told you my Resolution . 



Lys.   Aye to be inexorable out of a point of Friendship and Gratitude to the Regent ; 't is all Spleen , damned spleen , where 's Friendship or Gratitude when a fine Woman comes a cross one ? there 's nothing thought of but how to get her ; and if you think otherwise you are ungrateful to yourself . To quit Friendship in such a Case , were no more than to rifle the Temple and Debauch a pretty Priestress ; and that i  done afore now . 



Arg.   Nay thou art rakehell enough that 's the truth on 't , but since you say I have the Spleen so much , pray give me a remedy . 



Lys.   I could prescribe many , but here 's one just now falls in my way , you know my Old cross Father like all other Old fellows , when they cant enjoy no more themselves , grow malicious , and hinder us as much as they can , out of a pretence of making us virtuous and sober , forsooth , and if they can find no other way to Plague us , than they clinch us with a Wife , and that Faith is most commonly plague enough , for I 'd fain know any thing so sneaking and foolish a sight , as a young Fellow that has been Married but half a year ? 



Arg.   What! than I find that 's like to be your case you set it off so feelingly . 



Lys.   no , 't is not like to be my Case I promise you ; by jove I am a Spartan , and love Liberty , he that 's indifferently easy , is a Fool to through dice , whether he shall be so any longer , or no ; 't is perfect nonsense ; I wonder any body can have the face to propose Matrimony to a man , unless 't were to save him from going to Goal for Debt ? 



Arg.   If all men were of your mind how should we have the World continue ? 



Lys.   O — there are people enough in the World , that are fit for nothing else ; Fools that will Mary whither ye will or no ; all yourself admirers too , and your whining Adorers , I would have Mary ; I would have all Ugly people to Mary , and get out of sight , that the handsome ones may enjoy the World , and one another , my Dear . 



Arg.   Well — but a great deal of Money with a Wife , will prove a Comfort to a Man , let the worst happen that you can imagine . 



Lys.   't is true Money is a sure stake , and I think there 's a great deal of reason we should have it , for since the Matrimonial Sea is so Dangerous we ought to insist upon great Insurance , before we Launch into the deep ▪ our Ancestors were Fools , and did'nt know their own worth , Women must have Us , and will have Us , and can't live without Us , no more than they can without sleep , and some of 'em lose a good deal every night about it , would I were with 'em , I 'd so rock 'em : then forsooth to keep up the show of Modesty , for they must not be seen in it for the World , they get a third Party , a go between , a Matrimonial Bawd , ( there 's abundance of 'em ) and they bring you by chance together ; the Innocent Virgin knows nothing of the matter , not she ▪ nor is'nt Tricked , and dressed out , not she ; nor dos'nt Simper , not she ; then afterwards you are told a damned company of lies about her Fortune , or her good Qualities , and they believe the thing might be brought about , and a thousand little tricks , you know ' 'em . 



Arg.   Why dost thou think all this ? They must know Chastity and Modesty are the Virtues most admired by us Men.  



Lys.   Aye the scarcest Commodities are ever the most valued : you can't know some things till you use them , we are Devilishly imposed upon sometimes in Merchandizes that are set to Sale ; what do you think they Dress themselves out for , with so much Pains and Art ? what do you think they take such Care to show themselves afterwards for , if not for Sale ? and if we passed by without Cheap'ning 'em , they 'd cry out what do ye Lack Sir.  



Arg.   Fie , fie , mere railing . 



Lys.   What do they Plague me with Matrimony then for ? when one's weary of every thing else ( as one shall be ) then 't is the time to Mary , aye and to make the best Husband too ; to be contented with riding out a mile or two , to take the air , to keep a pack of maingey , stinking Beagles ; to visit my Neighbours in their turns , and to lie with one and the same Woman every night soberly , and gingerly , there 's the Husband for ye . 



Arg.   ha ha ha thou art a rare Philosopher , but what 's the remedy for the Spleen , if this bened one ? 



Lys.   This matrimony has put it out of my head , I was going to tell you my Father will have me marry the rich Widow the Lady Demetria's Daughter , that charming Pearl Miss Mawkine . 



Arg.   O — I know 'em , Hercules ! what a Creature has he found out for you ? 



Lys.   An odious thing indeed . I must go and Visit her . Come you shall go along with me . 



Arg.   I can't now , I have business of consequence , but I 'll meet you in the Evening , at Minerva's Temple , and then I may have leisure to laugh with you . 



Lys.   The Old Lady sets out I assure you , for something , or another , look to your self Argilius . 



Arg.   Well , I dare venture her . Minerva's Temple . 



Lys.   I wonot fail to meet you . Exeunt . 



SCENE II Pandora's Apartment . 

Enter Pausanias , Pandora follows and stops him by the Robe . Pan.   Leave me not thus — 
Let me not live to see you run such hazards , 
By all the tenderness of truest Love , 
I do conjure you , by all the Virgin joys I gave you , 
When at Byzantium's famous Siege , your Captive , 
When midst the sound of War , and heat of Glory 
Love too displayed his ensigns , with sighs and Vows , 
And winning looks , you tuned me to your Love , 
Byzantium and Pandora both were yours , weeps . 
Happy and pleased , my Chains I bore , thro' ' all 
Rough seasons , and more rugged Fortunes ( unknown 
Till then ) I followed you ; Love and Pausanias , 
Were all to me , and still are so , but O 
Too much I fear Pausanias his has lost , 
And poor Pandora's Love , alone remains : weeps . 


Paus.   Why will you add this torment to my Soul ? 
Or why affect me with Presaging Tears ? 
Pandora ! 't will be time enough to weep , 
When I miscarry . — 


Pan.   then 't will be too late . 
Think what you are , and what you have to Loof , 
Your well got Fame which sounds thro'out the World , 
If it must go , let it be like yourself , 
With vast Designs , and those too well concerted ; 
then more than giddy chance is on your side ; 
Trust not Pausanias , trust not Feeble aid ; 
The awkward Helots' , timorous and Enslaved 
And all the Party that you can propose , 
Are but the dross , and refuse of the Land ; 
The best are gone to the Athenian War , 
Shall great Pausanias thus poorly trust his sat , 
no , let a Warlike host of Persians 
Give credit to your arms , and make the Conquest sure : 


Paus.   Credit and Conquest , follow my Command : 
Brave Leaders make brave Men ; those that with such 
Disdain you treat , would make you Gaudy Persians 
Feel , once again the Force of hardy Greece , 
Of that no more , Pandora , you 're to blame , 
Press me no farther . — 


Pan.   My Lord , you seem to be displeased , with Me : 
If I have said what Mis-became me 
If Passion too much Innocent freedom showed — 
Believe that Passion only was my fear , 
My fear for you and that you should forgive . 


Paus.   Stifle that fear , for fear that brings no help , 
May bring much harm ; trust me Pandora , trust 
My grown experience , 
i  weighed it well — 
Money and Men don't grow like Mettles , whether 
We will or no , if we can save 'em both 
And gain our Ends Xerxes and all wise Men , 
Will praise my Conduct , and esteem my Service ; 
Therefore the Persians wait , till farther orders . 


Pan.   And therefore would I 'd never been born 
'T were better , better I had never known , 
Never felt the joys of great Pausanias' love , 
If I should say the Gods themselves , never tasted 
Diviner bliss : I think I should not boast , 
A noble Flame   kindled in my Soul , 
Fed , with your breath , your looks , your every Grace , 
Heroic actions , and your feasts of love , 
Unenvied , and unrelished be the World , 
While I , O happiness ! enjoying you , 
Have more than comes to any mortals share 
I cannot bear it , cannot see you lost , 
My artless fondness , and my murdering feats , 
Are troublesome , I find you think 'em so 
Yet give me , may be a last leave to beg . 


Paus.   't is sixth , and now once more I take my leave : 
Business of several kinds must be dispatched [ Embraces is going ▪ ] 


Pan.   Stay Sir , yet stay , till I have finished mine , 
'T will not be long a doing , and then I 'll never 
Disturb you more , I see you are resolved , Takes his hand . 
( With utmost grief , and all the pangs of parting 
Souls I find it ) to seek your Ruin , let me 
Once more Embrace the greatest Man on Earth — Embrace . 
What will the World lose ? What shall I lose rather ? 
Who live not but in you — 
Like flowers spreading to the rising Sun. 
Beauteous , and gay , while they are warmed by him , 
But when he 's gone and the Cold Evening comes , 
Closed up their withered sweets Decay , and Die — 


Sinks in his Arms.  Paus.   Ha! she 's gone , what hoa there , the woman has 
O'ercome her Spirits , what hoa who waits ? — Enter Ser.  
Be sure you take all necessary care — 
I 'm loath to leave her thus , but I 'll avoid 
The second grief of parting , and please her more 
Returning with Success — Exit . 


Pan.   Away , stand off , he 's gone , and all my arts , 
The Woman , and the Mistress too have failed , — 
However I have done my part for Xerxes . 
And Artabazus when he knows it must 
Approve my management ; I love Pausanias , or I loved him once 
And I would save him , save the lovely Youth 
Argilius , who I know will fall with him — 
May be he suspects the Persians , and he 
Has reason , but this present Enterprise 
Is Madness , Fury , throwing all away . 
Rather than have him lost , I will call in 
The Persians — Pythia , you find out my Lord 
Ambassador — but stay — you may retire — 
Exeunt Women . The Persians here , my reign is at an end . 
Pausanias runs too fast , and hurrys Me 
And my design upon Argilius 
I 'll seize this Night : once more attempt his Love 
Before to Morrows bloody Enterprise : 
For after that I must despair to see him . 
If I 'm unlucky — 
Let him unpityed fall , and his loathed Life resign , 
If I succeed — 
I with delight shall think he once at least was Mine . Exit . 


The End of the Second Act 

ACT III  

SCENE I Pandora in her Apartment . 

SONGS . After which Argilius enters . Sweeter than Roses , or cool Evening's breeze , 
On a warm Flowery Shore , 
Was the dear Kiss , first trembling made me frieze , 
then shot like Fire all o'er ; 
What Magic has Victorious love ! 
For all I touch , or see , 
Since that dear kiss , I hourly prove , 
All , all is Love to me . 
DIALOGUE . Wom.   My Dearest 


Man   My Fairest 


Both.   I Languish for thee . 


Wom.   Thy Kindness has wone me 


Man   Thy Charms have undone me 


Both.   I never shall be Free.  


Man   I faint with the Pleasure I fain would repeat , 


Wom.   Ah why are Love's Raptures so short and so sweet ? 


Both.   Thus pressing and kissing , fresh joys we 'll pursue , 
And ever be happy , and ever be true . 


Wom.   But alas ! should you Change 


Man   Ah tell me not so , 


Wom.   no never my Dearest 


Man   no never my Fairest 


Both.   no never no no.  


Arg.   Behold me Madam , waiting your Commands . 


Pan.   Must I Command you then to have you here ? 
Must I still send for you , Argilius ? 
Where is that welcome Warmth , fruitful of Love , 
To bless my barren , wintered , dying hopes ? 
Why am I slighted thus I should complain , 
But would not willingly complain of You. 
Would I had been more Fair , You lesle reserved : 
What can I do to gain , and keep your Heart ? 
Tell me , Argilius , and it shall be done . 
Tell me my faults , for I can hear even them 
From those dear Lips , they shall be mended all : 
My Love can Conquer every thing but You : 
Cruel Argilius ! yet I wonot think , 
You will be Cruel , for my being kind . 


Arg.   Your dazzling Beauty , and your wondrous Charms 
Are fit for jove , no Goddess half so Fair. 
no need of Arguments where proofs are plain : 
Witness , the many many Slaves   made , 
Witness , the greatest Man Pausanias ; 
A Conqueror still you Triumph o'er his heart , 
You he Adores , and with the strictest Love , 
You mix your happy Souls — 
As you deserve so you enjoy the best 
Of Men ; how Madam , can you think of me ? 
My faithfulness to him has born the trial , 
And thank the Gods , he ever found me true ; 
Ah Madam ! why then all these pains , to make 
A Villain of a Friend ? — 


Pan.   no I would make you mine Argilius , 


Arg.   In me 't were Sacrilegious rage Indeed , 
To violate the Temple of his Love.  


Pan.   The temple 's meanly served , that has but one 
Poor votary ; when a full Chorus shakes the roof 
then then 's the best Devotion . 


Arg.   The Priest alone , has right to Sacrifice , 
I with the distant crowd shall humbly Bow.  


Pan.   Give me no Ceremony , but the Heart . 
O cruel Youth ! averse to Love , and Me : 
Too fond of what was never meant for thee : 
For thou , wert surely made for Gentler Wars 
Change thy fierce mind , and think on softer Love , 
Arms are to rugged for thy Pliant Limbs , 
For close embraces , let 'em be Exchanged ; 
Instead of Noise , and the shrill Trumpets sound , 
Let tender Murmuring sighs , divert thy ear ; 
no fear of Death , but smiles and dying Eyes , 
no smarting Wounds but those of bleeding , Love. 
Which with delight are cured . — 


Arg.   Ah Madam hold , you know not what you do . 


Pan.   I 'd have thee hasten to be Happy now . 
Neglect no longer the advice of Love , 
But scape the pain , which I have born so long , 
For love of thee , what Torments have I felt ? 
What torments do I feel ? loaden with cares , 
Torn with my Hopes , and Fears , sleep from my Eyes 
Is fled , while I restless ▪ despairing pine 
My life away ; give me one tender look , 
One moment's love , and I 'll forgive you all . 


Arg.   O! Help me all ye Powers or I am gone , — 
A strange forgetfulness comes o'er my Soul , aside . 
And I can think of nothing else but her . 
I know not how , I 'm hurried on so fast , 
Deaf to my reason , Duty pleads in vain . 


Pan.   Why muses , thus my Life , so thoughtful , why ? 
You sha'not think , 't is Love , Argilius , Love , 
With all the charms of a fair eager Lover , 
Invites you to be kind , my panting Breasts 
Blown up by Love , like Neptune's waves foretell . 
A storm of swelling Joy , plunge boldly in , 
Within these Arms you can no danger fear , 
no Rock , but Scorn , no Shipwreck but Despair . 


Arg.   Friendship and Love , distracted my tortured mind , 
Such kindling Charms , such Tenderness , such Love , 
With thousand Graces , Favours undeserved , 
Set me on fire , and captivated my Soul. 
But then methinks I hear Pausanias , betrayed by me , 
Cry out , there there he goes , 
th' ungrateful Villian , whom I thought my Friend , 
Argilius , only he could so have done . 
Shall I consent to wrong this Godlike Man ? 


Pan.   Is 't come to this , this hateful Parley then ? 
I know your thoughts , hence from my sight be gone ; 
thou honest Fool , unfit for me ; thou hadst 
But few hours happiness to taste , and those 
thou hast lost , to morrow thou 'rt no more , then perish 
With the Helots' and Pausanias' ; — 
no , I 'll be revenged on him , the cause of this , 
And thee ; so honourably you shall not fall ; 
I 'll to the Ephori , discover all , 
And leave you to the Executioner : upgoing . 


Arg.   Hold Madam hold , — a woman's hate is fatal , aside . 
I find he is engaged in new designs ; 
On me alone let your — to her . 
Resentment fall , O! let me expiate 
Great Pausanias' Crimes : Here Madam at your Feet knelt . 
Behold your slave let the dire sentence Death , 
Nay worse than death , your , your displeasure , light 
On me alone , tell me but how I may 
His pardon win , his safety but procure , 
I 'll merit it , with all that I can think , 
Or do , for you . 


Pan.   I take you at your word ,   saved his Life : 
And that 's an action worthy of a Friend . 


Arg.   then I am blessed , and now am wholly yours 
Embraces her . My Life , my Soul , which way will you dispose — 


Enter Servant . Seru.   Madam the Persian Ambassador . 


Pan.   Conduct him up — would he were in Persia : 
Exit Seru.  This comes of losing time . 


Arg.   He must not see me here , I 'll soon return 
And then — Exit Arg.  


Pan.   And then deceive me if thou canst . 
Enter Ambassador . My Lord you 're come very opportunely , I longed 
To see you , though I wish , I could 
Tell better news , I followed your Commands , 
Tried all you're Arts , and some too of my own , 
To change Pausanias' mind , but all in vain . 
there 's a Fatality that urges him , 
To ruin , and stops all our good designs . 


Amb.   It must be so : just now I left him where 
He told me all ; and is in care to know , 
How Fair Pandora does ; as soon as ever 
He told me you were ill , struck with the news , 
I hither flew , to satisfy my fears , 
And thank the Gods , gaurdians of our Persia , 
I find you , Madam , well ; you are the light 
That guide's us in our travels , withdraw yourself . 
And helpless we are lost . — 


Pan.   I feigned to swoon , at last and so he left me : 
I heard him say , he quickly would return 
With Victory , but 't is impossible , he 's lost , 
And with him all the hopes of Persia — 


Amb.   When so much Beauty fails , we must expect 
The worst ; I found him angry , much disturbed , 
I doubt our common enemy his Mother the Princess 
Anchilthea , undermines us . 


Pan.   The Spartan Ladies , are all Politicians , 
All Patronesses of the public weal , 
Story is full of 'em , and there she hope's a name ; 
There let her live , so we were rid of her . 


Amb.   We both with equal Zeal our Country serve ; 
Thou I with half the pains , attain my ends , 
While bright Pandora , her assistance lends . 


Pan.   My Lord , my Lord , I have no such Vanity , 
I shall be happy if by my poor means , 
I answer your designs , and serve the mighty King.  


Amb.   Xerxes' the great , receives your kindness right , 
Resolves to honour you , above all Women , 
Informed by me , of all your beauteons Charms , 
Love's you unseen , desire's your Character , 
And when Triumphant he arrives in Greece , 
Pleased with the Charge , and Proud of such a Mistress , 
I 'll soon conduct you to his kind Embrace . 


Pan.   Dissembling Knave — aside . 
My Lord I hear the Regent 
Is to have Xerxes' Daughter , I shall be pleased 
To see him grow so great , and soon retire 
Contented from the World , praying for Xerxes , 
And his great Sons good Fortune — 


Amb.   I may impart with safety what I know ; 
These are pretended Nuptials Madam ; these 
Are ways of State to gain a present point , 
You can't believe 'em real — 


Pan.   no more than the other — aside . 
My Lord I dive not into turns of State , 
I 'm only happy to be useful here . 
What shall we do , to get the Persians in ? 
This rising will be vainly desperate . 
It will awake the sleeping Ephori , 
Put 'em upon their Guard , and so prevent 
Our hopes ; besides Pausanias meets his Death . 
And dear Argilius will be lost with him , aside . 
I have no Patience , o find out some remedy . 
Use all your cunning , stop this mad design , 
I have done all I can . — 


Amb.   To change Pausanias is impossible , 
And I have tried a second time in vain — 
— You have inspired me Madam , 
And to your influence I owe the thought , 
By the bright Sun I have it — 
I 'll send a Letter to the Ephori , unsigned , 
Therein at large I will inform of all , 
And that to morrow is the day set down . — 


Pan.   You won't discover Pausanias ? — 


Amb.   no , Madam , no , not the least glance at him . 
no naming Names . I 'll word it cunningly . 


Pau.   Well , it must do . 


Amb.   It will have this effect : 
'T will make 'em all intent upon this Plot. 
So while they 're busy , bustling here at home , 
Our Men may land securely . 


Pan.   Excellent ! our time 's but short . 


Amb.   I 'll instantly about it . Exeunt . 


SCENE II A Public Place . 

Enter Anchilthea . Anc.   Sparta ! thou noblest seat of Liberty ! 
Still may'st thou be preserved and greater still , 
Freed from self Interest , and base corruption , 
From traitorous designs of trusted Friends , 
And slavish Principles , yet more dangerous . 
Ba thou the Ballence still of Greece and spread 
Thy easy Conquests through the Persian sway : 
Thus it was once , thus , thus it used to be , 
When with united Hearts , and hands we fought , 
And smiling Fortune purpled the Victor's way : 
But now , alas ! distracted heats , and jarring , 
Factions , strive hard for thy undoing : 
Now who bids most for Liberty , or Country , 
Takes the unhappy Purchase . See he comes — 
Argilius has raised my Jealousy — 
Enter Pausanias Attended by his Party . I 'll try Pausanias , if I find him bend 
On ill Designs , myself would see him Perish . 


Pau.   The best deserver will be sure of that . 
Now separate , and so my Friends farewell . 


They bow , and go out . Anchilthea comes forward . Anc.   Well met my Son ; when saw you the Young King ▪ 
My Nephew , good Plistarchus ? he is well ? 


Pau.   Very well in health Madam , 
And still much like his Father . 


Anc.   I hope he 'll prove much like him in his Virtues , 
You are his Guardian , Son , and should inform him 
Of his Father's Actions , worthy his Imitation , 
Tell him the Great Leonidas with Heroic 
Fortitude , redeemed poor Greece from Persian Slavery , 
When with but only three , three Hundred men , — 
He stopped their torrent at Thermopylae , 
Which threatened utter Desolation ; tell him 
His Father then lost his life , but mounted 
To the Gods , a glorious Victim for his Country , 
Tell him he refused the Sovereignty of Greece , 
Offered by Xerxes , and choose a Noble 
Death , rather than an ignominious Rule , 
Tell him what all good Kings should know . 


Paus.   There want not these to make a Spartan King , 
His Lesson's written in the Laws , he need 
But learn to Read , and then he 's taught to Govern.  


Anc.   Methinks there 's more required Pausanias , 
The Virtues of the Ancients should be shown , 
The liberality of Agamemnon , Old Nestor's Eloquence , 
Vlissess Arts , and the brave Daring of Achilless too . 
A King should learn to fill his People's hands , 
Study to rob 'em only of their hearts , 
That would become a King : and then so wise , 
That he should be a Council to himself . 
So Bold and Daring , that while others pause 
Upon the Danger he should break through it , 
And leave them to finish the easy part ; 
On Justice and Clemency I could much more enlarge , 
But this methinks is somewhat more than Spelling . 


Paus.   The Kings of Sparta have all this inspired , 
The race of Hercules are Born with these 
Endowments , though there are some who are not Kings , 
Whom Chance thought fit to send into the World 
Out of the reigning Constellation — 
Yet have more shining qualities — 


Anc.   That there are Souls worthy of Sceptered sway , 
I doubt not , I wish all Kings were such , if not , 
They are to be the more despised , you once 
My Son , were one of those great Souls , O pleasure 
To my thoughts ! 
With joy unspeakable I heard the News , 
And blessed the Gods Sparta and Greece were saved , 
Saved by Pausanias my beloved Son , 
then , with what thirst of Glory and revenge 
You driven the Invaders hence , — then was a time ! 
Now Persian habits , and Rich Persian Wines 
Mistresses Persian , nay and Persian Gold 
Would bring 'em in again . My Son , my Son , 
Your dress , your Manners , Customs , and what most 
I fear , your Inclinations to are theirs , 
A Persian Strumpet , and a Persian Spy , 
Are dearer to you than the Love of Sparta ; 
Take heed Pausanias , keep yourself from Plots , 
Lose not the Fame   Got , by base designs , 
You know you are suspected to the State , 
But former merits Spoken in your behalf , 
Throw off these Persian Novelties , and rise again 
A bright Conductor of the Commonwealth , 
For know , that were they more , your Plots are vain , 
For Sparta like the Rainbow , will shine most , 
When gird with thickest Clouds . — 


Pau.   Madam the Charge is weighty , that you lay , 
And I must try to bear it . — 


Anc.   Very brave ! how it becomes 
Your Pride ! Aye , aye , go on , 
thou silly Tool for others Interests , 
Go on Ambitious , Insolent , and Proud , 
Disgrace to Sparta , and thy Royal Stem , 
If against my hopes and cares , thou provest a Villain , 
I with these Arms which nursed thee up for good , Draws a Dagger . 
Will be the first , shall die 'em with thy Blood.  


Pau.   Please to retire Madam I doubt you are not well . 


Is going . Anc.   You sha'not scape me so , for I will do 
My part , O! Witness all ye Gods , and the great Manes 
Of our Ancestors , if I would aught , but what 
Is great and Glorious , — 
Think on the Torments of a Mother's Soul , 
Who strives to save her only darling Child , 
Often forewarned to keep within his bounds , 
The Giddy headed minds it not , Enticed 
By other , and his own desire to range , 
Ventures to far , till mist , his Mother calls , 
And runs and cries in vain , Helpless and Breathless . 
Now she see 's , the hopeful boy is by a 
Tiger slain , this , this , is my case now . I know 
Thy wild designs , and would prevent thy fall . 


Pau.   Madam I must admire you for your Virtue 
Thou you ▪ Condemn me , on your bare Suspicion , 
Have I not given proof of my Love to Sparta ? 
Witness what you have said . — 
Why then am I accused , by restless humours , 
And causeless Jealousies ? if I design 
It shall be how to make myself and her — 
Much greater than we are . — 


Anc.   Son , I have more than fancy for my fears , 
I know your meaning , you aim full at Power , 
At Power despotic , you would be a Tyrant , 
And like a Monster waste this Fruitful Land , 
then Starve yourself , forsaken and abhorred . 
As in a Moment after the Last sigh , 
The Body motionless , colour the Face , 
Heat fly's the stiffining Veins , 
The glorious tissue soon unweaves itself , 
And all the Elements which were before 
Subjected to the Offices of Life 
Now snatch their several parts , fight on ruins , 
Till there 's nothing left ; so Tyranny 
The sure disease of States , when ever it seizes 'em proves mortal , 
The People languish , and their freedom dies . 


Pau.   Sentence is past , and Pleading is in vain , 
And now no matter Innocent or not . 
Yet ever to morrows Sun reddens the Western Sky 
you 'll find me clear myself — 


Anc.   — Else may the Traitor Die. Exeunt . 


The End of the Third Act.  

ACT IU.  

SCENE I A Garden . 

Enter Argilius , Lysander with Demetria , and Mawkines with a Baby . Arg.   YOU have a very fine Garden here Madam , and very well understood , as every thing else is about you . 



Dem.   O good Sir I have no fancy at all indeed , if we are but clean , 't is the most we can pretend to ; however this little outlet is a convenience in the City , I walk here every morning before dinner , for a little fresh air . 



Arg.   't is very agreeable Madam and it gives Health and Appetite . 



Dem.   O dear Sir I never want Appetite , I wish Maukine had as much poor Child , she is so overrun with the green-sickness , I don't know what to do with her , I make her get up every morning early , when I do , and stir about , we were up this morning by nine a clock I protest , and were dressed in two hour's time , as you may guests by the hanging of our Clotheses . 



Lys.   Nothing can be more exact Madam , I 'm in amaze it could be done in so short a time , pray Madam don't hurry yourself so , let me alone to cure my pretty Jewel here . 



Dem.   Truly Lysander I am a little out of order with it that 's the truth on 't , but I don't care how I look so I do my poor Girl good ; but could you cure her think you , umph — I don't know but you might , if you made her stir Sound , a warming Exercise is the only way — but she 's fit indeed for a Husband , that plays with Babies , have you brought that along with you too ? I have told you a hundred times I 'd burn it — give me 't I say . 



Maw .  OH Save me , Save me , I will play with 't that I will so . Runs to Lysander . 



Dem.   How dare you say such words , Baggage , ha ? 



Maw .  I won't then , I won't O Dear Mother — I will play with it then . 



Dem.   Indeed Gentlewoman I shall order you I shall . 



Shakes her by the Arm.  Maw .  OH Mother —   hurt my Issue , o Gods ! o Gods ! o Gods ! 



Dem.   Hold your Tongue you nasty Slut , but I 'll throw this away for you . Throws out the baby . 



Lys.   OH dear Madam don't be angry with pretty Miss , poor creature how she Sobs ! 



Arg.   Pray Madam , she 'll do so no more , I dare promise for her , she was only practising how to dandle a living Baby of her own . They laugh . 



Dem.   O Sir I 'm so troubled with her sometimes , I dont know what in the world to do ; yet the Girl has a great deal of good nature in her , and I hope will come off from these Childish things . 



Arg.   Aye Madam a good Husband will make her a Woman . 



Dem.   Some Husbands will go a great way that 's the truth on 't , I had a good one once , that would have made a Woman of any thing , I am sure I was very Young and Foolish then , but he made a Women of me presently , while you could say what 's this ; but I grow old now and must leave that to my Daughter . 



Arg.   no body would take her for your Daughter Madam , you must call her Sister indeed , so youthful and blooming as you are . 



Dem.   O dear Sir it can't be indeed , OH good , I dont know truly — I vow I can't be so vain to think it . — but do you speak seriously now ? 



Arg.   Madam I 'll leave the World to Judge ; 



Dem.   no no , I can't believe it , though I was young and beautyful once , your Uncle ( Lysander ) and I were very well together , he was a fine man as I may say , for he always kept great Equipage about him , how I loved play in those days , there would be such Squabbling , such a pother sometimes , and though we were out for a little time , yet we were quickly in again , I was never weary of playing — it makes me laugh ha ha ha , and now to have such a fine young Spark as this say such things to me — does really as it were — I don't know how methinks — but it obliges me to you strangely — I 'll Swear I 'm out of Countenance . OH juno ! what has she put in her Mouth Squeezes her mouth out drops an apple . there ? Huzzy let it out — by Venus a green Apple — O this intolerable girl , this 't is is her Bane , I am quite weary of my Life with her — 't is to no purpose , all this Charge and Care I have been at to give her Physic and Opening , the Mischievous Creature gets herself Stopped again , do what I can . 



Maw .  Why Mother 't was only a little Apple my Cousin Memnon gave me , when we were at play together on the Bed in the Damsen Coloured Chamber . 



Dem.   Aye thou art a Tom-rigs , fie at this Age ? it makes me quit wild , Huzzy have you got nothing else in your Pockets ? 



Maw .  no Mother indeed , and indeed now . Mawkine Riggling about . 



Dem.   I won't believe you , I will see , therefore stand still — look here a great piece of Chalk — a Scrap of Parchmin — a great piece of Alum , — an Apple Scoop , and a raw Turnip — are not you a lying Girl ? speak — a piece of Plaister-lime and hair , mere Poison — are not you a Vexatious Child ? speak — why do you Plague me thus ? speak I say . 



Maw .  I won't . 



Dem.   Come let see what 's in tother Pocket — full of Oatmeal — why wou'd'nt this make any Flesh Mad ? but I 'll — Runs after her Arg. Stops her . 



Arg.   Hold Madam hold , let me entreat you . 



Dem.   O Sir I am the unfortunat'st Woman in Greece , she breaks her poor Mother's heart that she does , for me this is the daily Life I have with her or worse , I have tried all the fair means in the World , but it signifies nothing , a great Hoiden as she is , you shall have a Husband indeed , you shall , Ah if Lysander were not your true Lover , and blind to all your faults you might stay long enough , ever any other would be troubled with you , O I 'm past Patience . 



Maw .  Maw , waw here 's a rout indeed — but I 'll be revenged on you for this and that soon too . 



Lys.   't is all nothing Madam , these little things are incident to Youth , she 'll make never the worse Wife , this is all Innocent , you may thank the Gods she 's Virtuous Madam , and that 's the Charm that wins my Heart . 



Dem.   O Sir you are a good discreet Young man , as you say , 't is a great Comfort to me to think she 's Virtuous , all the Mischief she does is to herself poor Child , but when you have her , she 'll be Weaned from every thing of this kind , and I hope I shall have Comfort in her and hers . 



Arg.   no doubt on 't Madam , she must be good that comes from you , she must have Beauty , Sense and Virtue if she 's your Ladyship's Daughter . 



Dem.   O sweet Sir you oblige me Eternally to you , and when you and I are better Acquainted , I hope you will speak your Mind freely to me , I love Flat and Plain doings Sir , I am for downright dealing . 



Lys.   Your Ladyship says very true , and I 'll promise you , you could not meet with a more upright Man than my Friend here , I 'll Answer for him . 



Arg.   Lysander has done me great honour Madam in making me known to your Ladyship , and I shall use all the means Possible to requited him so great a Kindness , and endeavour always to show myself deserving of the favours I receive . 



Dem.   Well I vow I can't choose but look upon you — I Dreamt last Night of just such a Face and Person , — well really ones Fancy works very oddly when ones a sleep sometimes — O juno ! O the Gods ! she has run a Pin into me jove knows how far — where is she — [ Lysan. steps between 'em ] Nay I will come at her — I 'll never forgive it Huzzy — I shall meet with you , — 



Lys.   for Heaven's sake Madam be pacified . 



Dem.   Pray Sir meddle with that which belongs to you , you are no Master here . Gods ! how it Smarts ? 



Lys.   Why so outrageous Madam ? 



Dem.   you 're a Saucy Coxcomb Sir , what do you mean ? do you know who I am ? 



Lis.   Yes Madam you han't concealed yourself at all , I hope you don't think I or my Friend here , have any design upon you . 



Dem.   Why this is intolerable , to be Affronted thus at my own house , my Daughter ! my Scullion's too good for you . 



Lys.   She may be the better Choice for aught I know . 



Dem.   Had your Father the wealth of Persia , he nor you should ever come within my doors , you have your answer Sir.  



Lis.   I am Proud you employ me Madam , my Father shall have your Message . 



Dem.   The sooner the better Sir , there 's your way . I shall have a reckoning with you Mistress . 



[ to Mawkine who runs off ] Exit . Arg.   OH the sweet Conversation we have had Poor Miss has brought us both off , but she 'll pay for 't , come let 's be gone . 



Lys.   Nothing ever happened better , you have had the diversion I promised you , and I have my Liberty secured , much sooner , than I expected . I 'll tell my Father how she despised him , I know his temper , 't will put a certain end to this business , and then the world 's my own again . 

Thanks to the Gods our Matrimonies done , 

Which never begins too late , nor ends too soon . Exeunt . 



SCENE II  

Enter Pausanias , and Ambassador . Paus.   Hear you the news my Lord Ambassador ? 


Amb.   What news ? 


Paus.   Honest Argilius brings me word , 
The Business of the Helots' is discovered ! 


Amb.   OH the good Gods discovered ! 


Paus.   Eternal Death pursue the Villains fears , 
Rot , rot the hand , that written the coward Scroll ; 
Would I could know the Secretary — but 
I have the means to spoil their blabbing still . 
It shall be told , but not so soon as done . 
And when the first Discoverer brings the news , 
It shall be Conquest and Proud Sparta's Fall. 
Thus to be Baffled by dull blockheads , thus ! 
Puzzling about , at last   hit it off , 
And follow with full cry : I 'll lay a trail 
Of Persian Game , shall draw 'em to the Toils . 


Amb.   Come my good Lord be pacified : it is 
But shifting Sail , and still the wind sits fair : 
We are not destitute , remember Rhodes . 


Paus.   Rage , and Revenge , like fierce imprisoned Winds , 
Hurry my Sense , and shake me , like an Earthquake : 
But there will come a time to give 'em vent . 


Amb.   My Lord , I do beseech you Calm your mind , 
And on fresh Methods let it be employed . 
So Great your Power , so many are Your Friends , 
The Ephori dare not say that you are guilty . 


Paus.   He says I was not mentioned in the Paper . 
Let 'em suspect me , while they have no proof . 
I trust my Treasons only with a few . 
Let hot Brained Fools set up their noisy Clubs , 
Caball with Malcontents , and whisper Secrets , 
The very Forum will be sure to know : 
Nothing so vain , so Buoyed with hopes as they , 
Dirty and weary Hobbling up and down , 
To Spread reports which no Body believes ; 
Mighty designs they Hatch in Speculation , 
Not Possible in practice , they wish well 
To Treason , and will dip themselves as far , 
As any One will trust 'em , but all the 
Credit they can do their Cause , 
Is when the silly Blockheads Suffer for 't . 


Amb ,  Your very right my Lord , 
they 're only Engines , the Spring is hid 
Which gives the Motion , and when 
they 're once worn out , are thrown aside 
My Lord our building needs no Scaffolds now , 
One word from you will Raise and Finish it ; 
Think of your Friends , at Rhodes , 
The eager Troops lie Languishing 
For Summons , when will Pausanias , when the 
Regent send ? why so much time before we 
Call him General ? why dos'nt Xerxes send us 
Into India ; to push our Conquests there , why keep 
Us here in Tedious Expectation ? himself 
Is with 'em raising still their Hopes , 
His Confines open to Incursions lie , 
Yet he Expects , and Venturs all for you . 


Paus ,  no farther need of Rhetoric Artabazus , 
Now they shall come , my Friend , my last advice 
I will dispatch to Xerxes Instantly . 


Amb.   But I am Cautious in the Messenger 
In these suspected times we ought to choose 
Most warily , it will be difficult — 
Besides our all depends upon these Letters — 
Since we must trust the Secret to one more , 
He must be one of tried Fidelity — 


Pau.   Such Men we find are scarce — 


Amb.   Yet there is One , Faithful Argilius . 


Paus.   Argilius . 
You know he is a Spartan in his Heart . 


Amb.   That is one Reason why I wish him there . 
A Spartan ! that 's an Enemy to you . 


Paus.   O! he 's my Friend . 


Amb.   Why let him show it then : 
This way he carries on your Interest ; 
And that I 'm sure 's the business of a Friend . 
He must know nothing of the deep contents , 
Only convey the Letters to my master . 


Pau.   You know the Messengers have never returned , 
By our Agreement suffering present Death . 


Amb.   then he will fall with Honour serving you . 


Pau.   He saved my Life at famed Bizantium's Siege — 


Amb.   And you would there have done as much for him . 


Pau.   Since that you know how great has been his Love : 
And many are the Proofs , this very Hour , 
Is Witness of his Faith — What such a Friend ! 


Amb.   There is no Friendship , in Affairs of State.  


Pau.   I grant it — but we 'll think upon another . 


Amb.   there 's not another : You are sure of him . 


Pau.   then I 'll Subscribe his life shall be untouched . 


Amb.   You may and give him time to ruin Us. 
Consider Sir when he shall come to Rhodes 
And see the Mighty preparations there 
His zeal for Sparta , then preferred to You , 
( Before the numerous Fleet can yet arrive ) 
May make him send advice , discover all . 


Pau.   Advice ! Discovery ! let the Names be lost : 
They signify a Villain every way . 


Emb.   then you will thank his Friendship . 


Pau.   He shall Die . 
Friendship implys an Equal in the Throne ; 
A Subject-passion : But Ambition 
Fills all the Soul , and Godlike reigns alone 


Exeunt . SCENE III Pandora's Apartment . 

Enter Argilius . Arg.   Now I shall prove the Ambassador a Villain , 
I saw the letter which disclosed the Plot 
o' th' Helots' to the Ephori , and know the hand 
To be one of his Secretaries ; I 'm glad 
The design 's prevented , but I fear 't will 
Bring on a worse ; if Pausanias will hear me 
He must resent the Fact. — 
then for Pandora here , I 'll Feign to love her still 
Appoint my Lodgings as the meeting place 
then bring Pausanias to find her Falsehood ; 
Help me ye Powers , who Watch for Sparta's good , 
That I may save him from their Cursed wiles 
Restore him to his Country's Interest . 
With all the Eagerness of panting Hearts , Enter Pan - 
I come , to bless my Eyes , my every sense . 
Ages methinks are past , and Wracks I've felt , 
Since the Ambassador did send me hence 


Pan.   Love has a Thousand Thousand joys in store 
And Coveting is still possessing more , 
A Thousand Raptures he is pleased to give , 
And show by Dying what it is to Live.  


Arg.   Pardon me Madam pardon what is past , 
Pardon an unexperienced Youth , and Love , 
I 'll soon recover what I dully Lost , 
Thus Pleased , thus Charmed , the Rival of the Gods 
I 'm more than Mortal something more than Man 
While thus I hold my Goddess in my Arms. Embraces her 


Pan.   she 's yours Argilius , all , she all is yours , 
Preserve your Conquest still with kindness thus 
With Freedom I have often owned my Love , 
Too Powerful to strive against , or hide , 
And 't is my greatest Pleasure that you know 
What to the World were shame . 


Arg.   This , this I know , the Hours 
Shall wait to see our Joys , the Nights 
Shall linger with delight , as loath to rob us 
Of even a Minute's Pleasure ; a week with us 
Shall be a Year , an Age , to other Lovers . 


Pan.   Let us retire , lest we be over heard . 


Arg.   When shall I then be Happy ? 
Let but that be fixed Before I go . 


Pan.   Must you then go First ? 


Arg.   The Regent has Commanded my Attendance , 
This Minute he expects me , tell me where , and when . 


Pan.   You must not fail with him , my Lodgings 
Are not safe , I 'll come to yours . 


Arg.   At Eight my Life I will not fail to meet you , 
The doors shall be unlocked . 


Pan.   Agreed , than we will talk again , of Love.  


Arg.   we 'll do , as Love and you inspire , I know 
Not how to leave you , what a tedious hour 't will be , 
Would it were come . 


Pan.   Time now appears our greatest Enemy , 
We wish him gone ; anon he 'll be our Friend , 
And we shall wish his stay , 't is but an hour , 
Yet we may take a pledge for meeting . 


Arg.   This , and this , and this — Salute . 


Pan.   Nay now you 're lavish — 


Arg.   The store can never never waste , while you 
Still feed desire . Now we will know no bounds , 
no regulation in our Pleasures now . 


Pan.   Curse on the cause that calls you thus away , 
Methinks the Regent might not want you , stay : 
Prudence is a Fool , in Love ; yet Jealousies a Foe 
That may pursue us , therefore quickly go , 
Absence like sullen night , darkens the joyful day , 


Arg.   Return , like rising beams , will chase those fogs away . 


Exeunt severally - The End of the Fourth Act.  

ACT v.  

SCENE I  

Enter Argilius with Letters . here 's the reward of all my Faithful Service , 
Cruel Pausanias , how shall I forbear , 
To load thee with Deserved reproaches ? 
Yet still I love thee , and will show it too , 
A hard necessity promotes my Death , 
Were I a Villain , this way I should not die . 
Ambition causing Us t' expose our Friends , 
Makes me a Victim to unlawful Ends.  
Enter Anchilthea . Anc.   Why should he eat me ? why withdraw alone ? 
I will observe him farther — aside . 


Arg.   These Letters full of Impious guilt , 
I am to bear to Xerxes , th' imployment has 
Ever been fatal to the Messengers , 
And must be so to me . Sure I might hope , 
In things of small import , to have been spared ; 
then these contain great , universal Ill , 
Where the best Friend , must give the first Example . 


Anc.   Letters ! and Xerxes ! aside . 


Arg.   OH Sparta ! I with Joy could lose my Life 
To save thee ; but horrid destiny , brings with my death 
Thy fall ; yet I could save 'em both , and with 
A just Revenge , defeat the black design , — 
These , these would do 't , thy Life Pausanias 
Is Safe no longer , than I keep these Concealed , 
Pausanias' Life ! no , that is still so dear 
I could even wish his Villainies success . 
What is the World to me when I am gone ? 
I Live for him : The Gods must look to Sparta , 
then vanish all ye anxious cares , I 'll go , 
My part I justly in obeying show . 
What makes me thus ! unusual tremble seize me ! Stops . 
And now methinks my Mother's bleeding Ghost 
Stands in the passage , and forbids my way , 
Calling me Traitor — so , she's , gone again — 
How can this be ? am I a Traitor then ? 
All , all are so , Villains , and Traitors all , 
Who wound their Country's Peace , and drink her Blood , 
Who is the common Mother of us all ! 
Villains , and Traitors all , who see the Sword 
At their dear Country's throat , and not disarm , 
And Stab its Rage through the Oppressor's Heart . 


Anc.   Now is my time — aside . 


Arg.   What Torments must , they feel in the next World 
Who help the Cursed deed ? Must I be One ? 
Cursed here through a Posterity Enslaved , 
By my means ? And doubly damned in Hell ? 
O ye Just Gods assist ! — 


Anc.   The Gods by me are ready — Snatches the letters . 


Arg.   O Heavens ! Madam let me entreat , give back 
What you have taken , they 're Letters to the Mistress 
Of my Heart , derected in unusual Names , 
Indicted with unusual Terms , 
Which were Concerted , to deceive the Jealous . 


Anc.   no good Argilius no , i  heard your Plaint , 
And know what I have got , ungrateful Son , 
Traitor to every thing , now he is so to you , 
Could not such Virtue breed remorse in him ? 
Unhappy Youth , thy Fortune I deplore , 
I know so great 's thy Love , thy Care is more , 
Yet be advised , you my protection have , 
I 'll keep you safe , while base Pausanias , 
Finds his deserved Fate . 


Arg.   O! rather let the Sentence fall on Me. 
I own the Letters , all the Practices 
Of their Contents : You found 'em in my hands , 
I own 'em all . Pausanias is abused , 
And I the guilty Villain fit to Fall.  


Anc.   Charge not yourself unjustly . 


Arg.   What shall I do ? what will he think of Me ! 
I 'll go to him , tell him I have Betrayed him , 
Urge him with all my Power to take my Life ! 
But I 'm Unworthy of a Death from Him. 
O! spare Pausanias : spare my Honoured Lord : Knelt . 
The Seat of Mercy is a Mother's Breast . 
You cannot , O , you must not see him fall , 
Your only Son , the Glory of your Blood , 
Think on his Actions past : he 's still the same . 
The Ambassador alone is here concerned Rises . 
And I will prove it , give me but the time . 


Anc.   Miraculous Friendship ! I would calm his mind 
And manage these with the best Arts I can : aside . 
I 'll send him to Neptune's Temple , 
There he is safe , Pausanias there will meet him , 
The Ephori shall overhear 'em then : 
That will be proof , I hope if these are not . 
You charge the Ambassador , I shall be glad if 
You can make it good . to him . 
In the mean time , that He may think you gone , 
Retire to Neptune's Temple , there take Sanctuary , 
To save you from his malice when he hears 
Himself accused , for he is Treacherous , 
And by your Death , may smother Evidence , 
And then he leaves my Son to Answer All.  


Arg.   Madam I go , and If I do not prove 
What I have said ; Expose me to his Rage . 
Yet I may save my Friend . Exit . 


Anc.   Blessed be th' immortal Powers that sent me hither , 
Now I have proof which I so long have feared . 
Let me see , both to Xerxes — This is my son 's , 
This hand unknown — My curiosity 
Shall be th' excuse , I 'll open this — 
O 't is Signed Artabazus . Reads . Most mighty most Illustrious , and above all Princes Great and happy Xerxes , your Slave has with unwearied pains and diligence , pursued the matters given him in trust , and has at last prevailed upon Pausanias to send for thy invincible Army , as soon as he shall have done what is expected from him , he shall suffer the same fate this Messenger must , that Xerxes may rise the sole Sovereign of Greece , to whom all Nations be Subjected ; Artabazus . 


Brave Villain ! And thou Fool Pausanias , 
Alas ! why have I lived to see thy ruin ? 
My peaceful Ashes undisturbed had lain , 
And in the Grave I had not cursed thy Birth ; 
Some other than might have performed this task , 
Which tears a Mothers Soul. 
Now I find out why this Solemnity , 
Neptune must be implored with Sacrifice 
To bring the Persian Fleet , and Army safe ; 
Can then Religion serve such Impious ends ! 
Nature be gone , here I disclaim my Blood , 
Incorrigible to a Mother's council , 
Often forgiven , still Engaged in Ill , 
A spreading Gangreen to his Royal Stem , 
And must be fevered to redeem the whole ; 
I will assert the Glory of his Ancestors , 
Which he thus seeks to tarnish . 
Alas , in vain such black Designs are laid , 
thousands of Noble Souls defend our Sparta , 
Unconquered Hearts , disdaining Slavish Rule , 
And the attempt is ever fatal : OH ye Immortal Gods ! 
Laugh not at human Misery , but renew our Hopes , 
Let us convince the World you made us free , 
And yet uncanceled stands that first Decree . Exit . 


SCENE II Neptune's Temple . 

Enter Highpriest , a Choir of Priests followed by Pausanias . Solemn MUSIC . H. Pr.   Prepare , prepare , a Solemn Sacrifice prepare , 
Prepare we to appease , 
The powerful God o' th' Seas . 


Cho.   Hear , Mighty Neptune hear . 


H. Pr.   Let the Billows cease to roar , 
Smooth and silent be the shore , 
Save , and conduct our hopes , while we adore . 


Cho.   Hear , mighty Neptune hear . 
From Crystal Throne adorned with Pearl , receive 
Our humble Vows , and thy Protection give . 


H. Pr.   While blustering Winds do thee obey , 
no Storms can ever enrage the Sea , 
For gentle lucky gales we Pray . 


Cho.   Hear , mighty Neptune hear , 
From Crystal Throne adorned with Pearl , receive 
Our humble Vows and thy Protection give . 


H. Pr. & 2 Pr.   Glory attend each filling Sail , 
May Sailors Courage never fail , 
Let the merry Victors go ▪ 
Destroy the treacherous Foe . 
Increase our Traffic , and our gain , 
On equal Terms , we never fear , 
We will be Masters every where , 
And Triumph o'er the Main . 


Cho.   Increase our Traffic , etc.  


Enter Argilius . Pau.   ha — withdraw a while . Exeunt Priests . 


Arg.   You must not wonder Sir to see me here , 
Believe me true , I never will betray you , 
I hope this Accident will give me opportunity , 
To serve you more than ever — 


Pau.   I doubt you are too busy grown Argilius , 
I thought you would have been by me Directed , 
But you turn Politician . 


Arg.   May the Great Deity within these Walls adored . 
Pursue me with his utmost Wrath , if I 
Have failed , or did Design to fail your Orders , 
Unlucky Chance brought Anchilthea to me . 


Pau.   What ? then my Mother has prevailed with you , 
Take heed Argilius . 


Arg.   Going from you with full Intent to haste 
On Shipboard , she came into your Antichamber 
Unseen , and snatched the Letters from my Hands . 


Pau.   't is Mighty well , go on ; 


Arg.   I Feigned , beseeched her to restore 'em , 
But in Vain , she Threatened all that 's Dear to me , 
Your Life , I proffered mine ▪ Happy if she 
Had ta'en my Life then I conjured her , by 
A Mother's name by Pity , still unmoved : 
Till at the last I said the Ambassador 
Was guilty , and that I 'd prove he only was 
Concerned ; let me , my Lord , charge him alone , 
And then you will be free , he and Pandora , 
Design your ruin , that too I can make clear , 
Let me my Lord , OH let me prove 'em false ; 
By the advice of Anchilthea , I here 
took Sanctuary , that I might clear my points 
With safety . She consented to this manner . 


Pau.   This Indefatigable Mother is Enter Ephori come forward to harken . 
In every Place — I shall outwit her yet — 
Without more proof , than this , I cannot fall 
Some of the Ephori I know my Friends — 
If they were all my Enemies Declared , 
I fear 'em not ; proceeding , as they must , 
In Lazy methods , and unactive Forms — 
One of my Rank , and Interest cannot Want 
The means to baffle Justice , and delay — 
At last I have recourse to Bribery : 
And I have passed a Senseless Life at Court , 
If I should ask whose hands are to be filled : 
I know my Men , they won not fail their Fee : 
This way I would not have thee Take , 
thou ever kind and ever Dear Argilius . 
I have no time to write , I can trust Thee , 
Proceed with haste to Rhodes , there you 'll find Xerxes , 
Greet him from Me , and tell him all is Ready : 
I with impatience shall attend his Forces 
Be speedy , and be all my Fortune thine . 


Arg.   I never yet desputed your Commands , 
I go , though I could wish you had not sent me . 
Yet give me leave once to embrace your Knees , 
I know my Fate , and from your mouth 't is easy , 
Farewell farewell may you be happy long : 
And all your Friends be Faithful found , like Me.  


Eph.   Where are our Guards ? 


As he is going the Ephori with Guards advance , Pausanias draws his Sword.  Paus.   Ha! This from thee dissembling Traitor — go , 
Take thy Reward then . Kills Argilius then Scapes through the Guards . 


Eph.   OH horrid Fact ! 


Enter Lysander . Lys.   I come to Acquaint your Lordships the Princess 
Anchilthea has been Saved by Miracle . 
Coming to the Temple through the Crowded streets , 
The Persian Woman , Pandora she is called , 
Did like a Fury rush upon her ? 
And she as Bravely did Defend herself , 
Wresting the Dagger from the Traitress hands , 
And plunged it in the Conquered Strumpet's Heart . 


1.  Eph.   She has met a nobler Fate than she deserved . 
She should have died with Puplick infamy . 


2.  Eph.   Now hope we better days , and for the Persian , 
We will employ our utmost force against him . 
The Ambassador shall bear the News , 
He must depart to Night . 


3.  Eph.   We Spartans will preserve Our Freedom still , 
And drive their big swollen Navy from our Coasts , 
They shall once more find Us their Conquerors . 


1.  Eph.   Pausanias cannot far escape 
Already by our order the Guards are doubled 
At the City Gates . 


Enter Anchilthea to ' 'em . Anc.   What! is the Traitor gone ! And you my Lords , 
Are Satisfied ? Have you not Proof enough ? 
For shame Rouse up your Souls : Or are you Bribed 
With Persian Gold ? The Persians will be kind , 
Kind Masters when they come : you will deserve their thanks . 


1.  Eph.   Madam you Charge us too Severely here . 


Enter Messenger . M.   My Lords the Regent's fled to the Temple of Minerva . 


Anc.   Dam up the Temple Gates , there he shall starve : 
We must not violate the Holy Altar , 
To drag him thence : but we may shut the doors . 


1.  Eph.   Pausanias as he is of Royal Blood , 
We with all Tenderness regard : but now , 
His treason 's plain , thanks to the Gods , and You , 
Protectress of our Country , his Punishment 
Is just , and he shall have it . She sees Argilius Body . 


Anc.   Good Heavens ! Argilius dead ! 


1.  Eph.   Pausanias' killed him , as soon as we appeared . 


Anc.   The Temple violated ! Murderer of his Friend ! 
Had he met Me , thus he had served his Mother . 
Ah! pitied Youth ! Pattern of virtuous Faith ! 
thou hadst been sase , had I not sent thee here . 
I did it for the best — yet the last rights , 
Thy Funeral Obsequys I will perform , 
My Son forgot , and only Mourn for thee . 
Inhuman , Barbarous Pausanias ! 
But acts like these , are Trifles to such Traitors . 
The fearful Sinner , trembling at the first 
New fault , believes himself for ever cursed : 
Finding no Punishment , he ventures in , 
Till by degrees he 's quite immerged in Sin : 
His Pleasure now , which had his Horror been . 
Thus , when with hardened guilt , good Principles are gone , 
Million of blackest Crimes urge one another on . 


FINIS . 

