THE POET'S Complaint of his Muse ; OR , A SATYR Against LIBELS . 

A Poem . 

By Thomas Otway . 

Si quid habent veri vatum praesagia , vivam . 

LONDON , Printed for Thomas Norman , at the Pope's Head in Fleetstreet near Salisbury-court . 1680.  

TO The Right Honourable THOMAS Earl of Ossory , BARON of MOOR-PARKE , Knight of the most noble Order of the GARTER , etc.  

My LORD , 

Though never any man had more need of excuse for a presumption of this nature , than I have now ; yet when I have laid out every way to find one , your Lordship's goodness must be my best refuge , and therefore I humbly cast this at your feet for protection ; and myself for pardon . 

My Lord , I have great need of protection , for to the best of my heart I have here published in some measure the truth , and I would have it thought honestly too , ( a practice never more out of countenance then now ) yet Truth and Honour are things your Lordship must needs be kind to , because they are Relations to your nature and never left you . 

'T would be a second presumption in me to pretend in this a Panegyric on your Lordship ; for it would require more art to do your Virtue justice , then to slatter any other man  

If I have ventured at a hint of the present sufferings of that great Prince mentioned in the latter end of this paper , with favour from your Lordship I hope to add a second part and do all those Great and Good men Justice , that have in his Calamities stuck fast to so gallant a Friend and so good a Master . To write and finish which great Subject faithfully , and to be honoured with your Lordship's patronage , in what I may do , and your aprobation or at least pardon , in what I have done , will be the greatest pride of 

( My Lord ) Your most humble Admirer and Servant , Thomas Otway . 

THE POET'S Complaint of his Muse ; OR , A SATYR Against LIBELS . 

ODE . 

TO a high Hill where never yet stood Tree , 
Where only Heath , course Fern and Furzes grow , 
Where ( nipped by piercing Air ) 
The Flocks in tattered Fleeces hardly graze , 
Led by uncouth Thoughts and Care , 
Which did too much his pensive mind amaze , 
A wand'ring Bard , whose Muse was crazy grown , 
Cloyed with the nauseous Follies of the buzzing Town , 
Came , looked about him , sighed , and laid him down . 
'T was far from any Path , but where the Earth 
Was bare , and naked all as at her Birth , 
When by the Word it first was made , 
Ere God had said , 
Let Grass and Herbs and every green thing grow , 
With fruitful Trees after their kind ; and it was so . 
The whistling Winds blew fiercely round his Head , 
Cold was his Lodging , hard his Bed ; 
Aloft his Eyes on the wide Heavens' he cast , 
Where we are told Peace onely's found at last : 
And as he did its hopeless distance see , 
Sighed deep , and cried , How far is Peace from me ? 
2.  

Nor ended there his Moan : 
The distance of his future Joy 
Had been enough to give him Pain alone ; 
But who can undergo 
Despair of Ease to come , with weight of present Woe ? 
Down his afflicted Face 
The trickling Tears had streamed so fast a pace , 
As left a path worn by their briny race . 
Swollen was his Breast with Sighs , his well - 
Proportioned Limbs as useless fell , 
Whilst the poor Trunk ( unable to sustain 
Itself ) lay racked , and shaking with its Pain . 
I heard his Groans as I was walking by , 
And ( urged by pity ) went aside , to see 
What the sad cause could be 
Had pressed his State so low , and raised his Plaints so high . 
On me he sixth his Eyes . I craved , 
Why so forlorn ? He vainly raved . 
Peace to his mind I did commend . 
But , o ! my words were hardly at an end , 
When I perceived it was my Friend , 
My much-loved Friend : so down I fate , 
And begged that I might share his Fate : 
I laid my Cheek to his , when with a Gale 
Of Sighs he eased his Breast , and thus began his Tale.  
3.  

I am a Wretch of honest Race : 
My Parents not obscure , nor high in Titles were ; 
They left me Heir to no Disgrace . 
My Father was ( a thing now rare ) 
Loyal and brave , my Mother chaste and fair . 
Their pledge of Marriage-vows was only I ; 
Alone I lived their much-loved fondled Boy : 
They gave me generous Education , high 
They striven to raise my Mind , and with it grew their Joy. 
The Sages that instructed me in Arts 
And Knowledge oft would praise my Parts , 
And cheer my Parents longing hearts . 
When I was called to a Dispute , 
My fellow-pupills oft stood mute : 
Yet never Envy did disjoin 
Their hearts from me , nor Pride distemper mine . 
Thus my first years in Happiness I passed , 
Nor any bitter cup did taste : 
But , o ! a deadly Potion came at last . 
As I lay loosely on my bed , 
A thousand pleasant Thoughts triumphing in my Head , 
And as my Sense on the rich Banquet fed , 
A Voice ( it seemed no more , so busy I 
Was with myself , I saw not who was nigh ) 
Pierced through my Ears ; Arise , thy good Senander's dead . 
It shaken my Brain , and from their Feast my frighted Senses fled . 
4.  

From thence sad Discontent , uneasy Fears , 
And anxious Doubts of what I had to do , 
Grew with succeeding Years . 
The World was wide , but whither should I go ? 
ay , whose blooming Hopes all withered were , 
who 'd little Fortune , and a deal of Care ? 
To Britain's great Metropolis I strayed , 
Where Fortune's general Game is played ; 
Where Honesty and Wit are often praised , 
But Fools and Knaves are fortunate and raised . 
My forward Spirit prompted me to find 
A Converse equal to my Mind : 
But by raw Judgement easily miss-led , 
( As giddy callow Boys 
Are very fond of Toys ) 
I missed the brave and wise , and in their stead 
On every sort of Vanity I fed . 
Gay Coxcombs , Cowards , Knaves , and prating Fools , 
Bullies of o'ergrown Bulks , and little Souls , 
Gamesters , Half-wits , and Spendthrifts , ( such as think 
Mischievous midnight Frolics bred by Drink 
Are Gallantry and Wit , 
Because to their lewd Understandings fit ) 
Were those wherewith two years at least I spent , 
To all their fulsome Follies most incorrigibly bend : 
Till at the last , myself more to abuse , 
I grew in love with a deceitful Muse.  
5.  

no fair Deceiver ever used such Charms , 
T' ensnare a tender Youth , and win his Heart : 
Or when she had him in her Arms , 
Secured his love with greater Art 
I fansyed , or I dreamed , ( as Poets always do ) 
no Beauty with my Muse's might compare . 
Lofty she seemed , and on her Front sat a majestic Air , 
Awful , yet kind ; severe , yet fair . 
Upon her Head a Crown she bore 
Of Laurel , which she told me should be mine : 
And round her Ivory Neck she wore 
A Rope of largest Pearl . Each part of her did shine 
With Jewels and with Gold 
Numberless to be told ; 
Which in Imagination as I did behold , 
And loved , and wondered more and more , 
Said she , These riches all , my Darling , shall be thine , 
riches which never Poet had before . 
She promised me to raise my fortune and my name , 
By Royal Favour , and by endless Fame ; 
But never told 
How hard they were to get , and difficult to hold . 
Thus by the Arts of this most sly 
Deluder was I caught , 
To her bewitching Bondage brought . 
Eternal Constancy we swore , 
A thousand times our Vows were doubled o'er . 
And as we did in our Entrancements lie , 
I thought no Pleasure ever was wrought so high , 
no Pair so happy as my Muse and I  
6.  

Ne'er was young Lover half so fond 
When first his Pusillage he lost , 
Or could of half my Pleasure boast . 
We never met but we enjoyed , 
Still transported , never cloyed . 
Chambers , Closets , Fields and Groves , 
bore witness of our daily Loves ; 
And on the bark of every Tree 
You might the Marks of our Endearments see . 
Distiches , Posies , and the pointed Bits 
Of Satyr , ( written when a Poet meets 
His Muse in Caterwauling fits ) 
You might on every Rind behold , and swear 
I and my Clio had been at it there . 
Nay , by my Muse too I was blessed 
With Offsprings of the choicest kinds , 
Such as have pleased the noblest minds , 
And been approved by Judgements of the best . 
But in this most transporting height , 
Whence I looked down , and laughed at Fate , 
All of a sudden I was altered grown ; 
I round me looked , and found myself alone : 
My faithless Muse , my faithless Muse was gone . 
I tried if I a Verse could frame : 
oft I in vain invoked my Clio's name . 
The more I striven , the more I failed . 
I chafed , I bit my Pen , cursed my dull Scull , and railed , 
Resolved to force m'untoward Thought , and at the last prevailed . 
A Line came forth , but such a one , 
no trav'ling Matron in her Childbirth pains , 
Full of the joyful Hopes to bear a Son , 
Was more astonished at th' unlookt-for shape 
Of some deformed Baboon , or Ape , 
then I was at the hideous Issue of my Brains . 
I tore my Paper , stabbed my Pen , 
And swore I 'd never write again , 
Resolved to be a doting Fool no more . 
But when my reckoning I began to make , 
I found too long I 'd slept , and was too late awake ; 
I found m'ungratefull Muse , for whose false sake 
I did myself undo , 
Had robbed me of my dearest Store , 
My precious Time , my Friends , and Reputation too ; 
And left me helpless , friendless , very proud , and poor . 
7.  

Reason , which in base Bonds my Folly had enthralled , 
I straight to Council called ; 
Like some old faithful Friend , whom long ago 
I had cashiered , to please my flattering Fair. 
To me with readiness he did repair ; 
Expressed much tender cheerfulness , to find 
Experience had restored him to my Mind ; 
And loyally did to me show , 
How much himself he did abuse , 
Who credited a flattering , false , destructive , treacherous Muse. 
I asked the causes why . He said , 
'T was never known a Muse ever stayed 
When Fortune fled ; for Fortune is a Bawd 
To all the Nine that on Parnassus dwell , 
Where those so famed , delightful Fountains swell 
Of Poetry , which there does ever flow ; 
And where wit 's lusty , shining God 
Keeps his choice Seraglio . 
So whilst our Fortune smiles , our Thoughts aspire , 
Pleasure and fame 's our business , and desire . 
then , too , if we find 
A promptness in the Mind , 
The Muse is always ready , always kind . 
But if th' old Harlot Fortune once denies 
Her favour , all our Pleasure and rich Fancy dies , 
And then th'yong , slippery Jilt , the Muse too from us fly's . 
8.  

To the whole Tale I gave Attention due ; 
And as right search into myself I made , 
I found all he had said 
Was very honest , very true . 
O how I hugged my welcome Friend ! 
And much my Muse I could not discommend ; 
For I ne'er lived in Fortune's grace , 
She always turned her Back , and fled from me apace , 
And never once vouchsafed to let me see her Face . 
then to confirm me more , 
He drew the veil of Dotage from my eyes : 
See here , my Son , ( said he ) the valued Prize ; 
Thy fulsome Muse behold , be happy , and be wise . 
I looked , and saw the rampant , tawdry Quean , 
With a more horrid Train 
then ever yet to Satyr lent a Tale , 
Or haunted Chloris in the Mall . 
The first was he who stunk of that rank Verse 
In which he wrote his Sodom Farce ; 
A Wretch whom old Diseases did so bite , 
That he written Bawdry sure in spite , 
To ruin and disgrace it quite . 
Philosophers of old did so express 
Their Art , and showed it in their Nastiness . 
Next him appeared that blundring Sot 
Who a late Session of the Poets wrote . 
Nature has marked him for a heavy Fool ; 
By 's flat broad Face you 'll know the Owl . 
The other Birds have hooted him from light ; 
Much buffeting has made him love the Night , 
And only in the dark he strays ; 
Still Wretch enough to live , with worse Fools spends his days , 
And for old Shoes and Scraps repeats dull Plays . 
then next there followed , to make up the Throng , 
Lord Lampoon and Monsieur Song , 
Who sought her love , and promised for 't 
To make her famous at the Court. 
The City Poet too was there , 
In a black Satin Cap. and his own Hair , 
And begged that he might have the Honour 
To beget a Pageant on her 
For the City's next Lord Mayor . 
Her Favours she to none denied : 
They took her all by turns aside . 
Till at the last up in the rear there came 
The Poet's Scandal , and the Muse's Shame , 
A Beast of Monstrous guise , and LIBEL was his name . 
But let me pause , for 't will ask time to tell 
How he was born , how bred and where , and where he now does 
dwell . 
9  

He paused , and thus renewed his Tale. 
Down in an obscure Vale , 
' Midst Fogs and Fens , whence Mists and Vapours rise , 
Where never Sun was seen by eyes , 
Under a desert Wood , 
Which no man owned , but all wild Beasts were bred , 
And kept their horrid Dens , by prey far foraged fed , 
An ill-piled Cottage stood , 
Built of men's Bones slaughtered in Civil War , 
By Magic Art brought thither from a far . 
There lived a widowed Witch , 
That used to mumble Curses eve and morn , 
Like one whom Wants and Care had worn ; 
Meagre her Looks , and sunk her Eyes , 
Yet Mischiefs studied , Discords did device . 
She appeared humble , but it was her Pride : 
Slow in her Speech , in semblance sanctified . 
Still when she spoke she meant another way ; 
And when she cursed , she seemed to pray . 
Her hellish Charms had all a holy dress , 
And bore the name of Godliness . 
All her Familiars seemed the Sons of Peace . 
Honest habits they all wore , 
In outward show most lamblike and divine : 
But inward of all Vices they had store , 
Greedy as Wolves , and sensual too as Swine . 
Like Her , the Sacred Scriptures They had all by heart , 
Most easily could quote , and turn to any part , 
Backward repeat it all , as Witch's Prayers do , 
And for their turn , interpret backward too . 
Idolatry with Her was held impure , 
Because besides Herself no Idol she 'd endure . 
Though not to paint , she 'd arts to change the Face , 
And alter it in Heavenly fashion . 
Lewd Whining she designed a mark of Grace , 
And making Ugly faces was Mortification . 
Her late dead Pander was of well-known fame , 
Old Preshyter Rebellion was his name : 
She a sworn Foe to KING , his Peace , and Laws , 
So will be ever , and was called ( bless us ! ) THE GOOD OLD CAUSE . 
10.  

A Time there was , ( a sad one too ) 
When all things wore the face of Woe , 
When many Horrors raged in this our Land , 
And a destroying Angel was sent down , 
To scourge the Pride of this Rebellious Town . 
He came , and o'er all Britain stretched his conquering hand : 
Till in th'untrodden Streets unwholesome Grass 
Grew of great stalk , its Colour gross , 
And melancholic poisonous green ; 
Like those course sickly Weeds on an old Dunghill seen , 
Where some Murrain-murthered Hog , 
Poisoned Cat , or strangled Dog , 
In rottenness had long unburied laid , 
And the cold Soil productive made . 
Birds of ill Omen hovered in the Air , 
And by their Cries bade us for Graves prepare ; 
And , as our Destiny they seemed t' unfold , 
Dropped dead of the same fate they had foretold . 
That dire Commission ended , down there came 
Another Angel with a Sword of Flame : 
Desolation soon he made , 
And our new Sodom low in Ashes laid . 
Distractions and Distrusts than did amongst us rise , 
When , in her pious old Disguise , 
This Witch with all her Mischief-making Train 
began to show herself again . 
The Sons of old Rebellion straight she summoned all ; 
Straight They were ready at her call : 
Once more th' old Bait before their eyes she cast . 
That and her Love they longed to taste ; 
And to her Lust she drew them all at last . 
So Reuben ( we may read of heretofore ) 
Was led astray , and had pollution with his Father's Whore.  
11.  

The better to conceal her lewd intent 
In safety from observing eyes , 
th' old Strumpet did herself disguise 
In comely Weeds , and to the City went , 
Affected Truth , much Modesty , and Grace , 
And ( like a worn-out-suburb-trull ) past there for a new Face . 
Thither all her Lovers flocked , 
And there for her support she found 
A Wight , of whom Fame's Trumpet much does sound , 
With all Ingredients for his business stocked , 
Not unlike him whose Story has a place 
In th'annals of Sir Hudibras . 
Of all her business He took care , 
And every Knave or Fool that to her did repair , 
Had by him admittance there . 
By his contrivance to her did resort 
All who had been disgusted at the Court. 
Those whose Ambition had been crossed , 
Or by ill manners had Preferments lost , 
Were those on whom she practised most her Charms , 
Lay nearest to her Heart , and oft'nest in her Arms. 
Interest in every Faction , every Sect she sought ; 
And to her Lure , flattering their hopes , she brought 
All those who use Religion for a Fashion . 
All such as practise Forms , and take great pains 
To make their Godliness their Gains , 
And thrive by the Distractions of a Nation , 
She by her Art ensnared , and fettered in her Chains . 
Through her the Atheist hoped to purchase Toleration , 
The Rebel Power , the beggared Spend thrift Lands , 
Out of the King 's or Bishop's hands . 
Nay , to her side at last she drew in all the rude , 
Ungovernable , headlong Multitude : 
Promised strange Liberties , and sure Redress 
Of never-felt , unheard-of Grievances : 
Pampered their Follies , and indulged their Hopes , 
With May-day-routs , November Squibs , and burning Pasteboard Pope's 
12.  

With her in common Lust did mingle all the Crew , 
Till at the last she pregnant grew , 
And from her womb , in little time , brought forth 
This monstrous , most detested Birth . 
Of Children born with Teeth   heard , 
And some like Comets with a Beard ; 
Which seemed to be forerunners of dire Change : 
But never hitherto was seen , 
Born from a Wapping Drab , or Shoreditch Quean , 
A Form like this so hideous and so strange . 
To help whose Mother in her Pains , there came 
Many a well-known Dame. 
The Bawd Hypocrisy was there , 
And Madam Impudence the fair : 
Dame Scandal with her squinting Eyes , 
That love's to set good Neighbours at debate , 
And raise Commotions in a jealous State , 
Was there , and Malice Queen of far-spred Lies , 
With all their Train of Frauds and Forgeries . 
But Midwife Mutiny , that busy Drab , 
that 's always talking , always loud , 
Was she that first took up the Babe , 
And of the office most was proud . 
Behold its Head of horrid form appears : 
To spite the Pillory , it had no Ears . 
When straight the Bawd cried out , 't was surely kin 
To the blessed Family of Pryn. 
But Scandal offered to depose her word , 
Or oath , the Father was a Lord 
The Nose was ugly , long , and big , 
Broad , and snowty like a Pig ; 
Which showed he would in Dunghills love to dig ; 
Love to cast stinking Satyrs up in ill-piled Rhymes , 
And live by the Corruptions of unhappy Times . 
13.  

They promised all turns to take him , 
And a hopeful Youth to make him . 
To nurse he straight was sent 
To a Sister-witch , though of another sort , 
One who professed no good , nor any meant : 
All day she practised Charms , by night she hardly slept . 
Yet in the outcasts of a Northern factious Town , 
A little smoky Mansion of her own , 
Where her Familiars to her did resort , 
A Cell she kept . 
Hell she adored , and Satan was her God ; 
And many an ugly loathsome Toad 
Crawled round her walls , and croaked . 
Under her Roof all dismal , black , and smoked , 
Harboured Beetles , and unwholesome Bats , 
Sprawling nests of little Cats ; 
All which were Imps she cherished with her blood , 
To make her Spells succeed and good . 
Still at her riveled Breasts they hung , when ever mankind she cursed , 
And with these Foster-brethrens was our Monster nursed . 
In little Time the Hellbred Brat 
Grew plump and fat , 
Without his Leading-strings could walk , 
And ( as the Sorceress taught him ) talk . 
At sev'n years old he went to School , 
Where first he grew a foe to Rule . 
Never would he learn as taught , 
But still new Ways affected , and new Methods sought . 
Not that he wanted parts 
T' improve in Letters , and proceed to Arts ; 
But as negligent as sly , 
Of all Perverseness brutishly was full , 
( By Nature idle ) loved to shifted and lie , 
And was obstinately dull . 
Till spite of Nature , through great pains , the Sot , 
( And th' influence of th' ill Genius of our Land ) 
At last in part began to understand . 
Some insight in the Latin Tongue he got ; 
could smatter pretty well , and write too a plain hand . 
For which his Guardians all thought fit , 
In Compliment to his most hopeful Wit , 
He should be sent to learn the Laws , 
And out of the good old to raise a damned new Cause . 
14.  

In which the better to improve his Mind , 
As by nature he was bend 
To search in hidden paths , and things long buried find , 
A Wretche's Converse much he did frequent : 
One who this World ; as that did Him , disowned , 
And in an unfrequented Corner , where 
Nothing was pleasant , hardly healthful found , 
He led his hated life . 
Needy , and even of Necessaries bare , 
no Servant had he , Children , Friend , or Wife : 
But of a little remnant , got by Fraud , 
( For all ill turns he loved , all good detested , and believed no God ) 
Thrice in a week he changed a hoarded Groat , 
With which of Beggar's Scraps he bought . 
then from a neighbouring Fountain Water got , 
Not to be clean , but slake his Thirst. 
He never blessed himself , and all things else he cursed . 
The Cell in which he ( though but seldom ) slept , 
Lay like a Den , uncleansed , unswept : 
And there those Jewels which he loved , he kept ; 
Old worn-out Statutes , and Records 
Of Commons' Privileges , and the Rights of Lords . 
But bound up by themselves with care were laid 
All the Acts , Resolves , and Orders made 
By the old Long Rump-parliament , 
Through all the Changes of its Government : 
From which with readiness he could debate 
Concerning Matters of the State , 
All down from Goodly Forty one to Horrid Forty eight . 
15.  

His Friendship much our Monster sought 
By Instinct , and by Inclination too : 
So without much ado 
They were together brought . 
To him Obedience Libel swore , and by him was he taught , 
He learned of him all Goodness to detest ; 
To be ashamed of no Disgrace ; 
In all things but Obedience to be Beast ; 
To hide a coward 's Heart , and show a hardy Face . 
He taught him to call Government a Clog , 
But to bear Beat like a Dog : 
T' ave no Religion , Honesty , or Sense , 
But to profess them all for a Pretence . 
Fraught with these Morals , he began 
To complete him more for Man : 
Distinguished to him in an hour 
Betwixt Legislative , and judicial power ; 
How to frame a Commonwealth , 
And Democracy , by stealth ; 
To palliate it at first , and Cry 
'T was but a Well-mixed Monarchy , 
And Treason Salus Populi ; 
Into Rebellion to divide the Nation , 
By fair Committees of Association ; 
How by a lawful means to bring 
In Arms against himself the KING , 
With a distinguishing old Trick , 
Betwixt persons Natural , and Politic ; 
How to make faithful Servants Traitors 
Through-paced Rebels Legislators , 
And at last , Troupers Adjutators . 
Thus well informed , and furnished with enough 
Of such like wordy , canting Stuff , 
Our Blade set forth , and quickly grew 
A Leader in a factious Crew . 
Where ever he came , 't was he first silence broke , 
And swelled with every word he spoke . 
By which becoming saucy Grace , 
He gained Authority and Place : 
By many for Preferments was thought fit , 
For talking Treason without Fear or Wit ; 
For opening Failing in the State ; 
For loving noisy and unsound Debate , 
And wearing of a Mystical green Ribbon in his Hat.  
16.  

Thus , like Alcides in his Lion's skin , 
He very dreadful grew . 
But , like that Hercules when Love crept in , 
And th'hero to his Distaff drew , 
His foes that found him saw he was but Man : 
So when my faithless Clio by her Snare 
Had brought him to her Arms , and I surprised him there , 
At once to hate and scorn him I began ; 
To see how foolishly she 'd dressed , 
And for diversion tricked the Beast . 
He was Poetry all o'er , 
On every side , behind , before : 
About him nothing could I see , 
But particoloured Poetry . 
Painter's Advices , Litanies , 
Ballads , and all the spurious excess 
Of ills that Malice could device , 
Or ever swarmed from a licentious Press , 
Hung round about him like a Spell : 
And in his own hand too was written , 
That worthy piece of modern Wit , 
The Country 's late Appeal . 
But from such Ills when will our wretched State 
Be freed ? and who shall crush this Serpent's head ? 
't is said , we may in Ancient Legends read 
Of a huge Dragon , sent by Fate 
To lay a sinful Kingdom waste : 
So through it all he ranged , devouring as he passed , 
And each day with a Virgin broke his fast . 
Till wretched Matrons cursed their Wombs , 
So hardly was their loss endured : 
The Lovers all despaired , and sought their Tombs 
In the same monster 's Jaws , and of their Pains were cured , 
Till , like our Monster too , and with the same 
Cursed ends , to the Metropolis he came . 
His Cruelties renewed again , 
And every day a Maid was slain . 
The Curse through every Family had passed , 
When to the Sacrifice at last 
th' unhappy Monarch's only Child must bow : 
A Royal Daughter needs must suffer then , a ROYAL BROTHER now . 
17.  

On Him this Dragon Libel needs will pray ; 
On Him has cast 
His sordid Venom , and profaned 
With spurious Verse his spotless Fame , 
Which shall for ever stand 
Unblemished , and to Ages last , 
When all his Foes lie buried in their Shame . 
Else tell me why ( some Prophet that is wise ) 
Heaven took such care 
To make Him every thing that 's rare , 
Dear to the Heart , desirous to the Eyes . 
Why do all Good men bless Him as he goes ? 
Why at his presence shrink his Foes ? 
Why do the Brave all strive his Honour to defend ? 
Why through the World is he distinguished most 
By Titles , which but few can boast , 
A most Just Master , and a Faithful Friend ? 
One who never yet did wrong 
To high or low , to old or young ? 
Of Him what Orphan can complain ? 
Of Him what Widow make her Moan ? 
But such as wish Him here again , 
And miss his Goodness now he 's gone . 
If this be ( as I am sure 't is ) true , 
then prithee , Prophet , tell me too , 
Why life's He in the World's Esteem , 
Not one man's Foe ? and why then are not all men Friends with Him ? 
18.  

When ever his Life was set at stake 
For his ungrateful Country's sake , 
What Dangers or what Labours did He ever eat ? 
Or what Wonders has not done ? 
Watchful all night , and busy all the day , 
( Spreading his Fleet in sight of Holland's shore ) 
Triumphantly ye saw his Flags and Streamers play . 
then did the English Lion roar , 
Whilst the Belgian couchant lay . 
Big with the thoughts of Conquest and Renown , 
Of Britain's Honour , and his own , 
To them He like a threat'ning Comet shined , 
Rough as the Sea , and furious as the Wind : 
But Constant as the Stars that never move ; 
Or as Women would have Love. 
The trembling Genius of their State 
Looked out , and strait shrunk back his head , 
To see our daring Banners spread . 
Whilst in their Harbours they 
Like Battened Monsters weltering lay : 
The Winds , when Ours they 'd kissed , scorned with their Flags to play . 
But drooping like their Captain's hearts , 
Each Pendant , every Streamer hung . 
The Seamen seemed t' have lost their Arts. 
Their Ships at Anchor now , of which w 'had heard them boast , 
With ill-furled sails , and Rattling loose , by every Billow tossed , 
Lay like neglected Harps , untuned , unstrung ; 
Till at the last , provoked with Shame , 
Forth from their Dens the baited Foxes came : 
Foxes in Council , and in Fight too Grave ; 
Seldom true and now not brave . 
They blustered out the day with show of Fight , 
And ran away in the good-natured Night . 
19  

A bloody Battle next was fought , 
And then in Triumph home a welcome Fleet He brought , 
With Spoils of Victory , and Glory fraught . 
To Him then every heart was open , down 
From the Great man to the Clown ; 
In Him rejoiced , to Him inclined : 
And as his Health round the glad Board did pass , 
Each honest fellow cried , Fill full my glass ; 
And showed the fullness of his Mind . 
no discontented Vermin of ill Times 
durst then affronted him but in show ; 
Nor Libel dash Him with his dirty Rhymes : 
Nor may he live in peace that does it now . 
And whose Heart would not wish so too 
That had but seen 
When his tumultuous misled Foes 
Against Him rose , 
With what Heroic grace 
He choose the weight of wrong to undergo ? 
no tempest on his Brow , unaltered in his Face , 
True witness of the Innocence within . 
But when the Messengers did Mandates bring 
For his retreat to Foreign Land , 
Since sent from the relenting hand 
Of the most Loving BROTHER , Kindest KING ; 
If in his heart Regret did rise , 
It never scaped his Tongue or Eyes : 
With steady Virtue 't was allayed , 
And like a mighty Conqueror He obeyed . 
20.  

It was a dark and gloomy Day , 
Sad as the Business , sullen too , 
As proud men , when in Vain they woe , 
Or Soldiers cheated of their pay . 
The Court , where Pleasures used to flow , 
became the scene of Mourning , and of Woe . 
Desolate was every Room , 
Where men for News and Business used to come . 
With folded Arms and downcast Eyes men walked , 
In corners and with caution talked . 
All things prepared , the Hour grew near 
When He must part : his last short Time was spent 
In leaving Blessings on his Children dear . 
To them with eager Hast and Love he went : 
The elder first embraced , 
As newborn Day in Beauty bright , 
But sad in Mind as deepest Night . 
What tenderest Hearts could say , betwixt them past ; 
Till Grief too close upon them crept : 
So sighing He withdrew , She turned away and wept . 
Much of the Father in his Breast did rise , 
When on the next he fixed his Eyes , 
A tender Infant in the Nurse's Arms , 
Full of kind play , and pretty Charms . 
And as to give the Farewell kiss He near it drew , 
About his manly neck two little Arms it threw ; 
Smiled in his Eyes , as if it begged his Stay ; 
And looked kind things it could not say . 
21.  

But the great pomp of Grief was yet to come . 
th' appointed Time was almost past , 
th' impatient Tides knocked at the Shore , and bid him haste 
To seek a Foreign Home . 
The Summons He resolved t' obey ; 
Disdaining of his Sufferings to complain , 
Though every step seemed trod with pain ; 
So forth He came , attended on his way 
By a sad lamenting Throng , 
That blessed him and about him hung . 
A weight his generous Heart could hardly bear , 
But for the Comfort that was near , 
His Beauteous MATE , the Fountain of his Joys , 
That fed his Soul with Love ; 
The cordial that can mortal Pains remove , 
To which all worldly Blessings else are Toys . 
I saw Them ready for departure stand , 
Just when approached the MONARCH of our Land , 
And took the charming Mourner by the hand . 
T' express all noblest Offices he striven , 
Of Royal Goodness , and a Brother's Love , 
then down to the Shore side , 
Where , to convey Them , did two Royal Barges ride , 
With solemn pace They passed : 
And there so tenderly embraced , 
All grieved by sympathy to see Them part , 
And their kind Pains touched each By-stander's heart . 
then hand in hand the pitied Pair 
Turned round , to face their Fate : 
She even amid Afflictions Fair ; 
He , though oppressed , still Great . 
Into th'expecting Boat with haste They went ; 
Where , as the troubled Fair one to the Shore some wishes sent , 
For that dear Pledge she 'd left behind , 
And as her Passion grew too mighty for her Mind , 
She of some Tears her Eyes beguiled ; 
Which , as upon her Cheek they lay , 
The happy Hero kissed away , 
And , as She wept , blushed with Disdain , and smiled . 
Strait forth They launch into the high-swollen Thames : 
The well-struck Oars lave up the yielding Streams . 
All fixed their longing Eyes , and wishing stood , 
Till they were got into the wider Flood ; 
Till lessened out of sight , and seen no more : 
then sighed , and turned into the hated Shore . 
THE END . 

