The question concerning the divine right of episcopacy truly stated . 

London , printed for Robert Bostock , 1641.  

To the most reverend and gracious father in God , my Lord primate of Ireland . 

My Lord , 

In a discourse lately written concerning Puritans , i had occasion offered me to declare my opinion against the divine right of episcopacy . Those reasons which i then urged , seemed weak to your grace , as i have heard , which was a great discouragement to me : but i thought it not fit to desert so well a seeming cause , and to resign my judgement presently upon a mere discouragement . I have since summoned up some more deep and retired thoughts , that i Might gain a more just cause to retract my error , or to clear the truth , and persist in my assurance . The question of episcopacy , i think , i have now rightly stated , and if i am not deceived , i have let in such light upon it , that judicious men will now more easily ransack the profundity of it . Certainly the matter of itself is of great difficulty , and of great moment in these times , and it was not any confidence in my own wit that first engaged me in it , but the knowledge of my candour , and freedom from private respects . No man living , i conceive , can be more dispassionate , or more disinteressed in this case than i am , the heat of my own mind could never yet thrust me into any faction , or make me turbulent in the world , neither has any impression from without either by hope of gain , or fear of damage stirred up sleeping passion in me . Of myself i rather wish well then ill to episcopacy , because it is so ancient a government ; and for my own interest i have found more friendship than enmity from Bishops , so that i am certain , there is nothing but the simple love of truth , as it is truth , is the bias of my actions at this time . As for the presbyterial discipline also , i have so laid open my opinion concerning that , that if i have erred therein , i am sure the world can charge me of nothing else but error . Had all men which have formerly treated of this subject , been as unswayde by private interests as i am , this controversy had not been so long protracted as it is ; but your grace knows well , that scarce any but Bishops have maintained Bishops hitherto ; nor scarce any opposed them , but such as have found some opposition from them ; my Lord , i now beg your gracious favour to lay aside your palle , and to put on the same impartial man in perusing these papers , as i now am whilst my pen is upon them : for i know there is none has a more clear spirit , and less liable to the gross damp of worldly respects than yourself . Let this my humble address be a testimony at this time that i am not a prejudging , factious enemy to all Bishops , and let your gracious acceptance of the same be as strong a crisis that your grace is not a prejudging factious enemy to all which maintain not Bishops . 

Your graces in all observance most humbly devoted , h. p.  

The question concerning the divine right of episcopacy truly stated . 

The question about episcopacy hath never yet been truly stated , nor the chief points of it methodically distributed , and this is the cause that it is now become so intricate and involved to the great disturbance of the world ; for satisfaction therefore herein , the first thing to be questioned is the quid esse of episcopacy , and what is separable from the order of it , as it is now constituted in England . 

According to Bishop Bilson , there are four things necessary in religion . 

1.  Dispensing of the word . 
2.  Administering of the sacraments . 
3.  Imposing of hands in ordination . 
4.  Guiding of the keys . 
The first two of these being the ordinary means of salvation , he attributes generally to all ministers : the other two respect the cleansing and governing of the church , and are committed ( As he saith ) to Bishops only , and not ; to all presbyters equally , least by a parity of rule confusion follow , and ruin upon confusion . It seems then , that the end of religion is , that God be duly served , and the end of churchpolicy , that religion be wisely maintained . And for the wise maintenance of religion , it behooveth not only that some peculiar chosen men be separated & dedicated to officiate before God , and to direct and assist others in the offices of devotion , but also that all anarchy and confusion be avoided amongst those that are so chosen into the priesthood . Thus far there needs no dispute : the main branches then of this controversy are three . 

1.  Who are designed by God to be governors over the priesthood for avoiding of confusion . 

2.  What proportion of honour , revenue , power in ecclesiastical and in temporal affairs is due to those governors . 

3.  What are the proper , distinct offices of that government to be executed & undergone . 

As to the first main branch , the first question is , who is supreme head of the church under Christ : whether the Prince as Bishop Gardiner first held under h. 8. or the Bishop of Rome , as Sir Thomas more held , or the aristocracy of Bishops , as dr. Downing holds , or the democracy of presbyters and lay-elders , as Calvin taught ; if scripture be express in any precept to this purpose , or any canon extending to all places and times , we must look no farther : but if no such express rule be , nor no necessity of any such , nor divines were ever yet agreed upon any such , it seems that under the King , that junto of divines , statesmen , and lawyers in parliament , which hath a legislative power over the state , hath the same over the church . And if the King have not the same supreme power in spiritual as in temporal things , it is either for want of sanctity in his person , or for want of capacity in his judgement : but that the Prince is more than temporal , and of sanctity competent for supremacy of rule in the church is sufficiently evinced by Bilson , Hooker , &c. against Calvin , and the Papists , and Presbyterians both ; and that defect of judgement is no bar in the church more than in the state , is apparent ; for if the King be unlearned , yea , an infant , lunatic , &c. yet by his counsels and courts of law , war and policy , he May govern the commonwealth well enough ; and it little skilleth whether he be lawyer , soldier , or politician : and there is the same reason in the church . And if we admit the King to be supreme head of the church , i think no man will deny but that the fittest policy for him to govern the church by , will be the same pattern by which he governeth the state , making as little difference between them as May be ; for it is the same body of men now , of which both state and church are compacted , and so it was not in the apostles times ; and the same body hath the same head now , as it had not in the beginning : for Tiberius was then the head of the Christians , but the enemy of Christian religion . So the main {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} remaining is , whether the King having power to choose subordinate officers and counsellors in the church , May or aught to choose such as are merely spiritual or merely temporal , or a mixture of both . The Papists hold no governors over the clergy competent , neither supreme , nor subordinate , but such as are merely spiritual : the Protestant's everywhere almost but in England , incline to a mixed government in the church , though they exclude the King quatenus King : in the mean while , we in England admit of the King for our supreme governor , but doubt of any subordinate mixed government . 't is not my task at this present to dispute the conveniency of a mixed government , and an association of spiritual and lay rulers : but i think the Presbyterians have sufficiently asserted it though to another purpose . And it seems to me , that the apostolical form of government , as to the supremacy of it , is not now in force , because there is not the same reason , that head being then wanting in the church which is since supplied ; but as to any constitution in the subordinate wheels of government , if the laity had then any motion or influence therein , i think the same reason still remains , and the same form ought still to be in force . 

In the second branch : be the subordinate governors of the church mixed or simple , either according to the popish or Presbyterian discipline : the question is , whether or no , such ecclesiastical governors ought to be vested , and dignified with temporal honours above the judges of the land , and equal with the peers of the realm , and whether or no they ought to enjoy temporal revenues proportionable to that honour , and power in secular affairs correspondent to those revenues ; and if so , whether by divine or human constitution . Also if these differences were added ( As Bishop Bilson acknowledgeth ) rather for the honour of the calling , then for any necessity of God's law , it is next to be questioned , whether or no a parliament hath not now power and cause to reduce these additions of episcopacy into more modest limits , for it seems that from Adam till Christ , no such grandeur and splendour was in churchmen , nor from Christ to Constantine , and from Constantine to the reformation , we know how they were abused to the mischief of the church , and decay of religion ; and in the reformation , we know all nations besides us did utterly remove them : and we know that the church in England is now much impoverished by many impropriations and commendams , &c. now detained by Bishops and cathedrals , besides that which it suffers by laymen ; and it seems strange that the pastors of the flock should be starved , that prelates should abound , and swim in too great excess : and that the mere livelihood of holy preachers should be held less necessary than the proud pomp of unuseful ( Nay as some think ) mischievous dominators . 

As to the third branch : if the end of episcopacy ( As Bishop Bilson holds ) be to prevent the confusion of parity in the church , we are first to question , whether ordination by imposition of hands , and guiding of the keys be necessary to episcopacy , and so necessary , as that confusion cannot be prevented without them : all wise men will allow some authority requisite , whereby ministers May be duly elected , and their true qualifications of learning and integrity tried , and that being rightly elected , they May be further consecrate by prayer and the solemnity of hands , and being consecrate , that they May be further instituted , and designed to some particular charge . The Presbyterians do not dislike such authority , nor are negligent in the same : the question is therefore only , to whom this authority May be committed , whether to Bishops only , or to some such judicatory as the Presbyterians use , or some other of human institution . As for example , if the universities , or some select committee therein , be entrusted to try the sufficiency of scholars , and to give orders , and upon the vacancy of a rectory to present three , &c. to the King , and the King out of those three to present two , &c. to the parish , and the parish out of two to choose one for their pastor , the question only is , whether such election , ordination , presentation , and induction , be not as legal , and religious , as if it were by Bishops , and be not far more politic in preventing simony , and in better satisfying the right of the flock , whose souls are mainly concerned , and whose tithes are to that purpose contributed . And now it seems s. Jerome allows no further use of Bishops to have been of old : for he says plainly , that a Bishop differs from a presbyter in no act exceptâ ordinatione : and as for the power of the keys , that has been always held common to the whole clergy : but we will not stand upon this , we will freely grant an authority necessary as well to superintend over ministers in their charges , as to place them therein , and when b. Bilson appropriates to Bishops the guiding of the keys , we will understand not the mere power of them , but the government of that power : we will admit also under this term of guiding the keys to be comprehended 

1.  The power of making ecclesiastical canons . 

2.  Of giving judgement , and executing according thereto . 

3.  Of issuing the sentence of excommunication . 

4.  Of deciding controversies . 

And the question now is , whether the keys May not be so guided by some other ecclesiastical judges and magistrates besides Bishops , if the King think fit to design them , for 

First , the legislative power of the church was never yet only committed to Bishops , the whole clergy , and the King were never yet excluded from synods , and counsels , neither are the acts of synods and counsels binding to any nation unless the secular states ratify them . And i think , there is no question of the validity of such canons as are now made in those Protestant countries , where Bishops have no command , or being at all . 

And secondly , spiritual jurisdiction is not only appropriated to Bishops , but to laymen under Bishops , canonists and civilians are held more able and knowing herein than Bishops , and Bishops are held less fit by reason of their more sacred employments : so the question here will be only this , whether or no the jurisdiction of lawyers , and such like , as now execute justice in the spiritual courts under Bishops will be as competent under the King without Bishops as it is now under Bishops immediately . Some say , that chancellors &c. are not mere laymen , no matter : for by the same reason any others to whom such ecclesiastical jurisdiction shall be committed by the King shall be held sacred , and if they are not mere laymen , yet they are not mere Bishops ; if they are preferred to some equality with the clergy , yet they are not preferred above the clergy , and this preferment is no other , but such as May be bestowed upon any other layman , that is not otherwise insufficient . And even amongst Presbyterians there is a form of jurisdiction , and i think not held vain , or unlawful by any : and even in cases of heresy , blasphemy , &c. which are most spiritual , if none can so rightly judge what is heresy , blasphemy , &c. as spiritual governors , yet this proves not any necessity of Bishops , for the fact May be tried , & execution awarded by others , and nothing but an assistance of council from spiritual men will be needful . In the third place also , if excommunication be still held of necessity , and all other temporal authority defective without it , if it be concluded to be perpetual , notwithstanding the decay of prophecy , and the supply of other Christian jurisdiction , and if it be to be extended also to all persons in all cases as our Christian court now extends it ( Which seems to me a strange , obscure , unproved thing ) yet the only question is , whether it May not continue in the church , and be still ordered and guided without episcopacy : for it seems that the Presbyterians , though they use not excommunication for such violent , rigorous purposes as the Papists do , yet they are more severe in it then ever the fathers were before the law or under the law : and yet notwithstanding , their authority of using it , is not excepted against by their enemies . And fo•rthly , if it be granted that Bishops were first introduced for the preventing of schisms and factions in the church , as being held the fittest means for to procure the decision of controversies , and the determination of disputes in religion : yet the question is whether discord and division May not be prevented , and difficulties of dispute as conveniently resolved by some other as by episcopal authority : for it seems there is great difference inter ecclesiam constitutam , and ecclesiam constituendam , and between a church whose supreme governor is ill affected to it , & a church whose Prince is an indulgent father to it : so that episcopacy cannot be now of the same use , as it was at first in the infancy of the persecuted church . And it seems that amongst all other Protestant's both Calvinists and Lutherans where Bishops rule not , controversies are not so manifold , nor innovations in religion so easy to be induced , nor factions in the church so dangerously maintained , as they are in England under the sway of Bishops . It seems also in all great emergent occasions of division and dissension in points of doctrine , that if our two famous universities were consulted , and in case of disagreement there , if London , as our third oracle should arbitrate by a junto of all her divines , the decision would be far more honourable and satisfying to all , than if any one Bishop , or any province , or nation of Bishops should attempt to give the like . And to conclude this point , the solemn use of synods , counsels , and parliaments does not at all depend upon episcopacy , so that it seems as to this purpose no necessity can be alleged for the government of Bishops , as Bishops are now qualified in England . 

These branches if they were thus orderly discussed by moderate , conscionable , & learned divines , many incomparable advantages in probability would arise thereby : for first , the very foundations of popery would be laid open and naked , the very centre of that tyrannous united empire which has subjugated the world so long under such base slavery , would be ripped up , and all its infernal mysteries discovered to the sun . Secondly , that unpolitike axiom , no Bishop , no King , whereby Bishops have always embarked Princes in their wars , would appear to be sophisticate , and a mere colour without all substance of reason . Thirdly , many great fruits of peace and unity both ecclesiastical and civil would redound to our whole nation . Those many mischiefs which attend episcopacy , against which the complaints are so grievous and universal would be remedied . That new module of government which so many have so variously fancied , and proposed in these latter times would open itself , and offer itself to us of its own accord . The pattern of the state would be sufficient to present to us a fit & harmonious pattern for the church : and the body and head of both church and state would appear to be the self same . The King should be the same in both , and counsels and courts govern under him by the same commission in both . A power to ordain fit ministers , and to put a final end to controversies and dissensions Might be committed to the universities , and some gentle influence by votes affirmative or negative Might be also allowed therein to the laity . The power of making articles and orders for decency and peace in the church Might remain unaltered in the King's clergy , and parliament : able civil and canon lawyers Might still sit in their tribunals taking cognizance of such cases , as are truly ecclesiastical , and have not been by usurpation of the hierarchy wrongfully wrested out of the temporal courts : and the spiritual sword of excommunication Might still be gently weelded in the same hands as it has been , when it is necessary . An assistance of godly divines in all cases of conscience Might be allotted to the k. and all his judges and magistrates upon occasion , without wholly drawing them from their charges , and this would be no less effectual , then that of the greatest prelates . The inconveniences of the Presbyterian discipline also which is not so adequate and conformable to monarchy would be rectified . And lastly , the bleeding church which had so great a part of her patrimony torn from her by hen. 8. by the addition of episcopal and cathedral livings Might be healed up , and restored to her ancient grace and vigour . 

Finis . 















