The grand case of conscience stated , about submission to the new and present power . 

Or , an impassio•…te answer to a modest book concerning the lawfulness of submitting to the present government . 

By one that professeth himself a friend to presbytery , a lover and embracer of truth wheresoever he finds it . 

Although i love not contention , yet i desire satisfaction : that whilst  live a midst a tumultuous generation , and unquiet times , i May be delivered from a troubled spirit and discalmed mind ; a wounded spirit who can bear ? i was willing to have sat down in silence , res•…lving to hau•… kept my conscience , as void of offence to others , so •…ree from disturbance in itself , ch•…sing rather quietly to suffer for not doing what was commanded , than knowingly to act what is ( At least to me ) •…lawfull : such a liberty of conscience i conceive none will deny me . But since •…at book came to mine hands , i ( Although unwillingly ) undertook this task , not only out of an earnest desire i had to find out truth , but for the unusual modesty of the tract it s•…lf , knowing that the foulest corn is best winnowed in a gentle gale ; a tempestuous wind blows away ch•…ffe and corn too . 

I shall take a brief view of the book , and submit what i shall speak to the authors judgement , a declaration hath been lately published , &c.  Indeed there was such a declaration published , which i desired with much earnestness , and read with some d•…ration , expecting to have found the very quintessence of reason , and stre•…gt of argument , whereby judicious men Might have been wholly convinced ▪ and abundantly satisfied ; but my s•…rupleses were not answered by it . For suppose that had been proved , which was there much argued , that the government of a free state were in some respects more convenient than that of monarchy ; that Might have been a prevalent argument to an irregulated persons , who were ( de novo ) to constitute a government , not to those , who had before an ancient form suited to the persons , established by law , confirmed by oath , and engaged to by the several declarations of them who are so solicitous for the altering of it . Surely if convenience or inconvenience only can break a promise , and disengage an oath , David was much mistaken in the 15th psalm , and others May be easily cheated , who expect ready performance of , not needless disputing about oaths , in wh•… 〈◊〉 stand bound to them . What is there said concerning declarations [ that the Lords and Commons were of that mind when they made them ] May serve their turns for the present , but would equally serve others turns for the future ; for by the same reason , when those that penned and published that declaration , shall borrow money of men , and declare to pay them , employ soldiers with an engagement to satisfy them , persons May suspect that their minds May alter , and then ( By this rule ) their former declarations will be of no strength . 

What is further spoken in the preface for a lawful obedience to an unlawful change of government , will be touched on in the further prosecution of this discourse . It is said [ the apostle commands obedience to higher powers , rom. 13. and thence it is inferred , that he speaks not in that place merely of power or authority abstracted from persons , but of persons clothed with that authority . ] The apostle speaks there directly of authority , of men only in subordination to that authority ; no further than as the executioners of that power , because it is impossible authority should be exercised , but where men are to manage it . The apostle in that place requires submission to legal authority , by whomsoever executed , not to any men commanding by an illegal power . 

higher powers are there expressed indefinitely , not pointing at any particular government : in a monarchy , an aristocracy , a democracy , the persons under the several constitutions May , yea must , by the apostles command obey the higher powers , those who by their legal constitution are in authority , not in power , over them : there is a law of nature , that will make man obey a power if h•… cannot •…sist , but the injunction of the apostle ( There ) is only to lawful author•… ▪ 〈◊〉 the author of that book knows , that those only can be the higher powers , or legal authority of any kingdom , which the constitution of that kingdom makes such , and that only can exact obedience according to the scripture rule . Now what the higher powers of England are , by the constitution of this kingdom , is sufficiently known . 

The apostle commands wives to submit to their husbands , ephes. 5. 22. surely the injunction is for obedience to husbands , quà husbands , not quà men , indeed not abstracted from their persons , because it is impossible the authority of an husband should be submitted to , where a man is not to exercise it : but should a stranger come to another's wife , and call himself husband ( Having before either imprisoned or slain the rightful husband ) and require submission , i scarce think the author himself ( Especially if he be married ) would press for obedience to such an usurped power : such a woman May be forced , and overpower , but to submit to him as an husband , were a sin . 

What is there urged as the great argument to prove the lawfulness of obedience to the present government , hath been my main deswasive ( viz. ) the apostles command to obey higher powers for conscience sake : had i been convinced that the King in his person had been the higher powers of England , and that his personal command •…ad by the apostles rule exacted undeniable obedience , although he had been visibly •…ing what we suspected , and palpably introducing what we feared , i should have submitted for conscience sake . The great inducement i had to adhere to the parliament , was ( Besides the hopes of better reformation ) that thorough conviction that lay upon me , both by mine own reason , and parliamentary practices , that the two houses of parliament , in case of the King's absence , weakness or refusal , had in them such a part of the higher powers , and supreme authority , as to defend , and preserve the persons without , yea against the King , doing , commanding or exacting any thing besides or against the law . And this is that main block , at which i stumble in yielding obedience to this new power , because i am yet convinced , that they are not the higher powers of our kingdom , to which the apostle requires obedience . 

I acknowledge a government May be altered ( Although i think it not safe , but upon urgent and evident necessity ) to which being altered obedience is required , but it must be done by the higher powers still , whom we ought equally to obey in submitting to an altered , as a continue form ; but for any party by force to lay low the higher powers , and to exact obedience as to the legal authority , is to me a sin . 

I am not ignorant what pleas there May be from inconvenience in such a doctrine , but according to the light i have , where lawful or unlawful are in question , their convenience and inconvenience must keep silence . 

It is to be observed what is spoken by the apostle in the same place , the powers that are , are ordained by God : to which in the second page of the book is a little addition , viz. rulers and those that were in authority were ordained of God : the scripture enjoins obedience to powers , to men only as entitled to those powers : the authority was ordained by God , not the rulers , they were constituted by men , the power May be God's ordinance , when the deputing of persons to the exercise of that power May be ( At most ) but God's permission : nay , that men in authority ( Rulers in the apostles expression ) are to be obeyed no further than as acting according to that authority , is the judgement of one much used by the composer of that book . When a tyrant shall offer violence to his private subjects . which they can by no other means avoid , they May defend themselves and theirs against that tyrant as against a thief ; when are men properly called tyrants , but when they either usurp or exercise a power contrary to the law and usage of those places where they rule ? when a conscientious obedience is required to the authority , but not to those , who by their own will , or procured force , either usurp or exercise a power besides that authority . 

Should we grant that men assuming to themselves the place and power of magistrates , by what right or means soever they came by it , must be obeyed , surely it would be the greatest inlet to tyranny in the world , and the speediest means of destroying states that could be invented : for than should none govern in any kingdom any longer , than their swords and their strength could bear them up . 

Thus much i shall yield , that when any shall usurp authority , by whatsoever title or force he procures it , such May be obeyed in reference to their power , while they command lawful things , but not in reference to authority : a man being overpowered May yield for his own safety , but to submit to that usurped power , as to the legal authority of that kingdom where it is , is to assert that as lawful , which is but usurped , and in the scripture language to make a lie . 

From this i shall take a just occasion to speak to those instances there urged , from obedience to whom , the argument is drawn to prove the lawfulness of our submission now . 

Concerning Claudius Caesar and Nero which are mentioned , pag. 2 , 3. how they came in by force , yet were obeyed by the persons , i shall not trouble myself nor the reader with any tedious search into , or large recital of the story , but take it as there laid down , and give a brief answer to it . 

But before i fall upon a plain answer to what is there fallaciously urged , and show the insufficiency thereof to prove that for which it is asserted : i conceive there will appear such a disproportion between the quoted instances and our present case , that should we grant all the premises , yet the conclusion would not directly follow to prove the question . The most that can be asserted from those examples is , that persons did obey a supreme power as exercised by those who had no true ( At least but a dubitable ) title , when the same form of government was still continue , for so it had been for many years before , during the reign of a 4 Emperors , yea , such a government which was the pristine constitution of that place , it being monarchical for above b 44•… . years , till Tarqvinius , about the business of his son with Lucretia , was rejected . Whether party had or pretended most right , and the best ends in their changing of the government , either i. Brutus from , or Julius Caesar to monarchy , i shall not dis•…ute : nor shall i decide , whether God Might not justly give them to see the evil of a change , who ( It May be ) chiefly out of a desire of change , would wholly alter a constituted form . But this is not our case : the insubmission of persons now , is not grounded upon a suggested sc•…uple of a dubious title to the same , but upon an apprehend illegality of the new and needless establishment of another government : it is one thing , and as in itself more lawful , so to persons lesss scrup•…lous , upon a pretended title to usurp the exercise of an established authority : another , and as in itself less just , so to persons more doubtful upon pretended apprehensions to eradicate a lawful authority , and illegally to lay low those which legally are the higher powers of a kingdom : in the one , persons less able to •…mine titles , submit to the established government of that kingdom where they are , and this is sufficient to yield obedience , that they know not who hath the right : in the other , they must give themselves up to a new-fashioned model illegal to them , because not the constituted powers of that place , and this is enough to withhold allegiance , that they know such have not ( Nor pretend ) a title . 

Now to the instances themselves , to see how far they prove the lawfulness of our submission to a change of government , although the change be believed unlawful . 

after the death of Caius Caligula , the consuls and senate of Rome entered in•…o a consultatio•… , how they Might restore the commonwealth to her ancint free•…m , i think this argument will take in all that is therein spoken : if the peo•…e of the Roman empire did submit to the power of Claudius and Nero , who by force were put upon them , than the persons of England May lawfully submit to a change of goverument , though believed unlawful : but they did submit , therefore these May , i will find no fault with the syllogism , because it is of mine own making , although it be the very sum of what is urged : what equivocal terms there are whereby a spiritual eye would quickly see four terms ( At least ) in it . I shall discover in mine answer to the several propositions . 

In the first proposition , it being hypothetical , i shall deny the consequence : for 1.  A persons May possibly do what is not in itself lawful either for themselves or others to do , a facto ad jus non valet argumentum , had the author proved their submission legal , it had been more urgent . Indeed it is said at the end of that paragraph , we see rulers put by soldiers into that power which is said by the scripture to be ordained of God , and even to these rulers men must be subject for conscience sake . but the apostle doth not command obedience to these men , but to the powers , nay not to any men , but as commanding according to th•…se powers ( As was said before ) nor is it material who put men in , nor what men are put into powers , if they are the powers that are ordained of God : those that command according to that authority , must be obeyed : and whatsoever the soldiery of Rome did , had the soldiery of England ( In this tacitly pleaded for ) observed that doctrine before , we had not been ( I think ) disputing this question now . But 2.  What Might be lawful for the persons in the Roman empire , May not be lawful for the persons of this kingdom : i find not in any history that ever they were sworn to a particular government as we have been : things in themselves indifferent are made necessary , when by an oath engaged to . But of that more afterward . 

To the minor proposition , i shall say 1.  That those mentioned had ( At least seeming ) titles to the empire . Indeed it is agreed by all historians i have met withal , that they were first encouraged by soldiers : but what iniquity is in that , if they Might pretend a title ? The very end of power and strength is or should be to conserve and recover just right , we have always acknowledged it lawful and expedient by force of arms to acquire a rightful possession illegally detained ; but i could wish that this story had been printed and read by the swordmen in this kingdom five months ago , that they Might but have thought whether it had been greater honour to be recorded as men , that should guard a King of a doubtful title to the crown , or to be storied as men that should bring a King of an indubitable right to the scaffold . 

I will not here dispute by what title , or according to what law Julius Caesar , not yet his successor Octavius assumed the empire , but when that government and those governors were received , and acknowledged by the senate , it became lawful to that persons . Although conquest be no true title , nor durable tenure any longer than strength can keep it , yet compact upon that conquest , gives a title to the conqueror , and engageth submission from the other party to those rules resolved on at , or given out according to that agreement . 

Tiberius from whom indeed both Claudius and Nero had their government , did not only for a great part of his time , do all he did by the advise of the senate , but would ( At least seemingly ) be chosen by the senate , as not contented secretly t•… step into a government either by the earnest engagement of his mother , or by the fond adoption of Augustus , but would have the c•…ll and election of the commonwealth too : now here surely was a lawful title , if the consent of the persons could make it lawful , although ( It May be ) not in its first acquisition , yet in it 's after establishment : and Claudius deriving his title from him , why should not persons obey it ? yea , methinks the author of that book intimates a title that Claudius had , where he saith , pag. 3.  Claudius being frighted with the news of Caligula's death , and fearing himself Might be enquired for , upon suspicion withdrew : had not he been the heir apparent to the empire , what ground of fear , or what cause of withdrawing ? nay , if he had not been looked on as the rightful successor , why should the soldier primo intuitu salute him by the name of Emperor ? 

For Nero he descended in a direct line on the mother's side , from Livia Augustus his wife , and although Brittanicus was the natural son of Claudius , yet Nero ( By Agrippina's means ) was his adopted son for the empire , and brought to the senate , where it was consented unto , that he should have his togam virilem , and he called Prince of youth : it being their usage , as far as i have observed in the story , that an adoptive title assented to by the senate , hath commonly been acknowledged , when a lineal succession hath been rejected : yea , the author seems to grant a kind of title to Nero too , where it is said , pag. 3. that the sentence of the soldiers was followed by the consent of the senate : if the senate had any share in either constituting or declaring a King , Nero's title was hereby established . 

But what is this to our case ? A rightful or doubtful heir was brought by soldiers to the senate , who among themselves were contriving to alter their government : this heir was received by the senate , and upon that submitted unto by the persons : but doth the author think that if the senate had declared and acknowledged , yea , promised to preserve the title of a rightful Prince , and the soldiers by the advice , counsel , or assistance of some party in this senate , should imprison or slay their Prince , and take away the major part of the senate , only because against their actings , and this minor part relict should alter their government , yea , make themselves without the consent of the persons their rulers , that then the persons would or lawfully could have submitted to them as their legal and rightful governors , nay , would not rather have resisted them , as not being those higher powers , whom they ought for conscience sake to obey ? 

Indeed had the King for some reason hide himself ( As Claudius ) or for other reasons absented himself , and the two houses of parliament legally elected , and freely sitting ( At such a time esteemed ) the higher powers , contrived a way for the altering the government , although i should not have proclaimed their wisdom , yea , should have bewailed their sin , in respect of the many ties and bonds of declarations and oaths upon them , i think i should have submitted to their power , yet i would not for my oath 's sake ( Had i liked the thing ) have acted in it . In which i think i •…eeld more than many anti-malignant men in England will do : yet how far from our case this is , what hath been spoken will testify . 

But 2.  Had the instance been of Julius Caesar , who by mere force and violence , without the least pretence of title acquired the government , which had better suited our business , yet i should say , that what submission the persons yielded , and what commands he gave , were in relation to a power which he by force had gotten , and did exercise without any pretence to a legal constituted power , till received and acknowledged by the senate . 

I confess should these rulers now in our kingdom command submission to them , as to a conquering party , and acknowledge they did by power exercise , what by force they had gotten , i should in that sense submit to them , because not able to defend myself against them : but they call themselves the legal authority , and higher powers of England , under which notion i cannot submit , because positively to obey what is thus commanded , what soever secret reservation i May have , i do and must assert their power as lawful , and their authority as the legal authority . 

By this i shall fitly descend to those instances of our nation , to which what hath been already spoken , will give ( me judice ) sufficient answer : for 

1.  What submission was given to the conqueror , was yielded as to a forced power , until by after-compact it was acknowledged and made legal . 
2.  What was practised by the successors mentioned ( Besides the acknowledged force in their unrightfull acquisitions , and violent exercise of power ) it was only upon difference of title , which persons May not be able to judge of , as the author says , pag. 9 but amongst us , here is an alteration of government , where a change only seems to be asserted , no title at all pretended . 
3.  What is spoken of hen. 7. May be enough to answer the argument drawn from him and the rest too . Although the title Might be unjust , and the power illegally gotten , yet when the title was acknowledged , at least , confirmed by parliament , and the laws whereby he ( Or they ) should rule , were enacted in a parliament , that did engage the persons to an unquestionable obedience , the constituted higher powers then commanding , to whom the apostle requires obedience : for although a parliament ( Such i mean , which by the known law and continue usage of the kingdom as a parliament ) should acknowledge or do any thing civilly evil ( I mean in reference to the state ) it is lawful and just in respect of the persons , and engageth obedience , which i think will be a sufficient excuse for people's yielding obedience to their laws , not only because then enacted , but since confirmed by the higher powers of our nation : although in the mean time upon the same ground they rest •…nsatisfied in the lawfulness of submission to the present power . 
I Might add , that what the whole body of a nation did , if illegal , doth not engage our practice : for we know Papists ( And such they were all who submitted to the forementioned rulers ) make no conscience of denying a rightful title , nor yielding to an illegal power , when they May but probably carry on their own design : but what is spoken already will satisfy , and i had rather give a rational answer , then question the wisdom or honesty of ancestors , where it May be avoided . 

What is urged from the casuis•…ss and Paraeus ( Although i am not bound jurare in verba , being of dr Moulins his mind , rather to like one argument then ten authors ) i shall agree to in that sense , in which i conceive they delivered it , to submit to such power as forced , not to their authority as legal , unless it be 〈◊〉 an authority which by constitution and usage are the higher powers of our kingdom ▪ 

The author after the example of others , proceeds now to give some reason o•… his own , which i shall also endeavour to examine , and so far as they carry streng•… and truth ( As least to me ) shall submit : where otherwise , i shall give mine on the contrary . 

indeed how can it be otherwise ? For when a person or persons have gotten supreme power , and by the same excluded all other from authority , either that authority which is thus taken by power must be obeyed , or else all authority must fall to the ground . persons May indeed get themselves the greatest strength , and in that sense May be submitted to ▪ but they cannot illegally get themselves the legal power , nor can they exclude others from their authority , although by force they May keep them from the exercise of it , a man May be a man , yea a living man , although by the violence of disease , he May be kept from outward actings . An husband May be a husband still although imprisoned and thereby kept from the exercise of his duty to his wife . A parliament May be a parliament still , although by violence kept from sitting and executing their authority . I am so far from thinking that disobedience to such power will make all authority and government fall to the ground , that i believe submission to such will quickly lay all authority waste : for by the same reason that we obey this altered government and usurped authority now , we must obey any other suddenly , if another party get more strength , and what an unsettled state and unknown authority we should then have May easily be judged : nor do i think the author himself would be of the same mind , should the Prince with a potent army get the power into their hands . Surely were this doctrine true , those renowned men shall be razed out of the calendar for saints , that opposed the King's power in ship-money : nor must such be sequestered who under the King's power formerly did lend or give whatsoever he required , whether men , money , horse or arms : nor these put out of the parliament , who obeyed him in sitting at oxon : nay , nor himself neither put to death for doing what was urged against him , if men in power howsoever they come by it are rulers ordained by God , and to be obeyed for conscience sake . 

if confusion be worse than titular tyranny , i wish that seeing we had no titular tyranny , we had had no confusion neither : and i should be glad that confusion May befall ( If any ) only such , who in this kingdom have been the greater introducers of it , either those who acquire and assert , or those who cannot receive or submit to an usurped government : for although the end must not be destroyed for the means , yet he that destroys the means in its tendency to the end , will scarcely preserve the end at last . 

if a Master's mate had thrown the Master overboard , and by power would suffer no other to guide the ship but himself , if the mariners will not obey him commanding aright for the safe guiding of the ship , the ship must needs perish , and themselves with it . i doubt here is a fallacy , and this case will not concern our question , for i suppose , although i am not so well skilled in the discipline of mariners , as to know that a Master's mate hath a kind of title to the government of the ship in case of the Master's miscarriage , which suits not our condition : but suppose him to have no title , or state the question somewhat nearer our case , that if a party of the seamen should throw the Master overboard , and assume to themselves the government of the ship : •…•…hall then answer , that if that mate or this party having the greater strength , •…hould by power enforce and exact obedience of the rest , these aught for the safety of their own lives , although not to obey the authority , yet to do the commands of the enforcing party , and if ever they come ashore , to do what they can to bring such unworthy persons to condign punishment , who , besides the murder of the Master , would so basely hazard the ship too ; but if that mate or party should command the seamen to obey them as the rightful Master , i think ( Although with submission to better judgements ) they ought not , although for the safety of their lives thus to obey them . It is better to lose a natural life , than a quiet conscience , and a spiritual soul : the greatest advantage will not warrant the least evil . In such a case it would easily be judged both by God and men , to whose fault the loss of the ship should be imputed , either to them that did unjustly require , or those who dared not unwarrantably to do an unlawful thing . I know not what the sudden fear of unavoidable death Might make such men ( de facto ) do , and i can easily think what harsh censures their hazarding or losing their lives upon such refusal , May bear from rash and less considerate men , as an empty product of mere peevishness : but i am confident that a synod of religious and intelligent divines would conclude , that ( de jure ) they ought rather to adventure the loss of all , than call him a lawful , who is but an usurped Master , which they must by yielding to his or their commands under that notion . 

Whereas some speak of a time for settlement , they indeed do rather speak for a time of unsettlement , for they will have an unsettlement first and a settlement after . if i mistake not the desires of those who withhold submission to the present power , the author of that book is mistaken in his apprehensions of them : that they desire a settlement ( I think ) is true , but that they desire an unsettlement first , is besides my thoughts of them ; i know it is the grief of their souls , and causeth sad searchings of heart , that ever they were brought into such unsettlements , and thereby put upon such racks of conscience as these are . It is not unsettlement but a deliverance from unsettlement they long for : i scarce see how we can be more unsettled then now we are : indeed being unsettled , we would use any means for a settlement , although for its procurement our unsettledness were more unsettled ; if a man be at the river's brink , i would advise him to keep out of the water , but if at once he leap into the middle of the river , i should persuade him to come to the bank , although he wade through much water to come thither : i would counsel a man to prevent distempers , but when the disease is already contracted , i should prescribe some physic for the safety of his life , although for the present it should more disease him . 

What is spoken of the former scriptures and casuists in the same page , i shall refer to what was before answered . 

But it is asked : whether that May not be called a settlement , how soon soever it is , when there is such a way settled , that men May have justice if they will , and May enjoy that main end of magistracy , to live a peaceable life in godliness and honesty ? to speak of what justice some have had at Westminster , since the unsettlement of our times , or what to be expected , when colonels appear as parties with their arguments by their sides before committees , ( An argument too often used in the house too , as i believe the gentleman knows , ) where to engage a bustling daring colonel is to carry a cause : as also what peaceable lives men live , when the soldiers having put other men in power in the state , put themselves in command in men's houses : and what godliness and honesty May be looked for , when blasphemy must be tolerated , wickedness must not be punished , when in the mean time godly men ( If but of a contrary judgement , a liberty of conscience formerly pleaded for ) are made offenders for a word , would be too large a field to walk in , and besides the swelling of this tract , but give too wide an occasion to further contests . But this shall suffice , that the gentleman a little begs the question in calling it justice , for although men May have , or Might expect , what he calls justice , viz. things in themselves just , yet if he grant , as i have proved , that authority illegal by which they act , what they do or is done by any under that authority , although in itself just , yet is not properly justice : judgement ( For i conceive the author means justitiam distributivam ) is then only just , when it is exercised by the higher powers , the legal magistracy of that kingdom where it is acted . The Hebrews express justice by that word , which they likewise use for the usage and custom of that persons , that are concerned in it . 

Another argument the author useth is , because persons cannot judge of titles : when they cannot judge , than an usurped title is true to them , and will exact obedience : but if this be an argument , than ( For contrariorum eadem est ratio ) when titles are visibly unlawful , persons are disengaged from obedience . This is our case , where there is not any pretence of title . 

But some say , there are oaths that justify disobedience to the present government : there are indeed several oaths that engage us to the contained observance of our formerly established government , and then how far they justify disobedience to this , let the author judge . that oaths are sacred bonds and reverend obligements , and where they do not themselves leave or make us free , we are not to cut or break them in pieces : i shall equally assert , and could heartily wish it had been as truly practised in the kingdom as plainly spoken in the book : but seeing there are indeed ( As the author affirms ) concerning these , faults on both hands , let us a little examine the faults he mentions , and see whether there are not other faults too , that he speaks not of . 

on the one side the slieghting of an oath , &c.  This is a fault indeed : oaths and covenants are the strongest engagements ▪ whereby we can bind ourselves either to God or man , if these come once to be slighted and no longer observed , than they May conduce to the palpable advantage of those that made them , i am afraid that May justly be written upon the door-posts of England , what was set in the front of David's song , psa. 12. 1 , 2.  

I am loathe to misjudge any person , whom i find so modest , else i should fear that this fault was purposely argued , the more secretly to insinuate another , though not under the name of a fault : it is said , we find some part of the covenant to speak of •…ll th•… days of our lives : as if some part had been but of a temporary engagement : but if i mistake not , the covenant did in every part of it oblige us to a continue observance of it : we did not swear constantly to keep this part , or that clause , but all our lives to keep this covenant , which is known to comprehend every part of it . 

true it is , that the obligation of some things end , because they can no longer be kept , as that of the King's person &c.  I grant that the obligation of a persons to any thing ends , when that thing obliged to , necessarily , and in its own nature ends ; but if men shall by violence put an end to the thing , that thereby the obligation May end too , i doubt such will be esteemed by God as covenant-breakers ; i do not think , that he breaks his covenant , that doth not preserve the King's person , when he is dead ▪ but i think he is guilty , that did not endeavour to preserve it while he was living ; had the covenant , in that part , been observed then , for all that i know , it Might have obliged now . A woman promiseth to be faithful to her husband so long as he lives , but if she , out of love to another man , shall lay violent hands on her husband to end his life , that thereby she Might marry another , i believe she would scarcely be thought to have performed her promise . A tenant bargains with his landlord to pay him rent for his house , so long as he lives in it : but if he through malice shall pull down the house , that he cannot live in it , and thereby to extinguish his bargain , it May be easily thought what determination the law would make in such a case . 

What is spoken here of the King's person , Might as well have been spoken of any other part of the covenant : it is covenanted to preserve religion , but if those that made the covenant should by force extirpate , or by deceit undermine religion : would the author think himself or others disengaged from that part of the covenant , or rather look upon himself as bound to preserve it , while it hath a being ? If this liberty should be given , no man would keep any oath any longer , than he saw good , if it were in his power to put an end to that thing to which he is obliged . But let 's see what faults are found on the other hand . 

but on the other side there are other faults : such are the urging of an oath or covenant against enemies , and not against friends in one and the same action . in this i am wholly of his judgement , and could wish that he had instanced in some things , whereby i Might have guessed what aim he had taken , and against what he had leveled it . As i would not have any unequally excused , who are equally guilty , so i would not have him free from blame , who imputes guilt to one , when another shall be connived at , or encouraged in the same thing . 

In that clause of bringing delinquents to condign punishment : if the covenant engage to bring one to punishment , that raised arms against the parliament in Kent and Essex , why not another that raised arms against the parliament in Oxon shire and berks shire ? If according to our covenant we should preserve the privileges of parliament against a malignant party , that would have taken away but five members ; why not against an heretical party that took away above two hundred ? If one party be charged as guilty in not obeying orders of , but offering violence to the parliament ; why should another be excused as faultless , whose disobedience was more manifest , and whose violence was more palpable ? or if not altogether so , yet ( As the author ) a slight and diminishing charge of it upon one , and a vehement and aggravating charge of it upon the other . 

another fault May be , a stiff insisting on one part , and a neglect or at least silence in another part . this is not always a fault , for when there is no occasion given to speak , silence is no evil ; one part May be in more danger to be broken than another , when a more violent asserting , and stiff contending for that part is more necessary . If i had two children , the one at home in safety , the other in imminent danger , that i were more earnest and industrious for the saving and preserving of this , doth not at all argue less love or care to the other . But to take it in the best sense , to pretend much care in the keeping of one part , and in the mean time , to neglect another , i think a fault . As when men are seemingly violent against popery and prelacy , yet very indulgent to heresy and profaneness . When men shall plead covenant in the preservation of subject's liberties , yet forget their oath for the safety of the King's person in the preservation of religion ; which in respect of the covenant are of equal concernment ; for although it be pleaded by foam , and granted by all that religion , yea asserted by others , that the subjects liberties are of greater concernment than the King's person , it must be ratione mat•…riae , not ratione juram•…nti , for in that regard , we are equally obliged to one as the other . 

as also when by event two parts of it came to be inconsistent , to choose and enforce the keeping of the higher and less necessary part , and to give way to the loss and not keeping of the greater . here is to me a falsum suppositum ; i think it a sin in any to •…njoin , and wickedness in any to take a covenant for the doing of two things that are or May be inconsistent ; nor do i know what parts of our covenant are such ; when the author makes such appear , i shall bewail my sin in taking it . If it be by him meant , what is talke•… by others , ( viz. ) That the safety of the King's person , and the preservation of religion are inconsistent , i must declare my dissent in this ; for i am yet convinced , that both the truth and honour of religion Might have better been preserved by the safety of his person , and the continuance of our government , than hitherto it hath been , or for all i see , like to be , by the altering of the one , or taking away of the other . 

there is another , in racking an oath or covenant , to make it speak that which it meant not . i will add , there is another fault to stop the mouth of a covenant , and denying it to speak what it would . Nay , there is yet one more , when men shall put what interpretation upon covenants they please , or reserve to themselves a power to make any other interpretation upon them , than what the common and natural sense of the words in which they are taken do afford . Oaths ought to be their own interpreters ; we May deceive men , but God is not mocked . 

But to come to what i conceive is the main end of what hath been hitherto asserted about oaths ▪ to consider whether there be any clause in any oath or covenant , which in a fair and common sense forbids obedience to the commands of the present government and authority . there is in the solemn league and covenant , that which engageth to another government , and than what forbids obedience to this ? In one clause we solemnly covenant to preserve the person , and not to diminish the just rights of the King ; had his person and just rights been preserved , his government could never have been attempted ; but seeing that cord is broken ( unhappy blow that struck it •…sunder ! ) is there yet no bond will hold us ? yes ; we do in the same clause faithfully promise to preserve the law of the kingdom , and surely to change the government is to alter the fundamental laws of the kingdom ; if we are bound to preserve our law , than that government that is established by law ; nay yet further , in the same place , we do swear , yea and call the world to witness it , that we will not diminish the just rights and greatness of the King : is not a man's right as much concerned in his heirs inheriting , as in his own enjoying what legally belonged to him ? Is it not a man's undoubted right to have his lawful heirs succeed him in his lawful enjoyments ? But now by this government the King's heirs are wholly divested of any possession , and absolutely debarred of that right , which by the usage of the kingdom belongs to them . 

much less when no other can be had ( As the author ) i do not yet see impossibility in having another , truly i think , if the covenant had been strictly observed , we had never had this , and if it were yet carefully performed , we Might quietly have another government , such under which godly persons Might live with more comfort , and less scruple . 

if it be said that in the oath of allegiance , allegiance is sworn to the King , his heirs and successors . If his heirs be not his successors , how doth that oath bind ? either the word successors must be superstuous , or else it must bind successors as well as heirs , &c.  If i should grant that the word successors were superfluous , it would not be the only superfluous word in things of that nature ; or that it is an exegetical expression which is not unusual in all writings both divine and profane , the more fully to express the same thing by two words : his heirs and successors are conjunctive , which must necessarily imply , that his heirs according to the usage of this kingdom ought to be his successors : so that it can bind to no successors besides the heir : indeed should the line extinguish , than the legal successor were to be obeyed by that oath , and yet that too in the continuance of the government , for he is not properly a successor , unless in the same form of government ; for without asking lawyers and learned men , he is properly a successor , that succeeds any man in the place where he was . If the agitators in the army should depose the general , and order the army according to their wills , would they be justly called his successors , when the frame of their discipline were altered ? This seems partly to be acknowledged by the author in the same page , where he instanceth only in those for successors , which su•…ceeded in the same government , and saith that the word successor is taken for him that actually succeeds in government , i conceive it must be meant , when the same form still is continue , else what he asserts , and the instances he names , would hold no proportion . 

But there is one engagement to the former government yet lies upon us in reference to our oaths , which is mentioned either in that ( Before named ) or in the oath of supremacy , that no power on earth shall deter or absolve us from the keeping of it , if so , i would but humbly beg the author conscientiously to judge , whether the force or fear of any party , were they stronger than they are , should affright a persons into a submission to any other government , then that to which they have thus sworn . 

I May take the same liberty to propose a few short , yet considerable quaete•… ▪ while the son is in the same posture in which the father was , how comes this oath at thi•… time to stand up , and pl•…ad for disobedience in regard of the son , that was asleep and silent in regard of the father ? i do not know in what one title this oath is more urged for the son , than it Might have been , and was for the father ; unless that now there is more need of pressing it , because in the sons days the government is altered ; in the fathers , it was ( At least ) promised to be continue . Those , who were against the irregular actings , the court-faults , the wicked counsels of the father , were for the safety of his person , the preservation of his rights , and the continuance of his government : and now the same persons that are for the rights of the son , and the continuance of the government , are as much against the vices and counsels in and about him , as about the father . Besides it Might be said , that the father was not opposed , until there was a parliament , that being the legal means in our kingdom of resisting arbitrary and extra-legall power ; the King in the intervals of parliaments being the chief officer , not to be resisted by private subjects : and certainly i think , were there now a parliament sitting according to the constitution of England , and the received to the crown , should act any thing against the known law , and •…he kingdoms safety , those who are now for the reception of the son , and for the performance of their oaths , would as truly and conscientiously ( According to their covenant ) join with them against the exorbitancies of the son , as they did against the evil of the father : only i believe they would expect some security , that his person and rights ( Parts of the covenant ) should be better preserved and less diminished than his fathers were . 

Besides what hath been spoken to the book , i Might add also one small quaer•… about altering the government : whether in such an alteration there is not necessarily required , either the general consent of the major part of the persons , or at least the major part of their trustees ? if so , what right have these men to do , who now act in it , some of them being the trustees of no persons , having no election , others who were legally chosen denied their liberty ? May not any number of persons ( There being no known law nor constituted rule for this transaction ) by the like reason conceive , and ( If they have strengt•… ) alter it again to morrow ? But if they will ( Which is but equal ) give them liberty of di•…enting from their government , whom they deny the liberty of delating or consenting to it , i shall be free . 

Whether there be any scripture example or prudential rule unnecessarily to oppress•… , and , where it May be avoided , to rack the tender consciences of unquestionably godly men , not only when they are the major part , and most judicious Christians ( Both of ministers and persons ) and most likely to know the truth , but when they are the least strong , and most discountenanced , and therefore unlikely to be biased by any private interests ? Indeed those who side with the strongest party , lie under grounded suspicion of having particular ends , who can turn any way , to any party , where they May get the best places , the greatest preferments , and the largest rewards : such many have received , and i believe more expect ; for it is observable , that for the most part , your only parliament convert•… before ▪ are •…our greatest parliament assertors now : but how a poor persons despised and opposed by power , who can expect the conferment of nothing but punishment , should design an interest in standing to their principles , when they know ( Some of them at least being very able and prevalent ) they Might upon their least turning have as large a share in the rewards of the kingdom as those who now enjoy the greatest , is to me irrational and improbable . The apostle Paul would avoid a lawful thing rather than offend the scrupling consciences of weak brethren : what then is their fault , who do unlawful things , and thereto engage the dijudicating consciences of weak Christians ? 

Whether both in human probability , and religious reason , it were not more likely to conduce to God's glory , to religion's settlement and honour , to Christians union and satisfaction , to the kingdom's peace , to the prevention of danger , and the safety of all ( Who have not wickedly out-acted all hopes of safety , and are conscious to themselves that their bucket must sink , whensoever authorities bucket shall arise ) to endeavour ere it be too late , to join authority and power , title and strength together ; that as power May arm authority , and render it formidable , so authority Might justify power , and make that lawful ? Least when the title shall be claimed , those who May dislike the vices , and oppose any tyranny ( Were they legally authorised ) of the claimer , yet should not for conscience sake deny his right ; and those who could like well the pretensions of our new governors ( Were they justifiably managed ) should not adventure for religion's sake to assist their usurpation : whereby , as by our unwise actions , we have too much justified malignants actions , and made them our deriders : we May strengthen their hands , and make them our Masters . 

I am confident that if the great managers of our new-work , and the violent assertors of this changed government would but seriously lay these things to heart , it Might make them seasonably retract , what they untimely attempted , and rather find out ways to settle , then further unsettle the kingdom , rather to satisfy then disturb the peaceable consciences of religious and unbiased men ( the Lord prevail upon their spirits . ) 

Thus have i endeavoured to answer that with a meek , which was written with a peaceable spirit , where i shall profess ( If i mistake not myself ) to side rather with truth then with any party . What i have hastily spoken i shall submit to the deliberate judgements of more intelligent men : i shall be willing to receive a rebuke wherein i have erred , and ready to yield wherein i May receive satisfaction : i hope i have not discovered any turbulence of spirit , but a willingness to examine truth : as i would keep my conscience from being wounded by doubtful pressures , so i would keep my tongue and pen from wounding others by imbittered expressions : i would not willingly give offence , i hope none will be taken . If it be lawful for one man to propose , it must be lawful for other to answer arguments , in reference to satisfaction . I•… would be too great a burden to true English spirits , to see one man permitted to stand with a drawn weapon daring all that pass by , and he only faulty that takes up the weapons •…o answer him : either prevent such darings , or else excuse the provoked . 〈◊〉 will be my comfort to give , it will be my advantage to receive satisfaction ▪ howsoever , i shall commit myself , the safety of our kingdom , the establishment of such  government that is most conducible to God's honour , to that God , who is able to answer scruples , to preserve a persons , and to command settlement according to his own wil•… and way . 

Romans 3. 8.  

and not rather as we be s•…anderously reported , and as some affirm , that we say , let us do evil that good May come : whose damnation is just . 

Romans 13. 23.  

whatsoever is not of faith is sin . 





pag. 1.  pag. •…1 ▪ of the declaration . pag. 1 , 2.  it is not {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . eph. 5.  〈◊〉 . rom. 13. 1.  pag. 2.  dis•…ernendum est inter potestatem quae semper est a deo , 〈◊〉 inter acqui•…onem & us•…pationem . Paraeus in ro. 13.  Hos. 8 4.  subditis merè privatis , s•… tyrannus t•…nquam latro in ipsos faciat impetum , & ipsi nec potestatem ordinariam implorare , nec ali•… ratione eff•… re pe•… possi•…t senti per & s•…os tyrann•… contra pr g ssa•…or fendere Paraeus rev. 2•… . 15.  pag. 2 , 3.  a Julius Caesar . Augustus . Tibertus Caius Caligula . b principio reges ibi sep•… impera•…unt , a•…nis ducentis quadraginta quatuor . Sl•…dan . de 4.  Monarch . pag. 4.  to  Tiberius augu•…ti Oct a eight prirignus & gen•…r , & filius adoptivus admodum invitus , ut prae se serebat , & vix tandem exoratus a supplice sena•…u principatum accepit . Sle•…dan . de 4.  Monarch . Tiberius maximos dolores & gemitus simula vit principa•… tanquam onerosam servitutem recusans . Pezel . mel. histor. par . 2•… . Pezel , mel. hist. part . 2•… ▪ Tacitus annal. lib. 〈◊〉 . pag. 3.  pag. 4 , 5.  pag. 9  pag. 5.  pag.  . pag. 6.  pag.  . pag. 6 , 7.  pag. 7.  pag. 7.  pag. 8.  pag. 8.  pag. 8 , 9  ut judicium •…it actus justitiae , requiritur ut procedat ex authoritate praesidentis : quando •…omo judicet de his de quibus non •…abet authoritatem dicitur judicium usurpatum . aquin. 22.  q. 60 cap. 2.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} exod 21. 9  ▪ & josh. 6.  〈◊〉 . pag. 9  pag ▪ 9  pag. 10.  i  pag. 11.  pag. 11.  pag. 11.  pag. 11.  pag. 11.  pag. 12.  pag. 12.  pag. 12.  pag. 13.  






























































































