An inquiry after further satisfaction concerning obeying a change of government believed to be unlawful . 

Tendered to the Presbyterian proposer , by way of reply to his book entitled ; the lawfulness of obeying the present government . by a dissenting brother 

rom. 14. 23.  

he that doubteth , is damned if he eat , because not of faith : for whatsoever is not faith , is sin . 

London , printed for g. t. anno dom. 1649.  

To the author of a book entitled , the lawfulness of obeying the present government 

Honoured Sir , 

Having seen your treatise , and being in the number of those to whom your discourse is directed , i do in my own and others behalves return you thanks , for your offer and endeavour to hold forth somewhat for the satisfaction of those who desire to walk by rule , and cannot comply with alterations , great , sudden , and of public concernment upon such grounds , as peradventure take with some others . 

In the argument you express yourself thus , a declaration hath been lately published , wherein the grounds are expressed of settling the present government , with which if any be not so far satisfied as to think that settlement lawful , yet even to such is this discourse directed , which proposeth proofs , that though the change of a government were believed not to be lawful , yet it May lawfully be obeyed . 

I hope you will not take offence , if i ( Having many times read over , and as i was able weighed your treatise ) do acknowledge , that i am not yet satisfied in that which is made the business of your book . I suppose also that i shall not in this writing giv• offence to any of different judgement , and i am apt to believe that those that are true to the principles of liberty of conscience , will not take offence at me for proposing in a peaceable way the grounds of my scruples , to such a casuist , as if the work itself be feasible , May be a probable instrument of clearing that case wherein he hath appeared , and therein both satisfy the spirits of many that truly fear the Lord , and be serviceable to the establishing of the new fabric , in a more honourable and lasting way , than the greatest penalties can encompass . For myself i shall only add thus much , that i am persuaded ; if you knew , how much unbelief lodges in my heart , and how great inconveniencyes i must wrestle with , in case my scruples be not satisfied ; you would not much doubt , but that i would be as willing to receive satisfaction , as you have expressed yourself to give it . Thus leaving the following lines to your consideration i rest , 

Sir , Yours obliged and to be obliged . 

An inquiry after further satisfaction concerning obeying a change of government believed to be unlawful . 

The question is this , whether though the change of a government were believed not to be lawful , yet it May lawfully be obeyed ? 

A late treatise proposeth proofs for the affirmative ; which before we come to examine , it will not be amiss to consider some things by way of premise towards the clearing of the point in question . 

And here in the first place let it be considered , whence it is , that this or that particular person , comes to be a subject to this or that particular government or governor ? and this May be four ways . 

1.  In regard of original or natural descent and inferiority . Thus in the first age of the world , Cain , Abel , Seth , and t•e rest of Adam's children and their offspring , were under the government o•adam by natural right ; and this is founded upon the primitive terms of the 5th . Commandment , honour thy father . 

And to this head we May refer the subjection of the younger brother to the elder as being in ordinary course the heir of his father's government . And thus , with Chrysostom , musculus , and others , i understand that as spoken by God , to Cain the elder brother , concerning Abel . Gen. 4 7.  Unto thee shall be his desire and thou shalt rule over him . the like phrases are used in the 3d. chapter v. 16. concerning the subjection of the wife to the government of the husband . 

2.  In regard of some special precept or institution of God . So whensoever God doth expressly assign a person to government over a kingdom , the subjects of that kingdom are thereupon bound to obey that person . So David was taken from feeding of sheep to be ruler over Israel . 1 sam. 16. 1.  The Lord said unto Samuel , fill thine horn with oil , & go , i will send thee to Jesse the bethlemit• for i have provided me a King among his sons . the like we read concerning Jesu , who was in particular appointed by God to be King over Israel . these cases are extraordinary , and the ground of obeying in these cases is , that sovereignty of God whereby he bestows authority on whom he pleases ; expressed by some special word , whereby in such cases the title of government May be known to be by divine donation . ier. 27 5. 6.  I have made the earth , the man and the beast that are upon the ground , by my great power , and by my outstretched arm ; and have given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me ; and now have i given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezer the ki•g of Babylon my servant . 

3.  In regard of place . Suppose a man , with his family , goes into some place which hath neither owner nor inhabitant : he pla•• and possesses that place , and hath by right of primitive possession , aut•ority to govern in that place ; and if afterward any other come to dwell within compass of that plantation he ought to be subject to the governor and government of the place ; and so ordinarily , whatsoever kingdom a man comes into ; he is during his abode there subject to the authority of the place ; and here is the proper room for that saying , persona sequitur locum . and upon this account it is , that the fourth commandment enjoins the governor of a family or city , to see that the Sabbath be not profaned by the stranger that is within their gates ; for whilst he is within their bounds , he is within their jurisdiction ; and thus the patriarchs by soj•urning in Egypt , became subjects to Pharaoh . 

4.  In regard of consent . When those that are free to dispose of themselves or others under a government or governor , do by such consent constitute or lay a foundation for government . Thus was the original of the Romans under Romulus , •s the learned author of the treatise ; de jure magistratum in subditos informs us . a Romulo populus romanus creatus fuisse dicitur , quia prius originalis populus non fuerit sed multitudo quaedam ex varijs gentibus & populis collecta . Romulus in has gentes collectitias , non nisi ex ipsarum consensu dominatus est . the scripture gives many instances of the right of government founded in consent or agreement : amongst others the case of Jepthath is clear . iudg. 11. 8. 11.  The elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah go with us and fight against the children of Ammon , and be our head over all the inhabitants of Gilead , and the persons made him head and captain o•er them . 

Again it is considerable , in what respect the change of a government is believed to be unlawful , whether it be : 

1.  Only in regard of the end , that those aim at , which do alter the government . And in this case i conceive , if there be nothing to vitiate the change but a bad end in the changers ; this doth not make it unlawful to be obeyed . 

Or 2.  In regard of the comparative badness of the government brought in by change . As if instead of a well regulated monarchy , a more turbulent democracy were brought in . In this case i conceive , if there be no exception against the change , but the bringing in of a less commendable government , this doth not make it unlawful to obey it . 

Or 3 in regard of the commission that those have that do alter the government . For , if they be not plenipotentiaryes as to such an act of instituting a new government ; that new fabric will want authority which is the soul of government , & therefore i do not see how it May be obeyed . 

As put case , in Utopia the majestas or supreme authority lies in 3.  Estates ; a Prince , nobles , and representers of the communality in senate assembled if these by their joint authority do make very considerable alterations in erecting or abolishing courts , enlarging or restraining power of state-officers . I make no question but in this case the Eutopians May as well without scruple comply with these acts , as with the other statute-laws of that kingdom ; because these alterations are acts within the compass of the supreme authority . 

Again put case : these 3 estates in Utopia undertake to overthrow the fundamental government , and set up one of those 3 to be the supreme and instead of the whole fundamental government , if the question were put whether the inhabitants of Utopia Might obey that single estate as the sole supreme , upon a declaration or act of the 3. estates to that effect : this i conceive a very difficult case : and the clear stating of it will require a man welg inshih•ed in the history of the Eutopian government , and well studied in that grand question in politics , an jura majestatis sint communicabilia ? 

But put case , one of those 3.  Estates in Utopia will undertake to exclude the other 2 , and to set up itself solely as supreme ; and to null laws made by all 3 estates : if one that is not able to comprehend how this act is within compass of the commission of that one estate ; doth thereupon believe that change of government not to be lawful . If the question be put , whether one so believing May obey that change , i must confess i am not satisfied in the affirmative , and my reason is this ; because if that change be not an act of authority it May not be obeyed , and that it is not an act of authority , seems to me rational upon obvious inferences from these grounds . par in parem non habet authoritatem . Totum aggregatum est maius qualibet sui parte . Ejusdem est leges abolere cuius est condere . the English of all which May be summed up in this : a lesser authority hath no authority over a greater . 

Again put case , that estate in Utopia was under a force when it did decree that change of Governmenr : by reason of which force many members were kept away : and one that doth not question the ordinary power of that estate , doth yet believe that the change being made by that estate , under that disadvantage of force , is not lawful . If the question be put , whether in this case , he that so believes the unlawfulness of that change , May , till he be otherwise informed , obey that change : i say as in the former case , i am not satisfied in the affirmative . I shall illustrate this case by a supposition nearer home , there is in the first leaf of the b•eif memento , the copy of an ordinance , wherein is expressed , that all votes , orders , ordinances passed in either or both houses of parliament , between the 26 of July and the 6 of August 1647. were null and void at the making thereof , the parliament being under a force and not free . Now suppose that in this space of time there had passed , in either or both houses of parliament , a decree for the change of government : suppose further that one that truly honours the parliament , and is of the same judgement with that ordinance of the 20 of August 1647. and knew of the force mentioned therein ; doth thereupon believe that change of government to be unlawful , if it be asked whether he , so believing , May lawfully obey that change of government , i would answer , no , and my reason is this ; positive precepts do imply negative duty : i mean thus ; that command that says honour thy father and thy mother , doth as well forbid obeying that which is not authority , as command obeying that which is authority : now that change of government ( Being ( According to the supposition ) decreed , the parliament being under a force ) ha•h nothing at all of authority in it : because the decree is null and void at the time of the making there of . 

Now reader take the right state of the question along with you ▪ the question is not concerning the forbearing of resistance , or concerning some kind of occasional compliance , but only concerning obedience which is a duty of the 5 commandment . Nor is the question in general whether a change of government May be obeyed , but whether it May be obeyed by one that believes the unlawfulness of the change , nor shall it be questioned for me , whether though a change of government were believed to be in some respect not lawful , it May yet lawfully be obeyed , but that which i hold is this , that if the change of a government be believed not to be lawful , for want of sufficient authority in that change , than he that so believes May not lawfully obey it . For this i could produce proofs ; but i wave them ; and come now to consider , what the presbyterian proposer offers by way of proof . 

And in the first place that scripture rom. 13. is alleged . Which scripture if clearly opened , and rightly appl•ed , would state the present and many other controversies . And here i grant that scripture requires subjection both to authority , and to persons clothed with that authority , neither do i deny , but that scripture proves subjection due to Claudius and Nero when they were invested in authority . But here the proposer queries the lawfulness of their coming to be invested in their authority , and says , that the soldiers was the foundation of Claudiuse's and of Nero's empire : and here i grant that the soldiery was the occasion or means by which they came to be Emperors : but i deny that they received authority from the soldiery ; they received it from the persons or senate ; and they had power to give it . I touched before the original of the Roman power . Romulus was the first King , and he reigned by consent of those who had power to give up their consent . This Romulus did institute as the great council a senate consisting of 100 men ; which number afterwards increased . The power of the senate to confirm a supreme governor , May be proved out of Livius and other authors . And that Nero had the consent of the senate is clear , by what the proposer p. 3. cites out of Tacitus , in these words . The sentence of the soldiers was followed with the consent of the senate , and then it was not scrupled in the provinces . And that Claudius had also the consent of the senate , May be gathered out of approved authors , and is not denied by the proposer . I say then that , though the soldiers could not give them a legal title , yet the senate both could and did . That an unlawful means and a legal title May meet together , i shall illustrate by a similitude in an other kind . The usurer lends a man 100 pound , and has his bond for the principal and 8 pound interest ; the borrower dies ; the executor May pay that 8 pound above the principal : because though the usurer hath not a moral right to that 8 l. by lending upon usury , yet he hath a legal title to it by the bond of the deceased . So he that by usurpation encroaches upon a crown ; if besides this , he gains also a legal title ; May be obeyed upon that legal title , though not upon the ground of usurpation . To this purpose is that de jure magistratuum p. 22. vitium quod ab initio usurpationi inerat potest postea emendari : adeo ut qui ab initio tyrannus fuit , possit legitimus et inviolabilis magistratus offici , si videlicet postea liber et legitimus accesserit eorum consensus , qui verum et legitimum magistratum creare et constituere possunt . the like answer to what i have given to that text rom 13 doth Mr. Burroughs give to dr. Ferne , his words are these p. 7.  The apostle requires them not to resist their power , their {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} he doth not charge them not to resist their tyranny . Certainly they could have no power but that which was given them by some agreement ; if they challengd further it was no authority at all . And afterward p. 8. what they got and held merely by force without any consent or agreement , was no power , no authority at all but Might be resisted notwithstanding that prohibition . 

From the scripture argument the proposer passes to historical observasions about the interruption of lineal succession to the crown in England . 

To which i Might answer that , a facto ad jus non valet argumentum . whatsoever title others have had in former ages , if the title since be clear , we need not trouble ourselves with those observations , which the proposer says , learned men and statesmen have been ignorant of . I shall therefore here only cite some passages out of a parliamentary acknowledgement . anno 1.  Jacobi regis . Your most humble and loyal subjects , the Lords spiritual and temporal , and the Commons in this present parliament assembled , in most humble and lowly manner do beseech your most excellent majesty , that ( as a memorial to all posterities , amongst the records of your high court of parliament for ever to endure , of our loyalty , obedience , and hearty humble affection ) it May be published and declared in this high court of parliament , and enacted by authority of the same , that we ( being bounden thereunto both by the laws of God and man ) do recognize and acknowledge , that immediately upon the dissolution and decease of Elizabeth late Queen of England , the imperial crown of the realm of England , and of all the kingdoms , dominions , and rights belonging to the same , did by inherent birthright and lawful and undoubted succession , descend and come to your most excellent majesty , as being lineally , justly , and lawfully , next and sole heir of the blood royal of this realm , as is aforesaid , and that by the goodness of God almighty and lawful right of descent , under one imperial crown , your majesty is of the kingdoms of England &c.  King — and thereunto we most humbly and faithfully do submit , and oblige ourselves our heirs , and posterities for ever , until the last drop of our bloods be spent . And do beseech your majesty to accept the same , as the first frnits in this high court of parliament , of our loyalty and faith to your majesty , and your royal progeny , and posterity for ever . 

The proposer likewise cites the judgement of a few divines and casuists for obeying the commands of an usurper . And i believe those that abound with books May meet with far more of the contrary judgement . But because our faith must not stand in the wisdom of men ; and we are upon a case of conscience , wherein the opinions of men are of small weight ; i judge it superfluous to multiply authors : take therefore only 2. for a taste , Mr.  Burroughs' answer to dr. Ferne . p. 7. there is no here that yet hath attempted to take any power away from the King that law hath given him . Howsoever the point of inheritance of conquest can not hinder ; for first , none inherits but that which his progenitors had , and his progenitors had no more originally then by consent was given them ; therefore the difference between Kings by inheritance , and Kings by election , in this case is not much . And for conquest , that only settles former right , or makes way to some farther agreement , to add to what was former ; the right comes not from power to conquer , or act of conquering , but from some agreement , precedent , or consequent . de jure magistratuum p. 27. is qui alienos invadit nullo modo sibi subditos , et si cupiat juste et ex bono et aequo dominari ( sicut de pisistrato et Demetrio phalaraeo apud athenienses legimus ) potest tamen jure impediri , etiam armata manu , et a quibusvis vel infimae sortis , quibus vim inferre voluerit , quum nullo jure illi obstringantur . 

From the alleging of authors the proposer comes again to arguing , and urging the former scripture , tells us , it speaks not of obeying those that shall be powers , but the powers that are , and those that are in authority . 

I grant it is spoken of the present powers : but who are those ? surely those which are constituted powers , not those which are pretenders to power . Whatsoever force rises up to hinder the parliament , yet the parliament is a power in being , because it has a legal being . To this purpose is that which we read in Mr.  Burroughs' book , entitled the glorious name of God the Lord of hosts , which book was printed by order from a committee of the house of Commons . In that book p. 47 he tells us , the kingdom hath a parliament in being , until both houses have agreed to dissolve it . And in his answer to doctor Ferne p. 3 he places the emphasis upon the word power ; for thus he writes ; we distinguish between the man that hath the power , and the power of that man , and say although the power must not be resisted according to the letter and sense of the text , yet the illegal will and ways of the man , May be resisted without the least offending against the text . 

To what the proposer demands concerning the covenant , i will on• only tell you what is lately published by Mr.  Can a great patron of the late proceedings , in his book against the covenant p. 7. his words are these . It is not possible that ever this common wealth should be settled according to what the parliament hath lately declared , and the covenant duly observed ; so incompatible is the one with the other . 

To the proposers passage concerning heirs and successors in the oath of allegiance . I say ( With submission to better information ) whereas the office of a King May outlive the race of a King , there are therefore mentioned not only heirs but successors ; that in case heirs fail , yet kingship Might not die , and therefore heirs is set first , and successors after . But of this enough , and it May be also this May seem superfluous ; for if the proposed alteration go on , it will exclude both heirs and successors . 

To the last quere of the proposer ( If i understand the meaning of it ) there May be a sufficient answer picked out of the last passage which i cited out of mr Burroughs . 

I shall therefore here conclude with the council of the most wise God , given by the wisest of men . prov. 24. 21. 22.  my son , fear thou the Lord , and the King : and meddle not with them that are given to change . For their calamity shall rise suddenly , and who knoweth the ruin of them both . 

Finis 









































