A sober and seasonable vindication , of the modest presbytery . 

When by the providence of God in the year 1640. the late unfortunate King , by the serious advice of his gravest counsellors for a remedy to the then menacing grievances of the persons , had the third of November called a parliament , and therein given from the crown many precious jewels voluntarily , ( Not to be retorted from his ancestors by a continue series and concatenation or blood and treasure expended in a long and tedious war , ( The name whereof yet too freshly bleeds in the late renewed distractions ; ) yet such was the rage of the then regnant party , that under pretence of a disagreeing humour , not immediately jumping with their fancy , there began a deficiency in the main under which the nation for a long time laboured ; and after many strong convulsions and gripping pains was delivered of a personal treaty , the then only thought conducing means to resettle the disturbed nation , ) and herein indeed were included the major part of the parliament , whose original aims never tended any further than to reform the abuses of the then present power , not an extirpation either of the governor much less government . 

We need not run to antiquity to maintain this point , that most worthy and learned gentleman Mr. Pryune hath so cleared the way , that he hath left nothing for a poor gleaner ; however in vindication of the truth , and as a poor imitator of his virtues , give me leave to inform the whole English nation . 

That when the burden of dissension ( By its too frequent decision in the field ) had made the persons pant for want of breath , that they were even ready to fall grovelling in the dust , then as a Moses in the gap did the far major part of the Commons house , joined with the then sitting Lords , conclude themselves within the reasonable limit of amending abuses , not engrossing the public revenues of the nation into private and single hands . But although the unwearied endeavours of some ambitious heads , wrought effects even beyond expectation , as to an oligarchical democracy ; yet the uncessant labours of the honest and modest presbyter could never be beaten off , but even when the sword itself with an usurped majesty cut the Gordian knot of their rule , they yet kept their heart ; and notwithstanding the decollation of the head , maintained that ancient maxim of cor'ultimum moriens ; for indeed had they not been all heart , the whole from thence could never have received a new strength and vigour . 

To these therefore all freeborn Englishmen owe their liberties , magna charta had died if the members secluded in 1648. had not survived , the law had ceased , and every man Might have done what seemed good in his own eyes , as when there was no King in Israel ; or as at the time when the committee of safety domineered in England , whose constitutions used only to the calm of a Southern breeze , was not able to endure the storm of a cold Northern blast . 

But such is the well-tempered constancy of the not to be altered members , that maugre malice and envy , they still continue in their first resolved temper , namely , a regulated monarchy , according to the concession in the isle Wight , a democratical house of Commons in its primitive original , soon joined to the fountain of honour by an oligarchical peerage ; which three ( Without blasphemy be it spoken ) resemble the deity , and each of them on the other so consistent , that though there be peace in the circumference , yet still they unite in the centre . 

It is therefore a sin to doubt a defect : in them whose realities cure the imperfections of the nation ; the worst that can be said of them being only this , that having deviated , they now return into the right path.  A good precedent to the whole kingdom . 

With what triumph and exaltation did the streets echo and resound at this restauration , as already confident of a settlement from them in power , whose promises were so rich while laid aside , i really hope the fullness of our expectation shall from them receive the desired satisfaction ; so shall they by all , be justly entitled , patres patriae , the fathers of their country ; the repairers of breaches , and the restorers of paths to dwell in . 

Printed for Henry Marsh . 1660.  







