Modern policies , taken from Machiavel , Borgia , and other choice authors , by an eyewitness . 

hom.  

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} 



Sallust . Fragm. 

Libidinem dominandi , causam belli habent , & maximam gloriam in maximo imperio putant . 



Plautus in captivis . 

Nam doli , non doli sunt , ni si astu colas , 

Sed malum maximum , si id palam pervenit . 



trinummus . 

Ambitio jam more sanctaest , liberaest a legibus , 

Petere honorem pro flagitio , more sit : 

Mores , leges perduxerunt jam in potestatem suam . 



The fourth edition . 

London , printed for Tho : Dring , at the sign of the George in Fleetstreet near Clifford's inn . 1653.  

To my very good Lord my Lord r. b. e.  

My Lord , 

I was never so proud , as to think i could write any thing that Might abide the test of your judicious eye ; what i now send , appeals to your candour , entreating you to lay aside the person of a judge , for that of a friend . It is at best but a pamphlet , whether you consider its bulk , or worth . The result of a few pensive hours spent in recollecting what the memory had registered from public observance , or private reading , in a theme so sadly copious as this is . If it be not impertinent to tell you what hinted to this trifle , it was this ; having had opportunity to look abroad into the world , i took some notice of the contrastos of the Italian Princes ; i remarked the Spaniards gripping Portugal ; his grounds for the challenge of that kingdom , & his way of managing those grounds ; i looked upon his method of propagating Christianity in the West : ( Where one says the Indian is bound to be religious and poor upon pain of death . ) Moreover , i observed with what artifice the Pope moderated in the European quarrels , and with what devices he twisted the gops•ll , and the advantage of the chair toge•hir ; and in all the strugglings and disputes , that have of late years befallen this corner of the : world , i found •hat although the p•letence was , five and spiritual , yet the ultimate end , and ••••sedpe , was gold , and greatness , and secular glory . 

But ( My Lord ) to come nearer , when i saw kingdoms tottering , one nation beeding against another , yea , one piece of a nation justling the other , and split into so many parties , and petty enmities : and each of these quoting bible to palliate his mad , and exorbitant opinions ; i sighed , and it grieved me to see popular easiness , and well-meaning abused by ambitious self-seeking men ; for there is a generation that is born to be the plague , and disquiet , and scourge of the age it lives in ; that gladly sacrifice the public peace to private interest ; and when they see all fired , with joy warm their hands at those unhappy flames , which themselves kindle , tuning their merry harps ; when others are weeping over a kingdom's funeral . 

But above all , it pierced my heart to see the clergy in such an high degree accessary to the civil distempers , and contentions that have everywhere shaked the foundations of church and state ; so that ( As a Catholic noted ) there hath been no flood of misery , but did spring from , or at least was much swelled by their holy-water . I searched Evangelical records , and there was nothing but mild and soft doctrines , i enquired into the breathings of the spirit , and they were pacificatory ; i wondered from what precedents and scripture encouragements these men deduced their practices ; and at last was forced to conclude , that they were only pretended chaplains to the Prince of peace ; those torches that should have been for saving light , were degenerated into firebrands ; those trumpets that should have sounded retreats to popular furies , knew no other music but martial alarms . 

I have endeavoured in the sequel to represent to you the arts of ambition by giving you the picture of a person over covetous of glory , the piece is course , but yet like ; drawn only in water colours , which some of greater leisure and abilities May possibly hereafter lay in oil . 

You know that the desires of man are vast as his thoughts , boundless as the ocean , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a bored tub is not more insatiate . 't is pity that greatness should at any time be out of the road of goodness ; and i would sometimes , if i durst , with Socrates , curse him that first separated profitable and honest ▪  

It does to me a little relish of paradox , that where ever i come , Machiavelli is verbally cursed and damned , and yet practically embraced and asserted ; for there is no kingdom but hath a race of men that are ingenious at the peril of the public ; so that as one said of Galba in respect of his crooked body : ingenium Galbae malè habitat ; so May i say of these in regard of their crooked use ; that wit could not have chosen a worse mansion , than where it is viriated , and made a pander to wickedness . 

If you ask me what i mean to trouble the world , that is already under such a glut of books ? You May easily perceive that i consulted not at all with advantaging my name , or wooing public esteem by what i now write ; i knew there was much of naked truth in it , and though it Might possibly be of some caution to prevent the insinuation of pious frauds , and religious fallacies into my native country : if any plain-hearted , honest man shall cast away an hour in perusing it , he May perhaps find something in it resembling his own thoughts , and not altogether strange to his own experience . It is not the least of our misfortunes , that sins and vices are cost times endeared to us by false titles and compliments : being cozened with a specious name , though much incoherent to the thing we ascribe it : or el•e , omi••ing the vice which is the main , it intimates only the •e•i•e which is the by  as for example , we call an ambitious man {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a person of notable aim and high enterprise whereas in truth , signifies , an indirect affector of grandeur : and i find that by incautelous entertainment of these phrases , our judgments are often bribed to misapprehensions , & we seduced to bad actions . I have endeavoured in the ensuing discourse to wipe off the paint and fucu• : that so things May appear in their true complex•o• , unadulterated with the slights and subtleties of deluders . 

My Lord , that your lordship May be one of those which the dark poet calls {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , that the youth of your honours May be renewed to you , that your happiness May be acquainted with no other season but a spring , is the earnest vote 

Of your bounden servant . 

The name of Prince , which i often use , must be understood , as convertible with any person , or persons , whom God hath entrusted with a just supremacy ; all the dialects of government being concerned in the abuse ; i have made the chief , and most familiar , to represent the rest . 

I am not ignorant that the quotations May justly seem more numerous than method , and the rule of art will conveniently allow ; i have this to say , to vindicate me from affectedness ; that i have been little studious of elegance , and curiosity in the composure ; esteeming nakedness to be the best dress of truth : and if i mistake not , those attendants i have here procured for her , May afford some material , though little ornamental advantage . 

A praemonition . 

It is far from the design of this treatise , to derogate from the honour of the calling , or worth of the person of any sober statesman ; 't is a knowledge that no man observes with more due respects then myself ; because , i know it is no mean degree essential to the peace , and flourishing condition of a kingdom or commonwealth . 't is a jewel to be locked up in some few rare cabinets , and not to be made cheap , and exposed to irreverence , by being bared , and prostituted to every vulgar eye . The pseudo-policy here mentioned is contradistinct to that science , which is ever built upon piety and prudence ; for upon these solid bases , your wise architect delights to raises he glorious superstructure of government in a Prince , and subjection in a persons : so knitting the interest of both with reciprocal mixture , that the welfare of the one May be involved in the good of the other : the majesty May be preserved in its just splendour , and ye• the liberty of the subject remain inviolate : he is the Atlas of the falling state , cures it when sick , sets it when disjointed , meets it in its several pressures with suitable reliefs . Such was Philip de commines , of whom one said , it was a measuring cast , whether Lewis were the wiser King , or Philip the wiser counsellor : such was Burleigh to our late Queen Elizabeth , whose advise had very eminent influence into the prosperity of her reign , which was such , as i believe few ages can parallel , and future times will read her happy annals , as written like Xenophon's Cyrus , non ad historiae fidem , sed ad exemplum justi imperij ; so that if we love peace , or plenty , or liberty , we are bound in way of acknowledgement to own that in Plutarch , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} pav . 

But as the corruption of the best things makes them worst , so this noble knowledge has been abused to loose and ambitious ends , by some men who seem to have sucked the venom out of all politics , misapplying what was good , and creating new according to the urgency of their own occasions , like the laws that were made in Causinus his Babel , to berued by manners , and not manners by laws . They vex true policy by misinterpreting , and false glossing ; framing in their hearts Diana's of hypocrisy and subtlety , and worshipping them in their actions . 

The rules following there are few so silly as to believe , though too many so wicked as to practise ; and not only so , but by a bold imposture to persuade that such actions as are deduced from these principles , are justifiable , and if fortunate , commendable . 

That all May see these rocks , and shun them , and detest knavery though never so specious , and nauseate sin , though robed in successes and triumphs , is my daily prayer . 

First principle . The politician must have the shadow of religion , but the substance hurts . 

There is no superstition in politics more odious , then to stand too much uponniceties and scruples : and therefore Machiavel cut the hair , when he advised , not absolutely to disavow conscience , but to manage it with such a prudent neglect , as is scarce discernible from a tenderness : not permitting it to be tetchy and relucting , nor yet prostituting it , unless upon solemn and insuperable occasion : he notes it from Papirius in Livy , who slighted the Pullarii handsomely , and was rewarded ; whereas Appius pulcher did it grossly , and was punished . 

But because the politician is best able to tell his own documents , you May please to conceive you found these broken discourses in his study : to each of which i shall add an antidote . 

External holiness invites awful regards ; there is no mask that becomes rebellion and innovation so well as religion ; nothing that so much conceals deformity , & pretends beauty . 't is an excellent thing so to dissimulate piety , that when we act strongly against it , in that very article of wickedness the persons saint us : Herod would fain worship , when he means to worry . — Ipso sceleris molimine Tereus 
Creditur esse pius : 




This is that which leads the world in a string , that hallows the most hellish enterprises : for the common persons ( Which are the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) never see behind the curtain , a handson gloss is with them as good as the text : i believe the great naturalist was in the right , when h• called a• deity a jolly inven•ion , irridendum , agere curam rerum humanarum quicquid est summum , sed credi ex usu vitae est , let me enjoy the temporal advantages of religion , and let others take the eternal ; let me use it for a cloak or a crutch , and let others expect from it a crown . 

The river in Athenaeus is my emblem , whose upper waters were sweet and grateful , but towards the bottom brackish . Let me be a superficial , let others be fundamental Christians : i like the humour of the Samseans in Epiphanius , that were neither jewer , nor gentiles , nor Christians , but preserving a commodious correspondence with all ▪ whatsoever i act in reference to heaven is merely theatrical ; and done in subordination to some other interest . Lycurgus could never have ingratiated his laws so effectually , if he had not pretended a dialogue with his goddess . 't is to me indifferent , whether the religion i personate be true or false , so it be but popular : and if the persons i mean to juggle with err fundamentally , i can by no means court them more , then by embracing their delusion ; it buckles them very close to me in moral observance , to assist them in their spiritual soundness , and mix with their distemper ; and therefore i commonly lead the van in the faction , and call it jure divino , though i never found it but in hell's black canons . How comfortably the Pope and Cardinal conferred notes , — quantum nobis lucri peperit illa fabula de christo ! Oh the rich income and glorious result of hypocrisy ! This , this must be diligently studied and practised . — Da justum sanctumque videri , 
Noctem peccatis , & fraudibus objice nubem . 




Privacy for a sin , and cleanly conveyance for a cheat , make it to common eyes seem as white as innocency itself : the strictness of that thief was very notable , who always before he went about the work of his calling ( For so he called stealing ) went to prayers that God would bless and prosper him : so i say grace to the design , be it never so wicked , and give thanks for the success , be it never so bloody . 

But further in subserviency to a loose interest , there must be no such puling thing as conscience ; hell , and heaven , and scripture , and what else the Christian esteems most sacred , must all truckle under the plot , but not be observed when they come to oppose it : had Alexander boggled at invading other men's kingdoms , he had never wept for the scarcity of worlds . There is no greater obstacle to generous actions , than a coy and squeamish conscience ; 't is pretty that some tell us that it strikes surdo verbere , and then how can it be heard in the noise and bustle of a clamorous world ? Had your mighty conquerors , and your valiant captains , and your thriving Popes , listened to this inward charmer , their names had never swelled , and looked big in the rolls of fame . 

Colasterion . 

But let all sober Christians know , that this shell of religion , though it May be of external conducement , yet there is nothing that God's pure and undeluded eye looks on with more abhorrency : we May possibly deceive men , but 't is in vain to put ironies upon God . A counterfeit religion shall find a real hell , and 't is pity that such a sacred thing should be violenced , & made to obstetricate to rebellious irregular designs . 

As for such who have conspired with the wrath of God in the stupefaction of their consciences , though they May for a time struggle with those inward checks , yet there will be a day ( If not in this life ) when that witness , that judge , that jury will not be bribed . God hath fixed it in the soul as an eternal register , as an impartial diary as the censor of the affections , and pedagogue of the passions . It does not only illustrate divine justice in an autocat•crisy , but was meant by God for a bridle and restriction : and he that hath by an inveterate wickedness conquered the opposition which God seated in his heart to sin , May possibly consult well with his present advantage and greatness , but not at all with his future comfort ; for besides the loss of that intimate pleasure which writes upon innocency ; he •eels sometimes those bosom quarrels that verberate and wound his soul , — for {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 




Principle ii thè politician must by all means make the most insinuating applications to the persons that he can ; and lock up his own design , in pretence for religion , liberty , restitution of laws , reformation of gabelles , &c.  

The prosperity of innovation depends in a high measure upon the right knack of kindling and fomenting jealousies and dislikes in the persons ; and then wielding those grudges to the favour & advantage of private ends ; for the persons are to the politician like tools to the mechanic , he can perform nothing without them , they are his wings , his wheels , his implements , the properties that he acts with . 

That this May be done effectually , there must be an excellency in these following slights . 

First , to assign such a cause of grievances , and such a course for redress , as May open a way to the alteration he aims at : as if he means to alter the government  , or to engross the supremacy , he must artificially convince of a necessity to arm , 1.  Defensively , and if that succeeds , 2.  Offensiu•ly ; this he May do by false alarms of danger , inventing horrid news , and plying the persons with such fictitious perils , as May make them believe , religion and liberty , and all is at stake , and that they are the geese that must save the Capitol . 

Secondly , when he sees opportunity to reveal his own design , he must do it gradually , and by piecemeal ; for that which at one view would be a Mormo to fright them , give it them in small parts , and they will digest it well enough . 

Thirdly , he must compose his very garb and gesture : 't is a great matter to tell a lie with a grace ; as , if religion be the mode , he must in his tales knock his breast , attest God , and invoke imprecations upon himself , if he does not do that , which he never intends . 

Fourthly , he gives them good words , and bad actions , like those the historian brands with a crudelitatem damnatis , crudelitatem initis , ravishes them with apprehensions of liberty , under the highest strain of oppression : for it is most certain if , you please them with the name , they will embrace it for name and thing . Something like this had been imposed upon Rome , when the orator writ to his friend Atticus , — nominu rerum perdidimus , & licentia . militaris libertas vocatur , that they were cheated in names , for military licence was miscaled liberty ; this is well described by Plautus in truculentu . In melle sunt lingu• sitae vestrae , atque orationes , 
Lacteque : corda felle sunt sita , atque acerbo aceto . 
Elinguis dicta dulcia datis , at cord amare facitis . 




Fifthly , he observes that they receive probabilities wisely propounded , more greedily then naked truths : and therefore he is very studious to glass and polish his impostures , that so they May to a loose eye dissemble truth , according to that of pindar , — {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} — 
{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , 
{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} 
{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : 




Or that of Menander : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} 
{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} 
{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 




Sixthly , when he hath by the assistance of the persons got the sword into his own hands , he awes them with it , and frights them into future compliance . He tha• courted them before with all the adulator• terms , that ambition could invent , or they receive ; as if he had bee• vowed their martyr , and ready to sacrifice his dearest enjoyments upon the altar of public liberty and freedom ; as if his veins knew no other blood , but such as he would be proud to spend in their service , having now served himself of them , he forgets the bosom that warmed him , they hear from him now in a palinode , he curls up his smooth compliments into short laconics , and exchanges his courtship for command . 

Colasterion . 

First , we May be assured that there is no greater index of ambition , than an affectation of popularity : which appears in meek addresses to the persons , wooing and familiar condescensions , bemoaning thei• sufferings , commending a more vigorous sense o• them ; that of the comit• is no bad rule , Non temerarium est ubi dives ble• de appellat pauperem , 
Aitera manu fert lapicadem , pa•• ostentat altera : 
Nemini crede , qui longe blanduest 〈◊〉 ves pauperi . 




Or that which Livy notes of a crandee , credebant haud gratuitam in tanta superbid comitatem fore , the extreme kindness or fawning of great persons , is always suspicious , because often fraudulent : remember the sileni , that use to kill with hugs , and embraces . 

Secondly , know it 's very usual for men to personate goodness , till they have accomplished their ends ; 't is observed of Appius , when he had his wish , finem fecit gerendae alienae personae ; 't is an old note , Maxima pars morem hunc homines habent , quod fibi votunt , 

Dumid imperiant ▪ honi sunt , se•• ubi iam penes sese habent , 

Ex bonis pessimi , & fraudulentiss•• sunt . 





Athon••s tells a pretty story , of one atheni•• born obscurely , who 〈◊〉 long as he was priva•• and poor , excelled in 〈◊〉 soft and tractable disposition , but when by jug•ling he had obtained Th•athenian Governmen• there was none more •dious for a cruel , cove•ous , & barbaric tyra•ny : as it is reported 〈◊〉 Caligula , there was nev•• a better servant , and a worse Master . 

Thirdly , we know that a good aim , much •ess a good pretence cannot justify a bad action , and therefore we ought to be as solicitous about the lawfulness of the means , as about the goodness of the end . It •s a maxim in morality , that bonum oritur ex inte•••s , and in Christianity , •hat we must not do •vil that good May come •f it ; & we May possibly •escue ourselves from •uture cozenage , if we •xamine the lawfulness •f every circumstance leading to the end propounded , before we are tickled and transported with the beauty of the pretence . 

Principle . Iii if the supremacy be invaded , the lapses of the former magistrate must be inculcated with the greatest advantage , and what is wanting in reality , must be supplied in calumny . 

It cannot easily be imagined of what singular importance the aspersing and blotting of a Prince is , to boil up popular discontent to that height which is requisite for a rebellion ; and here it must diligently be enquired if there have not beeene indeed such lapses , as have galed the persons ; and though they be old sores and skined , yet they must be searched and refreshed , and exasperated with all the urging circumstances , that come within the invention of scandal ; it must be remembered , if any persons of public note have suffered under the sword of justice , whose crimes can by art or eloquence be extenuated , whose hard measure must be mentioned with tears , that so old traitors May be propounded for new martyrs . this hath been the ordinary method of ambition , as you May find it noted by a great scholar in these words , — fuit haec omnibus saeculis , & adhuc est ad occupandum tyrannidem expeditissima via , dum summo se amore ; ac pietate in patriam esse simulant , principum vitia , & populi miseriam , apud suos primum , deinde palam queribunda voce lamentantur , non quo plebem , cuius solius commodis inservire •ideri volunt , ab illo servitutis jugo asserant in libertatem ; sed quo populari aura subnixi , aditum •ibi & januam ad eam ipsam dignitatem , nequiora aliquando ausuri patefaciant . and therefore if the Prince be severe , he gives him Nero's brand , a man kneaded up of dirt and blood : if he be of parts and contrivance , he calls it pernicious ingenuity : if he be mild and favourable to tender consciences , he declaims against his toleration : if he urge uniformity , and decency in divine service , he rails at his superstition . And because there is no such aequilibrious virtue , but has some flexure to one of the extremes he is very careful to publish the extreme alone , and to silence the virtue . 

But if the Prince hath by carriage of extraordinary innocence , vindicated himself from obloquy ( Which shall scarce be , if small faults be rightly improved ) then Machiavel's advice must be followed , to calumniate stoutly , till the persons have entertained something to his prejudice : 't is a figure in politics to make every infirmity a fault , and every fall a crime : and if the persons be disposed to alteration , these must be first urged against a monarch to depose him , or if need be to murder him ; which is commendable , if you can dress him up like a tyrant , as you May find it justified by an honest Scot , who complains that there are not some glorious rewards appointed for Tyrannicides : and by the best of orators , — graecos deorum honores tribuisse iis , qui tyrannos necaverunt : and by the tragedian , victima bawd ulla amplion potest . 





magisve optma mactari jovi , 

quam rex iniquus . 

And secondly , these personal faults must be artificially devolved upon monarchy itself . 

There remains to disperse the commendations of that government which is intended for a successor : if arstocracy , the long-lived prosperity of Sparta and Venice , is a very plausible evidence of its goodness : if democracy , the happiness of the Romans under their tribunes is very memorable ; to which May be added this out of Machlavel : that they are the most suitable guardians of any thing , who are least desirous to usurp it : and without doubt considering the designs of the nobility and the persons , we must confess , that the first are very ambitious of rule , the last desire only not to be oppressed . 

Colasterion . 

I presume that person is very rare , that can boast of such an absolute saint-ship whilst he is amongst mortals , but that there will now and then some actions fall from him , which confess humanity , and require candour : some leaves in the volume of the fairest life , that are legenda cuno venia : if this be a common frailty , why do we six such rigid censures upon the miscarriages of Princes or why do we deny them the same mildness which we use , when we commiserate the infirmities of other men ? 't is yet much more disingenuous to revive and poor upon a few bad actions , which it May be have been long ago expiated with many good : take this from no mean statist . — iniqua in omni re accusanda , praetermissis bonis , malarum enumeratio , vitiorumque selectio ; namne ullus quidem isto modo magistratus vituperabilis no•erit . 

As greatness gives a gloss to the virtues of a Prince , so it mitigates his vices ; for if we look upon him as circled with honour , and all outward enjoyment ; we see withal that variety of temptations he hath to struggle with above others , having no other guard , no other weapon than his mere virtue ; sometimes we are defended from a sin by our very impotency , it May be above our sphere , or out of our reach ; we do not , because we cannot ; how often are our wills offenders , when our hands are innocent ? we are checked from without , he commonly from within , having nothing to dispute with his immoderate desires but himself . This is that which enhances the goodness of a Prince , as that excellent poet leads his temperate knight through all the delicacies and charms of pleasure , and delivers him a conqueror . 

But suppose a magistrate really tyrannical ; it is no contemptible question , whether the evils of the redress May not be equivalent to the mischief . I remember livie's , nec morbum ferre possumus , nec remedum : and Plutarch's , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : and Tacitus , ferendae regum ingenia , neque usui esse crebras mutationes : vitia erunt , donec homines , sed neque haec continua , & meliorum interventu pensantur ; and Seneca , infaeliciter aegrotat , cui plus periculi a medico quam à morbo . poise the miseries of a civil war with the grievances of an unjust magistrate , and the politician must take many grains of allowance from fallacy to make the scales even . For though the fury of incensed tyranny May fall heavy upon many particulars , yet the bloody consequences of an intestine sword , are more epidemical , and more permanent . 

As to the charging the faults of a governor upon the government itself , i see nothing in it but delusion , nor can there be a more gross abuse , then {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

For king-killing , because i know it a tetchy subject , i shall wholly omit all discuss of it ; only i find it damned by an able English divine Jesuitical ; and Tacitus commends to subjects rather scutum than gladium , the shield of patience and toleration , rather than the sword . 

Principle iv. the politician must nourish some mercenary Jesuits , or other divines , to cry up his aims in their churches , that so the poison May insinuate more generally into all the parts . 

He that peruses history , will find that there hath been no innovation so gross , no rebellion so hideous , but hath had some ecclesiastical fomentors : for such as want worth enough of their own to reach preferment in a regular way , are most apt to envy the just honours of better men ; and despairing to obtain their end by learning and piety , they aspire to it by the crooked means of faction and schism ; nor are these despicable instruments to the politician ; for the sharpest sword in his army cannot vie services with a subtle quill : you May see his business in the comic , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

The Jesuit reckons it in the number of his merits , if he May by any sinister ways ruffle and disorder heretical kingdoms ( So he calls them ) encourage weak and unstable minds to slight magistracy  , irritate divisions , tumults , rebellions , absolve from oaths , and all sacred ties ; so that it is hard to find any tragical scene , or bloody theatre , into which the Jesuite hath not intruded , and been as busy as Davus in the comedy , contributing in a very high measure to every fanatic insolence , justifying the old lemma of Loiola's picture , cavete vobis principes : these are the firebrands of Europe , the forge and bellows of sedition , infernal emissaries , the pests of the age , men that live as if huge sins would merit heaven by an antiperistasis . 

2.  Nor is any nation without some turbulent spirits of its own , the dishonour of the gown and pulpit , the shame , and sometimes the ruin of their country ; you would think they had their text from a Gazet , because you hear so much of a coranto in the application• : that these May be fit implements for the politician , there are th•se requisite qualifications . 

1.  There must be a principal gift of wresting the scripture , vexing & urging the holy text , constraining it to patronize the design ; the great apostle expresses this in three very emphatical terms ; 1.  Cogging the dye , making the word speak what they list ; 2.  Crafty applications , and expositions of it ; 3.  All the methods and arts of consenage , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , gilding and varnishing rotten doctrines , and this must be done . 

1.  In public , vomiting out flames and sulphur from that sacred pegma , where he should deliver none but mild and soft , that is , Evangelical embassages . 

2.  In private , at parlour sermons , and meeting houses , where he is listened to as an oracle , and here commonly he is more euthsivast than scripturist , and his auditors believe his dreams to be as canonical as the revelation ; like those Melancthon speaks of , quicquid somniant , volunt esse spiritum sanctum , or those that the father chides , when he tells them that every whimsy is not prophesy {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

3.  He ought to be of some abilities in disputing , and what he wants in logic , he must supply in garrulity : for whatsoever he affirms , the interest he hath in his seduced hearers improves into a syllogism ; if you ask after his topics ; ex officina carnificum argumenta petit : if after his weapons , armat se ad latrocinium per christi nomen , and the woun•• he makes is faction ; those consciences which will not surrender to his parley , his Master takes by storm : and thus he abuses Christ , by pretending his favour to unwarrantable actions ; he abuses his Prince , by alienating the affection and allegiance of his subjects ; he abuses the church , by shattering it into rents and schisms ; wounding it with a feather from its own wing , snatching a coal from the altar , to fire both church and state ; and lastly he abuses himself , for when the politician hath made his best use of his seditious spirit , he leaves him to his own wild distempers , having directed his own thoughts to another goal . 

Colasterion . 

Although we have caution enough against these in sad and frequent experiences , these latter ages groaning under the effects of an exorbitant clergy ; yet such is the easiness and credulity of the vulgar , such the subtlety and dissembled sanctity of the impostor , that he meets with as great a proneness in the persons to be couse•d , as he brings willingness to delude ; for it is a true observation , that these clancular sermocinators bear as great sway in popular minds , and make as deep impression upon their consciences , as the loyolists do , when they impose upon their blind laity . 

I dare only subjoin these few advices . 

First , i should suspect  clericall statu• , i mean such a one as in the dispensation of sacred oracles , tampers with secular affairs , unless it be in case of high concernment to his auditors souls . 

Secondly , i should believe him a juggler , that sprinkles his sermons with murmurs against the lawful magistrate , ecclesiastical , or civil , unless he hath some better ground for his dislike , than a th' warting his humour , in things controversial and adiaphorous . 

Thirdly , i should more than doubt his knavery , that should suborn scripture , to attest , or incite to illegal actions , as a kin to that , which Salvian calls religiosum scelus . 

4ly . all news in religion , whether in doctrine or discipline , is 〈◊〉 common screen of private design ; let {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} tell it , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} which is noted by the great Causabon in his epistle before his Baronian exercitations , thus ; cupiditas novandi haec secum mala semper trahit , christ• inconsutilem tunicam lacerate , sectas novas parit , & statim multiplicat , ecclesiam & populum concutit &c.  

't is sad to see vra•ti• divine Urania enrolled i• blood , the stars and luminaries of the church , to shed such black and malignant influences ; in lieu of pious documents , to hear none but furious incentives ; ite a•acreses , tantaeque precor confidite causae ; the cause they serve , is the doctrine and the use , the egg , the apple , the head and foot of all their discourses ; if you like to confer notes , you May find a piece of their sermon in Barclay to this effect , se evangelij libertatem praedicare , •ill•m christianis animis vim inferre , suam cuique conscientiam liberam relinquere , verbo ducere , non vi quemquam adigere ; ea• esse evangelij doctrinam , u• omnes conscientiae fruantu• libertate : sibique ut id liceat , votis omnibus postulare . 

Principle . v. if success waits upon his enterprises , he urges it to authenticate his cause . 

There is no argument more popular than success , because the bulk of men is not able to distinguish the permission of God , from his approbation : and although it be in its self fallacious and feeble , yet the misery of the conquered denies them the opportunity to dispute it ; for the opposition of the sword will never be confuted by the bare fist of logic . Nor doth the victor commonly permit any ventilation of his dictates ; for when the body is a slave , why should the reason be free ? {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; as the soldiers in Plutarch wondered any would be so importunate to preach laws , and moral reasons to men with swords by their sides ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : and if arms knew not how to descend to rational inquiries , but were enough justified by an odd kind of necessity of their own creating ; like those in Livy , in armis jus ferre , & omnia fortium virorum esse . 

I have often considered with myself , what should move tyrants to print justifications of themselves , and assertions of their proceedings , which i suppose never made an understanding man a convert , nor met with a cordial reception in any ; unless the abuse of a few , poor , shallow believers , be thought a triumph worth their pains . I have sometimes thought they do by these papers please themselves in their abilities to delude , and so gratify their tyranny over the noblest part of m•n , by denying the liberty of the thought , and subduing the powers of the soul to an implicit coherence with their own magisterial opinions . 

But our politician , by quoting the success of his undertakings , besides the plausibleness ▪ and insinuating nature of the proposition itself , hath the advantage of power to make us believe him . 

Nor ▪ is this bait contemptible , many of parts and prudence , yea and of religion , have been staggered by it ; some question whether Diagoras deserved the brand of atheism , considering the wild conceits they then had of their gods ; or differed from the common creed , crying out , oh how the God's favour sacrilege ! when he had a merry gale , after a sacrilegious attempt . The best of the Roman historians calls the victory , the just arbitress of the cause , eventus belli velut aequus judex , unde jus stat , ei victoriam dabit : so hard it is to persuade mere reason , that virtue May b• unfortunate , and vi• happy . 

He was no small po•• that argued himself o•• of his gods , by seei•• wickedness honoured , 〈◊〉 worth slighted : whi•• he expresses thus ; Memtor to Li••us tu mulo iacti• at Cato parv• , 
Pompeiusnullo , guis putet esse de• 




In English . Licinus does in marble sleep , 
A common urn does Cato keep 
Pompey's ashes May catch cold , 
That there are God's , let dou• 〈◊〉 




there May be so•• use made of that in Se••ca , honesta quaedam scelera successus facit , prosperous mischiefs are Cardinal virtues in the world's ethics ; & therefore the tragedian repeats it , prosperum ac faelix scelus , virtus vocatur . the unwarrantableness is hide and concealed in the glory of the success : we often praise the Macedonian conquest , but seldom mention their boundless and unjust ambition . 

On the contrary , if an undertaking really good miscarry , we censure it : so that according to the vogue of the world , 't is the event that gives the colour to the action , and denominates it good o• bad . to {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

Colasterion . 

There is some of this leaven in the judgments of most , notwitstanding those brighter discoveries , in the noon of Christianity we live under . A bible thoroughly observed , would expound to us much of the riddle , and dark passages of providence : we are so shortsighted , that we cannot see beyond time , we va•ue things , and men , by their temporal prosperities , and transient glories ; whereas if we put eternity into the othe• seal , it would much out-poise that worldly lusstre , that so much abuses our eye , and cousins our understandings . 

I find not in holy writ that God hath in separably annexed goodness and greatness , justice and victory : he hath secured his servants of the felicities of a better life , but not of this . Ch•ists' kingdom was not , our happiness is not of this world . 

Nor doth my bible show me any warrant for appeal to heaven for th•• decision of this , or that •ntricacy , by bestowing success upon this party , or that cause , according to its righteousness , and due merit . There is a vast difference betwixt {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} and {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , even in scripture construction . 

The great Turk May justly exult , and prune himself in discourses of this nature , if they be once admitted , & owned by Christians : and i shall forbear any longer to think Mahomet an impostor , and must receive the Alcoran for gospel ; •f i shall be convinced that temporal happiness and triumph , are a true index of divine favour ▪ our religion hath something more to invite our closure with it ; it proposes a conveniency on earth , but the Crowne• and garlands are reserved for heaven . 

The Money-god in Aristophanes pretends a command from Jupiter to distribute as great a largesse to the wicked , as to the good ; because if virtue should once impropriate riches , that fair goddess would be more wooed for her dowry ▪ than for her native beauty : so if religion were attended with those outward allurements that most take the senses ; we should be apt to follow Christ for the loaves , and overlook the spiritual charms , and more noble ends of Christianity . 

The heathen could say , foelix praedo mundo exemplum inutile , happy piracy is a thing of unhappy presidency ; fortunate sins May prove dangerous temptations ; but to say that God doth signally at test the actions of such a person , or the justice of such a cause , by permitting it to prosper , and taper up in the world , is such a deceit , as deserves our serious abhorrency — i leave it with Ovid's wish , — careat successibus opto , quisquis ab eventu facta not anda putant . 





Principle vi . The politician must change with the times . 

That alterations & revolutions in kingdoms are the rods with which God scourges miscarrying Princes , is resolved by my Lord of Argenton : to which May be added out of Aristotle in the fift of his politics — per fraudem & dolum regna evertuntur , that the ruins of a kingdom are often derived from fraud and subtleties : i shall omit inquiry into other causes , as foreign to my present purpose . 

The politician knows best how to improve these popular gusts , because he caused them ▪ such a storm is his seed time . 't is the boast of a Dutch man , that he can sail with all winds ; the aspiring man observes the quarter whence the fairest gales of preferment blow , and spreads the sails of his ambition to entertain them ; nor can the compass breath more varieties , than his dextrous soul has changes and garbs , and suitable compliances . 

What the orator calls his top and perfection , to make happy application to the several humours and genius of all sorts of men , qualifying his address with what he knows will most charm the person he treats ; that the politician does not only with his lip , but life you May find all those figures and tropes digested into his actions , and made practical , that are in the other only vocal . 

He remembers that of an English marquess •awlet of Winchester ) who having successfully served four Princes , and still in the same room of favour , unshaken with the vicissitudes he had run through , being asked by one , by what means he preserved his fortune , he replies , that he was made , ex salice , non ex quercu , of the pliant willow , not stubborn oak , always of the prevailing religion , and a zealous professor . This detractness and bending is of absolute necessity ; for , if the same temper , which insinuated in violent times , were retained in a composed and settled government , it would be altogether distasteful ; and so on the contrary . 

Therefore if religion be fashionable , you can scarce distinguish him from a saint : he does not only reverence the holy ministers , but if need be , he can preach himself : if cunctation prevails , he acts Fabius : if the buckler must be changed for a sword , he personates Marcellus : if mildness be useful , Soderini of Venice was not more a lamb than he : if severities are requisite , Nero's butcheries are sanctities , compared with his : as Alcibiades in Plutarch , shifted disposition as he altered place ( Being voluptuous and jovial in Jonia , frugal & retired in Lacedaemon ) so he proportions himself to time , place , person , religion , with such aplausiblenesse , as if he had been born only to serve that opinion , which he harboured but as a guest whilst it continue in sway : having a room in his heart , if occasion be , to lodge the contrary , and to cry it up with as much ardour ; as he once used to extol the former . And thus like a subtle Proteus' , he assumes that shape that is most in grace , and of most profitable conducement to his ends , in eo stant confilia , quod sibi conducere putat . 

He abounds in that which Varo calls , ver•atile ingenium , a voluble wit , like the changeling derided by Plautus , as more turning then a potter's wheel . 

He hath this advantage of the chameleon , that he can assume white ness ; for i find him often wearing the rest of innocency , to conceal the ugliness and blackness of his attempts . 

Finally , he is the Heliotrope to the sun of honour , and hath long since abjured his god , religion , conscience , and all that shall interpose , and screen him from those beams , that May ripen his wishes and aims into enjoyments . 

Colasterion . 

But the true statesman is inviolably constant to his principles of virtue , and religious prudence ; his ends are noble , and the means he uses , innocent : he hath a singl eye on the public good ; and if the ship of the state miscarry , he had rather perish in the wrack , than preserve himself upon the plank of an inglorious subterfuge . His worth hath led him to the helm , the rudder he uses , is an honest and vigorous wisdom the star he looks to for direction is in heaven ; and the port he aims at , is the joint welfare of Prince and persons . 

This constancy is that solid rock upon which the wise Venetian hath built its long-lived republic : so that it is not improbable the maiden-queen borrowed her motto of semper eadem , from this maiden common wealth . 

't is true , something is to be conceded to the place , and time , and person ; & i grant that there are many innocent compliances ; Virgil's obliquare sinus is observable , there May be a bending without a crookedness : we May circumire , and yet not aberrare ; Paul became a Jew , that he Might gain the Jews , but he did not become a sinner , that he Might gain sinners ; he was made all things to all men , but he was not made sin to any : that is , his condescensions were such , as did we• consist with his Christian integrity . 

Greatness , and honours , and riches , and sceptres , those glorious temptations , that so much enamour the doting world , are too poor shrines for such a sacrifice as conscience , which the politician hath so much abused by an inveterate neglect , that it is become menstruous , and ephemerall . 

Principle vii . If the politician find reason to impose oaths , let them be of such ambiguity as May furnish with a sense obliging to the design , and yet so soft as the persons May not feel the snare . 

It appears by sad experience , that in propounding of oaths , requiring promises , and other solemn ties ; there have been multitudes induced to bind themselves upon some secret loose , and men tall reservation ; w•ch they have framed to themselves as a salvo in case of breach : so apt we are in affairs of greatest importance , to advise more with corrupt ▪ wit than sound conscience . 

In the catalogue of self-delusions , you May possibly find these ; 

1.  We are ready to interpret the words too kindly , especially if they be ambiguous ; and 't is hard to find terms so positive , but that they May be eluded indeed , or seem to us to be so , if we be disposed . 
2.  Some are invited to illicite promises qu• illicit , because they know them to be invalid . 
3.  Some are frighted into these bonds by threats , and losses , and temporal concernments , and then they please themselves that they swear by Duress , and so are disengaged . 
4.  Some are oathproofe ; i mean there are such sear-souled men , as will swear pro and con.  
5.  Some have learned from the civilians , that though we swear to a thing not materially unlawful , yet if it impedes a greater moral good , it becomes void . 
Some take liberty to swear , because they judge the person to whom they swear incapable of an oath : as Cic•ro defends the breach of oath to a thief , from perjury , and Brutus to a tyrant : as it is in Appian , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

The first sort of thes• false most properly under the notice , and practise of our politician ; though he May also use the last , but at different times . 

It is not difficult for him to cast his desire into such soft glib expression as will down with most ▪ yea , with many that would absolutely disavow the same thing in rough language . If he be unskilled in this black art , i commend him to the pedagogy of the Delphic devil . 

Now it is most certain , there is no other tie of such security , and establishment , to a person that hath ravished greatness , and acquired it by violence . Usurpation hath only these two pillars , it 's own arms , and militia , and public oath and acknowledgement ; and it is scarce worth query , whether , when the gross of a nation is thus bound , the oath be not as valid , and the conscience as much concerned , as if it had been sworn to a lawful Prince . It is reasonable that a• usurping power cannot upon any prudent persuasion have the same confidence in the love of the persons that a just hath : nor is the following government enticing , as Tacitu• notes , nec qu•squam imperium malis artibus quaesitum benè administravit . the same with Guazz• , where one objecting the vices of Princes , receives this answer , perchè non erano prencip• per natura , ma per violenza , & erano più temuti che amati : and therefore if the politician can by the blessed means forementioned gain a superiority , there is no trusting to those ingenuous guards , his own goodness , and the love of others : his best defence is awe , and fear , and scaffold , and gibbet , and the like . For he that hath no voluntary room in the hearts of his persons , must use all means to gain a coercive . 

For his own promises he puts them into the same bottomless bag , which the poets say Jupiter made for lovers asseverations : his word is as good as his oath , for they are both trifles , as it is in Plautus . — pactum non pactum est , un pactum pactum est , cum illis lubet . 





'T was he that first invented that useful distinction of a lip-oath , and a heart-oath ; you May find him in Euripides . Jurata lingua est , ment iuravi nihil 




He makes good use of that in Plutarch , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} that children are to be cozened with rattls , and men with oaths . 

't is an huge advantage that man hath in a credulous world , that can easily say and swear to any thing ; and yet withal so palliate his falsifications and perjuries , as to hide them from the conusance of most . The politician must be furnished with handsome refuges , that May seemingly heal miscarriages this way . He need not spend much time in inquiry after such helps ; these declining ages will abundantly furnish his invention . 

Colasterion . 

An oath is in its self a religious affirmation , a promise with God's seal ; and therefore it concerns Christians to be cautelous before swearing , to swear liquidly , and to observe constionably . 't is pity such slender evasions should satisfy us , as have been scorned by heathens . We are bound ( Says one of them ) to the sense of the imposer , or else we do {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , we are bound to the performance of what we have thus sworn , or else we do {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : 't is much , that a moral conscience should more check them , than a clearer light can awe us : as if they more honoured the genius of a Caesar , than we revere the presence of a God : or else we should never engage in new protestations , that do interfere , yea , and sometimes positively quarrel with old . They had their {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , their perjury revenging gods ; to whose vindictive powers they referred their offenders : they punished such as swore falsely by their Prince with fustigation ; but such as abused their gods , were left to the dispose of their injured deities , as if they were at a loss how to find a punishment equal to the sin . Hear how soberly Plato mentions it ( Out of the noble commentator upon Philostratus ) en toutes manieres sà este un fort belle ordinance & institutition , de n' user point du nom des dieux legerement , de peur de les contaminer ; ca• la majeste des dieux ne se doit imployer , qu' en un saint & venerabile puretè . see what real honour they gave to their counterfeit gods : let us have a care that we ascribe not counterfeit honour to the true God . 

Our god hates every false oath : it appears in his severity to Zedekiah , for breaking covenant with the Babylonian monarch , though a tyrant of the first magnitude . 

Were all subjects duly solicitous about the weight of this bound , we should be less prone to take , and more studious  observe it ; i remember the scholiast upon Aristoyha•es , derives {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , it hedges in and shuts up a man , and ties his hands behind him ; i know not how some conquerors May cut this knot with the sword ; or how some Samson's May shake off these cords ; or what gaps the licentious May make in this hedge ; but such as value God , or heaven , or Prince , or peace , can discover it no way better than in a sincere use of so divine an ordinance . 

There can be no certain rule given , when to believe , and when not , what such as are , or would be great , please to inculcate to us : i find more wracks upon the rock of credulity : and •tis no heresy to affirm , that many have been saved by their infidelity ; i commend that of epichar•••• {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} 




Principle viii . Necessity of st•te , is a very competent apology for the worst of actions . 

It has been observed , that in all innovations and rebellions ( Which ordinarily have their rif•• from pretences of religion , or reformation , or both ) the breach and neglect of laws hath been authorised by that great patroness of illegal actions — necessity . 

Now the politician is never without such an advocate as this ; for he cares not to distinguish whether the necessity be of his own creating , or no , as for the most part it is ▪ being indeed an appendix to the wrong he undertakes : and signifies no more , then that he is compelled to cover wrong with wrong , as if the commission of a second •in were enough to justify the first . 

He changes that old charitable advise — benefact a benefactis al•js per•egito nè perpluant ; into vitia vitijs alijs pertegito nè perpluant : that so heapi•g one crime upon another , the later May defend the former from the stroke of justice . 

He adores that maxim in Livy , justum ••t bellum quibus necessarium , & pia arma quibus in armis spes est : it were very incongruous to desire that man to leave his crutch , that cannot walk without ; 't is no less unnatural to invite him to quit his sword , whose life and fortune leans entirely upon it . 

If he can insinuate the scope of the war to be legal , a little daubing will serve to legalize the circumstances : that of the civilians must be remember — licere in bello quae ad finem sunt necessaria , the oracles of the gown are too tender for swordmen ; and it May be he had wit in his anger , who affirmed , that martial law was as great a solecism , as martial peace . 

If the persons be once possessed that his aim and intention is fair , they will never expect that the Media for attainment of his end should be retrenched by the strict boundaries of law : he manages that rule very practically , rem alienam , ex quâ certum mihi peri•ulum eminet , citra culpae alienae considerationem invadere possum ; now he can very plausibly make this periculum , certum , or incertum , as shall best suit with his affairs . 

't is a broad liberty that Grotius concedes , quare si vitam aliter fervare non possum , licet mihi vi qualicunque arcere eum qui eam impetit , licet peccato vacet ; & hoc ex jure quod mihi pro me natura concedit . when life , and liberty , and safety come in question , there ought no consideration to be had of just or unjust , pitiful or cruel , honourable or dishonourable : now when the persons have according to his desire got over the great obstacle , and digested the plot for pious ; it is easy to set all future proceedings upon the score of liberty , safety , religion : and if he be constrained to use means grossly unlawful , 't is but to make them seem holy in the application , and all 's well ; for it is the humour and genius of the vulgar , when they have once rushed into a party implicitly , to prosecute it as desperately , as if they were under demonstrative convictions of its justice . 

Finally , he must make a virtue of necessity , because there is no other virtue will so easily be induced to serve his proceedings as this ; she May well smile upon licentiousness , who hath herself no law . 

Colasterion . 

Let that great rule be received , that no man can be necessitated to sin : our divines generally damn an officious lie ; and the equity binds from any officious sin . 

It would soon cut the nerves of the eighth commandment , if necessities and urgencies , though real , were pronounced a sufficient excuse for stealing . But that which our politician calls necessity , is no more than necessity of convenience , nor so much , except we interpret that convenience , which May favour his own ends , and so is convenient for his design . He uses necessity , as the old philosophers did an occult quality , though to a different purpose ; that was their refuge for ignorance , this is his sanctuary for sin . 

those civilians that are most charitable to necessity , make it no plea at all except it be absolute and insuperable ; as by the Platonic laws only those persons are allowed to drink at their neighbours well , that had in vain sought a spring , by digging fifty cubits deep in their own ground . We allow the disburdening of a ship in imminent peril of wrack ; but this will not excuse those , who upon a fond or feigned prevision of a state-tempest , shall immediately cast law and conscience overboard ; discard , and quit hudder and steerage , and so assist the danger , they pretend to fear . 

Pausanias tells of a chapel in Acrocorinth , dedicated to necessity and violence ; those twingoddesses May be fit objects for the worship of heathens ; but 't is pity they should be so much adored by Christians . 

If i mistake not , the fundamental deceit lies in a greedy entertaining those first pretences , and seemingly candid propositions are made to us , before they have passed those scrutinies , and severe inquiries , they deserve ; or been examined by the test of God's word , and national laws : all the rest are but ugly consequences of that absurdity we first granted , according to the ancient philosophic maxim , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

Principle ix. . The politician must wave all relations , both sacred and civil , and swim to his design , though in a sea of blood . 

Such as study to be great by any means , must by all means forget to be good ; and they that will usurp dominion over others , must first become slaves to the worst of tyrants , a lust after greatness . 

crescit interea roma albae ruinis , begins one of the decades , that the walls of Rome were cemented with blood , is known and commended by Machiavel ; although the superstructure was brave , yet if we search the foundation , we shall find it laid in the rod ruins of her wasted neighbours ; that the first founder became a fratricide upon reason of state , to guard his new conquest , by freedom from a competitor ; is not only vindicated from cruelty , but asserted to be a piece of meritorious policy . Nor did this happen to the city in its structure alone , but after in its reparation ; when the sons of Brutus were sacrificed to the design of their father : so that Rome was not only nursed with blood , but after growth and ripeness , she sustained herself ; jived and thrived upon Magna & sanguinolenta latrocinia ; so that our politician can scarce want examples in the applauded actions of this city , to patronize the most crimson and scarlet sin , that ambition can prompt . 

He admires the generosity of nero's mother , who is reported to have said of her son , a {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , let my son be my murderer , so he May be a monarch ; according to the advice of an high-spirited fury , pro regno velim patriam , penates , conjugem flammis dare , imperia pretio quolibet constant bene ; an empire cannot be purchased too dear , though it cost the blood of million . 

He is much taken with the gallantry of the Mammalukes , who abused the easiness of the Egyptian sultan , and wore the supremacy three hundred years , upon the length and keenness of an usurping sword . 

And rather than want a bongrace , he commends the Ottoman wisdom ; for the great Turk rivets himself to the imperial chair , with the bones of his murdered brethren . Aspiring desires are not only insatiate , but admit of any sin ; that will promote their ends : see Bass•anus murdering his brother Geta in his mother's arms ; Andronicus strangling his cousin Alexius , lest he should have a part in the empire that had right to all : see Caesar slighting the oaths by which he had obliged his obedience to the Roman senate . 

Finally , ambition knows no confinement , nothing so sacred but it violates . The gods must bow and yield to it , as Tertullian , id negotium sine deorum injuriâ non est , eadem strages manium & templorum , tot sacrilegia romanorum , quot trophaea ; tot de diis quot de gentibus triumphi . 

Colasterion . 

The Italian politician seems to intimate a scruple , when he says , — si jus violandum est , regnandi causâ violandum est , his ( If ) dictates an uncertainty ; and if we appeal to the bar of nature , or divinity ( Though possibly the entire assertion May have something of truth ) yet we shall find that wicked ( •f ) absolutely banished . 

't is true , we May more justly pity him , that swallows a bait fair and glistering , than a person that tempts temptations to deceive him ; or catches at flies , and trifling allurements because in the first case a greater reluctancy is requisite , and the dart May possibly be so sharp , as to pierce through the armour of a sober resolution ; but all this will little succour •im , who knows it to be a bait , and hath beforehand designed its beauty , and fairness , to apologise for the foulness of the sin : for here the greatness of the temptation will not at all extenuate ••e grossness of the •rime : no more than he mitigates his robbery , who shall plead , that he stole nothing but gold and jewels . 

The world is much mistaken in the value of a sceptre or crown ; we gaze upon its brightness , and forget its brittleness , we look upon its glory , and forget its frailty ; we respect its colour , and take no notice of its weight . But if all those gay things which we fondly fancy to ourselves were really to be found in greatness , yet still he pays too dear , that pawn•• his heaven for it• he that thus buys a shor• bliss , gives not twenty , or an hundred years' purchase , but ( If mercy prevent not ) eternity . 

It will be little advantage here , to introduce the example of a Roman , or Turk , or Christian , if unlawful ; such precedents May perchance baffle the vulgar ( In whose creed you May insert what you please ) but will be very cold answers , when we appear before a severe tribunal : it concerns us rather to observe how ambition claims kindred with every other vice , stoops , and takes up every sin lies in its way ; and , if upon enquiry we find it to be indeed such a complicated mischief , it will become us studiously to shun it ourselves , and seriously to detest it in others . 

Principle x. a general innovation contributes much to the growth and security of usurpation . 

We May receive this as a tradition , handed to us from the great patriarchs of policy , attested by the practice of the subtlest times ; i presume it May be grounded upon these , or the like persuasions . 

1.  Because such an innovation raises the dust , and begets a cloud for the main design ; for when the waters are troubled , 't is hard to see the bait . 

2.  Because the parenthesis betwixt an old and new government , flatters the hopes of all parties , soothing those desires that are for a relapse into the old , and yet encouraging those that wish for the establishment of a new . 

3.  Because when all things are reduced into a chaos and rude heap , when all the lines and lineaments of the former government are blotted out , that which is new written will be more legible , and the old sooner forgotten : for suppose a kingdom made a lump , without shape and void , and it is like materia prima , prone to embrace any form ; when an instrument is distuned , you May set it to what key you please ; and he that cannot sometimes lo•s•n the strings , will never make good music upon Synesius his harp.  

4.  Because by n•w moulding of jurisdictions , and offices of state , there May be a fair opportunity offered , of gratifying those that have served us ; and for others its very familiar to see some stubborn and rigid opiniators , who have continue long unshaken either by threat or argument , at length to surrender their principles , and bow the knee before the Dagon of honou• and riches ; such is the flexanimous power of golden eloquence , as it is in the adage , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} 




Besides , we can find no better way to breed an absolute dependence , and make others adhere to our fortunes , then by winding the concernments of other men upon the same bottom with our interest ; we May observe this from the practice of great favourites , who always delight in these props , and are careful to set their whole tribes in the sunshine of favour . 

5.  Because such a general deordination gives a taste and relish to the succeeding government , though in its self not so delectable ; for Aristotle notes , that democracy is better than anarchy . 

There are many other advantages to be made by a due improvement of these turbid intervals ; as the occasion of subdividing , and parcelling out your great end ; for by this means they which refused to close with it in gross , will receive it in retail : and having entertained some portions of it , the grudge they bore to the whole will be by degrees quieted and appeased . 

Besides , when all things are ruffled and confused , it is then the devil's holiday , and therefore our work-day : the noise is so loud , that it drowns the voice of the law ; and there May be some truth in his waggery , who said , that such as mean to commit a rape upon the body politic , must put out the laws ; as others upon a like occasion use to put out the lights . 

Finally , if we ever hope to sin with impunity , to usurp prosperously or to govern arbitrarily ; we must take out that lesson in plantus : 

Idem facere , quod plurimi alij , quibus res timida aut turbida est ; pergunt turbare usque , ut ne quid possit conquiscere . 

Colasterion . 

't is most certain , that sinister ends are promoted by innovations ; but it lies in our bosoms to promote or quench the innovations themselves , which we can no way better do , than by a strict adherence to the laws ; for as long as we maintain them , they will maintain us : if we observe these , it will rescue us from the hands of state-novellists ; for we are not fit for their turns , till we are cross-byassed with faction . 

As a caution against changes in government , give me leave to repeat , what was long since told us by an ingenious Lord , — that all great mutations are dangerous ; even where what is introduced by that mutation , is such as would have been very profitable upon a primary foundation : and it is none of the least dangers of change , that all the perils and inconveniences which it brings , cannot be foreseen ; and therefore such as make title to wisdom , will not undergo great dangers , but for great necessities . 

But further , let me appeal to general experience , yea , let me ask thee ( Reader ) if thou hast never before heard , or read of a nation , that was once the gaze and envy of its neighbours ; and yet being insensible of its happiness , or possessed with fond hopes of bettering its condition , has closed with pretended friends , and real enemies , and gladly contributed to its own ruin . 

So apt men are to catch at the shadow , though they hazard the substance : we May guess at the moral of the frogs in the fable , who could find no satisfaction in a still Prince , and were after forced to abide the severities of a tyrant they prayed for . 

But if there be such distempers in a state , as shall necessarily require amendment ; let it be done with the pruning-hook of the law , and not with the sword of violence : for i never read , that illegal , or tumultuous , or rebellious , were fit epithets for reformation . And 't is fit Christians should forbear the use of such surly physic , till they have levied a fine in the court of heaven , and cut off the entail of the seventh beatitude . 

This May suffice to reveal in some measure , arcanum ambitionis , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . I could add much more , but that i judge it a fit task for our nephews , when pens shall be enfranchised . 

And now ( Reader ) let us mix our prayers , that God would for ever banish this cursed policy out of Europe , and the whole Christian world ; and damn it down to hell , from whence originally it came , and let such as delight to abuse others , think of that self-cozenage , with which in the interim they abuse themselves ; God permitting the devil to revenge the imposture . And whilst we are busy with politic stratagems , and tortuous arms to invade the rights of others ; let us all consider that this is not the violence which takes heaven . 

Let it be a piece of our daily orisons , that God would guard our pulpits from such Boutefeus , as like A•tna and Vesuvius , belched out nothing but flames , and fiery discourses ; using the scripture as preposterously and impertinently , as some pontificians , who transported with the vehemence of Hildebrandian zeal , think the temporal monarchy of Popes sufficiently scriptural , from the saying of Christ to Peter — pasce oves . far be it from us to entitle the spirit of God to exorbitant doctrines , it is easy to distinguish the vulture from the dove . The miscarriages of the clergy have a deeper stain from the sacredness of their function , as probably he that invenomed the eucharist has the more to answer for his triple crown . 

It is manifest , that we are fallen into the dregs of time ; we live in the rust of the iron age , and must accordingly expect to feel , v'tima se•escentis mundi deliria , the dotages of a decrepit world : what is become of truth , sincerity , charity , humility , those antiqui mores , whither are they gone ? Did they attend Astraea into heaven ? And have left such degenerous successors , as cruelty , pride , fraud , envy , oppression , &c.  such qualities as abundantly justify the worst of heathens , and dishonour the name of Christians : i think it May safely be affirmed , that if a new europae speculum were sincerely written , it Might be contracted into this short summary ; 

novi ego h•c seculum quibus moribus sit ; malus bonum , malum esse vult , ut sit sui similis ; turbant , miscent , mores mali ; rapax , avarus , invidus , sacrum prophanum , publicum privatum habebit ; 

hiulca gens , &c.  

That eternal majesty , which raised so brave a fabric , out of such indisposed materials ; that wields the world with his finger , ever since it was made ; that controls the wave , and checks the tumult of the persons : that sits above , and laughs at the malignant counsels , and devices of wicked men : let his mercy be implored for the speedy succour of his distressed church ; that the rod of Aaron May blossom ; that the tabernacle of David May be raised ; that the subtle May be caught in their own snares ; and that the result of all afflictions , May be the greatning his glory , and exalting of his sceptre . 

Finis . 





Cato mayor . Ophyogenes , & Pfylli . furialibus commentariis illustraut . 

plin. l. 2.6.7 . 43 fons in Mileto , cuius proflue•s aqua dulcissima , guae vero in imo falsa . Origen . vinum i• pectore . 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ingeniosi muse pulatores . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

Barclay contra monarch ▪ 30.  candida vita . Buchanan . pro mil•ne . Hercules furens . •pon Livi p. 22.  Spencer . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , arist. pol. 7.  Isocrates . io. Goodwin , in his anticavalerism . 

aristoph. concutiunt populos , vexant regna , solicitant bella , diruunt ecclesias . classica canere . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Evangelioptho . ri . populi . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} •l• . St. H•erom Strada . ecclesiae nomine armamini & contra ecclesiam dimicatis . aug.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} apud . Dion . Cass.  Papirius . con. Monarc . p. 32.  

in Pompeio . hipp.  her. eur.  old.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

Comin . 170  nantons regalia . Rota figulari versatilior . 

grot. de iur . belli , 245.  de civil converse . l. 2. p. 132.  aulular . apoph . Causabon exercitat . 202.  p. 848.  

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} •eva ne•essitas Victor . de jure belli , nu . 18.39 . de iure belli , l. 424.  mach. on Livy , 627  •ess . l. 11 , 12. •ub . 12.  〈◊〉 70.  Caelius rhodig. 1025.  

upon Livy l. 2. c. 3•thebe maritum , T•moleon fratrem , Cassius filium ho jure interfecore . in apologer . 

3 po• , faulkla• trinummus . 





























































































































































































































































































































