The rights of primogeniture : or , the excellency of royal authority in a sermon preached before his majesty in the isle of Wight , upon the anniversary of his birthday . 

By the r. r. father in God , James , l. Bishop of Armagh , and primate of Ireland . 

— nunquam libertas gratior extat 
quam sub rege pio — 
London , printed for r. Lowndes , 1648.  

The rights of primogeniture , &c.  

gen . 49. 3.  

Reuben , thou art my first born , my might , and the beginning of my strength . 

This is the beginning of Jacob's blessing his children , which was an act ( And a principal act ) of his faith , as it is heb. 11. 20.  

And in this we May see a difference betwixt the death of Jacob and his fathers . Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , were famous in their generations : God is not ashamed to be called their god . and if we consider their lives and deaths , we shall find this difference . Abraham in his life was most glorious , his faith famous , witness his offering his only son to God with that strength of faith , that although he verily believed that in Jacob all the nations of the earth should be blessed , yet was his faith so strong as to be content to offer him up , being persuaded that God was able to raise him from the dead . 

Now although his life was thus glorious , when ye come to his death , this is all that is said of him : then Abraham gave up the ghost , and died in a good old age , and was gathered unto his fathers . 

Commonly great things are expected from holy men at their death , yet ye see Abraham was but ordinary in his death . 

Concerning Isaac's life , the scripture saith but little , and the self same words are used of him at his death , as was at the death of Abraham . 

Jacob as ordinary in his life as ye shall meet withal ; but his death was a prophecy of Christ's coming into the world . He begins with Reuben , to whom ( Though he had no mind at all to bless him ) he gives his due ; shows him that the right of primogeniture belonged unto him , if he had not forfeited it : thou art my first born , my might , & the beginning of my strength . for this reason God commands , that the first born should have a double portion . And so Reuben should have received , but that he forfeited it ; therefore , saith he , because thou art unstable as water , &c. thy excellency is departed from thee : and so he gave it to Joseph . in repeating the genealogy of Jacob's sons , 1 chron. 5. 1 , 2.  Now ( Saith the text ) the sons of Reuben the first born of Israel , ( For he was the first born ) but forasmuch , as he defiled his father's bed , his birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph , the son of Israel , and the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the birthright , &c.  

Ye see , though he had forfeited his birthright , he could not forfeit his primogeniture , but there was an escheat thereof to Joseph . all the rest had a single tribe , set out to them , but Joseph had two tribes , and so the right that should have gone to Reuben fell to Joseph . besides this , had not Reuben forfeited his birthright , he should have had more than this double portion , for there was a promise made , that Kings should proceed from him . now as in the former Joseph succeeded him , so in this of eminency and power , it fell to Judah , for so it follows in 1 chron. 5. before named . 

Now to explicate this . 

The regal power which comes by descent is described by a double eminency . the excellency of dignity , and the excellency of power . by dignity you understand , all outward glory ; by power , all dominion , and these are the two branches of majesty . 

The Greeks' do therefore express it in the abstract . In respect of dignity , the supreme magistrate is called glory , in respect of sovereignty , he is called lordship . 

The King is not only glorious , but glory ; not only powerful , but power . Let every soul be subject to the higher powers . both are joined in the epistle to Jude , and in the 8.  verse , there is a wicked sort described , that despise dominion , and speak evil of dignities . they despise dominion that make no conscience to blaspheme the footsteps of the Lord's anointed . these men dare do what Michael durst not do , verse 9  He durst not bring against the devil a railing accusation , but these dare speak evil of dignities . and what is their censure ? verse 13.  To whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever . we use to say , that those that have God's tokens upon them are past hopes of like . Here ye May plainly see God's tokens upon these men , they are reserved to everlasting damnation . 

Well , let us now come to unfold these two parts of majesty , dignity , and dominion . the excellency of dignity , and the excellency of power 

By dignity , is meant , the outward pomp and glory annexed to the sceptre . For , it is God's ordinance that there should be an extraordinary splendour in majesty more than in any other . And therefore the scripture doth often describe the courts of Princes , their splendour at home , and in their progress abroad , with dignity and state . Acts 25. 23.  When King Agrippa and Bernice went to hear Paul , the text saith , they removed with great pomp . it was a thing beseemed the regal power so to do . 1 king. 10. 2.  The Queen of Sheba came to Jerusalem to see Solomen with a great train : but she came to a far greater court than her own . And this state in courts is not pride , but it is a thing allowed by God's ordinance , as Christ saith , those that wear soft raiment are in King's courts . and speaking of the lilies of the field , i say to you ( Saith he ) that Solomon in all his glory was not like one of these . 

If you see a man ( Though in russet ) attended upon by others in rich clothes , you will conclude that man ( Though in russet ) to be some great personage . The Queen of Sheba was astonished at what she saw in Solomon's court ; for , when she beheld the meat of his table ( He must not be served as other men ) the sitting of his servants , the attendance of his ministers , and his cupbearer , &c. the text saith , there was no more spirit in her . she was ( As a man May say ) besides herself to see this state . And so stately it was , that psal. 45. it is brought in as an allegorical description of the glory of Christ and his church . I need not go to foreign Princes to prove this , the scripture doth sufficiently evidence it . In Ester 1. there is a description of Ahasuerus and his feast , the like to which you will not read of in any other story , it lasted one hundred and fourscore days , which was a full half year , and with the greatest glory that could be , ver. 4.  When he showed the riches of his glorious kingdom , and the honour of his excellent majesty , &c.  

So then , this is the first part of majesty , namely , outward splendour , which is lawful and requisite to maintain the dignity of a Prince . And as the Prince ought to have this in his own person , and his attendants , so all dignity and glory rests in him as in the fountain , and all titles of dignity are in him also . Even as ye see in the firmament , 1 cor. 15.  there is one glory of the sun , another of the moon , and one star excelleth another in glory . 

In the commonwealth , there are some knights , some Lords , some Earls , &c. but all these differences come from one sun , one head , the Prince . there is no light in the moon but what is derived from the sun , even here is borrowed , the stars light is borrowed also , and when the son appears , they cease to shine . The stars at this time shine as much as at midnight , but that the light of the sun doth darken them . Even so in the presence of majesty , those other excellent dignities do not shine at all . 

2.  To come to the eminency of power ; for a King to have great state and to have no power , he were then but a poor King . 

A Duke of Venice is served in as great state as can be , but he hath no power at all . 

There is a subordination of power in all government , which because it cannot go ad infinitum , it must needs rest somewhere , and that is in the King . let every soul be subject to the higher powers . and the apostle in 1 pet. 2. 13. distinguisheth , whether it be to the King , as supreme , or unto governors , as unto them that are sent by God , for the punishment of evil doers , &c. and he adds , that by so doing , the ignorance of foolish men May be put to silence . 

If any professor of religion do rebel against the King , this is a scandal to religion . 

Now the apostle did foresee that such there would be , and therefore commands that they be put in mind to be subject , &c.  But if any that profess religion do rebel ( As i said before ) it is the fault of the professor , and not of the profession ; for the church of England doth teach the contrary . 

But when men shall not only practice , but teach rebellion , ( For by their fruits ye shall know them ) this amounts to a very high crime indeed . 

the King ( As saint Peter saith ) hath the excellency of power , as sent by God . 

But , what need i say any more ? We all swear that the King is the only supreme governor in his dominions . a man would think , that that word only Might be spared , since nothing can be above a supreme , but it is put there by way of eminency . 

There can be no dominion in the world , unless there be an eminency of power in some one or other . If a man be wronged in any court , he May lawfully appeal higher , but then , appeals must not be infinite , there must be a supremacy of power somewhere to rest in . 

The philosopher saith , it must be either in one , or in all . Where the eminency of power is in one , it is called a monarchy . The King must only have the supreme power , for if any be joined with him , than it is no monarchy . 

If the power be in a certain number , it is called an aristocracy . 

If the power be in all , a democracy ; and all power then is derived from the body of the persons , and where you say so , you destroy the monarchy , and erect a democracy . 

The Duke of Venice hath ( As i said before ) a marvellous great state , and yet the state of Venice is no monarchy , because the supremacy of power is not in him . He cannot receive a letter , nor make an edict without the state's allowance ; nay , he May be called to account by them . 

I read in Josephus that Herod having offended Cleopatra , she be sought Antony ( Who did not use to deny her any thing ) to call him to account ; but Antony refused so to do , then , saith he , he will be no King . 

Look upon the commonwealth of Lacedaemon , they had Kings lineally descended from the race of Hercules ; but shall we say they had regal power ? nothing less , because there were ephori in that state , a certain power in the persons to call their Kings to account : the supremacy of power there was not in the Prince . 

In Switzerland , there is a democracy , and the only democratical government i know of . They have their magistrates that govern the persons . And yet though there be many magistrates that govern in those cantons , this is no aristocracy , for at the magistrates in Switzerland are accountable to the persons , and all their power is limited by them . The supremacy of power is in the persons there , and thence it comes to be a democracy . 

eminency of power . In the word of a King there is power , saith the preacher , eccles. 8. 4.  It was wont to be so , and by the word of God you see it ought to be so . But i will not enlarge upon this . It May be some ears will not endure sound doctrine . 

But the King we see must be acknowledged to be supreme , and no superior to the King . 

Far be it from me ( Being in God's place ) to flatter any man , i thank God i fear no flesh , but do deliver the truth . 

Having now spoken of the two branches of majesty , dignity , and power . we shall speak of a birthright that descends to Kings . It should have been Reulien's right here , if God had not taken it from him for a fault . 

This day is the birthday of our sovereign Lord . Birthdays of Kings have been usually celebrated with great solemnity in former times . Herod's birthday was celebrated many years after his death : and the Herodians ( For the many mighty works that Herod did ) bleeeved him to be the Messiah . 

It pleaseth God that this day begins the 49. year of his life , and let me call it the year of jubilee to his majesty . 

The Jews had a custom that in the 49. year of any man's life , he should be at liberty , what ever his sufferings were before . It must be the desire and prayer of every loyal heart , that the King May have a jubilee indeed . This is that which loyalty bids us do . 

I will not stand too much upon this particular . But this i will say , oh that we knew our happiness ; to have a King that is the son of nobles ! A King that is not a child . A King that is at full age to govern , by wisdom , and prudence . And truly as God gives us this blessing , so he expects we should acknowledge it thankfully . eccles. 10 , 16.  Woe be to thee oh land ( Saith the preacher ) when thy King is a child : and blessed art thou oh land when thy King is the son of nobles : that hath his breeding answerable . 

To have him , when his experience both reverted in him sound judgement , and ability to govern . The Lord threatened Jerusalem , in Esay 3. 4.  I will give children to be their Princes , and babes shall rule over them . those that would have their own wills , could ( I warrant you ) be content that the youngest should reign . 

To have a base man exalted , is one of the things that the earth cannot bear . But some body must have the government , it doth not belong to all . You see here is by birth , one that hath a right unto it . 

When Jehosaphat distributed his estate , 2 chron , 21. he gave gifts to his other sons , but the kingdom unto Jehoram , because he was his firstborn . A kingdom is not a thing dividable . 

So the King of Edom , 2 king. 3. 27. though he took and offered his elder son ( That should have reigned in his stead ) as an offering : yet in the prophecy of Amos , he is called the King of Edom , because he had it in view . 

Now to come to Christians , we are Kings in our sort , we are primogeniti , we are the Israel of God . When God sent Moses to deliver his persons , he bids him deliver this message to Pharaoh , exod. 4. 22.  Thou shalt say to Pharaoh , thus saith the Lord , Israel is my son , even my firstborn . here is our privilege , though God hath many sons , yet being found in Christ , we are all firstborn . And so the children of God are called , heb. 12.  The congregation of the firstborn . every one that is a member of Christ hath the privilege of a firstborn . They are all heirs . In the same relation that Christ is , by nature , we are by grace and adoption : and being so , we have the excellency of dignity , and the excellency of power . 

We do not speak of the power of this world : Christ said , my kingdom is not of this world . 

They that preach , the saints shall reign upon the earth , did not learn it from God , for our kingdom is not of this world . 

There is not that excellency to be found in any of the sons of men , as is to be found in one poor child of God . 

Will you see David a King ? when he comes with a pious eye , psal. 15. 4. see who are there the most worshipful persons . In whose eyes a vile person is contemned , but honours them that fear the Lord . When he sees God's image in any soul , he honours him ; and if he be a wicked man , a child of the devil , he is a vile person in his eyes . A sinner ( Though otherwise never so noble ) is a very vile person , psal , 16.  my goodness , saith David , doth not extend to thee , but unto the saints upon the earth . 

The apostle saint John , 1 joh. 3.  Behold ( Saith he ) what manner of love the father bestowed upon us , that we should be called the sons of God , and therefore the world doth not know us , &c.  

But if they be so excellent , how come they to be so despised in the world ? the reason is , because the world doth not know them to be such . The world doth not know Christ's children , more than they know Christ himself . 

I have often thought , that when his majesty was in France , where he was not known , a neglect put upon him there , would not have been in any proportion so bad , as the like must needs be amongst his own subjects . And so it is with us . We are spiritual Kings , a royal priesthood : if the world did know us to be such , they would deal with us otherwise then they do , but our life is hide with Christ in God , and one day it shall appear , and then shall the righteous shine in the kingdom of their father . 

Beloved , hereupon it is that the children of God have their guard of angels . 

The King hath a choice guard to attend him , but if ye did see what attendance the children of God have , you would admire . The angels of God do pitch their tents about them . 

In the cantioles , the state of Solomon's bed is described with threescore valiant men about it for a guard . What is this but a type of the angels of God guarding his own persons , the militia of heaven ? 

But i perceive the time is past , therefore will end here . 

The end . 







