A view of the times . 

With Britain's address to the Prince of Orange . 

A Pindaric poem . 

London , printed in the year mdclxxxix . 

To the right honourable the Earl of Arran , elder son to Duke Hamilton . 

My Lord , 

In this humble address to your lordship , perhaps as unseasonable now as the declaration of my never-failing zeal to his sacred majesty , my Lord and Master . I am very sensible how great a risque i run , first , of offending your lordship , and next the present state ; but i assure your lordship , i am infinitely more awed by my first fear than my last , for that i hope will allow liberty of conscience , even to the poets themselves , ( provided they be no Papists ) though there ought to be no toleration for indiscretion and ill manners ; which , at this time , take too saucy a liberty , and treat even crowned heads with that disrespect and contempt , as if the British world had agreed they would be governed by no more Kings : and it is no doubt that sort of establishment is aimed at by that great part of the nation , the dissenters . but all true English men , men of honour , and of the orthodox church , 't is to be hoped yet , have other sentiments , of which number your lordship is one ; whose glorious principles of loyalty and honour , even now shine forth to the world , and with a noble lustre gilding all your other virtues , have rendered your lordship one of the most considerable of any great men of your nation to all succeeding times ; and 't is from men of such principles we must hope for the accomplishment of that good which has so lately been assured us , that of making both King and persons happy ; which cannot be by forcing his majesty to an exile , and , to palliate that cruelty , ( To give it no worse name ) brand him with all the infamy that malice can invent . We would willingly possess ourselves with the belief , that such impudent and rightdown treasonable libels , as daily come out upon their majesties , are rather the uncontrollable and implacable fire-balls of a few convicted ( Though now too bare-faced ) criminals , than the connivance , much less the toleration of those that now rule ; whose commands ought to suppress mischiefs of so dangerous a consequence , lest upon every little Pique they shall please to take against those they now pretend to serve , they should run into the same extremity , and treat them at last as ill as they have done their lawful King , or God himself ; since to speak evilly of the one , is to profane the other : they need not give us that infallible proof , that religion ( So much their pretence ) is the least of their design and aim , since no man on earth can profess himself a Christian , or even a moralist , with notions so absolutely heathenish and diabolical ; actions so directly contrary to scripture , and all the rules that God himself has set us . And however necessary some May imagine these aspersions May be to the present interest , to possess the wretched rabble , and common rascality , yet they are so far from being approved or believed , by those of common sense or tolerable education , that they are abhored ; and are as absolutely a disgrace to this great design of settling religion , as the protection and toleration given to the assassin of the most reverend Bishop of St. Andrews , and the rye-house conspirator . And because three or four condemned criminals have by their villainies made themselves uncapable of living under a King , they must now be allowed authentic evidences against his present majesty , and blacken him with such actions of horror , that the most barbarous of villains , thieves , and murderers , nay the fiends themselves , were never guilty of : and though these ridiculous and inhuman libels are only calculated for the nasty rabble , and the foolish positive multitude , and are below the sense even of those that write them ; yet they serve to blow a fire that will be one day too hot for this nation . I know they are countenanced , and seemingly credited , by a great many disaffected and ill-minded men , whose business is no other ways to be done than by setting the world at odds. and no doubt but it was found absolutely necessary , after the treating his majesty at his return with such unaccountable contempt , that his fame and glory should be ruined as well as himself ; having no other excuse for their own crimes but loading his majesty with calumnies : a poor and barbarous shift to justify a too precipitate proceeding ; a proceeding which their lordships , both spiritual and temporal ( Too zealous for religion , and too remiss for the King and nations safety ) had not , i am afraid , well enough considered , or the ensuing consequences ; nor ought it to have been expected , that when they turned out popery they should have suffered their King , by the indignities put upon him , to seek his safety in a foreign nation . I am certain , that none has a more entire respect for the Prince of Orange than myself , nor a higher veneration for the established religion : as for that word Protestant religion , it bears too great a latitude for me to understand ; but , i hope , it is not by driving out the Jesuits , to down with the Bishops too ; which is but too much the fear of those that are hearty wellwishers to the established church , laws , and liberties . 't is therefore wished that such public and noble spirits , as that of your lordship , would represent these fears to the great councils of both nations ; and since affairs go so contrary to the true intent of this great design , they would be pleased to take the care of these nations into their consideration : and as they are all men of honour , and his sacred majesty the head and fountain of honour , they would not suffer that to be polluted by profane hands ; nor permit a cause of so high and glorious pretences , as this of the Prince of Orange , to be violated , and not serve the end for which it was advanced . And let those foul aspersers make good those scandals they have spread , by any honest or tolerable witnesses , ( And not such as perhaps , who having been guilty of a thousand crimes , and to get a general pardon for real villainies will confess themselves guilty of feigned ones ) and then they May be allowed to rail ; but if not , let them be delivered to that just law to which they are condemned already : for the land has too lately been made calamitous enough by false witnesses , on whose account too much blood has been shed . 

Some such witnesses ( If any ) Danvers will pick up for proofs that the e. of ess. was murdered , on which bloody subject he has troubled the world with too notable pieces ; which he is pleased to call , a full discovery , by positive proofs ; in which there is neither discovery , nor proof , but a deal of stuff and noise , trifling surmises , bug bear words , of horrid murder , bloody villainy , and a thousand terms of the like frightful sense , dividing his text as if he were in his tub a bellowing forth as many lies , aspersing and accusing men of undoubted honour , and honest principles ; laying the scandal on , let them take it off as well as they can ; and let the world judge , if that noble and most pious Lady , the Countess of ess. exemplary for every virtue , and holiness of life , would let pass the murder of her Lord in silence , and unsearched into , when she had so good an occasion offered as this , by the unchrist'ned colonel , if she were not assured of the way and manner of his lordship's deplorable death already . 't is therefore the humble request of all honest men , that this licentiousness of the press May be suppressed ; otherwise , instead of establishing of laws and religion , we are hurrying both to ruin , and confusion . 

My Lord , all the world knows your lordship to be a true lover of your country , and a noble asserter of all its liberties , and equal to those , the rights and prerogatives of your King , whose interest has hitherto been inseparable with your own , even in the worst of times ; but , oh ! never so bad as these ; for then our King was but oppressed , but now he is forced to fly , contrary to the intent ( I hope ) of all who have embarked in this great design . But though we have not yet found the effects of it , wholly to doubt it , were to call in question the integrity of a great Prince , and the loyalty of the noblest part of the nation , and suspect the most astonishing and unpresidented atchieument that ever was surprising in history , and the most considerable turn of state that the universe ever saw . We will therefore look up , and hope that the Prince of Orange , accomplished with so many virtues , and who has the true notion of religion and honour in his great soul , will , by the sacred keeping of his word , in making our King happy , give us an assurance of all he has promised us besides : for after the most refined statesmen , and men of the most wisdom and conduct in the establishment of nations , have debated as long as they please , they will find at last there is no way to give us our religion , laws , liberties , and repose , but by recalling and fixing our King in his lawful throne . The constitution of England being founded on monarchy , it were to embroil the nation in eternal war , either civil or foreign , not to submit half way , and recall our King to his proper glories ; otherwise , no human wisdom can prevent our being perpetually fatigued with our neighbours , who are like to give us sufficient diversion , if we are in love with war , and be at a continual expense of English blood ( And money more dear to us ; ) and let us please ourselves , if we can , with the contempt we put on France , and set as lightly of the force and power of that Monareh , as we do of his person , we May to our cost find , that Lewis xiv . of France is not so easily subdued as ( It happened ) James ii of England was ; nor that his forces , of what religion soever , will abandon and betray their King , as ours did ; who , to the eternal shame of that religion ( We only talk of and do not practise ) find those principles ( Which are thought too bloody in the Papist ) infinitely more just and honourable than those of ours ; since they thought they ought in conscience to fight faithfully for that Prince who fed and clothed them , let his religion be never so contrary to their own ; and most certainly there Might have been a medium found between their quitting of their religion or their loyalty , which have hitherto been thought inconsistent : but on the contrary , virtues that used to go hand in hand among good Christians , and men of honour . And the primitive Christians gloried in their loyalty , though even to heathen and tyrant Emperors . 

And as it was not lawful to push things to that extremity to which they are arrived , so neither was it needful ; we having a King that blessed be God , who would not have carried his dispensing power to that height , as to become a burden , or grievance to his persons ; and his majesty , and his council , must have been a synod of gods , to have committed no errors in the management of so critical a government . 

There is no doubt but his majesty , out of a tender compassion to the Papists , was pleased to give them a little encouragement and respite from affliction ; and we May see by his majesty's willingness to restore all things to their first order , at the very first address of the Bishops , that he did not think his counsels infallible . 

Perhaps 't will be objected , that he made not this gracious condescension till after he heard of the designs of the Prince of Orange : if this be granted , they must also grant me this other truth , that it could not be fear of being conquered by the foreign army ( As malice would insinuate ) that could oblige him to it ; for then his majesty knew not but that he was sure not only of his great men , but also of his army , that was able to have vanquished a far greater army than what came with the Prince ; and no doubted his success ( If they had fought , and that his men had stood by him ) except those who before knew how he was to be abandoned . And 't is most certain , and well known to some of quality , that his majesty would have condescended to any reasonable terms that honour could have proposed ; nor did he come back again from Feversham but with a full intent to have adjusted the great affair : but while they complained on evil counsels , on the King's side , 't is thought , they had not those , on the other side , that were friends to peace , or an accommodation ; for if they had meant any such thing , his majesty had not been sent away again no better than a prisoner . 

I will not say , that those misfortunes that hindered us of this happy peace , and promised union , were the faults of his highness , whose designs were undoubtedly noble , but the effects of a too violent council , too much biased against the royal interest . 

Your lordship , and all other great men of both nations , are most humbly besought , by all loyal and honest church of England men , to use your interests both for the preservation of these poor distracted kingdoms , and especially for the restauration of his most sacred majesty ; for which yours , and their lordships , will eternally receive the prayers and blessings of all good men : and my humble muse , who presumes to prostrate her complaint here at your feet , shall rouse her melancholy head again , and sing yet once more to celebrate the loyalty of the great name of Arran , and the illustrious Hamilton . 

Vivat rex . 

A view of the times , &c.  

I.  

As late my melancholy muse retired 
With thoughtful grief , not noble song inspired ; 
And underneath a gloomy shade , 
All silent , as the mansions of the dead , 
On the rough moss her bed she made , 
Where down she laid her wearied head , 
And thus the weeping nymph in sighing numbers said : 
Ii  

Farewell , false Britain ! on thy faithless shore 
No more my songs I 'll tune in vain : 
My loyal lays shall strive no more 
To make your savage nature's tame . 
The changing winds thy voice as well 
May hope to calm to constant breeze ; 
Or when they ruffle all the seas , 
Thy verse the mounting waves as soon May quell : 
And yet the seas will sometimes cease to storm , 
And winds to murmur in the trees ; 
But oh ! the fickle world is never calm , 
The restless Britain never is at ease . 
Iii  

How many forms of government  've seen ? 
How many dangerous turns of state have been 
In this fantastic world ? 
When first the British light i saw , 
Religion , liberty , and law , 
Were all to wild confusion hurled . 
A bleeding body 't was without a head , 
And every street was stored 
With mangled members of the noble dead , 
The trophies of the impious conqueror's sword . 
True child of sorrow thou were 't born , 
And loyal sighs and tears did usher in thy morn . 
Iv.  

Then in a vile democracy 
Thou soundest thy education , 
And yet , by nature , scorned that tyranny , 
That so enslaved the nation ; 
And still religion was the cry , 
The subjects liberty and property . 
No business here was for heroic song , 
And only satyr ( Then but young ) 
Durst move her daring tongue : 
And that in whispers too ; for had she loudly spoke , 
Not all the gods she could invoke , 
Had saved her from the tyrant's fatal stroke . 
The rest of the harmonious train were laid 
Around the martyr's tomb , all pale and dead , 
And in a noble funeral fire 
Of mournful elegy , 
Which their own god , Apollo , did inspire . 
They raised their monarch's virtues to the sky , 
Then in the perfumed flame to him and heaven they fly . 
V.  

When from their ashes scarce yet cold and dead , 
A many little muses sprung , 
Amongst the rest thou rear'dst thy feeble head ; 
But oh ! 't was long , 
They useless lay , unplumed , unfit for flight , 
Nor could they thrive in Britain's night , 
But brooding sat expecting rising light : 
Enduring all the insolence of fate , 
And every rising storm of state . 
The bleak winds blew , and the loud thunder spreads 
Their swift-winged mischiefs round their heads , 
By numerous falling showers oppressed , 
By ignorance profaned ; 
Yet still they kept the silent downy nest ; 
Still they Parnassus sacred grove maintained . 
Vi . 

Oft thou hadst heard of Kings , 
Of courts , and long past glorious things ; 
And oft been told the piteous tale 
Of the deplorable , sad fate 
Of Charles the martyr , Charles the good and great ; 
And oft the story did with tender sighs bewail ; 
Oft thou hadst heard of a strange monstrous thing , 
That did at Westminster reside , 
Which had devoured church , Bishops , laws and King 
With an insatiate arbitrary pride : 
Thou heardest it fed on human blood , 
On widows , and on orphan's tears , 
On lands of loyal commoners , and peers : 
And for its grace , it said long prayers ; 
And form what laws it pleased , which past for good : 
With ease the restive world this monster backed , 
And taught the hard-mouthed beast t' obey , 
Knowing , if once his hand he slacked , 
Luxurious torrents , breaking from the sea , 
Are not so wild , so ruinous , as she . 
Vii . 

Thus when ten annual Tours , the sun 
In his diurnal course had run , 
After the ravage which the tyrant made , 
Of all that was religious , great , or good ; 
After he had in ruin laid 
The sacred mansions of his King and God , 
In such a storm as yet no mortal e'er 
On Britain's shores did ever hear : 
In a vast sea of noble blood , 
deep down to the infernal shade , 
The monstrous regicide by furies was conveyed . 
Viii . 

Then in the compass of one circling year , 
Each month was a new government , 
Which the mad , headless body did invent , 
Assisted by the monster parliament . 
King Dick's short month was mongrel monarchy , 
And the next turn was anarchy ; 
Then to a commonwealth they would submit , 
But none had sense enough to manage it : 
And Lambert's wife forbade that form , 
And swore her Lord should take his turn . 
Thus was poor Britain tossed and torn , 
By every sect and every form , 
Till ruined in the frantic storm . 
But heaven , more merciful , the tattered vessel saves , 
Just sinking in the rolling waves ; 
Who gathers up the winds , and binds the flood , 
And brings her labouring to the shore , 
Which had so many wrecking seas withstood , 
And heard so many tempests roar : 
Next heaven , 't was monk that made her stem the tide . 
And all triumphant on the billows ride . 
Ix. . 

monk ! whom true bravery inclined , 
Thought it more great to give , than wear a crown , 
That restless glory rather now resigned 
To that illustrious brow , 
To which alone the sacred load was due , 
Than by it deify his own . 
Whose entrance brought a universal change , 
And the whole world appeared surprising , new , and strange 
A doubtful joy in every face was seen , 
Both in the round-head , and the cavalier ; 
And all degrees of men 
Were filled at once with hope and fear . 
The bloodless victor did not yet explain 
The great design for which he came : 
Wallingford house committee stood amazed , 
And the rump-parliament 
Their trembling speaker sent , 
To ask the conqueror , what he meant ? 
While the expecting city on the wonder gazed . 
X.  

The rude , ungoverned mobile , 
As wild as the insatiate sea , 
No bounds or limits used to obey ; 
Those who before with arbitrary rule , 
Durst pull down monarchies and Kings , 
Prelates and peers as useless things ; 
And what was sacred turn to ridicule : 
This coward base plebeian rout , 
Who never venture out , 
But , like wild beast , for prey , 
Where certain pillage , and no danger lay : 
These fearful curs , now in their kennels stay . 
Not a horned beast durst from his covert peep , 
No busy traders fill the street ; 
But the whole city now appeared 
A desert , all abandoned by the frighted heard . 
Xi . 

'T was wonderful to see 
That insolence , which nothing could confine , 
Laws human , nor divine : 
Allegiance , nor their oaths of loyalty , 
( But for each little fault that Caesar made ) 
Against all laws , religion , gratitude , 
The faithless , saucy multitude 
Rebelled for idol liberty , 
And stamped it with the specious name 
Of conscience , and their darling property , 
As if no sin , impiety , or shame 
Could in that standard of their actions lie . 
Those , who but now to Europe gave a law , 
And kept the universe in awe ; 
Like rebel Indian slaves now poorly creep 
Beneath the mean subjection of the conquering whip . 
Xii . 

Thus easily the victor gained , 
Without one stroke , his glorious end : 
( th' attempt to pious was , to be by blood obtained . ) 
And thus the exiled monarch was restored , 
His entrance crowding worlds attend , 
Who , like a god , was welcomed and adored : 
Wild with their joys , no countenance durst wear 
Disguised in a fanatic Leer ; 
But even the most dissatisfied would feign 
To approve the change in a consenting sneer . 
'T was then our Haltion days began ; 
'T was then just laws in their old channels run , 
And right religion in her churches shone ; 
'T was then the King's prerogative 
Did with the people's property revive , 
And each man basked beneath his vine ; 
No sequestrators , by a lawless Might , 
Invaded now the subjects right , 
And mighty Caesar too , 
From every willing hand received his due , 
According to the laws divine : 
Xiii . 

'T was then , the Muses left the sheltering grove , 
And to the open air 
Unfrighted now repair , 
Than thou , my muse , with unfleged pinions strove , 
To soar amongst the rest above . 
Through untraced paths thou didst essay to fly , 
To bear thy monarch's fame on high , 
But flaged beneath thy sisters in the sky ; 
Yet often didst strive and often strive in vain , 
At last Parnassus' hill thou chanced to gain : 
the royal theme inspired thy noble verse ; 
Great Charles and James' virtues gave thy fancy wing , 
Which in soft lays thou didst rehearse , 
And in prophetic numbers sing : 
Xiv . 

But oh ! my callow muse had scarce began her flight , 
When a new face the faithless Britain wears ; 
And to excuse her shameful appetite , 
Pretends a thousand jealousies and fears ; 
Wanton and loose , with too much plenty cloyed , 
She satiates with the pleasure she enjoyed . 
Her plighted Lord grows dull in her embrace , 
And his caresses now no more surprise : 
She dotes on every flattering face , 
And each new fop is gracious in her eyes : 
Adheres to every lewd dispute , 
And to each sect becomes a prostitute : 
Then , like a subtle harlot , first complains , 
And cries , her Lord by evil counsel reigns , 
To Rome affected , pensioners of France . 
Oh false ! oh villainous pretence ! 
Against so just , so merciful a Prince ; 
Yet this pretence , when all her other failed , 
Upon the restless multitude prevailed , 
And only Caesar's ruin could redress 
Her new-coyned fears , and fancied grievances . 
Xv . 

Then a false idol up they set , 
Whose title is proclaimed aloud , 
And frantic Huzza's through each street , 
Salute him from the dirty crowd ; 
That very crowd ( When the reverse of state , 
Had turned about the wheel of fate ) 
Pursued his ruin too , with equal-joys , 
And crucify him , was the common voice . 
Oh faithless crowd ! Oh vain uncertain state ! 
Both of the peasant , and the potentate . 
Thus fell th' ambitious youth lamented more , 
Than e'er he was beloved before . 
But while he triumphed here , he led along 
th' associating and rebellious throng ; 
More than divided now the world appeared , 
And the more numerous part he shared . 
Still 't was religion was the word 
That sanctified the cause , and edged the sword . 
Xvi . 

No wonder then , illustrious James , 
That barefaced malice dares traduce thy name ; 
When with the same inhuman crimes , 
They blot great Charles' sacred fame ; 
Though he the same established faith professed 
With those , by whom he was so long oppressed . 
If with some laws he did dispense , 
Should those , who by rebelling , broke 'em all , 
Make themselves judges of a King's offence , 
Whom his just laws to no account can call ? 
Those say , that Kings can do no wrong ; 
Though the account 
To any number should amount ; 
To heaven alone his judgement must belong . 
Laws , and religion both this maxim teach , 
If we 'll profess what our own churchmen preach ; 
Their doctrine says , no ill we can commit , 
whatever good Might follow it : 
And all the dictates of the sacred word 
Command us not to touch th' anointed of the Lord : 
No law was given more forcibly and plain , 
Than strict obedience to the sovereign . 
A thousand times God , and his prophets vexed 
With rebel Israel , do repeat that text : 
and yet how oft was Caesar's life the aim , 
And nothing , but his death , could free 
The world from slavery and popery , 
And fix religion in her wont frame . 
Religion ! oh thou thing of noise and show ! 
What villainies cannot religion do ? 
Xvii . 

But heaven forbids that horror they design ! 
And Caesar only must resign 
His life of wonders to the powers divine : 
Those powers divine , that royal James preserved , 
For the succeeding glories he deserved , 
By heaven , by virtue , and by birth his own , 
And every mercy that adorns a throne . 
Strange turn of fate ! that Prince so lately sent , 
Like a mean criminal to banishment , 
Blackened with all the sins fiends could invent . 
That Prince for whom they form an impious bill , 
Hatched by the dark cabal of hell , 
Which heaven abhorred , and all heavens * prophets too , 
Who with a pious scorn , and just disdain , 
Out of the senate that bold treason threw , 
That on the British honour laid so great a stain . 
This very Prince their caprice would destroy , 
They now enthrone with universal joy . 
Xviii . 

He reigns ! The pious Prince in glory reigns ! 
But Britain's still distempered brains 
To her old natural vice adheres , 
Which fills her mind with jealousies and fears ; 
She fears , and cannot be appeased , 
Dares not on Caesar's word rely ; 
But seeks a desperate cure , before she is diseased , 
And to no wound will corrosives apply . 
His mercy is for strange designs mistake 
Against the church and laws ; 
His kind indulgences are took 
For an establishing the Roman cause . 
If laws too hard upon the subjects bear , 
What serves the mercy of a Prince , 
But to excuse and soften what 's severe ; 
And with those laws by his just right dispense ? 
And since a monarch does a god present , 
It more becomes heaven's representative , 
The wretched guilty to forgive , 
Than to destroy the innocent . 
Xix . 

Britain , who by no laws enslaved will be , 
Unjustly would her King enslave ; 
Rebels for idol liberty , 
And yet her fellow Christians , born as free ; 
They would of liberty deprive : 
As if the all-creating powers divine· 
Did their vast knowledge to one sect confine . 
If holy writ must judge , ( As gownsmen say ) 
Then every Christian May 
Pretend a right to heaven his different way : 
If his own judge each is allowed to be , 
Why do you punish what the scriptures teach ? 
Or if you will deny 'em liberty , 
Why have they freedom then to search ? 
If all have right t' interpret , then in vain 
Of principles and notions you complain . 
Who can prevent opinion ? Or convince 
The errors of his fancied sense ? 
Who shall determine then 'twixt right and wrong , 
If each man's faith to his own sense belong ; 
Why then , mistaken gownsmen , why 
Must i for an opinion fly , 
Or changing my opinion , die ; 
Since you have taught it in your school , 
That each man's judgement should be each man's rule ? 
And if our guides mistake their way , 
Shall we be punished if we stray ? 
Your pulpits oft this error do commit , 
And make a different sense of holy writ . 
When paying Caesar's dew has been the theme , 
Then nonresistance was the cry ; 
Which text was born to that extreme , 
As if in that one point , did lie 
The saving business of eternity : 
Xx . 

But oh ! with every turning tide , 
With every little ship of Caesar's government , 
( Which human counsels can't prevent ) 
That passive Doctrin's laid aside : 
And with new measures you pursue , 
New methods in your pulpits too ; 
and to th' occasion , suit the sacred word , 
T' advance some new design , and enterprise , 
Then , 't is the doings of the Lord , 
and marvelous in our eyes . 
Perhaps in some of these perverted strains , 
( For which this land has paid so dear ) 
'T will be at last , we 'll lead their Kings in chains , 
and all their peers shall iron fetters wear . 
Thus while from fears of slavery , 
The murmuring world we hope to free , 
We run into a worse extremity . 
Unthinking Britains ! you should first agree 
what 's by that word , religion , meant , 
If the established church it be , 
By boasted act of parliament , 
Then oh , * Eusebia , you , with justice , fear , 
Religion will not now be settled here : 
If the whole reformation you include 
Of differing sects , that endless multitude , 
what 's this , but that dispensing power in you , 
Which Caesar's great prerogative must not do ? 
All of the Christian faith you cannot mean , 
Lest popery , for her share , come in : 
Is it religion lawful right to oppose ? 
Or violate our sacred oaths ? 
Is it religion to unsheathe the sword 
against the anointed of the Lord ? 
Alas ! how vain is then the sacred word ? 
Why then was David smitten in his heart , 
For robbing Saul but only of his skirt ; 
With the same struck he Might have empire gained ; 
but God forbid , ( The royal youth replied ) 
against the King i should direct my hand , 
Or see it in the blood of monarchs died : 
If those a curse upon themselves must bring , 
Who , but in heart , think evil of the King ; 
If of King's safeties heaven has took such care , 
That even the winged inhabitants of the air , 
Shall every secret rebel thought declare . 
Then , wretched Britain ! What must be thy fate ? 
And where is this religion , which has made 
So great a noise in this divided state , 
And has so just , so good a King betrayed ? 
The outlawed villains blot his sacred name , 
He was , he is , this King of an immortal fame . 
Then since , oh muse forlorn ! thy Prince is gone , 
For whom thou tun'dst thy noblest song , 
in this dark shade ne'er with Apollo blessed , 
This covert suiting with a soul distressed , 
With sighing winds , and murmuring rivers mourn , 
Till James , thy godlike Master , back return . 
Britain's address to the Prince of Orange . 

To you , great Prince , three prost'rate nations come 
To ease their fears , and to expect their doom ; 
Oh! hero , more than half divine ! 
Whose glories , and replenished virtues first 
Made me my willing shores resign 
Up to your conquering hands in trust . 
Not Caesar's promise , nor the word of God 
Could calm the trembling fevers in my blood ; 
'T was yours , great Sir , on whom i did depend , 
My laws , and just religion to defend ; 
'T was that , that did assist your glory's rise , 
'T was that , that made you Britain's noblest choice , 
And gave you all the applauses of my people's voice : 
Then , ( As your gracious declarations speak ) 
My King and persons once more happy make . 
My persons whom no more words or oaths can bind , 
Yet strictly will exact this truth from you , 
As their own right , their property and due ; 
But to that justice will not be confined . 
The mighty work 's but half yet done , 
Your glories cannot be complete , 
Till by a justice more illustrious yet , 
You bring great Caesar to his rightful throne . 
Brave offspring of the royal martyr's blood , 
By nature pious , merciful and good , 
Maintain this empire in its lawful line ; 
This empire , which succeeding time , 
By right of birth heaven May to you resign . 
Content you with the glories you have won , 
Such as no hero yet did e'er renown ; 
Nor let your nobler quiet be undone 
With the too restless burden of a crown . 
nor you , illustrious Mary , can receive 
What heaven Denys , and justice cannot give : 
Your virtues are too eminently great , 
To rob a father's head to adorn your own ; 
And that bright angels face , with every charm replete , 
Needs not th' addition of a lawless crown : 
Leave it to heaven ! since you 've too lately seen 
The faith false Britain paid an injured Queen . 
Finis . 





Hone's trial , &c. and rye-house . * the Bishop . ☜  * the church . oath of allegiance , &c.  1 sam. c. 24. v. 4 , 5.  eccl. 10.20 . 

the Princess of Orange . 







