The grounds of obedience and government . 

By Thomas White , gentleman . 

Salus populi , suprema lex esto . 

Tullius de legibus , lib. 3.  



London , printed by j. Flesher , for Laurence Chapman next door to the fountain tavern in the strand . 1655.  

To my most honoured , and best friend , Sir Kenelme Digby . 

Sir , 

The many attempts you have this long time made upon me , to declare a point of philosophy , wherein partly i was ignorant , and partly loathe to meddle ( Being mindful of the poet's admonition , incedis per ignes suppositos cineri doloso ) have at the last beaten out of my resistance , this little spark of fire , or rather light ; born by the author's intention , to shine , not to burn . For , having by experience of many our debates upon single points , found that such skirmishes were not like to gain the victory of satisfaction upon your so solid understanding ; i saw myself forced to lay before your eyes , in one platform or design , the most intimate and bottom principles of obedience and government . The which , i have strove to do in the most short and summary manner i was able : not willing to be overcurious in so awful a subject . I play therefore the pure philosopher . I deliver the abstract notions only : leaving to the prudence of particulars , to draw such consequences , as every ones circumstances shall make necessary and evident unto him by the short hints i give . And as for yourself , i doubt not but my time is well employed . As for others , i fear the fortune of my other writings , May prove constant also to this ; that it will find , those who read it not , or who cannot judge of it , severe censurers : and those who like it , fearful to oppose so loud and clamorous a multitude ; or at least , stonned with the adverse noise . But for this , let the eternal providence care . To me such clamours will be no novelties : but the content of having given you satisfaction , an abundant reward of the endeavours of 

Sir , Your true friend , and most obliged servant , Thomas White . 

The contents . 

ground 1.  Wherein consists the perfection of government . pag. 1 
ground 2.  That the nature of man reacheth not to the perfection of government . p. 9 
ground 3.  That a rational belief is necessary to human action . p. 12 
ground 4.  Of the virtue of obedience , and wherein it consists . p. 19 
ground 5.  That fidelity is different from obedience ; and in what it consisteth . p. 27 
ground 6.  In what consists right or due . p. 34 
ground 7.  Why men desire to live in community ; and of the necessity of government . p. 40 
ground 8.  Of the authority given to an absolute governor ; and of under-sorts of government . p. 48 
ground 9  Of slavery and the lawfulness of it . p. 53 
ground 10.  Why a man is to hazard himself for the common good . p. 67 
ground 11.  The quality and rational power of a supreme governor . p. 78 
ground 12.  Who is such a governor , and the subjects duty towards him . p. 94 
ground 13.  Of the qualities of laws and commands , in respect to obedience . p. 101 
ground 14.  In what conditions the subject May resist government . p. 109 
ground 15.  Wherein consists the power and liberty of the subject . p. 120 
ground 16.  Of the dispossession of a supreme former governor , and of his right . p. 131 
ground 17.  Of a supreme governor dispossessed . p. 144 
ground 18.  The objection of divines answered . p. 158 
ground 19  The authority of lawyers insufficient in this question . p. 172 
The grounds of obedience and government . 

The first ground . 

Wherein consists the perfection of government . 

Xenophon , in his excellent book of the instruction of Cyrus , moves this question , why , of all other living creatures , which are of different natures from man , we easily attain to the mastery and rule ; but few men are so intelligent as to be fit to govern men ; and those few are the highest and worthiest part of mankind ? But , to me , the very question seems to bear the solution in its own bowels . For , when one asks , why man is hard to be governed since he governs other creatures ; he asks , why one , who hath the power to rule others , is himself so difficult to be Mastered : and the answer is , because the powers , by which he reduceth others to his obedience , makes him apt to resist them who seek the conquest of himself ; and so renders it a higher task to wield and manage him , than those creatures which he hath power over . 

For , we need not look into philosophy , nor study learned books , to know that the nature of man is inclined to have its own will , and casteth all things which are under his consideration to compass and effect it : as also , that every ordinary man's knowledge and consideration is far beyond any we find in other living creatures ; and , by consequence , is far less easily masterable than any of them . 

Whence we May plainly collect , that were it possible for a governor to make every single person in his dominion particularly understand , that what was ordered by the government was his own truest interest ; such an one would be the most absolute and perfect governor ; and infallibly would find the charge of governing most easy and sweet , as well to himself as to his subjects . 

This case is clear both in reason and in experience . Reason showeth us , that to draw any thing to action , according to its own fitness and inclination , is both easier to the attempter , and makes the action itself more efficaciously and thoroughly performed . He that will drive a wedge into a hard piece of wood , strives , as far as the situation gives him leave , to make his hammer fall downwards , because a weight hath , of itself , an inclination that way , and so both the impression is stronger and the arm less strained , knocking and the very fall of a weight increasing by motion downwards : therefore blacksmithes , whose continual labour is to use the hammer , lay their iron upon their anvil , that is , in such a situation below their heads , as is most fitting to gain the best advantage of the descent of their hammers , which they first raise to give them scope of a descent . 

Upon this principle it is , that they who tutor dogs , horses , elephants and hawks , knowing the ordinary attractive of beasts to be meat and some kind of flattery , make them understand , to the proportion of their capacity , that to do the action they breed them for , gains them food ; to which they join also certain motions of stroking and gentle words , that make an impression in the beast of its own excellency , and that it pleaseth its Master . In like manner , to deter them from certain actions , cudgels , whips , and harsh words are used ; which have a notabler efficacy than one would easily imagine , if he saw it not by experience . 

This , now , being applied to mankind , drives the effect home . For man , being a rational creature , ( Whose inclination it is to work according to knowledge ) desires to know that the work prescribed him is good , that is , good for him , or his good . And because if two actions be proposed , whereof the one is better for him then the other , the less good action deprives him of some good which the more good had brought him ; his inclination leads him to do the better , and by consequence to know and dispute which is the better ; which is as much as to choose betwixt them ; and this we call being free , or having natural liberty to do one and not the other . So that , the nature of man is to be free ; and to act what ever he does , because it seems to him the best . 

Whence it is evidently concluded , that the perfectest way and most connatural for governing men is , by making them determine themselves to their actions , and to proceed freely , and act , as it were , by their own inclinations . This if the governor can effect , he shall find both his intent generally performed , because the subject proceedeth with much affection and courage ; and seldom or never will his commands be resisted , or their obedience repent : for , men are not wont to repine often at what themselves choose and judge best for themselves ; especially if , even after the action performed and peradventure the attempt failed , yet the subject remains satisfied , that it was best for him , in those circumstances , to do what he did : now , if the reasons were solid when the governor proposed them , such must of necessity be , for the most part , the sequel . 

Experience maketh this same as manifest as reason concludeth it . What mother or nurse doth not seek to persuade and win the yet sucking child with gay things , with flattery and such demonstrations of love ( That is , of the child's good ) as the child is capable of ? What Master or father draweth not his boys to school and sitting exercises , by promises and proposals of good , as play , goodcheere , fine clothes , and any other toys suitable to their tempers ? The stronger ages have stronger motives ; as , of honour , lands , offices , and the like : by which we see the most part of men led , not only to labour , but even to hazard their lives and those very goods which are proposed them for motives of their actions . 

On the contrary side , how ill do those enterprises thrive , where the actors conceive themselves either not concerned or wronged ? How diligently are excuses sought out and easily found , and every cause of delay judged sufficient ? How readily ( If the actors be in great multitudes ( As soldiers or scholars ) do seditions and mutinies spring up , and all disorders grow bold and spread themselves , the commander of the action hated and esteemed an oppressor and a tyrant , his officers scorned and disobeyed ? 

This then is , of all hands , concluded , that the proper and natural way of government is , by making the obeyer understand that it is his own profit which the action aims at ; so to make him work out of the inclination of his own will , and the dictamen of his own understanding . 

The second ground . 

That the nature of man reacheth not to the perfection of government . 

Notwithstanding this inclination be so natural to us , yet nature is not able to make it perfect in most both persons and actions . Children are not come to the ability of judging ; some others are so gross of capacity , they cannot be brought to understand their own good , at least in that time and circumstances which nature hath provided them ; most spend so much of their day in some one business , which they have chosen either for their livelihood or pastime , that they have not sufficient leisure to attain the knowledge necessary for other occurrences of their life : even the greatest wits are not capable to understand the nature of all things necessary to their own private conditions . The Prince himself must trust the physician , the lawyer , the mariner , the soldier , the merchant , the cook , the brewer , the baker , and divers other trades and knowledges , which he hath no possibility to understand so perfectly as to be a Master in them . 

Nevertheless , nature doth not recede wholly from her principle , in thus subjecting one man's understanding to another's , and the greater most times to the lesser . For it doth not this , otherwise then by making the party subjected see , it is his own good to trust another's skill . Wherefore , it is true , that he follows his own inclination , and is ruled by his own understanding ; and so governs himself ; only , he is a degree higher , not busying his thoughts about the particular work , but only about choosing the Master of the work , or about his own submission , that is , his own action , as he is a man , and his action as that of a man , and not of a physician or pilot , or such other particular discipline or quality . It remains therefore still that he is free , and Master of his own action and the commanding part of it . 

The third ground . 

That a rational belief is necessary to human action . 

Of those things to whose knowledge we cannot ourselves arrive , but must rely on the credit of others , there are two kinds ; some purely to be believed , others to be also acted . As , when we inform ourselves of what passed in some foreign country , or of the nature of trees or beasts we never have use of ; we are barely to assent to what is delivered : but , when a physician telleth us we must take a purge or keep such a diet ; we do not only believe him but act according to our belief . Now , though in truth this second sort belongeth properly to our discourse apart , because the nature of pure belief is intrinsically included in it , as a part in the whole ; yet we must first note the errors to be avoided in a mere speculative assent : and these are two ; one of defect , and one of excess . 

The vice by defect , warns you to believe no thing but what yourself understand , that is , indeed to believe nothing at all . But , were these men bound to their own law , that they should take no physic till they knew it would do them good , at least as well as the physician doth ; nor trust their cause to a lawyer till they understood the subtleties as perfectly as he ; and so in other vocations ; i doubt they would have neither health nor wealth for physician or lawyer to work upon . 

But , because those who advance this proposition are persons of wit , i must not think they stumble at so notorious a block : therefore , their meaning is only , that we ought not to believe , but what we are able to understand if we had will and leisure to study . But , even so explicated , it is a most wilful proposition , reason being quite on the opposite side : for , let the authority which denounceth me a truth , be sufficient to make it credible , and overvalue the mysteriousness of the object ; and the higher it is above my knowledge , the more necessity there is of believing it . What is but a little above me , i May easily come to know ; and so need not believe but take pains and see it : belief is ordained for truths whose direct and immediate evidence we cannot compass ; and therefore is more proper , more due , more requisite for such as are above our knowledge . 

But , peradventure these smart persons do suppose that all things which have a possibility to be known , are the subject of man's wit ; and so take these two to signify the same sense , that the object is such as we are able to understand , and that it is understandable , or doth not couch a contradiction in its terms : and peradventure conceive themselves able to show contradiction in whatever they refuse to believe . If this be their meaning , the maxim they go upon is safe ; but they must be very careful not to subsume or apply it to particular instances without much consideration : for , ordinarily , the authority is very great which by understanding men , is alleged for remote and high truths ; and so is dangerously neglected , without an exact perusal and anatomy of the truths maintained by it . 

There are others so prodigal of our natural endowments , that they will teach us a kind of contempt of reason and understanding . In a word , their position is , that , though you be certain the proposition made ( For aught you know ) is false , nevertheless , you May and aught to think it true : which how to excuse , from being an irrational act and a pure folly , is beyond my skill ; at the same time to be assured it is uncertain , and to hold it for certain is , to me , an impossibility . Do i not hold that which i am certain of ? that is , that this truth is uncertain ? How then can i hold it is certain ? Put this in the mouth of a witness in any court of justice , and teach him that , though he know certainly he doth not perfectly remember whether he saw the man killed , yet he May swear he saw it ; what justice will remain uncorrupted ? 

Passion and precipitation May prevail with us , to judge that clear and evident which is not so , and carry us to believe and affirm it ; but that reason should make us believe what it telleth us it seeth no ground for , or not sufficient , is to me , an assertion the most unworthy , the most contrary to reason , and the most biased by interest that can be imagined . If our nature be rational , if all our actions should be conformable to our nature , and governed by reason ; there cannot be a more pernicious proposition , then to tell us we must assent , when there is no proportioned motive think we ought to assent . 

Thus much i thought fit to say concerning the errors of belief in speculation ; because belief in practical things , and which concerns our actions , depends of it , and includes it , and is , in part , regulated by the same rules . The believing of practical things begins to trench upon the subject of our main discourse : for it is the first and most simple or uncomposed degree of government and obedience , and so the very roots of both are dependent from and to be discovered out of it . 

For , we experience by our ordinary apprehensions , that we esteem a physician , a lawyer , a schoolmaster ought to be obeyed , though we do not acknowledge in them the power of a Lord or magistrate . And so we say , the scholar will never profit , because he will not do what his Master would have him : the client loseth his cause , because he would not obey his counsel : the patient recovers not , because he followeth not the advice of his physician . And though we do not say the doctor or counsellor commands his patient or client , yet , if we look into it , he both rewardeth and punisheth , which are the concomitants of commanding . For who obeyeth is rewarded with learning , health , and prosperity , and who disobeyeth is punished with ignorance , sickness , and losses . 

The fourth ground . 

Of the virtue of obedience , and wherein it consists . 

Out of this we May easily understand what nature intends by the virtue of obedience , and what are the limits and laws of it . For it is plain , the immediate end is that our works and all that concerns us May be well done , even as to those things wherein ourselves have no skill , or not enough , and the more remote end to be achieved by this is , that our life May be good and happy , and the end of nature arrived to by us . The conditions likewise are clear : first , that the matter of our action be such as ourselves are not sufficiently skilful in ; the second , that our commander be a Master in that art ; the third , that he be a good and honourable person , in whom we May rest confidently he will deal with us conformably to his skill , and not wilfully or for his own pleasure , or interest , do any thing against our good and profit . 

If the first be wanting , we also ourselves are wanting to ourselves ; for nature hath endowed us with reason to provide for our own good by this power : again , it is nonsense and folly to expect another man should be more careful of our good , than ourselves : and suppose it were so , it were either our fault or his , and for aught to be mended on one side ; our fault if we be not so solicitous as we ought to be , that is , as much as the weight of the affair requires ; his if he be more solicitous of our good than the same demandeth , and so he who professeth such a care May be feared to be a busy fellow , and one who aims at his own profit under colour of love , unless it be in an evident neglect of ours , which cannot well be imagined of one who is ready to obey another . 

If the second condition be wanting , there can be no virtue in obedience , since it will nothing mend but rather impair our life , and to the import of that action , destroy our pretence to happiness , to submit ourselves to one who hath no more skill than we , nor can be rationally supposed to bear us more love and care , or that he will or aught to employ himself in our particular business more attentively than we ourselves . 

As for the last condition , without it obedience is a plain precipitation of ourselves into misguidance and absolute ruin , and therefore a pernicious & wicked practice . 

By this discourse we May understand , it is a fallacious principle , though maintained by many , that obedience is one of the most eminent virtues , and that it is the greatest sacrifice we can offer to God , to renounce our own wills , because our will is the chiefest good we have . For , not denying that obedience is a great virtue ; it being , truly in itself , the affection to moderate the pride of our understanding , which is subject to make us think too well of our own opinions without having evidence of the truth of them , and so hinder us from candidly seeing and acknowledging the truth ( An inclination of all others most deeply rooted in our nature , and both most hard to be conquered , and most pernicious to be followed ) and therefore , the virtue which tempers and moderates this passion must needs be very excellent : yet i cannot give it so high a rank , as to prefer it before all . 

For , i see it is only a virtue in case of imperfection , as penance and some others are ; it being grounded on this , that a man is ignorant in those matters wherein he ought to be obedient . But , the reason displeases me more than the conclusion : for what signifieth this , that it is the greatest good we have and can renounce for God's sake ? If it be a great good , it is no vice , no excess , but a natural power or exercise of a power given us by almighty God ; and then would i know , why to renounce such a thing is pleasing to him . Can we think it were pleasing to God for any one to bind up his arms or legs , or cut off his hands , pretending to do it for his sake ? He that made them gave them us to use ; and there by commanded us to use them according to the manner intended by nature ; and , if we do not so , we offend him . 

There is a story of Origen , that he exsected his virility , thinking to please God ; but the same story saith , he was reproved by the whole church , and excommunicated for the fact : Simeon Styletes is reported to have chained himself upon a hill , that he Might not go thence ; but he was taught that such impotency was fit for beasts , not men . So that , to renounce any natural faculty or the legitimate and fitting use of it , under pretence of pleasing God , is a folly , not a virtue . 

But , let us see what power it is that we must renounce ; our will : and this word doth not , in this place , signify any interessed affection or malicious resolution ; but that will which followeth and is guided by our understanding , and that truth which God hath made us capable of : therefore the renouncing of this will , is , withal , the renouncing of our understanding ; that is , of our wits and manhood ; so that it is in effect to renounce our rationality , and that by which we are the image of God . If any man should take a fancy to go upon all four like a beast , or subject himself to be led in a string like a bear about the country ; would not all wise men cry out on him for bestiality , and think him unworthy the conversation of men ? How much greater is the indignity of him who permitteth himself to be carried in his whole course of life , and those actions that most concern him without using that wit or understanding which he hath , and by the sole direction of another ? 

He can be accounted so far no better than a clock or watch , which tells the hour by the wit and industry of the maker , not by any sense or worth of its own . If therefore , to renounce our wills for God's sake be to be accounted a sacrifice ; as far as my understanding reacheth , it is no other than that the scripture expresseth upon another occasion , to wit , one by which the sons are sacrificed to the father , the image of God defaced to the glory of him whose image he is . 

The fifth ground . 

That fidelity is different from obedience ; and in what it consisteth . 

But leaving this mistake of simple devotion ; of which we needed not have spoken so much , had there not depended on it some matter of greater consequence ( As the following discourse will manifest in its due place : ) we are to take notice of an equivocation which May draw on some error if not prevented . We use to say servingmen and waiting-maids ought to be obedient to their Masters and Mistresses , whereas indeed , the virtue by which they serve is not that of obedience , but of fidelity and truth , which is manifest to him that looks into the nature of hirelings . For , none think a husbandman , who is hired to till or fence a piece of ground , obeyeth the hirer more than he that selleth a piece of cloth or other merchandise obeyeth the buyer , because he taketh his monies ; but they are said to contract and perform their part of the bargain faithfully and truly . So servants pay their duties , perform their bargains : and fidelity is their proper virtue ; to do it carefully , and uprightly ; not obedience . 

For , obedience is in such actions as are the proper actions of the obeyer , which concern his life , and by which he May derive good if well done , and harm if amiss . Now in servants the good success pertaineth to the Master , the servant hath his livelihood and wages , whether the event go right or wrong , so he do what his Master commandeth . And hence it followeth , that neither aught he be ignorant in the action he doth , nor solicitous whether his Master be either skilful or honest : for , since what is done concerneth not him but his Master , his duty is to seek to do what he is commanded in the best way he can , without interessing himself about the success . This i say , as far as he is a servingman ; but as he is also an honest man , it May belong to him to suggest to his Master what he thinks best ; and , sometimes , when it lieth happily in his way , to help such errors of his Master as he can : without trenching on his Master's credit ; still providing for his own indemnity : that he be not involved in his Masters either imprudence or iniquity ; for by his bargain with his Master , he did not renounce the care of his own preservation . 

The reason of this equivocation is because we ordinarily call obeying the doing another man's will : and distinguish not how , sometimes , this is done with renouncing our own wills , which is in those actions whereof we are Masters , that is , our own actions ; and , sometimes , without such renunciation , as in the actions which belong to others , in which we have no will to renounce . Now obedience as it is a virtue especially attending on the renouncing of our wills , is properly confined to the former sense , not to the other ; with which it only hath an alliance in the name , and which truly is fidelity , as we have already declared . 

But , although fidelity be a distinct virtue from obedience , yet is it not such a stranger as not to demand a place in this treatise : especially because the kind of obedience we desire to look into , which is that by which commonwealths and communities subsist , is founded generally on fidelity or the matter thereof which we call promise , and in that virtue it binds to observance . After which discourse we shall be prepared to venture on the matter itself of government , and to our power , declare the force of it amongst men . 

Man therefore being by his nature and definition a reasonable , that is , an understanding creature , or one whose primary and principal inclination is to truth or true knowledge ; and the outward carriage and action of man being naturally proportionable to his inward substance ; it is clear his chief property , by which he behaves himself outwardly like a man , is to speak truth , and to do as he sayeth , when his words have action following them . Hence it is , that though honesty ( Which in a courtlier term is called honour , when applied to a rational carriage , and in a more spiritual language , conscience ) be extended to many other qualities , yet it is most frequently and principally expected in his keeping his word ; in so much that though he have other faults , either spiritual or carnal , yet if he be true of his word , he , often and in ordinary conversation , passeth for an honest man . 

Again , this virtue of truth is the principal and first engine of human conversation , and he that hath it not is unfit to be admitted to treat amongst men , but is to be rejected and banished from all negotiation . Thus you see what engagement every one hath , both by nature and necessity of conversation , to stand upon his word or fidelity : for so we call the virtue by which we speak our mind in reference to action , and are constant to perform what we say . 

Yet , since malice is grown to such a height , all nations , who pretend to the fear of any deity , have used to make men confirm their faith and promise by the invocation of the deity they worship ; hoping religion May work in them what nature is not strong enough to effect . This confirmation is performed in two sorts : one , when we only call God to witness ; as when we say , God , who sees my heart , knows this to be truth , or that i mean as i speak : the other , when we pledge our trust in God for a security ; as when we wish God May punish us , or never do us good , if we break our promise . And this is properly an execration , as the other an oath ; yet both called oaths , and agree in this , that we pledge our belief and fear of God , to another , for his security . 

By which it is evident , that men generally esteem religion the thing which should pierce deepest into a man's heart and affection ; and the strongest bond and tie of faith and honesty ; and that he , who setteth little by his religion , hath neither honour nor honesty in him ; or at least wanteth the greatest and strongest part of them , and that which ought to rivet in and fix the natural inclination which we have to truth and fidelity . 

The sixth ground . 

In what consists right or due . 

The next consideration May appear too metaphysical a subtlety for a moral treatise : yet such it is , that the ignorance of it is mother of many mistakes and quarrels . We ought therefore , to know that a man , considered in pure nature , looks on all other things , men and beasts , and insensible creatures , as his subjects to work on ; his only rule being reason , which takes nothing to be good but what is good to himself ; and makes the rule of his actions , to do what is fitting for him or conformable to his , that is , to a rational nature . By this rule he treats another man , otherwise then a horse or a dog , and them otherwise then a tree or stone : for reason is a faculty to use every thing suitably to their natures ; as , to take a knife to cut , a horse to ride on , a man to read or write or be his counsellor . And this runs through all his actions . 

But as , though a tailor or mariner govern himself by this rule , even when he playeth the tailor or pilot , yet none can doubt but the rules of taylorship or steerage are different from this seeking his own good and applying all things to that end : so , neither can any justly doubt but the art of a lawyer or counsellor is different from this principle which belongeth to all men . 

And to find out the difference , we are to reflect , that he who maketh a promise to another , so it be a perfect one ( Which we add to decline the question of what promises oblige , what not ) puts himself and his promissory into a rank of agency and patiency , on a new score , to wit , that of fidelity and negotiating : so that now , not the nature of the two men , but their words , and what followeth out of them , ground their being active and passive . This power of activity is , in Latin , called jus or justum , in English , right or due . 

The difference of these two arts is , one considers only what is noble , and manly , and conscience ; the other , what is according to promise and consent of parties . Whence we find , by the virtue of a promise , a new order grown amongst men following out of promise : wherein three things are to be considered ; the engagement of nature and honesty ; the confirmation by oath ; and lastly , this right and duty which ariseth from the promise : for , whoever promiseth , submits himself to his promissory , and becomes his subject , as far as the contract reaches . 

The first mistake that springs from the ignorance of this difference is , the great noise we hear of the law of nature and the law of nations . For , we are made imagine that nature hath bound us to certain laws , and not left us to the liberty of reason , where no pacts or agreements intervene : as , that men ought to give free trade to leave the seas open , to give immunities to ambassadors , and the like : for these either depend on custom and consent , or are free for every man to dispose of , according to his own profit , necessity , or convenience of his affairs . 

It is true , there is an inclination in man , from reason , to do another any good i can without my own prejudice , and to have a desire to keep peace with all men : but if i do not , it follows not that i wrong him , even though i do him harm or seek his ruin ; but i wrong myself , nature binding me to make my carriage to every one rational and becoming a man : for he is no otherwise to me then a piece of clothe or wood , which i cut and shape after my own will , fittingly for my use . And , on the contrary side , the party prejudiced or refused a courtesy , gets no right over me to revenge himself : but nature and reason teaches him , peradventure , that it is good and prudent for him to hurt me , to prevent a greater mischief to himself ; and he doth right to himself in harming me , because he doth an action rational and suitable to manhood . 

The different consequents of the two positions , will appear in this : that , if there be , in nature , radicated such an order of right and naturally just or due ( As many hold ) it is a thing that reason can never infringe nor can any thing justify what God hath showed us by example , and we see wise politicians practise sometimes , when , without crime or offence offered , they make themselves Masters of convenient places : but , if there be no such right by nature , than reason is left Mistress to judge whether it be conformable to the nobility of man to do such an action or no . 

The seventh ground . 

Why men desire to live in community ; and of the necessity of government . 

Not to make the foundations or underground works bigger than our building ; it is time to enter upon our pretended subject of government and obedience , and examine what it is maketh government necessary to mankind . And , because the government we look upon is that of a multitude ; first it is fit to understand why men desire to live in flocks or multitudes . Neither can any who hath never so little skill in nature doubt , but , as pleasure Masters and heads all our actions , so likewise doth it this of living in society . 

The first community is of man and wife . Who seeth not the power of pleasure in their mutual society ? Aristotle , out of experience , teacheth us that we take pleasure in conversing with handsome persons . And if we consider pleasure to be nothing but the knowledge or sense of our being well or receiving some good ; and , that the immediate cause of pleasure is the impression which some natural or apprehend good maketh of its own presence ; and that good signifieth connatural or fitting for us ; we shall perceive that handsomeness in our own kind must of necessity cause pleasure in us ; the impression it makes by our eyes being of the features and colour due to the perfection of our nature ; a gracefulness , not only of gesture and voice , but even of wit and discourse being regularly the ground of the outward beauty . So that ( If nature hath not miscarried ) all the parts and actions of a beautiful body are graceful to nature , and breed pleasure in others who enjoy them by conversation and , as it were , communication . 

This then is the first origine of meeting and living together ; as , whosoever looks into experience will easily discover : for , he will find most men burdensome to themselves when they are alone , and to seek company to divert themselves , so to elude the length of time . I remember to have heard a country fellow complain of the loss of a dog which was stolen from him ; and gave for his reason , that he was to travel a whole night alone , and the dog would have been an excellent companion to him . Bees also , we know , love company . Horses not only labour , but even eat better amongst their fellows : and we often hear sickly stomachs thank those that visit them for the good meal they have made , as if the company helped down their meat . Pleasure therefore and love is the first combiner of men into society . 

The next is , that God and nature have so managed mankind , that no one hath of himself , as much as he desireth ; but regularly aboundeth in one kind of goods and wants some other which his neighbour hath : hence , they mutually affect society ; to be accommodated with such necessaries , as they cannot have but by communication one with another . 

In the third place comes fear : for he that findeth himself stored with those things which he and others love , is subject to fear those whom he suspecteth able to bereave him of them ; and so seeketh company of friends for protection . Nor doth any one fear to lose but what he affecteth to have ; so that first love Marcheth in the van , and fear followeth in the rear . Besides , it is against all generosity , and embases nature itself , to set the throne of fear above that of love ; and agreeth neither with philosophy nor morality . 

To make a step farther : granting once men to be desirous to live together , and taking notice of the passions they are subject to , and how self-love corrupteth the judgement of almost all in their own case ; it is evident they can never live in quiet and content , unless there be some way contrived of agreement , when passion stirreth contention . They must therefore , necessarily , give consent , to end their controversies by some means . And since reason is our nature ; and every ones reason freer to see the truth in another's case then in his own ; and a wise and good man fit than a fool or knave , the most natural way for a multitude to live in peace is to have some man or men , accounted wise and good , chosen , to whose arbitrement all the rest ought to stand ; the stronger part combining to force the weaker , in case of resistance ; that is , the disinteressed part , which is the multitude , to force the interessed , which generally are but particulars if compared to the body of the persons . 

Here you see the nature of government begin to appear . But , to make it perfect , we must farther consider , that many commodities are necessary to a multitude , which are to be furnished by common consent : that likewise there are many foreign enuier's to a multitude which liveth handsomely and happily : and in conclusion , that to provide for goods and prevent evils in common , is a matter of so great weight and difficulty , that it takethup the whole life of one or more men ; and by consequence , these businesses cannot be carried on by the whole body of the community , whose work and aim is to enjoy themselves to their proportion , in getting by their labour , those accommodations of human life , which they esteem necessary or conducing to their happiness . It solloweth therefore , they must entrust some more or fewer to take care of the common concernments . 

Such trustees are called governors , and the commnnity is said to obey them ; and according to the principles forelaid , you see the persons are supposed ignorant of what ought to be done for the public , this being a business requiring a man's whole time ; which they neither can spare , nor do desire to employ in this : way : you see they entrust others in whose prudence and goodness they confide ; and themselves execute what their trustees think fitting , either by practising when they are commanded , or giving a sufficient force to their governors to Master such restif parties as will not obey : in conclusion , you see government is , naturally , a power or right of directing the common affairs of a multitude , by a voluntary submission of the communities wills to the will of the governors ; whom they trust , upon opinion that they are understanding and honest , and will administer the commonalty by the rules of wisdom and goodness , as is most convenient and advantageous for the persons . 

It seems to me no moderate and discreet person can doubt but a government so ordered is both necessary and connatural to a rational multitude , and , in a word , such as human nature requires ; and is the best , if not the only , that suits to the disposition of free men and prudent . 

The eighth ground . 

Of the authority given to an absolute governor ; and of under-sorts of government . 

By this resignation of the people's will , it is also evident , the magistracy receives such an activity and power as , we have explicated before , did arise out of a man's promise to his neighbour : and by consequence , that the persons as far as they have renounced their own will , so far they have no power left in them to contradict or resist the orders of the magistracy . 

I say , as far as the persons have submitted their wills : for since this power is in the magistrate in virtue of their wills , it cannot extend farther than the people's promise : so that if the persons bind their magistrates to certain laws and limits ; he hath no right to transgress such laws , or extend himself beyond the prefixed limits by his instalment , and the original power given him : but above all , he cannot dispose of one chip or dispense in one the least law ; farther than he apprehends it as fit and necessary to the good of the commonwealth : and , if he doth , he exceedeth his patent and power . True it is , there is a great discretion to be used in such limits , and the prudent governor will see that the good of the community requireth many of those dispensations , which careless governors use out of an overweening of their own height and power . 

Having thus declared the nature and conditions of natural government ; it is not amiss to see whether there be any other government ; and wherein distinguished from this . And casting our eyes round about us we quickly perceive certain communities which pretend to a defective government : as companies of merchants or tradesmen ; universities and colleges of scholars ; and cloisters of men and women , who pretend to employ themselves wholly to perfect their souls towards eternal beatitude . All these have a participation of government ; but have not the universal administration of human goods and evils : for , power of life and death , generally , they have none ; and are subject , for the most part , to appeals from their judgements , in matters of great consequence : neither have they any power of peace and war : and if sometimes any of these royalties belong to them ; it is not as they are heads of such communities , but as they participate of sovereignty by privilege , or accident . 

These therefore are distinguished from the government we pretend to declare ; as being slight imitations of it , and certain likenesses , not the power itself ; or as some art or trade is different from moral philosophy , which is Mistress of the will , and all her actions ; the others being but ushers to the particular , as it were forms or ranks in which petty things are taught . In fine , these others are to our government , as particulars to the universal . The government therefore which we explicate is that which hath power , either of all things belonging to the persons it governeth ; or at least , of all comprehensible by nature and falling under sense and experience . The first of these we see in the Pope and such Bishops as are withal secular Princes ; the second , in other Christian governments either of Princes or commonwealths , where the spiritual jurisdiction is acknowledged to be higher and greater , though not commander of the temporal . 

But we seek farther , whether there be any supreme government different from this we explicate , or no : and the occasion is from what we see in certain instances , that there is a kind of command or rather subjection , which we call slavery , exercised , not only amongst heathens , but even Christians , who have more conformity to nature . 

The ninth ground . 

Of slavery and the lawfulness of it . 

And first , we must look into the notion of slavery ; which signifies a subjection to command in all things ; and that merely for the Master's profit . This all things May either reach to the hindering him from those actions which are necessary to obtain beatitude ; or only to corporal services , with that moderation , that the Master hinders him not from such exercises as concern the procurement of future happiness . 

And clearly , it is against nature for any to submit his will so far as to renounce eternal bliss . There cannot , then , be any obedience due to such an extremity ; and , by consequence , there cannot be any power of commanding such enormities in the compass of nature . The like i conceive of a subjection to be killed or maimed causlessely and without desert , or even tormented ; nay , or so penuriously abused as to have no content in life ; but perpetually to suffer sickness , hunger , cold , or any other notably afflictive condition , so that his life is rather a punishment than a content to him . For since life is our being , and since being is the thing most deeply recommended to us by nature ; it is evidently against the inclination of nature , to consent to the loss either of life or of the profit of life , which is , either to be well in this world or in the next : therefore it cannot be conformable to nature to renounce either ; especially , the quiet in this world being the means to gain bliss in the other . 

Neither doth it scare me to cast my eyes upon so many holy men and women , as have put themselves , voluntarily , upon penurious and painful lives . For , i can easily answer , that they had not displeasing lives ; enjoying the fruit of contemplation , and the sweetness of conscience in expecting a great reward for what they did : so that , they only refused the pleasures of this world , to gain those of the next ; which is very rational . But , for a man to renounce the content of this world , who either think not of another , or , at least , hopeth nothing out of his renunciation : this must of necessity be extremely irrational and against nature ; whose universal aims are , to be well , either in the next or this present life . But if there be no su•h subjection natural , there can as little be any power of command gotten either by promise and submission of the subject , or violence of the commander ; who May perforce do what he list , but can never make it conformable to nature , to use an other with such inhuman severity . 

There follows yet another kind of slavery ; which consisteth in being bound to do what his Master commandeth , while his Master affordeth him a convenient livelihood ; and being subject to due punishment , without farther appeal , when he deserveth it . And this hath no apparent opposition to nature ; why , in circumstances , a man May not bind himself to it , and be obliged to maintain and make good his word to his dying day . And , of such a kind of slavery , we May question , whether nature alloweth a whole persons to be involved in it , or it be a thing that only can happen accidentally in nature . 

And Aristotle is the first man whom we are engaged to offend in this matter ; who says or seems to say , that some nations are naturally Masters and commanders , others , slaves and subjects : to which conceit Virgil seems also to incline ; Tu regere imperio populos Roman memento &c. 
Ha' tibi erunt arts — 


as if it were proper to that country to command . Neither do i think Aristotle's meaning was any more , then that there was a greater fitness in some nations to command , then in others : for , himself teacheth , the barbarous prisoners , whose education had been noble , should not be put to servile offices . So that , it was but a little self-pleasing in these two great authors , and affection towards their countries , which made them fall into this extremity , of thinking it fit that other nations should submit to theirs : whereas , had they lived in our days , long experience would have taught them that , in every nation , there are men fit to govern , if education and discipline be not wanting ; and again , any nation May prove a slave , even through too much wit , if they have not goodness to temper it . But we must not be angry , even with great ones , if they flatter a little their country : but take warning it be not our own case , either for our country , or , which is more absurd , for ourselves . 

Leaving then this question , whether any nation be , by nature , born and designed to slavery ? let us see whether , within the latitude of nature , it consists that any nation can enslave itself in the sense propounded . I do not here intend to engage in that question ; whether one nation May oppress another , and , by force of garrisons and armies , keep them quiet in a legitimate course of government and subjection ? A question much different from ours , which is only , whether a whole nation May voluntarily submit itself to a government , by which it shall have nothing of its own , nor be able to deserve or get any thing ; but be entirely at the disposition of the magistrate it chooseth , without right or property ? 

That we May not walk too much in the dark , the holy scripture holdeth us out a lantern , in the example of Joseph ; who bought up the whole nation of Egypt for Pharaoh their King , so that he rendered him not only the governor as before , but also absolute Lord and Master , and them his slaves ; and this by their consent . Nevertheless , i am not able to understand reason in it . To put therefore the case clearly , the meaning is ; whether a whole nation can tie itself so by any promise to one magistrate , as afterward to be bound , they and their children , in force of their words , not to have or dispose of their labours and goods of fortune but at the pleasure of the magistrate ; and that he hath power , arbitrarily and without any farther reason than his own will , to give what one man possesseth to another , and make any one work and obey another , merely because such is his pleasure . 

That which induceth me to declare for the negative is the nature of man ; whose first and main operation , is judgement and choice ; and the matter of this is his outward action : so that , who univer•ally renounceth his judgement in extern action , truly renounceth nature itself , in renouncing the end and action for which it was made . Now , that a single man May be forced to this , i make no difficulty : for , if force can take away a single man's life , much more May it take away his outward action . But , when i speak of a nation , methinks i speak of nature itself : for , i understand a nation to signify a thing in nothing different from human nature , except in greatness ; as a bit of bread from a loaf or a pail of water from the pond out of which it was taken ; and so , reason cannot teach us to do that to a nation , which ought not be done to all human kind . Now , who abhors not to think that the use of judgement and will should be banished out of mankind ? Were not that quite to unman us and be-beast our whole nature ? On the other side , it being the property of reason to use every thing it knoweth , according as it is fitting to the respective nature of the thing ; and nothing being more fitting for man in common and every one in particular , then to judge and govern in his little sphere of activity ; reason can never demand or approve of the contrary to be practised universally ; as is employed in this position , that it May be done to a whole nation . 

I look not into the inconvenience of such proceeding : how base and unworthy it renders the subjects ; how unfit for the service of the magistrate ; how ready to accept of any occasion to better themselves ; and the like ; which are sufficient to dehort any wise governor from attempting or desiring it : because my theme is only upon the contracting an obligation of obedience , out of the force of their promise ; and extends no further . And , i suppose , the showing that such a promise invalidateth the principle upon which a promise grounds its constancy , is enough , to show that no promise so made can be constant and firm ; since a man stands to his word , because he is a man and hath a principle of judgement or choice upon judgement , by which and according to which he is and aught to be governed : now then , such a promise being a renouncing and bereaving him of this his manliness ; it cannot assuredly be maintained by manliness which is the only or chief strength of a promise . 

But , what must we reply to Joseph ? what to many thousands of eminent Christians , who seem to profess and observe , in virtue of a vow , this very kind of subjection ? As for Joseph , he justifies himself , in renouncing the vassalage of his persons for one fifth part of their lands and fruits . 1.  And , not to make an estimate , how proportionable the fifth of a kingdom is to the furnishing of necessaries for governing ; so much at least is plain that , by his remission of four parts absolutely , that is , for ever , he did not execute what he pretended by the bargain ; but , by the formality of acquiring all , he obtained what he aimed at , that the persons should willingly contribute the fifth part of their labour and goods generally , and , in case of necessity , willingly obey their governor . 

As for the special obedience vowed by some Christians of exemplary life , it is professedly only , concerning spiritual instruction or exercise , even than when it is applied to the knight's champions of Christendom : and this is expressed by the greatest divine the school ever had , in his 22• . qu. 104.  art. 5. ad tertium . so that , neither of these objections prejudice the conclusion we have settled ; however the outward undiscerned show May make an appearance to the contrary . 

Out of this conclusion it is easily seen , that the Turkish , moscoviticall , Tartarian and other whatsoever governments , settled upon this principle , that the goods and lives of the subjects are the Princes , not to defend ( As our laws go ) but to dispose of at will , without contradiction or limitation , more than of his pleasure ; neither do nor can ever breed any obligation of obedience in the subject , farther than out of fear or present utility . 

It is not amiss to add this consideration , that those tyrannical governors exact of their subjects no less than to forgo all that is dear in this world , at their pleasures , life and means , wife and children , and whatsoever hath made impression upon them : so that , truly , there is no protection or security from them ; and if they rob you not , it is because they have no occasion , not because they conceive any unworthiness in it . Whence , no good nor profit doth , regularly and according to the intention of the pact and agreement , result to the particular ; but all is the high Masters , and the subjects portion is only to share those scraps he shall cast down to him , as to a dog , to make him fit to hunt for his Master . 

The tenth ground . 

Why a man is to hazard himself for the common good . 

It is true , this debt in the subject , of hazarding life and limbs and all that is estimable in this world , is exacted , as well in just and legitimate governments as in those hideous tyrannies ; but , there is a recompense for it , and the good of the whole reflecteth on the part ; and if one lose his life , his children and relations at last feel the sweetness of it ; and this makes men hazard with courage , and die with comfort . And clearly , were there not this obligation , no commonwealth could stand . What city could be defended , if the citizens would not venture their lives upon the walls ? What army could be managed , if the soldier would never be brought into the danger of death , or would fly as soon as the bullets began to play about his ears ? all wrongs must be suffered at their hands who would expose their own lives to hurt others ; and no justice maintained , or innocency defended . Nature therefore makes it most clear that such an obligation is unavoidable , and the daily necessity of it beateth it out so flat and plain , that we can no way escape so manifest an evidence . 

But if it be by the direction of nature , certainly it is also rational , and hath some principles of its truth and reasonableness . Now , in morality the reason of all action is the good obtaineable by it ; which if less or not greater than what we hazard and , peradventure , lose in the attempt , it is no good nor can be a rational motive of such an action . We ought therefore to seek out this great good . 

Aristotle proceeds as cunningly in this business as became so wise a Master ; and , according to his fashion , where his skill reached not to explicate the particulars , remained in common terms : telling us , that bonum commune divinius est quàm particulare : but , in what this divinity consists , he nowhere expresses . Truly , if there were a Platonic idea of the particular's goods , which Might be termed the common good , i could understand that there were a divinity in it ; but himself hath extinguished that flash of Plato's , beyond reviving . I understand also , that the notion of common , compared to the notion of individual , hath a kind of excellency by its universality , which rendereth it very August and lustrous , and of a higher degree than the particular . I know again the perpetuity a commonwealth pretendeth to , compared to the mortality of a single person , vesteth itself with a kind of infinity , which giveth it a glorious appearance . Nay , when i see the same man work for a commonwealth , in a free way of doing it good ; and again , for a private friend : i see a vast distance between his pretended ends ; and an eminent generosity in one over the other : whence , i believe , it cometh that heroes and heroical virtues are chiefly taken in respect of doing good to whole countries or cities . 

But when , on the other side , i see the same great Master teach us , that good is the same with desirable ; and every ones good , what is desirable to him ; i find it is an intricate labyrinth of equivocation wherein we endlessely err , while we think that good taken in common , should be accounted good , truly and properly . As , who would be so wild as to bend any strong labour here in England to profit the King of Persia or Siam , if he expected no good to reflect on himself by it ? Much less would any account it good to be robbed or maimed , because it was good to another who possessed his money or was afraid of him : and yet if we stick upon the common notion of good , without determining to whom it is good , •oth these must be esteemed not only goods but great ones ; for , so they are to some body , though nothing or harm to the esteemer . Then , to cry , the common good , is a mere deceit and flattery of words ; unless we can show that the common good is as great to us as we make it sound . 

Neither can the authority of learned nations and the many endeavours of worthy men persuade us the contrary . For these nations generally were of popular governments , where plainly the common good was the good of them who were to reward the causes of it : so that , it was no wonder the common good should be so highly exalted and cried up ; where it was the particular good , both to them to whom it was commended , as also the commenders themselves were to arrive to their own private pretences through that notion of the common good . The like is of all Princes and governors ; who if they be wise , conceive the common good in most circumstances , to be compared to them as their own proper good . 

It remains therefore , to see what May be the ground on which an understanding man ought to value so highly the common good ; and expose his life and all that is dear to him , upon the score of the public . Clear it is , that he who ventures his life , ventures all this world : for if he dyes , what reward remains there in this world ? fame is a slender recompense , when the fruit of it ( Which chiefly consists in being respected in company , and having a power amongst his associates ) is once passed . The good of his wife and children ; that May rejoice a dying man ; but if there rest nothing after death , it is a comfort which soon expires ; being indeed nothing but a flash . It is then past dispute , that for him , who expects nothing in the next world , there can be no rational motive of voluntarily endangering his life for the common cause ; if himself be not particularly interessed in it . 

I know philosophers reply , that there is no harm in death , nor pain after it , and we are but as if we never had been ; so they dispute to take away the fear of death . But first , i would ask them , why , even in such a case , the fear of death should be taken away ? What signifieth this to a sound philosopher , to take away the love of his summum bonum ? of the end for which he is to do all his actions ? Again if he must embrace death , upon what motive must he make his onset ? shall he propose to himself none ? or a less good than he loses ? or entertain frantic apprehensions of glory after he is nothing ? These are not answers for philosophers and considerate persons ; but for some harebrained foolhardy flashes or doting orators , who , with a multitude of fine words , can plausibly dress up contradictions and nonsense . 

This therefore remains certain , that there is no good to be expected here equivalent to the hazard of death ; and consequently , none can be rationally valiant , who sets not his hopes upon the next world : and as , before , we made it apparent , that he who was not constant to his religion , could have no rooted honour or honesty in him ; so , now it is likewise evident , he cannot rationally be either valiant himself or trusted by others in danger , farther than he is a fool . Since then , on the contrary side , the nature of commonwealths makes it beyond dispute that hazarding is necessary ; it is both evident there is another life to be expected , and that it imports good government to plant deeply in the breast of the subjects a rational apprehension of it . The cause therefore , and solid reason why men ought to be valiant , is the hope of reward hereafter for doing good to our neighbour here : and the commonwealth being our nearest and greatest neighbour , as including our friends , parents , acquaintance , and all of mankind that our knowledge reacheth to ; to perform service to it is , certainly , the greatest act of charity towards our neighbour ; that is the highest extern act which God hath granted to us , and , consequently , to be preferred before all others ; and , as such , to expect a profit and recompense in the next life . 

I know , it May be objected , that in beasts also is to be found a kind of valour , even to the hazard of their lives for their mates and little ones , and yet no reward of the next world can be pretended for them . But , we are to reflect , that beasts are not governed by any reason given them to govern themselves by ; but like clocks and other engines , by the wit of their makers : and therefore it ought not to be expected they should be addressed to that which is their individual greatest good , as man is by his reason ; but only to what is fittest for their creator's intention ; which being only to continue them for the use of man ; and this passion of audacity which we see in them , being fit for that , we are not to seek a further reason for them to hazard their lives , nor to draw any consequence from them to mankind , whose propriety is to govern himself by the knowledge of his own good , and not to be forced out of that for the good of any other , so the notion of good be rightly taken . 

By this we , in part , understand wherein consists the worth and excellency of a magistrate and his office : to wit , that all others ends being purely for the good of their private persons or family ; the magistrates aim is at the universal good of the whole eternal body of the commonwealth , the extent of the persons , the long and far-sighted care , and the abstraction from his private good , manifestly exalt this function , beyond comparison , above that of private men and their intentions ; and placeth it , as it were , in an orb of honour proper to its dignity . 

The eleventh ground . 

The quality and rational power of a supreme governor . 

Thus is our supreme magistrate or governor mounted on his throne of justice and sovereignty . He hath for his strength , that right the persons have bestowed on him ; divesting themselves , by this submission , from interposing in common affairs . He hath besides , the strength of the persons ; both their wealth and swords being delivered up to him ; so that , if he be wise , he can make himself and his laws obeyed . But chiefly he hath his own prudence and goodness , which is supposed to be the choicest that could be found in that persons ; and the credit of it to be his strength and support . 

For , if we look into it ; as we see that , in the natural generation of government , the persons truly intend to be governed by one whom they esteem the wisest and best amongst them : so afterward , when they apprehend their magistrate no Solomon , yet they still conceive he is the best they can obtain or prudently aim at ; that is , if they should attempt to change , it would bring greater inconveniences than their continuance under this weaker magistrate . So that , as it were , the essence and form of his power to govern , is wisdom and goodness ; at least , such a degree of both as is supposed and apprehend the greatest possible , according to the circumstances wherein they are . His end we find to be the common good : and to that is he wholly and adequately bound , by his own goodness , by the people's intention , by his own acceptance , by the nature of the charge itself , and by the very form of his life and profession : in so much that , he faileth from his duty , from the expectation of his subjects , and his own goodness , if he doth the least action for his private interest , or otherwise then out of his esteem that it is for the greatest good of the commonwealth . 

And truly , if it be duly considered , we May plainly see that his private interest is not distinguished from the public . For , how can it be ? First for honour , 't is plain , the welfare of his subjects is his highest honour ; their knowing they are well by him , and so their love to him , his strongest security ; their expressing still on all occasions content with his actions , and esteem of his person , his greatest pleasure ; and in fine , the more wealth they have , the greater commander is he : so that really , this private interest ( If he be indeed a good governor ) is the true felicity of his persons . I do not , by this , intend to cut off from supreme magistrates that promise and magnificence we see usually in persons of that quality : but , whereas it May be practised either for pride and vanity , that is , to procure an esteem of the private merit of the magistrate , or else , to facilitate the government by the awe and reverence it printeth in the subject ; i expect the supreme magistrate to be so discreet , as to understand the former is merely a shadow or faint and fading colour , the other a real profit and necessary instrument , and so to be embraced for the good of the persons . 

Neither must we leave our magistrate here , but transplant our discourse into a new consideration . For , if he hath gotten a commission , he hath not , by that , lost the quality of a rational , wise , and good man ; but joined to that a new obligation of being new fixed upon the common good , as the effect and scope of the actions of his whole life : insomuch that , to determine the quality of his action , we must make one complexe of the whole person ; and ask , what a wise and noble mind , having such limitations upon him , by word or oath engaged in his instalment , May or aught to do concerning the limitations ? 

And first , it is undoubted on both sides , that neither May he , without great cause , make a breach in those hedges his way is fenced with ; nor , if he make some small and inconsiderable breaches , that he violates therefore his oath . For , the nature of human action is such , as not to consist in an indivisible ; but , of itself , to have a moral latitude ▪ our understandings not being able to reach to such small and petty differences as nature maketh and our operations contain , as far as they depend from nature . 

But , the question cometh , when some great fault discovers itself in the limitations , and the end of government is prejudiced by such a defect ; and nevertheless it is no doubt but 't is the intention of the persons or the trustees of the persons to bind their magistrate to such conditions ; whether , in such a case , he be bound to his orders and oath , or whether the duty of a wise and good man doth enfranchise him to do what is truly best for the persons , though it be against their wills ? 

The question seemeth hard : and therefore it is not amiss to note , that truly best signifieth that it be not only best , if it had been fore-ordered or if it were in practice ; but that it be best to be brought into practice ; and that , notwithstanding all damages and dangers which are to be incurred in the settling of it ; otherwise , it is clear , he ought to stand to his oath . Another caution is , that the magistrate do not only think it so best , but know it by certainty and science ; otherwise , he proceedeth not wisely , to hazard a disturbance of the commonwealth upon slight and weak appearances . 

These two suppositions premised , we are to consider what it is that engageth the magistrate on both sides . And , for his promise , it is above declared , that he is engaged to it by the connaturality and beauty of truth in man's nature : now not truth only is conformable to man's nature , but also that nobleness and goodness that bindeth man to man ; which in its highest pitch , that is , as it looketh upon a commonwealth or a little mankind , is the beauty and virtue of a governor . 

Again , i see a governor hath in himself , as it were , two truths , or degrees of truth belonging to his person : one , which is the public honesty , either considered betwixt him and his subject or some aliens ; and this forfeited maketh his public credit weak and unfit for the use of government : the other is but a splendour reflecting on his own person , by which he appeareth in the face of honour and a man of his word . For this latter it is very evident , the affection to the public aught to oversway it ; because being but a private good it should do homage to those virtues which carry a man to the common interest . For the former , the damage ensueing is to be esteemed and poised against the profit or necessity of the commonwealth : for , if it be evident , that the good of the change openly and vastly exceeds the damage proceeding from the discredit ; clearly he is bound to admit of the discredit , to purchase the advantage accrueing by the change : but , where there is none or little difference , there the balance hangs upon quietness side , and change is not to be ventured on . 

This seemeth so plainly and evidently concluded , that a rational man cannot resist it . But , to those who are used to maintain their credit by custom more than by reason , it is a bolus of hard digestion , to tell them they must break their word for the common good : and seemeth to be of the same nature , with that famous definition of an ambassador , witty in England , harsh in other nations , that he is sent ad peregrè mentiendum pro patriâ , which where the equivocation of lying abroad is not understood , is , in verity , a scandal to statesmen , whose negotiation hangs so tenderly on their credit , that , it once being broken , they have lost a principal instrument to penetrate the hearts on which they are to work . 

Therefore , let us see whether the high magistrate ( In proceeding as we have declared ) does truly force the rampart of veracity so necessary for a government . Let us first begin with his promise , and consider what it is . He is entrusted to do for the common good : and the reason why he is entrusted is , because the entrusters conceive themselves either through their incapacity or attendance to other employments , ignorant of what is truly the common good . They entrust him , therefore , with more than they understand ; and so his power is to proceed , according to his understanding , though it cross theirs : he then of necessity , must be false to his oath , if he do not , according to his trust , act for the common good what he evidently sees in a high degree to import it . Further , because we know , in moral businesses , the end aimed at , is more principal than the means ordered to it , and hath such a command over them that they are to be or not to be , according as is fitting for the end : and in the oath or promise of our high magistrate , if he observe his limitations , he destroyeth the end for which they were put : he offends against both his oath and fidelity to his persons , if he maintain such limitations , when he is obliged , for the public good , that is , when he ought to break them . 

Yes but ( Replieth the man who thinketh himself wedded to an outward and seeming honesty in this cause ) howsoever , at least he breaketh that part of his oath , in which he swore directly , to those limitations . Let us therefore see even that point , and ask , what was the people's will in Exacting his oath or promise ? Doth any one will what he understandeth and knoweth not ? If one should say to another , i give thee what is in that trunk ; in which himself had put a suit of apparel , and , without his knowledge , his servant had taken that out and put in bags of gold to the same bulk ; would any divine , or chancery judge , or prudent person assert he were bound to bestow on that promissory all his gold , which was in the trunk ? I think not ; and the reason is , because it is the will and understanding which hath the power to give strength to a promise or contract ; and here the will is wanting ; for he knew not what he said , nor intended to give any thing but a suit of clothes . 

How many promises do divines and lawyers pronounce null , though they were good and valid when they were made , by reason of the change of accidents following , which could not be foreseen ? If one promise his daughter in marriage to his neighbour , and she dyeth ; is he bound to fulfil his engagement , or seek his neighbour another wife ? Nay , if the neighbour be discovered not to be the man he was taken for ; not to have a competent estate and such like conditions ; he May justify the disperformance of his promise ; nor shall he forfeit his credit if he doth not keep his word , but rather , if he do , be accounted a weak man . 

Now , to come to our purpose , let it be supposed the persons were made understand , when they exact the promise from their magistrate , that such limitations would destroy their peace , and contentment : doth any one think they would bind their governor to maintain them ? If they would not , 't is evident , howsoever their mouths pronounced the words , their hearts were ignorant and inculpable of such an exaction ; for they knew not what they did , they understood not nor meant what they spoke . 

But suppose that truly they knew the incommodities that were to follow , and yet they would have them observed : for , this happeneth often in this our subject , that some ( Especially great men , and sometimes the populace ) understand the inconvenience of a law , and yet for private interest will have it maintained : what then is the duty of the supreme magistrate , who is sworn to maintain the said laws ? The question is clearly answered by the condemnation of Jephthe ; who , when he had rashly vowed to sacrifice the first thing that met him from home , did impiously murder his daughter . All understanding men know , a wicked oath is not to be observed . He that should give a mad mana sword , because he had vowed or sworn it , deserved to be hanged for the murders by him committed : now , an ignorant and wilful man , what is he but a mad man ? Or what is madness but a wilfulness in doing evil ? If the action be naught and such as the exactor cannot , with reason , desire , he cannot by any oath bind a swearer to it : now to observe conditions which shall ruin the government and destroy the end for which they were instituted , is an action contrary to all reason , and to which the promissory cannot bind the promiser , in any wisdom and goodness : he is therefore bound , rather to the destroying then fulfilling such conditions ; neither is he therefore perjured , but were rather unjust and wicked , if he observed them . This so resolved , it appeareth plainly , that no supreme magistrate can be bound to any laws contrary to good government ; farther than either the danger of changing them , or the not clearly seeing them to be such , May hold his hand . 

The twelfth ground . 

Who is such a governor , and the subjects duty towards him . 

We have long talked of a supreme governor ; it is time we should point him out , that he May be known . And , since all agree that there are three sorts of government , monarchy , aristocracy , and democracy ; when they are simple , there can be no doubt who is the supreme magistrate . Now , mingled they May be , all together , or some two of them : and again , their mixing May be either continually , as when all parts mixed are so often engaged that their authorities run jointly , or else some are continual , others but at certain terms . 

If monarchy be mixed , either with aristocracy or democracy , so that they be continually joint actors ; the monarch is but a servant , and the other part the Master : as is to be seen i• the Italian dogs , and the Lacedaemonian Kings ; for his force is nothing , compared to his consort . 

If democracy and aristocracy be so mixed , the quarrel is more balanced ; and because it is a government divided in itself , and therefore dangerous ; no doubt but , if the aristocracy get power enough , she is in the posture of supreme authority . The example of this we have in the Roman commonwealth , in the time , specially , of Sylla's conquest ; when , if he had settled the state in the senate , there had been no fear of Caesar and Pmpey's mangling that commonwealth , as afterwards fell out . 

Monarchy and democracy can hardly be so mixed , that democracy be perpetual , and monarchy by spurts : for that is not monarchy ; the said monarch being not long enough in power to be accounted a settled magistrate ; as we see in the decemvirs , tribunes and dictators amongst the Romans : so that , the monarch hath not the power in his hand to change any thing , which is the case we aim at . And the like is of aristocracy ; when its employment is the ordinary and continual , and monarchy only by turns and seasons . 

There remaineth only monarchy in continuance , compared to aristocracy and democracy at certain turns . And in both , it is clear , the monarch is the supreme governor in ordinary ; and so the magistrate of whom we speak , who May alter the inconveniences , if occasion serve . As for the persons , they are but a weak part , if the governor be wise : so that he is , by this posture , in the state of doing that good to the commonwealth which his judgement and conscience dictate to him to be necessary . The comparison to aristocracy is much harder ; every one of the aristocracy being , generally and regularly speaking , a petty monarch ; and the whole of them easily assembled ; and , when so , having the power in their hands : so that the monarch is not ( By virtue of his ordinary condition ) in a posture to be able to rectify what he seeth necessary to be altered ; therefore he is not the man we call the supreme magistrate , but the assembly of the nobility , whereof he is but an eminent and considerable one . 

The subject , being correlative to the magistrate , requireth upon that title , to be reflected on ; but much more because the nature of the magistrate cannot be well understood , unless the duty of the subject be jointly declared . We must therefore declare , or seek out at least , what honour and conscience obligeth the subject to : and , to perform this , we must reflect upon his motive of obedience ; which , as is before insinuated , was grounded on the love and necessity of living in community , that , from it , he May receive good , and , by its protection , secure himself against evil . To this end he entrusteth the charge of the common administration to the magistrate ; taking himself as one unskilful or unable for such employment . We see therefore , the end of the subject in his obedience , immediately , is the public good or the good of the commonwealth : a farther though more cordial and deep in the subject , is the good he is to receive out of the commonwealth being well ; which is nothing else but that the particulars of the commonwealth be so . Evident then it is , that the immediate motive which the subject is to propose before his eyes , in his obedience , is the good of the commonwealth ; that is , the very same motive the magistrate ought to have in administering , and which he had when first , in his own person or in his forefathers , he submitted himself to this rule . 

We know , by consequence , how excellent a virtue this act of obedience is ; having a motive of so great a price and high elevation above other ordinary employments , which reach no farther than to his private good . But , herein the same virtue is less in the subject then in the commander ; that , because the common good is the very private good of the commander , therefore it is not related to any private good of the same nature ; and so not commanded or limited by any other , as in the subject it is by the end of his idioticall good . 

The next thing that occurreth is the subjects fact by making this trust ; and that is , that he hath made away all power of judgeing and caring for the common good , farther than by the eyes and hands of the magistrate , his trustee , otherwise they have not made him supreme governor : so that , if he thinketh or judgeth any thing to go amiss , or interpose his opinion , in any real and effective way , even so far as to disgust himself or any other against the government ; he breaketh his promise and engagement to his governor : much less is it in his power to recall the trust and seek any way to take it out of the hands of his sovereign . As for his oath of allegiance , i believe every man sees , it takes its strength from these two ; and , by consequence , is to be understood to reach whither they carry it , and strengthen the obligation that they ground : but , not to extend itself to what they do not ; only what they begin and , as it were , make , the oath doth , by religion and reverence to God , enholy and consecrate , and so give it the greatest strength that falleth upon human liberty . 

By this discourse , we learn , that the magistrates security , from honesty and conscience , is the greatest that human nature can frame ; being grounded upon the noblest virtue , fortified by the virtue of veracity so natural and principal as is above signified ; the subject having made as great an alienation of his propriety to government as will can ratify ; and lastly , elevated it above his cwne soul by the invocation of him who is Master both of soul and body , of time and eternity . Whence , nothing but the frailty of human condition can prejudice a governor once estated legitimately in his seat of justice ; nothing can make a subject more delinquent , then to work against this duty of obedience ; no wonder , therefore , if rebellion be connumerated with soothsaying and idolatry . and obedience preferred before sacrifice , even in the sight of God . 

The thirteenth ground . 

Of the qualities of laws and commands , in respect to obedience . 

Out of what hath been said concerning the subject's obligation to obedience , we May understand a distinction made by many , of the validity and lawfulness of commands . For , the lawfulness to a sovereign commander , is no other than that he truly thinketh it to be for the good of the common ; that is , for the greatest good , all things considered : which if he doth , it is , by the former discourse , lawful for him to command , what he pleases , without reproach of conscience or honour to him ; and on the other side , if he swerve never so little , he so far breaketh his trust : and the greater the abuse is , the greater also his fault and shame . But , the subject is to remember that he hath put his confidence in his governor ; as being himself ignorant and not having leisure to look into the depth of the policy : and therefore he is to think and judge well of his magistrates counsels , and make account he doth not understand the bottom of them ; and so be prompt and forward to obey . 

The validity of the command consists in the obligation the subject hath to perform it : and this May fail in two degrees ; one to the not fulfilling the command , by avoiding it ; the other , by resisting it . This latter is no ways in the subjects hands , unless it be in such a case as his oath of allegiance and obligation to the good of the community , cease or bind not : the former can never happen as long as it can be presumed to be the commanders will this subject , in these circumstances , should perform this command ; for , so long , his trust obligeth him not to fail . But , because a governor many times is not rightly informed , nor can a law reach home to all particular accidents ; it is very incident that ; in some special cases , the subject May presume it is not the magistrates will he should be bound to this particular service . And this is so ordinary that , among us , there is a particular and highest court , to declare when we are not bound to the written laws . 

Yet is it necessary to believe that even that court is able to satisfy all cases , or that private men are bound not to avoid a law without having recourse to that court , or to obey all decrees of that court if they can prudently avoid it : because no court ( Especially amongst refined pleaders ) can be without many formalities ; which are not the substance of justice , and therefore May prudently be declined , neither honour nor conscience obliging to such proceedings . But they must ever have for their rule , that the lawmaker intended not to include them , in these circumstances , within the compass of his law . 

Some make us a threefold division of laws ; the first absolute or commanding ; the second permissive ; the third they call penal laws : the first they aver to be obligatory , because directly intended by the lawgiver ; and of this sort is verified what we have newly discoursed . 

The second ( Were it expressly the sense of the law to permit a thing ) is also of the former kind and only distinguished in the matter : for it would make the thing permitted truly lawful . But this is not the writers meaning : for they do not conceive it was the lawmakers intention to allow of the practice ; but only not to punish it , or to ordain somewhat in supposition of the case . As when usury is limited to such a rate , that greater is forbidden ; but to such a rate is so permitted , that he that hath borrowed is bound and compellable to pay so many in the hundred ; but no man is bound to borrow ; nor as they say , allowed to take interest , though the law constrain the borrower to pay . But , how the law can forc• the one to give , and yet not allow the other to take , is to me , a hard proposition and like a riddle ; and therefore , i believe , the law itself is to be condemned or the practice to be justified ; and that truly there neither is nor can be such a kind of law , as shall compel a thing to be done and not approve of the doing . 

The third sort also seemeth to me no less contradictory : for though i confess there are penal laws unquestionably , that is , such as constitute punishments for offences ; yet these Masters mean not such , but under the cloak of the name , teach disobedience to certain laws , persuading us the lawgivers intention is indefinite , that either a man should do such a thing , or suffer such a punishment if he be discovered to have committed the fault : which is directly against all goodness . For first we are to consider whether the thing commanded be useful to the commonwealth ; if so , it clearly argues it is the direct will of the lawmaker . Again , it is to be looked into , if it be universally neglected , what damage accrueth to the common ; and this also will assure us , by the necessity of it , that it is intended for the common good , and therefore to be executed to the possibility of the subject . Again , how unworthy a thing is it of a governor , who is sapposed to be all equity and goodness , to lie at the catch with his subjects , to entrap them for a thing he doth not aim to have done ? Besides , the name of punishment supposeth a fault ; so that , the law must be supposed to speak improperly ; which , in its dogmatic way of proceeding , is absurd . 

Yet do i not deny but laws May be made indefinitely ; as , to command every townsman to March or pay so much monies , leaving it to his liberty to do which he listeth : but this is no penal law , nor hath it any likely hood of one ; but is merely a disjunctive command . Neither likewise do i entrench upon such orders in communities , which being almost impossible to be rigorously observed , have some other obligation annexed to the failing ; to be performed by the conscience of the delinquent , whether discovered or no . For , this clearly remaineth voluntary , and is ordered to make the failing rare , and to acknowledge a defect and fault in the not observing ; and so hath not that crossing of the will , and that force which one feeleth when he is discovered and , by authority , chastised . So that , in conclusion , there is but one sort of law in all these ; and that binding the subject , in force of his promise and oath , to the proportion of his concurrence to the common good , by his act of obedience . 

The fourteenth ground . 

In what conditions the subject May resist government . 

Now , to return to the former part ; it is evident , if it be rational to resist the government , it will be lawful also to break and remove it : for , these two actions are of the same nature ; and , in truth , pure resistance and disobedience is the annulling it . For , government , consisting in the power of commanding , that is , of having no resistance ; to resist is not to acknowledge it , but maintain there is no such power , at least , in this case ; that is , to take it away in this case ; that is , to set another judge or knower when obedience is due and when not ; that is , not to keep the subject in the nature of ignorance , in which is grounded his being a subject . This being the nature of this disobedience or resisting , the magistrate is bound with all his strength to crush and break it ; and , by consequence , it draweth along the concussion of the whole state , if the subject be able to make good his resistance . Out of this it is clear , that a subject May not use this resistance ; but in case when it is fitting to attempt the dissolving of the government . 

It follows first , that it cannot be done , but when the occass•on is greater than the value of the public peace and good of the commonwealth . No man therefore can justly attempt such a disobedience , to save his own life and goods , or the life and goods of his own family , how great soever , if contained within the bounds of a private family , or but a part of the commonwealth . Now , how far this extendeth , i dare not subtilise ; it being a kind of moral consideration and a prudential esteem to weigh it in particular ; the common notion reaching no farther , then that it be not so notorious a part of the commonwealth , that it be a homogeneal part of it , such as is fit to make a commonwealth of itself , to determine whose nature , is not the intent of our present embarkment . 

The next consideration is , that neither an universal harm , if moderate and such as May be supported with less damage than follows out of the state , is a sufficient cause of resistance to the sovereign magistrates command . As for example , an enormous tax ( Such as was thought to be that which revolted Guienne from Edward the third of England , or the low countries from Philip the second of Spain : ) as both their wars May well testify ; in which the taking of any one town was of more consequence than all such a tax would have been . How far this also reaches is not for me to esteem ; who should ask me , if the governor exacted for one time all the subject had , so there remained a ground to work upon of new , and within a little time to live contentedly ; i should be troubled to confess it were a sufficient injury to take up arms against him , because i cannot judge which were the greater mischief to the subject . 

Thirdly , if the wrong be of that nature as to ruin the whole commonwealth , yet not suddenly but after many years , if often repeated ; i cannot allow it a sufficient cause of open resistance . The reason is clear ; for , on the one side there is no inconvenience so small but ( In process of time ) May grow to be the ruin of the commonwealth , if it be often repeated and so excessively multiplied ; and on the other side , long time breeds so great changes or , at least , is subject to them , that the pure nature of the offence is not able to justify a rebellion and breach of unity in a commonwealth , and so , not the resistance to the governor . How much the time in which the ruin would follow should be , to make it a sufficient cause , who can judge ? Only this we see , that what will not ruin in a set time , will never do it ; and i have seen persons live happily , where it was said , they paid the value of their whole subsistence to their magistrate once in seven years . Nor do i pretend , by these instances , to set any rule for enfranchising the subject ; more than this , when evidently the tyranny of the governor is greater than the mischief hazarded . When ever this happeneth , be the material conditions what they will , the subject is free : and if this be not , whatsoever the circumstances be , the subject ought not to stir . For , this and this only is the final cause measuring all attempts , what is best for the persons ; and known it is that , if it be not evident to be better to stir , it is evidently better to remain quiet : for , not-a-cause is sufficient for not changing ; but , for a change and such a change , it ought to be a clear and evident abbetterment . 

There is further to be looked into what part of the commonwealth it ought to be that is sufficient to justify such a quarrel . For , as there is no doubt , but the whole commonwealth , that is , such a portion of it as makes the governors' party inconsiderable , is sufficient : so , there will be less doubt on the other extreme , if the number resisting be a pure single part , it is not sufficient to proceed to this extremity . The question than is , whether the party rising aught to be the major or equal or , at least , inconsiderably less than those who side with the magistrate . But here we must observe the greatness of the commonwealth divided . For if such parts be of themselves , fit to make commonwealths , nothing considered but the quantity or the number ; it cannot be doubted but that will susfice : now what that quantity is , belongeth to another science . 

Besides all these considerations , there remaineth another ; that it can be effected : for who is to attempt an action , aught as well to weigh the cost of compassing , as the worth and recompense when it is compassed : so that , unless the hazard of missing and the labour of obtaining , being both added into the balance with the present quiet , be all overswayed ; it cannot be prudently done to engage for a change . 

Some will tell me , never did persons expect with so much patience as i require : and your gallants , who pretend to generosity , will exclaim , it is better to die in the field then suffer such indignities : nay , some will think or , at least , vaunt it fit to lie in prison or rot in a dungeon , or seek his fortune in Barbary , then to be under such a slavery . My answer to these last gallants is , that they should first try what it is to rot in a dungeon , or to wander amongst barbarians ; before they engage themselves and other ignorant persons in such adventures . To the second , that i understand not those spurgalls of honour , which disquiet their fiery humours : i only discourse of what is fitting to make a sweet and contented life , to them who think it consists in enjoying natural goods of science and virtue for our minds , and the accommodation of our senses for our bodies : those high and aereal goods of honour , and vapouring words i esteem as Ajax ( When his eyes were open ) at his death ; virtue ( Said he , meaning honour ) i followed thee as a thing , but i find thou art but words . to the foremost , i answer , i do not aver men either have been wise or will be so wise ; only endeavour to lay before them what it is to be so ; let them look to the exercise . Neither on the other side do i justify the Prince who putteth his subject to such extremities , or think it prudence in him to do it , or that he doth not deserve all the mischief which May light upon him for it : i leave both to the force of nature , to their wit or folly , and to the force of reason or passion which governs in persons and present circumstances ; keeping myself in the common notions which belong to science . 

Still there remains one difficulty , which May breed great variety in the resolution ; and it is , who is to be judge , whether the neglect of the magistrate be so great , as to deserve resistance ? For , if the magistrate himself be endowed with that power , it is a folly to think that circumstance will ever come ; and , if it belong to the persons , such hotspurs , as we spoke of , will make it come long before the season be ripe for it . But , the truth is , this question seemeth in a manner superfluous : for it supposes , there is a question and ambiquity to be decided ; and by the conditions put , it is clear there can be no question of the necessity of the resistance ; for they are such as to put the question beyond all ambiguity in the very conscience of the magistrate , the objects beating on the subject in every ones particular beyond denial and dispute . And besides , as long as truly there is any disputableness , the trust reposed in the magistrate makes him judge ; for , being entrusted as a man both knowing and good , and the persons taking themselves as ignorant in what they trust him ; clearly he remains sole judge , as long as there remains a case to be judged . And therefore his either ignorance , or carelessness , or tyranny ought to be so evident , that it be beyond all question ; or else the subject must have patience for his own good , which is his aim in putting himself under government . 

The fifteenth ground . 

Wherein consists the power and liberty of the subject . 

Yet May some think , on the other side , that the doctrine delivered contradicts itself . For , it being before determined , that the persons hath alienated all right of judging or meddling in government ; how can it ever happen that they should have a right to interpose again , or that such circumstances can possibly fall out in which they May resist the magistrate ? And this objection is so much the stronger , by acknowledging so great a power in the magistrate of breaking all laws and limitations of government , by the force of reason placed in the circumstances of power and authority , as hath been declared : whence it seems , since that authority in the magistrate cannot consist with an opposite authority in the subject , to bridle and curb him ; they can never have this power to resist . 

And the truth is , the persons acteth not what it doth in such a case , by any authority acquired , but by the force of nature ; that same force by which the magistrate overswayes the laws , but in other circumstances . And first that the persons hath no authority to oppose their superior is manifest : for , authority is a thing instituted by consent and depending on promise ; but here is no need of consent nor any thought of it ; here is no public meetings or leagues ; and if there were , they would be of no value against a former tradition of their wills to their magistrate : it cannot be therefore , that the persons proceed by any such contract . 

Whence is it then that the persons come to any such power ? The answer is , as , when they first instituted government , they did it in the force of nature ; without having any other power than the pure force of rationality : so , if , by any circumstance they be devolved into the same state of anarchy that their promise made binds no more ; then rationality teacheth them and giveth them , by force of nature , to institute another government . Now , the excessive disorders , expressed in the forementioned conditions , make it evident they are not in a government , that is , in a conspiracy to the common good , which is the offence of government ; but in an anarchy , and therefore remitted , by the evil managing or insufficiency of their governor , to the force of nature to provide for themselves , and not bound by any promise made to their governor : the whole end and intention of their promise being , purely , to submit to government , that is , conduce to the common good & safety ; which having failed , there is no more obligation in their oath or promise , then if they had never made them . This is , therefore , the ground of the people's opposition , and only circumstance to justify their breaking their oath and promise : so that , in truth , the magistrate , first , by his miscarriages , abdicateth himself from being a magistrate , and proveth a brigand and robber in stead of a defender ; and the persons , in the way of natural preservation of themselves , make resistance against him . 

I should pass farther to the change of government , did not the loud and universal cry of all common persons , especially of our Northern countries , diverting my pen , force me to attend their importunity . They say , this doctrine delivered ruineth their liberty ; and persons are but a knot of slaves and galley-birds , if this be the course of government . They must be satisfied , or , at least , their courage allayed , by reason , if it be possible . For this word liberty prints itself in such a letter , that it leaves unstudied no man , as one speaketh . The Pelagian thinks he hath lost his natural liberty , if it May be commanded by God's omnipotency . The worldly man accounts himself a slave , if rational government be conserved : he must have licence to commit wickedness and ruin government , or else he is in chains . Let us then repeat the nature of government , and see wherein consisteth the liberty of the subject , that we May know when he hath it , and what belongeth to it . 

The persons ( We said ) to fall to their own business , and the improving of nature , choose one or more to manage the common interests ; holding them wise and capable , and themselves unskilful ; and this with a great deal of reason : for nothing but experience , and much debating is able to beget a sufficient art or knowledge , in such subtle points and turnings . Besides , they esteemed a few fit for resolution , and easier to agree then their own multitude ; where so many private aims are hard to be avoided , and if not prejudicial to the common . Upon these grounds , it is plain , out of the very nature of government , that they reserve no power in themselves to consult of common businesses . For , how absurd is it that he who hath no skill shall give counsel , or sway the resolutions of those whose art and profession it is ? Or , what wise man could undertake a government with truth and honour , if , in his greatest difficulties , he must depend on the advice , or rather wilfulness of an ignorant rabble ? 

Let us look now what is left for the obeying party ; and we shall find , it is to govern their private affairs , as far forth as they fall not within the verge of the common good or harm . But , once put that the private man's business either hinders , or is necessary to help the common designs : and , as evident as it is that the common is to be preferred before the particular ; so evident it is , that even his proper business is not to be managed , so far , by his private understanding and liberty . If the soldier , when he is commanded to stand perdue , should have his private considerations allowed him , what could the army do ? If the citizen , being commanded to watch his turn upon the walls , Might bring an excuse that he had no to look to his shop , the city would soon fall to the enemy's prey . Private interest , then , must yield , when the public is concerned , or else no government can be hoped for : and , he that will leave matters of great consequence to the resolution of the governed party , must make them the governors . 

Wherein then consists the liberty of every subject ? In not being controlled in his private affairs . If there be not justice administered both against robbers and riotous oppressors , the citizen is not free : if he be molested in his domestic manage , otherwise men when the common demandeth his assistance , he is not free . But , for serving the common , it is the freest act he hath : it was his choice to elect it , it is his good to conserve it , and will be his destruction to infringe it . As it is no liberty to have an immunity to hang or maim himself , or his wife and children , or to commit any other unnatural act ; no more is it to be esteemed liberty , to have the privilege to subtract himself from the service of the commonwealth . They are therefore seditious spirits , who , using the name of liberty , provoke the subject against the magistrate ; and in themselves , ordinarily , it is either ignorance or faction , which is the true Mistress of such attempts . Nor can it be feared , that government , carried connaturally and as it ought to be , doth any way prejudice the liberty of the subject , what seizures soever it makes either upon goods or persons . 

Yes , but governors will exceed the moderation of the true laws of government . First , the commonwealth hath a presumption of their goodness to the contrary . Secondly , admit they do , must we seek to remedy it by a greater wound which is , by taking away the life and soul of government ? Again , the oppression is either in common upon all , or in particular upon some few : if in common , it is almost impossible to be heavy upon every one ; for , many little sums easily rise to a great one , and many hands make light work : if the wrong be done to particulars , we ought to consider that accidental harms cannot be prevented neither in nature nor in human affairs ; and so are objects of pity rather than of hope to be amended , and to be tolerated rather , in respect of the great good which is in the common peace , then expose all to such confusion as must be , and ever hath been where the government is , in part , placed in unexperient hands . 

This , therefore , is resolved , that the plenitude of power in the governor hinders not the liberty of the subject : which is to be contained within an inferior sphere , and the sphere itself within the sphere of government ; and to be carried by it , as the private good by the common , when the necessity of the public requires . Likewise , the propriety of right of the subject is to be taken , not against the governor or common right , but against the encroaching of another party : as , whoever understands what common and particular signify , easily understands that the common and particular are not two ; as the part and the whole make not two , because the part is included in the whole ; but part and part make two , because one hath no community with the other . Therefore , it stands not with reason , that any private person should claim a right against the commonwealth , or the governor , which is all one ; for , so he makes the commonwealth a part distinguished from himself . 

The sixteenth ground . 

Of the dispossession of a supreme former governor , and of his right . 

This rub being taken away , our March is free to consider the action of the change of government ; by what it is effected that the former governor remaineth no longer in his authority , and the new one beginneth to have the power . For , we speak of a supreme governor whose power is sworn to ; and so fortified , by an allegiance due from the persons , and a right obtained by himself . And , we May presently reflect , that our former discourse , of the people's resistance to a sovereign magistrate , reached not to the resolution of this . For , there we supposed the magistrate to have behaved himself so unworthily , that he was truly no governor but a tyrant and robber ; and so had really deposed himself , and disannulled the subjects oath and obligation by renouncing , in deeds and practice , the nature of a governor . Now , our question supposeth the governor not to have come to that extremity : but , either to have been good or innocent : or that it is doubtful whether his excesses deserved expulsion : or , at least , if they did deserve it of themselves , yet the circumstances were not fitting for it ; but the expulsion happened either by the invasion of a stranger , or the ambition of a subject , or some popular headless tumult ; for , these three ways a magistrate comes , forcibly and unjustly , to be outed of his power . 

And first , if the magistrate have truly deserved to be dispossessed ; or it be rationally doubted that he hath deserved it , and he be actually out of possession : in the former case , it is certain , the subject hath no obligation to hazard for his restitution , but rather to hinder it : for , since it is the common good that both the magistrate and the subject are to aim at ; and clearly , out of what is expressed , it is the common harm , to admit again of such a magistrate ; every one , to his power , is bound to resist him . If you say , he May or will repent and amend , that importeth not our question , or whether he be to be restored ? but , whether he be to be chosen of new ? For , since it was merely his possession and the interest of not changing or troubling the commonwealth which obliged the subject to maintain him ; it being supposed his own desert did condemn him , this change and trouble of the commonwealth being now turned on the other side and another in possession , clearly neither he hath any right left , nor the subject any obligation to maintain but rather oppose him . Now , if his desert be doubtful , then is it also doubtful whether he hath right or no : and certain , that the common good is not to be disturbed for it ; nature teaching that we need no reason to be quiet and remain where we are , but that to make a change we must see a strong cause and motive . 

The next case is , if he be innocent and wrongfully deposed , nay , let us add , one who had governed well and deserved much of the commonwealth : yet he is totally dispossessed ; and so , that , it is plain , in these circumstances , it were better for the common good to stay as they are , then to venture the restoring him , because of the public hazard . It is clear , in this case , there is a comparison between the general good of the commonwealth , on the one side , and the particular of this man or family on the other . Let us , then , put the case on his part ; and see , if he be generous , if he hath settled in his heart that every single man ought to prefer the common interest before his particular safety , profit , or honour ; if he be fit for a governor , that is , one that is to espouse the common good as his own individual ; what he will , in honour and conscience , resolve : whether he be not obliged absolutely to renounce all right and claim to government ; and , if he does not , he be not worse than an infidel : for , if he that hath no care of his domestics , be reputed so ; with how much more reason , he that is ready to plunge a whole nation in blood , for his own interest ? 

Let us cast the accounts on the other side ; and see , that the subjects aim ought to be the public peace , and quiet enjoyment of their lives and interests : it will appear that , if he be bound to renounce his claim , they cannot be obliged to maintain it : and besides , that they are wilfully blind , if , where the whole concernments of themselves , their wives and children lie at the stake , they will venture all for an aereal fancy , without regard to the end of government , public peace ; merely for the means , this man's government , without whom the end May be obtained . It cannot , therefore , be rational on either side , for a dispossessed governor to be restored with hazard : unless it be certain the succeeding government be a pure tyranny , and so the dispossessed person necessary for the quiet and peace of the commonwealth ; and therefore , that both sides pretend the good of the commonwealth , as well he that is to be restored , as those who seek to restore him . 

But some cry , he had right ; he hath not deserved to lose it ; justice must be done whatever follows on it ; happy they that are unfortunate in so good a cause , they shall not lose their reward , however it fares with them now . Well for them , if this plea will serve them in the next world ; nor will i dispute whether the evidence of what i deliver be so great as that ignorance May not excuse them : that question belongs to the tribunal of God only : i must say that , before men , who are clad with flesh , and whole hearts cannot be pierced by other men's guesses , the law is , that not only the intention be good , but also the action be intelligent and prudent ; otherwise , we are subject to believe , that some vanity or secret hopes do bias the actor and make his proceeding irrational . I must also tell them , that this principle , fiat justitia & ruat coelum , is seldom practised amongst the wise ; who all agree that charity and prudence ought still to moderate the rigour of justice . It is also too metaphysical for a moral way , to think that justice is a Platonic idea in the concave of the moon ; no ways to be changed by circumstantial occurrences : whereas , the truth is , justice is but a partial and commanded virtue ; and that which governs in man , is reason or his own nature and inclination to make all his actions connatural and fit for a rational creature ; and so May consult whether justice be in some to be administered , and pronounce that summum jus est summa injuria . 

But , the capital in this matter is , that truly there is no justice on either the magistrates or people's side , to bind to the restoring him : both these depending on the promise made , and the force of the promise being none , since the ground of it is changed . For , the substance of the promise made to a magistrate , is , to obey him as a magistrate , that is , as far as is fitting for the commonwealth and peace ; he being nothing but the instrument of the common good : now , take away that fitness for the commonwealth , and that which gave strength to the promise is gone , and the promise itself is no more a promise , nor can any obligation arise from it . Who knows not , that the promise of any man depends on his intention , his intention on his knowledge , his knowledge reacheth no farther than his consideration and present memory when he maketh the promise ? So that , in nature , a promise reacheth only to presupposed and thought on circumstances : and who , when he sweareth to a magistrate , expecteth to see him dispossessed and turned off ? 

Nature annulleth promises : as , when we promise to come such a day , and either die or are imprisoned before . Morality annulleth them : as if we promise to run such a horse against another a month hence , and the horse in the mean time falleth lame ; who will condemn the Master for not venturing on such a race ? Is not the man better than his word ? If then the man himself be less than the common good , which he must violate by keeping his word ; can his word be greater ? But a promise must many times be kept even with loss of life ? I deny it not : but , first , i must be assured it is a promise ; which before i have declared to be none : for , our case is case of nature not of law , we admit no presumptions ; nothing what he meant to do or should have done , we only regard what was done . Secondly , if it were intended to be so promised , it was wicked and irrational ; for , to promise to regard a private man's good against the common , is unnatural and wicked ; therefore , it never was a promise , can never bind as such , nor be professed with honour , either to be made , or , if made , to be kept . I need not insist upon the confirmation by oath : for , every one understands , if the oath be but a confirmation of a precedent promise , and there were no promise , there can be no oath , to have the nature and force of an oath . 

So that , this is manifest , a magistrate actually dispossessed hath no right to be restored , nor the subject any obligation to seek to restore , but oppose him . For , what is man , or rather mankind ( For , so we have styled a nation ) better than a herd of sheep or oxen , if it be to be owned , like them , by Masters ? What difference is there between their Masters selling them to the butcher , and obliging them to venture their lives and livelihoods for his private interest ? We know it is natural , that the part should venture for the whole ; but that the whole should venture the loss of itself to save the part , i cannot understand . The governor is the highest and noblest part , yet but a part ; the persons is the whole , the end , ( Though not by office , yet by worth and dignity ) the Master and Lord , for whom those who are Lords by office are to be vested and devested in lordship , when it is necessary for the common good : who thinks otherwise , deserves not the name of a man . 

The seventeenth ground . 

Of a supreme governor dispossessed . 

But one will object , if he were wrongfully dispossessed , he suffered wrong ; it cannot then but be reason he should have reparation . And this cannot be denied . But beside the government taken from him , he was peradventure injured in his reputation and spoilt of such aliments as are fit to maintain him according to the quality of his birth and education : and , for these , he May , as a private man , demand reparation ; but so , as still to remember he is a denizen of that country , a member of that persons , and compared to it as a particular to its universal ; and May demand his share , yet so that if it cannot be obtained without the concussion of the public , he is to renounce it and sacrifice that interest to the good of his country . 

Likewise , on the opposite side , the commonwealth May demand reparations against the dispossessed magistrate , who abused it or his subjects during his government : not touching any thing he did upon intention of the public good , though it were breaking of known laws or any injurious violence offered , with pretence of serving the commonwealth ; for , the trust put in his hands vindicates him from all such actions , as long as they bear the face of any intention of the common good . But , if , for private men's satisfaction , or his own lust , or covetousness he did any wrong , of that he May be asked an account : not while he is in government but after the dispossession , when now the common distemper followeth not the prosecution of such riots , and so , his public protection being gone , he is but a private man , and consequently , by the force of nature , subject to a stronger ; obligations of common good and former promises being now faded away , and he left in the condition of a stranger , saving that his demerits follow and pursue him , if other merits do not counterbalance them and exempt him . 

Again , when he is to be judged , he cannot be proceeded against by law ; which can judge none but the offenders against it . Now we have had often occasion to declare that the chief magistrate is not under the law ; the common good for which the laws themselves were made , being committed to his trust , and the end he is to look after being higher than the laws , which are but a part of the means to arrive at that end , and therefore inferior and subordinate to it . But those who could put their own agreements , that is , the laws under his feet , could not put nature under them , nor authorise him to do any irrational or unhandsome action : therefore , when the structure of the commonwealth is dissolved , that is , disjointed from him , than any who hath suffered wrong in the fore-declared manner May be party against him and proceed as if there were no commonwealth ; by the law which , in a wilderness , warranteth us to kill a tiger or robber that seeketh to kill us , not pretending law for our action , but that it is manlike & rational . Neither ought it be called punishment that is done against a dispossessed magistrate , but rather revenge , or some other name that includeth no order to law . 

By this we understand the truth of that famous question ; whether a sovereign be under the laws ? to which is ordinarily answered , that he is , as far as his example and direction is necessary to his subjects ; but not so , that the law , as such , hath any superiority or force upon him . To declare this more plainly , we must remember , the rule of his actions is , to do what reason teaches a man in his posture ought to do , that is , what is fitting for the public : now generally speaking , the common good requireth that the laws be observed betwixt fellows of the same commonwealth ; wherefore nature teacheth him to give example of that observance , as far as his public office permits . 

Besides , in the very person of the sovereign are to be distinguished , his being one of the commonwealth , and being the head or magistrate : so that , though his being a magistrate exempts his public actions and also his person and private actions from the inquisition of the law ; yet it doth not exempt his private actions from the proportion to those of the subjects , that is , from being good or bad , because like or dislike to the actions which the law commandeth or forbiddeth . So that , he is not , even in his private actions , subject to the laws at his rule ; for that is only reason ; but , as they are a kind of way chalked out to him for the material part of his action ; as the architect frames his house for him ; or the gardener his walks : that is , the laws are to him as an art under him , an art to show him what is to be done , not to command or punish him for not doing ; nay , not so much as necessitating him to do , at least , universally , whether the business be purely betwixt subjects , or betwixt himself as a private person , and his subjects . 

For , the principle of common good being higher than the art of making laws , May , nay ought in some cases , differ from the prescriptions of the law . Yet this must not authorise him to dispense frequently with the law ; the government being not possible to be good in which there is no constancy : but , if the circumstances require any law to be often forced ; the law itself ought to be limited , that the practice of the subject May be firm and customary , which is that maketh the lawe-please . Thus in conclusion , though the magistrate be not commanded by the laws , nor personally subject to them , yet reason ( Which is his rule ) bindeth him to observe them as the good of his persons ; and ( Ordinarily speaking ) essential to his end , which is the common good . The laws therefore are his matter to work on , or instruments necessary to work by , not his rule or Mastering directions . 

There remains yet untouched the question that seemeth most troublesome to many , when the change of the government is valid , and such as the subjects' obedience is due to the new magistrate and to be subtracted from the old , how unjustly soever he were bereaved of it . And , others have sought by term of years to decide the difficulty : among whom , one was Pope Vrban the eight , an intelligent and generous Prince and well versed in politic government . He published a decision that after five years quiet possession of an estate , the church was not bound to take notice whether the title were lawful or no ; but acknowledge the possessor , in ecclesiastical businesses . So much he said for aims sake . But , we must proceed upon other principles , that is , the forelaid and main basis of our discourse , that the common good aught to be the rule of the magistrates title , and the subjects' obedience . 

Out of which this followeth , that when ever ( Considering all things ) the common good is clearly on the possessors side , than the dispossessed hath no claim . Neither ought we expect till we have assurance , that it will not be better for the subject if the late owner ( After great dangers , gaineth his former power : for , first , this itself is uncertain ; secondly , the success of endeavours to restore him must be hazardous ; thirdly , many and great mischiefs , during the time of the attempt , are altogether unavoidable ; and all this to be balanced against those uncertain hopes . Nor , again , must we expect that the wills of all the subjects concur , actually , to the acceptance of the new governor : for that is either impossible or of so long expectation , as to ruin all dissensions and jealousies in the mean time : nay , the vulgar sort are so easily led by fancy , that they understand not the common good , nor what they should wish . 

But you May demand , how shall it be known when the common good holdeth itself on the possessour's hand ? I answer , we must first see who are the common , whose welfare is to be preferred before private interests . And presently it appeareth that , dividing the whole persons into governors and governed ; the governed part is the public to whose good the governors are to direct their pains : and that these are they that spend their lives in seeking their own profits , either by improving the land , or in arts and handicrafts : whence , it follows , when their good stands on the possessors side , then clearly he begins to gain right and power ; and this is plain to be , when the merchant , the husbandman , and tradesman , with their appendices , are in an undisturbed practice of their functions , and begin to be afraid of change upon the noise of an invasion . 

This resolution could not be doubted , were it not that one Might object , that what is said seems true , abstracting from circumstances ; but it ought to be considered , that such men see nothing but the outward appearances of what passes in human negotiations , and so there May many circumstances lie hidden from them , which would make them think or wish otherwise if they knew them : as , for example , home-discontents , and foreign conspiracies ; which if understood , would make these honest men prefer a war , after which there is to follow a peace far exceeding the present quiet and such a one as deserves the intervening disturbance and damages . 

And indeed , i allow these men understand not such mysteries of state , nor penetrate the value of the hazard : but , if they do not , why are they not also exempted from engaging on those motives ? and than the rest of the commonwealth will be but so many private men , who must follow the common ▪ again , if they think themselves well , they manifestly consent to the present government , and therefore cut off the title of the dispossessed governor . Besides , who can answer they shall be better by the return of the dispossessed party ? surely , by common presumption , the gainer is like to defend them better than he who lost it . 

But , let us overslip this opportunity and end of the common good : how long must we expect , till it shall be supposed the right of the former magistrate is extinct ? Some ages ? as we kept our title to France , and France did to Sicily and Naples' : or at least some generations ? as the durance of the Spaniards wars upon Holland : or , till the former magistrate declares the relinquishment of his right ? Or , till his followers are weary of inventing new devices , to blind , & ruin their unwary friends ? All these are soon discerned to be mere uncertainties ; and rather nets to catch fools and bring them to the ambitious desires of some few men , than any grounded reason . But , what if an open enemy should come , could or ought the subjects join against him with their new magistrate ? If not , the whole public must perish : if they May , than the case is the same against their old magistrate ; since his right stood upon the common peace , and that is transferred from him to his rival by the title of quiet possession . 

The eighteenth ground : 

The objection of divines answered . 

reason hath played its part ; but authority cannot be silenced unheard . Let us therefore hearken to what it saith . And , first steps up the divine to preach us , out of scripture , the duty we owe to priests and Kings ; no less than death and damnation being the guerdons of rebellion and disobedience . The lawyers come yoked from the Popes and Emperor's court , taking for maxim , tempus non occurrit ecclesiae & regi . the practice seems to confirm the same ; we seeing both some noble men and divers cities make protestations against the possession of others for many years and ages . But , which is more , they will speak reason too at least , by the divines mouth ; who telleth us , that God , by nature , is high Lord and Master of all ; that whoever is in power receiveth his right from him ; that obedience consists in doing the will of him who commandeth ; and concludeth that this will ought to be obeyed till God taketh away the obligation , that is , till he who is to be obeyed himself releaseth his right . 

The authorities they cite out of holy writ are , for the most part , mere commands to obey where obedience is due , without specifying what or when it is due . This command is extended to wicked and evil governors as well as good . One place there is , where Samuel denounceth to the persons the evils that will come to them by the power of the King ; and calleth them jus regis , or , as the Hebrew text , judicium regis , or , legem regis , and afterward , regni . and these words are , in two senses , true ; one , that the King would do the wrongs there mentioned , by force ; the other , that the persons , since they would have a King , ought not to resist him when he did such things . Yet do i not deny but , if the particulars there mentioned , be interpreted gently , all that is there recited might , with justice , be practised by a King : as , when it is said he should take away their vineyards and olive-gardens ; it May be understood , upon confiscation and by other lawful ways . Besides , they May peradventure allege that God , by his special command , transferred the kingdom from Saul to David , from Roboam to Jeroboam , and some others . But , they should also let us know , what they deduce from hence : for in such changes , God gave no new authority or power to such Kings , but the same their predecessors had : so that , in fine , all that is brought out of scripture falleth short of proving that no time can make void the right of a King once given him from the hand of God . 

The reason of this weak way of alleging scripture is , that when they read that God commandeth or doth this , they look not into nature to know what this commanding or doing is ; but presently imagine God commandeth it by express and direct words , and doth it by an immediate position of the things said to be done ; whereas in nature the commands are nothing but the natural light God hath bestowed on mankind , and which is therefore frequently called the law of nature . Likewise , God's doing a thing is many times only the course of natural second causes , to which because God gives the direction and motion , he both doth and is said to do all that is done by them ; as truly as the weight of a Jack turns the meat upon the spit , and the spring of a watch makes the clock of it strike : a notion not only of a large extent and usefulness in itself , but , which gives me just occasion of complaining against these verbal and wind-blown divines , as the bane of Christendom and Christian doctrine . For , whereas the scripture is a book enriched with all science and depth of learning ; this sort of grammar divines , without either logic , philosophy , or morality , merely by the virtue of their dictionary , and such like lip-learning , undertake to be interpreters of the sacred bible , and in stead of the sense of the letter , obtrude to the readers their own low and many times phrenetical fancies . 

Let us instance in our present question . The first position they take is , that God is Lord and Master of all things . What seems , nay truly is more conformable to scripture and reason then this assertion , as it lies in words ? And yet many not looking into the nature of God and rational and intelligent substances , make a shift to pervert it into a mere blasphemy : for , if the sense be only this , that God is omnipotent and no resistance possible in any creature to his absolute will ; nothing is more certain , nothing more holy . But , this is not the meaning of the divines ; but , that there is an attribute or notion in God of being Lord and Master , to which they do not say we cannot , but , ought not resist , and rather admit that we can . And herein is the first faltering , that , in effect , they deny the omnipotency , and reduce that which is a true physical power to a moral obligation . But this is not all . 

The next point is , that , if even this morality were founded in that great nature of being , and being intelligent , which is in God almighty ; and that they also held his commands were to be obeyed , because they proceed from an understanding which cannot err , and which is essentially the very order and well being of all creatures ; the former would seem pardonable : but , they will have it quite contrary , that therefore things amongst creatures go well , because not reason , not the eminentiall being of themselves in God is their offspring , but because a high and overpowering will or voice commandeth it so . A position in respect of God , absolutely blasphemous ; as far as it makes him work without the guidance of his understanding , that is , like the lowest order of creatures , as stocks and stones &c.  It is again afflictive and vexatious to mankind ; taking away that sweetness of obeying , which consists in the persuasion that because creatures are the participation of God's own nature , every one in its degree and mankind in the first and highest place , therefore all God's command and government , are most conformable to their good , as it were salves to their sores , and allurements to the bringing them to their final end and perfection . 

But , that which is more to our purpose is , that , upon this blasphemy against God , they build the greatest inconvenience that , peradventure , is to be found in man's nature ; to wit , that God gives to all in power the likeness and participation of this irrational dominion which they conceive in him ; and that truly there is in superiors a kind of dote or free gift of mastery derived from God , in virtue whereof he is Master of the inferiors and what belongs to them , either wholly or in a certain measure , according to the extent of the power given ; that , lawfully and validly , he May dispose of all or a certain part of the things under his charge , merely because such is his will and pleasure , & that the subject ought to be content to let him do his will , upon this score , because it is God's will that this man's will should be fulfilled . Which doctrine , though it be manifestly against Christ's directions left to his disciple , and the practice of all good men ; yet , because this treatise doth not pretend to divinity , i will only insist upon its natural inconveniences . 

As first , that it is not connatural to mankind : which , consisting , for its better part , in understanding , is not governed conformably to its disposition , unless it be so guided that the understanding be principal and satisfied in itself and leader to the will and action ; which course of proceeding when it is observed , than is a man truly a man and his action goes on with sweetness , as is before declared . Again , it maketh the governor proud , insolent , and careless . Proud , because he taketh himself to be of another orb than his subjects ; that they are all slaves and beasts , himself only Master , himself only intelligent and a man . Infolent , because fully persuaded , by this doctrine , that he can do them no wrong ; that they are bound to suffer what he lays on them ; that his pleasure is and must be their content and rule . Careless , because he thinks he hath no account to make , either to God or man : not to God , since he hath submitted the persons to his will and disposition ; and therefore he being incapable of doing them any wrong , cannot be charged with any crime : much less is he solicitous to content his subjects , in whom he taketh it for an insolency to repine at any thing , and esteems it their duty to commend all he does , and to have his authority for their rule to judge all things by . 

On the other side , the subject becomes base , restive , ambitious . For , the worth and dignity of man , which is his liberty or guidance of himself , being taken away , it follows , he must be servile and flattering , a slave , a body without soul and understanding . The more worldly and rustic part must , of necessity , grumble and feel it harsh to see their labours disposed on to persons , of whom they have opinion that they are idle , vicious , and unworthy : and therefore , desire liberty from such a yoke , and to become Masters of their own goods and labours ; and are easily susceptible of propositions tending to that purpose , when they come from fair tongues . Lastly , the higher spirits have government in admiration , and take it for the only happiness ; and therefore have their hearts wholly bent , how , by flattery , by cunning , by force , to arrive to this power to depose him that is in possession , and sit down themselves in his seat of glory . If their hopes mount not so high , for the impossibility of the fact and the remoteness of their quality ; then their aim is , by adulation and compliances , to come near the highest , to be participant of his authority , and have the like power to rob and oppress , which they esteem virtuous and glorious in him , and not unjust but fitting in themselves , as far as they can do it by the participation of that dote which God hath bestowed upon the highest magistrate . 

Lastly , we must look into the lame proceeding of the common good and public actions of such a government ; where the subject , by the consequence of this doctrine , is set eagerly upon his own interest , thinks all lost that is done for his , not governor or protector , but Lord and Master , and therefore alienated from him . Whence , it must come to pass that , what he can cozen , what he can excuse , what he can delay , he is still forward to ; and , by a secret instinct of nature which abhorreth such a government , thinketh it well done , though he cannot give an account to justify his action . In a word , who sees not this commonwealth to be a kingdom divided in itself always in affection , and very near in outward action ; wanting thereunto nothing but an occasion , and some head to manage the sedition ? who sees not that the whole government is violent ; and so May indeed continue whilst actual force hangeth over it , but hath not the possibility of a natural duration and length . 

The nineteenth ground . 

The authority of lawyers insufficient in this question . 

The divines error being thus discovered , our plea against the lawyers will be of less either debate or consequence : for , this question belongeth not to their science or employment . The maxims , the rule , the highest tribunal of their judgements is the text of the law , the agreements of men , and , at most , to declare the lawmakers intention : but , to judge whether the lawmakers intention be conformable to nature and such as it ought , whether he exceedeth his power , whether he be Master of the laws , and the like , is beyond the verge of their jurisdiction . Therefore , nothing is more absurd , then to demand that lawyers should plead cases between the sovereign magistrate and the subject , where the common good and government is interessed : for , there , things are not to be carried by the dictates of Justinian or Lancelotus , or the command of Caesar or Peter's successors , but either by the science of politics , or the certitude of faith and tradition ; which are the only two rules a high governor hath . If the divine findeth any thing contrary to the known law of God , he May speak : if the philosopher find any thing against the nature of man , his mouth is not to be stopped : the lawyer , what can he say ? It is against the agreement heretofore made by the government of the country ? The governor May reply , yes ; but what you say is against the present good of the country , with which i am entrusted . Is the country made for the laws , or the laws for the country ? The laws therefore must give place , where the good of the persons is against the former resolutions . If any law be repealed by the authority which made it , or by another equal ; is it the lawyer's part to plead what was law before , or what is now ? when a supreme governor speaketh as such , as declaring what the present necessity requires ; if any former law be against it , it is by his declaration annulled ; it was law before , but it is not now . But the lawyer will reply , there is no law in the land which giveth such authority : it is easily answered ; it is not a case for which a law is to be made . See the Roman government : when there came an exigence of desperation , all their magistrates , all their forms ceased ; a dictator was made , whose word was law , nor could any man appeal to law . Such is the case when the high governor pronounceth against the law : for he ought not to do it , but when the law standeth not with the good and safety of the subject ; and when he doth , law is not to be pleaded against him . 

Again can any law be enacted of what shall be done in case of a conversion of the government ? It is clearly a folly to pretend it . The ordering of the commonwealth is , then , in new hands : the former's power is expired : and to prescribe rules to them who will assuredly be their own judges , is a piece of great simplicity . The lawyer May peradventure reply , there is no power in the land to repeal the former laws or to oppose them . I think he will be wiser ; yet , if he doth say it , i ask him , who made the former laws ? was it not the persons , by themselves or their deputies ? and which is the stronger , if they make them by their deputies , or by themselves ? Certainly , it will be answered , by themselves ; for the deputies have no power but what they impart to them . Is it then possible to put a case , in which there is no power in a country to repeal laws ? Evidently , who says so must say there is no persons in the country ? For , if there be persons , there is in them a power to dispose of themselves , more strong than in deputies . 

But the lawyer May say , the persons cannot speak their minds freely . I answer , certainly , they not only can , but cannot choose but speak their minds , in the case we put . Who knoweth not that liberty and speaking of ones mind belo•geth to all circumstances a man can be put in ? The merchant that , in a tempest , throweth the precious fruits of his venture and labour into the sea , doth not he do it freely and willingly ? The Hollanders of late made a peace with the Spaniard ; we , both with the Hollander and the Dane , and are pretending to others : in any of these , were all parts pleased ? Did no party agree to somewhat which he would not have done , but in consideration of his present circumstances ? Or , was there ever peace made after a war , but one part grudged at somewhat ? must none of these be accounted freely done ? must none of these promises bind , and be kept , upon honour and veracity ? This is to destroy all commerce of mankind ; nay , not to allow man so much wit as to know what is fit for him to do in time of necessity . If then the persons speak , in one circumstance , something that they would not in another ; it is not to be said they speak not their minds , but that , according to circumstances , they alter their minds , as all wife men do . They agree and submit to the present conjunctures , not because they are not free , now as before , but because circumstances are changed , and now render it fitting . But , i said that , in the case i put , they could not choose but speak . My case was , that then a governor is acknowledged , when the persons casting off the care and thoughts of innovation , fall to their trades and manufactures : can it be denied that by so doing they acquiesce to the present government ? which if they do , can it be questioned whether they consent or not to the repealing of all such laws as cannot stand with the present government ? Such laws therefore are repealed , not by deputies , but by the deputants and Masters of the deputies . The lawyer , therefore , must either proclaim the present government none , or not plead law against it : for it is pure folly to admit both , that is , fair and full contradiction . In a new government , all laws prejudicial to it are annulled , by the pure admission of it : other indifferent laws so go on , as to be subject to its judgement , whether and how far to stand ; but a wise governor will continue them as far as he can with prudence , because innovation is contrary to the sweetness which is in custom , as in a kind of nature . 

The conclusion . 

Be this then so resolved , that God himself hath no irrational and dead title of lordship over his creatures , but only his all-right-settled understanding , and irresistible omnipotency . And , as he hath none in himself , so likewise not given any to those he hath put in authority ; but , that their power is either in the submission of the subject by promise and agreement , or in the rational disposition of the magistrate , which maketh him work what is conformable to human nature ; and the obedience or obligation to obey in the subject is out of this , that he hath entrusted the magistrate with the government , and is , by that , to suppose he doth regularly what is best ( All things considered ) for the common good . 

That , by consequence , the title of the magistrate begins and dyes with the good of the commonwealth ; and holdeth purely so long as it is good for the persons . That , no laws made by the power or agreement of men , can judge betwixt subject and sovereign , in dispute of the common good and government ; but only the tribunals of God and nature , or divinity and the science of politics : and therefore , the maxims of law have no force in these questions ; now , if Princes lose their pretences by the force of nature , it is ridiculous for private men to build hopes , upon rotten titles of ages long passed , upon weak maxims of law , after nature , by her revolutions , hath cast all law and mortal acts and agreements . 

And so is finished this small treatise , to the profit of them who are able and willing to make use of it . Some , by the method i have used , something new in moral discourses , May imagine the doctrine i deliver , to be more subtle in explication then solid in practice : but , let them either look into the causes of governments , or the effects ; they will see nature and practice both conspire to give testimony to the truth . The cause of all moral effects , if morally carried , are the end and intention for which they are sought and endeavoured after ; this is manifest to be the well-being of particulars under a government . The practices , which are the effects , will show , that governments break when it is not well with the subjects , but they are oppressed by the governor ; that wise and good governors are forced sometimes to break disordered rules which hinder their free administration ; that persons , as it were , forced by natural changes , violate the promises made to their governors , cast them off when they think them pernicious , and proceed against them , per viam facti , as they speak in the schools , not by laws , which cannot be made for such matters . These are , in a manner , the whole subject of the precedent discourse . 

Finis . 













































