The Grateful Acknowledgement Of a Late Trimming Regulator . 

Humbly Presented to that Honest and Worthy Country Gentleman who is come lately to Town , and styles himself by the Name of Multum in Parvo . With a most Strange and wonderful PROPHECY , Taken out of Britain's Genius . 

Written in the time of the late Wars , by that Famous and Divine Poet of our Age , Captain George Withers . 

London , Printed in the Year , 1688.  

The Grateful Acknowledgement of a late Trimming Regulator . 

Thou honest Janus Face , what didst thou mean ? 
My Eyes to blind in thy so great Extreme : 
Thy very Front did make my Heart to ache , 
Booted Apostles made my Soul to quake . 
thou gav'st me Poison in a bitter Cup , 
thou gav'st me Oil , and bid me drink it up , 
'T would cure all Poison to the very Heart , 
Thus thou was pleased at me to sling thy Dart. 
Thy Title Page did swell my Eyes with Grief , 
Thy Antidote did soon give me Relief ; 
Thy Regulators put me in such Fret , 
As if I were a Prey unto his Net ; 
Who by the Stars , long since , hath often said , 
About this time in England should be laid : 
Till that within I soon there did behold , 
Thy first twelve Lines were worth their weight in Gold : 
At the first sight , my trembling hand was such , 
And more afraid than some are of the Dutch ; 
My Head was hot , as if all on a Fire , 
My Pulse did beaten still higher and still higher , 
To stay at home , or else straightways to flee , 
For my Protection , to the Orange Tree ; 
Straightways to run , or else to stay at home , 
Or else to fly with Peter's unto Rome ; 
To let them know of our late sad Disaster , 
These were my thoughts , until thy Sovereign Plaster 
Did ease my mind , by thy ingenious Pen , 
Who first did wound , and after cured our Men : 
When we perceived the Cream of thy Contest , 
Multum was much , and Parvo was in jest ; 
Booted Apostles only was a Trap 
To catch some Gudgeons with thy French Fools Cap , 
Printing and Paper being near of kin , 
Without the First Ink is a foolish thing ; 
The Gudgeons here , must pay the Printing-press ; 
So that at present we may give a guess , 
This Genteal Plot , which surely was thy Own , 
Instead of Ten we wish thee Forty One ; 
At every throw , and every Hawl and Pull , 
Sometimes a Gudgeon , sometimes a Seagull : 
could we but know Thee in thy naked Dress , 
Vve'd soon surround thee with a fair Address ; 
Hussa's an Acclamations we must give , 
Unto thy Lines , so long as we do live . 
Adam , where art thou ? now let all Men know , 
Bowls do run Trim , where Thistles used to Grow : 
Lo , here we come , our Service to Present , 
With all Submission , to thy good Intent ; 
And those that will not join in this thy Pace , 
Are not ( we fear ) of the True Christian Race . 
Thy Royal Master , Forty One , and we , 
Aught to present Thee to the Orange Tree . 
thou hast said more than ever we could think , 
What , dost thou write with some Inspired Ink ; 
You make Distinctions to all Sober Men , 
Betwixt Forty One , and Thirty Nine with Ten ; 
Which is a thing which few Men Understand , 
Which made them so the Forty One Men Brand. 
Rebels and Traitors , Men of Forty One , 
The Tories Curse , and the Tantivies Tone ; 
Men so sunk down beyond Old Adam's Fall , 
Nothing would please them , but a Rope for All : 
So that this Tory and Tantivy Heat , 
May end with some in a cold trembling Sweatman 
We pray to God , that those which shall get Free , 
May never more outface the Tripple-tree . 
The Regulators in the Rare a Show , 
Concerns not us , as most good People know : 
We gave no Charters up , nor made no Slaves , 
But always counted them a Pack of Knaves ; 
Our Post therein , was only to Persuade , 
And to Unhing what those first Rogues had made . 
Squeeze but their Pockets , and then let them Pass , 
One for an Ox , another for an Ass , 
Most bravely matched , to draw both in one Team , 
The Ox before , behind the Ass so Lean. 
Let the State purge them of some Guiney Gold , 
they 'll never MORE of our Laws make so Bold , 
Save but their Lives , their Pelf will serve to Pay 
The king 's Old Soldiers , though they Run Away . 
That was foretold a thousand Years ago , 
then was fulfilled this Most Re-ree Show . 
We dare engage our Future Judges shall 
no more Fine Men , according to Whitehall . 
What they did Dictate , that the Judge must Do , 
( O Blessed Tools ! ) Three Nations to Undo . 
Some Men not worth Five thousand Pound i' th' World , 
Must pay One hundred or to Prison Hurled ; 
This was the Mode , and this the Fashion then , 
Mad Men to sit , the Wise Men to Condemn . 
Our Souls did grieve , sung Welladay , Alas , 
To see , ' amongst Christians , such things come to Pass . 
This was complained of in the Prophet's Day , 
For one word speaking made a Beast of Prey ; 
And though such words not in the least were Treason , 
Yet they were Fined ( the Lord knows ) without Reason ; 
Sooner or later these Men they have Found 
( Like to Old Nick ) their Measures under Ground . 
The Fomous B — worth , in those days procured 
A Tory Jury , not to be endured ; 
Eight hundred Pounds they gave for Damage there , 
When as two Shillings could not then appear . 
What Men were those that made so much Ado , 
Juries to Pack , our Children to Undo ; 
We must them Note , or else we are Undone 
If once they get again a Rising Son. 
By force of Arms they swore Shame Shriefs , by Name 
We know them well , and though we did complain , 
Got no relief , but only got this Grace , 
For Honest Broom to lose his Crowner's Place . 
Mandamus , Aliis , Pluris , to them all one , 
Are these Men fit to guard the Royal Throne 
Of Justice , which to all Men gives their Due , 
Sure these can't be the protestants True Blue . 
Such were the Regulators of those times , 
no more we hope to ring such B — B. Chimes . 
Empson and Dudley , little did they Dream , 
To be Chastized for their great Extreme ; 
Though some have dreamt , that they themselves should Die , 
Upon a Gibbet of two Stories High. 
The Famous OATS , his Cards are all now Trumpets , 
Thanks to High ORANGE and his Mogan Jumps ; 
From Exon Gates to Berwick upon Tweed , 
At one great leap , here is a Jump indeed ; 
Who would not be a Jumper at this Rate , 
Not one in Million ever had this Fate . 
God sent his Moses to Egyptian Land , 
To save the Jews from great King Pharaoh's Hand 
God sent his Son , to save us from the Grave , 
Now sends his Orange us all to Unslave ; 
could Monsieur le Grand now Jump as well as He , 
he 'd make our Orange leap the Tripple-tree 
If he could catch him ; herein lies the Art , 
God hath him raised to make that Kingdom Smart 
For all the works which they have done Amiss , 
This Orange Tree is for them Rods in Piss : 
Instead of Monsieur Jumping here next Spring , 
Before that time another Tune will sing ; 
His Orange Land with all his Heart will Give 
Up to the Heir , provided he may Live : 
Ill gotten Goods , when took in so great Haste , 
Do seldom thrive , but quickly they do Waste : 
The boldest Thief , which to that Sport is Bend , 
Is sometimes Hanged before his money 's Spent . 
Courage Brave Hero , be not you Dismayed , 
Nor of his Numerous Arms be you Afraid ; 
Heavens' Lord Protector is your only Prop , 
Next Spring he 'll give you your own Orange Crop. 
Invade his Borders but that time , and then 
With your own Troops , and our true English Men , 
We dare be Bold his Army then will Run , 
Like Mists and Fogs before the Rising Sun ; 
And many will ( like us ) run to your Camp , 
then after Him , you may the Pope new Vamp , 
Who is so warped , he wants an Underlay , 
An Orange Scent will make him Dance the Hay 
So rarely well , whenever you shall come , 
To bid Defiance to the Walls of Rome . 
This we may see before some years be gone , 
By this Great Orange , our Great James' Son. 
Much being lost , we took hold on a Twig , 
This is the Case of the Poor Trimming Whig ; 
Being near Drowning by some Men of Note , 
We then did strive only to Trim the Boat , 
To save ourselves , and all our Noble Race , 
And shall we now for this suffer Disgrace , 
If this a Crime esteemed be , and Blot , 
then let our Names for ever Die and Rot. 
Upon this Topick we will lose our Lives , 
And leave to God our Children and our Wives . 
And for yourself to own us at this time , 
Sure you must be no lesle than a Divine . 
The Forty One Men were a Trimming Race , 
The Forty Eight Religion did Disgrace ; 
The last were Tories of the highest Form , 
The Nations Scourges , and the Nations Scorn : 
The first were Mild and Gentle like thyself , 
The last were got sure by a Romish Elf ; 
For Persecution always leaves behind 
A Sting i' th' tail , and so is NEVER KIND . 
Mark these two words , and the first N Deface , 
There you may see an Honest Trimmers Face . 
And if Men now shall Act as Heretofore , 
God may next turn , Open the Trimmers Door , 
Which if he should , Great Truth will then Prevail , 
And make all Popes to her Dutch Ship strike Sail. 
Our Prince's Sins , to God only are known , 
His Christian Acts we never will Disown . 
The Eighty Eight Men , as they shall Proceed , 
You say you 'll watch them as you shall have need ; 
But we do hope all things will stand so Fair , 
Whatever comes , the king 's the Legal Heir , 
Unless we shall Unhing the Legal Right , 
And for a Commonwealth rise up and Fight ; 
Which , in this Land , the Lords will never bear , 
Therefore we must not think such Fruit to Rear : 
When Priests do Run , and Chancellors do Flee , 
We may bless God we have an Orange Tree , 
Who will defend us in our Equal Rights , 
God still Preserve him in such Wars and Fights ; 
Whose Sweet Perfume , like God's Grace from Above , 
Is sent from Heaven , to make us live in Love ; 
Which if we don't , God knows whose turn is next , 
Let us not dare then , to pervert the Text. 
And so we 'll leave thee to thy next Effort , 
Storm Roger still , and please the Orange Court ; 
And let John Bayss from you have one more Lift , 
In Statu Quo , he 'll turn for his last Shift ; 
What ever it be , we are resolved to buy , 
Or else our Tongues must give our Hearts the lie . 
And so farewell , till we can see thy Face , 
We do believe thy Stock is Noble Race . 
The Prophecy , etc.  

When here a Scot shall think his Throne to Set , 
Above the Circle of a British King , 
He shall a Dateless Parliament Beget , 
From whence a Furious Armed Brood shall Spring . 
That Army shall beget a wild Confusion , 
Confusion shall an Anarchy beget , 
That Anarchy shall bring forth in Conclusion , 
A Creature which you have no Name for yet . 
That Creature shall conceive a Sickly State , 
Which shall an Arostocracy Produce , 
The many Headed Beast not liking that , 
To raise Democracy shall rather choose ; 
And then Democracy's Production shall 
A Moon Calf be , which some a Mole do call : 
So acting for a while , few Men shall know , 
Whether among them , a Supreme or no. 
Five of them shall subdue the other Five , 
And then those Five shall by a doubtful Strife , 
Each others Death so happily contrive , 
That they shall Die to Live a better Life : 
And out of their Corruption Rise there shall , 
A true Supreme acknowledged by All ; 
In which the Power of all the Five shall be , 
With Unity made Visible in Three ; 
King , People , Parliament , with Priests and Peers , 
Shall be a while your Emulous Grandees , 
Make a confused Pentarchy some Years , 
And leave off their Distinct Claims by Degrees . 
And then shall Righteousness ascend the Throne , 
then Love and Truth and Peace Re-enter shall ; 
then Faith and Reason shall agree in One , 
And all the Virtues to their Council Call. 
And timely after this , there shall Arise , 
That Kingdom , and that Happy Government , 
Which is the Scope of all those Prophecies , 
Which future Truths obscurely Represent : 
But how this shall be done , few Men shall see , 
For wrought in Clouds and Darkness it shall be ; 
And ever it come to pass in public View , 
Most of these following Signs shall first Ensue . 
A King shall willingly himself Vnking , 
And thereby grow far greater than before , 
The Priests their Priesthoods to contempt shall bring , 
And Piety shall thereby thrive the more . 
A Parliament itself shall overthrew , 
And thereby shall a better Being gain , 
The Peers by setting of themselves below , 
A more enobling Honour shall obtain . 
The People for a while shall be Enslaved , 
And that shall make them for the future Free , 
By private Loss , the Public shall be saved , 
An Army shall by yielding Victor be . 
then shall God own his People and their Cause , 
The Laws Corruption shall Reform the Laws , 
And Bullocks of the largest Northern Breed , 
Shall Fattened be , where now scarce Sheep can Feed . 
POSTSCRIPT . 

Noli me Tangere , our known Laws do say , 
To him that doth the Royal Sceptre sway , 
Others must pay the Damage in this Cause , 
And Cost to Boot , so says the same Good Laws . 
His Evil Counsellors , these are the Men 
Must be Trussed up in Bunches Ten by Ten : 
Our Prince is safe , the former are not so , 
As they Advice , to Tyburn they must go . 
