The Sworne confederacy between the convocation at Oxford , and the tower of London . 

London , printed in the year , 1647.  

June the 5th 

The sworn confederacy between the convocation at Oxford , and the tower of London . 

My Lords and gentlemen ; 

You are desired to hear what 's the best news in the middle region . i had lately the honour to meet with one of the secretaries of art and nature , who assured me that there was pretty sport at Oxford . there are some right worthy doctors who are sick of the king's-evil , but dare not go to Holdenby to be cured ; for though they say the King's hand works more miracles since this truce , than it did all the time of the wars ; yet he cures none but such as are willing to be cured . It is observed by some , that there is most spiritual wickedness in All-souls at Oxford . Upon the 26. of May , divers subtlle doctors had a meeting very late at night at dr. Sheldens' lodging , to try whether they could out-plot those , whom they could not outpray upon the 26. of May , being our monthly fast . On Thursday the 27. they met at dr. Fell's house the pretended vicechancellor , or deputy of marquess Hertford ; and on Friday the 28. of May , being the last Friday of the month , the malignants common fastingday , ( A day strictly observed as i hear at Christ-church in Oxford , by the Dean , sub-dean , and canons ) they ealled a vestry , that they Might choose out some bold delegates to oppose the visitors ( Who are to meet June the 4th . ) and hinder a reformation . But it seems they could not work miracles upon that fastingday ; and therefore they adjourned to the 31. of May , an happy season , for than they unanimously agreed to call a convocation , which they did upon the first of June ; and being assembled , dr. fell made a speech without fear or wit , in which he called those that took the covenant , perfidious persons & traitors . upon a sad debate it was agreed , that certain reasons , ( Called just scruples ) should be tendered to justify such as refuse to take the national covenant , and the negative oath . 

These reasons were not communicated then , for they were not so much as read in the convocation house ; but they were received with an implicit faith ; and if any man would question the fidelity or wisdom of dr. Shelden , and the rest , he was to have satisfaction in his private college ; and yet ( As i am informed ) in their private colleges the heads do only use it for the strengthening and arming of their own party against the covenant , & corrupting of some youths , that are not able to distinguish between pretences and arguments ; for at trinity college , Mr. Vnet fellow of the house could not obtain a sight of the reasons . Hannibal ( p. ) was not so great an enemy to Rome , as to divulge the secrets of the conclave to Mr. Vnet , a known friend to the parliament . 

The grand design is to unite the whole university in a body that they May join together as one man , to oppose a reformation , and then they hope all to escape by a general mutiny , the ringleaders as well as their followers : but if the parliament allow them the benefit of their clergy , the law of decimation May behead some colleges , and make a perfect cure . 

The mystery of iniquity . works highest in dr. Shelden , who is the elder son of Prince Lucifer , and who holds correspondence with honest judge Jenkins' ( In the tower ) who lent him money , when he run away into Wales in the year 1642 , for fear of pursuivants , as Mr. Jones observed ; the scouts to convey letters or intimations are dr. Morley , who lies lieger at London ( As some whisper here in the city ) dr. Stutville , who pretends to be in France ;  . the printer is suspected also , and so is our good friend and neighbour Lambert Osbolston , ( The malignant earwig to the nobles ) who plays fault and loose , elects scholars at Westminster , as if he were a friend to the parl. intercedes for malignants , and carries messages in stead of letters for fear of being searched , whereby it is evident that he is an enemy to the parl. and therefore it is fit that he should be sent once more beyond Canterbury . 

You May take notice that the first scruple ( In the new scruple-house erected at Oxford , June 1 ) is this , whether the house of Commons should be owned and acknowledged as a parliamentary house ? the reason whispered is , because there are so many new members chosen in by virtue of the new great-seal without his majesty's coment. 

This design is smoothly carried , yet sufficiently discovered , and almost confessed by that deliberate and advised omission in their preface to their other just scruples ; the words run thus . 

Whereas by an ordinance of the Lords assembled in parliament for the visitation and reformation of the university of Oxford lately published , power is given to certain persons therein named , to inquire concerning those of the said university , that neglect to take the solemn league and covenant , and the negative oath , being tendered unto them , and likewise concerning those that oppose the execution of the ordinances of parliament concerning the discipline and directory , or shall not promote or cause the same to be put in execution according to their several places and callings . We the Masters , scholars , and other officers of the said university ( Not to judge the consciences of others , but ) to clear ourselves before God and the world , from all suspicion of obstinacy , whilst we discharge our own , present to consideration the true reasons of our present judgement concerning the said covenant , oath and ordinances , expecting so much justice , and hoping for so much charity , as either not to be pressed to conform to what is required in any of the premises , farther than our present judgement will warrant us , or not condemned for the refusing so to do , without clear and real satisfaction given to our just scruples . 

This is just judge Jenkins' , the house of Commons must not be acknowledged for one of the houses of parliament , so that the learned dr. Shelden and judge Jenkins' are entered into a confederacy against the house of Commons , the directory , and the discipline established by both houses of parliament ; and therefore it is a confederacy against the Lords also . They insist not much upon the introductory preface to the covenant ; they pretend that they are not able to say , that the rage , power , and presumption of the enemies of God ( In the sense therein intended ) is at this time increased , whereas their present confederacy against the house of Commons makes it most clear and evident : never did the enemies of God rage more furiously in Oxford , then now they do . 

Nay , they are so high and gallant , that they profess that they will not be satisfied , although the covenant should not be imposed upon them at all , for if it be but only recommended to them and then left to their choice , yet being subjects they cannot of their own freewill enter into any covenant wherein his majesty is concerned without his consent , it being in his power by the equity of the law , nugmb . 30. to annul such a league as soon as he pleaseth . 

Besides , it is contrary to the proclamation the 9 of October 19 carol , and they are obliged by their natural allegiance to obey all commands of his majesty , which are not in their apprehensions repugnant to the will of God , or the positive laws of the kingdom : from whence it will follow , that one proclamation of the Kings is ground sufficient for them to oppose all orders and ordinances of parliament ; whereas i was such a fool to conceive , that upon the surrender of Oxford they did agree to submit to all orders and ordinances of parliament , or leave the kingdom within 6 months : they May be fully assured that the parliament will not permit them to stay here , only to rebel . 

Concerning the first article of the covenant . 

They are not satisfied how they can in judgement swear to endeavour to preserve the religion of another kingdom . 1.  Whereof they have little knowledge . 2.  A religion in respect of worship , discipline , and government , much worse , and in doctrine not at all better ( Say they ) than our own , which we are in the next passage of the article required to reform . 3.  Wherein they do already find something to their thinking tending towards superstition and schism ( viz. in accounting Bishops Antichristian , and indifferent ceremonies unlawful ) that it seems to us more reasonable that we should call upon them to reform the same , then that they should call upon us to preserve it , considering that they make their discipline and government ( As they that are most prelatical esteem prelacy ) a mark of the true church , and the setting up thereof the erecting of the throne of Christ . Finally they all do tacitly accuse both houses of parliament of endeavouring to violate the oath of supremacy : the whole pover of spiritual jurisdiction for the visitation and reformation of the ecclesiastical state , and persons , belonging to the King's highness the only supreme governor of this realm . 

Concerning the second article . 

They are much offended , that it should be so much as intimated , that prelacy is contrary to sound doctrine , and the power of godliness : and therefore they have invented this mock article , intended as a libel against the city of London and the government thereof , their words are these : 

we desire it May be considered , in case a covenant of the like form should be tendered to the citizens of London , wherein they should be required to swear , they would sincerely , really , and constantly , without respect of persons , endeavour the extirpation of treason , the city-government by a Lord Major , alderm•n , sheriffs , common . Council , and other officers depending thereon , murder , adultery , theft , cozenage , and whatsoever shall be contrary to sound doctrine and the power of godliness , lest they should partake in other men's sins : whether such a tendry could be looked upon by any citizen that had the least spirit of freedom in him , as an act of justice , meekness , and reason ? 

They think that they have reason to believe , that prelacy ( They must understand it of such a prelacy as we would have rooted out of England ) was established in the churches by the apostles according to the mind , and after the example of their Master Jesus Christ ; and that by virtue of their ordinary power ( And authority derived from him ) as deputed by him governors of his church . 

Or at least , that episcopal aristocracy hath a fairer pretention , and May lay a juster title and claim to a divine institution , than any of the other forms of church-government can do , all which yet do pretend thereunto , viz. that of the papal monarchy , that of the Presbyterian democracy ( aristrocracy they should have said ) and that of the independents by particular congregations , or gathered churches . 

Moreover , they are assured by the undoubted testimony of ancient records and latter histories , that prelacy hath been continue with such an universal , uninterrupted , unquestioned succession of all the churches of God , and in all kingdoms that have been called Christian throughout the whole world for 1500 years together , that there never was any considerable opposition made there against . What they May prove by latter histories i know not , but sure i am , it is a folly to cite late histories , to prove what was done 1500 years ago , and i am most sure , that all the prelates and their adherents in England , can never prove , that such a prelacy as we desire to extirpate , hath been for 1500 years established in all the churches of Christ . 

But their truest reason and saddest scruple , is this that follows : 

we do ( say they ) some of us hold our livelihood , either in whole or in part , by those titles of Deans , Deans and chapters , &c. mentioned in the articles , being members of some collegiate and cathedral churches . 

If they had put this foremost i should have been sooner satisfied , but i must break off being called to other service ; you May have more hereafter if opportunity permit : in the mean time , take notice how much the house of Commons is slighted , as if not worthy to be named , in their preface : 2.  How grossly they abuse the church of Scotland , and city of London : 3.  How they combine against all Presbyterians and independents , that is , against all the friends of the parliament : 4.  How they declare all that have taken the covenant , Lords and Commons , to be perjured persons , men that have shaken off their allegiance , and renownced the King's supremacy : 5.  ( They say ) what i cannot omit ; that if we receive not prelacy upon the grounds they offer , the judgement and practice of the universal church , we shall be at a loss in sundry points both of faith and manners at this day firmly believed , and securely practised by us , when by the Socinians , Anabaptiss and other sectaries , we are called upon for our proofs : as namely , sundry orthodoxal explications concerning the trinity and coequalitie of the persons in the godhead , against the ari•nss and other heretics , the number , use , and efficacy of sacraments , the baptising of infants , national churches , the observation of the Lord's day , and even the canon of scripture itself . 

But stay , May not the scripture be sufficiently known by its own majesty , light and glory , by the testimony of the spirit , speaking in the word to our hearts and conferences ? And are not the scriptures perfect , and therefore sufficient for reproof and correction without ecclesiastical traditions ? And are not all those reverend divines , and other learned men who have taken the covenant , able to refute Socinians , Papists , Arminians , Anabaptiss , without the help of the prelatical party ? If they be not , we will send to doctor Shelden and judge Jenkin for their assistance . So much for the Oxonian jenkinism . 

Finis . 





observe that have a no mention of the Commons . 













