Transcendent and multiplied rebellion and treason , discovered , by the laws of the land . 

I had not known sin but by the law . 

8.  Rom. 7.  



Let our strength be the law of justice : for that which is feeble is found to be nothing worth . Therefore let us lie in wait for the righteous , because he is not for our turn , and he is clean contrary to our doings , he upbraideth us with our offending the law . 

wisd. 2. 11. 12.  



Am i your enemy because i tell you the truth ? 

4. gal. 16.  



Anno , 1645.  

Reader , 

Instead of an epistle , thou shalt have my resolution , concerning some particulars , principally agitated at this time , and necessary to be premised . 

1.  Concerning political and regal authority and power , and the author thereof . 

political authority , is the power which the supreme magistrate hath over men's persons and estates , over their lives and fortunes ; and such is the power of a King in his kingdom : and that power with us is to be exercised by the King according to the laws of the land . The original thereof is from God ; who is the only potentate , the King of Kings , and Lord of Lords , 1. tim. 6. 15. and from none other , men or angels : for the creatures generally are under the commandments , thou shalt not kill , thou shalt not steal . and then cannot by any authority of their own , warrant any man to take away another's life without murder , nor his estate without theft . Only God , who is the Lord of life and death , the Lord possessor of heaven and earth , the creator of all things , and therefore hath a natural dominion over all , can authorize in these cases : and he gives this authority to Kings and other supreme magistrates , his vicegerents , and deputies here on earth , for the administration of justice , and for the effectual restraint of sin and vice , by the utmost of corporal and temporal punishments , and for the maintenance of order and government amongst men . And so the apostle tells us , that there is no power but of God , rom. 13. 1.  And in the scripture Kings are called God's anointed ; anointed with power , as the holy ghost phraseth it , act. 10. 38.  Yea they have the compellation of God himself , because , saith mr Perkins , they partake of his power in their authority , and of his glory in their majesty . and Daniel tells us thrice in one chapter , that the kingdoms also are God's , and he giveth them to whom he will . 4. dan. 17. 25. 32.  For instance , 't is by the grace of God that our sovereign Lord Charles is King of England , Scotland , &c.  and in these kingdoms he constitutes governors also as he will ; either by his own nomination or by natural generation , or by the people's election : i know that too , to the end Popes Might usurp power over Kings , 't is the tenent of the Papists , and of the parliament party , that the King hath his power from the persons , and that they May reassume it . But this opinion is founded in blasphemy , loosens the bonds of loyalty , advanceth popular insolency , leads on to rebellion , and ends in anarchy , and confusion . 

And in truth all the persons do in this case , or can do , is this ; they May in order to the divine disposition of things , and in some tlaces they do ( Not without God's especial inclination and direction ) elect such a one to be their King , but they do not , they cannot , invest him with royal authority and power ; which he hath from God alone , at his inauguration , or first entrance upon his kingly office ; according to that commission , dixi dii estis , i have said ye are God's : psal. 82. 6.  As in corporations , the inhabitants do elect the major , but they do not confer on him his authority , which he hath from the King's charter only , investing him with such power , and giving them power also of electing him , which they could not have done without special licence from the King . And as it is of the King's singular favour and indulgence , that they chose their governor ; and as , for all their elections , the major is minister regis , the King's minister , constituted in authority by and under him , in that corporation , to represent his person , and to discharge his offices so it is between God , the King , and persons , in point of election and ministration . 

And as God constituteth every supreme governor , so doth he every kind of government in the world ; according to the confession of the church of Scotland , delivered in these following words . 

We confess and acknowledge empires , kingdoms , dominions and cities to be distincted , and ordained by God ; the powers and authorities in the same , be it of Emperors in their empires , Kings in their realms , Dukes and Princes in their dominions , and of other magistrates in their cities , to be God's holy ordinance , ordained for the manifestation of his own glory , and for the singular profit and commodity of mankind : so that whosoever goeth about to take away , or confound the whole state of cavil policies now long established , we affirm the same men not only to be enemies to mankind , but also wickedly to fight against gods expressed will . 

And hitherto appertaineth that maxim . qui introducit mala , peccat contra voluntatem dei revelatam in verbo : qui nova introducit , peccat contra voluntatem dei revelatam in factis : he that introduceth evil things , sinneth against the will of God revealed in his word : and he that introduceth new things , sinneth against the will of God revealed in his works . 

2.  Concerning the King's negative vote in parliament , which the two houses would utterly overthrow : and to that end they allege the form of an oath in hen : the fourths time , which they say the Kings of England usually took at their coronation : and whereby they promise to protect the laws , and to corroborate such as the persons shall choose : quas vulgus juste & rationabiliter elegerit ( As it is rendered , rot. claus. 1. r. 2. nu . 44. ) which the persons shall choose justly and reasonably : and such was not the first controverted bill of the militia ; for it was both unjust ( To take the King's power from him ) and unreasonable , because without the militia he cannot , according to his oath protect the laws ; and the true sense of that branch of the oath is expressed by that form used at the coronation of edw : the sixth . do you grant to make no new laws , but such as shall be to the honour of God , and to the good of the commonwealth , and that the same shall be made by the consent of your persons , as hath been accustomed ? 

So that branch in the King's oath , to corroborate such laws as the persons shall choose , must not be understood universally , that the King is sworn to pass all those laws that the persons shall choose , but restrictively , that he shall enact only such laws as the persons have chosen , and none other ; and it is only a restraint and limitation of that absoluteness in law-making , exercised by the Kings of England formerly , from which they receded by degrees : using first the advice of the Bishops and Barons in making their laws , and afterward their consents also : than not their advice and consent only , but also the advice and consent of the Commons also . And hitherto doth the clause in the oath relate , to the end that no law , not agreeing with the interest of every of the three formal parts of the kingdom Might pass , to the maiming and enfeebling of the established frame of the kingdom . 

And these forms in rich : 2. and edw : 6. are cited by the Lords and Commons in their remonstrance . 2. novem. 1642.  

3.  Concerning the King's counsels . Beside his great council , the Lords and Commons in parliament , the law takes notice of the King's power to swear unto himself a body of council of state , ( Which our laws call sometimes his grand council ) and to swear unto him all councillors at law ; even the judges , and others learned in the law , those to advise him in matters of state , these in matters of justice : and hence is that maxim in law , the King can do no wrong ; if any ill be committed in matters of state , the council , if in matters of justice , the judges must answer for it . And it will be very preposterous to make the two houses of parliament the King's only councillors in these cases ; if things shall be managed by the major part of the house of Commons , as now they are : for that house hath not in it an hundred knights of the shires , and three or four hundred citizens and burgesses , which May be all mechanics , and so unfit councillors in those cases : and who with the help of the tumultuous persons about London , May deal with the King and nobles , and gentry as they please . 

And because the two houses are a numerous body , and the King a single person , therefore to counterpoise them , doth the law express the King hath a council of state , and councillors at law , faithfully to advise him in his government , that be May neither do , nor receive any wrong , especially in parliament , where the wrong May be perpetual . 

How unjust then , and unreasonable is it at this time , to debar or remove those councillors from his majesty , and to express no legal cause against them , to which the King hath ever submitted them ? 

4.  Concerning the tumults raised and countenanced this parliament , whereof if any man doubt , let him consider , 

1.  that multitudes of persons went to Westminster with clubs and swords ; crying , no Bishops , no Bishops . 

2.  That they assaulted the Bishops , and would not suffer them to come to , and sit in the house of Lords . 

3.  That upon the complaint of the Bishops , the house of Lords twice moved the house of Commons to join with them in an order against tumults . 

4.  That the Lords having in vain tried that way ( Upon the advice of the judges ) sent a writ to the sheriff and justices for setting watch and ward , and hindering all tumultuous resort to Westminster : and for it one of the justices was sent to the tower by the house of Commons . 

5.  That they assaulted , and evil entreated some of the members of the house of Commons , as Sir John strangswayes ; who also complained of them in the house . 

6.  That mr Kyrton , a member of the house of Commons , offered proof to the same house , that captain Venne several times sent , and solicited the persons , to come down out of the city of London , with swords and pistols , when he had told them , or sent them word by his wife , that the worse party was like to have the better of the good party . 

7.  That ( decemb : 31. ) His majesty sent a message to the Lord major of London , for endeavouring to suppress the like tumults ; and that at a common-council held that day , the Lord Major and aldermen found , that there had been tumultuous and Riotons' assemblies spread day and night in the city , &c.  

8.  That jan. 31.  The poor persons about London , preferred a desperate petition to the house of Commons , against some of the house of Lords : whereof in its due place . 

Now by the ancient law and custom of the parliament , a proclamation ought to be made in Westminster , in the beginning of the parliament , that no man upon pain to loose all that he hath , should during the parliament in London , Westminster , or the suburbs , &c. wear any privy coat of plate , or go armed during the parliament ; and the reason hereof was , that the high court of parliament , should not thereby be disturbed , nor the members thereof ( Which are to attend the arduous and urgent business of the church and commonwealth ) should be withdrawn . Cook . 4. part . Instit. l. 1. of the high court of parliament . 

5.  Concerning the cause of the war on the parliament side . sometimes it is pretended , that the first army was raised to fetch in refractory delinquents , and to bring them to coudigne punishment : but who are those delinquents ? Such as apply themselves to the King , and were ready to assist him in the recovery of his rights taken from him ; his magazine at Hull , the power of the militia , the disposition of the forts and castles , his navy , &c.  

As for other delinquents , his majesty left them to their justice at the beginning of the parliament : and they proceeded against whom they pleased . The Earl of Strafford , and the Archbishop of Canterbury : but whether they or their judges proved delinquents , most men now know . And yet they spared whom they pleased in relation to their design , as the Lord privy seal , &c.  

Again , as those delinquents were of their own making , so the necessity of raising an army to bring them in , was from themselves ; for whereas that is done ordinarily by the posse comitatus , they had dissolved it by their vote , 15.  March . 1641.  That the several commissions granted under the great seal , to the lieutenants of the several counties , are illegal and void . Though such commissions had been in use during the reigns of , King James , and Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory ; and the ordering of the militia had been ever in the crown : and the crown hath its customs as well as the subject his , and not to be violated by the subject . 

So then arms were taken up , not in a judiciary way to force delinquents properly so called , and to punish offenders against law ; but in the way of state policy to subdue the King's friends , and their opposites ; not to do justice , but to promote their designs . 

Again , sometimes it is pretended , that the King endeavoured to bring in popery and tyranny ; and that they were forced to take up arms , for the defence of our religion and liberty . 

But our liberties were all asserted by several acts passed at the beginning of the parliament : and before arms were taken up , his majesty had promised to enact whatsoever they did desire against Jesuits , priests , Papists , and popery , as appears by his declaration . iun. 2.  

And to secure our liberties and religion , and the whole kingdom ( Before arms were taken up ) his majesty had promised that the forts and castles should be always in such hands , and only such , as they should have cause to confide in , ian. 27.  

And he accepted of Sir John Coniers , to be lieutenant of the tower of London , in the place of Sir John Byron , feb. 11.  And he allowed their recommendation of the lieutenants for the several counties , feb. 28.  

And what need then of an army , to defend and secure our liberties , and religion , against tyranny and popery ? 

And the truth is , this pretended necessary defence and security of our religion and liberty , against popery and tyranny , was only a colour for the taking up of arms , and a slight to gain , or rather to entrap and ensnare the persons , that by the power of the kingdom , and the help of the persons , they Might carry on , and compass their design against monarchy , and against episcopacy and the liturgy . 

And so the present quarrel is , for a ( Not to be pretended to by any law , ) liberty against monarchy , not against tyranny ; and for a ( Not known or chosen by themselves , ) religion against episcopacy and the liturgy , and not against popery : for therein the King opposeth them , and they have no enemy otherwise . 

And this alteration of government in church and state , was first attempted in a parliamentary way , than it was carried on by tumults , afterward they proceeded to apparent treason ; and from treason to treason , until at last they came to the height of rebellion : as the subsequent discourse will show the• . 

Several treasons by the laws of the land . 

To compass the death of the King and Queen , or to intend or imagine it . 

To intend to deprive , depose , or disinherit the King , if it May appear by word or otherwise . 

To levy war against the King in this realm , or to conspire to levy war against him . 

And this was high treason by the common-law , for no subject can levy war in the realm , without authority from the King , for to him it only belongeth , Cook . 3. part . Instit. cap. de high treason . 

Again , if any levy war to expulse strangers , to deliver men out of prisons , to remove councillors , or against any statute , or to any other end pretending reformation of their own heads without warrant ; this is levying of war against the King , because they take upon them royal authority , which is against the King , ibid.  

Also to detain or hold a fortress or castle against the King . And to deteive or withhold from him , or against him , any his ships or ordinance , is to levy war against the King , in the construction of the law . 

To encounter in fight , and kill such as are assisting to the King in his wars , or such as come to help the King . 

To plot , or do any thing toward the moving sedition , either in respect of the King , or his army ; or to give advice , or to procure or lend aid thereunto . 

To succour the King's enemies . 

To be adhering to the King's enemies , aiding them , or giving them comfort in this realm , or elsewhere . 

Besides other treasons mentioned in M Saint-johns' argument , upon the Earl of Strafford ; as , 

1.  To endeavour to corrupt the people's judgement , and to take off the bonds of conscience , the greatest security of the King's life ; as in Owen's case , who said , that King James being excommunicated by the Pope Might be killed of any man , and that such killing was not murder , but only the execution of the Pope's supreme sentence : God forbid i said one of better judgement than Owen , that i should stretch forth mine hand against God's anointed : no saith Owen , the Lord doth not forbid it , you May for these reasons kill the King . 

2.  To endeavour to draw the people's hearts from the King , to set discord between him and them ; whereby the persons should leave him and rise up against him , to the death and destruction of the King , as in sparhawks case . 

Also at the arraignment of the Earl of Essex , the judges delivered there opinions for matter of law upon two points ; 

1.  That in case where a subject attempteth to put himself into such strength as the King shall not be able to resist him , and to force and compel the King to govern otherwise then according to his own royal authority and direction , it is manifest rebellion . 

2.  That in every rebellion , the law intendeth as a consequent the compassing the death and deprivation of the King ; as foreseeing that the rebel will never suffer that King to live or reign , which Might punish or take revenge of their rebellion and treason . 

And at the arraignment of Sir Christopher Blunt . 

That the subject that rebelleth or riseth in forcible manner , to overrule the royal will and power of the King , intendeth to deprive the King both of crown and life ; and that the law judgeth not of the fact by the intent , but of the intent by the fact . 

How then , is not this rebellion in those who are now risen in forcible manner to overrule the royal will and power of the King ; and have put themselves into such strength , as the King shall not be able to resist them , thereby to force and compel the King ( In some particulars ) to govern otherwise then according to his own royal authority and direction , and to take from him the power of governing in some cases ; as of the church , and of the militia of the kingdom ? 

And in prosecuting this rebellion , how have they incurred several treasons ? 

1.  By endeavouring to corrupt the judgement of the persons , and to take off the bonds of conscience , the greatest security of his majesty , and to draw the people's hearts from the King , and to set discord between him and them , whereby they should leave the King , and rise up against him . 

2.  By levying war against the King in his realm . 

3.  By detaining his forts and castles from him ; and his ships and his ordinance . 

4.  By encountering in fight , and killing them that assist him , and by adhering to the King's enemies , and giving them aid and comfort . 

5.  By compassing the death and deprivation of the King : rebels never suffering that King to live or reign , which Might punish or take revenge of their treason . 

Now the method observed in this rebellion , was this . 

The government of the church being in the King by law ; and he governing it by Arch-bishops , Bishops , &c.  

A bill was brought into the house of Commons for the extirpation of them , but it passed not . 

Also the government of the militia of the kingdom being by law in the King , for the effectual protecting of the law and his persons , Sir Arthur Hasterigges , brought a bill into the house of Commons , for taking away the militia from his majesty , and placing it in the hands of subjects : and this bill was rejected with indignation . 

When they could not compass their design by vote in parliament , they attempt and prosecute it otherwise . 

And whilst his majesty was in Scotland ▪ they send forth lecturers , and give licence to pamphleteers , by their preaching and writing to corrupt the judgement of the persons , and to take off the bonds of conscience towards his majesty ; and to draw the people's hearts from the King , and to set discord between him and them , whereby they should leave him , and rise up against him : and this is the scope of the remonstrance published , decemb : 15. 1641.  

The people's judgement thus corrupted , and their hearts not only alienated from , but also set against the King , they run head long into rebellion ; and first those about London conspire , and go in multitudes to Westminster with swords and clubs ; and with clamours they revive and press the matter of the bill against Bishops , formerly rejected ; and they menace , affront , assault , and chase the Bishops , then actual members of parliament : so that they could not sit and vote in the house of peers ; and they proclaimed the names of others of the peers , as evil and rotten-hearted Lords ; and they assault and evil entreat those of the house of Commons , who they supposed favoured the Bishops , and had voted against their bills , and against their design , as Sir John strangswayes , &c.  and as they pass and repass through the streets , they utter seditious and traitorous words against the King and his government . Hereupon his majesty exhibited articles of high treason against the Lord Kimbolton , and the five members , the ringleaders in this rebellion . 

For endeavouring to subvert the fundamental laws and government of the kingdom , and to deprive the King of his legal power , and to place on subject an arbitrary and tyrannical power . 

For endeavouring by many foul aspersions upon his majesty and his government , to alienate the affection of his persons and to make his majesty odious to them . 

For endeavouring to subvert the very rights and being of parliaments , and as far as in them lay , by force and terror to compel the parliament to join with them in their design . 

But the accused members shelter themselves under the privilege of parliament ; ( Though it be a maxim in law that in case of treason privilege of parliament doth not extend , is of no signification ) and by the power and protection of the city of London , and the counties adjacent . 

And now they begin to put themselves actually into the strength of the kingdom ; and they dispose & order the militia of the city of London , under the command of Major . General skippon , and seize on his majesty's magazine at Hull , and commit the custody of it to Sir John Hotham . and the house of Commons petition his majesty , that the militia of the whole kingdom May be in such hands as they should confide in ; and when the major part of the Lords would not concur with them , the poor persons in and about London , come in a tumultuous manner to Westminster , and they revive & press the matter of Sir Arthur Hasterigges bill for the militia formerly rejected , and petition the house of Commons against those Lords , as malignants , and disturbers of the peace , and desire to have their names declared , and threaten to remove them , ( jan. 31. ) So they withdrew , and the militia was carried by the remaining party of the Lords . 

In Feb , and March , they settle the militia of the whole kingdom by an ordinance , excluding his majesty from any power in the disposition , or execution of it . 

In April , they possess themselves of the navy-royal . and having put themselves into the strength of the kingdom , they seek to overrule the royal will and power of the King , by declaring against his negative vote in parliament May , 26.  

And to compel the King to govern otherwise then according to his royal authority , and directions ; as appears by the 19 propositions tendered to his majesty , jun. 2.  

And upon his majesty's refusal of those propositions , according to the latitude of their desires , they raise an army , iun. 10.  

Though his majesty by his declaration , in answer to those propositions which concern religion , revives and renews his promises made formerly , ( viz. decemb. 1.  & 15. ) to remove all illegal innovations , and to call a national synod , and to abolish offensive ceremonies : professing himself also willing to a reformation of the government and liturgy of the church , according to his message sent to both houses , feb. 14.  

And though in answer to the propositions which concern the choice of privy-councillors , and other great officers of state &c.  his majesty promised that he would be careful to make election of such persons in those places of trust , as have given good testimony of their ability and integrity , and against whom there can be no just cause of exception : and that if he should be mistaken in his election , and they should offend in their several places , he would leave them to the justice of the law ; to be executed every triennial parliament at the least : showing moreover , that if the two houses of parliament should have the power of electing them ; great factions , animosities and divisions would follow thereupon , both in the houses themselves , and between the two houses , and in the several counties also . 

Lastly , touching the other propositions , though his majesty had fully declared and showed , that they tended to the depriving him of the power of protecting his persons and the laws , which he is sworn to maintain ; and to the very deposing of him and of his posterity ; and to the utter overthrow of that ancient , happy , equal , and well-poysed constitution of the government of this kingdom , and to the overthrow and ruin of the kingdom itself , by destroying monarchy , and therewith unity ; by introducing aristocracy , and division with it , and democracy , and with it tumults , violence , and licentiousness . 

Though the King , i say , in his answer to their propositions had declared , promised , and showed this , yet they took up arms , without authority and commission from his majesty , and so they levy war against our sovereign Lord the King , his crown and dignity . And they encounter in fight , and kill such as assist the King , and they gave battle to the King himself in person at Edge-hill . 

They insist also upon the same propositions at Oxford , 1643.  And upon the King's refusal of them , they prosecute war , as before . 

Lastly , the parliament of both kingdoms offer the same propositions to be treated on at Uxbridge , 1644. wherein also , they farther desire the concurrence and consent of the parliament of Scotland , in our reformation of religion ; in the settling and managing of the militia of the kingdom , and in concluding of peace and war with foreign Princes . 

Besides , they require the cessation in Ireland to be made void , and that the two parliaments May order the war there , and the militia ; and conserve the peace of the kingdom of Ireland . 

True it is , that in some points of regality and sovereignty , the King of England is already restrained and limited , so that he cannot rule and govern absolutely as he will , as in making of laws ( Which he cannot do , but with the consent of the Lords and Commons assembled in parliament , ) and in declaring of laws , ( Which he cannot do , but by the proper judges in his several courts ) but in all other things that are not expressly restrained by law , he is free and absolute , and the sovereignty both of judgement and power , is in the person of the King alone : as in providing for the present safety against sudden danger , and in levying of arms , suppressing of tumults , and rebellion ; convoking of parliaments , and dissolving them , making of peers , granting liberty of sending burgesses to parliaments , treating with foreign states , making of war , league , and peace , giving of honour , rewarding , pardoning , &c.  And in these , and the like particulars , it is ▪ that they would farther limit and restrain the King , that he should not govern as he hath done formerly , according to his own judgement and will , informed and regulated by the advice of his council of state , and councillors at law , but according to the judgement , and with the consent of both houses of parliament in some cases , according to the judgement , and with the consent of the parliaments of both kingdoms , and in some other cases they would assume the government wholly to themselves : and they take up arms , and fight to force the King's vote and assent to several bills concerning these particulars , and so at once wholly to overthrow the King's sovereignty , legislative and gubernative . 

But though others May not , yet the Lords and Commons assembled in parliament , May rise in a forcible manner , and compel the King to govern as they please , in some cases ; and deprive him of his government in other cases as they please . And others , in obedience to their authority and command , May assist in this war against his majesty , without rebellion and treason . 

This is a false and treasonable suggestion , as Owen's was , to corrupt the judgement of the persons , and to take off the bonds of conscience towards his majesty , by advancing the houses of parliament above the King . 

And the falseness and treasonableness thereof will plainly appear , upon the due consideration of the King's superiority to the two houses of parliament , and of the relation between his majesty and the Lords and Commons assembled in parliament , and between them and us out of parliament . 

1.  Touching the point of superiority between the King and the parliament , the two houses themselves have long since determined it . The parliament 25. h. 8. declares thus ; this your grace's realm recognising no superior under God but your grace . the parliament 16. r. 2. 5. affirms the crown of England to have been so free at all times , that it hath been in no earthly subjection , but immediately to God in all things touching the regality of the said crown , and to none other . ergo . the two houses of parliament cannot of right have or exercise any authority over the crown , or the realm , over the King or the subject of England . 

And though some parliaments called in troublesome times of faction , as now , and overswayed by those that were the head of the most potent faction , as at this time , have de facto deposed and murdered some Kings , yet such instances prove no more claim of sovereignty in the parliament , over the King , than a robber , when he exerciseth an arbitrary power over a man's person and purse ; and the observator himself confesseth ingeniously , that there was never King deposed in a free parliament : and that the acts of the parliament r. 2. were not so properly the acts of the two houses , as of h.  . and his victorious army . 

Nor is it treason only , but impiety also to advance the parliament ( The representative of the persons ) above the King , ( The representative of God : ) and it is to set up Kings and not by God . ( hos. 8. 4. ) Yea and against him too . 

2.  Touching the relation between the King and the Lords and Commons assembled in parliament , we must know this : that the high court of parliament consists of three integral parts ; the King , the house of Lords , and the house of Commons . The King is the head , and the two houses are the gross body subordinate to the King ; and to be considered always as a part of the parliament , and in a notion under the King , as well in parliament , as out of parliament : and they are subjected to the King in parliament . 

1.  In their persons ; for the King calls them together and dissolves them . And as they have occasion to petition the King in parliament they confess themselves his subjects : and directing their petitions to his majesty , thereby they acknowledge his sovereignty ; majesty being a ray of sovereignty . Yea the very legislative acts wherein consists their parliamentary eminency speak them always his subjects , and style him their sovereign : and according to the information of the judges in the time of h. 8.  The King in parliament standeth in his highest estate royal , in respect of the exercise of his sovereign authority and power in making laws , which he cannot do but in parliament . Besides , in token of his sovereignty and their subjection the King personally taketh homage and oath of fidelity of the Lords , and he commands the Commons before they sit and vote in the house to take the oath of supremacy and allegiance , whereby they acknowledge him to be the only supreme governor in this realm , and swear to assist and defend all jurisdictions , privileges , preeminences , and authorities , belonging to him , his heirs and successors , or annexed to the imperial crown of the realm . And farther the Lords and Commons in this present parliament have bound themselves by their protestation , to maintain and defend with their lives , power and estates , his majesty's royal person , honour , and estate . So the Lords and Commons assembled in parliament , are in the condition of subjects to his majesty , and they have sworn fidelity and allegiance to him ; and therefore they cannot rise up against the King , and compel him , as aforesaid , without manifest rebellion , and perjury also . 

2.  In their votes , in passing bills , and making laws ; wherein though they concur with the King necessarily , yet 't is not by equal authority but by consent only ; not as joint sovereigns , but as free subjects ; not as enacting with the King , but as choosing , and preparing and proposing laws to be enacted by the King ; according to the passage in the oath , that the King shall corroborate such laws as the persons shall choose : and without this corroboration , by the royal assent , which gives life and motion to our laws , the votes of the two houses of parliament die in the womb where they were conceived , like an embryo , and never see the light . 

3.  Touching the relation between the Lords and Commons assembled in parliament , and ourselves out of parliament , we take them to be no other than our fellow subjects , and them with us , and us with them , to be equally subjected to our sovereign Lord the King , who is head both of the kingdom and of the parliament , and to none other . Nor are they invested with any superiority over us , but are armed with some privileges against us , that we cannot arrest them or their servants during the parliament : and in case of rebellion and treason , they are no more privileged , than we out of parliament . 

So than the Lords and commons'assembled in parliament are wholly subjected to the King , their persons to his person , and their votes to his vote ; nor are we in any subjection to them or their votes ; nor have they jurisdiction over us , nor are we bound to the observance of them in any case whatsoever ; and our submission to them at any time , is an act of compliance only , and arbitrary , and not of obedience and duty . 

And their votes and ordinances , in this case at this time , are not legal obligations upon , but traitorous propositions to , and public invitations of the persons to join with them , and assist them in their rebellion and treason . and their partakers do not so properly obey them , ( Having no authority of command ) as conspire with them . 

Thus the Lords and Commons of England , being always subjected to the King by the constitution of the kingdom , and of the parliament , it is all one whether a rebellion be hatched , and acted by them in , or out of parliament ; and if there be any aggravation , 't is when perpetrated in parliament , for such rebellion leaves a brand upon that parliament , and is a dishonour to all parliaments , it involves in the sin the whole kingdom for the present , and is an ill precedent for time to come : and how shall we be ever hereafter liable to change , and upon change to intestine divisions , and to civil war , it May be , if ( As this doth ) so other parliaments shall , challenge to themselves absolute power to alter the established government of the church and state ; and if opposed , to take up arms for effecting it , as at this day . 

But though the name of both houses of parliament , be used to authorize and countenance this rebellion , yet the Lords and Commons generally do not concur in this action : but a great part of the house of Commons , and a great part of the house of Lords , driven from Westminster by the violence of tumults , and upon the horror of their proceedings there , do oppose it , both by their declarations and by force of arms . 

And the Lords and Commons now remaining at Westminster , are such as are either professed enemies to the established government of the church and state , or malicious against his majesty , and ambitious of his royalties , or covetous of the revenues of the Bishops , and Deans , and chapters ; or lastly , such as live in the counties near London , and within their associations , and comply with them for their private interests . And all that those Lords and Commons can truly challenge to themselves , is , that they are the ringleaders in this rebellion and treason , and that they have made other their fellow subjects , their fellow rebels , and fellow traitors . 

And let such as take part with those Lords and Commons , reflect upon themselves , and search their hearts , and examine their consciences , whether the like seditious dispositions , and perverse affections , and ambitious and covetous desires , and private respects , did not at first engage them in this war , and whether in their houses they have not prevented those Lords and Commons , rather than observed and followed their commands , all along throughout the whole progress of their rebellion and treasons ; and so whether their compliance be not a traitorous conspiracy with the Lords and Commons at Westminster , rather than an act of sincere and faithful obedience to the authority of both houses of parliament . 

It is observed by ancient parliament-men out of record , that parliaments have not succeeded well in five cases . 

1.  When the King hath been in displeasure with the Lords and Commons . So essential is the King's good will toward his Commons , that it was one of the petitions of the Commons to ed. 3.  That the Archbishops , and all others of the clergy should pray for it ; and many times are the like-petitions for the Lords . 

Always provided , that both Lords and Commons keep themselves within the circle of the law , and custom of the parliament . 

2.  When any of the great Lords were at variance within themselves . 

3.  When there was no good correspondence between the Lords and Commons . 

4.  When there was no unity between the Commons themselves . 

5.  When there was no preparation for the parliament before it began . 

And there is at this time , a 6th unprecedented , and unparalleled case ; making the present parliament , not only successless , but also pernicious ; even the disloyalty , and rebellion , and treason of a party of Lords and Commons of parliament , who being assisted by the anti-episcopal , antimonarchical faction about London , and throughout the whole kingdom , first violate the liberty of parliament , by tumults driving away diverse of the members thereof ; then they make themselves Masters of the militia , and afterwards they raise an army , as was pretended , for the defence of the Protestant religion , the King's authority , and his person in his royal dignity , and to maintain the free course of justice , the laws of the land , the peace of the kingdom , and the privilege of parliament . 

And being in a military posture , and having the power of the sword , they declare themselves to be the parliament of England , and assume unto themselves a new capacity of an absolute body , and independent state , and they take upon them authority legislative and gubernative ; and they pass votes , not in order to the King , to be proposed to him , and to be enacted by him , but by themselves , and they publish them not as laws in his name , but as ordinances in their own names , and to be put in execution , not in a judiciary way ( As our laws are ) by the ordinary ministers of justice , the judges and justices in their several courts , and countries , but by creatures of their own making , their committees and subcommittees , and by their deputy-lieutenants , and in a way extrajudicial and military . And they force us to submit to them , either by observing and doing what they enjoin , or by suffering what they impose . 

We shall also have ( When they can agree upon it ) the like model of government in the church : the authority to be derived not from the King , but from the two houses of parliament , and to be executed not by Bishops , but by presbyters , and such church-officers as the two houses shall think fit to ordain . And howsoever at first they pretended , that they took up arms for defence of religion , &c. yet their proceedings have been only against religion by law established , and against the King and against regality itself , and against the laws of the land , magna charta , and the petition of right , and so against the liberty of the subject ; and lastly against the peace , and the very constitution and being of the kingdom : and they fight against them that defend these , and oppose their usurped power , and new frame of government , whether their fellow subjects , or their fellow parliament men , or their King and sovereign himself . Yea from the first bringing in of the two bills , against the government of the church , and for taking the militia out of the King's hand , all their proceedings have been only rebellious and traitorous until this day ; and they and their complices have spoken and acted nothing but rebellion and treason , if examined and tried by the laws of the land . 

And their rebellion is an attempt to force and compel the King in some cases to govern otherwise then according to his own royal authority and direction , and by force of arms to deprive him of his government in some other cases : and to force and compel his vote and assent to several bills in parliament against himself , and against his authority and government : and so at once to subject both his gubernative and legislative authority to the two houses of parliament . 

And the treasons already acted for promoting this rebellion , are , 

The corrupting the judgement of the persons , and the taking off the bonds of conscience toward his majesty , and the drawing away the people's hearts from him , and the setting of discord between him and them , whereby they should leave him , and rise up against him : and these are the treasons more especially of their preachers and pamphleteers . 

The levying war against the King in this realm . 

The detaining his castles and forts from him , and his ships and his ordinance . and these are the treasons of those Lords and Commons principally . 

The encountering in fight , and killing them that assist him ; and the adhering to the King's enemies and giving them aid and comfort . And these are the treasons of their soldiers and contributors . 

thus the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously , yea the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously , Esay . 24. 16.  

And the treasons to be acted ( Which i tremble at , and whereof all will be guilty that have any hand in the preceding treasons ) i say , the treasons to be acted for consummating this rebellion , are 

The depriving , or deposing , or murdering of the King , the Lord's anointed : in every rebellion the law intending , as a consequent , the compassing the death and deprivation of the King ; as foreseeing that the rebel will never suffer that King to live or reign , which Might punish , or take revenge of his rebellion and treason . and therefore doubtless it is , that Sir Thomas Fairfax hath his commission without exception to fight with , kill , and slay all that shall oppose him . 

But God forbid that i should stretch forth mine hand against the Lord's anointed ; for who can stretch forth his hand against him , and be guiltless , 1. sam. 26. 9 , 11.  

and my admonition to them , and to all , and every one any way engaged with them , shall be that of Simon Peter , to Simon Magus ; repent of this thy wickedness , and pray God , that if it be possible , the thought of thine heart May be forgiven thee . For i see thou art in the gall of bitterness , and in the bond of iniquity , acts , 8. 22. 23 ▪ 

And for the King it shall be my prayer , and let it be the prayer of all loyal hearts . 

Plead thou the King's cause , oh Lord , with them that strive against him : and fight against them that fight against him . 

Lay hand upon the shield and buckler : and stand up to help him . 

Bring forth the spear , and stop the way against them that persecute him : say unto his soul , i am thy salvation . 

Let them be confounded and put to shame , that seek after his soul : let them be turned back , and brought to confusion that imagine mischief for him . 

Let them be as the dust before the wind : and the angel of the Lord scattering them . 

Let their way be dark and slippery : and let the angel of the Lord persecute them . 

For they have privily laid their net to destroy him without a causes yea , even without a cause have they made a pit for his soul . 

Let a sudden destruction come upon him unawares , and his net that he hath laid privily , catch himself : that he May fall into his own mischief . 

And the King's soul shall be joyful in the Lord : it shall rejoice in his salvation . amen , amen . 

And now to conclude this tract , as Sir Edward Cook doth his chapter of treason . it appeareth in the holy scripture , that traitors never prospered , what good soever they pretended , but were most severely and exemplarily pu••ished : as Corah , Dathan , and Abiram , by miracle . the ground clove asunder that was under them : and the earth opened her month and swallowed them up , and their houses , and all the men that appertained unto Korah , and all their goods , num. 16. 31 , 32.  

Absalon , who by fair speeches and courtesies stole the hearts of the persons , and sought his father King David's life , riding upon a mule under the thick boughs of a great oak in the wood of Ephraim , where the battle was , his head caught hold of the oak , and he was taken up between the heaven and the earth : and Joab took three darts in his hand , and thrust them thorough the heart of Absolom , while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak , 2.  Sam ; 18. 9 , 14.  

Achitophel , Absolon's chief counsellor hanged himself , 2. sam. 17. 23.  

Shimei , for cursing David , had his hoar head brought with blood to the grave , 2. sam. 16. 5 , 6. 1.  King's 28. 46.  

Abiathat , the traitorous high priest against Solomon , was deprived of his priest hood , 1. k. 2. 26. 27.  

Zimri , who conspired against Elah , and smote him , and killed him , when he saw the city was taken wherein he was , went into the palace of the King's house and burned the King's house over him with fire and died . 1. reg. 16. 9 , 18.  

Athaliah the daughter of Omri , who destroyed all the seed royal , was slain with the sword , 2. reg. 11. 16.  

Bigthan and teresh , who sought to lay hold on King Ahasueerus , were both hanged on a tree . est . 2. 21. 23.  

Thewdas , who rose up , beasting himself to be somebody , and to whom a number of men about 400. joined themselves , was slain , and all even as many as obeyed him were scattered and brought to naught . After him rose up Judas of Galilce ▪ in the days of taxing , and drew much persons after him : he also perished , and as many as obeyed him were dispersed , act. 5. 36 , 37.  

Judas Iscariot , the traitor of traitors hanged himself , 27.  mat. 5.  And purchased a field with the reward of iniquity , and falling headlong , he burst asunder in the midst , and all his bowels gushed out , act. 1. 18.  

Peruse over all our books , records , and histories , and you shall find , a principle in law , a rule in reason , and a trial in experience , that treason doth ever produce fatal and final destruction to the offendor , and never attaineth to the desired end , ( Two incidents inseparable thereunto . ) And therefore let every one abandon it , as the most pernit•ous bait of the devil of hell ; and follow the precept in holy scripture . 

My son , fear thou the Lord and the King , and meddle not with them that are given to change . 

For their calamity shall rise suddenly , and who knoweth the ruin of them both , prov. 24. 21 , 22.  

Cook 3. part instit. cap. 2.  

Postscript . 

And now reader see the accomplishment of that Evangelical prediction . 

In the last days , perilous times shall come , for men shall be lovers , of their own selves , covetous , boasters , proud , blaspheamers , disobedient to parents , traitors , heady , high-minded , lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God ; having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof . 2. tim. 3. 1 , 2 , 4 , 5.  

Presumptuous are they , self-willed , they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities . 2. pet. 2. 10.  

Woe to them , for they have gone in the way of Cain , and run greedily after the error of Balaam for a reward , and perished in the gainsaying of Core , Jude 11.  

Also reader learn and consider , that what things soever are evil in their own nature ( As are rebellion and treason ) cannot be the subject of any command , or induce any obligation of obedience upon any man , by any authority whatsoever . 

As the Lords and Commons at Westminster have delivered in their declaration , May . 19 1642.  

Finis . 





political and regal power , & the author thereof . King's have not their power from the persons . ancient constitutions not to be overthrown . the King's negative vote in parliament . the King's oath to corroborate such laws as the persons shall choose . the King's several counsels . Cook upon Littleton . l. 2. c. 1. sect. 164.  tumults this present parliament . Strangsways . the parliament pretences , for taking up of arms . 1.  The fetching in delinquents . 2.  The defence of our religion and liberty . the true state of the present war . 

treasons by the laws of the land . other treasons in mr Saint-iohns' . argument . rebellion ▪  the present rebellion and treason . the method used in this present rebellion . a bill against Bishops . Sir Arthur Haslerigges bill concerning the militia . traitorous lecturers and pamphleteers . tumults revive the bill against Bishops . articles of high treason against the l. Kimbolton , and the five members . no privilege of parliament in case of treason . they put themselves into the strength of the kingdom ▪  tumults revive ; Sir Arthur Haslerigges bill , concerning the militia . the ordinance for the militia . the navy-royal . they declare against the King's negative vote , and so against his legislative power . the 19 propositions ▪ against his gubern•tive power . his majesty's answer to the propositious . they raise an army . the same propositions insisted on , at the treaty at Oxford . and at Uxbridge . how the King is restrained already : and how they would farther restrain him . ob.  ans. the King superior to the two houses of parliament . the Lords & Commons in parliament subjected to the King . in their persons . in their votes . they are our fellow subjects . their votes in this case . all one , whether a rebellion be by the subject in parliament , or out of parliament . a party of the Lords & Commons , only engaged in this rebellion . upon what motives others have engaged themselves . parliaments have not succeeded well in five cases . note . the sixth case . the beginning and progress of this rebellion . their proceedings in church and state . the present rebellion . treason's already acted , & by whom . horrid treasons to be acted for completing the rebellion . the rebels admonished . a prayer for the k•ng . the conclusion . 

the postscript . 

















