His highness the Lord protector's speech to the parliament in the painted chamber , on Tuesday the 12th of September . 1654.  

Taken by one who stood very near him , and published to prevent mistakes . 

London , printed by t. r. and e. m. for g. Sawbridge at the bible on Ludgate-hill . 1654.  

His highness the Lord protector's speech to the parliament in the painted chamber , on Tuesday , the 12th of September . 1654.  

Gentlemen , 

it is not long since i met you in this place , upon an occasion which gave me much more content , and comfort then this doth . 

That which i have to say to you now , will need no preamble to let me in to my discourse : for the occasion of this meeting is plain enough . I could have wished with all my heart there had been no cause for it . 

At that meeting i did acquaint you what the first rise was of this government which hath called you hither ; and in the authority of which you came hither . 

Among other things that i told you of then , i said you were a free parliament . And so you are whilst you own the government , and authority that called you hither . For certainly that word employed a reciprocation , or it employed nothing at all . 

Indeed there was a reciprocation implied , and expressed : and i think your actions , and carriages ought to be suitable . 

But i see it will be necessary for me now , a little to magnify my office ; which i have not been apt to do . I have been of this mind , i have been always of this mind , since first i entered upon it , that if God will not bear it up , let it sink . But if a duty be incumbent upon me , to bear my testimony unto it , ( Which in modesty i have hitherto forborn ) i am in some measure now necessitated thereunto . And therefore that will be the prologue to my discourse . 

I called not myself to this place ; i say again , i called not myself to this place ; of that God is witness . And i have many witnesses ; who i do believe could readily lay down their lives to bear witness to the truth of that : that is to say , that i called not myself to this place . And being in it , i bear not witness to myself . But God and the persons of these nations have born testimony to it also . 

If my calling be from God , and my testimony from the persons ; God and the persons shall take it from me , else i will not part with it . I should be self to the trust that God hath placed upon me , and to the interest of the persons of these nations , if i should . 

That i called not myself to this place , is my first assertion . 

That i bear not witness to myself , but have many witnesses , is my second . 

These are the two things i shall take the liberty to speak more fully to you of . 

To make plain and clear that which i have said , i must take liberty to look back . 

I was by birth a gentleman , living neither in any considerable height , nor yet in obscurity : i have been called to several employments in the nation : to serve in parliaments : and ( Because i would not be over tedious ) i did endeavour to discharge the duty of an honest man in those services , to God , and his people's interest , and of the commonwealth ; having , when time was , a competent acceptation in the hearts of men , and some evidences thereof . I resolve not to recite the times , and occasions , and opportunities that have been appointed me by God to serve him in : nor the presence and blessings of God bearing then testimony to me . 

I having had some occasions to see ( Together with my brethren and countrymen ) a happy period put to our sharp wars , and contests with the then common enemy , hoped , in a private capacity , to have reaped the fruit , and benefit together with my brethren , of our hard labours and hazards : to wit , the enjoyment of peace and liberty , and the privileges of a Christian , and of a man , in some equality with others , according as it should please the Lord to dispense unto me . 

And when , i say , God had put an end to our wars , at least brought them to a very hopeful issue , very near an end , ( After Worcester fight ) i came up to London to pay my service , and duty to the parliament that then sat ; and hoping that all minds would have been disposed to answer that which seemed to be the mind of God , ( viz. ) to give peace and rest to his persons : and especially to those who had bled more than others in the carrying on of the military affairs , i was much disappointed of my expectation : for the issue did not prove so ; what ever May be boasted , or misrepresented , it was not so , not so . 

I can say in the simplicity of my soul , i love not i love not , ( I declined it in my former speech ) i say , i love not to rake into sores , or to discover nakednesses . That which i drive at , is this ; i say to you , i hoped to have had leave to have retired to a private life : i begged to be dismissed of my charge : i begged it again and again . And God be judge between me and all men , if i lie in this matter . That i lie not in matter of fact , is known to very man's ; but whether i tell a lie in my heart , as labouring to represent to you that which was not upon my heart , i say , the Lord be judge : let uncharitable men that measure others by themselves , judge as they please . As to the matter of fact , i say it is true . As to the ingenuity and integrity of my heart in that desire , i do appeal , as before , upon the truth of that also . But i could not obtain what my soul longed for . And the plain truth is , i did afterwards apprehend , that some did think ( My judgement not suiting with theirs ) that it could not well be . But this i say to you , was , between God and my soul ; between me and that assembly . 

I confess i am in some strait , to say what i could say ; and what is true of what then followed . 

I pressed the parliament , as a member , to period themselves , once , and again , and again , and ten , and twenty times over . i told them ( For i knew it better than any one man in the parliament could know it , because of my manner of life , which was to run up and down the nation , and so Might see and know the temper and spirits of all men , the best of men ) that the nation loathed their sitting : i knew it . And so far as i could discern , when they were dissolved , there was not so much as the barking of a dog , or any general and visible repining at it . You are not a few here present that can assert this as well as myself . 

And that there was high cause for their dissolving , is most evident , not only in regard there was a just fear of the parliaments perpetuating themselves ; but because it was their design . And had not their heels been trod upon by importunities from abroad , even to threats , i believe there would never have been thoughts of rising , or of going out of that room to the world's end . 

I myself was founded ; and by no mean persons tempted ; and addresses were made to me to that very end , that it Might have been thus perpetuated , that the vacant places Might be supplied by new elections , and so continue from generation to generation . 

i have declined , i have declined very much , to open these things to you : yet having proceeded thus far , i must tell you , that poor men under this arbitrary power , were driven like flocks of sheep , by forty in a morning , to the confiscation of goods , and estates , without any man being able to give a reason that two of them had deserved to forfeit a shilling . i tell you the truth , and my soul , and many persons whose faces i see in this place were exceedingly grieved at these things : and knew not which way to help it , but by their mournings , and giving their negatives when occasions served . 

i have given you but a taste of miscarriages . i am confident you have had opportunities to hear much more of them : for nothing is more obvious . it 's true , this will be said , that there was a remedy to put an end to this perpetual parliament endeavoured , by having a future representative . How it was gotten , and by what importunities that was obtained , and how unwillingly yielded unto , is well known . 

What was this remedy ? It was a seeming willingness to have successive parliaments . What was that succession ? it was , that when one parliament had left their seat , another was to sit down immediately in the room thereof , without any caution to avoid that which was the danger ; ( viz. ) Perpetuating of the same parliaments ; which is a sore now that will ever be running , so long as men are ambitious and troublesome , if a due remedy be not found . So then , what was the business ? It was a conversion from a parliament that should have been , and was perpetual , to a legislative power always sitting : & so the liberties , and interests , and lives of persons , not judged by any certain known laws and power , but by an arbitrary power , which is incident and necessary to parliaments by an arbitrary power : i say , to make men's estates liable to confiscation , and their persons to imprisonments ; sometimes by laws made after the fact committed : often by taking the judgement both in capital and criminal things to themselves , who in former times were not known to exercise such a judicature . 

This i suppose was the case ; and in my opinion the remedy was fitted to the disease : especially coming in the rear of a parliament , so exercising the power and authority as this had done , but immediately before . 

Truly , i confess upon these grounds , and with the satisfaction of divers other persons , seeing nothing could be had otherwise ; that parliament was dissolved , we desiring to see if a few Might have been called together for some short time who Might put the nation into some way of certain settlement , did call those gentlemen out of the several parts of the nation for that purpose . 

And , as i have appealed to God before you already , i know ( And i hope i May say it , ) though it be a tender thing to make appeals to God ; yet in such exigencies as these , i trust it will not offend his majesty , especially to make them before persons that know God , and know what conscience is , and what it is to lie before the Lord . I say , that as a principal end in calling that assembly , was the settlement of the nation ; so a chief end to myself was , that i Might have opportunity to lay down the power that was in my hands i say to you again , in the presence of that God , who hath blessed and been with me in all my adversities and successes , that was as to myself my greatest end . a desire perhaps , ( And i am afraid ) sinful enough , to be quit of the power God had most providentially put into my hand , before he called for it ; and before those honest ends of our fighting were attained and settled . I say , the authority i had in my hand , being so boundless as it was , i being by act of parliament general of all the forces in the three nations of England , Scotland and Ireland , ( In which unlimited condition i did not desire to live a day , ) did call that meeting for the ends before expressed . 

What the event and issue of that meeting was , we May sadly remember . It hath much teaching in it ; and i hope will make us all wiser for the future . 

But this meeting succeeding , as i have formerly said to you , and giving such a disappointment to our hopes , i shall not now make any repetition thereof ; only the effect was , that they came and brought to me a parchment signed by very much the major part of them , expressing their resigning and redelivery of the power and authority that was committed to them , back again into my hands : and i can say it in the presence of divers persons here , that do know whether i lie in that , that i did not know one tittle of that resignation , until they all came and brought it , and delivered it into my hands : of this there are also in this presence many witnesses . 

I received this resignation , having formerly used my endeavours and persuasions to keep them together ; observing their differences , i thought it my duty to give advices to them , that so i Might prevail with them for union : but it had the effect that i told you : and i had my disappointment . 

When this was so , we were exceedingly to seek how to settle things for the future . My power again by this resignation , was as boundless and unlimited as before ; all things being subjected to arbitrariness , and a person having power over the three nations boundlessely , and unlimited ; and upon the matter all government dissolved , all civil administrations at an end ; as will presently be made appear . 

The gentlemen that undertook to frame this government , did consult divers days together , ( They being of known integrity , and ability ) how to frame somewhat that Might give us settlement ; and they did so : and that i was not privy to their counsels , they know it . 

When they had finished their model in some measure , or made a very good preparation of it , it became communicative . They told me that except i would undertake the government , they thought things would hardly come to a composure , and settlement ; but blood and confusion would break in upon us . I denied it again , and again , as God and those persons know , not complementingly as they also know , and as God knows . 

I confess , after many arguments , and after the letting of me know that i did not receive any thing that put me into any higher capacity than i was in before , but that it limited me , and bound my hands to act nothing to the prejudice of the nations , without consent of a council until the parliament ; and then limited by the parliament , as the act of government expresseth , i did accept it . 

I Might repeat this again to you , if it were needful , but i think i need not . I was arbitrary in power , having the armies in the three nations under my command : and truly not very ill beloved by them ; nor very ill beloved then by the persons , by the good persons ; and i believe i should have been more beloved if they had known the truth , as things were before God , and in themselves ; and before divers of these gentlemen whom i but now mentioned unto you . 

I did , at the entreaty of divers persons of honour and quality ; at the entreaty of very many of the chief officers of the army then present , and at their request , i did accept of the place , and title of protector , and was in the presence of the commissioners of the seal , the judges , the Lord Major and aldermen of the city of London , the soldiery , divers gentlemen , citizens , and divers other persons , and persons of quality , &c. accompanied to Westminster-hall , where i took my oath to this government . This was not done in a corner : it was open and public . 

This government hath been exercised by a council , with a desire to be faithful in all things ; and amongst all other trusts , to be faithful in calling this parliament . 

And thus i have given you a very bare and lean discourse ; which truly i have been necessitated unto , and contracted in , because of the unexpectedness of the occasion ; and because i would not quite weary you , nor myself . But this is a narrative that discovers to you the series of providence , and of transactions leading me into this condition wherein i now stand . 

The next thing i promised you , wherein i hope i shall not be so long , ( Though i am sure this occasion does require plainness and freedom , ) is , that as i brought not myself into this condition , ( As in my own apprehension i did not ; and that i did not , ( The things being true which i have told you ) i submit it to your judgements , and there shall i leave it , let God do what he pleaseth . ) The other things i say that i am to speak to you of , is , that i have not , nor do not bear witness to myself . i am far from alluding to him that said so ; yet truth concerning a member of his he will own , though men do not . 

But i think ( If i mistake not ) i have a cloud of witnesses . I think so ; let men be as froward as they will . I have witness within , without , and above . But i shall speak of them that are without , having fully spoken before of the witness above , and the witness in my own conscience , upon the other account ; because that subject had more obscurity in it , and i in some sort needed appeals ; and i trust Might lawfully make them , as well as take an oath , where things were not so apt to be made evident . i shall enumerate my witnesses as well as i can . 

When i had consented to accept of the government , there was some solemnity to be performed ; and that was accompanied with some persons of considerableness in all respects ; who were the persons before expressed ; who accompanied me at the time of my entering upon this government , to Westminster-hall to take my oath . 

There was an explicit consent of interessed persons ; and an implicit consent of many , showing their good liking , and approbation thereof . And ( Gentlemen ) i do not think that you are altogether strangers to it , in your country : some did not nauseate it ; very many did approve it . 

i had the approbation of the officers of the army in the three nations of England , Scotland , and Ireland ; i say of the officers . I had that by their remonstrances , and under signature ; there was went along with that explicit consent , an implicit consent of persons that had somewhat to do in the world ; that had been instrumental by God , to fight down the enemies of God , and his persons , in the three nations . And truly , until my hands were bound , and i limited , ( Wherein i took full contentment , as many can bear me witness , ) when i had in my hands so great a power and arbitrariness , the soldiery were a very considerable part of the nations , especially all government being dissolved . I say , when all government was thus dissolved , and nothing to keep things in order but the sword , and yet they ( Which many histories will not parallel ) even they were desirous that things Might come to a consistency , and arbitrariness Might be taken away , and the government put into a person ( Limited and bounded , as in the act of settlement ) whom they destrusted the least , and loved not the worst : this was another evidence . 

I would not forget the honourable and civil entertainment , with the approbation i found in the great city of London ; which the city knows whether i directly or indirectly sought . And truly i do not think it is folly to remember this . For it was very great , and high , and very public ; and as numerous a body of those that are known by names , and titles , ( The several corporations , and societies of citizens in this city , ) as hath been at any time seen in England ; and not without some appearance of satisfaction also . 

I had not only this witness , but i have had from the greatest county in England , and from many cities , and boroughs , and many counties , explicit approbations ; not of those gathered here , and there ; but from the county of York , and city of York , and other counties , and places , assembled in their public , and general assizes , the grand-jury in the name of the noble men , gentlemen , yeomen , and inhabitants of that county , giving very great thanks to me for undertaking this heavy burden , at such a time : and giving very great approbation , and encouragement to me to go through with it . These are plain . i have them to show . And by these in some measure it will appear , i do not bear witness to myself . 

This is not all : the judges , ( And truly i had almost forgotten it ) they thinking that there was a dissolution of government , met , and consulted , and did declare one to another , that they could not administer justice to the satisfaction of their consciences , until they had received commissions from me . And they did receive commissions from me . And by virtue of those commissions they have acted . And all the justices of the peace , that have acted , have acted by virtue of like commissions : which was a little more than an implicit approbation . And i believe all the justice administered in the nation , hath been by this authority ; which also i lay before you : desiring you to think whether all these persons before mentioned must not come before you for an act of oblivion , and general pardon , who have acted under , and testified to this government , if it be disowned by you . 

i have two or three witnesses more , equivalent to all these i have reckoned , if i be not mistaken , and greatly mistaken . If i should say , all you that are here , are my witnesses , ishould say no untruth . i know you are the same persons here , that you were in the country . But i will reserve to speak to this at the last ; for this will be the issue of my speech . i say , i have two or three witnesses , that are more , than all i have accounted , and reckoned before . 

All the persons in England , are my witnesses : and many in Ireland , and Scotland . all the sheriffs in England are my witnesses . And all that came in upon the process issued out by the sheriffs are my witnesses . Yea , the returns of the elections to the clerk of the crown , not a thing to be blown away with a breath ; the returns on the behalf of the inhabittants in the counties , cities , and boroughs , all are my witnesses of approbation to the condition , and place i stand in . 

And i shall now make you my last witnesses , and ask you whether you came not hither by my writs , directed to the several sheriffs ? and so to other officers in cities , and liberties , to which the persons gave obedience : having also had the act : of government communicated to them : to which end great numbers of copies were sent down , on purpose to be communicated to them ; and the government also required , to be distinctly read un . to the persons at the place of elections , to avoid surprises ; where also they signed the indenture , with proviso , that the persons so chosen shall not have power to alter the government , as it is now settled ; in one single person and a parliament . 

And thus i have made good my second assertion , that i bear not witness to myself ; but the good persons of England , and you all are my witnesses . 

Yea surely , and this being so , though i told you in my last speech , that you were a free parliament ; yet i thought it was understood , that i was the protector , and the authority that called you , and that i was in possession of the government by a good right from God and men . And i believe , if the learnedest men in this nation were called to show a precedent so clear , so many ways approving of a government ; they would not in all their search find it . 

I did not in my other speech to you take upon me to justify the government in every particular ; and i told you the reason of it ; which was plain . It was public ; and had been long published ; and it Might be under the most serious inspection of all that pleased to peruse it . 

By what i have said , i have approved myself to God , and my conscience , in my actions ; and in this undertaking . And i have given cause of approving myself to every one of your consciences in the sight of God . 

If it be so , why should we sport with it ? with a business thus serious ? May not this character , this stamp , bear equal poise with any hereditary interest , which May have , and hath had , in the common law , matters of dispute , and trial of learning ? wherein many have exercised more wit , and spilt more blood , than i hope ever to live to see , or hear of in this nation . 

I say , i do not know why i May not balance this providence , as in the sight of God , with any hereditary interest , as being less subject to those cracks , and flaws , they are commonly incident unto . Which titles have cost more blood , in former times , in this nation , than we have leisure to speak of now . 

Now if this be thus , and i am deriving a title from God and men , upon such accounts as these are : although some men be froward , yet that your judgements , that are persons sent from all parts of the nation , under the notion of acceptance of the government for you to disown , or not to own it ; for you to act parliamentary authority , especially in the disowning of it ; contrary to the very fundamental things ; yea , against the very root itself of this establishment ; to sit and not own the authority by which you fit , is that that i believe astonisheth more men than myself ; and doth as dangerously disappoint , and discompose the nation , as any thing could have been invented by the greatest enemy to our peace and welfare ; or could well have happened . 

It is true , there are some things in the establishment , that are fundamental : and some things are not so , but are circumstantial . Of such , no question but i shall easily agree to vary , or leave out , as i shall be convinced by reason . Some things are fundamentals , about which i shall deal plainly with you , they May not be parted with ; but will ( I trust ) be delivered over to posterity , as being the fruits of our blood and travel . 

The government by a single person and a parliament , is a fundamental ; it is the esse . it is constitutive . And for the person , though i May seem to plead for myself , yet i do not , no nor can any reasonable man say it . But if the things throughout this speech be true , i plead for this nation , and all honest men therein , who have born their testimony , as aforesaid , and not for myself . And if things should do otherwise , than well , which i would not fear ; and the common enemy , and discontented persons take advantage at these distractions , the issue will be put up before God , let him own , or let him disown it , as he please . 

In every government there must be somewhat fundamental , somewhat like a magna charta , that should be standing , and be unalterable . Where there is a stipulation on one part , and that fully accepted , as appears by what hath been said ; surely a return ought to be : else what does that stipulation signify ? If i have upon the terms aforesaid undertaken this great trust , and exercised it , and by it called you , surely it ought to be owned . 

That parliaments should not make themselves perpetual , is a fundamental . Of what assurance is a law to prevent so great an evil , if it lie in one or the same legislator to unlaw it again ? Is this like to be lasting ? It will be like a rope of sand ; it will give no security . For the same men May unbuild , what they have built . 

Is not liberty of conscience in religion a fundamental ? so long as there is liberty of conscience for the supreme magistrate , to exercise his conscience in erecting what form of church-government he is satisfied , he should set up ; why should not he give it to others ? Liberty of conscience is a natural right : and he that would have it ought to give it ; having liberty to settle what he likes for the public . 

Indeed that hath been one of the vanities of our contests . Every sect saith , oh! give me liberty , but give him it , and to his power he will not yield it to any else . Where is our ingenuity ? Truly that 's a thing ought to be very reciprocal . The magistrate hath his supremacy , and he May settle religion according to his conscience . And i May say it to you : i can say it ; all the money of this nation , would not have tempted men to fight , upon such an account as they have engaged , if they had not had hopes of liberty , better than they had from episcopacy ; or then would have been afforded them , from a Scottish presbytery , or an English either ; if it had made such steps , or been as sharp , and rigid , as it threatened when it was first set up . 

This , i say , is a fundamental . It ought to be so : it is for us , and the generations to come . And if there be an absoluteness in the imposer , without fitting allowances , and exceptions from the rule , we shall have our persons driven into wildernesses ; as they were when those poor , and afflicted persons , that forsook their estates , and inheritances here , where they lived plentifully and comfortably , for the enjoyment of their liberty , and were necessitated to go into a vast howling wilderness in new England , where they have for liberty sake stripped themselves of all their comfort , and the full enjoyment they had , embracing rather loss of friends , and want , then to be so ensnared , and in bondage . 

Another , which i had forgotten , is the militia , that 's judged a fundamental , if any thing be so . That it should be well and equally placed , is very necessary . For put the absolute power of the militia into one without a check , what doth it ? I pray you , what doth your check put upon your perpetual parliaments , if it be wholly stripped of this ? It is equally placed , and desires were to have it so ( viz. ) in one person , and the parliament , sitting the parliament . What signifies a provision against perpetuating of parliaments , if this be solely in them ? Whether without a check the parliament have not liberty to alter the frame of government , to aristocracy , to democracy , to anarchy , to any thing , if this be fully in them ? Yea into all confusion , and that without remedy ? And if this one thing be placed in one , that one , be it parliament , be it supreme governor , they , or he hath power to make what they please of all the rest . 

Therefore , if you would have a balance at all ; and that some fundamentals must stand , which May be worthy to be delivered over to posterity ; truly , i think , it is not unreasonably urged , that the militia should be disposed , as it is laid down in the government : and that it should be so equally placed , that one person , neither in parliament , nor out of parliament , should have the power of ordering it . The council are the trustees of the commonwealth , in all intervals of parliaments ; who have as absolute a negative upon the supreme officer in the said intervals , as the parliament hath whilst it is sitting . It cannot be made use of : a man cannot be raised ; nor a penny charged upon the persons ; nothing done without consent of parliament and in the intervals of parliament , without consent of the council , it is not to be exercised . 

Give me leave to say , that there is very little power , none but what is coordinate , in the supreme officer ; and yet enough in him that hath the chief government , in that particular , he is bound in strictness by the parliament , out of parliament by the council , that do as absolutely bind him , as the parliament , when the parliament is sitting . 

For that of money ; i told you some things are circumstantials . To have two hundred thousand pounds , to defray civil officers , to pay the judges , and other officers , defraying the charges of the council , in sending their embassies , in keeping intelligence , and doing that that 's necessary , and for supporting the governor in chief : all this is by the instrument supposed and intended ; but it is not of the esse so much , and so limited , as so many soldiers , 30000 , twenty thousand foot , and ten thousand horse . If the spirits of men be composed five thousand horse , and ten thousand foot , May serve . These things are between the chief officer , and the parliament , to be moderated , as occasion shall offer . 

So there are many other circumstantial things , which are not like the laws of the Medes and Persians' ; but the things which shall be necessary to deliver over to posterity , these should be unalterable , else every succeeding parliament , will be disputing to change , and alter the government , and we shall be as often brought into confusion , as we have parliaments , and so make our remedy our disease . The Lord's providence , appearing evils , appearing good , and better judgement , will give occasion for the ordering of things , for the best interest of the persons . And those things are the matter of consideration between you and me . 

I have indeed almost tired myself . That that i have further to say , is this , i would it had not been needful for me to have called you hither to have expostulated these things with you , and in such a manner as this is : but necessity hath no law . Feigned necessities , imaginary necessities are the greatest cozenage that men can put upon the providence of God , and make pretences to break known rules by . But it is as legal , and as carnal , and as stupid , to think that there are no necessities , that are manifest necessities : because necessities May be abused or feigned , and truly i should be so , if i should think so , and i hope none of you think so . 

I say , that the wilful throwings away of this government , such as it is , so owned by God , so approved by men , so testified to , in the fundamentals of it , as is beforementioned , and that in relation to the good of these nations , and posterity ; i can sooner be willing to be rolled into my grave , and buried with infamy , than i can give my consentunto . 

You have been called hither together to save a nation ; — nations . You had the best persons indeed in the Christian world in your trust , when you came hither . You had affairs , and these nations delivered over to you in peace and quietness : you were , and we all were put into an uninterrupted possession , no making title to us . Through the blessing of God our enemies were hopeless and scattered . We had peace at home : peace almost with all neighbours round about : fit to take advantages where God did administer them . 

To have our peace and interest , that had those hopes the other day , thus shaken , and under such a confusion ; and we rendered hereby ( Almost ) the scorn and contempt of those strangers that are amongst us , to negotiate their Master's affairs ; to give them opportunity to see our nakedness , as they do , a persons that have been unhinged this twelve years day , and unhinged still ; as if scattering , division , and confusion should come upon us ( As if it were desired ) which are the greatest plagues God ordinarily lays upon nations for sin : i would be loath to say , they are matters of our delight : but if not , why not the matter of our care , so wisely as we ought by uttermost endeavours to avoid ? Nay , when by such actions , as these are , these poor nations shall be thrown into heaps of confusion , through blood , and ruin , and trouble , upon the saddest account that ever was , if breaking should come upon us , and all because we would not settle when we Might ; when God put it into our hands : your affairs now almost settled everywhere : and to have all recoil upon us , and we ourselves shaken in our affections , loosened from all known and public interests , as i have mentioned to you : who shall answer for these things to God ? Who can answer for these things to God , or to men ? To the persons that sent you hither ? Who looked for refreshment from you ; who looked for nothing but peace , and quietness , and rest , and settlement . And when we shall come to give an account to them , we shall be able to say ; oh! we have quarrelled for , and we contested for the liberty of England . wherein forsooth for the liberty of the persons ? I appeal to the Lord , that the desires and endeavours , and the things themselves will speak for themselves ; that the liberty of England ; the liberty of the persons ; the avoiding of tyrannous impositions , either upon men as men , or Christians as Christians , is made so safe by this act of settlement , that it will speak sufficiently for itself . 

And when it shall appear what hath been said , and done ; and what our transactions have been : for God can discover , and no privilege will hinder the Lord from discovering , no privilege or condition of men can hide from the Lord : he can , and will make all manifest , if he see it for his glory . And when these shall by the providence of God be manifested , and the persons shall come and say , gentlemen , what condition are we in ? We hoped for light , and behold darkness obscure darkness ! We hoped for rest , after ten years civil wars : we are plunged into deep confusion again . Ay , we know these consequences will come upon us , if God almighty shall not find out some way to prevent them . 

I had this thought within myself . That it had not been dishonest , nor dishonourable , nor against true liberty , no not of parliaments ; when a parliament was so chosen , in pursuance of , in conformity to , and with such an approbation , and consent to the government , so that he that runs Might read by what authority you came hither : that an owning of your call , and of the authority bringing you hither , Might have been required before your entrance into the house . 

But this was declined , and hath not been done , bccause i am persuaded scarce any man could reasonably doubt you came with contrary minds . And i have reason to believe , the persons that sent you , least doubted thereof at all . And therefore i must deal plainly with you.  What i forbore upon a just confidence at first , you necessitate me unto now . — that seeing the authority calling you is so little valued , and so much slighted , till some such assurance be given , and made known ; that the fundamental interest of the government , be settled , and approved , according to the proviso contained in the return ; and such a consent testified , as will make it appear , that the same is accepted , i have caused a stop to be put to your entrance into the parliament house . 

I am sorry , i am sorry , and i could be sorry to the death , that there is cause for this . But there is cause . And if things be not satisfied , that are reasonably demanded . I for my part shall do that that becomes me , seeking my council from God . 

There is therefore somewhat to be offered to you , that i hope will ( Being understood with the qualifications that i have told you of : reforming circumstantials , and agreeing in the substance and fundamentals ( Which is , the government settled , as it is expressed in the indenture ) not to be altered ; the making of your minds known in that , by giving your assent and subscription to it ; is that , that will ) let you in , to act those things as a parliament , which are for the good of the persons . And this thing showed to you , and signed , as aforesaid , doth determine the controversy ; and May give a happy progress , and issue to this parliament . 

The place where you May come thus , and sign , as many as God shall make free thereunto , is in the lobby without the parliament door . 

The government doth declare , that you have a legislative power without a negative from me . As the government doth express , you May make any laws ; and if i give not my consent within twenty days , to the passing your laws , they are ipso facto laws , whether i consent , or no , if not contrary to the government . You have an absolute legislative power in all things that can possibly concern the good , and interest of the public . And i think you May make these nations happy by this settlement : and i for my part shall be willing to be bound more than i am , in any thing that i May be convinced of , May be for the good of the persons ; in preservation of the cause and interest so long contended for . 

Finis . 







