His highness the Lord protectors two speeches to the parliament in the painted chamber ; the one on Monday the 4. of September ; the other on Tuesday the 12. of September , 1654.  

Taken by one who stood very near him , and published to prevent mistakes . 

Printed at London , and reprinted at Leith , 1654.  

His highness the Lord protectors speech to the parliament , in the painted-chamber , on Monday , the fourth of sept. 1654.  

Gentlemen , 

You are met here on the greatest occasion , that i believe England ever saw : having upon your shoulders the interest of three great nations , with the territories belonging to them . And truly ( I believe ) i May say it without an hyperbole , you have upon your shoulders the interest of all the Christian persons in the world . And the expectation is , that i should let you know ( As far as i have cognizance of it ) the occasion of your assembling together at this time . 

It hath been very well hinted to you this day , that you come hither to settle the interests before mentioned : for , it will be made of so large extension in the issue and consequence of it . 

In the way and manner of my speaking to you , i shall study plainness ; and to speak to you what is truth , and what is upon my heart , and what will in some measure reach to these concernments . 

After so many changes and turnings which this nation hath laboured under , to have such a day of hope as this is , and such a door of hope opened by God to us ; truly , ( I believe ) some months since , would have been above all our thoughts . 

I confess it would have been worthy of such a meeting as this is , to have remembered that which was the rise , and gave the first beginning to all those turnings and tossings that have been upon these nations : and to have given you a series of the transactions ( Not of men , but ) of the providence of God , all along unto our late changes : as also the ground of our first undertaking to oppose that usurpation and tyranny that was upon us , both in civils and spirituals : and the several grounds particularly applicable to the several changes that have been . 

But i have two or three reasons which divert me from such a way of proceeding at this time . If i should have gone in that way , that which is upon my heart to have said ( Which is written there , that if i would blot it our , i could not ) would have spent this day : the providences and dispensations of God have been so stupendous . As David said in the like case : many , oh Lord my God , are thy wonderful works which thou hast done : and thy thoughts which are to usward , they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee : if i would declare and speak of them , they are more than can be numbered . 

Truly , another reason , new to me , you had to day in the sermon . Much recapitulation of providence ; much allusion to a state , and dispensation in respect of discipline and correction ; of mercies and deliverances ; the only parallel of God's dealing with us , that i know in the world : which was largely and wisely held forth to you this day : Israel's bringing out of Egypt , through a wilderness , by many signs and wonders , towards a place of rest ; i say towards it . And that having been so well remonstrated to you this day , is another argument why . I shall not trouble you with recapitulation of those things : though they are things , that ( I hope ) will never be forgotten ; because written in better books than those of paper ; i am persuaded , written in the heart of every good man . 

The third reason was this , that which i judge to be the end of your meeting ; the great end ; which was likewise remembered to you this day ; to wit , healing , and settling . And the remembering transactions too particularly , perhaps instead of healing ( At least in the hearts of many of you ) May set the wound fresh a-bleeding . 

I must profess this to you ( What ever thoughts pass upon me ) that if this day , that is , this meeting prove not healing , what shall we do ? But as i said before , seeing ( I trust ) it is in the minds of you all , and much more in the mind of God , which must cause healing : it must be first in his mind ; and he being pleased to put it into yours , it will be a day indeed ; and such a day , as generations to come will bless you for . I say for this , and the other reasons have i forborn to make a particular remembrance , and enumeration of things , and of the manner of the Lords bringing us thorough so many changes and turnings as have passed upon us . 

Howbeit , i think it will be more than necessary , to let you know ( At the least so well as i May ) in what condition this ; nay , these nations were , when this government was undertaken . 

For order sake . it 's very natural for us to consider , what our condition was in civils ; in spirituals . What was our condition ? Every man's hand ( Almost ) was against his brother ; at least , his heart . Little regarding any thing that should cement , and Might have a tendency in it to cause us to grow into one . All the dispensations of God , his terrible ones , ( He having met us in the way of his judgement in a ten years civil war , a very sharp one ; ) his merciful dispensations , they did not , they did not work upon us : but we had our humours , and interests : and indeed i fear our humours were more than our interests , and certainly , as it fell out in such cases , our passions were more than our judgements . 

Was not every thing ( Almost ) grown arbitrary ? Who knew where , or how to have right without some obstruction or other intervening ? Indeed we were almost grown arbitrary in every thing . 

What was the face that was upon out affairs as to the interest of the nation ? to the authority of the nation ? to the magistracy ? to the ranks , and orders of men , whereby England hath been known for hundred of years ? A nobleman , a gentleman , a yeoman ? ( That is a good interest of the nation , and a great one . ) The magistracy of the nation , was it not almost trampled under foot , under despite , and contempt , by men of levelling principles ? 

I beseech you for the orders of men , and ranks of men ; did not that levelling principle tend to the reducing all to an equality ? Did it think to do so ? or did it practise towards it , for propriety and interest ? What was the design , but to make the tenant as liberal a fortune as the landlord ? which i think if obtained , would not have lasted long . The men of that principle , after they had served their own turns , would have cried up interest , and property then fast enough . 

This instance is in stead of many , and that it May appear that this thing did extend far , is manifest ; because it was a pleasing voice to all poor men , and truly not unwelcome to all bad men . To my thinking it is a consideration , that in your endeavours after settlement , you will be so well minded of , that i Might well have spared this ; but let that pass . 

Indeed in spiritual things , the case was more sad , and deplorable ; and that was told to you this day eminently . The prodigious blasphemies , contempt of God and Christ , denying of him , contempt of him and his ordinances , and of the scriptures : a spirit visibly acting those things foretold by Peter , and Jude ; yea , those things spoken of by Paul to Timothy : who when he would remember some things to be worse than the Antichristian state , of which he had spoken in the first to Timothy , tells them what should be the lot , and portion of the last times , and says , in the last days perilous times should come , for men should be lovers of their own selves , covetous , boasters , proud , blasphemers , disobedient to parents , unthankful &c. and when he remembers that of the Antichristian state , he tells them , that in the latter days , that state shall come in , wherein there shall be a departing from the faith , and a giving head to seducing spirits , and doctrines of devils , speaking lies in hypocrisy , &c. by which description he makes the state of the last times , worse than that under Antichrist . And surely it May well be feared these are our times : for when men forget all rules of law and nature , and break all the bonds that fallen man hath upon him , the remainder of the image of God in his nature , which he cannot blot out , and yet shall endeavour to blot out , having a form of godliness , without the power ; these are sad stokens of the last times . 

And indeed the character , wherewith this spirit , and principle is described in that place , is so Legiole , and visible , that he that runs May read it to be amongst us : for by such the grace of God is turned into wantonness 〈◊〉 and Christ , and the spirit of God , made the cloak of all villainy , and spurious apprehensions . And although these things will not be owned publicly , as to practise , ( They being so abominable , and 〈◊〉 : ) yet how this principle extends itself and whence it had its rise , makes me to think of a second sort of men ; who , its true , as i said , will not practise , nor own these things ; yet 〈◊〉 tell the magistrate , that he hath nothing to do with men thus holding in for these are matters of conscience , and opinion ; they are matters of religion ; what hath the magistrate to do with these things ? he is to look to the outward man , but not to meddle with the inward . And truly it so happens , that though these things do break out visibly to all , yet the principle wherewith these things are carried on , so forbids the magistrate to meddle with them , as it hath hitherto kept the offenders from punishment . 

Such considerations , and pretensions of liberty ; liberty of conscience , and liberty of subjects two as glorious , things to be contended for , as any God hath given us ; yet both these also abused for the patronising of villainies ; in so much as that it hath been an ordinary thing to say , and in dispute to affirm , that it was not in the magistrates power ; he had nothing to do with it ; not so much as the printing a bible to the nation for the use of the persons , lost it be imposed upon the consciences of men ; for they must receive the same traditionally , and implicitly , from the power of the magistrate , if thus received . 

The aforementioned abominations , did thus swell to this height amongst us . 

The axe was laid to the root of the ministry . It was Antichristian : it was Babylonish . It suffered under such a judgement ; that the truth of it is , as the extremity was great on that , i wish it prove not so on this hand . The extremity was , that no man having a good testimony , having received gifts from Christ Might preach , if not ordained . So now , many are on the other hand , that he who is ordained , hath a nullity , or Antichristianism stamped upon his calling ; so that he ought not to preach , or not be heard . 

I wish it May not too to justly be said , that there was severity and sharpness ; yea , too much of an in posing spirit in matter of conscience ; a spirit unchristian enough in any times , most unfit for these ; denying liberty to those who have earned it with their blood , who have gained civil liberty and religious also , for those who would thus impose upon them . 

We May reckon among these our spiritual evils , an evil that hath more refinedness in it , and more colour for it ; and hath deceived more persons of integrity than the rest , have done : for few have been catched with the former m•st•keses , but such as have apostatised from their holy profession ; such as being corrupt in their : consciences , have been forsaken by God , and left to such noisome opinions , but i say , there are others more refined : many honest persons , whose hearts , are sincere ; many of them belonging to God : and that is the mistaken notion of the fifth monarchy . A thing pretending more spiritually , than any thing else : a notion i hope , we all honour , wait , and hope for ; that Jesus Christ will have a time to set up his reign in our hearts , by subduing those corruptions , and lusts , and evils that are there , which reign now more in the world , than i hope , in due time they shall do ; and when more falness of the spirit is poured forth to subdue iniquity , and bring in everlasting righteousness , then will the approach of that glory be . The carnal divisions , and contentions amongst Christians so common , are not the symtoms of that kingdom . 

But for men to entitle themselves , upon this principle , that they are the only men to rule kingdoms , govern nations , and give laws to persons ; to determine of property , and liberty , and every thing else , upon such a pretence as this is : truly , they had need give clear manifestations of God's presence with them , before wise men will receive , or submit to their conclusions . Besides , certainly though many of these men have good meanings , as i hope in my soul they have , yet it will be the wisdom of all knowing and experienced Christians to do as Jude saith , ( When he had reckoned up those horrible things done upon pretences , and haply by some upon mistakes , ) of some , says he , have compassion , making a difference ; others save with fear , pulling them out of the fire . ( I fear they will give opportunity too often for this exercise , ) and i hope the same will be for their good . 

If men do but pretend for justice and righteousness ; and be of peaceable spirits ; and will manifest this ; let them be the subjects of the magistrates encouragement . And if the magistrate by punishing visible miscarriages , save them by that discipline ; ( God having ordained him for that end , ) i hope it will evidence love , and no hatred , to punish where there is cause . 

Indeed this is that which doth most declare the danger of that spirit ; for if these were but notions , i mean the instances that i have given you both of civil considerations and spiritual ; if i say they were but notions , they were to be let alone . Notions will hurt none but them that have them . But when they come to such practices , as to tell us , that liberty and property , are not the badges of the kingdom of Christ ; and tell us , that instead of regulating laws , laws are to be abrogated , indeed subverted ; and perhaps would bring in the judicial law , instead of our known laws settled amongst us : this is worthy of every magistrates consideration : especially where every stone is turned to bring confusion . I think , i say , this will be worthy of the magistrates consideration . 

Whilst these things were in the midst of us ; and the nation rent and torn in spirit , and principle , from one end to another , after this sort and manner i have now told you ; family against family ; husband against wife ; parents against children ; and nothing in the hearts and minds of men , but overturning , overturning , overturning : ( A scripture very much abused , and applied to justify unpeaceable practices , by all men of discontented spirits ) the common adversary in the mean time he sleeps not , and our adversaries in civil , and spiritual respects , did take advantages at these divisions , and distractions , and did practice accordingly in the three nations , of England , Scotland , and Ireland . 

We know very well , that emissaries of the Jesuits never came in those swarms , as they have done since these things were set on foot . And i tell you , that divers gentlemen here , can bear witness with me , how that they have had a consistory abroad , that rules all the affairs of things in England , from an arch Bishop , with other dependants upon him . And they had fixed in England ( Of which we are able to produce the particular instruments in most of the limits of the cathedrals , ) an episcopal power , with arch-deacons , &c.  And had persons authorised to exercise and distribute those things , who pervert and deceive the persons . And all this while , we were in this sad , and , as i said , deplorable condition . 

In the mean time all endeavours possible were used to hinder the work in Ireland , and the progress of the work of God in Scotland , by continual intelligences , and correspondencies , both at home and abroad ; from hence into Ireland , and from hence into Scotland , persons were stirred up , and encouraged from these divisions , and discomposure of affairs , to do all they could to encourage , and foment the war in both these places . 

To add yet to our misery ; whilst we were in this condition , we were in war , deeply engaged in a war with the Portugal ; whereby our trade ceased , and the evil consequences by that war , were manifest , and very considerable . 

And not only this , but we had a war with Holland , consuming our treasure ; occasioning a vast burden upon the persons . A war that cost this nation full as much as the taxes came unto ; the navy being one hundred and sixty ships ; which cost this nation above one hundred thousand pounds a month , besides the contingencies ; which would make it fixscore thousand pounds a month . That very one war did engage us to so great a charge . 

At the same time also we were in a war with France . the advantages that were taken at the discontents , and divisions among ourselves , did also foment that war ; and at least hinder us of an honourable peace ; every man being confident we could not hold out long . And surely they did not calculate amiss , if the Lord had not been exceeding gracious to us . 

I say at the same time we had a war with France . and besides . the sufferings , in respect of the trade of the nation ; it 's most evident , that the purse of the nation had not been possibly able longer to bear it ; by reason of the advantages taken by other states , to improve their own ; and spoil our manufacture of cloth , and hinder the vent thereof ; which is the great staple commodity of this nation . 

This was our condition : spoilt in our trade ; and we at this vast expense ; thus dissettled at home ; and haying these engagements abroad . 

These things being thus ; ( As i am persuaded it is not hard to convince every person here , they were thus , ) what a heap of confusions were upon these poor nations ? And either things must have been left to have sunk into the miseries these premises would suppose , or a remedy must be applied . 

A remedy hath been applied : that hath been this government : a thing that i shall say little unto . The thing is open and visible to be seen and read by all men ; and therefore let it speak for itself . 

Only let me say this , because i can speak it with comfort and confidence , before a greater than you all ; that is , before the Lord , that in the intention of it , as to the approving our hearts to God , let men judge as they please : it is calculated for the interest of the persons : for the interest of the persons alone : and for their good , without respect had to any other interest . And if that be not true , i shall be bold to say again , let it fpeak for itself . 

Truly , i May ( I hope humbly before God , and modestly before you ) say somewhat on the behalf of the government : that is , ( Not to discourse of the particular heads of it , ) to acquaint you a little with the effects of it : and that not for ostentation sake , but to the end that i May deal at this time faithfully with you , by acquainting you with the state of things ; and what proceedings have been upon this government ; that so you May know the state of our affairs . This is the main end of my putting you to this trouble . 

It hath had some things in desire . And it hath done some things actually . It hath desired to reform the laws , to reform them ; and for that end , it hath called together persons ( Without reflection ) of as great ability , and as great integrity as are in these nations , to consider how the laws Might be made plain and short , and less chargeable to the persons ; how to lessen expense for the good of the nation , and those things are in preparation , and bills prepared , which in due time i make no question will be tendered to you . There hath been care taken to put the administration of the laws into the hands of just men ; men of the most known integrity and ability . 

The chancery hath been reform ; and i hope to the just satisfaction of all good men . And the things depending there , which made the burden and work of the honourable persons entrusted in those services , beyond their ability ; it hath referred many of them to those places where English men love to have their rights tried , the courts of law at Westminster . 

It hath endeavoured to put a stop to that heady way ( Touched of likewise this day ) of every man making himself a minister , and a preacher . It hath endeavoured to settle a way for the approbation of men of piety and ability for the discharge of that work . And i think i May say , it hath committed that work to the trust of persons both of the Presbyterian and independent judgements , men of as known ability , piety , and integrity , as i believe any this nation hath . And i believe also , that in that care they have taken , they have laboured to approve themselves to Christ , the nation , and their own consciences . And indeed i think if there be any thing of quarrel against them , it is , ( Though i am not here to justify the proceedings of any ) i say it is , that they go upon such a character as the scripture warrants , to put men into that great employment ; and to approve men for it , who are men that have received gifts from him that ascended up on high , and gave gifts for the work of the ministry , and for the edifying of the body of Christ . 

It hath taken care , we hope , for the expulsion of all those who May be judged any way unfit for this work ; who are scandalous , and who are the common scorn and contempt of that administration . 

One thing more this government hath done . It hath been instrumental to call a free parliament : which , blessed be God , we see here this day : i say a free parliament . And that it May continue so , i hope is in the heart and spirit of every good man in England , save such disconted persons as i have formerly mentioned . It is that which as i have desired above my life , i shall desire to keep it so , above my life . 

I did before mention to you the plunges we were in , in respect of foreign states ; by the war with Portugal , France , with the Dutch , the Dane ; and the little assurance we had from any of our neighbours round about . I perhaps forgot it , but indeed it was a caution upon my mind , and i desire that it Might be so understood ; that if any good hath been done , it was the Lord , nor we his poor instruments . 

I did instance in the wars which did exhaust your treasure ; and put you into such a condition , that you must have sunk therein , if it had continue but a few months longer . This i dare affirm , if strong probability can give me a ground . 

You have now ( Though it be not the first in time ) peace with Sweathland ; an honourable peace , through the endeavours of an honourable person here present , as the instrument ; i say you have an honourable peace with a kingdom that not many years since was much a friend to France ; and lately perhaps inclinable enough to the Spaniard . and i believe you expect not very much good from any of your Catholic neighbours : nor yet that they would be very willing you should have a good understanding with your Protestant friends . Yet thanks be to God that peace is concluded ; and as i said before , it is an honourable peace . 

You have a peace with the Dane : a state that lay contiguous to that part of this island which hath given us the most trouble . And certainly if your enemies abroad be able to annoy you , it is likely they will take their advantage where it best lies to give you trouble there . But you have a peace there ; and an honourable one : satisfaction for your merchant ships , not only to their content , but to their rejoicing . I believe you will easily know it is so . 

You have the sound open , which was obstructed . That which was , and is the strength of this nation , the shipping will now be supplied thence . And whereas you were glad to have any thing of that kind at the second hand , &c.  You have all manner of commerce , and at as much freedom as the Dutch themselves there , and at the same rates and toll ; and i think i May say , by that peace , they cannot raise the same upon you . 

You have a peace with the Dutch ; a peace unto which i shal1s say little ; because so well known in the benefit and consequences of it . And i think it was as desirable and as acceptable to the spirit of this nation as any one thnig that lay before us . And , as i believe , nothing so much gratified our enemies as to see us at odds ; so , i persuade myself nothing is of more terror nor trouble to them , then to see us thus reconciled . 

As a peace with the Protestant states hath much security in it ; so it hath as much of honour , and of assurance to the Protestant interest abroad , without which no assistance can be given thereunto . I wish it May be written upon our hearts to be zealous for that interest : for if ever it were like to come under a condition of suffering it is now . 

In all the Emperor's patrimonial territories , the endeavour is , to drive them out as fast as they can . And they are necessitated to run to Protestant states to seek their bread . And by this conjunction of interests i hope you will be in a more fit capacity to help them . And it begets some reviving of their spirits that you will help them as opportunity shall serve . You have a peace likewise with the crown of Portugal , which peace though it hung long in hand ; yet is lately concluded . It is a peace that your metchants make us believe is of good concernment to their trade ; their assurance being greater , and so their profit in trade thither , then to other places . And this hath been obtained in that treaty ; ( Which never was since the inquisition was sir up there , ) that our persons which trade thither have liberty of conscience . 

( Indeed peace is as you were well told to day ) desirable with all men , as far as it my be had with conscience and honour . 

We are upon a treaty with France . and we May say this , that if God give us honour in the eyes of the nations about us , we have rason to bless him for it , and so to own it . And i dare say that there is not a nation in Europe , but they are very willing to ask a good understanding with you . 

I am sorry i am thus tedious ; but i did judge that it was somewhat necessary to acquaint you with these things . And things being thus , i hope you will be willing to hear a little again of the sharp , as well as the sweet . And i should not be faithful to you , nor to the interest these nations which you and i serve , if i should not let you know all . 

As i said before , when this government was under taken , we were in the midst of these divisions , and animosities , and scatterings ; also thus engaged with these enemies round about us ; at such a vast charge ; sixscore thousand pounds a month for the very fleet ; ( Which was the very utmost penny of your assessments ) i , and then all your treasure was exhausted and spent , when this government was undertaken ; all accidental ways of bringing in treasure , to a very inconsiderable sum consumed ; that is to say , the lands are sold , the treasures spent ; rents , fee-farms , Kings , Queens , Princes , Bishops , Dean and chapters , delinquents lands sold . These were spent when this government was undertaken . 

I think it is my duty to let you know so much . And that 's the reason why the taxes do yet lie so heavy upon the persons , of which we have abated thirty thousand pounds a month , for the next three months . Truly , i thought it my duty to let you know , that though God hath dealt thus with you , yet these are but entrances and doors of hope , wherein through the blessing of God you May cuter into rest and peace . But you are not yet entered . 

You were told to day of a persons brought out of Egypt , towards the land of Canaan ; but through unbelief , murmuring , repining , and other temptations and sins , wherewith God was provoked , they were fain to come back again , and linger many years in the wilderness , before they came to the place of rest . 

We are thus far through the mercy of God . We have cause to take notice of it , that we are not brought into misery ; but as i said before , a door of hope open . And i May say this to you , if the Lord's blessing and his presence go along with the management of affairs at this meeting , you will be enabled to put the top-stone to this work , and make the nation happy . But this must be by knowing the true state of affair , that you are yet like the persons under circumcision , but raw , your peace's are but newly made . And it is a maxim not to be despised , though peace be made , yet it is interest that keeps peace . And i hope you will trust it no further than you see interest upon it . And therefore i wish that you May go forward , and not backward , and that you May have the blessings of God upon your endeavours . It's one of the great ends of calling this parliament , that this ship of the commonwealth May be brought into a safe harbour : which i assure you it will not well be , without your counseil and advice . 

You have great works upon your hands . You have Ireland to look unto , there is not much done towards the planting of it : though some things leading and preparing for it are . It is a great business to setele the government of that nation upon fit terms , such as will bear that work through . 

Yet have had i kewise laid before you the considerations intimating your peace with some foreign status ; but yet you have not made peace with all . And if they should see we do not manage our affairs as with that wisdom which becomes us , truly we May sink under disadvantages for all that 's done ; and our enemies will have their eyes open , and be revived , if they see animosities amongst us ; which indeed will be their great advantage . 

I do therefore perfwade you to a sweet , gracious , and holy understanding of one another , and of your business , concerning which you had so good Coussell this day ; that indeed , as it rejoiced my heart to hear it , so i hope the Lord will imprint it upon your spirits , wherein you shall have my prayers . Having sa•d this , and perhaps omitted many other material things through the frailty of my memory i shall exercise plainness and freeness with you , in telling you that i have not spoken shese things as one that assumes to himself dominion over you , but as one that doth resolve to be a fellow-servant with you , to the interest of these great affairs , and of the persons of these nations . I shall therefore trouble you no longer , but desire you to repair to your house , and to exercise your own liberty in the choice of a speaker , that so you May lose no time in carrying on your work . 

His highness the Lord protectors speech to the parliament in the painted chamber , on Tuesday the 12. of September , 1654.  

Gentlemen , 

It is not long since i met you in this place , upon an occasion which gave me much more content and comfort then this doth . 

That which i have to say to you now , will need no preamble to let me in to my discourse : for the occasion of this meeting is plain enough , i could have wished with all my heart there had been no cause for it . 

At that meeting i did acquaint you what the first rise was of this government which hath called you hither , and in the authority of which you came hither . 

Among other things that i told you of then , i said you were a free parliament : and so you are whilst you own the government and authority that called you hither . For certainly that word employed a reciprocation , or it employed nothing at all . 

Indeed there was a reciprocation implied and expressed : and i think your actions and carriages ought to be suitable . 

But i see it will be necessary for me now , a little to magnify my office , which i have not been apt to do . I have been of this mind , i have been always of this mind since first i entered upon it , that if God will not bear it up , let it sink . But if a duty be incumbent upon me , ro bear my testimony unto it , ( Which in modesty i have hitherto forborn ) i am in some measure now necessitated thereunto . And therefore that will be the prologue to my discourse . 

I called not myself to this place ; i say again , i called not myself to this place ; of that God is witness . And i have many witnesses , who i do believe could readily lay down their lives to bear witness to the truth of that : that is to say , that i called not myself to this place . And being in it , i bear not witness to myself : but God and the persons of these nations have born testimony to it also . 

If my cilling be from God , and my testimony from the persons ; God and the persons shall take it from me , else i will not part with it . I should be false to the trust that God hath placed upon me , and to the interest of the persons of these nations , if i should . 

That i called not myself to this place , is my first assertion . 

That i bear not witness to myself , but have many witnesses is my second . 

These are the two things i shall take the liberty to speak more fully to you of . 

To make plain and clear that which i have said , i must take liberty to look back , 

I was by birth a gentleman , living neither in any considerable height , nor yet in obscurity : i have been called to several employments in the nation : to serve in prliaments : and ( Because i would not be over tedious ) i did endeavour to discharge the duty of an honest man in those services , to God , and his people's interest , and of the commonwealth ; having , when time was ; a competent acceptation in the hearts of men , and some evidences thereof . I resolve not to recite the times and occasions , and opportunities that have been appointed me by God to serve him in : nor the presence and blessings of God bearing then testimony to me . 

I having had some occasions to see ( Together with my brethren and countrymen ) a happy period put to our sharp wars and contests with the them common enemy , hoped in a private capacity to have reaped the fruit , and benefit together with my brethren , of our hard labours and hazards ; to wit , the enjoyment of peace and liberty , and the privileges of a Christian , and of a man , in some equality with others , according as it should please the Lord to dispense unto me . 

And when i say , God had put an end to our wars , at least brought them to a very hopeful issue very near an end , ( After worcester fight ) i came up to London to pay my service , and duty to the parliament that then sat ; and hoping that all minds would have been disposed to answer that which seemed to be the mind of God , ( viz. ) to give pear and rest to his persons ; and especially to those who had bled more than others in the carrying on of the military affairs , i was much disappointed of my expectation : for the issue did not prove so , what ever May be boasted , or misrepresented , it was not so , nor so . 

I can say in the simplicity of my soul , i love not , i love not , ( I declined it in my former speech ) i say , i love not to rake into fares , or to discover nakednesles . That which i drive at , is this ; i say to you , i hoped to have had leave to have retired to a private life : i begged to be dismissed of my charge : i begged it again and again . And God be judge between me and all men if lie in this matter . That i lie not in matter of fast , is known to very many ; but whether i tell a l•e in my heart , as labouring to represent to you that which was not upon my heart , i say the Lord be judge : let uncharitable men that measure others by themselves , judge as they please . As to the matter of fact , i say it is true . As to the ingenuity and integrity of my heart in that desire , i do appeal , as before , upon the truth of that also : but i could not obtain what my soul longed for . And the plain truth is , i did afterwards apprehend , that some did think my judgement not suiting with theirs ) that it could not well be . But this i say to you , was between God and my soul , between me and that assembly . 

I confess i am in some strait , to say what i could say , and what is true of what then followed . 

I pressed the parliament , as a member , to period themselves , once and again , and again , and ten , and twenty times over . I told them ( For i knew it better than any one man in the parliament could know it , because of my manner of life , which was to run up and down the nation , and so Might see and know the temper and spirits of all men , the best of men ) that the nation loathed their sitting : i knew it . And sb far as i could discern , when they were dissolved , there was not so much as the barking of a dog , or any general and visible repining at it . You are not a few here present that can assert this as well as myself . 

And that there was high cause for their dissolving , is most evident , not only in regard there was a just fear of the parliaments perpetuating themselves ; but because it was their design . And had not their heels been trod upon by importunities from abroad , even to threats , i believe there would never have been thoughts of rising , or of going out of that room to the world's end . 

I myself was sounded ; and by no mean persons tempted ; and addresses were made to me to that very end , that it Might have been thus perpetuated , that the vacant places Might be supplied by new elections , and so continue fiom generation to generation . 

I have declined , i have declined very much to open these things to you : yet having proceeded thus far , i must tell you , that poor men under this arbitrary power , were driven like flocks of sheep , by forty in a morning , to the confiscation of goods and estatus , without any man being able to give a reason that two of them had deserved to forfeit a shilling . I tell you the truth , and my soul and many person , whose faces i see in this place were exceedingly grieved at these things , and knew not which way to help it , but by their mournings , and giving their negatives when occasions served . 

I have given you but a taste of miscarriages . I am confident you have had opportunities to hear much more of them : for nothing is more obvious . it 's true , this will be said , that there was a remedy to put an end to this perpetual parliament endeayoured , by having a future representative . How it was gotten , and by what importunities that was obtained , and how unwillingly yielded unto , is well known . 

What was this remedy ? It was a seeming willingness to have successive parliaments . What was that succession ? it was , that when one parliament had left their seat , another was to sit down immediately in the room thereof , without any caution to avoid that which was the danger ; ( viz. ) Perpetuating of the same parliaments ; which is a sore now that will ever be running , so long as men are ambitious and troublesome , if a due remedy be not found . So then , what was the business ; it was a conversion from parliament that should have been , and was perpetual , to a legislative power , always sitting : and so the liberties , and interests , and lives of persons , not judged by any certain known laws and power , but by an arbitrary power , which is incident and necessary to parliaments by an arbytrary power : i say , to make men's estates liable to confiscation , and their persons to imprisonments ; sometimes by laws made after the fact committed : often by takirg the judgement both in capital and criminal things to themselves , who in former times were not known to exercise such a judicature . 

This i suppose was the case ; and in my opinion the remedy was fitted to the disease : especially coming in the rear of a parliament , so cxercising the power and authority as this had done , but immediately before . 

Truly , i confess upon these grounds , and with the satisfaction of divers other persons , seeing nothing could be had otherwise ; that parliament was dissolved , we desiring to see if a few Might have been called together for some short time , who Might put the nation into some way of certain settlement , did call those gentlemen out of the several parts of the nation for that purpose . 

And , as i have appealed to God before you already , i know ( And i hope i May say it , ) though it be a tender thing to make appeals to God ; yet in such exigencies as these , i trust it will not offend his majesty , especially to make them before persons that know God , and know what conscience is , and what it is to lie before the Lord . I say , that as a principal ead in calling that assembly , was the settlement of the nation ; so a chief end to myself was , that i Might have opportunity to lay down the power that was in my hands , i say to you again , in the presence of that God , who hath blessed and been with me in all my adversities and successes , that Waas to myself my greatest end . A desire perhaps ( And i am afraid ) sinful1 enough , to be quit of the power God had most providentially put into my hand , before he called for it ; and before those honest ends of our fighting were attained and settled . I say , the authority i had in my hand , being so boundless as it was , i being by act of parliament general of all the force in the three nations , of England , Scotland and Ireland , ( In which unlimited condition i did not desire to live a day ) did call that meeting for the ends before expressed . 

What the event and issue of that meeting was , we May sadly remember . It hath much teaching in it ; and i hope will make us all wiser for the future . 

But this meettig succeeding , as i have formerly said to you , and giving such a disappointment to our hopes , i shall not now make any repetition thereof ; only the effect was , that they came and brought to me a parchment signed by very much the major part of them , expressing their resigning and redelivery of the power and authority that was committed to them , back again into my hands : and i can say it in the presence of divers persons here , that do know whether i lie in that ; that i did not know one tittle of that resignaton , until they all came and brought it , and delivered it into my hands : of this there are also in this presence many witnesses . 

I received this resignation , having formerly used my endeavours and persuasions to keep them together ; observing their differences , i thought it my duty to give advices to them , that so i Might prevail with them for union : but it had the effect that i told you : and i had my disappointment . 

When this was so , we were exceedingly to seek how to settle things for the future . My power again by this resignation , was as boundless and unlimited as before ; all things being subjected to arbitrariness , and a person having power over the three nations boundlessly , and unlimited ; and upon the matter all government dissolved , all civil administrations at an end ; as will presently be made appear . 

The gentlemen that undertook to frame this government , did consult divers days together , ( They being of known integrity and ability ) how to frame somewhat that Might give us settlement ; and they did so : and that i was not privy to their counsels , they know it . 

When they had finished their model in some measure , or made a very good preparation of it , it became communicative . They told me that except i would undertake the government , they thought things would hardly come to a composure and settlement ; but blood and confusion would break in upon us . I denied it again and again , as God and those persons know , not complementingly as they also know , and as God knows . 

I confess , after many arguments , and after the letting of me know that i did not receive any thing that put me into any higher capacity than i was in before , but that it limited me , and bound my hands to act nothing to the prejud•ce of the nations , without consent of a council until the parliament ; and then limited by the parliament , as the act of government expresseth , i did accept it . 

I Might repeat this again to you if it were needful , but i think i need not . I was arbitrary in power , having the armies in the three nations under my command : and truly not very ill beloved by them ; nor very ill beloved then by the persons , by the good persons ; and i believe i should have been more beloved if they had known the truth , as things were before God , and in themselves ; and before divers of these gentlemen whom i but now mentioned unto you . 

I did , at the entreaty of divers persons of honour and quality ; at theintreaty of very many of the chief officers of the army then present , and at their request , i did accept of the place , and title of protector , and was in the presence of the commissioners of the seal , the judges , the Lord Major and aldermen of the city of London , the soldiery , divers gentlemen , citizens , and divers other persons , and persons of quality , etc accompanied to West , whe•e i took my oath to this government . This was not done in a corner : it was open and public . 

This government hath been exercised by a council , with a desire to be faithful in all things ; and amongst all other trusts , to be faithful in calling this parliament . 

And thus i have given you a very bare and lean discourse ; which truly i have been necessitated unto , and contracted in , because of the unexpectedness of the occasion ; and because i would not quite weary you nor myself . But this is a narrative that discovers to you the series of providence , and of transactions leading me into this condition wherein i now stand . 

The next thing i promised you , wherein i hope i shall not be so long , ( Though i am sure this occasion does require plainness and freedom , ) is , that as i brought not myself into this condition , ( As in my own apprehension i did not ; and that i did not , ( The things being true which i have told you ) i submit it to your judgements , and there shall i leave it , let God do what he pleaseth . ) The other things i say that i am to speak to you of , is , that i have not , nor do not bear witness to myself i am far from alluding to him that said so ; yet truth concerning a member of his he will own , though men do not . 

But i think ( If i mistake not ) i have a cloud of witnesses . I think so , let men be as froward as they will : i have witness within , without , and above . But i shall speak of them that are without , having fully spoken before of the witness above , and the witness in my own conscience , upon the other account ; because that subject had more obscurity in it , and i in some sort needed appeals ; and i trust Might lawfully make them , as well as take an oath , where things were not so apt to be made evident . I shall enumetate my witnesses as well as i can . 

When i had consented to accept of the government , there was some solemnity to be performed ; and that was accompanied with some persons of considerableness in all respects , who were the persons before expressed , who accompanied me at the time of my entering upon this government to West minster hall to take my oath . 

There was an explicit consent of interessed persons , and an implicit consent of many , showing their good liking and approbation thereof . And ( Gentlemen ) i do not think that you are altogether strangers to it in your country : some did not nauseate it : very many did approve it . 

I had the approbation of the officers of the army in the three nations of England , Scotland , and Ireland , i say of the officers , i had that by their remonstrances , and under signature : there was went along with that explicit consent , an implicit consent of persons that had somewhat to do in the world , that had been instrumental by God to sight down the enemes of God and his persons , in the three nations and truly , until my hands were bound , and i limited , ( Wherein i took full contentment , as many can bear me witness , ) when i had in my hands so great a power and arbitrariness , the soldiery were a very considerable part of the nations , especially all government being dissolved : i say , when all government was thus dissolved , and nothing to keep things in order but the sword , and yet they ( Which many histories will not parallel ) even they were desirous that things Might come to a consistency , and arbirrariness Might be taken away , and the government put into a person ( Limited and bounded , as in the act of settlement ) whom they destrusted the least , and loved not the worst : this was another evidence . 

I would not forget the honourable and civil entertainment , with the approbation i found in the great city of London ; which the city knows whether i directly or indirectly sought . And truly i do not think it is folly to remember this : for it was very great and high , and very public ; and as numerous a body of those that are known by names , and t•ttleses , ( The several corporations and societies of citizens in this city , as hath been at any time seen in England , and not without some appearance of satisfaction also . 

I had not only this witness , but i have had from the greatest county in England , and from many cities and boroughs , and many counties , explicit approbations , not of those gathered here and there , but from the county of York and city of York , and other counties and places assembled in their public and general assizes , the grand-jury in the name of the noblemen , gentlemen , yeomen , and inhabitants of that county , giving very great thanks to me for undertaking this heavy Berden at such a time , and giving very great approbation and encouragement to me to go through with it . These are plain . I have them to show . And by these in some measure it will appear , i do not bear witness to myself . 

This is not all : the judges , ( And truly i had almost forgotten it . ) they thinking that there was a dissolution of government , met and consulted , and did declare one to another , that they could not administer justice to the satisfaction of their consciences , until they had received commissions from me : and they did receive commissions from me . And by virtue of those commissions they have acted . And all the justices of the peace that have acted , have acted by virtue of like commissions , which was a little more than an implicit approbation . And i believe , all the justice administered in the nation , hath been by this authority , which also i lay before you , desiring you to think , whether all these persons beforementioned , must not come before you for an act of oblivion and general pardon , who have acted under , and testified to this government , if it be disowned by you . 

I have two or three witnesses more , equivalent to all these i have reckoned , if i be not mistaken , and greatly mistaken , if i should say , all you that are here are my witnesses , i should say no untruth . I know you are the same persons here that you were in the country . But i will reserve to speak to this at the last , for this will be the issue of my speech : i say , i have two or three witnesses that are more than all i have accounted and reckoned before . 

All the persons in England are my witnesses , and many in Ireland and Scotland : all the sheriffs in England are my witnesses , and all that came in upon the process issued out by the sheriffs , are my witnesses : yea , the returns of the elections to the clerk of the crown , not a thing to be blown away with a breath , the returns on the behalf of the inhabitants in the counties , cities and boroughs , all are my witnesses of approbation to the condition and place i stand in . 

And i shall now make you my last witnesses , and ask you whether you came not hither by my writs directed to the several sheriffs ? And so to other officers in cities and liberties , to which the persons gave obedience , having also had the act of government communicated to them , to which end great numbers of copies were sent down on purpose to be communicated to them ; and the government also required to be distinctly read unto the persons at the place of elections , to avoid surprises , where also they signed the indenture , with proviso , that the persons so chosen , shall not have power to alter the government , as it is now settled , in one single person and a parliament . 

And thus i have made good my second assertion , that i bear not witness to myself ; but the good persons of England , and you all are my witnesses . 

Yea surely , and this being so , though i told you in my last speech , that you were a free parliament ; yet i thought it was understood , that i was the protector , and the authority that called you , and that i was in possession of the government by a good right from God and men . And , i beheve , if the learnedest men in this nation were called to to shaw a precedent so clear , so many ways approving of a government ; they would not in all their search find it . 

I did not in my other speech to you take upon me to justify . the government in every particular ; and i told you the reason of it ; which was plain . It was public ; and had been long publi••…ed , and it Might be under the most serious inspection of all that pleased to peruse it . 

By what i have said , i have approved myself to God , and my conscience , in my actions ; and in this undertaking . And i have given cause of approving myself to every one of your consciences in the sight of God . 

If it be so , why should we sport with it ? with a business thus serious ? May not this character , this stamp bear equal poise with iany hereditary interest , which May have , and hath had in the common law , matters of dispute , and trial of learning ? wherein many have exercised more w•t , and spilt more blood than i hope ever to live to see , or hear of in this nation . 

I say , i do not know why i May not balance this providence , as in the sight of God , with any hereditary interest , as being less subject to those cracks and flaws they are commonly incident unto . Which titles have cost more blood in former times in this nation than we have leisure to speak of now . 

Now if this be thus , and i am deriving a title from God and men , upon such accounts as these are : although some men be froward , yet that your judgements that are persons sent from all parts of the nation , under the notion of acceptance of the government , for you to disown , or not to own it ; for you to act parliamentary authority , especially in the disowning of it ; contrary to the very fundamental things ; yea , against the very root itself of this establishment ; to sit and not own the authority by which you sit , is that that i believe astonisheth more men than myself ; and doth as dangerously disappoint and discompose the nation , as any thing could have been invented by the greatest enemy to our peace and welfare ; or could well have happened . 

It is true , there are some things in the establishment that are fundamental , and some things are not so , but are circumstantial . Of such , no question but i shall easily agree to vary , or leave out , as i shall be convinced by reason . Some things are fundamentals , about which i shall deal plainly with you , they May not be parted with ; but will ( I trust ) be delivered over to posterity , as being the fruits of our blood and travel . 

The government by a single person and a parliament , is a fundamental ; it is the esse . it is constitutive . And for the preson , though i May seem to plead for myself , yet i do not , no nor can any reasonable man say it . But if the things throughout this speech be true , i plead for this nation , and all honest men therein , who have born their testimony , as aforsa•d , and not for myself . And if things should do otherwise , than well , which i would not fear ; and the common enemy , and discontented persons take advantage at these distractions , the issue will be put up before God . Let him own , or let him disown it , as he please . 

In every government there must be som•what fundamental , somewhat like a magna charta , that should be standing , and be unalterable . Where there is a stipulation on one part , and that fully accepted , as appears by what hath been said ; surely a return ought to be : else what does that stipulation signify ; if i have upon the tea•mss aforesaid undertaken this great trust , and exercised it , and by it called you , surely it ought to be owned . 

That parliaments should not make themselves perpetual , is a fundamentals . Of what assurance is a law to prevent so great an evil , if it lie in one or the same legislator to unlaw it again ? Is this like to be lasting ? It will be like a rope of sand ; it will give no security , for the same men May unbuild , what they have built . 

Is not liberty of conscience in religion a fundamental ? so long as there is liberty of conscience for the supreme magistrate , to exercise his conference in erecting what form of church government he is satisfied , he should set up ; why should not he give it to others ? Liberty of conscience is a natural right : and he that would have it ought to give it ; having liberty to settle what he likes for the public . 

Indeed that hath been one of the vanities of our contests . Every sect saith , oh! give me liberty . But give him it , and to his power he will not yield it to any else . Where is our ingenuity ? Truly that 's a thing ought to be very reciprocal . The magistrate hath his supremacy , and he May settle religion according to his conscience . And i May say it to you : i can say it ; all the money of this nation would not have tempted men to sight , upon such an account as they have engaged , if they had not had hopes of liberty , b•tter than they had from episcopacy ; or then would have been afforded them from a Scottish Presbyterian , or an English either , if it had made such steps , or been as sharp and rigid , as it threatened when it was first set up . 

This , i say , is a fundamental . It ought to be so : it is for us , and the generations to come . And if there be an absoluteness in the imposer , without fitting allowances , and exceptions from the rule , we shall have our persons driven into wildernesses ; as they were when those poor and afflicted persons that forsock their estates and inheritances here , where they lived pleat fully and comfortably , for the enjoyment of their liberty , and were niece sitated to go into a vast howling wilderness in new England , where they have for liberty sake stripped themselves of all their comfort , and the full enjoyment they had , embracing rather lots of friends , and want , then to be so ensnared , and in bondage . 

Another , which i had forgotten , is the militia , that 's judged a fundamental , if any thing be so . That it should be well and equally placed , is very necessary : for , put the absolute power of the militia into one without a check , what doth it ? I pray you , what doth your check put upon your perpetual parliaments , if it be wholly stripped of this ? It is equally placed , and desires were to have it so ( viz. ) in one person and the parliament , sitting the parliament . What signifies a provision against perpetuating of parliaments , if this be solely in them ? Whether without a check the parliament have not liberty to , alter the frame of government , to aristocracy , to democracy , to anarchy , to any thing , if this be fully in them ? yea , into all confusion , and that without remedy , and if this one thing he placed in one , that one , be it parliament ; be it supreain governor , they , or he hath power to make what they please of all the rest . 

Therefore , if you would have a balance at all , and that some fundamentals must stand , which May be wortby to be delivered over to posterity , truly , i think , it is not unreasonably urged , that the militia should be disposed as it is laid down in the government , and that it should be so equally placed , that one person neither in parliament nor out of parliament , should have the power of ordering it . The council are the trustees or the commonwealth , in all inte•valss of parliaments who have as absolute a negative upon the supreme officer in the said intervals , as the parliament hath whilst it is sitting . It cannot be made use of : a man cannot be raised , nor a penny charged upon the persons , nothing done without consent of parliament : and in the intervals of parliament , without consent of the council , it is not to be exercised . 

Give me leave to say , that there is very little power , none but what is coordinate in the supreme officer , and yet enough in him that hath the chief government , in that particular he is bound in strictness by the parliament , out of parliament by the council , that do as absolutely bind him , as the parliament ; when the parliament is sitting . 

For that of money , i told you some things are circumstantials . To have two hundred thousand pounds to defray civil officers , to pay the judges and other officers , defraying the charges of the council in sending their embassies , in keeping intelligence , and doing that that 's necessary , and for supporting the governor in chief . All this is by the instrument supposed and intended . But it is not of the esse to much , and so limited , as so many soldiers , 30000. twenty thousand foot , and ten thousand horse . If the spirits of men be composed , five thousand house , and ten thovasnd foot May serve . These things are between the chief officer and the parliament to be moderated as occasion shall offer . 

So there are many other circumstantial things , which are not like the laws of the Medes and Persians' . But the things which shall be necessary to deliver over to posterity , these should be unalterable , else every succeeding parliament will be disputing to charge and alter the government , and we shall be as often brought into confusion , as we have parliaments , and so make our remedy our disease the Lord's providence appearing evils , appearing good , and better judgement will give occasion for the ordering of things for the best interest of the persons . And those things are the matter of consideration between you and me . 

I have indeed almost tired myself . That i have further to say , is this , i would it had not been needful for me to have called you hither to have expostulated these things with you , and in such a manner as this is , but neccssity hath ; no law feigned necessities , imaginary necessities are the greatest cozenage that men can put upon the providence of God , and make pretences to break known rules by . But it is as legal and as carnal , and as stupid , to think that there are no necessities that are manifest necessities , because necessities May be abused or feigned . And truly should be so , if i should think so , and i hope none of you think so . 

I say , that the wilful throwings away of this government , such as it is , so owned by God , so approved by men , so testified to , in the fundamentals of it , as is before mentioned , and that is relat•on to the good of these nations , and posterity , i can sooner be wi•ling to be ro•led into my grave , and buried with infamy , than i can g•ve my consent unto . 

You have been called hither together to save a nation ; — nations . You had the best ; persons indeed in the Christian world in your trust , when you came hither . You had affairs , and there nations delivered over to you in peace and quietness : you were , and we all were put into an uninterrupted possession , no making title to us . Through the blessing of God our enemies were hopeless and scattered . We had peace at house : peace almost with all neighbours round about : fit to take advantages where God did administer them . 

To have our peace and interest , that had those hopes the other day thus shaken , and under such a confusion ; and we rendered hereby ( Almost the scorn and contempt of those strangers that are amongst us , to negotiate their Master's affairs ; to give them opportunity to see our nakedness as they do , a persons that have been unhinged this twelve years' day , and un inged still , as if scattering , division , and confusion should come upon us ( As if it were desired ) which are the greatest plagues God ordinarily lays upon nations for sin : i would be loath to say , they are matters of our delight ; but if not , why not the matter of our care , so wisely as we ought by uttermost endeavours to avoid ? Nay , when by such actions as these are , these poor nations shall be thrown into heaps of confusion through blood , and ruin , and trouble , upon the saddest account that ever was , if breaking should come upon us , and all because we would not settle when we Might , when God put it into our hands : your affairs now almost settled everywhere : and to have all recoiled upon us , and we ourselves shaken in our affections , loosened from all known and public interests , as i have mentioned to you : who shall answer for these things to God ? Who can answer for these things to God , or to men ? To the persons that sent you hither ? who looked for refreshment from you , who looked for nothing but peace and quietness , and rest and settlement . And when we shall come to give an account to them , we shall be able to say ; oh! we have quarrelled for , and we contested for the liberty of England . wherein forsooth for the liberty of the persons ? I appeal to the Lord , that the desires and endeavours , and the things themselves will speak for themselves ; that the liberty of England ; the liberty of the persons , the avoiding of tyrannous impositions , either upon men as men , or Christians as Christians , is made so safe by this act of settlement , that it will speak sufficiently for itself . 

And when it shall appear what hath been said , and done , and what our transact•o•ss have been : for God can discover , and no privilege will hinder the Lord from-discovering , no privilege or condition of men can hide from the Lord : he can and wi1l make all manifest if he see it for hi• glory . And when these shall by the providence of God be manifested , and the persons shall come and say gentlemen , what condition are we in ? We hoped for light , and behold darkness , obscure darkness ! We hoped for rest , after ten years civil wars : we are plunged into deep confusion again . Ay , we know these consequences will come upon us , if God almighty shall not find out some way to prevent them . 

I had this thought within myself , that it had not been d•shonest , nor dishonourable , nor against true liberty , no not of parliaments , when a parliament was so chosen , in pursuance of , in conformity to , and with such an approbation , and consent to the government , so that he that runs Might read by what authority you came hither ; that an owning of your call , and of the authority bringing you hither , Might have been required before your entrance into the house . 

But this was declined , and hath not been done , because i am persuaded scarce any man could reasonably doubt you came with contrary minds . And i have reason to believe , the persons that sent you least doubted thereof at all . And therefore i must deal plainly with you . What i forbore upon a just confidence at first , you necessitate me unto now — that seeing the authority calling you is so little valued , and so much slighted , till some such assurance be given , and made known ; that the fundamental interest of the government be settied and approved , according to the proviso contained in the return ; and such a consent testified , as will make it appear that the same is accepted , i have caused a stop to be put to your entrance into the Parliament-house . 

I am sorry , i am sorry , and i could be •…orry so the death , that there is cause for this . But there is cause . ••…d if things be not satisfied , that are reasonably demanded . I for my part shall do that that becomes me , seeking my council from God . 

There is therefore somewhat to be offered to you , that i hope will ( Being understood with the qualifications that i have told you of : reforming circumstantials , and agreeing in the substance and fundamentals ( Which is , the government settled , as it is expressed in the indenture ) not to be altered ; the making of your minds known in that , by giving your assent and subscription to it ; is that , that will ) let you in , to act those things as a parliament , which are for the good of the persons and this thing showed to you , and signed , as aforesaid , doth determine the controversy ; and May give a happy progress and issue to this parliament . 

The place where you May come thus , and sign , as many as God shall make free thereunto , is in the lobby without the parliament door . 

The government doth declare , that you have a legislative power without a negative from me . As the government doth express , you May make any laws ; and if i give not my consent within twenty days , to the passing your laws , they are ipso facto laws , whether i consent or no , if not contrary to the government . You have an absolute legislative power in all things that can possibly concern the good , and interest of the public . 

And i think you May make these nations happy by this settlement : and i for my part shall be willing to be bound more than i am in any thing that i May be convinced of , May be for the good of the persons , in preservation of the cause and interest so long contended for . 

Finis . 





psal , 40.5 . 1 tim. 4. 1. 2.  2 tim 3. 2 , 3 , 4.  1 tim 4. 1. 2.  1. 2.  
















































