His highness' speech to the parliament in the painted chamber at their dissolution , upon Monday the 22d . of January 1654.  

Published to prevent mistakes and false copies . 

Reprinted at Dublin , by William Bladen , 1654.  

His highness' speech to the parliament , in the painted chamber , at their dissolution , upon Monday January 22. 2654 

Gentlemen 

I perceive , you are here as the house of Parilament , by your speaker , whom i see here ; and by your faces , which are , in a great measure , known to me . When i first met you in this room , it was , to my apprehension , the hopefullest day that ever mine eyes saw , as to considerations of this world : for i did look at ( As wrapped up in you , together with myself ) the hopes and the happiness of ( Though not of the greatest yet a very great , and ) the best persons in the world ; and truly and unfeignedly i thought so ; as a persons that have the highest and the clearest profession among them , of the greatest glory ( To wit ) religion ; as a persons that have been like other nations , sometimes up , and sometimes down , in our honour in the world , but yet never so low , but we Might measure with other nations ; and a persons that have had a stamp upon them from God , God having ( As it were ) summed all our former glory and honour , in things that are glory to nations in an  we knew one another at home , and are well known abroad . 

And ( If i be not very much mistaken ) we were arrived ( As i , and truly , as i believe , many others did think ) at a very safe port , where we Might sit down , and contemplate the dispensations of God , and our mercies , and Might know our mercies not to have been like to those of the ancients , who did make out their peace and prosperity , as they thought , by their own endeavours ; who could not say , as we , that all ours were let down to us from God himself , whose appearances and providences amongst us are not be outmatched by any story . 

Truly this was our condition and i know nothing else we had to do , save as Israel was commanded , in that most excellent psalm of David , psal. 78. v. 4 , 5 , 6 , 7.  the things which we have heard and known , and our fathers have told us , we will not hide them from their children , showing to the generation to come the praise of the Lord , and his strength , and his wonderful works which he hath done ; for he established a testimony in Jacob , and appointed a law in Israel , which he commended our fathers that they should make them known to their children , that the generation to come Might known them , even the children which should be born , who should arise and declare them to their children , that they Might set their hope in God , and not forget the works of God , but keep his commandments . 

This i thought had been a song and a work worthy of England , whereunto you Might have happily invited them , had you had hearts unto it . 

You had this opportunity fairly delivered unto you ; and if a history shall be written of these times , and of transactions , it will be said ( It will not be denied ) but that these things that i have spoken are true . 

This talon was put into your hands , and i shall recure to that which i said at the first , i came with very great joy , and contentment , and comfort , the first time i met you in this place : but we and these nations are , for the present , under some disappointment . If i had purposed to have played the orator , which i did never affect , nor do , nor i hope shall , i doubt not but upon easy suppositions , which i am persuaded every one among you will grant , we did meet upon such hope as these . 

I met you a second time here , and i confess at that meeting i had much abatement of my hopes , through not a total frustration . I confess that that which dampt my hopes , so soon , was somewhat that did look  you that the management of affairs did savour of a not-owning too too much savour i say of a not-owning the authority that called you hither ; but God left us not without an expedient that gave a second possibility , shall i say , a possibility ? it seemed to me a probability of recovering out of that dissatisfied condition we were all then in , towards some mutuality of satisfaction , and therefore by that recognition , suiting with the indenture that returned you hither , to which afterwards also was added your own declaration , conformable to and in acceptance oh , that expedient , whereby you had ( Though with a little check ) another opportunity renewed unto you to have made this nation as happy as it could have been , if every thing had smoothly run on from hatsirct hour of your meeting . 

And indeed ( You will give me liberty of my thoughts and hopes ) i did think , as i have formerly found in that way that i have been engaged as a soldier , hat some affronts put up in us , some disasters at the first , have made way for very great and happy successes . 

And i did not at all despond , but the stop put upon you , would in like manner have made way for a blessing from God , that that interruption being , as thought , necessary to divert you from destructive and violent proceedings , to give time for better deliberati us ; whereby , leaving the government as you found it , you Might have proceeded to have made those good and wholesome laws , which the persons expected from you , and Might have answered the grievances , and settled those other things proper to you as a parliament , and for which you would have had thanks , from all that entrusted you . 

What hath happened since that time , i have not taken public notice of , as declining to entrench upon parliament privileges : for sure i am , you will all bear me witness , that from your entering into the house upon the recognition , to this very day , you have had no manner of interruption or hindrance of mine , in proceeding to that blessed issue the heart of a good man could propose to himself , to this very day . 

You see you have me very much locked up as to what you transacted among yourselves from that time to this , but something i shall take liberty to speak of to you , as i May not take notice what you have been doing , so i think i have a very great liberty to tell you , that i do not know what you have been doing , i do not know whether you have been alive or dead , i have not once heard from you in all this time , i have not , and that you all know : if that be a fault that i have not , surely it hath not been mine . 

If i had any melancholy thoughts , and have sat down by them , why Might it not have been very lawful to me to think that i was a 〈◊〉 judged vnconcerned in all these businesses : i can assure you , i have not reckoned myself , nor did i reckon myself unconcerned in you , and so long as any just patience could support my expectations , i would have waited to the untermost to have received from you the issues of your consultations and resolutions ; i have been careful of your safety , & the safety of those that you represented , to whom i reckon myself a servant . 

But what messages have i disturbed you withal ? What injury or indignity hath been done or offered , either to your persons , or to any privileges of parliament , since you sat ? I looked at myself , as strictly obliged by my oath since your recognising the government , in the authority of which you were called hither , and sat , to give you all possible security , and to keep you from any unparliamentary interruption . 

Think you i could not say more upon this subject , if i listed to expaciate thereupon ; but because my actions plead for me : i shall say no more of this . 

I say , i have been caring for you , your quiet sitting , caring for your privileges ( As i said before ) that they Might not be interrupted , have been seeking of God , from the great God , a blessing upon you , sand a blessing upon these nations ; i have been consulting , if possibly i Might in any thing promote , in my place , the real good of this parliament , of the hopefulness of which i have said so much unto you . 

And i did think it to be my business , rather to see the utmost issue , and what God would produce by you , than unseasonably to intermeddle with you . But as i said before , i have been caring for you , and for the peace and quiet of the nations , indeed i have , and that i shall a little presently manifest unto you . 

And it leadeth me to let you know somewhat that i fear , i fear will be through some interpretation a little too justly put upon you , whilst you have been employed as you have been ( And in all that time expressed in the government , in that government , i say , in that government ) brought forth nothing that you yourselves say can be taken notice of without infringement of your privileges . 

I will tell you somewhat , that ( If it be not news to you ) i wish you had taken very serious consideration of ; if it be news , i wish i had acquainted you with it sooner : and yet if any man will ask me why i did it not , the reason is given already , because i did make it my business to give you no interruption . 

There be some trees that will not grow under the shadow of other  a man May say so by way of allusion to thrive under the shadow of other trees : i will tell you what have thriven , i will not say what you have cherished under your shadow , that were too hard , instead of the peace and settlement , instead of mercy and truth being brought together , righteousness and peace kissing each other , by reconciling the honest persons of these nation : , and settling the woeful distempers that are amongst us , ( Which had been glorious things , and worthy of Christians to have proposed ) weeds and nettles , briars and thorn ; have thriven under your shadow , dissettlement ! and division , discontent and dissatisfaction , together with real dangers to the whole , has been more multiplied within these five months of your sitting , than in some years before . 

Foundations have been also laid for the future renewing the troubles of these nations , by all the enemies of it abroad and at home ; let not these words seem too sharp , for they are true , as any mathematical demonstrations are or can be ; i say , the enemies of the peace of these nations abroad and at home , the discontented humours throughout these nations , which i think no man will grudge to call by that name , or to make to allude to briars and thorns , they have nourished themselves under your shadow . 

And that i May be clearly understood , they have taken the opportunities from your sitting , from the hopes they had , which with easy conjecture they Might take up , and conclude , that there would be no settlement , and therefore they have framed their designs , preparing for the execution of them accordingly . 

Now whether ( Which appertains not to me to judge of on their behalf ) they had any occasion ministered for this ; and from whence they had it , i list not to make any scrutiny or search , but i will say this , i think they had them not from me , i am sure they had not ; from whence they had it is not my business now to discourse , but that they had , is obvious to every man's sense . 

What preparations they have made to execute in such a season as they thought fit to take their opportunity from , that i know ( Not as men know things by conjecture , but ) by certain demonstrable knowledge , that they have been ( For some time past ) furnishing themselves with arms , nothing doubting , but that they should have a day for it ; and verily believing , that whatsoever their former disappointments were , they should have more done for them by and from our own divisions , than they were able to do for themselves . I do not , and i desire to be understood so , that in all i have to say of this subject , you will take it that i have no reservation in my mind to  of guess and suspicion , with things of fact , but the things i am telling are of fact , things of evident demonstration . 

These weeds , briars and thorns , they have been preparing , and have brought their designs to some maturity , by the advantages given to them , as aforesaid , from your sitting and proceedings ; but by the waking eye that watched over that cause that God will bless , they have been , and yet are disappointed . and having mentioned that cause , i say that slighted cause , let me speak a few words in behalf thereof ( Though it May seem too long a digression ) whosoever despiseth it , and will say it is non causa pro causâ , the all searching eye before mentioned will find out that man , and will judge him , as one that regardeth not the works of God , nor the operations of his hands , for which God hath threatened to cast men down and not build them up ; that because he can dispute , and tell us , he knew not where the cause begun , nor where it is , but modelleth it according to his own intellect , and submits not to to the appearances of God in the world , therefore he lists up his heel against God , and mocketh at all his providences , laughing at the observations made up not without reason , and the scriptures , but by the quickening and teaching spirit , which gives life to the other , calling such observations enthusiasms . Such men , i say , no wonder if they stumble and fall backward , and be broken , and snared , and taken by the things of which they are so maliciously and wilfully ignorant . The scriptures say , the rod has a voice , and he will make himself known , and he will make himself known by the judgements which he executeth ; and do we not think he will , and does , by the providences of mercy and kindness which he hath for his persons , and for their just liberties , whom he loves as the apple of his ey ? Doth he not by them manifest himself ? And is he not thereby also seen , giving kingdoms for them , giving men for them , and persons for their lives ? As it is in the 43. of Isaiah is not this as fair a lecture , and as clear speaking , as any thing our dark reason left to the letter of the scriptures can collect from them ? By this voice has God spoken very loud on the behal of his persons , by judging their enemies in the late war , and restoring them a liberty to worship with the freedom of their consciences , and freedom in their estates and persons when they do so . And thus we have found the cause of God by the works of God , which are the testimony of God , upon which rock , whosoever spilits shall suffer shipwreck . 

But it is our glory , and it is mine , if i have any in the world , concerning the interest of those that have an interest in a better world ; it is my glory that , i know a cause , which yet we have not lost , but do hope we shall take a little pleasure rather to lose our lives than lose . But you will excuse this long digression . 

I say unto you , whilst you have been in the midst of these transactions , that party , that cavalier party , ( I could wish some of them had thrust in here to have heard what i say ) the cavalier party have been designing and preparing to put this nation in blood again with a witness ; but because i am confident there are none of that sort here , therefore i shall say the less to that ; only this i must tell you , they have been making great preparations of arms , and , i do believe , will be made evident to you that they have raked out many thousands of arms , even all that this city could afford , for divers months last past . 

But it will be said , May we not arm ourselves for the defence of our houses ? will any find fault for that ? No , for that , the reason of their doing so hath been as explicit , and under as clear proof , as the fact of doing so , for which i hope , by the justice of the land , some will , in the face of the nation , answer it with their lives , and then the business will be pretty well out of doubt . 

Banks of money have been framing for these , and other such like uses ; letters have been issued , with privy seals , to as great persons as most are in the nation , for the advance of monies , which have been discovered to us by the persons themselves ; commissions for regiments of horse and foot and command of castles , have been likewise given from Charles Stuart , since your sitting ; and what the general insolences of that party have been , the honest persons have been sensible of , and can very well testify . 

It hath not been only thus ; but as in a quinsy or pleurisy , where the humour fixeth in one part , give it scope , it will gather to that place , to the hazarding of the whole , and it is natural to do so , till it destroy nature , in that person on whomsoever this befalls , 

So likewise will those diseases take accidental causes of aggravation of their distemper ; and this was that which i did assert , that they have taken accidental causes , for the growing and increasing of those distempers , as much as would have been in the natural body , if timely remedy were nor applied . And indeed , things were come to that pass ( In respect of which i shall give you a particular account ) that no mortal physician , if the great physician had not stepped in , could have cured the distemper . 

Shall i lay this upon your account , or my own ? I am sure i can lay it upon God's account  mortal and destructive ; and what is all this ? Truly i must needs say , a company of men still , like briars and thorns , and worse , if worse can be , of another sort than those before mentioned to you , have been , and yet are , endeavouring to put us into blood and into confusion , more desperate and dangerous confusion than England ever yet saw . 

And i must say , as when Gideon commanded his son to fall upon Zeba and Zalmunna to slay them , they thought it more noble to die by the hand of a man , than of a stripling ; which shows there is some contentment in the hand by which a man falls : so is it some satisfaction , if a commonwealth must perish that it perish by men , and not by the hands of persons differing little from beasts ; that if it must needs suffer , it should rather suffer from rich men , than from poor men , who , as Solomon says , when they oppress , they l••ve nothing behind them , but are as a sweeping rain . 

Now , such as these also are grown up under your shadow : but it will be asked , what have they done ? I hope , though they pretend commonwealth's interest , they have had no encourageme•t from you , but that as before , rather taken it , than that you have administered any cause unto them for so doing , from delays , from hopes that this parliament would not settle , from pamphlets , mentioning strange votes and resolves of yours , which i hope did abuse you . Thus you see , what ever the grounds were , these have been the effects . and thus i have laid these things before you , and you and others will be easily able to judge how far you are concerned . 

And what have these men done ? They have also laboured to pervert where they could , and as they could , the honest meaning persons of the nation , they have laboured to engage , some in the army ; and i doubt , that not only they , but some others also very well known to you , have helped in this work of debauching and dividing the army ; they have , they have ; i would be loathe to say , who , where , and how , much more loathe to say , they were any of your own number , but i can say endeavours have been to put the army into a distemper , and to feed that which is the worst humour in the army , which though it was not a Mastering humour , yet these took their advantage from delay of the settlement , and the practices before mentioned , and stopping the pay of the army , to run us , into freequarter , and to bring us into the inconveniences most to be feared and avoided . 

What if i am able to make it appear in fact , that some amongst you have run into the city of London to persuade to petitions and add  own votes that you have passed ? whether these practices were in favour of your liberties , or tended to be get hopes of peace and settlement from you ; and whether debauching the army in England , as is before expressed , and starving it , and putting it upon freequarter , and occasioning and necessitating the greatest part thereof in Scotland to March into England , leaving the remainder thereof to have their throats cut there , and kindling by the rest a fire in our own bosoms , were for the advantage of affairs here , let the world judge ? 

This i tell you also , that the correspondency held with the interest of the cavaliers , by that party of men called levellers , and who calls themselves commonwealths-men ; whose declarations were framed to that purpose , and ready to be published at the time of their commonrising , whereof we are possessed , and for which we have the confession of themselves , now in custody ; who confess also they built their hopes upon the assurance they had of the parliaments not agreeing a settlement : whether these humours have not nourished themselves under your boughs , is the subject of my present discourse , and i think i say not amiss if i affirm it to be so . 

And i must say it again , that that which hath been their advantage , thus to raise disturbance , hath been by the loss of those golden opportunities , that God hath put into your hands for settlement , judge you whether these things were thus or no , when you first sat down , i am sure things were not thus , there was a very great peace , and sedateness , throughout these nations , and great expectations of a happy settlement , which i remembered to you at the beginning of my speech , and hoped that you would have entered upon your business as you found it . 

There was a government in the possession of the persons , i say a government in the possession of the persons , for many months , it hath now been exercised near fifteen months ; and if it were needful that i should tell you , how it came into their possession , and how willingly they received it , how all law and justice were distributed from it , in every respect , as to life , liberty and estate ; how it was owned by God , as being the dispensation of his providence , after twelve years' war , and sealed and witnessed unto by the persons , i should but repeat what i said in my last speech made unto you in this place , and therefore i forbear . 

When you were entered upon this government , raveling into it ( You know i took no notice what you were doing ) if you had gone upon that  visions for the good of the persons of these nations , for the settling of such matters in things of religion as would have upheld and given countenance to a godly ministry , and yet would have given a just liberty to godly men of different judgements , men of the same faith with them that you call the orthodox ministry in England , as it is well known the independents are , and many under the form of ba•tism , who are sound in the faith , only May perhaps be different in judgement in some lesser matters , yet as true Christians , both looking at salvation , only by faith in the blood of Christ , men profe•••ng the fear of God , having recourse to the name of God , as to a strong tower ; i say you Might have had opportunity to have settled peace and quietness amongst all professing godliness , and Might have been instrumental , if not to have healed the breaches , yet to have kept the godly of all judgements from running one upon another , and by keeping them from being overrun by a common enemy , rendered them and these nations , both secure , happy , and well satisfied . 

Are these things done ? or any thing towards them ? Is there not yet upon the spirits of men a strange itch ? Nothing will satisfy them , unless they can put their finger upon their brethren's consciences , to pinch them there . To do this was no part of the contest we had with the common adversary ; for religion was not the thing at the first contested for ; but God brought it to that issue at last , and gave it unto us by way of redundancy , and at last it proved to be that which was most dear to us ; and wherein consisted this , more than in •btain•ng that liberty from the tyranny of the Bishops , to all species of Protestant's , to worship God according to their own light and consciences ? for want of which , many of our brethren forsook their native countries , to seek their bread from strangers , and to live in howling wildernesses ; and for which also , many that remained here , were imprisoned , and otherwise abused , and made the scorn of the nation . 

Those that were sound in the faith , how proper was it for them to labour for liberty , for a just liberty , that men should not be trampled upon for their consciences ? had not they laboured but lately under the weight of persecutions , & was it fi• for them to sit heavy upon others ? is it ingenuous to ask liberty , and not to give it ? what greater hypocrisy , than for those who wer• oppressed by the Bishops , to become the greatest oppressors themselves , so soon as their yoke was removed ? I could wish that they who call for liberty now also , had not too much of that spirit , if the power were in their hands . 

 contentious railers , evil speakers , who seek by evil words to corrupt good manners , persons of loose conversaions , punishment from the civil magistrate ought to meet with them , because if these pretend conscience , yet walking disorderly , and not according , but contrary to the gospel , and even to natural light , they are judged of all , and their sins being open , makes them subjects of the magistrates sword , who ought not to bear it in vain . 

The discipline of the army was such , that a man would not be suffered to remain there , of whom we could take notice he was guilty of such practices as these : and therefore how happy would England have been , and you , and i , if the Lord had led you on to have settled upon such good accounts as these are , and to have discountenanced such practices as the other , and left men in disputable things free to their own consciences , which was well provided for by the government , and liberty left to provide against what was apparently evil . 

Judge you , whether the contesting for things that were provided for by this government hath been profitable expense of time for the good of these nations ? by means whereof , you May see you have wholly elapsed your time , and done just nothing . 

i will say this to you in behalf of the long parliament , that had such an expedient as this government been proposed to them , and that they could have seen the cause of God thus provided for , and had by debates been enlightened in the grounds by which the difficulties Might have been cleared , and the reason of the whole enforced , the circumstances of time and persons , with the temper and disposition of the persons , and affairs both abroad and at home , when it was undertaken , well weighed , ( As well as they were thought to love their seats ) i think in my conscience that they would have proceeded in another manner than you have done , and not have exposed things to those difficulties and hazards they now are at , nor given occasion to leave the persons so dissettled as now they are , who i dare say , in the soberest , and most judicious part of them , did expect , not a questioning , but a doing things in pursuance of the government , and if i be not misinformed , very many of you came up with this satisfaction , having had time enough to weigh and consider the same . 

And when i say , such an expedient as this government is , wherein i dare assert there is a just liberty to the persons of God , and the just rights of the persons in these nations provided for , i can put the issue thereof upon the clearest reason , whatsoever any go about to suggest to the contrary . 

But this not being the time and place of such an averment , for satisfaction sake herein , enough is said in a book , entitled , a true state of the case of the commonwealth , &c. published in jan. 1653.  ( And for myself , i desire not to keep it an hour longer than i May preserve England in its just rights , and May protect the persons of God in such a just : liberty of their consciences , as i have already mentioned ) and therefore if this parliament have judged things to be otherwise than as i have stated them , it had been huge friendliness between persons that had such a reciprocation , and in so great concernments to the public , for them to have convinced me in what particulars therein my error lay , of which i never yet had a word from you . But if instead thereof , your time has been spent in setting up somewhat else upon another bottom than this stands , that looks as if a laying grounds of a quarrel had rather been designed , than to give the persons settlement ; if it be thus , it 's well your labours have not arrived to any maturity at all . 

This government called you hither , the constitution whereof being so limited , a single person and a parliament , and this was thought most agreeable to the Genral sense of the nation , having had experience enough by trial of other conclusions , judging this most likely to avoid the extremes of monarchy on the one hand , and democracy on the other , and yet not to found dominium in gratiâ . and if so , then certainly to make it more than a nation , it was requisite that it should be as it is in the government , which puts it upon a true and equal balance . it has been already submitted to the judicious honest persons of this nation , whether the balance be not equal , and what their judgement is , is visible by submission to it , by acting upon it , by restraining their trustees from meddling with it : and it neither asks nor needs any better ratification . But when trustees in parliament shall by experience find any evil in any parts of the government , refered by the government itself to the consideration of the protector and parliament ( Of which time itself will be the best discoverer ) how can it be reasonably imagined , that a person or persons coming in by election , and standing under such obligations , and so limited , and so necessitated by oath to govern , for the people's good , and to make their love , under God , the best underpropping , and his best interest to him , how can it , i say , be imagined , that the present or succeeding protectors will refuse to agree to alter any such thing in the government that May be found to be for the good of the persons , or to recede from any thing which he Might be convinced 〈◊〉 the balance too much to the single person ? And although for the present , the keeping up , and having in his power the militia seems the most hard , yet if it should be yielded up at such a time as this , when there is as much need to keep this cause by it ( Which is most evident at this time impugned by all the enemies of it ) as there was to get it , what would become of all ? Or if it should not be equally placed in him and the parliament , but yielded up at any time , it determines his power , either for doing the good he ought , or hindering parliaments from perpetuating themselves , or from imposing what religions they please on the consciences of men , or what government they please upon the nation , thereby subjecting us to dissettlement , in every parliament , and to the desperate consequences thereof ; and if the nation shall happen to fall into a blessed peace , how easily and certainly , will their charge be taken off , and their forces be disbanded , and then where will the danger be to have the militia thus stated ? 

What if i should say , if there should be a disproportion or disequality as to the power , it is on the other hand , and if this be so , wherein have you had cause to quarrel ? What demonstrations have you held forth to settle me to your opinion ? would you had made me so happy as to let me have known your grounds . i have made a free and ingenuous confession of my faith to you , and i could have wished it had been in your hearts to have agreed that some friendly and cordial debates Might have been towards mutual conviction ; was there none amongst you to move such a thing ? No fitness to listen to it ? No desire of a right understanding ? If it be not folly in me to listen to towntalk , such things have been proposed , and rejected , with stifness and severity , once and again ; was it not likely to have been more advantageous to the good of this nation ? I will say this to you for myself , & to that i have my conscience as a thousand witnesses , and i have my comfort and contentment in it , and i have the witness of divers here , that i think truly scorn to own me in a lie , that i would not have been averse to any alteration , of the good of which i Might have been convinced , although i could not have agreed to the taking it off the foundation on which it stands , &c.  the acceptation and consent of the persons . 

I will not presage what you have been about , or doing in all this time , or do i love to make conjectures , but i must tell you this , that as i undertook this government in the simplicity of my heart , and as before God , and to do the part of an honest man , and to be true to the inerest which in my conscience is dear to many of you ( Though it is not always understood what God in his wisdom May hide from us , as to peace and settlement ) so i can say , that no particular interest , either of my self , estate , honour , or family , are , or have been prevalent with me to this undertaking . 

For if you had upon the old government offered to me this one , this one thing , i speak , as thus advised , and before God , as having been , to this day of this opinion , and this hath been my constant judgement , well known to many that hear me speak , if this one thing had been inserted , that one thing , that this government should have been , and placed in my family hereditary i would have rejected it , and i could have done no other , according to my present conscience and light ; i will tell you my reason , though i cannot tell what God will do with me , nor you , nor the nation , for throwing away precious opportunities committed to us . 

This hath been my principle , and i liked it when this government came first to be proposed to me , that it put us off that hereditary way , well looking , that as God had declared what government he had delivered over to the Jews , and placed it upon such persons as had been instrumental for the conduct and deliverance of his persons ; and considering that promise in Isaiah , that God would give rulers as at the first , and judges as at the beginning , i did not know , but that God Might begin , and though at present with a most unworthy person , yet as to the future , it Might be after this manner , and i thought this Might usher it in . I am speaking as to my judgement against making it hereditary , to have men chosen for their love to God , and to truth , and justice , and not to have it hereditary ; for as it is in Ecclesiastes who knoweth whether he May beget a fool or wise , honest or not , what ever they be must come in upon that account , because the government is made a patrimony . 

And this i do perhaps declare with too much earnestness , as being my own concernment , and know not what place it May have in your hearts , and of the good persons in the nation , but however it be , i have comfort in this my truth and plainness . 

I have thus told you my thoughts , which truly i have declared to you in the fear of God , as knowing he will not be mocked , and in the strength of God , as knowing and rejoicing that i am kept in my speaking ; especially when i do not form or frame things without the compass of the integrity , and honesty , that my own conscience gives me not the lie to what i say , and then in what i say i can rejoice . 

Now to speak a word or two to you , of that i must profess in the name of the same Lord , an i wish that there had been no cause that i should have thus spoken to you , and though i have told you , that i came with joy the first time , with some regret the second , that now i speak with most regret of all . 

I look upon you , as having among you many persons , that i could lay down my life individually for , i could through the grace of God , desire to lay down my life for you ; so far am i from having an unkind or Un-christian heart towards you , in your particular capacities . 

I have that indeed as a work most incumbent upon me , i consulted what Might be my duty in such a day as this , casting up all considerations . I must confess , as i told you , that i did think occasionally this nation hath suffered extremely in the respects mentioned , as also in the disappointments of their expectations of that justice that was due to them by your sitting thus long ; and what have you brought forth ? 

I did not , nor cannot apprehend what it is , ( I would be loathe to call it a fate , that were too paganish a word ) but there is something in it , that we have not our expectations . 

I did think also for myself , that i am like to meet with difficulties , and that this nation will not ( As it is fit it should not ) be deluded with pretexts of necessity in that great business of raising of money , and were it not that i can make some dilemmaes upon which to resolve some things of my conscience , judgement , and actions , i should sink at the very prospect of my encounters ; some of them are general , some are more special , supposing this cause , or this business must be carried on , either it is of God , or of man , if it be of man , i would i had never touched it with a finger ; if i had not had a hope fixed in me that this cause , and this business is of God , i would many years ago have run from it . If it be of God , he will bear it up . If it be of man , it will tumble , as every thing that hath been of man , since the world began , hath done . And what are all our histories , and other traditions of actions in former times , but God manifesting himself that he hath shaken and tumbled down , and trampled upon every thing that he hath not planted ? And as this is , so the all-wise God deal with it . 

If this be of human structure , and invention , and it be an old plotting and contrivance to bring things to this issue , and that they are not the births of providence , than they will tumble . But if the Lord take pleasure in England , and if he will do us good , he is able to bear us up ; let the difficulties be whatsoever they will , we shall in his strength be able to encounter with them . And i bless God i have been enured to difficulties , and i never found God failed when i trusted in him ; i can laugh and sing in my heart when i speak of these things to you , or elsewhere . And though some May think it an hard thing without parliamentary authority to raise money upon this nation ; yet i have another argument to the good persons of this nation , if they would be safe , and have no better principle ; whether they prefer the having of their will , though it be their destruction , rather than comply with things of necessity ; that will excuse me , but i should wrong my native country to suppose this . 

For i look at the persons of these nations , as the blessing of the Lord , and they are a persons blessed by God . They have been so , and they will be so by reason of that immortal seed , which hath been , & is amongst them , those regenerated ones in the land , of several judgements , who are all the flock of Christ , and lambs of Christ , though perhaps under many unruly passions , and troubles of spirit , whereby they give disquiet to themselves and others ; yet they are not so to God , as to us , he is a God of other patience , and he will own the least of truth in the hearts of his persons , and the persons being the blessing of God they will not be so angry , but they will prefer their safety to their passions , and their real security to forms , when necessity calls for supplies ; had they not well been acquainted with this principle , they had never seen this day of gospel-liberty . 

But if any man shall object , it is an easy thing to talk of necessities when men create necessities ; would not the Lord protector make himself great , and his family great ? doth not he make these necessities ? and then he will come upon the persons with this argument of necessity . 

This were something hard indeed , but i have not yet known what it is to make necessities , whatsoever the judgements or thoughts of men are . And i say this , not only to this assembly , but to the world , that that man liveth not , that can come to me , and charge me that i have in these great revolutions made necessities ; i challenge even all that fear God : and as God hath said . my glory i will not give unto another , let men take heed , and be twice advised , how they call his revolutions , the things of God , and his working of things from one period to another , how i say , they call them necessities of men's creation , for by so doing they do vilify and lessen the works of God , and rob him of his glory , which he hath said , he will not give unto another , nor suffer to be taken from him . We know what God did to Herod when he was applauded , and did not acknowledge God ; and God knoweth what he will do with men when they shall call his revolutions , human designs , and so detract from his glory , when they have not been forecast , but sudden providences in things , whereby carnal and worldly men are enraged , and under , and at which many i fear ( Some good ) have murmured and repined , because disappointed of their mistaken fancies ; but still they have been the wise disposings of the almighty , though instruments have had their passions and •ra•ltiess ; and i think it is an honour to God to acknowledge the necessities to have been of God's imposing , when truly they have been so , as indeed they have , when we take our sin in our actings to ourselves , and much more safe , than judge things so contingent , as if there were not a God that ruled the earth . 

We know the Lord hath poured this nation from vessel to vessel , till he poured it into your lap , when you came first together : i am confident , that it came so into your hands , was not judged by you to be from counterfeited , or feigned necessity , but by divine providence and dispensation . And this i speak with more earnestness , because i speak for God , and not for men ; i would have any man to come and tell of the transactions that have been , and of those periods of time , wherein God hath made these revolutions , and find where they can fix a feigned necessity . 

I could recite particulars , if either my strength would serve me to speak , or yours to hear ; if that you would revolve the great hand of God in his great dispensations , you would find that there is scarce a man that fell off at any period of time when God had any work to do , that can give God or his work , at this day , a good word . 

It was , say some , the cunning of the Lord protector ( I take it to myself ) it was the craft of such a man , and his plot that hath brought it about . And as they say in other countries , there are five or six cunning men in England that have skill , they do all these things : oh what blasphemy is this ! because men that are without God in the world , and walk not with him , and know not what it is to pray , or believe , and to receive return from God , and to be spoken unto by the spirit of God , who speaks without a written word sometimes , yet according to it : God hath spoken heretofore in divers manners , let him speak as he pleaseth . Hath he not given us liberty ? nay is it not our duty to go to the law and to the testimonies , and there we shall find that there have been impressions in extraordinary cases , as well without the written word as with it , and therefore there is no difference in the thing thus asserted , from truths generally received , except we will exclude the spirit , without whose concurrence all other teachings are ineffectual ; he doth speak to the hearts and consciences of men , and leadeth them to his law and testimonies , and there he speaks to them , and so gives them double teachings , according to that of Job . God speaketh once , yea twice ; and that of David , God hath spoken once , yea twice have i heard this . those men that live upon their Mumpsimus and sumpsimus , their masses and service-books , their dead and carnal worship , no marvel if they be strangers to God , and the works of God , and to spiritual dispensations . and because they say and believe thus , must we do so too ? we in this land have been otherwise instructed , even by the word , and works , and spirit of God . 

To say that men bring forth these things , when God doth them , judge you if God will bear this . I wish that every sober heart , though he hath had temptations upon him of deserting this cause of God , yet May take heed how he provokes , and falls into the hands of the living god by such blasphemies as these , according to the 10th of the Hebrews , if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth , there remains no more sacrifice for sin ( It was spoken to the Jews , that having professed Christ apostatised from him ) what then ? nothing but a fearful falting into the hands of the living God . 

They that shall attribute to this or that person the contrivances and production of those mighty things God hath wrought in the midst of us , and that they have not been the revolutions of Christ himself , upon whose shoulders the government is laid , they speak against God , and they fall under his hand without a mediator , that is , if we deny the spirit of Jesus Christ the glory of all his works in the world , by which he rules kingdoms , and doth administer , and is the rod of his strength , we provoke the mediator ; and he May say , I 'll leave you to God , I 'll not intercede for you , let him tear you to pieces , I 'll leave thee to fall into God's hands , thou deniest me my sovereignty and power committed to me , I 'll not intercede nor mediate for thee , thou fallest into the hands of the living God . Therefore whatsoever you May judge men for , and say , this man is cunning , and politic , and subtle ; take heed , again i say , how you judge of his revolutions , as the products of men's inventions . 

I May be thought to press too much upon this theme , but pray God it May stick upon your hearts and mine ; the worldly minded man knows nothing of this , but is a stranger to it , and because of this his atheism and murmurings at instruments , yea repining at God himself ; and no wonder , considering the Lord hath done such things amongst us as have not been known in the world these 1000 years , and yet not withstanding is not owned by us . 

There is another necessity which you have put upon us , and we have not sought ; i appeal to God , angels , and men , if i shall raise money according to the article in the government which had power to call you hither , and did , and instead of seasonable providing for the army , you have laboured to overthrow the government , and the army is now upon freequarter , and you would never so much as let me hear a tittle from you concerning it , where is the fault ? has it not been as if you had had a purpose to put this extremity upon us and the nation ? I hope this was not in your minds , i am not willing to judge so ; but this is the state unto which we are reduced : by the designs of some in the army who are now in custody , it was designed to get as many of them as could , through discontent for want of money , the army being in a barren country , near thirty weeks behind in pay , and upon other specious pretences , to March for England out of Scotland , and in discontent to seize , their general there , a faithful and honest man , that so another might head the army , and all this opportunity taken from your delays , whether will this be a thing of feigned necessity ? What could it signify but that the army are in discontent already , and we 'll make them live upon stones , we 'll make them cast off their governors and discipline ? What can be said to this ? I list not to unsaddle myself , and put the fault upon others backs ; whether it hath been for the good of England whilst men have been talking of this thing or the other , and pretending liberty , and a many good words whether it hath been as it should have been ? I am confident you cannot think it has , the nation will not think so . And if the worst should be made of things , i know not what the Cornish men , or the Lincolnshire men May think , or other counties , but i believe they will all think they are not safe . A temporary suspension of caring for the greatest liberties and privileges ( If it were so , which is denied ) would not have been of that damage , that the not providing against free quarter hath run the nation upon . And if it be my liberty to walk abroad in the fields , or to take a journey , yet it is not my wisdom to do so when my house is on fire . 

I have troubled you with a long speech , and i believe it May not have the same resentment with all that it hath with some : but because that is unknown to me , i shall leave it to God , and conclude with that , that i think myself bound in my duty to God and the persons of these nations , to their safety and good in every respect . i think it my duty to tell you , that it is not for the profit of these nations , nor for common and public good , for you to continue here any longer , and therefore , i do declare unto you , that i do dissolve this parliament . 

























