England's Ichabod , glory departed , discoursed by two Christian men , zealous for the glory of God , and true lovers of their nation : the one called Heraclitus junior , weeping for and lamenting the inevitable woe and desolation impending and approaching on his native country . And the other called democritus natu minimus , laughing at the ignorance , blindness , madness , and inexorable stupidity of his own nation , overwhelmed in folly , sin , and wickedness , insensible of its own ruin and misery . Both of them paradoxically praising the Jesuits , and their spurious seed , for their policy , activity , and dexterity , in promoting their factions and projects . 

By Heraclitus junior , and Democritus natu minimus , for ri : Fosterschism . 

isa. 31. 1.  

woe to them that go down to Egypt for help , and stay on horses , and trust in chariots , because they are many , and in horsemen , because they are very strong : but they look not to the holy one of Israel , neither seek the Lord . 

matth. 12. 25.  

every kingdom divided against itself , is brought to desolation ; and every city or house divided against itself , shall not stand . 

London , printed for edw. Blackmore . 1650.  

England's Ichabod , &c.  

Democritus .  My love and affection to you , most dear Heraclitus , hath induced me to visit you , that you and i May discourse a little touching these woeful and doleful days wherein we live . 



Heraclitus .  Welcome , my most cordial and most constant friend ; i rejoice in your presence so gladsome to me , that , if any thing would assuage my mournful tears ▪ your cheerful society would do it . But , Sir , it is too late : i rather wish to be dissolved into tears , then to be revived with mirth ; for the glory of England is departed . Where is the glory of our cities , of our academies , of trade , and merchandise , either domestic , or with foreign nations ; of equity , law , and justice ; of the liberty of the persons ; of the freedom and privileges of the nation in the whole commonwealth ? Nay , ( Which is the greatest woe of all ) where is the glory of religion and sincerity ? Religion is nothing but Opus operatum , a formal , outside preaching and hearing , like the figtree cursed by our Lord Christ , bearing no fruits of charity , humility , obedience , justice and mercy . It is by some made a mere stalking-horse and a servant to pride , ambition , covetousness ; whose entire and endeared companions and confederates , gilded hypocrisy , and execrable villainy , merciless cruelty , bloody and horrid treason , must be sometimes assistant , to effect impious lawless designs . And where will the glory of one of the most famous cities of the world , of London , be , if the citizens lose exportation of cloth and stuffs , and importation of foreign merchandises , as they have lost themselves in their covenant made with God , whereof there is a table and copy , for memorial , fixed and hanged up in most temples in the city ? And then where will the glory of clothiers , artificers , and others , whose trades and livelihoods depend upon manufacture of cloth and stuffs , appear ? And where will the glory of the nobility and gentry , whose revenues depend upon sheep and wool , soon after be ? Last of all , where will the glory of our army and soldiery be , if they conquer not all Europe , or at least quit themselves against the power and forces thereof ? For it appeareth manifestly , that they have provoked most part thereof to be enemies to our nation . Woeful will our lamentations be : i shall not be able to weep enough : i shall even wish to be a Niobe , that i Might be dissolved into tears . tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum ? as the poet . Simon , John , Eleazar ; prelate , independent , presbyter . Scarce three men meet accidentally together of one mind : men are so transported with fiery zeal for one of the three , and so void of meekness of spirit , that they become as fierce as Bellarmine , and cry down all arguments on the behalf of the other two , although they be newly roused from the pillow of Bacchus , and be inscient of the validity of what was or can be said . Why hath opinion , distracted about rule and government , brought these later evils upon us , since the just shall live by faith alone , and not by government ? 



Democritus .  I myself making the same observations which you do , and being apprehensive of the calamities and desolation near approaching , and attending our nation , could , as i am subject to natural passions , mourn and lament also : but since i am fully satisfied , by consulting with the sacred prophets , that there is an inevitable divine decree in this vengeance of the sword , fore-appointed for the accomplishment and manifestation of God's infinite power and glory in purging his church , and bringing in a better persons , and in restauration of mercy and justice in the commonwealth ; that grief , which would otherwise possess me , is turned into mirth . Yet , if it May be asked by prayer , let not , oh God , the parable and curse of Jotham ( Mentioned in the ninth chapter of judges ) be fulfilled , and fall upon our Abimelechs and Shechemites of England ! Hearken , ye men of Shechem , famous citizens , that God May hearken unto you , and not send an evil spirit amongst ye , to stir ye up to destroy one another , as abimele•h did the Shechemites , when they had raised him , and made him their King , after the bloody murder of his brethren , the legitimate sons of Gedeon , about seventy men . Like noble Bereans , read the chapter , and apply it . And take notice of a few words uttered and predicted against our nation , and some famous city thereof , above 1100 years since , in the reign of Vortiger , printed at Frankfurt about 50 years since : viz.  vae perjuriae genti , qua urbs inclyta propter eam ruet : festinat namque dies qua cives ob scelera perjurii peribunt . if that astrologer who uttered these words , amongst others , ( Whereof we have seen the completion in a great part , and could , if without controlment permitted , fully demonstrate ) did now live , he would laugh profusely at some modern astrologers , who gainsay them , or speak slightly or dubiously of them , although completed . 



Heraclitus .  If there be a divine vengeance in this scourge of division , faction , rapine , and bloodshedding ; why have the persons severally murmured , railed , and clamoured , some against the beheaded King , some against the parliament , some against the city of London , some against the Scots , as the several sole causes of our unnatural and bloody civil war ? 



Democritus .  Because they ignorantly and falsely conjecture that all things come to pass by chance , without divine providence and governance ; many being so peremptory and stiff in opinion , and so puffed up with their own transcendency of piety , and singularity of spirit , that they explode all opinions but their own , and all reasons and arguments against the same , although valid and forcible ; as is evident , in that , that though they despise government and all dominion , yet none more eagerly aspire to , and hunt after high places of domination , both ecclesiastical and temporal : and when they are invested in them , none so rigid as themselves , who so much censured and condemned the government of others to be oppressive and tyrannical : and then they make ostentation , and buzz like the fly upon the wheel , this have i done ; whenas the coach-wheels and horses heels stirred the dust : so , by the help of insinuation , and subtle faction , ambitious , covetous , proud boasters , and singular self-lovers are exalted to trample on their brethren . plurimis famam {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , avidè magis ambientibus quàm fervidè , & sincerè {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} annunciantibus . one would be Paul , another Cephas , and the third Apollo : and the itching-eared persons love to have it so : but what will they do in the end ? These men consider not that their own particular sins , and the general sins of the nation , have drawn down God's wrath and indignation against us ; some daring to call our covenant made with God , filled of record in our temples an old almanac , which May be thrown in the fire at years' end . 



Heraclitus .  How Might their understandings be better informed , and their judgements rectified ? 



Democritus .  By none other means but , first , by reading the scriptures , and principally the prophet Isaiah , chap. 45. vers. 7. and Amos , chap. 3. v. 6. and jerem. chap. 25 , v. 15 , 16 , 26 , 27 , 29 , 31 , 32. and chap. 3. v. 6. and chap. 30. v. 24. and chap. 34. v. 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20. and chap. 5.  The whole scope of which two last-recited chapters plainly parallel with our times and nation , and matth. 24 ▪ with divers other scriptures , as well touching the nearness of the end of the world , in confutation of the Millenary schism , much availing for the Roman party , and now boldly and busily broached by some of the prime dissenting brethren , Igodown , Oglethorp , and others ; as also , touching national churches , in confutation of independency and singularity ; as rev. 20. 4. and 21. 24 , 26. and isai. 60. 3 , 5 10 , 11 , 16. and rev. 11. 15.  And secondly , by comparing the last occurrences of tumults and insurrections when we had a King , he then having no council nor army ; and our present home-divisions and Naumachies' , with the beginnings of our civil wars , when we had a King , he then having an host of men , and council . But now , since we have no King , who can be said to be the cause of our present broils , rapine , and spoils , by sea and land , but our own sins ; cùm anglia laborat saevire in semetipsam ? even as when there was no King in Israel , every man did that which was good in his own eyes : as judg. 17. 6. and ch. 19 more at large . 



Heraclitus .  The evidence thereof aggravateth my sorrow , and increaseth my tears ; and much more , when i read the fourth verse of the third chapter of Hosea , threatening judgement against the Israelites , that they should be many days without a King or Prince , &c.  was it a judgement in the days of Israel , and is it none in our days ? Our laws have depended upon monarchy , although enacted ( Which was our happiness , if we had well considered it ) not by monarchy alone , but by aristocracy , and democracy : therefore , without all three , our laws are dissolved , and we fall into anarchy . Is peace ever to be looked for without law ? If the sword be our lawgiver , shall we not become assassinates and heathens ? Where will truth and religion be ? Without them , farewel peace . We feel with sorrow and smart , that inter arma silent leges . and if there be neither King , law , nor religion , what will become of parliaments ? Our case will be the same with the Israelites , when they had no King : every desperate man will dare to say to a parliament-man , as an injurious Hebrew said to Moses , who made thee a man of authority , or judge over us ? but is there go balm left in Gilead ? is there not one man left , who by grave and seasonable counsel Might discover the incendiaries of our divisions , and the contrivers of our factions and distractions ; and so divert the deluge of confusion and slaughter ready to overwhelm our nation ? 



Democritus .  It is daily done by zealous preachers of God's word in the pulpit , and by them and others in printed papers , with solid and weighty motives ; but with little effect : for most men's hearts are hardened , and their understandings stupefied : God hath strike us , but we have not sorrowed ; he hath consumed us , but we have refused to receive correction : we have made our faces harder than a stone , and have refused to return . We May now , with Jeremiah the prophet , in his fifth chapter , run to and fro in the streets of our English Jerusalem , and behold now , and know , and inquire in the open places thereof , if we can find a man , or if there be any that spontaneously executeth judgement , and seeketh the truth ; and than hope that the Lord will spare the land . Where is the man , who payeth his vows to God ? Where is the patriot of his country , fearing God and hating covetousness ? Where is the justiciary ? Do we not see almost every man's self to be his own country ? Many great men say , they know the way of the Lord , and the judgement of their god ; but these have altogether broken the yoke , and burst the bonds . the sins for which most often and most severely God punished the Israelites , were idolatry , breach of covenant , and perjury . Did God punish them for those sins , and can other nations , now in being , hope to be quit , and go free ? We expected an issue of our miseries by the sword ; but they are augmented , and aggravated : our hopes fail us . What will become of that persons in the end , which repose confidence in their own strength of charets , horsemen , and horses ? Jeremiah ( In his 31 chap. vers. 1. ) telleth them what attendeth them . God is the god of order , and not of confusion . Will not the Lord visit for these things ? Shall he not be avenged on such a nation ? 



Heraclitus .  The consideration of these things , draweth a flood of tears from me . For it is most manifest , that the English Jesuits , by their secret and admirable policies , and subtle insinuations , under pretext of tender conscience their bugbear , work upon the easy minds of the weaker sort of persons , who , by how much they are more shallow in judgement , by so much are more obstinate and stiff in opinion , impenetrable , and inflexible with any arguments whatsoever , human or divine . Amid my sad and doleful tears , i am the more astonished , when i revolve this verse predicted of England long since , viz. corruet anglorum gens fraud suorum ; which word suorum can have relation to , or dependence on no words in the whole series of the Latin nouns but to one or two ending thus , viz. — ituum ▪ — itiorum . it irketh me very grievously , that it should be said to some of those , to whom belongeth the heading of those two imperfect words , whose hearts are right for church and country , against all obstructions , that exitus will be exitium : but as touching any amongst them , who are inveterate , rancorous , and deadly enemies to the tranquillity , peace , and splendour of our national church , and commonwealth ; i say , let God arise , and let his enemies be scattered ! how shall God's wrathful indignation be appeased , when through hardness of heart we are insensible of the national sin , as heinous as the sin of Achan , and the bloody sin of Saul against the gibeonites , committed under pretence of zeal to his nation , provoking God's wrath against the Israelites to destroy them with famine ; which was not abated , until , through David's satisfaction given to the gibeonites , by the decollation and slaughter of Saul's sons , God's wrath was appeased ? as 2 sam. 21. 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 ▪ 9 , 14.  Hath not God visited our nation with the same punishment ? It hath been said of old , quos Jupiter perdere vult , priùs dementat . what hope have we to evade and escape the snares of the politic Jesuits , when we are already wrapped and involved in them , and when we neither do nor will discern their most exquisite , subtle , and close conveyances ? they having adopted , or rather begotten a bastard-breed of sons , and infused so much of their virulent virtue into them , that thereby they have not only wrought weak judgements to pretended conscience of an independent church , but have also by state-policy benumbed , blinded , besotted , and stupefied some great and wise ones in our nation , inducing them to connive at their frauds and jugglings , whereby more strenuously a toleration of schism and heresy is creeping in , than ever could have been brought in by themselves alone for their party . 



Democritus .  Charitable and pitiful Heraclitus , thy tears verily proceed from a tender conscience affected with the abominable sinfulness of thine own nation , and the blindness and stupidity thereof . But be thou not solicitous and grieved , since God , for horrid and loud-crying sins , hath designed our nation to woeful calamities : let us be rather comforted , and give glory to God , and rejoice , that he hath given us the sight of those things in his holy word , which neither mighty men , nor noble , nor learned , nor politicians will take notice of ; but do rather wink with their eyes , and shut their understandings from being advertised thereof , and will deride both thee and me for our discourse , if they should hear it . 



Heraclitus .  Nevertheless , dear Democritus , let us not ••…ist : a word spoken in its place is like apples of gold with pictures of silver , as Solomon hath it in his proverbs . 



Democritus .  Moses and the prophets speak plain enough to our nation : if we will not hear them , neither will we hear , though one rise from the dead again , unless he should beat wit into our heads with a maul : and some such dreadful judgement , i fear , doth attend us . Were our words acceptable , or Might they be profitable to our nation , i could be incessant and indefatigable : for , cuique probo patria sua est jucundissima . but our nation is become so barbarous and heathenish , that it laboureth with all its wisdom , wealth , and power to destroy itself . We do but scatter our words , we do but charm a deaf adder . I have lately read these words in a book published long before our distractions grew to this immense multiplicity ( As now they are ) and irreconciliable incomposedness , viz. [ be wise , oh England , and discern the Jesuitical Romish frauds , and pernicious plots , and break and avoid their last arrow of independency and aristocracy , ( For they have no more left to wound great Britain withal ) and be happy : sin minus , caveto tibi , ne faciem tuam obfuscent tenebrae non nisi ex nova romana caligine illuminatae : ] and i well know that they came to the view of some both great and wise ; but they seemed to them ridiculous : yet now they May see , that darkness must give light , or we must have no light . The unwarrantable predictions of uncertain astrology promising security , were and are pleasing , and embraced ; which to confide in , is as to consult with the witch of Endor : but the warrantable presages couched in the infallible prophecies of God's holy seers , contained in his sacred word , contemned , slighted , and rejected , even of mighty men , much more of men of inferior order . Railing , lying , futile , scurrilous , seditious , libellous , traitorous pamphlets , spread abroad with all advantage by nimble winged Mercuries , have been , and are ( A time very unfit for such fopperies and iniquities , when our nation is bleeding , languishing , and at the point to be extinct ) embraced by most men , according to their several fancies and affections , very few men having ••…rned the catechism of that most pious and venerable doctor Joshua hall sometimes Bishop of Exeter , since Bishop of Norwich , where they May learn how God doth and will do all things in this world , and as few having compunction of heart for the destruction and desolation of their own country . 



Heraclitus .  How cometh it to pass that the Jesuits have such influence upon our nation now at this time , since their manifold , bloody , and traitorous practices throughout the whole reign of Queen Elizabeth , of King James , of our late King Charles , are fresh in memory , being to be read in histories , rehearsed in almanacs , and brought to our ears by public thanksgivings to God yearly for our deliverances from them ? 



Democritus .  Thou knowest , Heraclitus , that a ship at sea is in the power of its pilot , and that he , if out of treachery he intend it , can betray it to an enemy at his pleasure . The politic practices and treasons of the Jesuits against Queen Elizabeth ▪ by commotions , rebellions , pistols , poisons , poniards , the Spanish armado , were so exquisite and admirable , carried on with such secrecy , that had any of them prevailed , England must have gone to Rome again for the Pope's pardon . But what were all those their devices to that transcendent hyperbolical gunpowder-treason , which with one sulphureous blast had destroyed King James , and all his royal issue male ; all the nobility , and a great part of the gentry , and had subverted religion , and our laws , and had subjugated our nation again to the yoke and tyranny of the popedom ? Since then , far more transcendent , exact politic , never to be parallelled have their stratagems been to undermine our church and state , by insinuating , creeping , and serewing themselves into eminent places and employments in both , under pretext of patriarchacy and sanctimony ; and they have so hood-winked many of the wisemen in our nation , that they suspect them not at all , much less that they have now any plot upon our nation and church , or are at the rudder ; but suppose that they sit still and quiet , neither acting nor plotting any thing . It it is evident to all honest intelligent men , that our late civil bellum Episcopale was plotted and contrived by their ingenuous and profound policies ; and it will shortly be as evident , that our civil bellum populare is driven on by their close conveyances , and ambodexter-jugglings , by misleading the persons under pretence of new lights , and divine raptures , and Christian liberty , and liberty of chiveril conscience . 



Heraclitus .  We know well in former times the Bishops days , when all functions ecclesiastical and civil were transacted and conferred at a price ( For quid mihi dabis ? ) it was an easy thing , they being so exquisite and secret in their plots and contrivements , and they having at that time ducem venerii castri , the buck with the gilded horns for their patron and advocate , to step into ▪ nestle , and rivet themselves as well into high and eminent places in the court , as also into subordinate judicatory-administrations , and into the clergy and prelacy without controlment , especially after the eagles' chicken had nested himself in the highest rochet in the realm . But by what means now do they possess themselves of public places either ecclesiastical or civil , sance there hath usually been such a wide and opposite antipathy between them , and all manner of Protestant's , though sectaries and separatists ? 



Democritus .  First , know , Heraclitus , that the range and rabble of those gleeds which the eagles prime chicken brought in , are not outed of the clergy , academies , and other public societies , nor , as the case now standeth , can be , but rather more are gotten into them . And next know , that the Jesuits are the most subtle expert , and artificial impostors in the world , instructed by art and exercise , to put on Proteus shapes , and to personate all degrees and qualities of men , and neatly , closely , and dexterously to act in all manner of societies , counsels , and factions . And all moderate men know , and of that part yield , that in the late wars many of them became commanders and prime officers in the field and forts against the parliament . And if after their surrenders , and yielding up of forts and forces , they have been entertained , and ma•• commanders in the present army , have they not obtained their ends to agitate their designs of poisoning the army , and consequently the whole nation with schism and heresy , so to hinder the settlement of peace , and to embroil the nation in future war ? And further , know , Heraclitus that the Pope , and his emissaries and ministers have of late years had private oaths for secrecy , fidelity , and activity in their Catholic cause , to minister to all their party both abroad and at home , with dispensation to repair to our temples , whereby they Might seem Protestant's , so to gain popular esteem in their country . And since many men have been presented to the parliament from counties and boroughs by the power of the soldiery , Might not such men , having taken such oath , by insinuation with the soldiery by the assistance of their party in the army , make themselves of the number of legislatores , that they Might without the least jealousy or suspect become legisviolatores ? 

anglicano Italianotto , diabolo incarnatto . 

an English man Italianate , a devil incarnate . 



Heraclitus .  What is thine expectation , Democritus ? dost thou conclude that these foxes , wolves , and wild boars shall still prevail against the unity of the church , and tranquillity of the realm ? 



Democritus .  Though i know well , that hoc rupti foederis deaurabit aquila , that his holiness is better pleased with the device and plot of his dearest sons the Jesuits for democracy , than apes with nuts : if their plot take full effect , he will write both in red letters in his calendar . Yet i make no such conclusion ; but i conclude them to be the servants of God , as Nabuchadnezzar and Pharaoh were , and as the devil sometimes is , that is , instruments to execute his vengeance , to bring inevitable woe upon our nation , and for his glory to gather wholesome hellebore out of the Orcades , therewith to purge our nation of frenzy and hypocrisy , and the church of schism , heresy , and idolatry ; and thence and thereout also to gather a lusty new green besom , that shall sweep themselves , and all their spurious seed , and bastard-sons out of the realm against their wills . And i conclude the Jesuits to be those unclean spirits , like frogs •oming out of the mouth of the dragon , and out of the mouth of the beast , and out of the mouth of the false prophet : for they are the spirits of devils working miracles , to go unto the Kings of the earth , and of the whole world , to gather them to the battle of the great day of God almighty , mentioned in rev. 16. 13 , 14.  

Let honest men therefore , with David , tarry the Lord's leisure , be strong , and trust in the Lord , and their hearts shall be comforted . 

And as Lot was in Sodom , if they be captivated , let them hope that God will send an Abraham to deliver them . And let them resolve with David , that whose dwelleth under the defence of the most high , shall abide in the shadow of the almighty . 



to England , an anagram on England . 

England , lament , repent ; bitter ennd-gal , 
Thine anagram portends thy fatal fall : 
Like Samson , grinding with thine eyes put out , 
Thou drivest Jesuits designs about : 
Thou mak'st them sport ; they make thee dearly pay 
For thine own downfall , ruin , and decay . 
No help remains , but to retort their darts 
Upon themselves , shot at good men and arts . 
Wisely discern ; be not blind , stupid , dull , 
In suffering them with shadows thee to gull , 
Under pretence Christ's gospel to advance , 
To advance heresy , schism , ignorance ; 
By false pretext beasts language to drive hence , 
To gain beast far more sway than peter-pences . 
Hadst thou in time imposed th' abjuring oath , 
They had not poisoned thee with deadly broth : 
But now they have enjoined thee such a diet 
Will gar thee pine , it 's vain to be unquiet . 
No joy remains , but by God's word to know , 
He will at last his rod in fire throw . 
Finis . 




























