England's genius pleading for King Charles to the right honourable the Lords and Commons in parliament , &c.  And to the Lord Monck general of all the forces in England , Scotland and Ireland , &c.  

Great worthies ! 

Who ( I hope ) were born to be 
the restaurators of my liberty : 
† you who rich scarlet , faced with ermines wear , 
And both high titles and true virtues bear : 
* you , who have always been , and now will be 
The perfect type of true democracy , 
My careful patriots of plebe an power , 
My never-stormed fortress my strong tower , 
Resisting still usurped monarchy , 
Or too much •ording aristocracy ; 
and you ( Great Sir ) who draw your splendid line 
From York's white-rose , whose noble blood doth shine 
With an untainted loyal tincture , you 
May give me peace , and Charles his empire too . 
At your auspicious feet the genius of 
Distracted Albion's isle doth lie , ( The scoff 
New justly of her foes ) this face you see 
This squalid face is mine , i , i am she 
Whem twice ten bloody and tempestuous years 
Have vexed with soul-tormenting fears ; 
Torn by the rage of my unnatural sons , 
Whose fury racked me with uncessant wrongs , 
( Oh vip'rous brood ! ingrateful whelps that dare , 
Your kindest mothers panting bowels tear ! ) 
My once vast treasures are exhausted , all 
Consumed , and i to a prodigious fall , 
And utter ruin posting down amain , 
If your heroic hands me not sustain ; 
But my decayed treasures likely are 
Ne'er to recruit till th' trade obstructing war 
with his great Catholic majesty of Spain 
Doth find a period ; till i be again , 
( I say ) till my three royal crowns and i , 
be given to Charles his sacred majesty . 
Even as a ship upon the boisterous seas , 
When the blue billows mount to troubled skies , 
When tempest-breathing Boreas does roar , 
Driving the waves against th' assaulted shore , 
When † corus from the great Atlantic main 
Thunders , and other winds retort again , 
His raging blasts and ship-encountring waves , 
When , not without just cause , the pilot raves , 
But th' shaken vessel ( Be what will his mind ) 
Is rapt away by the prevailing wind ; 
Just like this tempest-tossed ship i 've been 
Long time abused and cheated , racked between 
Pale fear and hope ; then by the longest sword 
Commanded , daring not to speak a word . 
be you [ my supreme court ] ( Illustrious Sirs , ) 
The olive-crowned , welcome harbingers , 
Be you the happy Phospherus , who May 
With your resplendent , truly happy ray 
The wished re-establishment forerun 
Of my so long in vain-desired sun ! 
But ( George ! ) to your renowned worth and you , 
How much doth England's grateful genius Owe ? 
Nor changes , nor this series of time , 
Nor yet to faith that inauspicious clime 
Scotland , ( Long never to one interest true ) 
Had power t' extinguish those true sparks in you , 
( sparks , which black embers many years did cloud 
And in eternal silence seem to shroud ) 
Of love to me , who in a pensive tone 
Wish my just Master , and his juster throne . 
Sir , you and your peace-bringing-troops did come 
Not as great Caesar to distracted Rome , 
Did once advance , trophies bringing along 
From the fierce galls , and fiercer Germans won , 
With raging Mars in his war-threatening-look , 
Which could no equal or superior brook . 
No angry frowns your milder looks did show , 
But peace sat crowned in your triumphant brow ; 
Your Scotish mist ( Oh strange ! ) down did not pour 
In a tempestuous or a bloody shower , 
But did impending rage and tempests chase , 
From the sad surface of my mourning face , 
And by it 's active breath , did dissipate 
The feared effects of my resolved fate . 
With king-restoring * Stanley shall you stand 
Ranked , when our pridigious annals brand 
The horrid fury and nefarious rage 
Of this bloodsucking , king-condemning age . 
The eager teeth of all-devouring time , 
Shall never triumph o'er your high , sublime , 
Star-towring name ; and , though we daily see 
no pitch of glory from the grave is free ; 
Yet when stern death ( Ne'er touched with least remorse ) 
Shall by his fatal unrelenting force 
Storm your life's fort , your better part shall then 
Survive , yea gloriously revive again ? 
Your fame ( I mean ) and lasting name shall be 
Preserved in brass to all eternity . 
† my hopes mount high ( grave senate ! ) when i see 
the regal crown and royal ca•opie , 
With that rich laurel , which fanatics hate 
To see upheld by cherubims in state ; 
I trust that halcyon days May once again , 
Return and i in my old glory shine . 
I hope your happy and resplendent light 
The bloody shades of my long gloomy night 
Will still dispel and drive away , and now 
My native foes proud fury tame , if you 
If you my King and ancient laws restore , 
If you take care i be abused no more , 
If you the church and clergy countenance , 
If you my now-decayed trade advance , 
While radiant stars shall run their usual race , 
While Neptune's arms these fruitful isles embrace , 
While Luna shall her horns together close : 
While the daystar the rosy morn foreshows , 
England's good genius shall your praises sound 
And your blessed heads with laurels shall be crowned . 
London , printed for j. Jones , 1660.  





† house of Lords  * house of com.  general . † n. w. wind.  * by whose means the crown was won from r 3. & restored to h. 7. heir of the house of lan. † parlia. 




