ד ה ד ח ד 

royalty per me reges regnant 

Quam bonum est conuenire 

Regem & populum conuenire 

loyalty subdite estate potestati superem  

royalty and loyalty or a short survey of the power of Kings over their subjects : and the duty of subjects to their Kings . 

Abstracted out of ancient and later writers , for the better composeing of these present distempers : and humbly presented to ye consideration of his •ma . tie and both houses of parliament , for the more speedy effecting of a pacification . 

By ro gross  

By God's command we rule this land . 

We are all yours and what is ours . 

chap. 1.  The King's royalty : or the power of Kings over their subjects . 

At the first , there was no distinction , or difference of men ; one man was as good as another : but afterwards , some excelling others in desert , were preferred before others in place . nature , saith Gregory , did produce all men alike : but the order of their ments varying , occult dispensation did prefer some before others . But this distinction , which happened from sin , is rightly ordered by the just judgement of God , that , because all men do not go the same course of life , one man should be governed by another . St. Augustine saith , that God would not that man , a rational creature , made after his own image , should domineer over any but irrational creatures ; not man over man , but man over beasts . Hence it was that those first just men , were constituted rather pastors of sheep , than governors of men : that even so , God Might insinuate both what the order of the creatures did require , and what the merit of sin had deserved . If men had continue in their first integrity and state of innocence , there had been no use of Emperors , or commanders : every man would have seemed a King unto himself ; nor would he have had any other lawgiver , than God and nature . But when this could not be obtained , and the perverseness of degenerous mankind grew such , as that breaking the bonds of all laws , they left nothing unattempted , which did not tend to the height of impiety , there was a great necessity of magistrates ; without whose prudence , and diligence , a city could not then consist ; and by whose description and putting men into order , the government of each commonwealth is still continue , and preserved . Hence came the command of man over men : without which , as Cicero saith , neither house , nor city , nor nation , nor mankind , nor the nature of things , nor the world itself can subsist . For to govern , and be governed , is not only ( According to Aristotle ) amongst those things that are necessary , but those things that are profitable . and to use St.  Chrysostom's words , in our dialect : if you take away judicial tribunals , you take away all order of life : for , as a ship cannot but miscarry without a pilot ; and an army cannot March in due number , or decent order , without a captain : so , without a governor , a city cannot be well ordered ; and without a King , a kingdom must needs come to ruin . If you take a King from his command , or authority from a King , we shall live a more beastly life , than irrational creatures : some biting and devouring others ; he that is rich , him that is poor ; he that is strong , him that is weaker ; he that is fierce , him that is milder ; so far , and to this purpose , the golden-mouthed Chrysostom . with whom , is agreeable that of the scriptures , in those days there was no King in Jsraell : and what follows ? every one did that which was right in his own eyes , iud. 17.6 . So that , as Tacitus hath it , it is better to be under an evil Prince , than under none . the tragedian tells us , that there is no greater evil than anarchy : it brings all things to confusion ; it ruins cities ; lays waste houses ; overthrows armies : but the submissive and due obedience of true subjects , doth preserve both life and fortunes . An empire now being constituted amongst men , it must needs be that one , or more , must have the pre-eminence : the former is called a monarchy , or a kingdom ; the latter an optimacy , or state of the persons . A kingdom then , which is most proper to us , is the command , or sovereignty of one man , for the good of all . I will not dwell long in describing the causes of it : i would they were as well observed , as they are known ; or better known , that they Might be the better observed . All power over the creature , is originally in God the creator : but out of his goodness to mankind , communicated to man above all others . So that God is the only author , and efficient cause , as of things , so of Kings : for however there are divers ways to attain to the princely sceptre ; as some have mounted the imperial throne by force and arms ; others by the command of God , have been designed Kings , as David , Hazael , Jehu , and others , of which you May read in the holy scriptures ; others have been elected Princes by the suffrages of the persons ; and others born in purple , by hereditary right , to a kingdom : yet it is most certain , that whether by these , or any other ways , men do ascend the chair of state , they have their power , whatsoever it is , solely from God ; and aught to use it to the glory of God , and the good of their subjects . Seneca tells us , that nature at first did invent a King : which is to be seen both in animals , and in inanimates : for the bees , cranes , and other living creatures , have their Kings or commanders : so among fourfooted beasts , the lion ; and amongst birds , the eagles do excel . In inanimates likewise the same is evident ; the sun amongst the stars , the fire amongst the elements , sight amongst the senses , gold amongst metals , wine amongst liquids have the precedency . And to speak truth , under God , the law of nature is a special cause for to effect and perfect monarchy . It is certain , faith that great statesman amongst the Romans , that all ancient nations did at first subject themselves to Kings : and that was the first name of government upon earth . the Jews had a monarchy from Saul to Zedekiah , as May be seen in sacred histories . The Assyrians from Nimrod to Sardanapalus . the Medes from Arbaces to Astyages . the Persians' from Cyrus to Darius the son of Arsamus . the Macedonians from Caranus to Perseus . Herodotus testifieth of the Egyptians , that they could be at no time without a King , and therefore they did voluntarily carry the rods before them , and submit themselves to be ruled by them . the first King , so far as May be gathered from antiquity , was called Menes . the same custom was also prevalent among other nations : the first King of the Indian's was Alexander ; of the Trojans , trojus ; of the Danes , the first that was King , was Graemus ; Brito of the Britains ; Fergusius of the Scots ; Craco of the Polonians ; Attilas of Hungary ; Zechus of Bohemia ; Pharamundus of France ; and Pelagius of Spain . The first Kings that are celebrated of the Grecians , were Saturn , Jupiter , and Cecrops ; of the Garamantes , a persons of the middle of Lybia , Cambyses ; of the Romans , Romulus , from whom at first to l. Tarqvinius Superbus , and afterwards from c. Julius Caesar to this day , they have retained a monarchy . Bellarmine would divine , that the civil power ought to be immediately , if not by the law of God , yet by the law of nature , in the whole multitude as in its subject ; and from it to be transferred by the same law of nature to one or more : but he much deceives himself , and others also , with such his hallucination . For this power of life and death is given by nature unto none . none seems to be Lord of his own members ; much less of another's . Only God , who gives life to men , hath the power of taking it away from them ; or those , to whom , by a special favour , he hath communicated that power . And surely your blood of your lives will i require ( Saith God ) at the hands of every beast will i require it , and at the hand of man , at the hand of every man's brother will i require the life of man . whosoever sheddeth man's blood , by man shall his blood be shed : for in the image of God made he man . hence is that precept both of God and nature : thou shalt not kill . but , if this power were given by nature unto men , it should surely have been given to one man , rather than to all : for the command of one man ( Even Bellarmine himself being the judge ) is the best , and most agreeable unto nature ; but the command of a multitude , the worst . Now nature in every thing ( As the philosophers will have it ) doth intend that which is best : so that , out of the politic society , and a certain form of civil government , there is not any politic or civil power given unto men . but all consent , that all ancient nations ( As formerly was spoken ) did at first obey Kings : and , that it was the first name of command upon earth . yea , as Bellarmine himself confesseth , kingdoms are of greater antiquity than commonwealths . In the beginning of states , ( Saith Justine ) the command of persons and nations was in the Kings . It must needs be then , that Kings not receive their power and authority from the multitude , or men , but from God only the King of Kings . for it is a maxim and principle among the lawyers , that no man can transfer more power upon another than he hath himself . Nor is this assertion contradicted , though you should allege , that Princes , as i said before , are sometimes chosen by men ; more often , if not always , inaugurated by them . For hence it is that s. Peter calleth a King , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the ordinance of man : which is not so to be understood , causally , as if it were excogitated or invented by men ; but subjectively , because it is exercised by men ; and objectively , because it is versed about the government of human society ; and then finally , because it is constituted by God for the good of men , and the conservation of human policy . For the word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} doth recall us to God , as to the first author of authority : and although Kings are create by men , that is , erected , anointed , and inaugurated by them ; yet the first creator of Kings is God , to whom all creation doth appertain , and from whom all power doth come . for there is no power but of God , if we will believe s. Paul , who from his Master tells us , that the powers that be 〈◊〉 ordained of God . the final cause of sooner aignty is the glory of God , and the happiness of the subject : that a King , as the keeper of the two tables in the decalogue , with one eye looks up unto God , whose vicegerent he is , in advancing and defending religion and piety ; and with the other upon his subjects , that they May live in peace and prosperity . for this cause , saith Epiphanius , are powers ordained , that all things from God May be well disposed and administered to the good order of government of the whole world . This is that goal to which the princely champion runs ; which is no other , as Lipsius speaks , than the commodity , security , and prosperity of subjects . And this is the end which s. Paul expresseth , when as he saith , that the magistrate is the minister of God to them for good : where , by [ good ] we May understand , good natural , good moral , good civil , and good spiritual . First , the King is the minister of God to his subjects for their good natural , whenas he makes provision of corn and victuals , whereby they May live . Secondly , he is a minister of God for their good moral , when as he doth prescribe such laws to his subjects , as that they conforming their lives to them May live honestly . Thirdly , he is the minister of God to them for good civil , when as by his sword he doth preserve their persons and estates from injury , and maintain the public peace . And lastly , he is the minister of God for good unto them , good spiritual , when as he doth advance and maintain religion and piety , and suppress profaneness and superstition . The material cause of sovereignty , is the King and persons ; with which , as with its integral parts , it is complete and absolute ; and without which , it cannot at all subsist . The formal cause of it , consists in that order which is between the King and his subjects : by which , he is above them , and they under him ; he commands , and they obey ; he rules , and they submit : of which , as Lipsius saith , there is so great a force , or necessity rather , that this alone is the stay or prop of all human things . This is that same bond , saith Seneca , by which the commonwealth coheres ; that vital spirit , which so many thousands of men do draw : who , otherwise of themselves , would be nothing but a burden and a prey , if this soul of command were withdrawn from them . This is that same Circaean rod , with the touch of which both beasts and men become tame and ruley ; & which of all , otherwise headstrong and untractable , makes every one obedient and pliable : each man with the fear of it . A commonwealth , saith Aristotle , is a certain description , or order of those men which do inhabit it . The King , he is above all others , according to that power which God almighty hath communicated unto him ; and the subjects , they are under him , by the same authority . 

And therefore Princes are called {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , that is , supereminent , seated in a more sublime estate : and subjects , they are called {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , subordinate , reduced into order . The metaphor is taken from military discipline , in which the commander placed above all others , overlooks the whole body , while every one , besides him standing in their ranks , keep their stations . Whereupon , as soldiers in an army placed in order , are subordinate to their captain , and perform obedience to him , as their supreme head : in the same manner , subjects are subordinate to their Prince , and bound to perform obedience to him . Now what this power of a King is , is not of all sides agreed upon . If we look into the sacred records , we May see the manner of the Israelites King to be described . and Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the persons , that asked of him a King . And he said , this will be the manner of the King that shall reign over you : he will take your sons , and appoint them for himself , for his chariots ; and to be his horsemen , and some shall run before his chariots . And he will appoint them captains over thousands , and captains over fifties , and will set them to care his ground , and to reap his harvest , and to make his instruments of war , and instruments of his chariots , and he will take your daughters to be confectionaries , and to be cooks , and to be bakers . And he will take your fields , and your vine-yards , and your olive yards , even the best of them , and give them to his servants . And he will take the tenth of your seed , and of your vineyards , and give to his officers , and to his servants . And he will take your men servants , and your maidservants , and your goodliest young men , and your asses , and put them to his work . He will take the tenth of your sheep , and ye shall be his servants . some , from this description of Samuel , do think , that the rights of majesty are set forth : so Luthen ( in Postil . super evang dom. 23. post trinit. conc. 1.  Those things ( Saith he ) which are said to be Caesar's , mat. 22.21 . are those rights of Kings which are described , 1 sam. 8.  Now those things which Christ affirmeth to be Caesar's , aught of right to be given unto him . So Strigelius in 1 sam. 8. p. 27.  hic dicunt aliqui describi tyrannum , non regem , &c. sed textus nominal jus regis , & loquitur de oneribus stipendiorum causâ mpositis . some say , that here a tyrant is described , not a King ; and that these things are not so spoken , as if the Lord did approve of servitude : but the text ( Saith he ) doth name the rights of Kings , and speaks of burdens imposed by way of stipend . But these , with others of the same opinion , are much mistaken and deceived . For God constituting judges under him , was himself in a peculiar manner ( Which never happened unto any other nation ) a King to the Israelites , who now did ask a King of him , as the other nations had . hearken ( Saith God to Samuel ) unto the voice of the persons ; in all that they say unto thee : for they have not rejected thee , but they have rejected me , that i should not reign over them . Samuel therefore , as the Lord commanded him , that he Might reprehend the rashness of this persons , describes unto them the impune licence , the rage and violence of this man , ( Whom , in stead of God , they did desire to be set over them ) and so , in his person , of all Kings . As if the prophet had said ; the lust of this King's licence shall break forth so far , that it shall not be in your power to restrain it : who yet shall have this one thing betide you , to receive his commands , and to be obedient to him . insomuch ( Saith he ) that ye shall cry out in that day , because of your King which ye shall have chosen you , and the Lord will not hear you . for Kings are exempted from the punishments of human laws , and have God only to be their judge and their avenger . the virtue of the law ( As Modestinus hath it ) is this , to command , forbid , permit , and punish : but no man can command himself ; or be compelled by himself ; or so make a law that he May not recede from it . Laws are given by superiors to inferiors : but no man is superior , or inferior , to himself . It is impossible therefore for Kings to be bound by their own laws : much less , by the laws of their predecessors , or the persons . For an equal hath not power over an equal : much less , an inferior over a superior . There are three sorts of civil government , according to Aristotle : monarchy , aristocracy , and democracy . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . it is necessary , saith he , that the chief be one , or a few , or many : for all nations and cities ( As that great secretary of state to many Emperors hath it ) are governed either by the persons , or by the peers , or by the Prince . As then , in aristocracy and democracy , it must needs be that the government be in the hands of some few , or many : so in monarchy , it is in one man's hands only ; whose laws all men are bound to obey , but himself none , save the law of God . For otherwise , it is not a monarchy , but a polyarchy , that is , the state of the peers , or persons . A King subject to laws , ( Saith the philosopher ) {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , is not a species of a republic . Cicero being to defend King Deiotarus , before Caesar , begins his oration from the insolency and novelty of the thing ; telling him that it was so unusual a thing for a King to be accused , as that , before that time , it was never heard of . c. Memmius a popular man , and of great power , although he were a most deadly enemy to nobility , yet he subscribes to the same opinion . For , to do any thing without being questioned , is to be a King , saith he . A Prince , saith Ulpian , is free from all laws . Dio , his coaetany , speaks to the same purpose : they are free from laws ( Saith he ) as the Latin words do sound : that is , from all necessity of the laws , or the necessary observation of the laws : nor are they tied to any written laws . Constantinus Harmenapolus , a Greek interpreter , to the same sense thus delivers himself . a King is not subjected to laws ; that is , he is not punished , if he offends . To which , i Might add the common consent of the interpreters of both laws , unanimously affirming and concluding , that a King is to give an account for his offences to God only , and only before him to justify his innocence . Excellently Solomon : where the word of a King is , there is power ; and who May say unto him , what dost thou ? and therefore the wise man , in the wisdom of Solomon , thus addresseth his speech unto them : hear therefore oh ye Kings , learn ye that be judges of the ends of the earth : give care you that rule the persons , and glory in the multitude of nations : for power is given you of the Lord , and sovereignty from the highest , who shall try your works , and search out your counsels . let us hear some of the fathers about this matter : Irenaeus tells us , that the Princes of the world having the laws as the garment of justice , shall not be questioned for those things they shall do according to law and justice , nor yet suffer punishment : but if they shall practise any thing contrary to law , in a tyrannical manner , to the subversion of justice , in this case they are reserved to the judgement of God , sinning against him only . Of those things which are committed to Kings by God , they are only to give an account unto God . So far he . Tertullian in his apology rhetorizes it thus : we , saith he , do invoke the eternal God , the true God , the living God , for the safety of Emperors , whom even the Emperor's desire above all others to be propitious unto them . They know who hath given power unto them , who men under them , who their own souls : they acknowledge it is God only , in whose power alone they are ; from whom they are second ; next him the first , before all gods , and above all men . saint Jerome saith of David , that he repenting , after he had accumulated murder upon his adultery , did say to God , against thee only have i sinned , because he was a King , and feared not man . Before s. Jerome , s. Ambrose thus descants on him : David sinned , as most Kings do ; but David repent , wept , and mourned , which most Kings do not . That which private men are ashamed to do , the King was not ashamed to confess : they that are bound by laws , dare deny their sin , and disdain to ask pardon ; which he implored , who was not bound by human laws . He was a King , he was tied by no laws : because Kings are free from the 〈◊〉 of transgressions , for they are not called to punisment by the laws , being free by the power of their command . He did not therefore sin against man , because he was not subject to man . after him let us comfort  lar : how far better than is the Emperor , 〈◊〉 not tied to the same laws , and hath power to make other laws : and in another •ce , there is a command upon judges , that they 〈◊〉 revoke sentence that is once passed upon an offender , and shall the Emperor be under the same law ? for he alone May revoke the sentence , absolve him that is condemned , and give him his life . Gregory arch Bishop of Tours , thus speaks to chelperick King of France . If any of us , oh King , shall transgress the limits of justice , he May be corrected by you : but if you shall exceed the same limits , who shall question 〈◊〉 for we indeed do speak unto you ; and if you will , you hear us : if you will not , who shall condemn you , but only he who hath pronounced himself to be justice itself ? Otto Frisingensis writes to Frederick O•n•barius in these words : furthermore , whereas there is no person in the world , which is not subject to the laws of the world , by being subject May not be enforced ; only Kings , as being constituted above laws , and reserved to the judgement of God ; are not 〈◊〉 by the laws of men . Hence is that testimony of that King and prophet , against thee only have i sinned it  then a King , not only nobilitated with magnanimity of spirit , but illuminated 〈◊〉 divine grace , to acknowledge his creator , to have always in his mind the King of Kings , and Lord of Lords , and , as much as in him lies , to take heed by all means not to fall into his hands . For , when as , according to that of the apostle to every man , it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God : it will be so much the more fearful for Kings , who besides him , have none above them , whom they May fear , by how much above others they May sin more freely . Which sayings of the fathers and other writers , divine and profane , thus premised , i cannot but wonder at the stupid ignorance , and ignorant wilfulness , of such men , who would make the world believe , that it is in the power of the Pope , or of the persons , or of the peers , to call Kings in question , and reduce them to order , if they be extravagant . And if there be a lawful cause , ( Saith Bellarmine ) the multitude May change the kingdom into an aristocracy or democracy ; and on the contrary , as we read hath been done at Rome . But to speak truly , there can be no cause , without the express command of God , either expressed or excogitated , for which it May be lawful for subjects , either to depose , or put to death , or any other way restrain their King , be he never so wicked , never so flagitious . We do not deny but this thing hath been done at Rome , ( As Bellarmine confesseth ) but by what right , let him look to it . We must not look so much what hath been done at Rome , ( As the Roman laws advise us ) as what ought to be done . But Bellarmine doth affirm that the King is above the persons and that , he acknowledgeth no other , beside  his  temporal things . 

But to return whe•  . the power of a King over his persons is expressed by Samuel , to which they must of necessity  without resistances . Not that the King was to 〈◊〉 so by right , as Samuel had told the Israelites 〈◊〉 would , ( For the law of God did prescribe 〈◊〉 a far more differing form of government , then sh•ls in any wise set him  whom the Lord thy god shall choose ( Saith Moses . ) but he shall not  to himself , nor cause the persons to return into Egypt , to the end that he should multiply horses : forasmuch as the Lord hath said unto you , ye shall henceforth return no more that way . Neither shall he multiply 〈◊〉 himself that his heart turn  neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold ) but because it was the common custom of the Kings of the nations ( Whose example they desired to imitate , in asking of a King , as other nations had ) so to do . For Samuel doth not speak to him that should be their King , but to the persons that desired a King : yea , and he wrote this law of a kingdom , which he there describes , in a 〈◊〉 and put it before the Lord , that is , into  of the covenant , that it Might be for  all for ever , and a testimony to their posterity , of those things which he had foretold . Joseph . l. 6.  Antiq. Judaic . c. 5.  where yet we must distinguish , between the rash and greedy desire of Kings , and the utility and necessity of commonwealths . if a King , spurred on by a private desire , and ravenous lust of having , doth claim such things as are there described , he deals unjustly and tyrannically : but if , the safety and necessity of the commonwealth so requiring , he demands those things ; then , he doth not unjustly , if he doth use his kingly power . Again , we must distinguish also between the thing , and the manner of the thing . if a King in exacting these things doth observe a just and lawful manner , and without compulsion & violence doth require the help of his subjects , as their labours , tenths , and tributes , for the supporting of the state , and necessity of his kingdom ; he cannot be said 〈◊〉 be a tyrant , or deal injuriously : but if he shall go beyond the bounds of necessity and •egality ; and only shall aim at his own private ends , to the inconvenience and detriment of the public good of his kingdom , he doth abuse his kingly power , and degenerates into tyranny . Excellently and satisfactorily to this purpose is that of Lyra ( in comment . 1 sam. 8. ) sciend• quod aliqua sunt de jure regis in necessitate positi , &c.  we must ( Saith he ) know , that there are some things , which by right are the Kings , being placed in necessity for the common good of the kingdom , and so all those things which are here expressed , are by right the Kings ; because that , in such a case , all things that are the Kings or Princes , are to be exposed and expended for the common good : even as we see in the natural body , that the hand , or any other part of the body , even by instinct of nature , is exposed for the preservation of the life of the who 〈◊〉 but if the •ight of a King be taken otherwise , out of necessity , than there are more things expressed there , than do appertain to the right of a King : as all those things which do make a persons to be 〈◊〉 subject , and those which do not respect the common good , but rather the will of that man that is set above others in 〈◊〉 some . And such things 〈◊〉 the prophet Samuel foretell them , to with d• their minds from asking after a King , because it was not so expedient for them , and because the power of a King , by reason of its greatness doth easily degenerate into tyranny . Gregorio calls the power given unto Kings , jus regium turannerum , the kingly right of tyrants . He calls it •gly , saith Arnisaeus , because it is common to all Kings : and he calls it the right , or power of tyrants , because it doth easily degenerate into tyrant , i• Kings do not use it in opportune and convenient time and place , with due moderation . 

The elect King David , ( As  the forenamed place when he was  unto the Lord , he would not 〈◊〉 at  power and right of tyrants ; but he did  the threshing floor of Araunah the  for his money yea , and Ahab , even  King , did usurpno such power unto himself , when as he sought to acquire the vineyard of 〈◊〉 for the worth of it in money , or in exchange for a better vineyard : but while he did , upon a pretended crime , take both life and vineyard away from na•th , because he refusing the conditions he had propounded to him , he did fulfil the prophecy of Samuel , and justly suffered the reward of his impiety . So that , though Kings be constituted only by God , & are to give an account of their actions only to God ; though they be above the persons , and for no crime soever May be deposed or coerced by the persons ; yet they must not deal with their subjects as they list : they must neither make slaves of their persons , unjustly oppressing them with their power ; nor yet make havoc of their estates , tyrannically usurping them at their pleasure . They must know , that as God hath set them over men ; so it is for the good of those men . They are not only Lords and arbiters , saith Lipsius , but they are tutors and administers of states . They are lewd and wicked Princes , as he speaks , who being constituted in an empire , do think of nothing but to be imperious : and they are proud and careless , ( Saith he ) who do think that they are not given for the good of their persons , but their persons only for them . For , as in the superior world , the stars have their splendour ; yet so , as they May be useful for men : so , in this inferior would , Princes likewise have their dignity ; yet so , as with it they have their duty . The commonweal• is by God conferred upon them : but it is committed , as it were , into their bosom ; that it May be fostered and preserved , not ruined and devoured by them . Happy is that Prince , who in the highest pitch of fortune , desires not so much to be held great , as good , in the esteem of his persons ; and he is no less fortunate , that can so temper power and modesty , the two most differing things , in his behaviour and carriage , as that his persons cannot tell whether they shall salute him as a Lord , or as a father . There are prerogatives and royalties , which must by no means be denied to the Prince : and there are immunities and privileges , which must not be kept back from the subject . The Prince must so use his royal prerogative , as that he doth not infringe the subjects rights ; and the subjects must so lay claim to their rights , as that they do not derogate from the regality of the Prince : that so , he ruling as a royal Prince , and they obeying , as loyal subj• , May be both happy in the enjoyment of each other . Now the prerogatives which by right belong unto the Prince , are Ripaticks , or watertoles , which are commonly called customs , for the importing and transporting of commodities , by sea , ship-money , the profit of fines and amercements , vacant goods , the goods of condemned and proscribed persons , and other emoluments , which the lawyers do term royalties , which are due unto the Prince , not only for the splendour and glory of his court , but for the better maintaining of the public affairs . Prince's May al• be use of the propes goods and labours of their subjects , for the 〈◊〉 of the common , good  May exact tributes , and taxes of the  they May impose laws to them , whe•  will or no , and they May command  which do not repugn the law of God  of nature , and the law of the land , o•  Christ to the Pharises asking him whether it were lawful to pay tribute to Caesar or no , looking upon the money which had the impression , and inscription of Caesar's image , gave this answer , render therefore unto Caesar , the things that are Caesars ; and unto God , the things that are God's . And saint Paul to the Romans , render therefore to all their dues : tribute to whom tribute is due , custom to whom custom , fear to whom fear , honour to whom 〈◊〉 : and the same apostle to Titus , put them in mind , to be subject to principalities and powers , to obey magistrates , to be ready to every good work . for as Seneca hath it , the power of all things pertain unto the King , the propriety unto the subject . The King hath all things in his command , every man in their possession . The King hath all things within his dominions , his exchequer only , those things which properly belong unto him : and all things are within his power , his own things only in his patrimony . rightly Cicero : we must endeavour that we do not ( Which often times happened amongst our ancestors ) give tribute by reason of the renuity of the treasury , and assiduity of wars : which that it May not come to pass , we must make provision long aforehand ; but if any necessity of this duty shall happen unto a common wealth ( For i had rather prophesy of another than our own , nor do i speak so much of our 〈◊〉 as of every commonwealth ) diligence  that all May come to know and understand if they will be safe ) that they must obey necessity . for as Tacitus hath it , neither the quiet of nations can be had without arms ; nor arms be had without stipends ; nor can stipends be had without tributes . these , these , ( Saith Cicero ) are the ornaments of peace , and the muniments of war . In the beginning of things ( Saith Justine ) the government of countries and nations was in the power of Kings : whom , no popular ambition , but approved moderation , amongst good men , did advance to this height of honour . The persons was not tied by any laws : but the arbitrament , and pleasure of their Princes , was instead of laws unto them . Pomponius speaks to the same purpose , whenas he saith : and to speak truth in the beginning of our city , all things were governed by the King's disposal . and Ulpian seconds him : that which pleaseth the King ( Saith he ) had the force of a law : as when by the royal law , which is given concerning his empire , the persons doth confer all their power and authority to him , and on him . Whatsoever therefore the Emperor hath ordained & subscribed by writing , or by any edict commanded , it is a law without contradiction : these are those which we commonly call constitutions . Justinian the Emperor to Demostenes thus writeth . if the imperial majesty shall have thoroughly examined the cause , and given sentence to the parties present , let the judges know , who are within our empire , that this shall be a law , not only for that cause for which it was given , but for all causes of the like nature . For what is greater , what more inviolable than the imperial majesty ? or who is so puffed up with the conceit of pride , as that he dare contemn the understanding of the King ? Whenas the founders of the old law do plainly & clearly define , that those constitutions which did proceed from imperial determination , do obtain the force and vigour of a law . and a little after he addeth these words : for , if , for the present , it be granted to the Emperor only to make laws , it is only worthy an Emperor to interpret laws . Whereupon he thus concludes ; therefore , these ridiculous ambiguities exploded , the Emperor alone shall be most justly reputed to be both the maker and interpreter of laws : this law nothing derogating from the makers of the old laws : because imperial majesty gave the same privilege even unto them . by me ( Saith the eternal wisdom of God ) do Kings reign , and Princes decree justice . From whence saint Augustine ( Whose sentence is reckoned amongst the canons ) doth thus argue : by what right do you defend the church ? by God's law , or by man's ? we have the law of God in the scriptures ; and we have the law of man in the constitutions of Kings . And not far after : therefore by the law of man , by the law of Kings . Why so ? Because God hath distributed the laws of men to mankind by Kings and Princes . so in another place be thus reasons : for , if it be lawful for a King in a city , where he hath dominion , to command anything , which neither ever any before him , nor yet he himself commanded , and not contrary to the society of that city , he is obeyed ; yea , contrary to the society he is not obeyed ( For it is a general pact and covenant amongst human society to obey their Kings ) how much more than ought we to obey God the governor of every creature , and serve him , without any doubt , in those things which he hath commanded ? Aristotle teacheth that there are three parts of every commonwealth : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . One which consults for the good of the republic : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} another which is versed in government : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a third which doth exercise itself in judicature . But that is the chiefest which consults of war and peace , of society and leagues ; of laws and death ; of banishment and publicating of goods ; of making and receiving accounts . Yet , in another place he seems to recall these three into two parts , in these words : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . for there are actions of a city : both of those who do command , and of those who do obey : but the scope and office of him that governs , consists in commanding and in judgeing . of later wrjters bodinus ( Whose sentence yet is approved with the common consent of the learned ) defines this power of the supreme magistrate ( Which he calls by the name of majesty ) to be an absolute and perpetual authority over citizens and subjects , and not tied to any laws . it is manifest therefore , that all other heads of majesty are included in this absolute power of making and taking away of laws : insomuch , that we May rightly call it , the chiefest power of a commonweal , comprehended in this one thing , which is , to give laws to all and every subject , never to receive any from them , for , by his own right , to make war with adversaries , and at pleasure to contract peace with them , although they May seem to be somewhat discrepant from the appellation of law ; yet they are done by law , that is , the command of imperial authority : so likewise , it is a prerogative of majesty to take notice of appeals fro higher powers , to give and abrogate commands to supreme officers ; to dispose of offices when they are vacant ; to give immunities , and free citizens fró , laws ; to have the power of life & death ; to set a price , name and figure upon monies ; and to impose an oath upon subjects : all which things both of commanding & forbidding , come within the supreme power ; that is , to give laws to all & every subject , and to receive from none but the immortal God . 

These are some of the royal prerogatives , which have been premised in general and promiscuously : but the politicians are more exact in describing these rights of majesty and royalty , and they make them of two sorts : greater and lesser . the greater prerogatives belonging unto majesty are those which do primarily and more principally appertain to the chief authority of the King of Emperor . And they are , first , the power of making and abrogating laws at pleasure , as the necessity of the common wealth shall require . for this is , as bodinus hath it , the prime and principal head of majesty , and without this the folitique power cannot long stand . for it is , as the jurisconsults have determined , the propriety of law to command . but an Emperor , or King without a command , what other thing is he , than as a dream without sleep ? But this must be understood of the nomothetique or legislative power , which doth institute laws by its own authority , and not by the command of another . And therefore , it is more than manifest that the decemuiri amongst the Romans , who were enforced to seek to the persons for the confirmation of those laws which they had made , as Livy relates , could not be said to make them by the right of majesty . 

Secondly , a second right of majesty is extreme provocation ; that is , that subjects cannot appeal from the laws that are made by imperial majesty . for it is a most certain sign of a limited power , if an appeal May be made from the law giver to a superior . And hereupon bodinus infers , that the dictators did not shine with royal majesty , and that they were not the chief magistrates , but curators only , or commisaries , as we call them . For the father of Fabius did appeal from Papirius then dictator unto the persons . ad tribunos appello ( So Livy repeats his words ) & ad populum provoco , qui plus quàm dictatura potest , i appeal , saith he , to the tribunes , i protest to the persons , who have more power than the dictatorship . now an appeal ( As Bedinus hath it ) is a suspension of the jurisdiction of an inferior judge , by a lawful invocation of a superior ; made in the same judicial place , and always ascends with the order of magistrates , until it comes to the highest power , in which it must necessarily acquiesce and rest . As for example : in the Roman empire the chief tribunal is the imperial chamber : in France and with us in England , the high court of parliament : and in other inferior principalities , the Princes chief court . 

A third right of majesty , is the creation of Dukes , marquesses , Earls , Barons , and other noble men . for it is without doubt , that the King or Emperor is the fountain of all nobility and dignity . 

Fourthly , another prerogative of majesty is the founding of academies . for this is referred to the eminence & pre-eminence of Kings & Emperors , & which , the Pope cannot ( As Baldus doth insinuate ) without unjust usurpation ascribe to himself . And this , not to speak of our own two famous universities , the most ancient academies , do evidence unto us : of which the university of Bononia , the mother of students , which was first erected by Theodosius , afterwards repaired by Carolus magnus , and endued by them with many immunities and privileges , is a sufficient witness . What shall i say of the universities of Prague , Paris and Padua , who acknowledge , not without respective gratitude , the Emperors of the same name to be their founders and benefactors ? And therefore the approbation of the Pope is not requisite for the founding of an academy : because the civilians tell us , that the jurisdiction , which is exercised beyond the territory of him that commands , is most worthily to be rejected . 

Lastly , other politicians are wont to refer to the regalities of majesty , the calling of councils and synods , legitimation , restitution of fame , the ordering of all judicials , the indicting of war , and conclusion of peace , and the like , of which you May read in Althus : in pol. c. 7. and thom.  Mich : de jurisdict : concil. 11.32 . and 47.  

The lesser rights belonging to majesty , which the King , or Emperor May more easily dispense with then the greater , are the remitting or lessening of penalties and mulcts , customs , tributes , the rights of fairs or publiplique mercats , of which you May likewise read l. un . C. de nund . Jus saxon. l. 3. art . 66. and l. 2. art . 26.  Mysing . 5. obser. 29. n. 1.2 . Nou. 89.  C. 9  Vult . l. 1.  Jurisp . c. 23. n. 13.  but to return , where we did digress , the King , ( Who hath the chief and absolute command in monarchy ) the parent , yea the author of the law , and {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a living law , is far greater than the law : as one , who by authority given him from God , can , when he sees it fitting , whether his subjects will or no , yea without their consent , either make or abrogate the law . Nor hinders it that he makes use of counselors and ministers , for so he doth lessen his care and solicitude , which in the government of a kingdom aright is the greatest ; but not diminish the power of his command , or eclipse his majesty . The Emperors were wont to say , that we account it of our princely clemency ( Worthy senators ) if when hereafter any emergent necessity shall happen , either in the private or public cause , which doth require a general form and not inserted in the ancient laws , that it be treated of by all ; as well the peers of our court aforehand , as by your most honourable assembly : and that , if it shall seem good to all the judges , as well as yourselves , it be then dictated as a law ; and so , when you be all met together , that it be read again : and when all shall have consented unto it , then at length that it be repeated in the sacred consistory of our majesty : that so the common consent of all May be confirmed with the authority of our highness , &c.  Hence is that , of the jurisconsults , that a Prince alone can make statutes , although it be his courtesy that he doth admit the counsel of his peers . The communication of counsels doth not introduce a consortship of the kingdom . for the rights of majesty ( As bodinus hath it ) May be attributed to the chief Prince ; but not to magistrates , or private men : but if they be ascribed to either , than they cease to be the prerogatives of majesty . and , as a crown , if it be distracted into parts , or communicated , loseth the name of a crown ; so the rights of majesty vanish if they be communicated with the subject . That which is more evident , by the common decrees of the lawyers : those rights can neither be passed away , nor divided , nor any ways abalienated from the chief Prince , nor can they be prescribed by any diuturnity of time . For which cause Baldus doth call them sacra sacrorum ; and Cynus the inidividuals of majesty : but if the chief Prince shall once communicate these unto the subject , instead of a servant , he is like to have a consort of his empire : and in the mean while , he loseth the regality of majesty , in that he cannot be said to be the chief Prince : because he is chief who neither hath a superior nor yet copartner of his empire . 

But because Princes when they are publicly inaugurated , do religiously promise that they will maintain the rights of their ancestors , & the former constitutions of the empire , and other things of that nature ; therefore May some think they are tied by their oath to observe them , nor can they with a safe conscience any way relinquish them . 

To this it is answered , that Princes do no ways prejudice themselves by swearing , but that they May as freely administer to the good of the commonwealth , as if they had not sworn at all : for they swear nothing , but that , to which if they had not sworn they are obliged . For , that which is just and equal , that by their office they are bound to observe and do ; but , to do that which is evil and unjust , they cannot be bound by any covenant or promise whatsoever , though they have confirmed it with an oath . Now what is more unjust , than that a Prince should be bound to maintain and keep those laws , which it is necessary that they must be either antiquated , or the commonwealth come to ruin ? Although all change whatsoever ( As it is in the proverb ) is very dangerous , year that of laws , is most pernicious : and yet it is as certain on the other side , that the change of manners doth efflagitate a change of laws , and that there is no law so honest and inviolable , or so dear , even by the show of antiquity itself , but that , necessity so requiring , it May & aught to receive a change . salus populi , suprema lex esto : the people's safety is the chiefest law . To conclude , if that Kings and Princes , breaking all bonds of laws ( Which yet God forbid they should ) do falsify their promises , and disrespect their vows , making no account of what they have engaged themselves to by their protestations ; yet the persons must not rise up in rebellion against them , or shake off the yoke of obedience from them , seeing they are to have no other than God himself to be their judge and their avenger . 

Chap. ii the subjects loyalty , or , the duty of subjects to their Kings . 

Having in the former chapter set forth unto you the royalty of Kings over their subjects : where i have declared their original from God , and their end , next to God , their subjects good ; and that though they should come short of that end for which they were constituted and ordained , yet they ought not to be cut short by the persons under them , but are to be reserved to the judgement of God , next to whom they are second here upon earth , and under whom they have no superior , being above all laws of men , and themselves a law unto their subjects : i now come to describe unto you the loyalty of subjects towards their Kings , and the people's duty . For , a King and subjects being relatives ; and the formal cause of a kingdom consisting in that order which is between the King and his subjects ; by which he rules , and they submit ; he govern , and they be governed ; he commands ; and they obey ; it is very requisite in these miserably distracted times , where most men would shake off the yoke of obedience from their shoulders , and live as they list without all order : that , having spoken of Kings and their power over their subjects , i should now say somewhat of subjects , and their duty to their Kings . 

And here , that we May the better setforth their duty , it will not be amiss to express their nature : for , so knowing what they be , we shall the sooner come to know what they must do . Now if we consult bodinus about them , he will tell us , that subjects are those , who are bound to maintain , and fight for the dignity & safety of their Prince as for themselves : and to have the same friends and enemies with their Prince . or , as others do describe them : subjects are a part of the commonwealth , which are obliged to the supreme power , even to all that they have : and for this cause it is , that they do enjoy all the privileges of the weal public . This is the nature of a subject . But then , if any should ask me who are subjects as well as what are subjects ; i must again have recourse to the politicians ; who do give us to understand , that by the name of subjects , we are to take notice of the multitude of men , which are governed ; or rather , who submit themselves to be governed . And in this name , we must comprehend all , and every one , of what state and condition soever they be , that are in that city , Provance , & country , where a magistrate is the head : for , so many as do belong to a commonwealth , do appertain to the one part of it : viz. they are referred to be either magistrates , or subjects : whence it follows , that the name of subject is more general than that of citizen , specifically and properly so called ; although in writers we find them to be promiscuously used . For , he that is a partaker with others of public honour and dignity is properly a citizen : but he that partakes only of burdens and taxes , & not as well of honours and dignity in the commonwealth , where he resides & lives , is not a citizen , but a subject . they are terms contrariant , not reciprocal . Every citizen , is a subject : but every subject , is not a citizen . there is also another disagreeing respect , for a citizen is so called , in respect of his native country or commonwealth , where he is born , or to which he is ascribed : but he is a subject in respect of that magistrate which he obeys , wheresoever he is . 

Now men are said to be subjects two manner of ways ; either by their nativity and birth ; or by their dwelling and habitation . that a man's nativity and birth do make him to be a subject , is plainly evidenced ex l. assumptio 6.  § 1. ad Municip . Filius civitatem , ex quâ pater ejus originem duxit , non domicilium sequitur . a son follows the city from which his father doth derive his original , not his house . And if a man be born of parents of divers cities , he follows the condition of his father , not of his mother . l. Municip . 1.  § 2. f.eod. the house , or dwelling , in which any doth fix and settle the seat of his fortunes , doth make him a subject . But what space of time is required to contract a house or dwelling , the interpreters of law do vary : because , in this thing the laws and manners of every particular commonwealth is to be respected . Agreeable to this , is that distinction of the jurisperites , who discriminate subjects by a natural , and a voluntary obligation . He is a subject , say they , by a natural obligation , who is born under the jurisdiction , and in the dominions of that magistrate , to whom he is subject : and he is a subject by a voluntary obligation , who willingly and spontaneously offers himself to any magistrate , and acknowledgeth him for his supreme head , although he be not born within his territories and dominions . To which two sorts of subjects , we May , not without good reason , add another species , viz. such a one , as being vanquished in war , is made subject to him that did subdue him . For , when a Prince or magistrate overcomes any in a lawful war , they are then made subject to his jurisdiction and power . But be they subjects these , or any other ways , they are bound , whosoever they be that are subjects , to yield obedience to him who is their Prince and governor . If any should doubt of the truth of this assertion , ( Because the contrary doctrine is now broached and published by our novel divines ) let him but consult the apostle to the Romans , ( Unless perchance for the same tenet he be held a malignant ) and he will satisfy him : let every soul ( Saith he ) submit himself unto the higher powers . they are his express words , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . In which universal precept he includes all , of all orders , and states , all sexes and conditions . As if he should have said : all , whatsoever they be , that do live in a commonwealth , must submit themselves to the supreme magistrate , that is the head of that commonwealth . So that , in the apostles precept , we have not only employed the qualities of their persons that are subjects ; but we have also expressed the nature of their duties : viz. subjection and obedience . we shall not need to go far then to search after the duty of subjects to their Prince : the apostle he hath done it to our hands : it is obedience . and so the Augustane confession in the 16.  Article doth acknowledge it . The first commandment of the second table , which ( As the apostle speaks ) is the first commandment with promise , doth set forth this duty by the name of honour . for so we read it in the decalogue , honour thy father and thy mother , that thy days May be long in the land which the Lord thy god giveth thee . Exod. 20.12 . Where , by father , according to the unanimous consent of all divines , we are to understand , not only our natural father , that did beget us ; but our spiritual father also , that doth teach us ; and our civil father likewise , the King , who is pater patriae , the father of our country , that doth protect us . And then , by honour which we are commanded to yield to this father , we are to conceive all those duties which are comprehended in it . Now the politicians do tell us , that this name of honour , doth consist of six several members , which do imply as many several duties , which every subject is bound to perform to the Prince his head , viz. agnition , reverence , love , obedience , gratitude , and equity . 

The first member , wherein this honour doth consist , and the first duty , which every subject is to perform unto his Prince , is agnition : that is , an acknowledgement of God's ordinance in the office of the Prince . For God will have his own ordinance to be acknowledged in the civil magistrate ; and that we do conceive of him , as constituted by God : seeing that as the apostle speaks , there is no power but of God ; and the powers that be , are ordained of God . after which manner , did the woman of Tekoah conceive of King David , when as she being sent by Joab to intercede for Absolom , that he Might return from his banishment into the King's favour : for as an angel of God , ( Saith she ) so is my Lord the King , to discern good and bad . and a little after , my Lord is wise according to the wisdom of an angel of God . and so did Mephibosbeth esteem of him , when as he did compellate him with the same title : but my Lord the King , is as an angel of God . which agnition and acknowledgement of God's ordinance in him , is a notable means to stir up our obedience to him . 

The second member wherein this honour doth consist , is reverence : when as , subjects look upon their Prince not only as a man , but as a man of God ; and reverence , not so much his person , as his office . for the King is God's legate , and his vicar , presenting his person . And therefore saint Peter , when he exhorts to the fear of God , he doth annex the honour of the King : as if there can be no true fear of God , without due reverence to the King , who presents God's person . For which cause , Solomon the wisest of men , & richest of Kings , doth join the fear of God and the King together : the King , for presenting God's perion is called God , not {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as Plato styles him , as a God amongst men ; but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , an earthly God , being God's minister . yea , as the prophet David , and before him Moses , God himself . yea , to go farther , God himself doth so call him , ego dixi , i have said it , ye are God's . which yet we must not understand , as if they were so {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , indeed ; but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} in name : not {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , by nature ; but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , by office . And so much the very heathen did acknowledge . for it is reported of Philip of Macedonia , that he was wont to say , that a King ought to remember , that he being a man , doth discharge the office of God : and the office which he doth execute , is from thence named {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a power like unto gods . whence it is , that s. Augustine saith , the King bearing the image of God , ought therefore to be reverenced , if not for himself , at least , yet for his office sake . 

The third member ; wherein this honour doth consist , is love . and it is another duty of subjects to love their Princes : not only for their office , which they , in the name and place of God , do undergo ; but for the manifold benefits and commodities which they receive from them , by their happy government : thus was King David accepted in the eyes of all the persons , whither soever he was sent . Kings , as you heard , are patres patriae , fathers of their country ; and therefore subjects ought to respect them with a filial love , even as children do love their fathers . 

A fourth member , wherein this honour doth consist , is obedience : subjects must willingly , and readily yield obedience , to all the just and honest commands of their Princes , which do no ways repugn the laws of God . They must not only acknowledge , reverentiam subjectionis , a reverence of subjection ; but they must also give them obedientians jussionis , an obedience to their just commands . for , as saint chrysost 〈◊〉 observeth : a persons that obeyeth not their Prince ; is like to them that have no Prince at all : yea , and in a worse estate : for you cannot call that a kingdom , where the King is neglected , and his laws not observed . He seemeth to me to have lost his kingdom , saith the philosopher , who hath lost his due obedience from his subjects . And therefore subjects must obey their Prince , not only for fear of wrath , that is , to escape punishment , if they neglect their duty ; but also for conscience sake , as the apostle teacheth , because God commands them . 

The fift member , wherein this honour doth consist , is gratitude . subjects are bound , by way of thankfulness , to honour their Princes , if it were for no other reason , but because they do daily enjoy the benefits of peace , prosperity , and protection by them . Which gratitude must express itself by two other virtues , as necessary as itself ; and without which , it cannot subsist : and they are these : verity and justice : verity , in acknowledging what great blessings , favours , and emoluments they receive by them ; and justice , in endeavouring to make satisfaction , and compensation for them . And for this cause it is , that they pay them tenths , subsidies , customs , and tributes : without which , not the King only , but the kingdom also , would be debilitated and go to ruin . In these tributes and contributions , ( Saith Ulpian ) there is none but May know that the strength of a kingdom doth consist . They are the very nerves of a commonwealth . they are , saith Cicero , the ornaments of peace , and the supporters of war . It is impossible , said the Emperor , that otherwise a republic could be conserved , if it were not for the religious observation , and due collation of tributes . The necessity of which , Menenius Agrippa , in Livy , would teach the Romans , with this not more witty than apposite apology : for , as if food and nourishment be denied to the belly , the whole body must of necessity languish and waste away by a consumption : so , if you withhold subsidies and tributes from the chief magistrate , the commonwealth must of necessity come to ruin . And therefore well said Tacitus , you soon teach the dissolution of an empire , if you diminish the revenue , by which it should be sustained : nay , if , as Lipsius hath it , you do not sometimes augment them . 

Lastly , the sixt member wherein the honour of subjects towards their Prince consists , is equity . which is a virtue , whereby every subject is bound with candour , either to cover the imperfections and errors of his Prince , and to interpret them in the best sense ; or , by a prudent dissimulation to pass them by , and take no notice of them : or , if the reason of his place doth so require it , by moderate counsels and admonitions to endeavour to reform them . For , that which is spoken unto children by the son of Sirach , every true subject ought to apply it to himself : glory not in the dishonour of thy father : for thy father's dishonour is no glory unto thee : for the glory of a man is from the honour of his father . and we cannot but be knowing of Cham's curse , for laying open , or not covering his father's nakedness . It is the office and duty therefore of every subject , according to their respective places , not to discover , but rather to cover and conceal the naeves , infirmities , and imperfections of their Princes ; and , as opportunity shall serve , in an humble way , seek by wholesome admonitions , and moderate counsels , to reclaim them . This was Luther's doctrine , that great instrument of reformation , which at this day is so much pretended . The office of subjects , saith he , doth require , that they do declare unto Princes what they know not . For , as Princes May sin by not knowing those things which they do to , be sins ; so , subjects May sin more in not showing to Princes those things which they do to be sins . The one sins by ignorance , the other by negligence . And to this end he allegeth that passage of Abimelock King of Gerar : who having taken to himself Abraham's wife , because Abraham had told him she was his sister ; and being warned by God in a dream to restore her to him ; did lay all the fault upon Abraham , because he had no sooner imparted the villainy and wickedness of his courtiers unto him . And thus you see wherein the duty of subjects consists : either in one word of obedience , as saint Paul expresseth it : or in one word of honour , which comprehends acknowledgement , reverence , love , obedience , gratitude and equity , as the fift commandment doth desire it . So then , to bring all to a head : all , and every subject , are bound to submit themselves unto their Princes , in those things which they command , not being contrary to the laws of God , and the laws of nature . 

It is true , that in the apostles times , there were some , who absurdly interpreting the holy scriptures , as too many now , fanatically given , by an unknown spirit ; and extending their Christian liberty further than the simplicity of the gospel would permit them , did maintain , that it was a most unworthy thing , that they , who were freed by the son of God , and governed by the spirit of God , should be under the power of man . Of this leaven , was Judas of Galilee , of whom we 〈◊〉 in the acts of the apostles . he , as Joseph 〈◊〉 late 's , taught , that by the law of God , none ought fit to be called Lord , but God himself ; and that there was no obedience due to the politic magistrate , no tribute to Caesar . 

After them , sprung up the Donatists , Anabaptiss , and their disciple , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , all birds of an ill brood , who did likewise reject the command of the civil magistrate . 

Lastly , the pontisicians , though not in the same manner , did oppose the power of Princes , cavilling with the civil authority , and maintaining that their clergy can by no means be punished by a civil judge : or compelled to appear before the tribunal of a secular magistrate ; but that all their goods , as well ecclesiastical as civil , 〈◊〉 free , and so ought to be from the tributes and taxes of secular Princes . 

All whose erroneous tenants , and opinions , the spirit of God having confuted in his holy word , doth exactly and precisely determine the contrary ; expressly setting forth , and commanding the office of subjects to their Princes . s. Paul , as you heard , gives this exhortation : let every souls submit himself unto the higher powers : rom. 13.1 . He excepts no order , nor sex , nor condition , nor any thing that hath the nature of man . And a little after , render wherefore unto all their dues : tribute , to whom tribute is do ; custom , to whom custom ; fear , to whom fear ; honour to whom honour . and , in his epistle to Titus , he lays a charge upon him , than Bishop of 〈◊〉 , that he should give it in charge to the Cretians , to be subject to principalities and powers , to obey magistrates , and to be ready to every good work . tit. 3.1 . So in his first epistle to Timothy : i exhort , saith he , that first of all , supplications , prayers , intercessions , and giving of thanks be made for all men : for Kings and for all that are in authority , that we May live a quiet and a peaceable life , in all godliness and honesty : 

The same thing , before saint Paul , yea , before our saviour himself , as he was in the flesh , did the prophet Jeremiah exhort the Jews unto , that were exiles from their own country in Assyria : and that not without especial command from God , that they should pray to God for the safety of the King , and the kingdom of Babylon , where they were captives ; and withal , he doth sharply reprove the rashness of those false prophets , who by vain promises , and hopes of immature liberty did incite them to rebellion . thus saith the Lord of hosts , the god of Israel unto all that are carried away captives , whom i have caused to be carried away from Jerusalem to Babylon : seek the peace of the city , where i have caused you to be carried away captives ; and pray unto the Lord for it : for in the peace thereof ye shall have peace . nor , is saint Peter backward to inform the strangers scattered throughout Pontus , Galatia , Cappadocia , and Bythinia , with the same doctrine . submit yourselves , saith he , to every ordinance of man , for the Lord's sake : whether it be to the King , as supreme ; or unto governors , that are sent by him : and presently after , fear God : honour the King . from which wholesome doctrine of saint Paul , the prophet Jeremiah , and saint Peter , you May see , not only the pernicious tenets and positions of those , and all other schismatically affected reformadoes , alias renegadoes , confuted ; but the truth of obedience , due to the civil magistrate confirmed : and , that in obedience , honour , reverence , tributes , and other duties , formerly mentioned , to be by subjects performed to their Princes , comprehended and enjoined . 

But , to what kind of Princes do the apostles etc prophets in scriptures enjoin these duties to be performed ? That will be a question well worth the time to be resolved , especially at this time , when every one almost doth take the liberty to himself ; peremptorily to affirm that subjects ought not to give obedience to their King , if he doth not , as they they would have him , & will not be persuaded & ruled by them . For say they , it would not be grievous or irksome to us to yield obedience and that respective observance , w• you have alleged fro the holy scriptures , unto good & gracious Princes ; but it goes against our consciences to perform these duties to one King , seeing he swerves from the holy scriptures , which are the word of God ; and will not be ruled by his great counsel , but is seduced by malignant councillors , to wicked and ungodly acts of tyranny . 

To this , i answer ; that if our gracious King ( Which God forbid ) should degenerate so far from himself , as to commit such outrages as they would suggest ( Which blessed be God as hitherto he hath not , nor is there likelihood that he ever will , although , if he were not so good and so gracious as he is , he Might soon by their rebellious carriage be invited to it ) yet they are bound in duty to perform obedience to him ; and not of as too many abuse  , etc misled , do , hand over headrise up in rebellion against him . For , if we consult the same apostle , and other places of the holy scriptures , we shall find , that the forementioned duties , are not only to be performed to good and gracious Princes ; but even to wicked and tyrannical , even , to those that are most cruel ; as were Tiberius , Caligula , Claudius , Nero : for under all these the apostles lived , & their epistles coetany to them , directed for obedience to them . Nor is it without good reason , that such obedience should be given to them : for , they are of God , as well as good Kings : there is no power ( Saith the apostle ) but of God : that is , all power is from God only . For that negative apostolical axiom is equipollent on all sides to an universal affirmative . So Daniel telleth Nebuchadnezzer , that the most high ruleth in the kingdom of men , and giveth it to whomsoever he will , and setteth up over at the basest of men . so Christ himself pronounceth of Pilate , that wicked president of the Jews , that he had no power over him , were it not given him from above . and therefore , seeing their power is alike from God , we must give the like obedience to them , as to God . It was the saying of him , who sometimes was nazianzen's worthy , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} subjects must submit themselves to good and gracious Princes , as to God : and they must submit to evil and ungodly Princes , for God : that is , because God hath so commanded it . Let us hear the fathers a little farther in this point , and we shall find that they do all unanimously give their votes unto it . Tertullian , if we address ourselves to him , resolves us in these words : for as much therefore as concerns the honour of Kings and Emperors , we have a sufficient prescript that we should be subject , according to the apostles precept , in all obsequiousness to magistrates , Princes , and higher powers . But yet within the bounds and limits of religion , so far , as we are separated from idolatry . For therefore is that example of the three brethren excelling , who otherwise obsequious to King Nabuchodonosor , did most constantly refuse to give honour to his image ; proving that it was idolatry , whatsoever was exalted above the measure of human honour , after the manner of divine majesty . And so Daniel relying upon Darius' forother things , so long continue in his office , as he was free from the danger of his religion : but rather than he would run that hazard , he did no more fear the King's lions , than the others were afraid of the King's furnace . 

Optatus milevitanus , speaking of David's observance to King Saul , hath these words : David had the opportunity of victory in his hands : he Might have killed his adversaries , unwitting of him and secure , without much ado , and he Might have changed , without much bloodshed , or the conflict of many , his tedious warfare into a sudden slaughter : both his servants and opportunity did invite him to it . Opportunity did spur him on to victory . Now he began to draw his sword : and now his armed hand was ready to seize upon his adversary's throat : but the remembrance of divine institutions did altogether withstand these intentions : he contradicts not only his servants , but opportunity , egging him on to victory . As if he should have said thus unto them : oh victory , causelessly dost thou provoke me on : oh victory , thou dost in vain invite me to triumph : i would willingly overcome mine enemy , but i must first observe the commands of God . I will not ( Saith he ) lay my hands on the Lord's anointed . he did repress both his hand and his sword ; and while he did revere the oil , he saved his adversary ; and performing observance to him , though his adversary , he did vindicate him from slaughter . 

Saint Augustine speaking of the same person , speaks in this manner : David well knowing that there was a divine constitution in the office of Kings , doth therefore still honour King Saul , being in the same condition , lest he should seem to injure God , who decreed honour to this order . For a King hath the image of God , even as a Bishop the image of Christ . So long therefore as he is in that condition , he is to be honoured ; if not for himself , yet for his order . Whereupon the apostle saith , be subject to the higher powers , for there is no power but of God , and the powers that be are ordained of God . hence it is that we do honour an infidel in authority , although he be unworthy of it ; who performing God's office in that order , doth gratify the devil : yet the power he hath , doth require that we give honour to him , &c.  And in another place : but in that the apostle saith , let every soul submit himself to the higher powers : for there is no power but of God : he doth rightly admonish , that no man be puffed up with pride , for that he is called by the Lord into liberty , and made a Christian ; and that he doth not think there is no order to be kept in the course of this life ; and that he is not to be subject to the higher powers , to whom for a time the government of temporal things is concredited . and a little farther , if any man therefore think , that because he is a Christian , he is not to pay custom , tribute , or due honour to those higher powers , to whom those things of right do appertain , he is in a great error : but this rule is to be observed which the Lord himself prescribed , that we give unto Caesar , the things that are Caesar's , and unto God , the things that are God's . 

S. Jerome , whose sentence is inscribed among the canons , saith thus : if it be good , which the Emperor , or magistrate , commands , obey the will of him that commands : but if it be evil , answer him out of the acts of the apostles , it is better to obey God then men . 

S. Chrysostom , upon the words of the apostle , let every soul submit himself to the higher powers , thus descants : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Although thou be'st an apostle , although an evangelist , although a prophet , or whatsoever else thou be'st , thou must submit . 

S. Ambrose thus expresseth himself : i could grieve , i could weep , i could mourn : my tears are weapons against the armies and soldiers of the Goths , for such are the weapons of a priest . Otherwise , i neither aught , nor will resist . 

Bernard to Lodowick King of France , writes in this manner : but whatsoever it shall please your majesty's mind to do , we that are the sons of the church , cannot , in the least , dissemble the injuries , contempts and scorn even to the trampling under foot of our mother , &c.  And a little after , but we will stand out , and fight even to the death , if necessity shall require , for our mother : but with such weapons as are lawful for us to use : not with swords , but with words ; not with shields , but with prayers and tears to God . And in another place , if the whole world should conspire against me , to make me attempt any thing against royal authority , yet i would fear God , and would not dare to do any thing rashly against the King , that is ordained by him . For i well know where i have read , whosoever resisteth the power , resisteth the ordinance of God , &c.  

Amongst later writers , Cardinal Cajetan thus comments upon saint Paul : after that the apostle had instructed the Romans about the use of the body , affairs of the world , and the gifts of God ; he doth now prosecute his instruction about the use of liberty in respect of Princes . For he gives them a caution , lest by reason of the liberty which they had obtained by Christ , they should think themselves to be exempted from the power of secular Princes . And to this end he doth instruct them , that they should be subject to secular powers . And whereas he ought to have said , every man , he doth more significantly say , every soul ; that so we Might understand , not only our estates , not only our bodies , but even our souls ought to be subject to temporal Kings , in those things which they May lawfully command . And in saying all , or every , he excepteth none . 

See , how the fathers do , with one consent vote that we must give obedience to Kings , although they be wicked , in all things that are not unlawful ; that honour , tribute , obedience , and the like , must be given to lawful Princes ; and that there is no other remedy against their violence and injustice , but prayers and tears to almighty God . What , do we think that they were destitute of strength , that they could not oppose one power with another , or repel one injury with another ? Were they so stupid and ignorant that they did not understand what power was in the Pope or persons , to reduce their Kings into good government ? They wanted neither power to resist , nor forces to rebel , if we dare give credit to Tertullian , ( Who yet is of sufficient authority and antiquity to be believed , even without our assent ) thus writing in his apology against the gentiles . But far be it that either the children of God should be exempted from the fury of man ; or that they should grieve to suffer in that thing wherein they are tried . For if we would take upon us to be open and professed enemies , do you think that we could want money or men ? Are we not more in in number then the Moors , and Marcomanns , & the Parthians themselves , or the gentiles , how great soever they be , let them be but of one place , and of their neighbours adjoining unto them , yea , then of the whole world besides . We are but of yesterday , and yet we have filled all places among you : your cities , islands , citadels , boroughs , assemblies ; your very camps , your tribes of the common persons , Decuries of the judges , palaces , senates , judicatories ; only we leave your temples to yourselves : for what war have we not been fit , and ready to manage , even with fewer forces , who thus willingly suffer ourselves to be put to death ; if that we were not disciplined by our religion , that it is more lawful for us to be killed then to kill ? Thus far Tertullian , with whom s. Augustine is not discrepant : you May find his sentence to be registered among the canons in these words : Julian was an infidel and unbelieving Emperor ; was he not likewise an apostate , an enemy , an idolater ? yet the Christian soldiers served under this unbelieving Emperor . When they came to the cause of Christ , they did acknowledge none but him that is in heaven ; when he would have them to worship idols , and to sacrifice , than they did prefer God before him : but when he said unto them , lead forth the army , & go against such a nation , they did presently obey him . They did distinguish the Lord eternal from a temporal Lord ; and yet they were subject unto their temporal Lord , for their eternal Lord's sake . 

When Jovianus after the death of the forenamed Julian was elected by his army to be their Emperor , and he refusing , began to speak in these words unto them : i cannot , seeing i am a Christian , command such men , nor take the government upon me , of Julian's army , which he hath imbued with such venomous precepts , and pernicious discipline . which , and words of the like nature , when the soldiers had heard , they began to shout with one acclamation , and say : oh Emperor , let not your mind be troubled with such doubtings , nor yet wave the command of us , as if we were profane and wicked , for you shall find both Christians of us , and men disciplined in piety to do you service . from which recited places , it May appear that it was no such difficult matter for the Christians in the primitve times to have coërced their Emperors , by whom they were miserably afflicted , and most cruelly used , if it had been lawful for subjects to rise up against their Princes . But if those forementioned fathers , endued with no less science than conscience , and furnished with as much knowledge as zeal , had thought it lawful , either for the Pope , or the persons , or any other men to regulate their Princes , as they thought fit ; without all question , they would never have suffered themselves and the whole church of God , to be so cruelly oppressed by those wicked Emperors . But as they did most freely reprehend their vices , so they would at least have admonished them of their office , if they had been wanting to it . But when they knew that Kings ( As have been formerly , not only touched , but oftentimes urged ) have only God to be their judge and their avenger ; hence it is , that they did only flee to him , and piously and happily implore his aid . 

These things ( Saith Nazianzen ) did Julian meditate and deliberate , ( As those that were witnesses and copartners of his secrets have imparted and divulged to the world ) yet he was restrained by the ordinance of God , and the tears of Christians , which were then many , and shed by many , seeing they had no other remedy against their persecutors . The like May be said of divers other wicked Princes , who have either been taken away by the singular providence of God , or at length reduced to a better mind : for God who is the father and judge of all alike , doth oftentimes most justly send ungodly Princes unto a persons for the punishment of their sins : although , they minding nothing less , than the justice or purpose of God's will do most unjustly . shall there be any evil in the city ( Saith God by the prophet Amos ) which the Lord hath not done ? But no sooner do subjects repent them of their sins , and depart from their evil courses , but God ( in whose hands the heart of Kings is , and which way soever it pleaseth him , as the rivers of waters , he doth incline it ) according to his great goodness and singular mercy , wherewith he is affected towards afflicted penitents , makes those wicked Princes either cease to be , or to be tyrants . 

vengeance is mine ( Saith the Lord ) i will repay it . this is the only fort and sure defence against all injuries of wicked Kings : they are the weapons that are to be taken up against ungodly Princes : and , this , lastly is the most expedite way to pessundate all tyranny . 

But than you will say , if the King should make aprey of his subjects , and impose greater taxes on them , and exact more grievous tributes and customs on them , oppressing all and every one of them with his tyrannical power , shall we not in this case resist and oppose him ? 

For answer of this , i must tell you , if we will be as we profess ourselves to be , Christ's disciple and obey his word , which we desire , at least pretend , above all things to be sincerely preached unto us , we must not resist him . Now what saith Christ . but i say unto you that ye resist not evil , &c.  our Lord and saviour Jesus Christ , being King of Kings , and Lord of Lords , as he is styled in holy scripture , yea and the son of Kings according to the flesh , being of the seed of David , yet lest he should give offence , though he were free , paid tribute to Caesar ; for so we find him discoursing with Peter : the Kings of the earth , of whom do they take custom or tribute , of their own children or of strangers ? Peter saith unto him of strangers . Jesus saith unto him , then are the children free ; notwithstanding lest we should offend them , go thou to the sea and cast an book and take up the fish that first cometh up , and when thou hast opened his mouth thou shalt find a piece of money , that take , and give for thee & me . hereupon Bernard to Henry then Archbishop of the Senones thus elegantly writeth : let every soul be subject to the higher powers : if every soul , than yours ; who doth except you from the universality ? If any endeavour to deceive you , hearken not to their councols , who seeming to be Christians , hold it yet a disparagement to them to follow the deeds or observe the words of Christ their Master . and a little after : these things , saith he , do they ; but Christ he did both bid otherwise , and did otherwise : give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's , and unto God the things that are God's . what he spoke with his tongue , he performed with his hand ; as he taught so he wrought : the maker of Caesar did not deny to pay tribute to Caesar , for he gave an example to you , that you should also do the like . and a little farther he saith to this purpose . do you contemn the saecular power ? None was more saecular than Pilate before whom our Lord stood to be adjudged . thou couldst have no power ( Saith he ) over me , if it were not g•ven thee from above ; even than did he speak by himself , and in himself show , what afterwards he did by his apostles in his church . that there is no power but of God , and that he that resisteth the power , resisteth the ordinance of God . 

Before Bernard St. Ambrose wrote to the same purpose . If the Emperor demands tribute , we do not deny it : the lands of our church do pay him tribute : if he requires our fields , he hath power to lay claim unto them ; none of us do interpose or withstand him . The collation of the persons May redound to the poor ; let them not conceive displeasure about our fields , let them have them if they like them ; i do neither give them the Emperor nor deny them . and again , i was commanded by the court officers and tribunes , to make a speedy surrender of the church , they alleging that the Emperor doth but use his right in demanding it , for as much as all things are in his power . I made this answer , that if he did require of me what was mine own to give , viz. my ground , or my goods , or any thing of the like nature , this my right i would not deny him ; although even those things of mine are the poors also . Very excellently St. ang. but whereas the apostle saith , wherefore ye must needs be subject ; it is as much as if he should have said , there is a necessity for this life that we be subject , not resisting ; if they will take any thing away from us , in that they have power given them over our temporal things . Now then , if it were not lawful for subjects , without sin , to resist their Kings when they did exact unjust tributes of them , and by violence take away their estates from them ; much less May we deny to Princes just tributes , & other things of the like nature , which are requisite and necessary for the safety of the commonwealth , and cannot be denied without its certain ruin , and the great hazard of the whole Christian policy . 

In the law of Moses we read , that the man that would do presumptuously , and would not hearken to the priest ( that stood to minister before the Lord , or unto the judge , even that man was to be put to death . and since by the laws of men they have proceeded no less severely against rebels . But most strict is that law of God promulged by the mouth of the apostle : therefore whosoever resisteth the power , &c. resisteth the ordinance of God , and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation : that is , as all divines expound it , temporal here ; and , without repentance eternal hereafter . 

And as for those that do calumniate and derogate from the power , &c. of Princes here , by their seditious words , and scandalous writings , although perhaps they May escape the hands of men ; yet they shall never avoid the judgements of God , from whose all-seeing eye of providence nothing can be hide , against whose omnipotent power nothing can resist , and by whose most just judgements no wickedness can go unpunished . No less wittily then pithily St. ang. for whereas the doctrine of the apostle doth make mention of these earthly powers , he doth insinuate into our apprehensions even the parts of the heavenly judgement . For whenas he doth enjoin us to obey the laws of the world , he doth necessarily admonish us to take heed of the world to come . if thou wilt not , saith he , fear the powers , do that which is good , which is as much to say . If thou wilt not fear the judgement to come , then eschew evil and do good whilst thou art here . Therefore we ought to take heed , & perform the first form of this constitution , which wants the laws of this life , that we May exclude & keep from us that fore-judgement of eternal death in the other life ; because those whom this temporal punishment doth not take hold of here ; there that eternal punishment will follow with insufferable torment hereafter . 

Amongst other examples of the judgements of God upon rebellious , gainsaying and disobedient persons , we have that dreadful and horrible example of Corah , Dathan and Abiram , in the holy scriptures , which the spirit of God sets down as a warning to us , that we fall not into the like contradiction , lest we fall into the like condemnation . Of whom Optatus milevitanus writing against the Donatists , who did refuse to obey their magistrates ( As too many of the Smectymnuan rout , & Antipodian state do now amongst us ) thus delivers himself . schisma summum , &c. that schism is a great evil , you yourselves cannot deny ; and yet without the least fear you do imitate your most desperate ringleaders , Corah , Dathan and Abiram , nor will you set before your eyes , or once take it into your hearts that this evil is both prohibited by the word of God , and revenged with a most grievous judgement . and a little after : the congregation of ministers , and the sacrilegious multitude that was soon to be confounded did stand with their inter dicted and forbidden sacrifices ; time for repentance was denied and withheld from them , because their fault was such , as it deserved no pardon . A command of hunger was laid upon the earth , which presently opened her greedy jaws upon them that caused division amongst the persons , and with an insatiable mouth did swallow up the contemners of God's word . In a moment's space the earth clove asunder to devour those forenamed separatists ; it did swallow them up , & then was closed again upon them . And lest they should seem to receive a courtesy by their soddain death ; as they were not worthy to live , so they were not vouchsafed to die . Upon a sudden they were cast into the prison of hell , and so buried before they were dead . 

St. aug. having occasion to speak of the same separates , cap. 29. of the wonders of the holy scripture speaks to the same purpose , & cap. 30. of the same book , he doth thus enlarge his meditations : again the next day the whole multitude gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron as guilty of blood and would have slain them , in revenge of those that were killed ; but here both Moses and Aaron come before the tabernacle of the congregation , and again the wrath of the Lord went forth and raged amongst the rebellious persons : and again Aaron at the command of Moses , filling his censer with fire from off the altar , run into the midst of the congregation , and standing between the living and the dead , the plague was stayed . A just judgement inflicted on both , that they who did inwardly burn with the fire of anger against their lawful Princes , should now outwardly perish with the burning flame of most deserved vengeance ; & he that in his heart had forgiven the offence of his brethren , by his footsteps others being defended , the fire from heaven durst not consume ; but they that died of the plague that day were 1400. whom the wrath of the Lord consumed . 

Wherefore to draw to a conclusion , as the apostle admonisheth and comandeth , we must needs be subject not only for wrath but also for conscience ; because as s. Peter saith , this is the will of God that with well doing we May put to silence the ignorance of foolish men , as free & not using our liberty for a cloak of maliciousness but as the servants of God . for although , as s. aug. hath it , we are called to that kingdom where there shall be no such powers , yet while we live here in our journey thither , until such time as we shall come to that age , where there shall be an annihilation & ceasing of all principality and power , let us cheerfully and willingly undergo our condition , according to the order of human things , not dealing feignedly and hypocritically : and so doing , we shall not so much obey man , under whose command we are , as God , who doth command us to be obedient to them . therefore to use s. Peter's words , he that will love life , and see good days , let him refrain his tongue from evil , and his lips that they speak no guile : let him eschew evil , and do good ; let him seek peace and ensue it ; let him bear in mind that commandment of God , thou shalt not revile the gods , nor curse the ruler of thy persons . and not forget the council of the preacher , curse not the King , no not in thy thought , for a bird of the air shall carry the voice , and that which hath wings shall tell the matter . but let him embrace the council of King Solomon , not only the wisest of Kings , but of all other men . my son ( Saith he ) fear thou the Lord and the King , and meddle not with them that are given to change ; for it is our saviour's saying , who is truth itself and aught to be believed before all our pretended reformadoes , whosoever shall take up the sword , especially against God's anointed , contrary to the word of God , shall perish with the sword . 

And thus having gathered certain flowers out of the garden of divinity , philosophy , history and policy , to make a crown for royalty , and a nosegay for loyalty , there wants nothing now but that same thread of charity ( Which the apostle casseth {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} the bond of perfection ) to constringe and bind them together ; and indeed to use s. chrysost. similitude , as flowers be they never so choice and rare , yea the prime darlings in nature's garden , and be they never so exactly composed and set in order , yet if they be not as perfectly combined & tied together , hey fall away from one another and come to nothing . In lik• manner although a man should compose an anthology of never so excellent precepts , sentences and examples out of the garden of divine and human writings , and propound them as so many sweet flowers to the use and benefit of the common good , yet if there be not the hand of charity to receive them , and the eye of candour for to read them , and the heart of sincerity to apprehend them , and tie them together with the constriction , or rather the construction of love ; like flowers that are not tied together , they fall to the ground and become useless . and s. chrysost. reason that he gives there will hold here likewise , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . for without love they will soon dissolve , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . It is love alone that knits them fast , and keeps them together , making them useful for the church of God , which otherwise would do no good . And therefore having selected and culled out variety of choice sentences , precepts and sayings , both out of ancient and modern writers as well human as divine , and they as well Protestant's as Romanists , and such as have been approved and honoured by the judgement of the learned even of the adversaries , to set forth to the world the royalty of Kings and the loyalty of subjects ; i humbly tender them to the consideration of both , his majesty our royal King & the parliament his loyal subjects ; that so if there be any thing in them , which showing the power of the one , and the duty of the other , May tend to the repairing of that great breach , by a happy pacification , between the King and his persons , which being at first begun with faction , fomented with fears and jealousies , and continue thus long with malignancy of affection , is likely to bring both King and parliament ( Without the especial providence of God preventing ) to utter ruin ; i shall attain the happy end that i first did aim at : and for that which remains in me to effect it , i shall turn my pen into a petition , and these occasioned collections , into religious ejaculations ; that God would be pleased to vouchsafe such a happy concurrence of opinions , and unanimity of affections between the King and his parliament ; that ( All fears and jealousies being laid aside on both sides ) the King would be graciously pleased to condescend , as far as with his honour he May , unto his parliament ; and the parliament would humbly address themselves to comply , as far as it May stand with the good of the commonwealth , with the King ; that so royalty and loyalty , like mercy and truth meeting together , and the King and his parliament , like righteousness and peace , embracing each other , the King May still enjoy his regalities and prerogatives without farther alteration , and the parliament May still retain their ancient privileges and immunities without any more interruption : that so the King , the head , May be happy in the parliament , his members , and the parliament , the members , reciprocally happy in the King their head ; and the whole kingdom , by this c•ment of charity , happy in both . Which that it May speedily come to pass , is the hearty wish and darling desire , of him who for the accomplishment of it is , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

his God's most humble orator , his King's most loyal subject , his country's most affectionate patriot , ro. Grossk . 



greg. lib. 21.  Moral . c. 11.  aug. l. 19 de civ. dei c. 15.  cic. de leg. 3.  cic. ibid. arist. l. 1. pol. c. 3.  chrysost. ad . Pop. Antioch . home  . tacit. l. 1. hut . soph.  arist 3. pol. c. 5.  sen. lib. 1. de clem . c. 19  casus sph. civi . p. 1 81.  plat. dial . 3. arist. 3. pol. 1.  cic. 1. de leg 3.  Sallust . de conjur . Caral . Herod . l. 2.  zech. l. 1. pol. c. 1.  diodor. l. 1.  polyd. virg. 2. de invent . rer. m. Arrian . in hist. alex. Messal . Corvin . in lib. ad aug.  herodot. 1.3 . bellar. de laic . l. liber homo . D•ad leg. aquil.  gen 9 5.6 . exod. 20.13 . bellar. de ro. pont. l. 1. c. 2.  cic. l. 3. leg. Sallust . bellar. de ro. pont. l. 1. c. 2.  just . l. 1.  l ne•o 54.  D. de Regul . jur . rom. 13.1 . ver. 2.  epiph. cont. Archon haer. 40.  lip. 2. l. pol. c. 6.  rom. 13.  lip. pol. 2. c. 1.  sen. de clem. 1.  liv. li . 6. spud lips . arist. l. 3. pol. c. 1.  1 sam. 8.10 . & se• . Luther in post . super eu•ng . Dom. 23. post trin. cor. c. 1.  Strigel , in 1. sam. 8. p 27.  1 sam. 8.7 . l. legis virtus d. de legibus . Ille a quo §. tempestivum . D. ad sc. trebel . l. 4. d. de . recept. . qui arbit . arist. pol. 3. c. 5  tacit. 1.3 . hist. arist. l. 3. pol. c. 12.  cic. orat. 4. deiot.  Sallust . de bell . Jugurth . l. Prince p• d. de legibus . Dio 1.53 . const. harm. 1.1 . Epit. tit. 1.  eccles. 8.4 . wisdom . 6.1.2 . Irenaeus 1.5 . advers haeres . Tettul . in apol.  hieron. ep. 46. ad rustic . psal. 51.  ambros. apol. prim . David . c. 4.  aug. ep. 48.  aug. de fa• . greg. l. 5.  Hist. c. 17.  & Aimoin . 1.3 . c. 20.  Otto f•sing in . ep. ad ercd. Oenob . praef. 1. chron. 6.  bellar. d• . laic . c. 6.  l. sed licet d. de offic. praef. bellar. de rom. 'pon . 1.2 . c. 17.  & 1.   3. 〈◊〉 de regim. civ. num . 4.  Bodin de . Rep. 1.1.13 . Philip . in epit.  Phil. moral . p. 197.  Brent . Hom. 27. in 1. l.  Sam. Osiander in notis d. h. l.  Deut. 17.15 , 16 , 17.  Joseph . 1.6 . Antiq. jud. c. 5.  Lyra in com. 1 sam. 8.  greg. l. 4. in 1. reg. c. 2.  arnisaeus l. 2. de jur . majest. c. 1. n. 4.  greg. l. 4. in 1 reg. c. 2.  1 King : 21.2 . 1 sam. 8.10 . lips . Pol. in praef.  lips . ibid. feud . l. 4. tit. 56.  regalia . mar. 12.21 . sen. 1.7 . de be nes . c. 4 , 5.  cit. off . 1 , 2.  tacit. 1.4 . hist. tacit. 1.4 . hist. cic. pro leg. man . just . l. 1. hist. pompon. l. 2. d. de orig. jur.  Ulpian l. 1. d. de constit . Princip. l. si imperialis 12.  C. de legib. & constit . Princip. pro. 8.15 . aug. tract. 6. in euang. Johan . & habetur dist. 8.  Can. quo jure . aug. l. 3. conf•s•e 8. & refertur dist. 8.  Can. quae contra . arist. l. 4. polit. c. 14.  arist. l. 7.  Pol. c. 4.  joan. Bodin . l. 1. de rep. c. 8.  joan. bo 〈◊〉 . l. 1. Derep . 〈◊〉  Bodin . l. 1. c. 10.  l. 7.  F. de legib. Bodin . l. 1. de rep. c. 8.  Bodin l. 1. c. 10.  & Arnisae . Pol. c. 11.  Keck . in syst . Polit. l. 1. c. 17. p. 303.  l. 3. f. de nat. resti . vult . de feud . l. 1. c. 5. n. 7.  Baldus c. 1.  Quae sit. reg. n. 3.  & 16.  mut. in vit. car.  M. & car. 4.  Althus . in pol. c. 7. and tho.  Mich. de . jurisdict. . Con. 11.32 . and 47.  vult . de . feud . 1.1 . C. 5. n. 7.  l un . c. de nund . Jus saxon. l. 3. art . 66. and 1.2 . art . 26.  l. humanum . C. de legib. & constit . Princip. Bodin . l. 1. de . Rep. c. 10.  ob.  resol. 

Bodin de repub. pag. 170.  colleg. polit. Dithmar . disp. 8.  Thes. 2.  l. assumptio . 6.  §. 1. ad Muncip . l. Municip . 1 sect. 2. f.eod.  augustan : confess . art . 16.  ephes. 6.2 . exod. 20.12 . Deut. 5.16 . ro. 13.1 . 2 sam. 14.17 . ver. 20.  2 sam. 19.27 . 1 pet. 2.17 . pro. 24.22 . Plato in point . ro. 3.4 . 〈◊〉 82.1 . Exod. 22.28 . Philip maced. in plin. paneg. aug. in lib. quest . V. & n. test. q•est . 35.  1 sam. 18.5 . chrysost. arist. polit.  rom. 13.5 . colleg. polit. Dithmar . disp. Ulpian . in• 1. in criminibus §. 20. f. de quaest. cic. pro Manl  nov. 149.  C.  liv• . 2. p. 78.  tacit. 14.  Annal. lip. pol. 4. c. 11  ecclus. 3.10 , 11  gen. 9.25 . luth. com. in gen. c. 23. p. 270.  gen. 20.  act. 5.  rom. 13.1 . Titus 3.1 . 1 tim 2 , 1 , 2.  jer. 29.4.7 . 1 pet. 2.13 , 14.  ver. 17.  rom. 13.  dan. 4.17.25 : John 19.11 . greg. nazian. tertul. de idololat . optat. milev. 1.2 . cont. parmen  aug : in quaest. ex vet. test . quaest. 35.  aug. exposed . quar . propos. ep. ad r•m . propos. 78.  hier. in ep. ad tit. & habetur 11. quaest. 3. can. si dominus . chrysost. in rom. 13. home  amb. 1.5 . orat . in Auxent . bern. ep. 22 1.  cajet. in ep. ad rom. 13.  tert. in Apologet advers. gent. c. 37.  aug. in psal. 1 2 4. & habetur 11. quaest. can. imperatores . Ruffin . Hist. eccl. 2. l. 1.  & Theodor . l. 4. hist. c. 1.  nazian. in orat . in Julian . Amos 3.6 . prov. 21.1 . object . resol. mar. 5.39 . mar. 17.25.26.27 . Bernard ad hen. archiep. Senon . Ep. 42.  amb. 10.5 . Conc. de basilicis non tradend . haer•t . p. 104.  ambros. l. 2. ep. 13. ad Marcel  August . Exposed . Quar. propos. ex epist. ad rom proposit. 74.  deut. 17.12 . August . de jmper . see . ro. 13.3 .  ptat . Mi levit. cont. parmen. August . de mirac . sact script . c. 29.  & 30.  num. 16.50 . •0 . 13.5 . pet. 2. •5 . 16 . August . Exposi• . Q•ar pro •of . Epist. •d rom. proposit. •2 . pet. 3.10  exod. 22. •8 . •ccless . 10. •0 . pro. 24.21 . mat. 26. •2 . conclusion . colos. 3.14 . chrysost. home in coloss. 3.  chrysost. ut supra . 



























































































