Valerius and Publicola : or , the true form of a popular commonwealth extracted Epuris naturalibus . 

By James Harrington . 

quos perdere vult Jupiter , hos dementat prius . 

London : printed by j. c. for Henry Fletcher , at the three gilt cups in St. Paul's churchyard . 1659.  

To the reader . 

The way of dialogue being not faithfully managed , is of all other the most fraudulent ; but being faithfully managed , is the clearest and most effectual for the conveying a man's sense unto the understanding of his reader . There is nothing in this world , next the favour of God , i so much desire , as to be familiariy understood : which that great men have thought below them , hath proved hitherto but the ruin of themselves , and the detriment of the public : for which cause , having tried all other means , i now add this . My work , if i be not given over unto utter blindness , is the same with , or nearest that of the nation ; and the work of the nation being not understood , is in horrid danger of utter ruin . 

Valerius and Publicola , &c.  

Valerius .  Dearest Publicola , how have i longed to meet you , and in the favourable silence of this long walk ! 



Publicola .  What has my noble friend Valerius to command his faithful servant ? 



Val.   Why really , notwithstanding the tumult of these extravagant changes , your last discourse had so much of my attention then , and hath had such digestion with me since , that i feel it running in my veins . 



Pub.   Find you in that any temptation to the buckling on of high-shoons ? 



Val.   My thoughts , Publicola , are quite of another strain ▪ sometimes methinks i see England grasping at empire , like Rome itself . 



Pub.   Why then Valerius , my discourses are not such as they say ; there runneth nothing of them in your veins , that hath embased your noble blood . 



Val.   The heraldry of them is of as high a pitch as the policy ; but i would have them be somewhat lower in some things . 



Pub.   What are those ? 



Val.   The vulgar complain of you , that you are too learned . 



Pub.   I thought it was not you , Valerius . 



Val.   For all that , i could be contented to see you raise your structure by your own strength , and without the help of other authors . 



Pub.   That i dare say you May , when you please . 



Val.   I must see it then , before i lose the covert of these reverent elms . 



Pub.   You take care , that the building should be well situated ; and for the foundation , i May presume by what hath already past between you and me , that we are long since agreed . 



Val.   That the threefold balance or distribution of propriety , is the cause of the triple way of government , i fully consent with you ; as also , that the balance now in England is in the persons plainly , and exclusively , both to a King and Lords . 



Pub.   You are not of them that grant this , and then ask which way a commonwealth should be introduced in England . 



Val.   Why truly yes ; seeing not only the persons are so wholly unacquainted with the means , but their leaders so averse to it . 



Pub.   Think you that a plant grows the worse for not understanding the means ? 



Val.   A plant is not a free agent ; but among men who are free agents , the introduction of government seemeth to be arbitrary . 



Pub.   What , where there is no more than Hobson's choice , this or none ? 



Val.   It is true , that if they can have nothing else , they must at length have a commonwealth ; but though they can have nothing else to be holding , yet they will be trying other things . 



Pub.   There is all the mischief . 



Val.   And enough to ruin the nation . 



Pub.   To hurt it very sore , but not to ruin it ; nor yet to evade a commonwealth , except they expose us unto foreign invasion . 



Val.   I am glad of your confidence . 



Pub.   You May let it pass for confidence , if you please ; but if there be no other way except that only of invasion , whereby the present balance can receive a change sudden enough to admit of any other form , the reason why we must have a commonwealth , is coercive . 



Val.   And putting the case it be the will of God to defend us from foreign invasion , how long will it be ere they see at home the coerciveness of this reason , or which is all one , that all power is in and from the persons ? 



Pub.   Good Valerius , how long is it since this was both seen and declared in parliament ? 



Val.   Perhaps as they meant , it Might be admitted as a principle even in monarchy . 



Pub.   This with your pardon you will revoke , seeing you well remember that this their declaration of power in the persons , hath been exclusive unto King and Lords , and that in express terms . 



Val.   But in this they related not at all unto the distribution of propriety . 



Pub.   Why then there is not such difference between the growing of a plant and of a commonwealth , as you thought ; seeing a commonwealth knowing as little , doth no less . 



Val.   This of all other is unto me a consideration fullest of comfort . 



Pub.   It will in time proceed accordingly , through mere necessity of nature , or by feeling ; but your desire i suppose is to know how it should be rationally introduced , or by seeing , and that with more ease , and better speed . 



Val.   If it Might please God , i would live to have my share of it , though i fear i never shall . 



Pub.   You carve yourself ill : for by hope a man enjoys even that which he never comes to attain ; and by fear he is deprived even of that which he comes not to lose . 



Val.   I must confess that our army hath it now in their power to introduce a commonwealth . 



Pub.   And there is no other action in their power that can excuse them . 



Val.   Putting the case they would hearken unto you , what course would you advise ? 



Pub.   The same that i have advised over and over . 



Val.   As how ? 



Pub.   As how ! is that yet a question ? Let them divide the territory into fifty equal parts . 



Val.   They will never make a new division . 



Pub.   Why then they shall never have an equal commonwealth . 



Val.   What ill luck is this , that the first step should be so difficult ? 



Pub.   You speak as if never any territory had been divided , whereas there is none that hath not ; and surveyors will tell you , it is a work to be perfectly performed in two months , and with ease . 



Val.   Putting the case this were done , what is next ? 



Pub.   The next is , that the commonwealth were complete . 



Val.   Say you so ? this indeed makes amends : but how ? 



Pub.   With no more addition , then that the persons in every distinct division elect annually two knights and seven deputies . 



Val.   I dare say the persons would never stick at this . 



Pub.   Not stioking at this , they of their own power have instituted the two great assemblies , of which every commonwealth consisteth . 



Val.   But in advising these things , you must advise men so that they May understand them . 



Pub.   Valerius , could i as easily have advised men how to understand , as what to do , there had been a commonwealth ere this . 



Val.   Come , i will have you try something of this kind , and begin upon some known principle , as this , all power is in the persons . 



Pub.   Content . But the diffusive body of the persons ( At least in a territory of this extent ) can never exercise any power at all . 



Val.   That is certain . 



Pub.   Hence is the necessity of some form of government . 



Val.   That is , the persons of themselves being in a natural incapacity of exercising power , must be brought into some artificial or political capacity of exercising the same . 



Pub.   Right , now this May be done in three ways ; as first , by a single person . 



Val.   How ! 



Pub.   Nay , i am not likely to trouble you much upon this point : but as you were intimating very now , there are royalists who derive the original right of monarchy from the consent of the persons . 



Val.   There are so . 



Pub.   And these hold the King to be nothing else , but the representor of the persons and their power . 



Val.   As the Turk . 



Pub.   Yes , as the Turk . 



Val.   The people's power at that rate comes to the people's slavery . 



Pub.   You say right ; and so it May at other rates too . 



Val.   As how ? 



Pub.   Why as i was about to say . The power of the persons May be politically brought into exercise three ways : by a single person , by an assembly consisting of a few , or by an assembly consisting of many . 



Val.   Or by a mixture . 



Pub.   Nay , i pray you let that alone yet a while : for which way soever you go , it must come at length to some mixture , seeing the single person you named but now , without his divan or council to debate and propose to him would make but bad work even for himself . But as the government cometh to be pitched fundamentally upon one of these three , so it differs not only in name , but in nature . 



Val.   I apprehend you , as monarchy , aristocracy and democracy . 



Pub.   Nay , you are out with your learning , when you have forbidden it me . But in countries where there is not a nobility sufficiently balanced or enriched , there can be none of your aristocracy ; and yet there May ( As long as it will last ) be a government in a few . 



Val.   What call you that ? 



Pub.   Nay , what say you ? 



Val.   Come , it is oligarchy : when all is done , some words of art we must use . 



Pub.   I thought you would come to it ; and yet seeing i have promised , i will be sparing . But with your pardon , you have disordered my discourse , or by this i had showed , that if the power of the persons be committed to a single person , the common interest is submitted unto that of a family ; and if it be committed to a few , it is submitted to the interest of a few families . 



Val.   Which so many times as they are more than one , is so many times worse than monarchy . 



Pub.   I am not sorry that you are of that mind . For there is no such thing as a commonwealth , or as you say democracy in nature , of it be not pirched upon a numerous assembly of the persons . 



Val.   What call you numerous ? 



Pub.   Why an assembly such for number , as can neither go upon the interest of one single person or family , nor the interest of a few persons or families . 



Val.   How will you constitute such an assembly ? 



Pub.   Commonwealths for the constitution of their popular assemblies , have had two ways . The first by inrolling all their citizens , and stating the quorum in such sort , that all to and above the stated number repairing at the time and place appointed , are impowered to give the vote of the whole commonwealth . 



Val.   The Athenian quorum was six thousand ; which towards the latter end of that commonwealth , came to five . 



Pub.   So , so , you May quote authors . But you May remember also , that Athens was a small commonwealth . 



Val.   How many would you advise for England ? 



Pub.   Put the case i should say , ten thousand ? 



Val.   They will laugh at you . 



Pub.   What can i help that ? or how many would you advise ? 



Val.   I would not go above five thousand . 



Pub.   Mark you then ; they only that are nearest , would come ; and so the city of London would give law unto the whole nation . 



Val.   Why really that same now is clear ; but would there be less danger of it , in case you stated your quorum at •en , at twenty , or though it were at an hundred or two hundred thousand ? 



Pub.   No : for which cause , as to England , it is a plain case , that this is no way , for the institution of a popular assembly . 



Val.   Which way then ? 



Pub.   For England there is no way but by representative , to be made rise equally and methodically by stated election of the persons throughout the whole nation . 



Val.   Need this be so numerous as the other ? 



Pub.   No . 



Val.   Why ? 



Pub.   Because it is not obnoxious unto a party , to any certain rank , or such as are soonest upon the spur , or make least account of their pains or of their money . 



Val.   Will you be so curious ? 



Pub.   Hold you this a curiosity ? How else will you avoid improvement in the interest of the better sort , to the detriment of those of meaner rank , or in the interest of the few to the detriment of that of the many ? 



Val.   Even this way than there is danger of that foul beast the oligarchy . 



Pub.   Look about you . The parliament declares all power to be in the persons ; is that in the better sort only ? 



Val.   Stay , the King was to observe leges & constitutiones quas• vulgus elegerit : that vulgus is to be understood of the parliament ; and the parliament consisted wholly of the better sort . 



Pub.   It is true ; but then that commonwealth went for the rest accordingly . 



Val.   It was , you will say , no democracy . 



Pub.   And will you say it was ? 



Val.   No truly : yet this derived in part from the free election of the persons . 



Pub.   How free ? seeing the persons then under Lords , dared not to elect otherwise then as pleased those Lords . 



Val.   Something of that is true ; but i am persuaded that the persons not under Lords , will yet be most addicted unto the better sort . 



Pub.   That is certain . 



Val.   How then will you prevent the like in your institution ? 



Pub.   You shall see presently . The diffusive body of the persons , in which the power is , and is declared to be , consisteth in the far greater part of the lower sort : wherefore their representative to rife naturally , and to be exactly comprehensive of the common interest , must consist also in the far greater part of the lower sort . 



Val.   Of what number will you have this representative ? 



Pub.   Say a thousand , or there about . 



Val.   What proportion will you have the meaner sort in it , to hold unto the better ? 



Pub.   Say about six to four . 



Val.   How will you order it , that it shall be so constituted ? 



Pub.   Why thus : let the persons in every precinct or shire at election choose four , under one hundred pounds a year in lands , goods or money , together with three at or above that proportion . 



Val.   I see not but this representative must be exact . 



Pub.   It is yet none at all , that is , unless you presume changes : for one thousand without change governing the whole persons , amounteth neither to a representative , nor to a commonwealth , but comes still unto your hard name . 



Val.   How do you order your changes ? 



Pub.   By annual election of one third part for three years . 



Val.   So that every year one third part of your assembly falls out of it , and a new third part at the same time , enters into the same . 



Pub.   Even so . 



Val.   This causeth the representative to be perpetually extant . 



Pub.   It doth so . But to respite that a little , i should be glad , before i stir farther , to know which way the vote of a representative thus constituted , can go one hairs beside the common and public interest of the whole diffusive body of the persons . 



Val.   No way in the earth that i can imagine , except through ignorance . 



Pub.   No human ordinance is infallible ; and what is done through mere ignorance or mistake , at one time , will be found and amended at another . 



Val.   A thousand men , and six to four of the lower sort , perpetually extant ! this must be a grievous charge to the most of them ; it will be hard to bring them , and impossible to hold them together . 



Pub.   Upon such as are elected , and come not , considerable fines must be levied ; and such as come and stay together , must have good salaries . 



Val.   Salaries to so many ! what will that come to ? 



Pub.   Not , with the rest of the pomp of the commonwealth , unto three hundred thousand pounds a year . 



Val.   Why ? the Kings have rarely had above six . 



Pub.   And did England ever grudge them of that proportion ? 



Val.   I must confess the quarrel grew , when they would not be contented with so little . 



Pub.   Now if England never did , nor needed grudge a King of six hundred thousand pounds a year , to be spent among courtiers ; why should we imagine she should grudge a commonwealth of three hundred thousand pounds a year , to be spent among magistrates ? 



Val.   But parliament-men have taken nothing . 



Pub.   Have the persons given nothing ? 



Val.   That was for the maintenance of armies . 



Pub.   And whether had you rather maintain armies or magistrates ? 



Val.   But putting the case , that this assembly needed not to be perpetually extant , this charge in the whole or in the far greater part Might be abated . 



Pub.   I cannot tell : for how often think you fit that this assembly should convene ? 



Val.   Parliaments at the most met not above once a year . 



Pub.   If they had been perpetually extant , there would have been no King . 



Val.   No truly , except in name only . 



Pub.   Therefore the popular assembly in a commonwealth , ought not to be perpetually extant . 



Val.   To the end ( You will say ) that there May be some King . 



Pub.   Mock not ; or what other guard of liberty is there in any commonwealth , but the popular assembly ? 



Val.   Come , let them assemble twice a year upon their ordinary guard . 



Pub.   And what if there be extraordinary occasion ? 



Val.   Then , as often as there is any such occasion . 



Pub.   How much will this abate of their necessary charge , or of the salaries ? And how much better were it for a representative to lead the life of statesmen then of carriers ? 



Val.   Commonwealths , whose assemblies have been of the former kind , have called them no otherwise then at stated times , or upon extraordinary occasions . 



Pub.   But then their assemblies were not equal . Representatives , but consisted of such as being next at hand were still ready upon any occasion . 



Val.   That makes indeed a considerable difference . But were this representative always extant , i cannot see but it would have nothing to do . 



Pub.   And in case it be not always extant , you imagine that it May have something to do . 



Val.   Yes . 



Pub.   Then whether goeth it better with the commonwealth when the representative hath something to do , or when it hath nothing to do ? 



Val.   This is very quaint . 



Pub.   No truly , Valerius , it is plain , that the guard of liberty perpetually extant , in doing nothing , must do much ; and not perpetually extant , in doing much May do nothing . 



Val.   I am afraid that having nothing to do , they will make work . 



Pub.   Such i warrant you as the parliament and the army made the other day . 



Val.   Nay , i am not so wide . A civil council and a standing army must needs have interests much more distinct , then two civil assemblies ; and where there is not like cause , i know well enough there cannot be the like affect . 



Pub.   I shall desire no more , then that you will hold you to this ; and than tell me what disputes there use to be between the senate of Venice and the great council , which is perpetually extant , and consisteth of about two thousand . 



Val.   Nay , certain it is , that between those two , there never was any dispute at all . 



Pub.   Then tell me for what cause such a thing should any more happen between the assemblies proposed ; or according to your own rule , from like causes , expect like effects . 



Val.   You put me to it . 



Pub.   Nay , it is you that put me to it ; for you will be presuming that this assembly can have nothing to do , before we come to consider what are their proper businesses and functions . 



Val.   Cry you mercy , and what are those ? 



Pub.   Why surely no small matters : for in every commonwealth truly popular , it is inseparable from the assembly of the persons , that first they wholly and only have the right of result in all matter of law-giving , of making peace and war , and in levying men and money . Secondly , that the ultimate result in judicature lie unto them ; and thirdly , that they have right to call unto account , and to punish their magistrates for all matter of maladministration of government . 



Val.   I assure you this must amount unto a great deal of business . 



Pub.   Certain it is , that in some commonwealths the popular assembly by this means , hath been perpetually employed . 



Val.   And so i think it Might be in England . 



Pub.   It Might ; but i do not think it would : however , if it be in the undoubted right of the popular assembly to proceed against their magistrates for maladministration , would you leave it upon the hand of those magistrates , whether this representative should assemble or no ? 



Val.   Come , you have said enough , it were not prudent : but as to the matter of appeals it is certain that in Israel the ultimate resort was to the Sanhedrim or 70 elders . 



Pub.   I know it very well : nevertheless you shall find that the congregation judged Benjamin ; and if you mark the appeal unto the 70 elders , you shall find that it was not an appeal of the party for relief , but of the judges in inferior courts for further light and direction in difficult cases of the law . 



Val.   Let me but know in what manner this assembly is to perform these functions , and i have done . 



Pub.   Why as to matter of law-giving , i told you that they wholly and only have the right and power of result . 



Val.   But to result , there must necessarily go precedent debate ; seeing a man , much less an assembly , resolveth not upon any thing without some considerations , motives or reasons thereunto conducing , which ought to be first orderly and maturely debated : and how will you bring a thousand men , especially being six to four of the lower sort , to debate any thing with order and maturity ? 



Pub.   You say that the popular assembly in Athens consisted at the least of five thousand . 



Val.   And i said true . 



Pub.   Yet this debated : why May not one thousand men debate as well as five thousand men ? 



Val.   As well ! Nay Publicola , if they debate no better in your commonwealth than they did in that , you May know what will become of it . And to tell you true , i do not think that one thousand men can debate any whit more orderly and maturely then five thousand . 



Pub.   And so think i too . 



Val.   How then ? 



Pub.   How then ? Why this is the reason of the senate in every commonwealth . 



Val.   So there must be a senate ; which amounts unto thus much , without a senate there can be no commonwealth ; and with a senate , there will always be practising upon the liberty of the persons . 



Pub.   How prove you that ? 



Val.   Why by the senate of Lacedaemon in the beginning ▪ and by the senate of Rome throughout . 



Pub.   But find you the like by the senates of Athens and Venice ? 



Val.   No . 



Pub.   Consider then that these were by election of the persons , and upon frequent removes , and that the former were defective in one or in both these circumstances . 



Val.   You intend your senate upon removes then ? 



Pub.   Right . 



Val.   And elective by the persons ? 



Pub.   Yes . 



Val.   How ? by the popular assembly , or by the body of the persons in their precincts ? 



Pub.   By the body of the persons in their precincts , at the same time when they elect their other deputies ; and with the same circumstances , save that these be all elected out of such as have one hundred pounds a year real or personal . 



Val.   What hurt if they were elected by the popular assembly ? 



Pub.   They would not derive so immediately , nor rise so equally from the persons , as chosen in the precincts ; because this way every shire cometh necessarily to have a share in the senate : besides , wise men and understanding are better known in their tribes , than they can be in an assembly out of their tribes ; especially while they are new comers : nor will the popular assembly afford so good choice as the whole persons . There are other reasons . 



Val.   Enough , enough . Of what number constitute you this senate ? 



Pub.   Of three hundred . 



Val.   Why should not one hundred be full enough for a debating council ; especially seeing debate is the more orderly , where the counsellors are fewer ? 



Pub.   You are to bear it in mind , that this senate is upon annual change in one third part . 



Val.   That is , every year one hundred having served three years , go out , and a new hundred come in . 



Pub.   Right : for which cause , to have one hundred well practised in debate , your senate must consist of three hundred . 



Val.   May not those that go out , come presently in again by new election ? 



Pub.   In no wise ; for that were yet another way of continuing the government in a few . 



Val.   Mean you that no man serve in this capacity , or that of the popular assembly , but once in his life ? 



Pub.   I mean , that a man having served his term in one of these , May after a like vacation or interval be elected again to serve in either of them , and not before . 



Val.   At what age do you make a man capable of these elections ? 



Pub.   Not till thirty . 



Val.   He stays a great while ere he come to preferment , and is soon out again ; at which rate a man should have much ado to attain unto sufficient knowledge for the leading of the commonwealth . 



Pub.   This was never objected against parliaments . 



Val.   It is true : but then the election of parliament-men was not obliged to any interval , and divers have been of every parliament that was summoned during their lives . 



Pub.   Parliaments •hen they were the most frequent , assembled not above once a year , very rarely so often ; and how long i pray you did they usually sit ? 



Val.   Some two or three months . 



Pub.   I allow you with the most you ask : at which rate a man that had satin in twenty parliaments , could not have satin above four years complete . 



Val.   And in your parliament , at one election he sits three . 



Pub.   Mark you that ? 



Val.   Yes , and more : whereas a parliament-man without interval could in twenty years have satin but four complete , in your assemblies a man observing his intervals , May in twenty years serve ten years complete . 



Pub.   You allow that , i hope , to be some advantage towards acquiring knowledge in conduct ; and yet anciently your parliament-men were in this point thought able enough . 



Val.   Now would i desire no more than to be as fully satisfied , that these senators must be honest enough . 



Pub.   Which way can they be dishonest ? 



Val.   Verily i am not yet acquainted with their ways : but if nothing can be proposed unto the popular assembly , save by these only , they methinks should propose nothing but what is for their own advantage . 



Pub.   They are the senate ; and in that , they have all the advantages that a well-ordered commonwealth can give unto a senate . 



Val.   But they will be still hankering after more . 



Pub.   As what ? 



Val.   Why riches or power . 



Pub.   All migistrates are accountable unto the popular assembly ; and so without acquisition of power , i cannot imagine which way they should turn themselves unto the acquisition of riches . 



Val.   They will drive then at power ; they will be coordinate . 



Pub.   In the world there hath never yet been any senate that durst so much as pretend unto power . 



Val.   No ? Had not the senate of Israel and that of Lacedaemon power ? 



Pub.   Executive power they had , in as much as they were judicatories ; but legislative or sovereign power ( Which is that whereof we speak ) they had none at all . 



Val.   Other senates have had other power , as in the managing of foreign affairs , and the like . 



Pub.   Which still cometh not unto the point in hand , because in these and like matters , as the creation of divers magistrates , the senate useth to be made plenipotentiary by the popular assembly , that is , by law . 



Val.   I hear them talk of making a coordinate senate first , and without the persons , and then of assembling a parliament in the old way to govern with that senate . 



Pub.   Things Valerius are soon said ; but if any parliament whatever , so it be elected by the persons ( And it May be though otherwise ) do not make it one of their first works to pull down a coordinate senate , i ask no credit to my politics . 



Val.   This is to prophesy . 



Pub.   Then to reason . I say , that the senate assuming power , the popular assembly falls immediately to debate ; and the popular assembly debating , the senate is ipso facto deposed , there being no other necessary use or function of the senate , but debate only . 



Val.   You said but now , that the popular assembly could not debate . 



Pub.   Not orderly and maturely : but upon such an occasion as this , they will do as they can ; nor is it avoidable . 



Val.   Nay , if there be some occasion in which you allow that the popular assembly must and aught to debate , there will hardly be any in which they will be persuaded that they May not . So this will come to the pulling down of the senate , as often as the persons please . 



Pub.   Which is so much the rather to be feared , because you shall never find that popular assembly , which did ever actually depose their senate . 



Val.   Our army hath pulled down a good many parliaments . 



Pub.   What is that to the purpose ? is our army a popular assembly ? yet let them pull down a parliament as often as they please , they must set up another ; and in this indeed there May be some resemblance : for let a popular assembly pull down the senate as often as they please , they must set up another . 



Val.   Or a single person . 



Pub.   Right : for that holds both ways too , and ( As to our case ) will stand neither . 



Val.   The persons of Athens debated , yet in that was not their senate deposed . 



Pub.   Not formally ; but it remained little better than a warrain , wherein great men did as it were start hares , to be hunted in the tumult of the popular assembly . 



Val.   Verily Publicola , this model of yours is a most entire thing . 



Pub.   This with the necessary consequences , as the division of the senate into Senatorian councils , the adorning and actuating of this and the other assembly with fit magistrates , whereof i have sufficiently discoursed in other places , amounteth unto an entire thing . 



Val.   And you offer it freely . 



Pub.   I do . 



Val.   Would it not grieve you , to see them crop a little of it , and spoil it ? 



Pub.   They had better take it to some purpose . 



Val.   Nay , what they take , will be to some purpose i warrant you . Come , there is a party , a select , a refined party , a nation in a nation , must and will govern . 



Pub.   That is it which i desire to see . 



Val.   You are of a rare temper ; happy in unhappiness . 



Pub.   Oh i love often changes . 



Val.   Is that any of your virtues ? 



Pub.   Yes , where we are certain never to go right , while there remains a way to go wrong . 



Val.   They are confident men . They cannot be persuaded but they can govern the world . 



Pub.   Till they have tried . Such as can govern the world , are such as can be governed by reason . Now there is no party refined , select , or what you will in England , amounting to one twentieth part of the whole persons . 



Val.   One twentieth part of the persons , for aught i know , May amount unto one hundred thousand ; there is no party any thing near this account , i dare say . 



Pub.   A twentieth part of the persons , can never govern the other nineteen , but by a perpetual army . 



Val.   They do not like that the worse . 



Pub.   The persons having been governed by a King without an army , and being governed by a commonwealth with an army , will detest the government of a commonwealth , and desire that of a King . 



Val.   Yes , such is the spirit of the nation . 



Pub.   Such is the spirit in this case of any nation . 



Val.   And yet they make it a particular quarrel . 



Pub.   They make every thing particular : if you speak of Israel , Athens , Room , Venice , or the like , they hear you with volubility of countenance ; and will not have it , that God ever minded the matter of government , till he brought them in play . Nay , though they have come heels overhead , for this very thing , i know not how often , yet they are resolved to take no warning . 



Val.   Publicola , you will be shent . 



Pub.   I am to perform my duty . To flatter is not my duty ! 



Val.   But between you and me , do you not think that the spirit of the nation , or the main body of the persons of this land , desires the restitution of their ancient government ? 



Pub.   I make little doubt of it . 



Val.   How then in case of a commonwealth are they to be trusted ? 



Pub.   In case of a commonwealth , it is not the persons that are trusted , but the orders of the commonwealth . 



Val.   The commonwealth must consist of the persons . 



Pub.   The persons under the monarchy , when that invaded them , invaded it . 



Val.   True , and in such manner as hath caused the ruin of it . 



Pub.   What was the spirit of the persons then ? 



Val.   But it is now another thing . 



Pub.   Nay , the very same : for than it invaded a government that invaded their liberty , and now it would invade a government that invadeth their liberty . 



Val.   But how should this be mended ? 



Pub.   Do you not see that this should not be mended , but encouraged ? 



Val.   How should it be encouraged then ? 



Pub.   By giving them a form , that must preserve their liberty . 



Val.   I little doubt but there is in your form a full security unto the persons of their liberty ; but do you think that there is in it any full security , that the persons shall not cast off this form ? 



Pub.   If it secure their liberty , why should they ? 



Val.   My question is not , why they should , but whether they can . 



Pub.   They cannot , without going against their own interest . 



Val.   But they can go against their own interest . 



Pub.   Nay , remember yourself , whether the form shown be not such , as you have already granted can in no wise go besides the interest of the whole persons . 



Val.   They that are now in power , have no trust at all in forms . 



Pub.   Do they sail in ships , not upon planks ? do they ride horses , not hogs ? do they travail in coaches , not upon hurdles ? do they live in houses , not in ditches ? do they eat bread , not stones ? 



Val.   Enough , enough . 



Pub.   But in so doing , they acknowledge such a form to be security for such an use or action . And must the form of a commonwealth be the only form in which they can allow no security for the proper use and action ? 



Tal.   They observe none of this . 



Pub.   Do they observe that there is any security in men ? 



Val.   That , especially in our times , were somewhat an hard matter . 



Pub.   And how many securities are there ? 



Val.   I know no more , than one personal , or in men ; another real , or in things . 



Pub.   Choose you whether you would have . 



Val.   Well , be the necessary action or use of your form what it will , i would see it more plainly and particularly demonstrated , how the spirit of the nation , or the whole persons , being freely eligible into your assemblies , must presently lose that inclination , which now plainly they have to set up monarchy , or to persecute for conscience . 



Pub.   You will allow no weight in the argument , that a persons in liberty , unless the orders of their commonwealth were first fundamentally ruined , that is , broken in the balance or foundation , did never do either of these . 



Val.   What weight soever i allow unto this argument , it is no wise to my present purpose . 



Pub.   You will put me then besides experience , and to show by what reason it is that a pear-tree must bear pears , or why men gather not grapes on thorns , or figs on thistles . 



Val.   Poor Publicola , be the task as hard as it will , i am for this time resolved to hold you to it . 



Pub.   What is it then that any government can be sufficiently founded or balanced upon , but such an interest as is sufficiently able to bear it ? 



Val.   Good Sir , a government ought to be founded upon justice , i take it . 



Pub.   Right : and is not that government which is founded upon an interest not sufficiently able to bear it , founded upon injustice ? 



Val.   I suspect whither this will go . A government founded upon the overbalance of propriety , is legitimately founded ? and so upon justice ; but a government founded upon the under-balance of propriety , must of necessity be founded upon force , or a standing army . Is not this that which you mean by interest sufficient or not sufficient to sustain a government ? 



Pub.   You have it right . 



Val.   Atheist , this damns the government of the saints . 



Pub.   Look you now , how irreligious a thing it May be made , to speak but with common honesty . Do you think that such as are plainly oligarchists , or shall exercise by a force , and without election by the persons , such power , as is both naturally and declaredly in the persons , and in them only , can establish their throne upon justice ? 



Val.   No . 



Pub.   Do you think that such as are truly saints , can establish their throne upon in justice ? 



Val.   No . 



Pub.   Why then you have granted , that such as are plainly oligarchists cannot be truly saints . Again , do you still think , as you once intimated , that a government now introduced in England , exactly according unto the principles of prudence and justice , would rule the earth ? 



Val.   Yes . 



Pub.   Do you think , that such as are truly saints , if they introduce government , aught to introduce it exactly according to the principles of prudence and justice ? 



Val.   Yes . 



Pub.   Why then , let such as are truly saints but see what it is to rule the earth ; and take the rule of the earth . 



Val.   They will not approve of this way . 



Pub.   How ! not the saints approve of prudence and justice ! who is the atheist now , Valerius ? 



Val.   Good Publicola , let us keep unto the point in hand . You say , that the security of liberty lieth not in the persons , but in the form of their government ; so i am yet to expect when you will show , what there is in your form , why it must be impossible for the persons under it , to restore monarchy , or to persecute for conscience . 



Pub.   See you not , that to do either of these under such a form , must be point-blank against their interest ? 



Val.   But so either of these is now , and yet in this posture you will confess that they would do both . 



Pub.   Mark how i am used . I speak of a form supported by an interest sufficiently able to bear it , and of an interest contained under a form sufficiently able to secure it ; and you instance in a posture which is no form at all , but such a confusion among , and force upon the persons , as createth an interest in them , to rid themselves which way they can of such a misery . 



Val.   I did acknowledge and must confess , that your popular assembly is such as cannot err , except through ignorance ; but through this , you yourself have acknowledged , and must confess , that it May err . 



Pub.   I retract nothing . 



Val.   Now first , or never , they will restore monarchy through ignorance . 



Pub.   But they cannot do this first , therefore they can never do it . 



Val.   Why cannot the popular assembly do this first ? 



Pub.   Because it must first be proposed by a senate , that can neither do any such thing through ignorance nor through knowledge . 



Val.   Nay , then have at you ; i will set this same senate and representative of yours to work in such a manner , that you shall confess they May set up monarchy . 



Pub.   Do your worst . 



Val.   Your senate being assembled ( I will not have them make long speeches . 



Pub.   Nor 1. ) 



Val.   Rises me up one of the senators , and saith , Mr.  speaker , this nation hath been long in labour , but now through the mercy of God , the child is not only come to the birth , but there is also strength to bring forth : in the number of counselors there is strength ; the number of this house is good ( Far better than hath usually been of late ) and their election hath been very free and fair . Here is also , i know not how ( But the inventions of men are overruled by the providence of God ) an extraordinary and exceeding great confluence of honest men , who are not so well here ; and if you determine any thing that is good for your country , will go home and pray for you . Now Sir , ( To be brief ) since our government consisted of King , Lords and Commons , the ancient , the only , the most happy government that this nation , nay , that the world ever knew , it is but too well known , that we have had no government at all : wherefore my opinion is , that we propose ( As they call it ) unto these honest men ( Who you need not doubt will receive it with glad hearts ) the restitution of right , and of the government in this nation by King , Lords and Commons . As sure as you live , Publicola , thus much being said , your whole senate will immediately agree to propose it unto the representative : and thus much being proposed unto the representative , those persons will throw up their caps for joy , and forthwith return unto their houses . 



Pub.   But Valerius , thus much hath been said in parliament when the house was fuller ; when they who were for this restitution , were backed by a single person in actual possession of the throne ; when over and above the zeal of Presbyterians , there were parties that knew no other means of self-preservation ; as without divines adoperating the oak of every pulpit ; and within , lawyers and salary-men : yet was it so far from being carried , that the single person hath been forced to dissolve parliaments , and that through apparent danger of being overrun by the principles of a commonwealth not in being . But if this were so when a commonwealth could scarce be hoped , what will it be when the commonwealth shall be in such a condition as cannot be withstood ? for the senate can never come to propose any thing unto the persons , without first agreeing upon debate , what it is that they will propose ; nor is it possible that such debate should be brought unto any end , but by reasons thereunto conducing : now it must not only be impossible to find reasons for the restitution of monarchy , but the reasons why monarchy ought not to be restored , must be obvious ; not only in regard that it is quite contrary to the interest of the nation , and of these assemblies , but to the interest ten to one of every particular man in either of these assemblies : nor are or have the reasons been less obvious , or less ventilated in parliament , why monarchy as to this nation is impossible in itself . 



Val.   Will you say the like for liberty of conscience ? 



Pub.   Yes ; because without liberty of conscience , civil liberty cannot be perfect ; and without civil liberty , liberty of conscience cannot be perfect . 



Val.   These things are true , but they will never see them , never , Publicola : you yourself say , that the persons cannot see , but they can feel . 



Pub.   I meant that of the diffusive body of the persons , not of the persons under good orders ; in which case they are the sharpest sighted , of any kind of government whatsoever : and therefore it is not modest , that you or i , or any particular man or party , blinded with self , should pretend to see with such a constitution ; or show me that eye under the sun , that sees like that of Venice . but putting the case it were otherwise as to seeing , these things are plainly palpable or obvious unto feeling . 



Val.   I have indeed observed , that in commonwealths there are very few that see or understand them , and yet their affection unto that way of government is exceeding vigorous . 



Pub.   Whence then can this otherwise be , then from feeling ? But one thing , Valerius , i take at your hands extreme heavily . 



Val.   What is that , Publicola ? 



Pub.   That you with one little speech of a single senator , should run so regardlessly over these two assemblies , without taking any notice at all of the necessary course of them . 



Val.   What course , Publicola ? 



Pub.   Why you Might easily have thought , that among three hundred senators there Might have been at least one hundred as good speakers as yours . 



Val.   Have i said any thing to the contrary ? 



Pub.   And do you or i what we can , ten to one of them will be longer wound than you have allowed . 



Val.   For that matter , let them please themselves . 



Pub.   Ay but than you should not have made an end of your debate in a minute . 



Val.   What is all this ? 



Pub.   Why i say , they would have been debating upon that point at least a fortnight . 



Val.   Well , and when that had been done , would never have agreed . 



Pub.   No . 



Val.   Did not you say that before ? 



Pub.   Well , but i am now upon another point ; that was to the matter in debate , this is to the manner of proceeding : imagine the matter had been such upon which they could have agreed . 



Val.   What then ? 



Pub.   Then such an agreement had been a decree of the senate . 



Val.   Is a decree of the senate binding ? 



Pub.   If it be upon law made , it is binding ; if upon law to be made , it is to be proposed unto the persons . Now every proposition to the persons is to be promulgated , that is , printed and published to the whole nation , six weeks before the time that the representative is to assemble and give the vote of the commonwealth , or that test without which no such proposition can be any law . 



Val.   By this means it must follow , that the whole persons both by discourse and letters , debate six weeks together upon the matter . 



Pub.   You are right . 



Val.   How is it then that you say , the representative of the persons must not debate ? allow you unto these less privilege , then unto the whole persons ? 



Pub.   No less , nor in this point any more . 



Val.   Yet amounteth this to debate in those that are of the representative . 



Pub.   You say well , but not unto any debate at all in the representative . 



Val.   Why this representative is nothing else but an instrument or method , whereby to receive the result of the whole nation , with order and expedition , and without any manner of tumult or confusion . 



Pub.   And is that any thing the worse ? 



Pub.   No ; but i am glad you have told it me : for , that those of the representative would one way or other have debate , i knew certainly . 



Pub.   In sum , are you satisfied , that the spirit of the nation , or the persons , however they May now under no form at all , and in detestation of such as having governed them by force , will let them see no way out of confusion , desire their old government , as having never yet known any other ; yet under such a form as is proposed , can never go about to introduce monarchy , without obvious discovery , that as to their interest , it is quite contrary , and as to itself impossible ? 



Val.   The satisfaction is pretty good . 



Pub.   Pretty good ! give me but half so good , that the spirit of the army , not formerly obedient unto parliaments , and now dreading or despising them , must apprehend the restitution of monarchy to be quite contrary to their interest . 



Val.   You surprise me : for if the army will have no parliament , and a King restored can now in England without an army have no government , they May imagine this their only way unto greatness and continuance . 



Pub.   Had not the oligarchy then , if they meant well , better to have used sober expressions , and minded what those true and real interests are , which in the foundation and preservation of every kind of government are paramount , then to have overcast them with the mist of new affected phrases , and fallen on conjuring up spirits ? 



Val.   You have conjured up a spirit will keep me waking . 



Pub.   Set him on pulling down the law and the ministry ; when that is done , let him blow-up Winsore castle , Hampton court , and throw Whitehall into the Thames . 



Val.   It is the only way , for then there can be no King . 



Pub.   You May be sure of that , seeing the Count of Holland's domain , and his houses are yet not only standing , but diligently preserved by the Hollanders . 



Val.   Publicola , have you any more to tell me ? 



Pub.   Valerius , have you any more to ask me ? 



Val.   Not , except why you have not given the parliament to understand thus much . 



Pub.   I have printed it over and over . 



Val.   They take no great notice of books ; you should have laid it , as they say , in their dish by some direct address , as a petition , or so . 



Pub.   I did petition the committee for government . 



Val.   What answer did they make you ? 



Pub.   None at all . 



Val.   I would have gone further , and have presented it unto the house . 



Pub.   Towards this also i went as far as i could . 



Val.   How far was that ? 



Pub.   Why i think my petition May have been worn out in the pockets of some two or three members . 



Pub.   Have you a copy of it about you ? 



Pub.   Let me see — here are many papers ; this same is it . 

To the parliament of the commonwelath of England , &c.  The humble petition , &c.  

Showeth , 

That what neither is , nor ever was in nature , can never be in nature . 

That without a King and Lords , no government either is , or ever was in nature ( But in mere force ) other then by a senate endued with authority to debate and propose ; and by a numerous assembly of the persons , wholly and only invested with the right of result in all matter of law-giving , of making peace , and war , and of levying men and money . 

wherefore your petitioner ( to disburden his conscience in a matter of such concernment unto his country ) most humbly and earnestly prayeth and beseecheth , this parliament to take into speedy and serious consideration the irrefragable truth of the premises , and what thereupon must assuredly follow ( that is ) either the institution of a commonwealth in the whole persons of England ( without exception , or with exception for a time , of so few as May be ) by way of a senate , and a numerous assembly of the persons ; to the ends , and for the respective functions aforesaid , or the inevitable ruin of this nation , which God of his mercy avert . 

And your petitioner shall pray , &c.  





Val.   I would it had been delivered . 



Pub.   Look you , if this had been presented to the house , i intended to have added this other paper , and to have printed them together . 

The petitioner to the reader . 

Reader , 

I say not that the form contained in the petition ( If we had it , and no more ) would be perfect ; but that without thus much ( Which rightly introduced , introduceth the rest ) there neither is , was , nor can be any such thing as a commonwealth , or government without a King and Lords , in nature . 

Where there is a coordinate senate , there must be a King , or it falleth instantly by the persons ; as the King failing , the house of peers fell by the Commons . 

Where there is a senate not elective by the persons , there is perpetual feud between the senate and the persons , as in Rome . 

To introduce either of these causes , is certainly and inevitably to introduce one of these effects ; and if so , than who are cavaliers , i leave you to judge hereafter . 

But to add farther reason unto experience . All civil power among us ( Not only by declaration of parliament , but by the nature of propriety ) is in and from the persons . 

Where the power is in the persons , there the senate can legitimately be no more unto the popular assembly , than my counsel at law is to me , that is , ( auxilium , non imperium ) a necessary aid , not a competitor or rival in power . 

Where the aids of the persons become their rivals or competitors in power , there their shepherds become wolves ; their peace , discord ; and their government , ruin . But to impose a select or coordinate senate upon the persons , is to give them rivals and competitors in power . 

Some perhaps ( Such is the temper of the times ) will say , that so much human confidence as is expressed , especially in the petition , is atheistical . But how were it atheistical , if i should as confidently foretell , that a boy must expire in nonage , or become a man ? I prophesy no otherwise ; and this kind of prophecy is also of God , by those rules of his providence , which in the known government of the world are infallible . In the right observation & application of these , consisteth all human wisdom ; and we read ( eccles. 9 14.  ) that a poor man delivered a city by his wisdom ; yet was this poor man forgotten . But if the premises of this petition fail , or one part of the conclusion come not to pass accordingly , let me hit the other mark of this ambitious address , and remain a fool upon record in parliament to all posterity . 





Val.   Thou-boy ! and yet i hope well of thy reputation . 



Pub.   Would it were but as good now , as it will be when i can make no use of it . 



Val.   The major of the petition is in some other of your writings ; and i remember some objections which have been made against it . As , that à non esse , nec fuisse , non datur argumentum ad non posse . 



Pub.   Say that in English . 



Val.   What if i cannot ? are not you bound to answer a thing , though it cannot be said in English ? 



Pub.   No truly . 



Val.   Well , i will say it in English then . Though there neither be any house of gold , nor ever were any house of gold , yet there May be an house of gold . 



Pub.   Right : but then , à non esse nec fuisse in natura , datur argumentum ad non posse in natura . 



Val.   I hope you can say this in English too . 



Pub.   That i can , now you have taught me . If there were no such thing as gold in nature , there never could be any house of gold . 



Val.   Softly . The frame of a government is as much in art , and as little in nature , as the frame of an house . 



Pub.   Both softly and surely . The materials of a government are as much in nature , and as little in art , as the materials of an house . Now as far forth as art is necessarily disposed by the nature of her foundation or materials , so far forth it is in art as in nature . 



Val.   What call you the foundation , or the materials of government ? 



Pub.   That which i have long since proved , and you granted ; the balance : the distribution of propriety , and the power thence naturally deriving ; which as it is in one , in a few , or in all , doth necessarily dispose of the form or frame of the government accordingly . 



Val.   Be the foundation or materials of an house what they will , the frame or superstructures May be diversely wrought up or shapen ; and so May those of a commonwealth . 



Pub.   True : but let an house be never so diversely wrought up or shapen , it must consist of a roof and walls . 



Val.   that 's certain . 



Pub.   And so must a commonwealth , of a senate and of a popular assembly , which is the sum of the minor in the petition . 



Val.   The mathematicians say , they will not be quarrelsome ; but in their sphere there are things altogether new in the world , as the present posture of the heavens is , and as was the star in cassiopoeia . 



Pub.   Valerius , if the major of the petition extend as far as is warranted by Solomon , i mean , that there is nothing new under the sun , what new things there May be , or have been above the sun , will make little to the present purpose . 



Val.   It is true ; but if you have no more to say , they will take this but for shifting . 



Pub.   Where there is sea , as between Sicily and Naples' , there was anciently land ; and where there is land , as in Holland , there was anciently sea . 



Val.   What then ? 



Pub.   Why then the present posture of the earth is other than it hath been , yet is the earth no new thing , but consisteth of land and sea , as it did always ; so whatever the present posture of the heavens be , they consist of star and firmament , as they did always . 



Val.   What will you say then to the star in cassiopoeia ? 



Pub.   Why i say , if it consisted of the same matter with other stars , it was no new thing in nature , but a new thing in cassiopoeia ; as were there a commonwealth in England , it would be no new thing in nature , but a new thing in England . 



Val.   The star you will say in cassiopoeia , to have been a new thing in nature , must have been no star , because a star is not a new thing in nature . 



Pub.   Very good . 



Val.   You run upon the matter , but the newness in the star was in the manner of the generation . 



Pub.   At Putzuoli near Naples , i have seen a mountain that rose up from under water in one night , and poured a good part of the lake anciently called Lucrine into the sea . 



Val.   What will you infer from hence ? 



Pub.   Why that the new and extraordinary generation of a star , or of a mountain , no more causeth a star , or a mountain to be a new thing in nature , than the new and extraordinary generation of a commonwealth , causeth a commonwealth to be a new thing in nature . Aristole reports , that the nobility of tarantum , being cut off in a battle , that commonwealth became popular . And if the powder-plot in England had destroyed the King and the nobility , it is possible that popular government Might have risen up in England , as the mountain did at Putzuoli . yet for all these , would there not have been any new thing in nature . 



Val.   Some new thing ( Through the blending of unseen causes ) there May seem to be in shuffling ; but nature will have her course , there is no other than the old game . 



Pub.   Valerius , let it rain or be fair weather , the sun to the dissolution of nature shall ever rise ; but it is now set , and i apprehend the mist . 



Val.   Dear Publicola , your health is mine own ; i bid you good-night . 



Pub.   Good-night to you , Valerius . 



Val.   One word more , Publicola : pray make me a present of those same papers , and with your leave and licence , i will make use of my memory to commit the rest of this discourse unto writing , and print it . 



Pub.   They are at your disposing . 



Val.   I will not do it as hath been done , but with your name to it . 



Pub.   Whether way you like best , most noble Valerius . 



octob. 22. 1659.  

a sufficient answer to Mr. Stubbe . 

There is a book newly put forth by Mr. Stubbe , entitled , a letter to an officer , &c. which in brief comes to this , that he would have a select senate for life , consisting of independents , Anabaptists , fifth monarchy-men and Quakers ; for which he is pleased to quote deut. 23. that he would have all such as adhered unto the parliament against Sir g. Booth , to be enrolled as the persons of England : that he would have all the rest of the persons of England to be holo•• , gibe•niter or Paysams . this book i have read ; and i have heard a tale of one ; who , to get something , pretended the showing of a strange bea•• , an horse and no horse , with the tail standing where the head should stand : which when all came to all , was a mare , with her tail tied to the manger ; the lively emblem of an oligarchy . Mr. Stubbe pretending to show his learning , takes those things ( As it were changing the sex of them ) which i have written , and in his writings turns their tails unto the manger . Now this , as to the unlearned reader , is that upon which it is to no purpose to move any controversy ; and as to the learned , i need no more than appeal , whether in their proper stables , or in the best authors , the heads of them stand , as i have set them , or the tails as Mr. Stubbe hath set them . Only let me say , that as to a select senate ( Understanding thereby a senate not elected by the persons ) there is no more of this in all story , than the senate of Rome only . Whence it is undeniable by any man of common understanding , that a select senate bringeth in a select interest , that a select interest causeth feud between that select interest , and the common interest , and so between the senate and the popular assembly ; which coal in England it is fit for such as Mr. Stubbe and his patrons to blow , then for such as understand story , government , or common honesty . But their reasons who decry the possibility or plausibility of such acts or orders as these , it pleaseth him to call high rodomontadoes . now which are the higher rodomontadoes , these , or those which he useth in flourishing the justitia of Anagon , ( A patch in a monarchy , which his design is to translate by a select senate , into a commonwealth ) i leave any man to judge , even by the testimony of his own author Blanca , and in a place cited by himself , though not so well rendered . our ancestors ( Saith Blanca ) have three ways secured our liberties ; by the justitia , by the great power of the ricos hombres ( Now he speaks ) and by the privilege of the union . The first was a civil and forensick curb ( A gown ) the second was a domestic , and more restraining one ( I think so the purse , and thence the power ) the third popular and warlike , an excellent militia , now let any man say , even after Blanca , if without the nobility , in whom was the balance of this monarchy ; and their retainers and dependants , of which consisted the militia , this court of the poor gown-man called justitia , must not have been a very likely thing to restrain a Prince ; or consider whether without this same mummery of the Arragonians , houses of peers and of Commons in other monarchies , have not every whit as much restrained their Kings , and more , seeing this toy ( As at every election of the magistrate called justitia , it received not breathe but from a King ) was blown away by a King . His other instances , as the thirty six curators of the public appointed unto Lewis the eleventh of France , by the three estates , and the twenty five select peers , given unto King John of England , were like shifts , and had less effect . Security in government must be from entireness of form ; and entireness of form , must be from soundness or rightness of foundation . But Mr. Stubbe founding himself upon the authority of Aristotle , that the Western parts are not capable of a right commonwealth , is declaredly for a wrong commonwealth in England . he minds not , that Venice , for the capacity , is a righter commonwealth than was ever any in Greece ; nor that the present state of England , is of a far different , if not a quite contrary nature to that of the Western parts , in the time of Aristotle . 

Finis . 






















