The Rota : or , a model of a free-state , or equal commonwealth : once proposed and debated in brief , and to be again more at large proposed to , and debated by a free and open society of ingenious gentlemen . 

ite fortes , ite foelices . 

London , printed for John Starkey at the mitre , near the Middle-temple gate in Fleetstreet , 1660.  

At the Rota . December 20. 1659.  

Resolved , that the proposer be desired , and is hereby desired to bring in a model of a free state , or equal commonwealth , at large , to be farther debated by this society , and that in order thereunto it be first printed . 

Resolved , that the model being proposed in print , shall be first read , and then debated by clauses . 

Resolved , that a clause being read over night , the debate thereupon begin not at the soonest till the next evening . 

Resolved , that such as will debate , be desired to bring in their quaeres upon , or objections against the clause in debate , if they think fit , in writing . 

Resolved , that debate being sufficiently had upon a clause , the question be put by the ballatting-box , not any way to determine of , or meddle with the government of these nations , but to discover the judgement of this society , upon the form of popular government , in abstract , or secundum artem ▪ 

The principles of government : 

All government is founded upon overbalance , in propriety . 

If one man hold the overbalance unto the whole persons in propriety , his propriety causeth absolute monarchy . 

If the few hold the overbalance unto the whole persons in propriety , their propriety causeth aristocracy , or mixed monarchy . 

If the whole persons be neither overbalanced by the propriety of one , nor of a few , the propriety of the persons , or of the many , causeth democracy , or popular government . 

The government of one against the balance , is tyranny . 

The government of the few against the balance , is oligarchy . 

The government of the many , ( Or attempt of the persons to govern ) against the balance , is rebellion , or anarchy . 

Where the balance of propriety is equal , it causeth a state of war . 

To hold , that government May be founded upon community , is to hold , that there May be a black swan , or a castle in the air ; or , that what thing soever is as imaginable , as what hath been in practice , must be as practicable , as what hath been in practice . 

If the overbalance of propriety be in one man , it necessitateth the form of the government to be like that of Turkey . 

It the overbalance of propriety be in the few , it necessitateth the form of the government to be like that of King , Lords , and Commons . 

If the persons be not overbalanced by one , or a few , they are not capable of any other form of government , then that of a senate , and a popular assembly . For example , as followeth : 

For the form or model in brief of a free-state , or equal commonwealth ; it hath been proposed in this manner . 

1.  Let the whole territory of Oceana , be divided as equally as May be into fifty parts or shires . 

2.  Let the whole inhabitants ( Except women , children , and servants ) be divided according unto their age into elders and youth ; and according unto their estates into horse and foot . 

3.  Let all such as are eighteen years of age , or upwards to thirty , be accounted youth ; and all such as are thirty or upwards , be accounted elders . 

4.  Let all such as have one hundred pounds a year , or upwards , in lands , goods , or monies , be accounted of the horse ; and all such as have under , be accounted of the foot of the commonwealth . 

5.  Let every parish in a shire elect annually the fifth elder of the same to be for that year a deputy of that parish ; if a parish be too small , let it be laid as to this purpose , unto the next ; and in this respect , let every part of the territory appertain to some parish . 

6.  Where there is but one elder of the horse in a parish , let him be annually eligible , without interval : where there are more elders of the horse , let no deputy of the parish be re-eligible , but after the interval of one year . 

7.  Where there be four elders of the horse , or more , in one and the same parish , let not under two , nor above half of them ▪ be elected , at one and the same election , or time . 

8.  Let the deputies thus elected at the parishes , assemble annually at the capital of their shire , and let them then , and there elect out of their own number , two elders of the horse to be knights or senators , three elders of the horse , and four elders of the foot , to be of the assembly of the persons , for the term of three years , enjoining an equal vacation , or interval , before they can be re-elected in either of these capacities . 

9  Let there be elected at the same time in each shire , the first year only , two other knights , and seven other deputies for the term of one year , and two other knights , with seven other deputies for the term of two years , which in all constituteth the senate of three hundred knights , and the popular assembly of one thousand and fifty deputies , each being upon a triennial rotation , or annual change in one third part . 

10.  Let the senate have the whole authority or right of debating and proposing unto the persons ; let the popular assembly have the whole power of result ; and let what shall be proposed by the senate , and resolved by the popular assembly , be the law of Oceana . 

The conclusion . 

Two assemblies thus constituted , must necessarily amount unto the understanding and the will , unto the wisdom and the interest of the whole nation , and a commonwealth ; where the wisdom of the nation proposeth , and the interest of the persons resolveth ; can never fail in whatever shall be farther necessary , for the right constituting of itself . 

The model at large of a free-state , or equal commonwealth . 

Proposed in four parts : First , the civil , 
Secondly , the religious , 
Thirdly , the military , 
Fourthly , the provincial part.  


Part 1.  

For the civil part , it is proposed , 

1.  That the whole native or proper territory of Oceana ( Respect had unto the the tax-role , unto the number of persons , and to the extent of territory , ) be cast with as much exactness as can be convenient , into fifty precincts , shires , or tribes . 

2.  That all citizens , that is , freemen , or such a• are not servants , be distributed into horse ▪ and foot ▪ that such of them as have one hundred pounds a year in lands , goods , or money , or above that proportion be accounted of the horse ; and all such as have under that proportion , be accounted of the foot . 

3.  That all elders or freemen being thirty years of age , or upwards , be capable of civil administration ; and that the youth , or such freemen as are between eighteen years of age , and thirty , be not capable of civil administration , but of military only ; in such manner as shall follow in the military part of this model . 

4.  That the elders resident in each parish , annually assemble in the same ; as for example , upon Monday next ensuing , the last of December . that they then , and there elect out of their own number every fifth man , or one man out of every five , to be for the term of the year ensuing , a deputy of that parish ; and that the first and second so elected , be overseers , or precedents for the regulating of all parochial congregations , whether of the elders , or of the youth , during the term for which they were elected . 

5.  That so many parishes lying nearest together , whose deputies shall amount to one hundred , or thereabouts , be cast into one precinct , called the hundred ; and that in each precinct called the hundred , there be a town , village , or place appointed , to be the capital of the same . 

6.  That the parochial deputies elected throughout the hundred assemble annually , for example upon Monday next ensuing , the last of January , at the capital of their hundred . That they then , and there elect out of the horse of their number , one justice of the peace , one jury ▪ man , one captain , one ensign , and out of the foot of their number , one other jury man , one high-constable , &c.  

7.  That every twenty hundred , lying nearest , and most conveniently together , be cast into one tribe , or shire . That the whole territory being after this manner cast into tribes , or shires , some town , village , or place , be appointed unto every tribe , or shire , for the capital of the same ; and that these three precincts , that is , the parish , the hundred , and the tribe , or shire , whether the deputies thenceforth annually chosen in the parishes , or hundred , come to increase , or diminish , remain firm , and inalterable for ever , save only by act of parliament . 

8.  That the deputies elected in the several parishes , together with their magistrates , and other officers , both civil and military , elected in their several hundreds , assemble , or muster annually , for example , upon Monday next ensuing the last of February , at the capital of their tribe , or shire . 

9  That the whole body thus assembled upon the first day of the assembly , elect out of the horse of their number one high sheriff , one lieutenant of the tribe , or shire , one custos rotulorum , one conductor , and two censors . That the high sheriff be commander in chief , the lieutenant commander in the second place , and the conductor in the third , of this band , or squadron . That the custos rotulorum be muster-master , and keep the rolls . That the censors be governors of the ballot . And that the term of these magistracies be annual . 

10.  That the magistrates of the tribe , that is to say , the high-sheriff , lieutenant , custos rotulorum , the censors , and the conductor , together with the magistrates and officers of the hundred ( That is to say ) the twenty justices of the peace , the forty jurymen , the twenty high-constables be one troop , and one company apart , called the prerogative troop , or company . That this troop bring in , and assist the justices of assize , hold the quarter sessions in their several capacities , and perform their other functions as formerly . 

11.  That the magistrates of the tribe , or shire , that is to say , the high sheriff , lieutenant , custos rotulorum , the censors , and the conductor , together with the twenty justices elected at the hundred , be a court for the government of the tribe called the phylarch ; and that this court proceed in all matters of government , as shall from time to time be directed by act of parliament . 

12.  That the squadron of the tribe , upon the second day of their assembly , elect two knights , and three burgesses out of the horse of their number , and four other burgesses out of the foot of their number . That the knights have session in the senate , for the term of three years , and that the burgesses be of the Prerogativ e tribe , or representative of the persons for the like e term . That if in case of death , or expulsion , a place become void in the senate , or popular assembly , the respective shire , or tribe have timely notice from the signory , and proceed in the manner aforesaid unto extraordinary election of a deputy , or senator , for the remaining part of the term of the senator , or deputy , deceased , or expelled . 

13.  That for the full and perfect institution , at once , of the assemblies mentioned , the squadron of each tribe ▪ or shire , in the first year of the commonwealth , elect two knights for the term of one year , two other knights for the term of two years , and lastly , two knights more for the term of three years ; the like for the burgesses , of the horse first , and then for those of the foot . 

14.  That a magistrate , or officer elected at the hundred , be thereby barred from being elected a magistrate of the tribe , or of the first days election : that no former election whatsoever bar a man of the second day's election at the tribe , or to be chosen a knight , or burgess . That a man being chosen a knight or burgess , who before was chosen a magistrate , or officer of the hundred , or tribe , delegate his former office , or magistracy in the hundred , or the tribe , to any other deputy , being no magistrate nor officer , and being of the same hundred , and of the same order , that is , of the horse , or of the foot respectively . That the whole , and every part of the foregoing orders , for election in the parishes , the hundred , and the tribes , be holding , and inviolate upon such penalties , in case of failure , as shall hereafter be provided by act of parliament against any parish , hundred , tribe , or shire , deputy , or person so offending . 

15.  That the knights of the annual election in the tribes ▪ take their places on Monday next ensuing , the last of March , in the senate . That the like number of knights , whose session determineth at the same time rec••e . That every knight , or senator , be paid out of the public revenue quarterly , seventy five pounds , during his term of session , and be obliged to sit in purple robes . 

16.  That annually upon reception of the new knights , the senate proceed unto election of new magistrates and counsellors . That for magistrates they elect one Archon or general , one orator or speaker , and two censors , each for the term of one year , these promiscuously ▪ and that they elect one commissioner of the great seal , and one commissioner of the treasury ; each for the term of three years , out of the new knights only . 

17.  That the Archon or general , and the orator or speaker , as consuls of the commonwealth , and precedents of the senate , be , during the term of their magistracy , paid quarterly five hundred pounds : that the ensigns of these magistracies , be , a sword born before the general , and a mace before the speaker : that they be obliged to wear Ducal robes , and that what is said of the Archon or general in this proposition , be understood only of the general sitting , and not of the general Marching . 

18.  That the general sitting , in case he be commanded to March , receive field-pay ; and that a new general be forthwith elected by the senate to succeed him in the house , with all the rights , ensigns , and emoluments of the general sitting : and this so often as one or more generals are Marching . 

19  That the three commissioners of the great seal , and the three commissioners of the treasury , using their ensigns and habit , and performing their other functions as formerly , be paid quarterly unto each of them three hundred seventy five pounds . 

20.  That the censors be each of them chancellor of one university by virtue of their election : that they govern the ballot , that they be precedents of the council for religion : that they have under appeal unto the senate , right to note and remove a senator that is scandalous , that each have a silver wand for the ensign of his magistracy , that each be paid quarterly three hundred seventy five pounds , and be obliged to wear scarlet robes . 

21.  That the general sitting , the speaker , and the six commissioners abovesaid , be the signiory of this commonwealth . 

22.  That there be a council of state consisting of fifteen knights , five out of each order or election ; and that the same be perpetuated by the annual election of five out of the new knights , or last elected into the senate . 

23.  That there be a council for religion consisting of twelve knights , four out of each order , and perpepetuated by the annual election of four out of the knights last elected into the senate . That there be a council for trade consisting of a like number , elected and perpetuated in the same manner . 

24.  That there be a council of war , not elected by the senate , but elected by the council of state out of themselves . That this council of war consist of nine knights , three out of each order , and be perpetuated by the annual election of three out of the last knights elected into the council of state . 

25.  That in case the senate add nine knights more out of their own number unto the council of war , the said council be understood by such addition , to be dictator of the commonwealth , for the term of three months , and no longer , except by further order of the senate , the said Dictatorian power be prolonged for a like term . 

26.  That the signiory have session and suffrage , with right also jointly or severally , to propose both in the senate , and in all Senatorian councils . 

27.  That each of the three orders or divisions of knights in each Senatorian council elect one provost for the term of one week ; and that any two provosts of the same council so elected , May propose unto the respective council , and not otherwise . 

28.  That some fair room or rooms well furnished , and attended , be allowed at the state's charge , for a free and open academy unto all comers , at some convenient hour or hours , towards the evening . That this academy be governed according to the rules of good breeding or civil conversation , by some or all of the proposers : and that in the same it be lawful for any man by word of mouth , or by writing in jest or in earnest , to propose unto the proposers . 

29.  That for ambassadors in ordinary , there be four residences , as France , Spain , Venice , and Constantinople , that every resident upon election of a new ambassador , in ordinary , remove to the next residence in the order nominated , till having served in them all , he return home . That upon Monday next ensuing , the last of November , there be every second year elected by the senate some fit person being under thirty five years of age , and not of the senate , nor of the popular assembly : that the party so elected repair upon Monday next ensuing the last of March following , as ambassador in ordinary unto the court of France , and there reside for the term of two years , to be computed from the first of April next ensuing his election . That every ambassador in ordinary be allowed three thousand pounds a year , during the term of his residencies , and that if a resident come to die , there be an extraordinary election into his residence for his term , and for the remainder of his removes , and progress . 

30.  That all emergent elections be made by scrutiny that is , by a council , or by commissioners proposing , and by the senate resolving in the manner following : that all field-officers be proposed by the council of war ; that all ambassadors extraordinary be proposed by the council of state : that all judges and sergeants at law be proposed by the commissioners of the great seal . Tha• all Barons , and officers of trust in the exchequer , be proposed by the commissioners of the treasury , and that such as are thus proposed , and approved by the senate , be held lawfully elected . 

31.  That the cognizance of all matter of state to be considered , or law to be enacted , whether it be provincial or national , domestic or foreign , appertain unto the council of state . That such affairs of either kind as they shall judge , to require more secreey , be remitted by this council , and appertain unto the council of war , being for that end a select part of the same . That the cognizance and protection both of the national religion , and of the liberty of conscience equally established , after the manner to be shown in the religious part of this model , appertain unto the council for religion . That all matter of traffic and regulation of the same , appertain unto the council for trade . That in the exercise of these several functions , which naturally are Senatorian or authoritative only ; no council assume any other power then such only , as shall be estated upon the same by act of parliament . 

32.  That what shall be proposed unto the senate by one or more of the signiory or proposers general , or whatever was proposed by any two of the provosts , or particular proposers , unto their respective council ; and upon debate at that council shall come to be proposed by the same unto the senate , be necessarily debatable , and debated by the senate . That in all cases wherein power is derived unto the senate by law made , or by act of parliament , the result of the senate be ultimate : that in all cases of law to be made , or not already provided for by act of parliament ; as war and peace , levy of men , or money , or the like ; the result of the senate be not ultimate . That whatsoever is decreed by the senate upon a case wherein their result is not ultimate , be proposed by the senate unto the prerogative tribe , or representative of the persons , except only in cases of such speed or secrecy , wherein the senate shall judge the necessary slowness , or openness , in this way of proceeding , to be of detriment , or danger unto the commonwealth . 

33.  That if upon the motion or proposition of a council , or proposer-general , the senate add 9 knights , promiscuously chosen out of their own number unto the council of war : the same council , as thereby made dictator , have power of life and death , as also to enact laws in all such cases of speed or secrecy for , and during the term of three months and no longer , except upon new order from the senate . And that all laws enacted by the dictator be good and valid , for the term of one year and no longer , except the same be proposed by the senate , and resolved by the persons . 

34.  That the burgesses of the annual election returned by the tribes , enter into the prerogative tribe , popular assembly , or representative of the persons , upon Monday next ensuing the last of March ; and that the like number of burgesses , whose term is expired , recede at the same time . That the burgesses thus entered , elect unto themselves out of their own number , two of the horse , one to be captain , and the other to be cornet of the same ; and two of the foot , one to be captain , and the other to be ensign of the same ; each for the term of three years . That these officers being thus elected , the whole tribe or assembly ▪ proceed to the election of four annual magistrates , two out of the foot to be tribunes of the foot , and two out of the horse , to be tribunes of the horse . That the tribunes be commanders of this tribe in chief , so far as it is a military body , and precedents of the same , as it is a civil assembly . And lastly , that this whole tribe be paid weekly , as followeth . Unto each of the tribunes of the horse seven pounds . Unto each of the tribunes of foot six pounds . Unto each of the captains of horse five pounds . Unto each of the captains of foot four pounds . Unto each of the cornets three pounds , unto each of the ensigns two pounds , seven shillings . Unto every horseman 2 pound , and to every one of the foot , one pound , ten shillings . 

35.  That inferior officers , as captains , cornets , ensigns , be only for the military discipline of this squadron , or tribe . That the tribunes have session in the senate without suffrage ; that they have session of course , and with suffrage in the Dictatorian council , so often as it is create by the senate . That they be precedents of the court in all cases , to be judged by the persons : and that they have right under an appeal unto the popular assembly , to note or remove any deputy or burgess , that is scandalous . 

36.  That peculate or defraudation of the public , all cases tending to the subversion of the government , be tryable by this representative ; and that there be an appeal unto the same in all causes , and from all magistrates , courts , and councils , whether national , or provincial . 

37.  That the right of debate , as also of proposing to the persons , be wholly and only in the senate , without any power at all of result , not derived from the persons . 

38.  That the power of result be wholly and only the popular assembly , without any right at all of debate . 

39  That the senate having debated and agreed upon a law to be proposed , cause promulgation of the same to be made for the space of six weeks before proposition , that is , cause the law to be printed and published , so long before it is to be proposed . 

40.  That promulgation being made , the signiory demand of the tribunes being present in the senate , an assembly of the persons . That the tribunes upon such demand by the signiory or by the senate , be obliged to assemble the prerogative tribe , or representative of the persons in arms by sound of trumpet with drums beating , and colours flying , in any town ▪ field , or marketplace , being not above six miles distant , upon the day , and at the hour appointed , except the meeting through inconvenience of the weather , or the like , be prorogued by consent of the signiory and the tribunes ; that the prerogative tribe being assembled accordingly , the senate propose to them by two or more of the Senatorian magistrates thereunto appointed , at the first promulgation of the law : that the proposers for the senate open unto the persons the occasion , motives , and reasons of the law to be proposed ; and the same being done , put it by distinct clauses unto the ballot of the persons . That if any material clause or clauses be rejected by the persons , they be reviewed by the senate , altered , and proposed , ( If they think fit ) to the third time , but no oftener . 

41.  That what is thus proposed by the senate , and resolved by the persons , be the law of the land , and no other , except as in the case reserved unto the Dictatorian council . 

42.  That every magistracy , office , or election throughout this whole commonwealth , whether annual , or triennial , be understood of consequence , to enjoin an interval or vacation equal unto the term of the same . That the magistracy of a knight and of a burgess , be in this relation understood as one and the same : and that this order regard only such elections as are national or domestic , and not such as are provincial or foreign . 

43.  That for an exception from this rule , where there is but one elder of the horse in one and the same parish , that elder be eligible in the same without interval ; and where there be four elders of the horse , or above in one and the same parish , there be not under two , nor above half of them eligible at the same election . 

44.  That throughout all the assemblies and councils of this commonwealth : the quorum consist of one half in the time of health , and of one third part in a time of sickness , being so declared by the senate . 

Part . 2.  

For the religious part , it is proposed , 

45.  That the universities , being prudently reform , be preserved in their rights and endowments for and towards the education , and provision of an able ministry . 

46.  That the legal and ancient provision for the national ministry be so augmented , that the meanest sort of livings or benefices , without defalcation from the greater , be each improved to the revenue of one hundred pounds a year , at the least . 

47.  That a benefice becoming void in any parish , the elders of the same May assemble , and give notice unto the vicechancellor of either university , by certificate ; specifying the true value of that benefice : that the vicechancellor upon receipt of such certificate , be obliged to call a congregation of his university , that the congregation of the university to this end assembled , having regard unto the value of the benefice , make choice of a person fitted for the ministerial function , and return him unto the parish so requiring : that the probationer , thus returned unto a parish , by either of the universities , exercise the office , and receive the benefits , as minister of the parish for the term of one year . That the term of one year expired , the elders of the parish assemble , and put the election of the probationer unto the ballot . That if the probationer have three parts in four of the balls or votes in the affirmative , he be thereby ordained and elected minister of that parish ; not afterwards to be degraded or removed but by the censors of the tribe , the phylarch of the same , or the council of religion , in such cases as shall be unto them reserved by act of parliament . That in case the probationer come to fail of three parts in four at the ballot , he depart from that parish ; and if he return unto the university , it be without diminution of the former offices or preferments which he there enjoyed , or any prejudice unto his future preferment : and that it be lawful in this case for any parish to send so often to either university , and be the duty of either vicechancellor , upon such certificates to make return of different probationers , till such time as the elders of that parish have fitted themselves with a minister of their own choice and liking . 

48.  That the national religion be exercised according to a directory in that case , to be made and published by act of parliament . That the national ministry be permitted to have no other public preferment or office in this commonwealth . That a national minister being convict of ignorance or scandal , be movable out of his benefice by the censors of the tribe , under an appeal unto the phylarch , or to the council for religion . 

49.  That no religion being contrary unto , or destructive of Christianity , nor the public exercise of any religion , being grounded upon , or incorporated into a foreign interest , be protected by , or tolerated in this state . That all other religions , with the public exercise of the same , be both tolerated and protected by the council of religion : and that all professors of any such religion , be equally capable of all elections , magistracies , preferments , and offices in this commonwealth , according unto the orders of the same . 

Part . 3.  

For the military part it is proposed : 

50.  That annually upon Wednesday next ensuing the last of December , the youth of each parish ( Under the inspection of the two overseers of the same ) assemble , and elect the fifth man of their number , or one in five of them , to be for the term of that year , deputies of the youth of that parish . 

51.  That annually , on Wednesday next ensuing the last of January , the said deputies of the respective parishes , meet at the capital of the hundred ; ( Where there are games and prizes allotted for them , as hath been showed elsewhere ) that there they elect to themselves out of their own number , one captain , and one ensign . And that of these games , and this election , the magistrates , and officers of the hundred , be precedents and judges for the impartial distribution of the prizes . 

52.  That annually , upon Wednesday next ensuing the last of February , the youth through the whole tribe thus elected , be received at the capital of the same , by the lieutenant , as commander in chief , by the conductor , and by the censors , that under inspection of these magistrates , the said youth be entertained with more splendid games , disciplined in a more military manner , and divided by lot into sundry parts , or essays , according to rules elsewhere given . 

53.  That the whole youth of the tribe thus assembled be the first essay . That out of the first essay there be cast by lot two hundred horse , and six hundred foot : that they whom their friends will , or themselves can mount , be accounted horse , the rest foot . That these forces amounting in the fifty tribes , to ten thousand horse , and thirty thousand foot , be always ready to March at a week's warning : and that this be the second essay , or the standing army of the commonwealth . 

54.  That for the holding of each province , the commonwealth in the first year assign an army of the youth , consisting of seven thousand five hundred foot , and one thousand five hundred horse . That for the perpetuation of these provincial armies , or guards ; there be annually at the time and places mentioned , cast out of the first essay of the youth , in each tribe or shire ten horse , and fifty foot ; that is , in all the tribes five hundred horse , and two thousand five hundred foot for Marpesia , the like for Pampea , and the like of both orders for the seaguards , being each obliged to serve for the term of three years upon the states pay . 

55.  That the senate and the persons , or the dictator having decreed or declared war , and the field-officers being appointed by the council of war ; the general by warrant issued unto the lieutenants of the tribes , demand the second essay , or such part of it , as is decreed ; whether by way of levy or recruit . That by the same warrant he appoint his time and rendezvous : that the several conductors of the tribes or shires , deliver him the forces demanded at the time and place appointed . That a general thus Marching out with the standing army , a new army be elected out of the first essay as formerly , and a new general be elected by the senate : that so always there be a general sitting , and a standing army , what generals soever be Marching . And that in case of invasion , the bands of the elders be obliged unto like duty with those of the youth . 

56.  That an only son be discharged of these duties without prejudice . That of two brothers , there be but one admitted to foreign service at one time . That of more brothers not above half . That whoever otherwise refuseth his lot , except upon cause shown , he be dispensed withal by the phylarch , or upon penitence , he be by them pardoned , and restored ; by such refusal be uncapable of electing , or being elected in this commonwealth ; as also , that he pay unto the state a fifth of his revenue for protection , besides taxes . That divines , physicians , and lawyers , as also trades not at leisure for the essays be so far forth exempted from this rule , that they be still capable of all preferments in their respective professions with indemnity . 

57  That upon warrants issued forth by the general for recruits or levies , there be an assembly of the phylarch in each tribe : that such volunteers or men being above thirty years of age , as are desirous of farther employment in arms , appear before the phylarch so assembled . That any number of these not exceeding one moiety of the recruits or levies of that tribe or shire , May be taken on by the phylarch , so many of the youth being at the discretion of this council disbanded , as are taken on of the volunteers . That the levies thus made , be conducted by the conductor of the respective tribe or shire , unto the rendezvous appointed : and that the service of these be without other term , or vacation , then at the discretion of the senate and the persons , or such instructions unto the general , as shall by them in that case be provided . 

Part . 4.  

For the provincial part it is proposed , 

58.  That upon expiration of magistracy in the senate , or at the annual recess of one third part of the same , there be elected by the senate out of the part receding into each provincial council four knights for the term of three years , thereby to render each provincial council , ( Presuming it in the beginning , to have been constituted of twelve knights , divided after the manner of the senate , by three several lists or elections ) of annual , triennial , and perpetual revolution , or rotation . 

59  That out of the same third part of the senate annually receding , there be unto each province , one knight elected for the term of one year . That the knight so elected , be the provincial Archon , general , or governor . That a provincial Archon , governor , or general , receive annually in April , at his rendezvous appointed , the youth or recruits elected in the precedent month to that end by the tribes , and by their conductors delivered accordingly . That he repair with the said youth and recruits , unto his respective province , and there dismiss that part of the provincial guard or army , whose triennial term is expired . That each provincial governor have the conduct of affairs of war , and of state , in his respective province ; with advice of the provincial council , and that he be president of the same . 

60.  That each provincial council elect three weekly proposers or provosts , after the manner , and to the ends already shown in the constitution of Senatorian councils , and that the provost of the senior list during his term , be president of the council in absence of the provincial Archon , or general . 

61.  That each provincial council proceed according unto instructions received from the council of state , and keep intelligence with the same by any two of their provosts , for the government of the province as to matter of war , or of state . That upon levies of native , or proper arms , by the senate , and the persons , a provincial council ( Having unto that end received orders ) make levies of provincial auxiliaries accordingly . That auxiliary arms upon no occasion whatsoever exceed the proper or native arms in number . That for the rest , the provincial council maintain the provincials , defraying their peculiar guards and council , by such known proportion of tributes , as on them shall be set by the senate and the persons , in their proper rights , laws , liberties , and Immunitiess so far forth as upon the merits of the cause , whereupon they were subdued , it seemed good unto the senate , and the persons to confirm them . And that it be lawful for the provincials to appeal from their provincial magistrates , councils , or generals to the persons of Oceana . 

Finis . 

















